THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. BADMAN, PRESENTED To the WORLD in a FAMILIAR DIALOGUE

Between
Mr. WISEMAN, And Mr. ATTENTIVE.
By JOHN BVNYAN, the Author of the Pilgrims Progress.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey, near
the Church. 1680.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
AS I was considering with my self, what I had written concerning the Progress
of the Pilgrim from this World to Glory; and how it had been acceptable to many
in this Nation: It came again into my mind to write, as then, of him that was
going to Heaven, so now, of the Life and Death of the Ungodly, and of their
travel from this world to Hell. The which in this I have done, and have put it,
as thou see, under the Name and Title of Mr. Badman, a Name very proper for
such a Subject: I have also put it into the form of a Dialogue, that I might
with more ease to my self, and pleasure to the Reader, perform the work.

And although, as I said, I have put it forth in this method, yet have I as
little as may be, gone out of the road of mine own observation of things. Yea,
I think I may truly say, that to the best of my remembrance, all the things
that here I discourse of, I mean as to matter of fact, have been acted upon the
stage of this World, even many times before mine eyes.

Here therefore, courteous Reader, I present thee with the Life and Death of
Mr. Badman indeed: Yea, I do trace him in his Life, from his Childhood to his
Death; that thou may, as in a Glass, behold with thine own eyes, the steps
that take hold of Hell; and also discern, while thou art reading of Mr. Badmans
Death, whether thou thy self art treading in his path thereto.

And let me entreat thee to forbear Quirking and Mocking, for that I say Mr.
Badman is dead; but rather gravely enquire concerning thy self by the Word,
whether thou art one of his Lineage or no: For Mr. Badman has left many of his
Relations behind him; yea, the very World is overspread with his Kindred. True,
some of his Relations, as he, are gone to their place, and long home, but
thousands of thousands are left behind; as Brothers, Sisters, Cousens, Nephews,
besides innumerable of his Friends and Associates.

I may say, and yet speak nothing but too much truth in so saying, that there
is scarce a Fellowship, a Community, or Fraternity of men in the World, but
some of Mr. Badmans Relations are there: yea rarely can we find a Family or
Household in a Town, where he has not left behind him either Brother, Nephew or
Friend.

The Butt therefore, that at this time I shoot at, is wide; and 'twill be as
impossible for this Book to go into several Families, and not to arrest some,
as for the Kings Messenger to rush into an house full of Traitors, and find
none but honest men there.

I cannot but think that this shot will light upon many, since our fields are
so full of this Game; but how many it will kill to Mr. Badmans course, and make
alive to the Pilgrims Progress, that is not in me to determine; this secret is
with the Lord our God only, and he alone knows to whom he will bless it to so
good and so blessed and end. However, I have put fire to the Pan, and doubt not
but the report will quickly be heard.

I told you before, that Mr. Badman had left many of his Friends and Relations
behind him, but if I survive them (as that is a great question to me) I may also
write of their lives: However, whether my life be longer or shorter, this is my
Prayer at present, that God will stir up Witnesses against them, that may
either convert or confound them; for wherever they live, and roll in their
wickedness, they are the Pest and Plague of that Country.

England shakes and totters already, by reason of the burden that Mr. Badman
and his Friends have wickedly laid upon it: Yea, our Earth reels and staggereth
to and fro like a Drunkard, the transgression thereof is heavy upon it.

Courteous Reader, I will treat thee now, even at the Door and Threshold of
this house, but only with this Intelligence, that Mr. Badman lies dead within.
Be pleased therefore (if thy leisure will serve thee) to enter in, and behold
the state in which he is laid, betwixt his Deathbed and the Grave. He is not
buried as yet, nor does he stink, as is designed he shall, before he lies down
in oblivion.

Now as others have had their Funerals solemnized, according to their Greatness
and Grandeur in the world, so likewise Mr. Badman, (forasmuch as he deserves
not to go down to his grave with silence) has his Funeral state according to
his deserts.

Four things are usual at great men's Funerals, which we will take leave, and I
hope without offense, to allude to, in the Funeral of Mr. Badman.

First, They are sometimes, when dead, presented to their Friends, by their
completely wrought Images, as lively as by cunning men's hands they can be; that
the remembrance of them may be renewed to their survivors, the remembrance of
them and their deeds: And this I have endeavored to answer in my discourse of
Mr. Badman; and therefore I have drawn him forth in his featours and actions
from his Childhood to his Gray hairs. Here therefore thou have him lively set
forth as in Cutts; both as to the minority, flower, and seniority of his Age,
together with those actions of his life, that he was most capable of doing, in,
and under those present circumstances of time, place, strength; and the
opportunities that did attend him in these.

Secondly, There is also usual at great men's Funerals, those Badges and
Scutcheons of their honor, that they have received from their Ancestors, or
have been thought worthy of for the deeds and exploits they have done in their
life: And here Mr. Badman has his, but such as vary from all men of worth, but
so much the more agreeing with the merit of his doings: They all have descended
in state, he only as an abominable branch. His deserts are the deserts of sin,
and therefore the Scutcheons of honor that he has, are only that he died
without Honor, and at his end became a fool. Thou shall not be joined with
them in burial. -- The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.

The Funeral pomp therefore of Mr. Badman, is to wear upon his Hearse the
Badges of a dishonorable and wicked life; since his bones are full of the sins
of his Youth, which shall lie down, as Job says, in the dust with him: nor is
it fit that any should be his Attendants, now at his death, but such as with
him conspired against their own souls in their life; persons whose
transgressions have made them infamous to all 2that have or shall know what
they have done.

Some notice therefore I have also here in this little discourse given the
Reader, of them who were his Confederates in his life, and Attendants at his
death; with a hint, either of some high Villainy committed by them, as also of
those Judgments that have overtaken and fallen upon them from the just and
revenging hand of God. All which are things either fully known by me, as being
eye and car-witness thereto, or that I have received from such hands, whose
relation as to this, I am bound to believe. And that the Reader may know them
from other things and passages herein contained, I have pointed at them in the
M^rgent, as with a finger thus:

Thirdly, the Funerals of persons of Quality have been solemnized with some
suitable Sermon at the time and place of their Burial; but that I am not come
to as yet, having got no further than to Mr. Badmans death: but for as much as
he must be buried, after he has stunk out his time before his beholders, I
doubt not but some such that we read are appointed to be at the burial of Gog,
will do this work in my stead; such as shall leave him neither skin nor bone
above ground, but shall set a sign by it till the b^riers have buried it in the
Vall^y of Hamon-gog, Ezekiel. 39.

Fo^rthly, At Funerals there does use to be Mourning and lamentation, but h^re
also Mr. Badman differs from others; his Familiars cannot lament his departure,
for they have not sense of his damnable state; they rather ring him, and sing
him to Hell in the sleep of death, in which he goes thither. Good men count him
no loss to the world, his place can well be without him, his loss is only his
own, and it is too late for him to recover that damage or loss by a Sea of
bloody tears, could he shed them. Yea, God has said, he will laugh at his
destruction, who then shall lament for him, saying, Ah! my brother. He was but
a stinking Weed in his life; nor was he better at all in his death: such may
well be thrown over the wall without sorrow, when once God has plucked them up
by the roots in his wrath.

Reader, If thou art of the race, linge, stook^ or fraternity of Mr. Badman, I
tell thee ^^fore thou read this Book, thou will neither brook the Author nor
it, because he has writ. of Mr. Badman as he has. For he that condemns the
wicked that die so, passes also the sentence upon the wicked that live. I
therefore expect neither credit of, nor countenance from thee, for this
Narration of thy kinsmans life.

For thy old love to thy Friend, his ways, doings, etc. will stir up in thee
enmity rather, in thy very heart, against me. I shall therefore incline to
think of thee, that thou will rent, burn, or throw it away in contempt: yea and
wish also, that for writing so notorious a truth, some mischief may befall me.
I look also to be loaded by thee with disdain, scorn and contempt; yea that
thou should railingly and vilifyingly say, I lie, and am a bespatterer of
honest men's lives and deaths. For Mr. Badman, when himself was alive, could not
abide to be counted a Knave (though his actions told all that went by, that
indeed he was such an one:) How then should his brethren, that survive him, and
that tread in his very steps, approve of the sentence that by this. Rook is
pronounced against him? Will they not rather imitate Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram's friends, even rail at me for condemning him, as they did at Moses for
doing execution?

I know it is ill pudling in the Cockatrices den, and that they run hazards that
hunt the Wild-Boar. The man also that writes Mr. Badmans life, had need be
fenced with a Coat of Mail, and with the Staff of a Spear, for that his
surviving friends will know what he does: but I have adventured to do it, and
to play, at this time, at the hole of these Asps; if they bite, they bite; if
they sting, they sting. Christ sends his Lambs in the midst of Wolves, not to
do like them, but to suffer by them for bearing plain testimony against their
bad deeds: But had one not need to walk with a Guard, and to have a Sentinel
stand at ones door for this? Verily, the flesh would be glad of such help; yea,
a spiritual man, could he tell how to get it. Acts 23. But I am stripped naked of
these, and yet am commanded to be faithful in my servicce for Christ. Well
then, I have spoken what I have spoken, and now come on me what will, Job 13.
13. True, the Text says, Rebuke a scorner, and he will hate thee; and that, He
that reproves a wicked man, gets himself a Blot and Shame; but what then?
Open rebuke is better than secret love; and he that receives it, shall find it
so afterward.

So then, whether Mr. Badmans friends shall rage or laugh at what I have writ,
I know that the better end of the staff is mine. My endeavor is to stop an
hellish Course of Life, and to save a soul from death, ( Jam. 5.) and if for so
doing, I meet with envy from them, from whom in reason I should have thanks, I
must remember the man in the dream, that cut his way through his armed enemies,
and so got into the beauteous Palace; I must, I say, remember him, and do my
self likewise.

Yet four things I will propound to the consideration of Mr. Badmans friends,
before I turn my back upon them.

1. Suppose that there be an Hell in very deed, not that I do question it, any
more than I do whether there be a Sun to shine; but I suppose it for argument
sake, with Mr. Badmans friends; I say, suppose there be an Hell, and that too,
such an one as the Scripture speaks of, one at the remotest distance from God
and Life eternal, one where the Worm of a guilty Conscience never dies, and
where the fire of the Wrath of God is not quenched.

Suppose, I say, that there is such an Hell, prepared of God (as there is
indeed) for the body and soul of the ungodly World after this life, to be
tormented in: I say, do but with thy self suppose it, and then tell me, Is it
not prepared for thee, thou being a wicked man? Let thy conscience speak, I
say, is it not prepared for thee, thou being an ungodly man? And do thou
think, wast thou there now, that thou art able to wrestle with the judgment of
God? Why then do the fallen Angels tremble there? thy hands cannot be strong,
nor can thy heart endure, in that day when God shall deal with thee: Ezekiel. 22.
14.

2. Suppose that some one that is now a soul in Hell for sin, was permitted to
come hither again to dwelt; and that they had a grant also, that upon amendment
of life, next time they dye, to change that place for Heaven and Glory; what
say thou, O wicked man? would such an one (think thou) run again into the
same course of life as before, and venture the damnation that for sin he had
already been in? Would he choose again to lead that cursed life that afresh
would kindle the flames of Hell upon him, and that would bind him up under the
heavy wrath of God? O! he would not, he would not; the sixteenth of Luke
insinuates it: yea Reason it self, awake, would abhor it, and tremble at such
a thought.

2. Suppose again, that thou that live and rollest in thy sin, and that as
yet have known nothing but the pleasure thereof, should be by an Angel
conveyed to some place where with convenience, from thence thou might have a
view of Heaven and Hell; of the Joys of the one, and the torments of the
other; I say, suppose that from thence thou might have such a view thereof,
as would convince thy reason, that both Heaven and Hell, are such realities as
by the Word they are declared to be; would thou (think thou) when brought
to thy home again, choose to thy self thy former life, to wit, to return to thy
folly again? No; if belief of what thou saw, remained with thee, thou
would eat. Fire and Brimstone first.

4. I will propound again. Suppose that there was amongst us such a Law, (and
such a Magistrate to inflict the penalty,) That for every open wickedness
committed by thee, so much of thy flesh should with burning Pinoers be plucked
from thy Bones: Would thou then go on in thy open way of Lying, Swearing,
Drinking and Whoring, as thou with delight do now? Surely, surely, No: The
fear of the punishment would make thee forbear; yea, would make thee tremble,
even then when thy lusts were powerful, to think what a punishment thou wast
sure to sustain, so soon as the pleasure was over. But Oh! the folly, the
madness, the desperate madness that is in the hearts of Mr. Badmans friends,
who in despite of the threatenings of an holy and sin revenging God, and of the
outcries and warnings of all good men; yea, that will in despite of the groans
and torments of those that are now in Hell for sin, ( Luke 16. 24. 28.) go on
in a sinful course of life; yea, though every sin is also a step of descent,
down to that infernal Cave. O how true is that saying of Solomon, The heart of
the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live,
and after that they go to the dead, Eccles. 9. 3. To the dead! that is, to the
dead in Hell, to the damned dead; the place to which those that have dyed Bad
men are gone, and that those that live Bad men are like to go to, when a little
more sin, like stolen waters, has been imbibed by their sinful souls.

That which has made me publish this Book is,

1. For that wickedness like a flood is like to drown our English world: it
begins already to be above the tops of mountains; it has almost swallowed up
all; our Youth, our Middle age, Old age, and all, are almost carried away of
this flood. O Debauchery, Debauchery, what have thou done in England! Thou have
corrupted our Young men, and have made our Old men beasts; thou have deflowered
our Virgins, and have made Matrons Bawds. Thou have made our earth to reel to
and fro like a drunkard; it is in danger to be removed like a Cottage, yea, it
is, because transgression is so heavy upon it, like to fall and rise no more,
Isa. 24. 20.

O! that I could mourn for England, and for the sins that are committed
therein, even while I see that without repentance, the men of Gods wrath are
about to deal with us, each having his slaughtering weapon in his hand: ( Ezekiel
9. 1, 2.) Well, I have written, and by Gods assistance shall pray, that this
flood may abate in England: and could I but see the tops of the Mountains above
it, I should think that these waters were abating.

2. It is the duty of those that can, to cry out against this deadly plague,
yea, to lift up their voice as with a Trumpet against it; that men may be
awakened about it, slye from it, as from that which is the greatest of evils.
Sin pulled Angels out of Heaven, pulls men down to Hell, and overthrows
Kingdoms. Who, that sees an house on fire, will not give the Allarum to them
that dwell therein? who that sees the Land invaded, will not set the Beacons on
a flame? Who, that sees the Devils, as roaring Lions continually devouring
souls, will not make an Outcry? But above all, when we see sin, sinful sin, a
swallowing up a Nation, sinking of a Nation, and bringing its Inhabitants to
temporal, spiritual, and eternal ruin, shall we not cry out, and cry, They are
drunk, but not with Wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink; they are
intoxicated with the deadly poison of sin, which will, if its malignity be not
by wholesome means allayed, bring Soul and Body, and Estate, and Country, and
all, to ruin and destruction?

3. In and by this my Outcry, I shall deliver my self from the ruins of them
that perish: for a man can do no more in this matter, I mean a man in my
capacity, than to detect and condemn the wickedness, warn the evil doer of the
Judgment, and fly therefrom my self. But Oh! that I might not only deliver my
self! Oh that many would hear, and turn at this my cry, from sin! that they may
be secured from the death and Judgment that attend it.

Why I have handled the matter in this method, is best known to my self: and
why I have concealed most of the Names of the persons whose sins or punishments
I here and there in this Book make relation of, is,

1. For that neither the sins nor Judgments were all alike open; the sins of
some, were committed, and the Judgments executed for them only in a corner. Not
to say that I could not learn some of their names; for could I, I should not
have made them public, for this reason.

2. Because I would not provoke those of their Relations that survive them; I
would not justly provoke them, and yet, as I think, I should, should I have
intailed their punishment to their sins, and both to their names, and so have
turned them into the world.

3. Nor would I lay them under disgrace and ^ontempt, which would, as I think,
unavoidably ^ave happened unto them had I withal insert^d their Names.

As for those whose Names I mention, their ^rimes or Judgments were manifest;
public almost as any thing of that nature that happens to mortal men. Such
therefore have published their own-shame by their sin, and God, his anger, by
taking of open vengeance.

As Job says, God has struck them as wicked men in the open sight of others,
Job 34 26. So that I cannot conceive, since their si^ and Judgment was so
conspicuous, that my admonishing the world thereof, should turn to their
detriment: For the publishing of these things are, so far as Relation is
concerned, intende^ for remembrancers: That they may also be think themselves,
repent and turn to God, (...) the Judgments for their sins should prove here
ditary. For the God of Heaven has threatne^ to visit the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, if they hate him, to the third an^ fourth
generation, Exodus 20. 5.

Nebuchadnezzars punishment for his pri^ being open, (for he was for his sin,
driven from his Kingly dignity, and from among men too, (...) eat grass like an
Ox, and to company with the beasts,) Daniel did not stick to tell Belshazz^^
his son to his face thereof; nor to publish (...) that it might be read and
remembered by the g^nerations to come. The same may be said (...) Judas and
Ananias, etc. for their sin and punishment were known to all the dwellers at
Je^salem, Acts 1. Chap. 5.

Nor is it a sign but of desperate impe^tence and hardness of heart, when the
offspring or relations of those who have fallen by open, fearful and
prodigious Judgments, for their sin, shall overlook, forget, pass by, or take
no notice of such high outgoings of God against them and their house. Thus
Daniel aggravates Belshazzars crime, for that he hardened his heart in pride,
though he knew that for that very sin and transgression, his father was brought
down from his height, and made to be a companion for Asses. And thou his son, O
Belshazzar, says he, have not humbled thy heart, though thou knew all this.
Dan. 5. A home reproof indeed, but home is most fit for an open and a
continued-in transgression.

Let those then that are the Offspring or relations of such, who by their own
sin, and the dreadful Judgments of God, are made to become a sign, ( Deuteronomy. 16.
9, 10.) having been swept, as dung, from off the face of the earth, beware,
lest when Judgment knocks at their door, for their sins, as it did before at
the door of their Pregenitors, it falls also with as heavy a stroke as on them
that went before them: Lest, I say, they in that day, instead of finding mercy,
find for their high, daring, and Judgment-affrontingsins, Judgment without
mercy.

To conclude, let those that would not dye Mr. Badmans death, take heed of Mr.
Badmans ways: for his ways bring to his end; Wickedness will not deliver him
that is given to it though they should cloak all with a Profession o^ Religion.

If it was a transgression of Old, for a man to wear a Woman's Apparel, surely
it is a trans^gression now for a sinner to wear a Christian Profession for a
Cloak. Wolves in Sheeps Clothing swarm in England this day: Wolves bot^ as to
Doctrine, and as to Practice too. Some men make a Profession, I doubt, on
purpose that they may twist themselves into a Trade; and thence into an Estate;
yea, and if need be, into an Estate Kuavishly, by the ruins of their Neighbor:
let such take heed, for those that d^ such things have the greater damnation.

Christian, make thy Profession shine by a Conversation according to the
Gospel: Or else thou will damnifie Religion, bring scandal to thy Brethren, and
give offense to the Enemies; and 'twould be better that a Millstone was hanged
about thy neck, and that thou, as so adorned, wast cast into the bottom of the
Sea, than so to do.

Christian, a Profession according to the Gospel, is, in these days, a rare
thing; seek then after it, put it on, and keep it without spot; and (as becomes
thee) white, and clean, and thou shall be a rare Christian.

The Prophecy of the last times is, that professing men (for so I understand
the Text) shall be, many of them, base; (2 Timothy 3.) but continue thou in the
things that thou have learned, not of wanton men, not of licentious times, but
of the Word and Doctrine of God, that is according to Godliness; and thou shall
walk with Christ in white.

Now God Almighty give his people Grace, not to hate or malign Sinners, nor yet
to choose any of their ways, but to keep themselves pure from the blood of all
men, by speaking and doing according to that Name and those Rules that they
profess to know, and love; for Jesus Christ's sake.

John Bunyan.

Books lately Printed for and Sold by Nathaniel Ponder at the Peacock in the
Poultrey, near the Church.
BIblia Sacra, sive Testamentum Vetus, a^ Im. Tremellio and Fr. Junio ex
Hebrae^ Latin redditum. Et Testamentum Novum (...) Theod. Beza e Graeco in
Latinum versum. Argumentis Capitum additi^ versibusque singuli^ distinctis, and
seorsum expressis. 12o.

(...), Or, A Declaration of the Glorious Mystery of the Person of Christ, God
and Man. With the Infinite Wisdom, Love and Power of God in the contrivance and
constitution thereof. As also of the Ground and Reasons of his Incarnation, the
nature o^ his Ministry in Heaven, the present State o^ the Church above
thereon, and the Use of (...) Person in Religion. With an Account and
Vindication of the Honor, Worship, Faith Love, and Obedience due unto him, in
and from the Church. By John Owen, D. D.

Divine Breathings: or a Manual of practical Contemplations, in one Century:
Tending to promote Gospel-Principles, and good Conversation in Christ.
Comprizin^ brief many of those great Truths that are to known and practiced by
a Christian. By T.

Youth's Comedy, or the Souls Trials and Triumph: a Dramatick Poem. With Diverse
Meditations intermixed upon several Subjects. Set forth to help and encourage
those that are seeking a Heavenly Country. By the Author of Youth's Tragedy.

A Treatise of the Fear of God: showing what it is, and how distinguished from
that which is not so. Also Whence it comes. Who has it. What are the Effects.
And What the Privileges of those that have it in their hearts. By John Bunyan.

The Tragical History of Jetzer: Or, a Faithful Narrative of the Feigned
Visions, Counterfeit Revelations, and false Miracles of the Dominican Fathers
of the Covent of Bern in Switzerland, to Propagate their Superstitions. For
which Horrid Impieties, the Prior, Sub-Prior, Lecturer, and Receiver of the
said Covent were Burnt at a Stake, Anno Dom. 1509. Collected From the Records
of the said City by the Care of Sir William Waller, Knight. Translated from his
French Copy by an Impartial Pen, and now made Public for the Information of
English Protestants, who may hence learn, that (...) will stick at no (...)
which may Adiunce their Designs, nor at any Per^^ries that may Conceal them.
With an Epistle, wherein are some soft and gentle Reflections upon the Lying
Dying Speeches of the Jesuits lately Executed at Tyburn. The Second Edition.

The Pilgrims Progress from this World to that which is to come: Delivered in
the Similitude of a Dream. By John Bunyan. This fourth Impression has the
Authors Picture and many Additions.

There is now in the Press, and will be suddenly published, An Exposition on
the 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10th, Chapters on the Hebrews* Being a Third Volume. By
John Owen, D. D.

ERRATA.
PAge 127. line 8. for amated read amazed, p. 149. l. 15. for herhaps r.
perhaps, p. 162. l. 3, and 4. for dia^a^olical r. di^bolical, p. 287. l. 9.
for, for r. so, p. 304. for reputation r. repentance.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. BADMAN, Presented to the World in a Familiar
DIALOGUE Betwixt
Mr. WISEMAN, And, Mr. ATTENTIVE.

Wiseman. GOOD morrow my good Neighbor, Mr. Attentive; whither are you walking
so early this morning? methinks you look as if you were concerned about
something more than ordinary. Have you lost any of your Cattle, or what is the
matter?


Attentive. Good Sir, Good morrow to you, I have not as yet lost ought, but yet
you give a right ghess of me, for I am, as you say, concerned in my heart, but
it is because of the badness of the times. And Sir, you, as all our Neighbors
know, are a very observing man, pray therefore what do you think of them?


Wise. Why? I think, as you say, to wit, that they are bad times, and bad they
will be, until men are better: for they are bad men that make bad times; if
men therefore would mend, so would the times. It Is a folly to look for good
days, so long as sin is so high, and those that study its nourishment so many.
God bring it down, and those that nourish it to Repentance, and then my good
Neighbor, you will be concerned, not as you are now: Now you are concerned
because times are so bad; but then you will be so, cause times are so good: Now
you are concerned so as to be perplexed, but then you will be concerned so as
to lift up your voice with shouting; for I dare say, could you see such days
they would make you shout.


Atten. Ai, so they would, such times I have prayed for, such times I have
longed for: but I fear they will be worse before they be better.


Wise. Make no Conclusions, man: for he that has the hearts of men in his
hand, can change them from worse to better, and so bad times into good. God
give long life to them that are good, and especially to those of them that are
capable of doing him service in the world. The Ornament and Beauty of this
lower World, next to God and his Wonders, are the men that spangle and shine in
godliness.

Now as Mr. Wiseman said this, he gave a great sigh.


Atten. Amen. Amen. But why, good Sir, do you sigh so deeply? is it for ought
else than that for the which as you have perceived, I my self am concerned?


Wise. I am concerned with you, for the badness of the times; but that was not
the cause of that sigh, of the which, as I see, you take notice. I sighed at
the remembrance of the death of that man for whom the Bell tolled at our Town
yesterday.


Atten. Why? I trow, Mr. Goodman your Neighbor is not dead. Indeed I did hear
that he had been sick.


Wise. No, no, it is not he. Had it been he, I could not but have been
concerned, but yet not as I am concerned now. If he had died, I should only
have been concerned for that the world had lost a Light: but the man that I am
concerned for now, was oue that never was good, therefore such an one who is
not dead only, but damned. He died that he might die, he went from Life to
Death, and then from Death to Death, from Death Natural to death Eternal. And
as he spoke this, the water stood in his eyes.


Atten. Indeed, to go from a deathbed to Hell is a fearful thing to think on.
But good Neighbor Wiseman, he pleased to tell me who this man was, and why you
conclude him so miserable in his death?


Wise. Well, if you can stay, I will tell you who he was, and why I conclude
thus concerning him.


Atten. My leisure will admit me to stay, and I am willing to hear you out. And
I pray God your discourse may take hold on my heart, that I may be bettered
thereby. So they agreed to sit down under a tree: Then Mr. Wiseman proceeded as
follows.


Wise. The man that I mean, is one Mr. Badman; he has lived in our Town a great
while, and now, as I said, he is dead. But the reason of my being so concerned
at his death, is, not for that he was at all related to me, or for that any
good conditions died with him, for he was far from them, but for that, as I
greatly fear, he has, as was hinted before, died two deaths at once.


Atten. I perceive what you mean by two deaths at once; and to speak truth,
it is a fearful thing thus to have ground to think of any: for although the
death of (...) ungodly and sinners is laid to heart but of few, yet to die in
such a state, is more dreadful and fearful than any man can imagine. Indeed if
a man had no Soul, if his state was not truly Immortal, the matter would not
be so much; but for a man to be so disposed of by his Maker, as to be appointed
a sensible being for ever, and for him too to fall into the hands of revenging
Justice, that will be always, to the utmost extremity that his sin deserves,
punisbing of him in the dismal dungeon of Hell, this must needs be unutterably
sad, and lamentable.


Wise. There is no man, I think, that is sensible of the worth of one Soul, but
must, when he hears of the death of unconverted men, he stricken with sorrow
and grief: because, as you said well, that man's state is such, that he has a
sensible being for ever. For it is sense that makes punishment heavy. But yet
sense is not all that the Damned have, they have sense and reason too; so then,
as Sense receives punishment with sorrow because it feels, and bleeds under
the same, so by Reason, and the exercise thereof, in the midst of torment, all
present Affliction is aggravated, and that three manner of ways:

1. Reason will consider thus with himself; For what am I thus tormented? and
will easily find it is for nothing but that base and filthy thing, Sin; and now
will Vexation be mixed with Punishment, and that will greatly heighten the
Affliction.

2. Reason will consider thus with himself. How long must this be my state? And
will soon return to himself this Answer: This must be my state for ever and
ever. Now this will greatly increase the torment.

3. Reason will consider thus with himself; What have I lost more than present
ease and quiet by my sins that I have committed? And will quickly return
himself this answer: I have lost Communion with God, Christ, Saints and Angels,
and a share in Heaven and eternal Life: And this also must needs greaten the
misery of poor damned souls. And this is the case of Mr. Badman.


Atten. I feel my heart even shake at the thoughts of coming into such a state.
Hell! who knows that is yet alive, what the torments of Hell are? This word
Hell gives a very dreadful sound.


Wise. (...), so it does in the ears of him that has a tender Conscience. But
if, as you say, and that truly, the very Name of Hell, is so dreadful, what is
the Place it self, and what are the Punishments that are there inflicted, and
that without the least intermission, upon the Souls of damned men, for ever and
ever.


Atten. Well, but passing this; my leisure will admit me to stay, and therefore
pray tell me what it is that makes you think that Mr. Badman is gone to Hell.


Wise. I will tell you. But first do you know which of the Badmans I mean?


Atten. Why was there more of them th^n one?


Wise. O, yes, a great many, both Brothers and Sisters, and yet all of them the
Children of a godly Parent, the more a great deal is the pity.


Atten. Which of them therefore was it that died.


Wise. The eldest, old in years, and old in sin; but the sinner that dies an
hundred years old shall be accursed.


Atten. Well, but what makes you think he is gone to Hell?


Wise. His wicked life, and fearful death, specially since the Manner of his
death was so corresponding with his life.


Atten. Pray let me know the manner of his death, if your self did perfectly
know it.


Wise. I was there when he died: But I desire not to see another such man
(while I live) die in such sort as he did.


Atten. Pray therefore let me hear it.


Wise. You say you have leisure and can stay, and therefore, if you please, we
will discourse even orderly of him. First, we will begin with his Life, and
then proceed to his Death: Because a relation of the first may the more affect
you, when you shall hear of the second.


Atten. Did you then so well know his Life?


Wise. I knew him of a Child. I was a man, when he was but a boy, and I made
special observation of him from first to last.


Atten. Pray then let me hear from you an account of his Life; but be as brief
as you can, for I long to hear of the manner of his death.


Wise. I will endeavor to answer your desires, and first, I will tell you,
that from a Child he was very bad: his very beginning was ominous, and presaged
that no good end, was, in likelihood, to follow thereupon. There were several
sins that he was given to, when but a little one, that manifested him to be
notoriously infected with Orginal corruption; for I dare say he learned none of
them of his Father or Mother; nor was he admitted to go much abroad among other
Children, that were vile, to learn to sin of them: Nay, contrariwise, if at any
time he did get abroad amongst others, he would be as the Inventer of bad
words, and an example in bad actions. To them all he used to be, as we say, the
Ringleader, and Master-sinner from a Child.


Atten. This was a bad Beginning indeed, and did demonstrate that he was, as
you say, polluted, very much polluted with Original Corruption. For to speak my
mind freely, I do confess, that it is mine opinion, that Children come polluted
with sin into the World, and that oft-times the sins of their youth, Original
sin is the root of Actual transgressions.
especially while they are very young, are rather by virtue of Indwelling sin,
than by examples that are set before them by others. Not but that they learn to
sin by example too, but Example is not the root, but rather the Temptation unto
wickedness. The root is sin within; Mark. 7.
for from within, out of the heart of man proccedeth sin.


Wise. I am glad to hear that you are of this opinion, and to confirm what you
have said by a few hints from the Word. Job. 11. 12*
Man in his birth is compared to an Ass, (an unclean Beast) and to a wretched
Infant in Ezekiel. 16.
its blood: besides, all the firstborn of old that were offered unto the Lord,
Exodus 12. 13.
were to be redeemed at the age of a month, Chap. 34. 20.
and that was before they were sinners by imitation. The Scripture also
affirms, that by the sin of one, Romans 5.
Judgment came upon all; and renders this reason, for that all have sinned:
nor is that Objection worth a rush, That Christ by his death has taken away
Original Sin. First, Because it is Scriptureless. Secondly, Because it makes
them incapable of Salvation by Christ; for none but those that in their own
Persons are sinners, are to have Salvation by him. Many other things might be
added, but between persons so well agreed as you and I are, these may suffice
at present: but when an Antagonist comes to deal with us about this matter,
then we have for him often other strong Arguments, if he be an Antagonist worth
the taking notice of.


Atten. But, as was hinted before, he used to be the Ring-leading Sinner, or
the Master of mischief among other children; yet these are but Generals; pray
therefore tell me in Particular which were the sins of his Childhood.


Wise. I will so. When he was but a Child, he was so addicted to (...) addicted
to Lying from a child.
Lying, that his Parents scarce knew when to believe he spoke true; yea, he
would invent; tell, and stand to the Lies that he invented and told, and that
with such an audacious face, that one might even read in his very countenance
the symptoms of an hard and desperate heart this way.


Atten. This was an ill beginning indeed, and argues that he began to harden
himself in sin betimes. For a lie cannot be knowingly told and stood in, (and I
perceive that this was his manner of way in Lying) but he must as it were force
his own heart unto it. Yea, he must make his A Lie knowingly told demonstrates
that the heart is desperately hard.
heart hard, and bold to do it: Yea, he must be arrived to an exceeding pitch
of* wickedness thus to do, since all this he did against that good education,
that before you seemed to hint, he had from his Father and Mother.


Wise. The want of good Education, as you have intimated, is many times a cause
why Children do so easily, so soon, become bad; especially when there is not
only a want of that, but bad Examples enough, as, the more is the pity, there
is in many Families; by virtue of which poor Children are trained up in Sin,
and nursed therein for the Devil and Hell. But it was otherwise with Mr.
Badman, for to my knowledge, this his way of Lying, was a great grief to his
Parents, for their hearts were much dejected at this beginning of their Son;
nor did there want Counsel and Correction from them to him, if that would have
made him better, He wanted not to be told, in my hearing, The Liars portion.
and that over and over and over, Rev. 21. 8. 27.
That all Liars should have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone; Chap. 22. 15.
and that whosoever loves and makes a lie, should not have any part in the
new and heavenly Jerusalem: But all availed nothing with him; when a fit, or an
occasion to lie, came upon him, he would invent, tell, and stand to his Lie (as
steadfastly as if it had been the biggest of truths,) that he told, and that
with that hardening of his heart and face, that it would be to those that stood
by, a wonder. Nay, and this he would do when under the rod of correction which
is appointed by God for Parents to use, that thereby they might keep their
Children from Hell. Prove. 22. 15.



Atten. Truly it was, Chap. 2^. 13, 14.
as I said, a bad beginning, he served the Devil betimes; yea he became a Nurse
(...) one of his Joh. 8. 44.
Br^ts, for a spirit of Lying is the Devils Brat, The Devils Brat.
for he (...) Liar and the Father of it.


Wise. Right, he is the Father of it indeed. A Lie is begot by the Devil, as
the Father, and is brought forth by the wicked heart, as the Mother: wherefore
another Scripture also says, Acts 5. 3, 4.
Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie, etc. Yea, he calls the heart that is
big with a lie, an heart that has Conceived, that is, by the Devil. Why have
thou conceived this thing in thy heart, thou have not lied unto men, but unto
God. True, his lie was a lie of the highest nature, but every lie has the The
Father and Mother of a Lie.
same Father and Mother is had the lie last spoken of. For he is a lier, and
the Father of it. A lie then is the Brat of Hell, and it cannot Mark.
be in the heart before the person has committed a kind of spiritual Adultery
with the Devil. That Soul therefore that tells a known lie, has lien with,
and conceived it by lying with the Devil, the only Father of lies. For a lie
has only one Father and Mother, the Devil and the Heart. No marvel therefore if
the hearts that hatch and bring forth Lies, be so much of complexion with the
Devil. Yea, no marvel though God and Christ have so bent their Word against
liars: a liar is weded to the Devil himself.


Atten. It seems a mavelous thing in mine eyes, that since a lie is the
Offspring of the devil, and since a lie brings the soul to the very den of
Devils, to wit, the dark dungeon of hell; that men should be so desperately
wicked as to accustom themselves to s^ horrible a thing.


Wise. It seems also mavelous to me, specially when I observe for how little
a matter some men will study, contrive, make and tell a lie. You shall have
some that will lie it over and over, and that for a penny Some will tell a Lie
for a Penny profit.
profit. Yea, lie and stand in it, although they know that they lie: yea, you
shall have some men that will not stick to tell lie after lie, though
themselves get nothing thereby; They will tell lies in their ordinary discourse
with their Neighbors, also their News, their Jests, and their Tales must needs
be ador^ed with lies; or else they seem to bear no good sound to the ear, nor
show much to the fancy of him to whom they are told. But alas, what will these
liars do, when, for their lies they shall be tumbled down into hell, to that
Devil that did beget those lies in their heart, and so be tormented by fire and
brimstone, with him, and that for ever and ever, for their lies?


Atten. Can you not give one some example of Gods Judgments upon liars, that
one may tell them to liars when one hears them lie, if perhaps they may by the
hearing thereof, be made afraid, and ashamed to lie.


Wise. Examples! why, An Example for Liars.
Saphi^a and his wife are examples enough to put a stop, one would think, to a
spirit addicted thereto, for they both were stricken down dead for telling a
lie, Acts 5.
and that by God himself, ^n the midst of a company of people. But if Gods
threatening of Liers with Hellfire, and with the loss of the Kingdom of Heaven,
will not pre^ail with them to leave off to lie and make lies, it cannot be
ima^ined that a relation of temporal ^udgements that have swept liers ^ut of
the World heretofore, should so it. Now, as I said, this Lying was one of the
first sins that Mr. Badman was addicted to, and he could make them and tell
them fearfully.


Atten. I am sorry to hear this of him, and so much the more because, as I
fear, this sin did not reign in him A Spirit of Lying accompanied with other
sins.
alone; for usually one that is accustomed to lying, is also accustomed to
other evils besides, and if it were not so also with Mr. Badman, it would be
indeed a wonder.


Wise. You say true, the lier is a Captive slave of more than the spirit of
lying: and therefore this Mr. Badman, as he was a lier from a Child, so he was
also much given to Badman given to pilfer.
pilfer and steal, so that what he could, as we say, handsomely lay his hands
on, that was counted his own, whether they were the things of his fellow
Children; or if he could lay hold of any thing at a Neighbors house, he would
take it away; you must understand me of Trifles; for being yet but a Child* he
attempted no great matter, especially at first. But yet as he grew up in
strength and ripeness of wit^ so he attempted to pilfer and stea^ things still
of more value than a^ first. He took at last great pleasure in robbing of
Gardens and Orchards; and as he grew up, to steal Pullen from the
Neighborhood: Yea, what was his Badman would rob his Father.
Fathers, could not escape his fingers, all was Fish that came to his Net, so
hardened, at last, was he in this mischief also.


Atten. You make me wonder more and more. What, play the Thief too! What play
the Thief so soon! He could not but know, though he was but a Child, that what
he took from others, was none of his own. Besides, if his Father was a good
man, as you say, it could not be, but he must also hear from him, that to steal
was to transgress the Law of God, and so to run the hazard of eternal Damnation.


Wise. His Father was not wanting to use the means to reclaim him, often
urging, as I have been told, that saying in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not
steal: Exodus 20. 15.
And also that, Zech. 5. 3.
This is the Curse that goes forth over the face of the whole earth, for every
one that steals shall be cut off, etc. The light of Nature also, though he
was little, must needs show him that what he took from others, was not his own,
and that he would not willingly have been served so himself. But all was to no
purpose, let Father and Conscience say what they would to him, he would go on,
he was resolved to go on in his wickedness.


Atten. But his Father would, a^ you intimate, sometimes rebuke him for his
wickedness; pray how would he carry it then?


Wise. How! why, Jer. 2. 26.
like to a Thief that is found. He would stand How Badman did use to carry it
when his Father used to chide him for his sins.
gloating, and hanging down his head in a sullen, pouching manner, (a body
might read, as we use to say, the picture of Ill-luck in his face,) and when
his Father did demand his answer to such questions concerning his Villainy, he
would grumble and mutter at him, and that should be all he could get.


Atten. But you said that he would also rob his Father, methinks that was an
unnatural thing.


Wise. Natural or unnatural, all is one to a Thief. Besides, you must think
that he had likewise Companions to whom he was, for the wickedness that he saw
in them, more Badman more firmly knit to his Companions than either to Father
or Mother.
firmly knit, than either to Father or Mother. Yea, and what had he cared if
Father and Mother and died for grief for him. Their death would have been, as
he would have counted, great release and liberty to him: For the truth is, they
and their counsel was his Bondage; yea, and if I forget not, I have heard some
say, that when he was, at times, among his Companions, he would greatly Badman
would rejoice to think that his Parents death were at hand.
rejoice to think that his Parents were old, and could not live long, and then,
quoth he, I shall be mine own man, to do what I list without their control.


Atten. Then it seems he counted that robbing of his Parents was no crime.


Wise. None at all, and therefore he fell directly under that Sentence, Whosoever
robs his Father or his Mother, Prove. 28. 24.
and says it is no transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.
And for that he set so light by them as to their Persons and Counsels, 'twas a
sign that at present he was of a very abominable spirit, 1 Samuel 2. 25.
and that some Judgment waited to take hold of him in time to come.


Atten. But can you imagine what it was, I mean, in his conceit (for I speak not
now of the suggestions of Satan, by which doubtless he was put on to do these
things,) I say what it should be in his conceit, that should make him think
that this his manner of pilfering and stealing was not great matter.


Wise. It was, for that, the things that he stole, were small; to rob Orchards,
and Gardens, and to steal Pullen, and the like, these he counted Badman counted
his thieving no great matter.
Tricks of Youth, nor would he be beat out of it by all that his Friends could
say. They would tell him that he must not covet, or desire, (and yet to desire,
is less than to take) even any thing, the least thing that was his Neighbors,
and that if he did, it would be a transgression of the Law; but all was one to
him: what through the wicked Talk of his Companions, and the delusion of his
own corrupt heart, he would go on in his pilfering course, and where he thought
himself secure, would talk of, and laughed at it when he had done.


Atten. Well, I heard a man once, when he was upon the Ladder with the Rope
about his Neck,
confess (when ready to be turned off by the Hangman) that that which had
brought him to that end, was his accustoming of himself, when young, to pi^fer
and steal small things. To my best remembrance he told us, that he began the
trade of a Thief by stealing of Pins and Points, and therefore did forewarn all
the Youth, that then were gathered together to see him die, to take heed of
beginning, though but with little sins, because by tampering at first with
little ones, way is made for the commission of bigger.


Wise. Since you are entered upon Stories, The Story of old Tod.
I also will tell you one, the which, though I heard it not with mine own Ears,
yet my Author I dare believe: Young Thieves take notice.
It is concerning one old Tod, that was hanged about Twenty years ago, or
more, at Hartford, for being a Thief. The Story is this:

At a Summer Assizes holden at Hartfort, while the Judge was sitting upon the
Bench, comes this old Tod into the Court, clothed in a green Suit, with his
Leathern Girdle in his hand, his Bosom open, and all on a dung sweat, as if he
had run for his Life; and being come in, he spoke aloud as follows: Old Tod
began his wa^ to the Gallows by robbing of Orchards and the like.
My Lord, said he, Here is the veryest Rogue that breaths upon the face of the
earth. I have been a Thief from a Child: When I was but a little one, I gave my
self to rob Orchards, and to do other such like wicked things, and I have
continued a Thief ever since. My Lord, there has not been a Robbery committed
thus many years, within so many miles of this place, but I have either been at
it, or privy to it.

The Judge thought the fellow was mad, but after some conference with some of
the Justices, they agreed to Indict him; and so they did of several felonious
Actions; to all which he heartily confessed Guilty, and so was hanged with his
Wife at the same time.


Atten. This is a remarkable Story indeed, and you think it is a true one.


Wise. It is not only remarkable, but pat to our purpose. This Thief, like Mr.
Badman, began his Trade betimes; he began too where Mr. Badman began, even at
robbing of Orchards, and other such things, which brought him* as you may
perceive, from sin to sin, till at last it brought him to the public shame of
sin, which is the Gallows.

As for the truth of this Story, the Relator told me that he was at the same
time himself in the Court, and stood within less than two yards of old Tod,
when he heard him aloud to utter the words.


Atten. These two sins of lying and stealing were a bad sign of an evil end.


Wise. So they were, and yet Mr. Badman came not to his end like old Tod;
Though I fear, to as bad, nay, worse than was that death of the Gallows, though
less discerned by spectators; but more of that by and by. But you talk of these
two sins as if these were all that Mr. Bad^man was addicted to in ^is Youth:
Alas, alas, he swarmed with sins, even as a Beggar does with Vermin, and that
when he was but a Boy.


Atten. Why what other sins was he addicted to, I mean while he was but a Child?


Wise. You need not ask, to what other sins was he, but to what other sins was
he not addicted, that is, of such as suited with his Age: for a man may safely
say, that nothing that was vile came amiss to him; if he was but capable to do
it. Indeed some sins there be that Childhood knows not how to be tampering
with; but I speak of sins that he was capable of committing, of which I will
nominate two or three more. And,

First, He could not endure the Badman could not abide the Lords Day.
Lords Day, because of the Holiness that did attend it; the beginning of that
Day was to him as if he was going to Prison, (except he could get out from his
Father and Mother, and lurk in by-holes among his Companions, until holy
Duties were over.) Reading the Scriptures, hearing Sermons, godly Conference,
repeating of Sermons, and Prayer, were things that he could not away with; and
therefore if his Father on such days (as often he did, though sometimes
notwithstanding his diligence, he would be sure to give him the slip) did keep
him strictly to the observation of the day, he would plainly show by all
carriages that he was highly discontent therewith: he would sleep at Duties,
would talk vainly with his Brothers, and as it were, think every godly
opportunity seven times as long as it was, grudging till it was over.


Atten. This his abhorring of that day, was not, I think, for the sake of the
day it self: for as it is a day, it is nothing else but as other days of the
Week: But I suppose that the Why Ra^man could not abide the Lords Day.
reason of his loathing of it, was, for that God has put sanctity and holiness
upon it; also because it is the day above all the days of the week that ought
to be spent in holy Devotion, in remembrance of our Lords Resurrection from the
dead.


Wise. Yes, 'twas therefore, that he was such an enemy to it, even because more
restraint was laid upon him on that day, from his own ways, than were possible
should be laid upon him on all others.


Atten. Does not God by instituting of a day unto holy Duties, make great proof
how the hearts and inclinations of poor people do stand to Holiness of heart,
and a Conversation in doly duties?


Wise. God proves the heart what it is, by instituting of the Lords day, and
setting it apart (...) his service.
Yes doubtless; and a man shall show his Heart and his Life what they are, more
by one Lord's Day, than by all the days of the week besides: And the reason is,
because on the Lord's Day there is a special restraint laid upon men as to
Thoughts and Life, more than upon other days of the week besides. Also, men are
enjoined on that day to a stricter performance of holy Duties, and restraint of
worldly business, than upon other days they are; wherefore, if their hearts
incline not naturally to good, now they will show it, now they will appear what
they are. The Lords Day is a kind of an Emblem of the heavenly Sabbath above,
and it makes manifest how the heart (...) to the perpetuity of Holi^^^^ (...)
than to be found in a (...) does.

(...) ^ys a man may be in and out of holy Duties, and all in a quarter of an
hour; but now, the Lords Day is, as it were, a day that enjoins to one
perpetual Duty of Holiness: Genesis 2. 2.
Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, Exodus 31. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
(which by Christ is not abrogated, Mar. 16. 1.
but changed, Acts* 20. 7.
into the First of the week, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
) not as it was given in particular to the Jews, Mar. 2. 27, 2^.
but as it was sanctified by him from the Beginning of the world; Revel. 1. 10.
and therefore is a greater proof of the frame and temper of a man's heart, and
does more make manifest to what he is inclined, than does his other performance
of Duties: Therefore God puts great difference between them that truly call
(and walk in) this day as holy, and count it Honorable, Isa. 5. 8, 13.
upon the account that now they have an opportunity to show how they delight to
honor him; Chap. 56. 2.
in that they have, not only an Hour, but a whole Day to show it in: I say, he
puts great difference between these, and that other sort that say, Amos* 8. 5.
When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may be at our worldly business. The
first he calls a Blessed man, but brandeth the other for an unsanctified
worldling. And indeed, to delight our selves in Gods service upon his Holy
days, gives a better proof of a sanctified Nature, than to grudge at the
coming, and to be weary of the holy duties of such days, as Mr. Badman did.


Atten. There may be something in what you say, for he that cannot abide to
keep one day holy to God, to be sure he has given a sufficient proof that he
is an unsanctified man; and as such, what should he do in Heaven? that being
the place where a perpetual Sabath is to be kept to God; Heb. 4. 9.
I say, to be kept for ever and ever. And for ought I know, one reason why one
day in seven, has been by our Lord, ^^t apart unto holy Duties for men, may be
to give them conviction that there is enmity in the hearts of sinners to the
God of Heaven, for he that hates Holiness, hates God himself. They pretend to
love God, and yet love not a holy day, and yet love not to spend that day in
one continued act of holiness to the Lord: They had as good say nothing as to
call him Lord, Lord, and yet not do the things that he says. And this Mr.
Badman was such an one: he could not abide this day, nor any of the Duties of
it. Indeed, when he could get from his Friends, and so How Badman did use to
spend the Lords Day.
spend it in all manner of idleness and profaneness, then he would be pleased
well enough: but what was this but a turning the day into night, or other than
taking an opportunity at Gods forbidding, to follow our Callings, to solace and
satisfy our lusts and delights of the flesh. I take the liberty to speak thus
of Mr. Badman, upon a confidence of what you, Sir, have said of him, is true.


Wise. You needed not to have made that Apology for your censuring of Mr.
Badman, for all that knew him, will confirm what you said of him to be true. He
could not abide either that day, or any thing else that had the stamp or image
of God upon it. Sin, sin, and to do the thing that was naught, was that which
he delighted in, and that from a little Child.


Atten. I must say again, I am sorry to hear it, and that for his own sake, and
also for the sake of his Relations, who must needs be broken to pieces with
such doings as these: For, for these things sake comes the wrath of God upon
the Children of disobedience: ^phes. 5. 6.
and doubtless he must be gone to Hell, if he died without Repentance; and to
beget a Child for Hell, is sad for Parents to think on.


Wise. Of his Dying, as I told you, I will give you a Relation anon, but now we
are upon his Life, and upon the Manner of his Life in his Childhood, even of
the sins that attended him then, some of which I have mentioned already; and
indeed I have mentioned but some, for yet there are more to follow, and those
not at all inferior to what you have already heard.


Atten. Pray what were they?


Wise. Why he was greatly given, and that while a Lad, to grievous Badman given
to Swearing and Cursing.
Swearing and Cursing: yea, he then made no more of Swearing and Cursing, than
I do of telling my fingers. Yea, he would do it without provocation thereto. He
counted it a glory to Swear and Curse, and it was as natural to him, as to eat
and drink and sleep.


Atten. Oh! what a young Villain was this! here is, as the Apostle says, a
yielding of Members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans 6. 13.
indeed! This is proceeding from evil to evil with a witness; This argues that
he was a black-mouthed young Wretch indeed.


Wise. He was so; and yet, as I told you, he counted, above all, this kind of
sinning, to be Swearing and Cursing a badge of Mr. Badmans honor.
a Badge of his Honor: He reckoned himself a man's Fellow when he had learnt to
Swear and Curse boldly.


Atten. I am persuaded* that many do think, as you have said, that to Swear, is
a thing that does bravely become them, and that it is the best way for a man,
when he would put authority, or terror into his words, to stuff them full of
the sin of Swearing.


Wise. You say right, else, as I am persuaded, men would not so usually belch
out their blasphemous Oaths, as they do: they take a pride in it; they think
that to swear is Gentleman-like; and having once accustomed themselves unto it,
they hardly leave* it all the days of their lives.


Atten. Well but now we are upon it, pray show me Difference ^etwixt Swearing
and Cursing.
the difference between Swearing and Cursing; for there is a difference, is
there not?


Wise. Yes: There is a difference between Swearing and Cursing. Swearing, vain
swearing, such as young Badman accustomed himself unto. Now vain and sinful
swearing, What swearing is.
Is a light and wicked calling of God, etc. to witness to our vain and foolish
attesting of things, and those things are of two sorts.

1. Things that we swear, are, or shall be done.

2. Things so sworn to, true or false.

1. Things, that we swear, are, or shall be done. Thou swearest thou have done
such a thing, that such a thing is so, or shall be so; for it is no matter
which of these it is that men swear about, if it be done lightly and wickedly,
and groundlesly, it is vain, because it is a sin against the Third
Commandment, Exodus ^0. 7.
which says, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. For this
is a vain using of that Holy and Sacred Name, and ^o a sin for^ which, without
sound Repentance, there is not, nor can be rightly expected, forgiveness.


Atten. Then it seems, though as to the matter of fact, a man swears truly,
yet if he swears lightly and groundlesly, his Oath is evil, and he by it,
under sin.


Wise. Yes; a man may say, A man^ may sin in swearing to a truth.
The Lord lives, Jer. 5. 2.
and that is true, and yet in so saying, swear falsely; because he swears
vainly, needlessly, and without a ground. To swear groundedly and necessarily,
(which then a man does, when he swears as being called thereto of God,) that is
tolerated by the Word: but this was none of Mr. Badmans swearing, and therefore
that which now we are not concerned about.


Atten. I perceive, by the Prophet, that a man may sin in swearing to a Truth:
They therefore must needs most horribly sin, that swear to confirm their Jests
and Lies; and as they think, the better to beautify their foolish talking.


Wise. They sin with an high hand; for they presume to imagine, He that swears
to a Lie, concludes that God is as wicked as himself.
that God is as wicked as themselves, to wit, that he is an Avoucher of Lies to
be true. For, as I said before, to swear, is to call God to witness; and to
swear to a Lie, is to call God to witness that that Lie is true. This therefore
must needs offend; for it puts the highest affront upon the Holiness and
Righteousness of God, Zech. ^. 3.
therefore his wrath must sweep them away. This kind of Swearing is put in with
lying, Jer. 7. ^.
and killing, Hos. 4. ^, 3.
and stealing, and committing Adultery; and therefore must not go unpunished:
For if God will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, which a
man may do when he swears to a truth, (as I have showed before,) how can it be
imagined, that he should hold such guiltless, who, by Swearing, will appeal to
God, if Lies be not true, or that swear out of their frantic and Bedlam
madness. It would grieve and provoke a sober man to wrath, if one should swear
to a notorious lie, and avouch that that man would attest it for a truth; and
yet thus do men deal with the holy God: They tell their Jestings, Tales and
Lies, and then swear by God that they are true. Now this kind of Swearing was
as common with young Badman, as it was to eat when he was an hungered, or to go
to bed when it was night.


Atten. I have often mused in my mind, what it should be that should make men
so common in the use of the sin of Swearing, since those that be wise, will
believe them never the ^ooner for that.


Wise. It cannot be any thing that is good, you may be sure; because the thing
it self is abominable: Six Causes of vain Swearing.
1. Therefore it must be from the promptings of the spirit of the Devil within
them. 2. Also it flows sometimes from hellish Rage, when the tongue has set on
fire of Hell even the whole course of nature. Jam. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9.
3. But commonly Swearing flows from that daring Boldness that bids defiance
to the Law that forbids it. 4. Swearers think also that by their belching of
their blasphemous Oaths out of their black and polluted mouths, they show
themselves the more valiant men: 5. And imagine also, that by these outrageous
kind of villianies, they shall conquer those that at such a time they have to
do with, and make them believe their lies to be true: 6. They also swear
frequently to get Gain thereby, and when they meet with fools, they overcome
them this way. But if I might give advice in this matter, no Buyer should lay
out one farthing with him that is a common Swearer in his Calling; especially
with such an Oath-master that endeavors to swear away his commodity to
another, and that would swear his Chapmans money into his own pocket.


Atten. All these causes of Swearing, so far as I can perceive, flow from the
same Root as do the Oaths themselves, even from a hardened and desperate
heart. But pray show me no^ how wicked cursing is to be distinguished from this
kind of swearing.


Wise: How Cursing is distinguished from Swearing.
Swearing, as I said, has immediately to do with the Name of God, and it calls
upon him to be witness to the truth of what is said: That is, if they that
swear, swear by him. Some indeed swear by Idols, as by the Mass, by our Lady,
by Saints, Beasts, Birds, and other creatures; but the usual way of our profane
ones in England, is to swear by God, Christ, Faith, and the like: But however,
or by whatever they swear, Cursing is distinguished from Swearing thus.

Of Cursing, what it is.
To Curse, to Curse profanely, it is to sentence another or our self, for, or
to evil: or to wish that some evil might happen to the person or thing under
the Curse, unjustly.

It is to sentence for, or to evil, (that is, without a cause): Thus Shimei
cursed David: He sentenced him for and to evil unjustly, when he said to him,
Come out, 2 Samuel 16. 6, 7, 8.
come out thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial. The Lord has returned upon
thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou have reigned, and
the Lord has delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and
behold thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

This David calls a grievous Curse. 1 King. 2. 8.
And behold, says he to Solomon his Son, thou have with thee Shimei a
Benj^mite, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to
Mahanaim.

But what was this Curse? Why, Eirst, It was a wrong sentence past upon David;
Shimei called him Bloody man, man of Belial, when he was not. Secondly, He
sentenced him to the evil that at present was upon him, for being a bloody man,
(that is, against the house of Saul,) when that present evil overtook David,
for quite another thing.

And we may thus apply it to the How the profane ones of our times Curse.
profane ones of our times, who in their rage and envy, have little else in
their mouths but a sentence against their Neighbor for, and to evil unjustly.
How common is it with many, when they are but a little offended with one, to
cry, Hang him, Damn him, Rogue! This is both a sentencing of him for, and to
evil, and is in it self a grievous Curse.

2. The other kind of Cursing, is to wish that some evil might happen to, and
overtake this or that person or thing: And this kind of Cursing, Job counted a
grievous sin. I have not suffered (says he) my mouth to sin, Job 30. 31.
by wishing a curse to his soul; or consequently, to Body or Estate. This then
is a wicked cursing, to wish that evil might either befall another or our
selves: And this kind of cursing young Badman accustomed himself unto.

1. He would wish that evil might befall others; Badmans way of Cursing.
he would wish their Necks broken, or that their Brains were out, or that the
Pox, or Plague was upon them, and the like: All which is a devilish kind of
cursing, and is become one of the common sins of our age.

2. He would also as often wish a Curse to himself, saying, Would I might be
hanged, or burned, or that the Devil might fetch me, if it be not so, or the
like. We count the The Damme Blade.
Damme Blades to be great Swearers; but when in their hellish fury they say,
God-damme me, God perish me, or the like, they rather curse than swear; yea,
curse themselves, and that with a Wish that Damnation might light upon
themselves; which wish and Curse of theirs, in a little time, they will see
accomplished upon them, even in Hell-sire, if they repent them not of their
sins.


Atten. But did this young Badman accustom himself to such silthy kind of
language?


Wise. I think I may say, that nothing was more frequent in his mouth, and that
upon the least provocation. Badman would curse his Father, etc.
Yea he was so versed in such kind of language, that neither Father, nor
Mother, nor Brother, nor Sister, nor Servant, no nor the very Cattle that his
Father had, could escape these Curses of his. I say, that even the bruit Beasts
when he drove them, or rid upon them, if they pleased not his humor, they must
be sure to partake of his curse. Badman would curse his Fathers Cattle.
He would wish their Necks broke, their Legs broke, their Guts out, or that the
Devil might fetch them, or the like: and no marvel, for he that it so hardy to
wish damnation, or other bad curses to himself, or dearest relations; will not
stick to wish evil to the silly Beast, in his madness.


Atten. Well, I see still that th^^ Badman was a desperate villain. But pray,
Sir, since you have gone thus far, now show me whence this evil of cursing
arises, and also what dishonor it brings to God; for (...) easily discern
that it does bring damnation to the soul.


Wise. This evil of Cursing arises, Job 15.
in general, Eccles. 7. 22.
from the desperate wickedness of the heart, but particularly from, (...)
^auses of Cursing.
1. E^vic, which is, as I apprehend, the leading sin to Witchcraft. 2. It also
arises from Pride which was the sin of the fallen Angels; 3. It arises too
from Scorn and contempt of others: 4. But for a man to curse himself, must
needs arise from desperate Madness.

The The disnour i^ brings to God.
dishonor that it brings to God, is this. It takes away from him his
Authority, in whose power it is only, to Bless and Curse; not to Curse
wickedly, as Mr. Badman, but justly, and righteously, giving by his Curse, to
those that are wicked, the due Reward of their deeds.

Besides, these wicked men, in their wicked cursing of their Neighbor, etc.
Jam. 3. 9.
do even Curse God himself in his handy work. Man is Gods Image, and to curse
wickedly the Image of God, is to curse God himself. Therefore as when men
wickedly swear, they rend, and ^are Gods Name, and make him, as much as in them
lies, the avoucher and approver of all their wickedness; so he that curses and
condemns in this sort his Neighbor, or that wishes him evil, curses,
condemns, and wishes evil to the Image of God, and consequently judges and
condemns God himself.

Suppose that a man should say with his mouth, I wish that the Kings Picture
was burned; would not this man's so saying, ^^nder him as an Enemy to the Person
of the King? Even so it is with them that, by cursing, wish evil to their
neighbor, or to themselves, they contemn the Image, even the Image of God
himself.


Atten. But do you think that the men that do thus, do think that they do so
vilely, so abominably?


Wise. The question is not what men do believe concerning their sin, but what
Gods Word says of it: If Gods Word says that Swearing and Cursing are sins,
though men should count them for Virtues, their reward will be a reward for
sin, to wit, the damnation of the soul.

To Swearing and Cursing are sins against the light of Nature.
curse another, and to swear vainly and falsely, are sins against the Light of
Nature.

1. To Curse is so, because, whosoever curses another, knows, that at the same
time he would not be so served himself.

2. To Swear also, is a sin against the same Law: for Nature will tell me, that
I should not lie, and therefore much less Swear to confirm it. Yea, Genesis 31.
the Heathens have looked upon Swearing to be a solemn Ordinance of God, and
therefore not to be lightly or vainly used by men, though to confirm a matter
of truth.


Atten. But I wonder, since Curseing and Swearing are such evils in the eyes of
God, that he does not make some Examples to others, for their committing such
wickedness.


Wise. Alas! so he has, a thousand times twice told, as may be easily gathered
by any observing people in every Age and Country. I could present you with
several my self; but waving the abundance that might be mentioned, I will here
present you with Examples of Gods a^ger against them that Swear and Curse.
two, One was that dreadful Judgment of God upon one N. P.
at Wimbleton in Surrey; who, after a horrible si^ of Swearing at, and Cursing
of some persons that did not please him, suddenly fell sick, and in little time
died raving, cursing and swearing.

But above all take that dreadful Story of Dorothy Mately an Inhabitant of
Asbover in the County of Darby.

This Dorothy Mately,
faith the Relator, was noted by the people of the Town to be a great Swearer,
and Curser, and Lier, and Thief; (just like Mr. Badman.) And the labor that
she did usually follow, was to wash the Rubbish that came forth of the Lead
Mines, and there to get sparks of Lead-Ore; and her usual way of asserting of
things, was with these kind of Imprecations: I would I might sink into the
cart^ if it be not so, or I would God would make the earth open and swallow
(...) up. Now upon the 23. of March, 1660. this Dorothy was washing of Ore upon
the top of a steep Hill, about a quarter of a mile from As^over, and was there
taxed by a La^ for taking of two single Pence out of his Pocket, (for he had
laid his Breeches by, and was at work in his Drawers;) but she violently denied
it, wishing, That the ground might swallow her up if she had them: She also
used the same wicked words on several other occasions that day.

Now one George Hodgkinson of Ashover, a man of good report there, came
accidentally by where this Dorothy was, and stood still a while to talk with
her, as she was washing her Ore; there stood also a little Child by her
Tub-side, and another a distance from her, calling aloud to her to come away;
wherefore the said George took the Girl by the hand to lead her away to her
that called her: But behold, they had not gone above ten yards from Dorothy,
but they heard her crying out for help; so looking back, he saw the Woman, and
her Tub, and Sive, twirling round, and sinking into the ground. Then said the
man, Pray to God to pardon thy sin, for thou art never like to be seen alive
any longer. So she and her Tub twirled round, and round, till they sunk about
three yards into the Earth, and then for a while staid. Then she called for
help again, thinking, as she said, that she should stay there. Now the man
though greatly amazed, did begin to think which way to help her, but
immediately a great stone which appeared in the Earth, fell upon her head, and
brake her Skull, and then the Earth fell in upon her and covered her^ She was
afterward dug up, and found about four yards within ground, with the Boys
two single Pence in her pocket, but her T^b and Sive could not be found.


Atten. You bring to my mind a sad story,
the which I will relate unto you. The thing is this; About a bow-sho^^ from
where I once dwelt, there was a blind Alehouse, and the man that kept it had a
Son whose name was Edward. This Edward was, as it were, an half-fool, both in
his words, and manner of behavior. To this blind Alehouse certain jovi^^
companions would once or twice a week come, and this Ned, (for so they called
him his Father would entertain his guests withal; to wit, by calling for him
to make them sport by his foolish words and gestures. So when these boon blades
came to this man's house, the Father would call for Ned: Ned therefore would
come forth; and the villain was devilishly addicted to cursing, yea to cursing
his Father and Mother, and any one else that did cross him. And because (though
he was an half-fool) he saw that his practice was pleasing, he would do it with
the more audaciousness.

Well, when these brave fellows did come at their times to this Tippling-house
(as they call it) to fuddle and make merry, then must Ned be called out; and
because his Father was best acquainted with Ned, and best knew how to provoke
him, therefore He would usually ask him such questions, or command him such
business, as would be sure to provoke him indeed. Then would be (after his
foolish manner) Curse his Father most bitterly; at which the old man would
laugh, (and so would the rest of the guests, as at that which pleased them
best) still continuing to ask, that Ned still might be provoked to curse, that
they might still be provoked to laugh. This was the mirth with which the old
man did use to entertain his guests.

The curses wherewith this Ned did use to curse his father, and at which the
old man would laugh, were these, and such like: The Devil take you; The Devil
fetch you: He would also wish him Plagues and Destructions many. Well, so it
came to pass, through the righteous Judgment of God, that Neds Wishes and
Curses were in a little time fulfilled upon his Father; for not many months
passed between them after this manner, but the Devil did indeed take him,
possess him, and also in few days carried him out of this world by death; I
say, Satan did take him and possess him: I mean, so it was judged by those that
knew him, and had to do with him in that his lamentable-condition. He could
feel him like a live thing go up and down in his body, but when tormenting
time was come (as he had often tormenting ^its) then he would lie like an hard
(...) in the soft place of his chest, ( I mean, I saw it so,) and so would rent
and tare him, and make him roar til he died away.

I told you before, that I was an ear and eye witness of what I here say; and
so I was. I have heard Ned in his Roguery, cursing his Father, and his Father
laughing thereat most hear^ily; still provoking of Ned to curse, that his mirth
might be increased. I saw his Father also, when he was possessed, I saw him in
one of his fits, and saw his flesh (as 'twas thought) by the Devil, gathered up
on an heap, about the bigness of half an Egg; to the unutterable torture and
afflicton of the old man. There was also one Freeman, (who was more than an
ordinary Doctor) sent for, to cast our this Devil; and I was there when he
attempted to do it: The manner whereof was this. They had the possessed into an
out-room, and laid him on his belly upon a Form, with his head hanging over the
Forms end; then they bound him down thereto: which done, they set a pan of
Coals under his (...) and put something therein which (...) great smoke; by
this means ((...) said) to fetch out the Death. There therefore they kept the
(...) he was ^^st ^^^thered in the (...) out of him; at which Freeman was
somewhat abashed, the man greatly afflicted, and I made to go away wondering
and fearing. In a little time therefore that which possessed the man, carried
him out of the World, according to the cursed Wishes of his Son. And this was
the end of this hellish mirth.


Wise. These were all sad Judgments.


Atten. These were dreadful Judgments indeed.


Wise. Ai, and they look like the Threatening of that Text, (though chiefly it
concerned Judas,) As he loved cursing, Psalm. 109. 17, 18.
so let it come unto him; as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far
from him. As he clothed himself with cursing as with a garment, so let it come
into his bowels like water, and as oil into his bones.


Atten. It is a fearful thing for Youth to be trained up in a way of Cursing
and Swearing.


Wise. Trained up in them! that I cannot say Mr. Badman was, for his Father
has oft-times in my hearing, bewailed the badness of his Children, and of this
naughty Boy in particular. I believe that the wickedness of his Children made
him (in the thoughts of it) go many a Night with heavy heart to bed, and with
as heavy an one to rise in the Morning. But all was one to his graceless Son,
neither wholesome counsel, nor fatherly sorrow, would make him mend his Manners.

A grievous thing to bring up Children wickedly.
There are some indeed that do train up their Children to swear, curse, lie and
steal, and great is the misery of such poor Children whose hard hap it is to be
ushered into the world by, and to be under the tuition too of such ungodly
Parents. It had been better for such Parents, had they not begat them, and
better for such Children had they not been born. O! methinks for a Father or a
Mother to train up a Child in that very way that leads to Hell and Damnation,
what thing so horrible! But Mr. Badman was not by his Parents so brought up.


Atten. But methinks, since this Young Badman would not be ruled at home, his
Father should have tried what good could have been done of him. abroad, by
putting him out to some man of his acquaintance, that he knew to be able to
command him, and to keep him pretty hard to some employ: So should he, at
least, have been prevented of time to do those wickednesses that could dot be
done without time to do them in.


Wise. Alas, his Father did so, Badman put to be an Apprenti^c.
he put him out betimes to one of his own Acquaintance, and entreated him of
all love, that he would take care of his Son, and keep him from extravagant
ways. His Trade also was honest and commodious; he had besides a full Employ
therein, so that this young Badman had no vacant seasons nor idle hours yielded
him by his Calling, therein to take opportunities to do Badly: but all was one
to him, as he had begun to be vile in his Fathers house, even so he continued
to be when he was in the house of his Master.


Atten. I have known some Children, who though they have been very Bad at home,
yet have altered much when they have been put out abroad; especially when they
have fallen into a Family, where the Governors thereof have made conscience of
maintaining of the Worship and Service of God therein; but perhaps that might
be wanting in Mr. Badmans Masters house.


Wise. Indeed some Children do greatly mend, when put under other men's Roofs;
but, as I said, this naughty boy did not so; nor did his badness continue,
because he wanted a Master that both could and did correct it: For his Young
Badmans Master, and his qualifications.
Master was a very good man, a very devout person; one that frequented the best
Soul-means, that set up the Worship of God in his Family, and also that walked
himself thereafter. He was also a man very meek and merciful, one that did
never overdrive young Badman in business, nor that kept him at it at
unseasonable hours.


Atten. Say you so! This is rare: I for my part can see but few that can
parallel, in these things, with Mr. Badmans Master.


Wise. Nor I neither, (yet Mr. Badman had such an one;) for, for the most part,
A bad Master, a badthing.
Master are now a days such as mind nothing but their worldly concerns, and if
Apprentices do but answer their commands therein, Soul and Religion may go
whither they will. Yea, I much fear, that there have been many towardly Lads
put out by their parents to such Masters, that have quite undone them as to the
next world.


Atten. The more is the pity. But pray, now you have touched upon this subject,
show me how many ways a Master may be the ruin of his poor Apprentice.


Wise. Nay, I cannot tell you of all the ways, yet some of them I will mention.

Suppose then that a towardly Lad be put to be an Apprentice with one that is
reputed to be a Godly man, yet that Lad may be ruined many ways; that is, if
his Master be not circumspect in all things that respect both God and man, and
that before his Apprentice.

1. How many ways a Master may be the ^uin of an Appren^^^e.
If he be not moderate in the use of his Apprentice; if he drives him beyond
his strength; if he holds him to work at unseasonable hours; if he will not
allow him convenient time to read the Word, to Pray, etc. This is the way to
destroy him; that is, in those tender beginings of good thoughts, and good
beginnings about spiritual things.

2. If he suffers his house to be scattered with profane and wicked Books, such
as stir up to lust, to wantonness, such as teach idle, wanton, lascivious
discourse, and such as has a tendency to provoke to profane drollery and
Jesting; and lastly, such as tend to corrupt, and pervert the Doctrine of Faith
and Holiness. All these things will eat as does a canker, and will quickly
spoil, in Youth, etc. those good beginnings that may be putting forth
themselves in them.

3. If there be a mixture of Servants, that is, if some very bad be in the same
place, that is a way also to undo such tender Lads; for they that are bad and
sordid Servants, will be often (and they have an opportunity too, to be)
distilling and fomenting of their profane and wicked words and tricks before
them, and these will easily stick in the flesh and minds of Youth, to the
corrupting of them.

4. If the Master have one Guise for abroad, and another for home; that is, if
his Religion hangs by in his house as his Cloak does, and he be seldom in it,
except he be abroad; this, young beginners will take notice of, and stumble at.
We say, Hedges have eyes, and little Pitchers have ears; and indeed, Children
are great observers of what old^^ fol^^ do.
Children make a greater inspection into the Lives of Fathers, Masters, etc.
than oft-times they are aware of: And therefore should Masters be careful,
else they may soon destroy good beginnings in their Servants.

5. If the Master be unconscionable in his Dealing, and trades with lying
words; or if bad Commodities be avouched to be good, or if he seeks after
unreasonable gain, or the like; his servant sees it, and it is enough to undo
him. Eli^s Sons being b^d before the congregation, 1 Samuel 2.
made Man despise the sacrifices of the Lord.

But these things by the ^y, only they may serve for a hint to Masters to take
heed that they take not Apprentices to destroy their Souls. But young Badman
had none of these hindrances; Badman had all advantages to be good, but
continued Badman still.
His father took care, and provided well for him, as to this: He had a good
Master, he wanted not good Books, nor good Instruction, nor good Sermons, nor
good Examples, no nor good Fellow Servants neither: but all would not do.


Atten. It Is a wonder, that in such a Family, amidst so many spiritual helps,
nothing should take hold of his heart! What! not good Books, nor good
Instructions, nor good Sermons, nor good Examples, nor good Fellow Servants,
nor nothing do him good!


Wise. You talk, he minded none of these things; nay, all these were All good
things abominable to Badman.
abominable to him.

1. For good Books, they might lie in his Masters house till they rotted for
him, he would not regard to look into them; but, contrariwise, would get all
the bad and abominable Books that he could, as (...) Romances, and books full
of (...), ev^n such as immediately (...) t^ set all sleshly lusts on fire.
True, he durst not be known to have any of these, to his Master; therefore
would he never let them be seen by him, but would keep them in close places,
and peruse them at such times, as yielded him fit opportunities thereto.

2. For good Instruction, he liked that, much as he liked good books; his care
was to hear but little thereof, and to forget what he heard as soon as 'twas
spoken. Yea, I have heard some that knew him then, say, that one might
evidently discern by the show of his countenance and gestures, that good
counsel was to him like Good counsel to Badman li^e Little-ease.
little-ease, even a continual torment to him; nor did he ever count himself at
liberty, but when farthest off of wholesome words. He would hate them that
rebuked him, Prove. 9. 8.
and count them his deadly enemies. Chap. 15. 12.


3. For good Example; which was frequently set him by his Master, both in
Religious and Civil matters; these, young Badman would laugh at, and would also
make a byword of them, when he came in place where he with safety could.

4. His Master indeed would make him go with him to Sermons, and that where he
thought the best Preachers were, but this ungodly young man, what shall I say,
was (I think) a Master of Art in all mischief; he had these wicked ways to
hinder himself of hearing, let the Preacher thunder never so loud.

1. How Badman used to behave himself at Sermons.
His way was, when come into the place of hearing, to sit down in some corner,
and then to fall fast asleep.

2. Or else to fix his adulterous eyes upon some beautiful Object that was in
the place, and so all Sermon-while, therewith be feeding of his fleshly lusts.

3. Or, if he could get near to some that he had observed would fit his humor,
he would be whispering, gigling, and playing with them, till such time as
Sermon was done.


Atten. Why! he was grown to a prodigious height of wickedness.


Wise. He was so, and that which aggravates all, was, this was his practice as
soon as he was come to his Master, he was as ready at all these things, as if
he had, before he came to his Master, served an Apprentiship to learn them.


Atten. There could not but be added (as you relate them) Rebellion to his sin.
Methinks it is as if he had said, I will not hear, I will not regard, I will
not mind good, I will not mind, I will not turn, I will not be converted.


Wise. You say true, and I know not to whom more fitly to compare him, The
deperate words of one H. S. who once was my Companion He was own brother to
Ned, of whom you read before.
than to that man,
who when I my self rebuked him for his wickedness, in this great huff replied;
What would the Devil do for company, if it was not for such as I.


Atten. Why did you ever hear any man say so.


Wise. Yes, that I did; and this young Badman was as like him, as an Egg is
like an Egg. Alas! the Scripture makes mention of many that by their actions
speak the same. Job 21. 14.
They say unto God, I^epart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways; Again, They refuse to hearken, Zech. 1. 11, 12, 13.
and pull away their shoulder, and stop their ears; yea, they make their (...)
hard as an Adamant-stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the words that the
Lord of Host has sent. What are all these but such as Badman, and such as the
young man but now mentioned? That young man was my Play-fellow when I was
solacing my self in my sins: I may make mention of him to my shame; but he has
a great many fellows.


Atten. Young Badman was like him indeed, and he trod his steps, as if his
wickedness had been his very Copy; I mean, as to his desperateness: f^r had he
not been a desperate one, he would never have made you such a reply, when you
was rebuking of him for his sin. But when did you give him such a rebuke?


Wise. A while after God had parted him and I, by Calling of me (as I hope) by
his Grace, still leaving him in his sins; and so far as I could ever gather, as
he lived, so he died, even as Mr. Badman did: but we will leave him, and return
again to our discourse.


Atten. H^, poor obstinate sinners! do they think that God cannot be even with
them?


Wise. I do not know, what they think, but I know that God has said, Zech. 7.
13.
That as He cried, and they would not hear, so they shall cry, and I will not
hear, says the Lord. Doubtless there is a time a coming, when Mr. Badman will
cry for this.


Atten. But I wonder that he should be so expert in wickedness, so so^n! alas,
he was but a Stripling, I suppose he was, as yet, not Twenty.


Wise. No, nor Eighteen neither: but (as with Ishmael, Genesis 21. 9, 10.
and with the Children that mocked the Prophet) 2 King. 2. 23, 24.
the seeds of sin did put forth themselves betimes in him.


Atten. Well, he was as wicked a young man as commonly one shall hear of.


Wise. You will say so, when you know all.


Atten. All, I think here is a great* All; but if there is more behind, pray^
let us hear it.


Wise. Why, then I will tell you, that he had not been with his Master much
above a year and a half, but he came Badmans Acquaintance.
acquainted with three young Villains (who here shall be nameless,) that taught
him to add to his sin, much of like kind; and he as aptly received their
Instructions. One of them was chiefly given to Uncleanness, another to
Drunkenness; and the third to Purloining, or stealing from his Master.


Atten. Alas poor Wretch, he was bad enough before, but these, I suppose, made
him much worse.


Wise. That they made him worse you may be sure of, for they taught him to be
an Arch, a chief one in all their ways.


Atten. It was an ill hap that he ever came acquinted with them.


Wise. You must rather word it thus. A Sign of Gods Anger.
It was the Judgment of God that he did; that is, he came acquainted with
them, through the anger of God. He had a good Master, and before him a good
Father: By these he had good counsel given him for Months and Years together;
but his heart was set upon mischief, he loved wickedness more than to do good,
even until his Iniquity came to be hateful; therefore, from the anger of God
it was, that these companions of his, and he, did at last so acquaint together.
Says Paul, They did not like to retain God in their knowledge; and what
follows? Romans 1. 28.
wherefore, God gave them over, or up to their own hearts lusts. And again, As
for such as turn aside to their own crooked ways, Psalm. 125. ^.
the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. This therefore
was Gods hand upon him; that he might be destroyed, be damned; 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10,
11, 12.
because he received not the love of the Truth that he might be saved. He chose
his Delusions and Deluders for him, even the company of base men, Prove, 12. 20.
of Fools, that he might be destroyed.


Atten. I cannot but think indeed, The Devils Decoys.
that it is a Great Judgment of God for a man to be given up to the company of
vile men; for what are such but the Devils * Decoyes, even those by whom he
draws the simple into his Net? A Whoremaster, a Drunkard, a Thief, what are
they but the Devils baits, by which he catches others?


Wise. You say right; but this young Badman was no simple one, if by simple,
you mean one ^instructed; for he had often good counsel given him: but if by
simple, you mean, him that is a Fool as to the true Knowledge of, and Faith in
Christ, then he was a simple one indeed: for he chose death, rather than life,
and to live in continual opposition to God, rather than to be Reconciled unto
him; according to that saying of the wise man; The fools hated knowledge,
Prove. 1. 29.
and did not choose the Fear of the Lord: and what Judgment more dreadful can
a fool be given up to, than to be delivered into the hands of such men, that
have skill to do nothing, but to ^ipen sin, and hasten its finishing unto
damnation? And therefore men should be afraid of offending God, because he can
in this manner punish them for their sins.
I knew a man that once was, as I thought, hopefully awakened about his
Condition; yea, I knew two that were so awakened; but in time they began to
draw back, and to incline again to their lusts; wherefore, God gave them up to
the company of three or four men, that in less than three years time brought
them roundly to the Gallows, This was done at Bed^ord.
where they were hanged like Dogs, because they refused to live like honest men.


Atten. But such men do not believe, that thus to be given up of God, is in
Judgment and anger; they rather take it to be their liberty, and do count it
their happiness; they are glad that their Cord is loosed, and that the reins
are in their neck; they are glad that they may sin without control, and that
they may choose such company as can make them more expert in an evil way.


Wise. Their Judgment is therefore so much the greater, because thereto is
added blindness of Mind, and hardness of Heart in a wicked way. They are turned
up to the way of Death, but must not see to what place they are going: They
must go as the Ox to the slaughter, and as the Fool to the Correction of the
Stocks, Prove. 7. 12, 13.
till a Dart strikes through their Liver, not knowing that it is for their
life. This, I say, makes their Judgment double, they are given up of God, for
a while to sport themselves with that which will assuredly make them mourn at
Prove. 5. 11.
last, when their flesh and their body is consumed. These are those that Peter
speaks of, that shall utterly perish in their own corruptions; these, I say, 2
Pet. 2. 12, 13.
who count it pleasure to riot in the daytime, and that sport themselves with
their own deceivings, are, as natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed.


Atten. Well, but I pray now concerning these three Villains that were young
Badmans companions: Tell me more particularly how he carried it then.


Wise. How he carried it! why, he did as they. I intimated so much before, when
I said, they made him an arch, a chief one in their ways.

First, He became a Frequenter of Badman becomes a frequenter of Taverns.
Taverns and Tippling-houses, and would stay there until he was even as drunk
as a Beast. And if it was so, that he could not get out by day, he would, be
sure, get out by night. Yea, he became so common a Drunkard, at last, that he
was taken notice of to be a Drunkard even by all.


Atten. This was Swinish, for Drunkenness is so beastly a sin, a sin so much
against Nature, that I wonder that any that have but the appearance of Men, can
give up themselves to so beastly (yea, worse tha^ beastly) a thing.


Wise.
It is a Swinish vanity indeed. A Story for a Drunkard.
I will tell you another Story. There was a Gentleman that had a Drunkard to be
his (...), and coming home one night (...) much abul^d with Beer, his Master
saw it. Well (quoth his Master within himself,) I will let thee alone to night,
but to morrow morning I will convince thee that thou art worse than a Beast, by
the behavior of my Horse. So when morning was come, he bids his man go and
water his Horse, and so he did; but coming up to his Master, he commands him to
water him again* so the fellow rid into the water the second time, but his
masters horse would now drink no more, so the fellow came up and and told his
Master. Then said his Master, (...) drunken lot, thou art far worse tha^ my
Horse, he will drink but to satisfy nature, but thou will drink to the abuse
of nature; he will drink but to refresh himself, but thou to thy hurt and
damage; He will drink, that he may be more serviceable to his Master, but
thou, till thou art incapable of serving either God or Man. O thou Beast, how
much art thou worse than the horse that thou ridest on.


Atten. Truly I think that his Master served him right; for in doing as he did,
he showed him plainly, as he said, that he had not so much government of
himself as his horse had of himself, and consequently that his beast did live
more according to the Law of his nature by far, than did his man. But pray go
on with what you have further to say.


Wise. Why, I say, that there are Four evils ^^ttend ^^^^kenness.
four things, which if they were well considered, would make drunkenness to be
abhorred in the thoughts of the Children of men.

1. It greatly rendeth to impoverish and beggar a man. P^ov. 2^. 2^, 21.
The Drunkard, says Solomon, shall come to poverty. Many that have begun the
world with Plenty, have gone out of it in Rags, through drunkenness. Yea, many
Children that have been born to good Estates, have yet been brought to a Flail
and a Rake, through this beastly sin of their Parents.

2. This sin of Drunkenness, it brings upon the Body, many, great, and
incurable Diseases, by which Men do in little time come to their end, and none
can help them. So, Eccles. 7. 17.
because they are overmuch wicked, therefore they dye before their time.

3. Drunkenness, is a sin that is often times attended with abundance of other
evils. Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Prove. 23. 29, 3^.
Who has contention? Who has babblings? Who has wounds without cause? Who
has redness of the eyes? They that tarry long at the Wine, they that go to
seek mixed wine. That is, the Drunkard.

4. By Drunkennnes, Men do often times shorten their days; go out of the
Alehouse drunk, and break their Necks before they come home. Instances not a
few might be given of this, but this is so manifest, a man need say nothing.


Atten. The fifth evil the worst.
But that which is worse than all is, 1 Cor. 6. 10.
it also prepares men for everlasting burnings.


Wise. Yea, and it so stupifies and besotts the soul, that a man that is far
gone in Drunkenness, is hardly ever recovered to God. Tell me, when did you see
an old drunkard converted? No, no, such an one will sleep till he dies, though
he sleeps on the top of a Prove. 23. 34, 35.
Mast, let his dangers be never so great, and Death and damnation never so
near, he will not be awaked out of his sleep. So that if a man have any respect
either to Credit, Health, Life or Salvation, he will not be a drunken man. But
the truth is, where this sin gets the upper hand, men are, as I said before, so
intoxicated and bewitched with the seeming pleasures, and sweetness thereof;
that they have neither heart nor mind to think of that which is better in it
self; and would, if embraced, do them good.


Atten. You said that drunkenness tends to poverty, yet some make themselves
rich by drunken bargains.


Wise. An Objection answered.
I said so, because the Word says so. And as to some men's getting thereby, that
is indeed but rare, and base: yea, and base will be the end of such gettings.
The Word of God is against such ways, and the curse of God will be the end of
such doings. An Inheritance may sometimes thus be hastily gotten at the
beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed. Hark what the Prophet
says; Habak. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Ver. 5, 15.
Woe to him that covers an evil covetousness, that he may set his nest on
high. Whether he makes drunkenness, or ought else, the engine and decoy to get
it; for that man does but consult the shame of his own house, the spoiling of
his family, and the damnation of his Soul; for that which he gets by working
of iniquity, is but a getting by the devices of Hell; Therefore he can be no
gainer neither for himself or family, that gains by an evil course. But this
was one of the sins that Mr. Badman was addicted to after he came acquainted
with these three fellows, nor could all that his Master could do break him of
this Beastly sin.


Atten. But where, since he was but an Apprentice, could be get Money to follow
this practice, for drunkenness, as you have intimated, is a very costly sin.


Wise. His Master Badmans Masters (...) paid for ^is drunkenness.
paid for all. For, (as I told you before) as he learned of these three
Villains to be a Beastly Drunkard; so he learned of them to pilfer and steal
from his Master. Sometimes he would fell off his Masters Goods, but keep the
Money, that is when he could; also sometimes he would beguile his Master by
taking out of his Cashbox: and when he could do neither of these, he would
convey away of his Masters wares, what he thought would be least missed, and
send or carry them to such and such houses, where he knew they would be laid up
to his use, and then appoint set times there, to meet and make merry with these
fellows.


Atten. This, was as bad, nay, I think, worse than the former; for by thus
doing, he did, not only run himself under the wrath of God, but has endangered
the undoing of his Master and his Family.


Wise. Sins go not alone, but follow one the other as do the links of a Chain;
he that will be a drunkard, must have money either of his own, or of some other
man's; either of his Fathers, Mothers, Masters, or at the highway, or some way.


Atten. I fear that many an honest man is undone by such kind of servants.


Wise. I am of the same mind with you, but A Caution for Masters.
this should make the dealer the more wary what kind of Servants he keeps, and
what kind of Apprentices he takes. It should also teach him to look well to his
Shop himself, also to take strict account of all things that are bought and
sold by his Servants. The Masters neglect herein may embolden his servant to be
bad, and may bring him too in short time to rags and a morsel of Bread.


Atten. I am afraid that there is ^uch of this kind of pilfering among servants
in these bad days of ours.


Wise. Now, while it is in my mind,
I will tell you a story. When I was in prison, there came a woman to me that
was under a great deal of trouble. So I asked her (she being a stranger to me)
what she had to say to me. She said, she was afraid she should be damned. I
asked her the cause of those fears. She told me that she had sometime since
lived with a Shopkeeper at Wellingborough, and had robbed his box in the Shop
several times of Money, to the value of more than now I will say; and pray,
says she, tell me what I shall do. I told her, I would have her go to her
Master, and make him satisfaction: She said, she was afraid; I asked her why?
She said, she doubted he would hang her. I told her, that I would intercede for
her life, and would make use of other friends too to do the like; But she told
me, she durst not venture that. Well, said I, shall I send to your Master,
while you abide out of sight, and make your peace with him, before he sees you;
and with that, I asked her her Masters name. But all that she said in answer to
this, was, Pray let it alone till I come to you again. So away she went, and
neither told me her Masters Name, nor her own^: This is about ten or twelve
years since, and I never saw her again. I tell you this story for this cause;
to confirm your fears, that such kind of servants too many there be; and that
God makes them sometimes like old Tod, of whom mention was made before,
(through the terrors that he lays upon them) to betray themselves.

I could tell you of another,
that came to me with a like relation concerning her self, and the robbing of
her Mistress; but at this time let this suffice.


Atten. But what was that other Villain addicted to, I mean, young Badmans
third companion?


Wise. Badmans third companion addicted to Uncleanness.
Uncleanness. I told you before, but it seems you forgot.


Atten. Right, it was Uncleanness. Uncleanness is also a filthy sin.


Wise. It is so; and yet it is one of the most reigning sins in our day.


Atten. So they say, and that too among those that one would think had more
wit, even among the great ones.


Wise. The more is the pity: for usually Examples that are set by them that are
great and chief, Sins of great men dangerous.
spread sooner, and more universally, then do the sins of other men; yea, and
when such men are at the head in transgressing, sin walks with a bold face
through the Land. As Jeremiah says of the Prophets, so may it be said of such,
From them is profaneness gone forth into all the land; that is, with bold and
audacious face, Jer. 23. 15.


Atten. But pray let us return again to Mr. Badman and his companions. You say
one of them was very vile in the commission of Uncleanness.


Wise. Yes, so I say; not but that he was a Drunkard and also Thievish, but he
was most arch in this sin of Uncleanness: This Roguery was his Masterpiece,
for he was a Ringleader to them all in the beastly sin of Whoredom. He was also
best acquainted with such houses where they were, and so could readily lead the
rest of his Gang unto them. The Strumpets also, because they knew this young
Villain, would at first discover themselves in all their whorish pranks to
those that he brought with him.


Atten. That is a deadly thing: I mean, it is a deadly thing to young men, when
such beastly queans, shall, with words and carriages that are openly tempting,
discover themselves unto them; It is hard for such to escape their Snare.


Wise. That is true, therefore the Wise man's counsel is the best: Prove. 5. 8.
Come not near the door of her house; for they are (as you say) very tempting,
as is seen by her in the Proverbs. I looked (says the Wise man) through my
casement, Chap. 7. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
and behold among the simple ones, I discerned a young man void of
understanding, passing through the streets near her corner, and he went the way
to her house: In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night. And
behold, there met him a Woman with the attire of an hariot, and subtle of
heart; ( Signs of a who^e.
she is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house. Now she is without,
now she is in the street, and lies in wait at every corner.) So she caught
him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him: I have
peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my vows. Therefore came I forth
to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee. I have decked
my bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved works, with fine Linen of
Egypt: I have perfumed my bed with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cinnamon; come let us
take our fill of love until the Morning, let us solace our selves with loves.
Here was a bold Beast: And indeed, the very eyes, hands, words and ways of
such, are all snares and bands to youthful, lustful fellows: And with these was
young Badman greatly snared.


Atten. This sin of Uncleanness is mightily cried out against both by Moses,
The sin of (...) against.
the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles; and yet, as we see, for all that, how
men run headlong to it!


Wise. You have said the truth, and I will add, that God, to hold men back
from so filthy a sin, has set such a stamp of his Indignation upon it, and
commanded such evil effects to follow it, that were not they that use it bereft
of all Fear of God, and love to their own health, they could not but stop and
be afraid to commit it. For, besides the eternal Damnation that does attend
such in the next world, (for these have no Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ
and of God Ephesians. 5.) the evil effects thereof in this world are dreadful.


Atten. Pray show me some of them, that as occasion offers it self, I may
show them to others for their good.


Wise. So I will. What ev^^s attend this sin.
1. It brings a man (as was said of the sin before) to want and poverty; for
by means of a Whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread. Prove. 6. 26.
The reason is, for that an Whore will not yield without hire; and men when the
Devil and Lust is in them, and God and his Fear far away from them, will not
stick, so they may accomplish their desire, to lay their Signet, Genesis 39. ^8.
their Bracelets, and their Stuff to pledge, rather than miss of the fulfilling
of their lusts. 2. Again, by this sin men diminish their strength, and bring
upon themselves, even upon the Body, a multitude of Diseases. This King
Lemuel's Mother warned him of. What my Son, Prove. 3^ ^.
said the, and what the son of my ^omb, and w^^t the Son of my Vows: Give not
thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroy^^^ Kin^s. This sin
is destructive to the Body. Give me leave to tell you another story. A Story
for uncle in persons to take notice of.
I have heard of a great man that was a very unclean person,
and he had lived so long in that sin, that he had almost lost his sight. So
his Physicians were sent for, to whom he told his Disease; but they told him,
that they could do him no good, unless he would forbear his Women. Nay then,
said he, farewell sweet Sight. Whence observe, that this sin, as I said, is
destructive to the Body; and also, that some men be so in love therewith, that
they will have it, though it destroy their body.


Atten. Paul says also, that he that sins this sin, sins against his own Body.
But what of that? he that will run the hazard of eternal Damnation of his Soul,
but he will commit this sin, will for it run the hazard of destroying his Body.
If young Badman feared not the Damnation of his Soul, do you think that the
consideration of impairing of his Body, would have (...) him there from?


Wise. You say true. But yet, methinks, there are still such bad effects
follow, often, upon the commission of it, that if men would consider them, it
would put, at least, a stop to their career therein.


Atten. What other evil effects attends this sin.


Wise. Outward shame and disgrace, and that in these particulars: More ev^^
attend t^^s (...).


First, There often follows this foul sin, the Foul Disease, now called by us
the Pox. A disease so nauseous and stinking, so infections to the whole body
(and so intailed to this sin) that hardly are any common with unclean Women,
but they have more or less a touch of it to their shame.


Atten. That is a foul disease indeed:
I knew a man once that rotted away with it; and another that had his Nose
eaten off, and his Mouth almost quite sewed up thereby.


Wise. It is a Disease, that where it is, it commonly declares, that the cause
thereof is Uncleanness. It declares to all that behold such a man, that he is
an odious, a beastly, unclean person. This is that strange punishment that Job
speaks of, that is appointed to seize on these workers of Iniquity. (...)



Atten. Then it seems you think that the strange punishment that Job there
speaks of, should be the foul disease.


Wise. I have thought so indeed, and that for this reason: We see that this
Disease is entailed as I may say, to this most beastly sin, nor is there any
disease so entailed to any other sin, as this to this. That this is the sin to
which the strange Punishment is entailed, you will easily perceive when you
read the Text. I made a covenant with mine eyes, said Job, why should I think
upon a Maid? For what portion is there (for that sin) from above, and what
Inheritance of the Almighty from on high? And then he answers himself; Is not
destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?
This strange Punishment is the Pox.

Also I think that this foul Disease is that which Solomon intends, when he
says, (speaking of this unclean and beastly creature) Prove. 6. 33.
A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be turned away.
A Punishment (...) calls it, a Wound and Dishonor, Solomon calls it; and they
both do set it as a Remark upon this sin; Job calling it a strange punishment,
and Solomon a reproach that shall not be turned away from them that are common
in it.


Atten. What other things follow upon the commission of this beastly sin?


Wise. Why, oftentimes it is attended with Murder, with the murder of the Babe
begotten on the defiled bed. How common it is for the Bastard-getter and
Bastard-bearer, to consent together to murder their Children, will be better
known at the day of Judgment; yet something is manifest now.

I will tell you another story. An ancient man, one of mine acquaintance, a man
of good credit in our Country, had a Mother that was a Midwise: who was mostly
employed in laying great persons. To this woman's house, upon a time, comes a
brave young Gallant on horseback, to fetch her to lay a young Lady. So she
addresses herself to go with him; wherefore, he takes her up behind him, and
away they ride in the night. Now they had not rid far, but the Gentleman litt
off his horse, and taking the old Midwife in his arms from the horse, turned
round with her several times, and then set her up again; then he got up, and
away they went till they came at a stately house, into which he had her, and so
into a Chamber where the young Lady was in her pa^^s: He then bid the Midwife
do her Office, and she demanded help, but he drew out his Sword and told her,
if she did not make speed to do her Office without, she must look for nothing
but death. Well, to be short, this old Midwife laid the young Lady, and a fine
sweet. Babe she had; Now there was made in a Room hard by, a very great Fire:
so the Gentleman took up the Babe, went and drew the coals from the stock, cast
the Child in, and covered it up, and there was an end of that. So when the
Midwife had done her work, he paid her well for her pains, but shut her up in a
dark room all day, and when night came, took her up behind him again, and
carried her away, till she came almost at home; then he turned her round, and
round, as he did before, and had her to her house, set her down, bid her
Farewell, and away he went: And she could never tell who it was.

This Story the Midwifes son, who was a Minister, told me; and also protested
that his mother told it him for a truth.


Atten. Murder does often follow indeed, as that which is the fruit of this
sin: but sometimes God brings even these Adulterers, and Adulteresses to
shameful ends. I heard of
one (I think, a Doctor of Physic) and his Whore, who had had three or four
Bastards betwixt them, and had murdered them all, but at last themselves were
hanged for it, in or near to Colchester. It came out after this manner: The
Whore was so afflicted in her conscience about it, that she could not be quiet
until she had made it known: Thus God many times makes the actors of
wickedness their own accusers, and brings them by their own tongues to condign
punishment for their own sins.


Wise. There has been many such instances, but we will let that pass. I was
once in the presence of a Woman, a married woman, that lay sick of the sickness
whereof she died; and being smitten in her conscience for the sin of
Uncleanness, which she had often committed with other men, I heard her (as she
lay upon her Bed) cry out thus:
I am a Whore, and all my Children are Bastards: And I must go to Hell for my
sin; and look, there stands the Devil at my beds feet to receive my Soul when I
die.


Atten. These are sad stories, tell no more of them now, but if you please show
me yet some other of the evil effects of this beastly sin.


Wise. This sin is such a snare to the Soul, that unless a miracle of Grace
prevents, it unavoidably perishes in the enchanting and bewitching pleasures of
it. This is manifest by these, and such like Texts.

The Adulteress will hunt for the precious life. Prove. 6. 26.
Whosoever commits adultery with a woman, lacks understanding, Chap. 23. 27.
and he that does it destroys his own soul. An Whore is a deep ditch, Prove. 2.
18, 19.
and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Her house inclines to death, and her
paths unto the dead. None that go in unto her return again, neither take they
hold of the path of life. Chap. 7. 2^, 26, 27.
She has cast down many wounded; yea many strong men have been slain by her,
her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death.


Atten. These are dreadful sayings, and do show the dreadful state of those
that are guilty of this sin.


Wise. Verily so they do. But yet that which makes the whole more dreadful,
is, That men are given up to this sin, because they are abhorred of God, and
because abhorred, therefore they shall fall into the commission of it; and
shall live there. The mouth (that is, the flattering Lips) of a strange woman
is a deep pit, Prove. 22. 14.
the abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. Therefore it says again of such,
that they have none Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God. Ephesians. 5.
5.



Atten. Put all together, and it is a dreadful thing to live and die in this
transgression.


Wise. True. But suppose, that instead of all these Judgments, this sin had
attending of it all the felicities of this life, and no bitterness, shame, or
disgrace mixed with it, yet one hour in Hell will spoil all. O! this Hell,
Hellfire, Damnation in Hell, it is such an inconceivable punishment, that were
it but thoroughly believed, it would nip this sin, with others, in the head. But
here is the mischief, those that give up themselves to these things, do so
harden themselves in Unbelief and Atheism about the things, the punishments
that God has threatened to inflict upon the committers of them, that at last
they arrive to, almost, an absolute and firm belief that there is no Judgment
to come hereafter: Else they would not, they could not, no not attempt to
commit this sin, by such abominable language as some do.

I heard of one that should say to his Miss, when he tempted her to the
committing of this sin, If thou will venture thy Body, Desperate words.
I will venture my Soul. And I my self heard another say, when he was tempting
of a Maid to commit uncleanness with him, (it was in Olivers days) That if she
did prove with Child, he would tell her how she might escape punishment, (and
that was then somewhat severe,) Say (says he) when you come before the Judge,
That you are with Child by the Holy Ghost. I heard him say thus, and it greatly
afflicted me; I had a mind to have accused him for it before some Magistrate;
but he was a great man, and I was poor, and young: so I let it alone, but it
troubled me very much.


Atten. 'Twas the most horrible thing that ever I heard in my life. But how far
off are these men from that Spirit and Grace that dwelt in Joseph!


Wise. Right; when Joseph's Mistress tempted him, Genesis 39. 10.
yea tempted him daily; Of chaste Joseph.
yea, she laid hold on him, and said with her Whores forehead, Come lie with
me, but he refused: He hearkened not to lie with her, or to be with her. Mr.
Badman would have taken the opportunity.

And a little to comment upon this of Joseph.

1. Here is a Miss, a great Miss, the Wife of the Captain of the Guard, some
beautiful Dame, I Will warrant you.

2. Here is a Miss won, and in her whorish Affections come over to Joseph,
without his speaking of a word.

3. Here is her unclean Desire made known; Come lie with me, said she.

4. Here was a fit opportunity. There was none of the men of the house there
within.

5. Joseph was a young man, full of strength, and therefore the more in danger
to be taken.

6. This was to him, a Temptation, from her, that lasted days.

7. And yet Joseph refused, 1. Her daily Temptation; 2. Her daily Solicitation:
3. Her daily Provocation, heartily, violently and constantly. For when she
caught him by the Garment, saying, Lie with me, he left his Garment in her
hand, and gat him out. Ay, and although contempt, treachery, slander,
accusation, imprisonment, and danger of death followed, (for an Whore cares
not what mischief she does, when she cannot have her end) yet Joseph will not
defile himself, sin against God, and hazard his own eternal salvation.


Atten. Blessed Joseph! I would thou had more fellows!


Wise. Mr. Badman has more fellows than Joseph, else there would not be so many
Whores as there are: For though I doubt not but that that Sex is bad enough
this way, yet I verily believe that many of them are made Whores at first by
the flatteries of Badmans fellows. Alas! Many are made whores by promises of
Marriage, etc.
there is many a woman plunged into this sin at first even by promises of
Marriage. I say, by these promises they are flattered, yea, forced into a
consenting to these Villainies, and so being in, and growing hardened in their
hearts, they at last give themselves up, even as wicked men do, to act this
kind of wickedness with greediness. But Joseph you see, was of another mind,
for the Fear of God was in him.

I will, before I leave this, tell you here two notable stories; and I wish Mr.
Badmans companions may hear of them. They are found in Clarks Looking-glass for
Sinners; and are these.

Mr. Cleaver (says Mr. Clark) reports of one whom he knew, Clarks Looking-glass
for Sinners, Chap. 2. Page 12.
that had committed the act of Uncleanness, whereupon he fell into such horror
of Conscience that he hanged himself; leaving it thus written in a paper.
Indeed, (says he) I acknowledge it to be utterly unlawful for a man to kill
himself, but I am bound to act the Magistrates part, because the punishment of
this sin is death.

Clark does also in the same page make mention of two more, who as they were
committing Adultery in London, were immediately struck dead with fire from
Heaven, in the very Act. Their bodies were so found, half burnt up, and sending
out a most loathsome savor.


Atten. These are not able stories indeed.


Wise. So they are, and I suppose they are as true as notable.


Atten. Well, but I wonder, if young Badmans Master knew him to be such a
Wretch, that he would suffer him in his house.


Wise. They liked one another even as Badman and his Master at her one another.
fire and water do. Young Badmans ways were odious to his Master, and his
Masters ways were such as young Badman could not endure. Thus in these two,
was fulfilled that saying of the Holy Ghost: Prove. 23. 27.
An unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he that is upright in the way
is abomination to the wicked.

The good man's ways, Mr. Badman could not abide, nor could the good man abide
the bad ways of his base Apprentice. Yet would his Master, if he could, have
kept him, and also have learnt him his trade.


Atten. If he could! why he might, if he would, might he not?


Wise. Alas, Young B^dman (...) away (...) M^^ter.
Badman ran away from him once and twice, and would not at all be ruled. So the
next time he did run away from him, he did let him go indeed. For he gave him
no occasion to run away, except it was by holding of him as much as he could
(and that he could do but little) to good and honest rules of life. And had it
been ones own case, one should have let him go. For what should a man do, that
had either regard to his own Peace, his Childrens Good, or the preservation of
the rest of his servants from evil, but let him go? Had he staid, the house of
Correction had been most fit for him, but thither his Master was loath to send
him, because of the love that he bore to his Father. An house of correction, I
say, had been the fittest place for him, but his Master let him go.


Atten. He ran away, you say, but whither did he run?


Wise. Why, He gets a new Master like himself.
to one of his own trade, and also like himself. Thus the wicked joined hand in
hand, and there he served out his time.


Atten. Then, sure, he had his hearts desire, when he was with one so like
himself.


Wise. Yes. So he had, but God gave it him in his anger.


Atten. How do you mean?


Wise. I mean as before, A sign of God^ anger upon young Badman.
that for a wicked man to be by the Providence of God, turned out of a good
man's doors, into a wicked man's house to dwell, is a sign of the Anger of God.
For God by this, and such Judgments, says thus to such an one: Thou wicked
one, thou love not me, my ways, nor my people; Thou castest my Law and good
Counsel behind thy back: Come, I will dispose of thee in my wrath; thou shall
be turned over to the ungodly, thou shall be put to school to the Devil, I will
leave thee to sink and swim in sin, till I shall visit thee with Death and
Judgment. This was therefore another Judgment that did come upon this young
Badman.


Atten. You have said the truth, for God by such a Judgment as this, in effect
says so indeed; for he takes them out of the hand of the just, and binds them
up in the hand of the wicked, and whither they then shall be carried, a man may
easily imagine.


Wise. It is one of the saddest tokens of Gods anger that happens to
Demonstration of Gods anger toward him.
such kind of persons: And that for several reasons.

1. Such an one, by this Judgment, is put out out of the way, and from under
the means which ordinarily are made use of to do good to the soul. Genesis 18. 18,
19.
For a Family where Godliness is professed, and practiced, is Gods Ordinance,
the place which he has appointed to teach young ones the way and fear of God.
Now to be put out of such a Family into a bad, a wicked one, as Mr. Badman was,
must needs be in Judgment, and a sign of the anger of God. For in ungodly
Families men learn to forget God, to hate goodness, and to estrange themselves
from the ways of those that are good.

2. In Bad Families, they have continually fresh Examples, and also incitements
to evil, and fresh encouragements to it too. Yea moreover, in such places evil
is commended, praised, well-spoken of, and they that do it, are applauded; and
this, to be sure, is a drowning Judgment.

3. Such places are the very haunts and Walks of the infernal Spirits, who are
continually poisoning the Cogitations and Minds of one or other in such
Families, that they may be able to poison others. Therefore observe it, usually
in wicked Families, some one, or two, are more arch for wickedness then are any
other that are there. Now such are Satan's Conduit-pipes; for by them he
conveighs of the spawn of Hell, through their being crafty in wickedness, into
the Ears and Souls of their Companions. Yea, and when they have once conceived
wickedness, they travel with it, as does a woman with Child, till they have
brought it forth; Behold, he travelleth with iniquity, Psalm. 7. 14.
and has conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood. Some men, as here is
intimated in the Text, and as was hinted also before, have a kind of mystical,
but hellish copulation with the Devil, who is the Father, and their Soul the
Mother of sin and wickedness; and they, so soon as they have conceived by him,
Jam. 1. 15.
finish, by bringing forth sin, both it, and their own damnation.


Atten. (...) to put their Children into (...).
How much then does it concern those Parents that love their Children, to see,
that if they go from them, they be put into such Families as be good, that they
may learn there be times to eschew evil, and to follow that which is good?


Wise. It does concern them indeed; and it does also concern them Masters
should also beware what Servants they entertain.
that take Children into their Families, to take heed what Children they
receive. For a man may soon by a bad Boy, be dammaged both in his Name, Estate,
and Family, and also hindered in his Peace and peaceable pursuit after God and
godliness; I say, by one such Vermin as a wicked and filthy Apprentice.


Atten. True, for one Sinner destroys much good, and a poor man is better
than a Lier. But many times a man cannot help it; for such as at the beginning
promise very fair, are by a little time proved to be very Rogues, like young
Badman.


Wise. That is true also, but when a man has done the best he can to help it,
he may with the more confidence expect the Blessing of God to follow, or he
shall have the more peace, if things go contrary to his desire.


Atten. Well, but did Mr. Badman and his Master agree so well? I mean his last
Master, since they were Birds of a Feather, I mean, since they were so well met
for wickedness.


Wise. This second Master, Young Badman and his second Master cannot agree.
was, as before I told you, bad enough, but yet he would often fall out with
young Badman his Servant, and chide, yea and sometimes beat him too, for his
naughty doings.


Atten. What! for all he was so bad himself! This is like the Proverb, The
Devil corrects Vice.


Wise. I will assure you, it is as I say. For you must know, that Badmans ways
suited not with his Masters gains. Could he have done as the Damsel that we
read of Acts 16. * Acts 16. 16
did, to wit, fill his Masters Purse with his badness, he had certainly been
his White-boy, but it was not so with young Badman; and therefore, though his
Master and he did suit well enough in the main, yet in this and that point they
differed. Reasons of their disagreeing.
Young Badman was for neglecting of his Masters business, for going to the
Whore-house, for beguiling of his Master, for attempting to debauch his
Daughters, and the like: No marvel then if they disagreed in these points. Not
so much for that his Master had an antipathy against the fact it self, for he
could do so when he was an Apprentice; but for that his servant by his sin made
spoil of his Commodities, etc. and so damnified his Master.

Had (as I said before) young Badmans wickedness, had only a tendency to his
Masters advantage; as could he have sworn, lied, cousened, cheated, and
defrauded customers for his Master, (and indeed sometimes he did so) but had
that been all that he had done, he had not had, no not a wry word from his
Master: But this was not always Mr. Badmans way.


Atten. That was well brought in, even the Maid that we read of in the Acts,
and the distinction was as clear betwixt the wickedness, and wickedness of
servants.


Wise. Alas! men that are wicked themselves, yet greatly hate it in others, not
simply because it is wickedness, but because it opposes their interest. Do you
think that that Maids master would have been troubled at the loss of her, if he
had not lost, with her, his gain: No, I Will warrant you; she might have gone to
the Devil for him: But when her master saw that the hope of his gain was gone,
Acts 16. 17, 18, 19, 20.
then, then he fell to persecuting Paul. But Mr. Badmans master did sometimes
lose by Mr. Badmans sins, and then Badman and his master were at odds.


Atten. Alas poor Badman! Then it seems thou could not at all times please
thy like.


Wise. No, he could not, and the reason I have told you.


Atten. But do not bad Masters condemn themselves in condemning the badness of
their servants.


Wise. Yes; To. 14. 22.
in that they condemn that in another which they either have, Bad Masters
condemn themselves when they for badness beat their Bad servants.
or do allow in themselves. And the time will come, when that very sentence
that has gone out of their own mouths against the sins of others, themselves
living and taking pleasure in the same, shall return with violence upon their
own pates. The Lord pronounced Judgment against Baasha, 1 King 16. 7.
as for all his evils in general, so for this in special, because he was like
the house of Jeroboam, and yet killed him. This is Mr. Badmans Masters case, he
is like his man, and yet he beats him. He is like his man, and yet he rails at
him for being bad.


Atten. But why did not young Badman run away from this Master, as he ran away
from the other?


Wise. He did not. Why young Badman did not run away from this Master though he
did beat him.
And if I be not mistaken, the reason why, was this. There was Godliness in the
house of the first, and that young Badman could not endure. For fare, for
lodging, for work, and time, he had better, and more by this Masters allowance,
than ever he had by his last; but all this would not content, because Godliness
was promoted there. He could not abide this praying, this reading of
Scriptures, and hearing, and repeating of Sermons: he could not abide to be
told of his transgressions in a sober and Godly manner.


Atten. There is a great deal in the Manner of reproof, wicked men both can,
and cannot abide to hear their transgressions spoken against.


Wise. There is a great deal of difference indeed. Why Badman could hear his
last Masters reproof ^^ter than he could the first.
This last Master of Mr. Badmans, would tell Mr. Badman of his sins in Mr.
Badmans own dialect; he would swear, and curse, and damn, when he told him of
his sins, and this he could bear better, than to be told of them after a godly
sort. Besides, that last Master would, when his passions and rage was over,
laugh at and make merry with the sins of his servant Badman: And that would
please young Badman well. Nothing offended Badman but blows, and those he had
but few of now, because he was pretty well grown up. For the most part when his
Master did rage and swear, he would give him Oath for Oath, and Curse for
Curse, at least secretly, let him go on as long as he would.


Atten. This was hellish living.


Wise. 'Twas hellish living indeed: By what means Badman (...) completed in
his wickedness.
And a man might say, that with this Master, young Badman completed himself
yet more and more in wickedness, as well as in his trade: for by that he came
out of his time, what with his own inclination to sin, what with his
acquaintance with his three companions, and what with this last Master, and the
wickedness he saw in him; he became a sinner in grain. I think he had a Bastard
laid to his charge before he came out of his time.


Atten. Well, Badman out of his time.
but it seems he did live to come out of his time, but what did he then?


Wise. Why, he went home to his Father, and he like a loving and tenderhearted
Father received him into his house.


Atten. And how did he carry it there?


Wise. Why, He goes home to his Father.
the reason why he went home, was, for Money to set up for himself, he stayed
but a little at home, but that little while that he did stay, He refrains
himself for Money.
he refrained himself as well he could, and did not so much discover himself to
be base, for fear his Father should take distaste, and so should refuse, or for
a while forbear to give him money.

Yet even then he would have his times, and companions, and the fill of his
lusts with them, but he used to blind all with this, he was glad to see his old
acquaintance, and they as glad to see him, and he could not in civility but
accomodate them with a bottle or two of Wine, or a dozen or two of Drink.


Atten. And did the old man give him money to set up with?


Wise. Yes, above two hundred pounds.


Atten. Therein, I think, the old man was out. Had I been his Father, I would
have held him a little at slaves-end, till I had had far better proof of his
manners to be good; (for I perceive that his Father did know what a naughty boy
he had been, both by what he used to do at home, and because Severity what it
in^^ines to.
he changed a good Master for a bad, etc.) He should not therefore have given
him money so soon. What if he had pinched a little, and gone to Journey-work
for a time, that he might have known what a penny was, by his earning of it?
Then, in all probability, he had known better how to have spent it: Yea, and by
that time perhaps, have better considered with himself, how to have lived in
the world. Ay, and who knows but he might have come to himself with the
Prodigal, and have asked God and his Father forgiveness for the villainies that
he had committed against them.


Wise. If his Father could also have blessed this manner of dealing to him, and
have made it effectual for the ends that you have propounded; then I should
have thought as you. But alas, alas, you talk as if you never knew, We are
better at giving then taking good Counsel.
or had at this present forgot what the bowels and compassions of a Father are.
Why did you not serve your own son so? But it is evident enough, that we are
better at giving good counsel to others, than we are at taking good counsel our
selves. But mine honest neighbor, suppose that Mr. Badmans Father had done as
you say, and by so doing had driven his son to ill courses, what had he
bettered either himself or his son in so doing?


Atten. That Is true, but it does not follow, that if the Father had done as I
said, the son would have done as you suppose. This is to be considered.
But if he had done as you have supposed, what had he done worse than what he
has done already?


Wise. He had done bad enough, thats' true. But suppose his Father had given
him no Money, and suppose that young Badman had taken a pett thereat, and in an
anger had gone beyond Sea, and his Father had neither seen him, nor heard of
him more. Or suppose that of a mad and headstrong stomach he had gone to the
Highway for money, and so had brought himself to the Gallows, and his Father
and Family to great contempt, or if by so doing he had not brought himself to
that end, yet he had added to all his wickedness, such and such evils besides:
And what comfort could his Father have had in this?

Besides, when his Father had done for him what he could, with desire to make
him an honest man, he would then, whether his son had proved honest or no, have
laid down his head with far more peace, than if he had taken your Counsel.


Atten. Nay I think I should not a been forward to have given advice in the
cause; but truly you have given me such an account of his villainies, that the
hearing thereof has made me angry with him.


Wise. In an angry mood we may soon out-shoot ourselves, but poor wretch, as he
is, he is gone to his place. But, as I said, when a good Father has done what
he can for a bad Child, and that Child shall prove never the better, he will
lie down with far more peace, than if through severity, he had driven him to
inconveniences.

I remember that I have heard of a good woman, that had (as this old man) a bad
and ungodly A good woman and her bad son.
son, and she prayed for him, counseled him, and carried it Motherly to him
for several years together; but still he remained bad. At last, upon a time,
after she had been at prayer, as she was wont, for his conversion, she comes to
him, and thus, or to this effect, begins again to admonish him. Son, said she,
Thou have been and art a wicked Child, thou have cost me many a prayer and
tear, and yet thou remainest wicked. Well, I have done my duty, I have done
what I can to save thee; now I am satisfied, that if I shall see thee damned at
the day of Judgment, I shall be so far off from being grieved for thee, that I
shall rejoice to hear the sentence of thy damnation at that day: And it
converted him.

I tell you, that if Parents carry it lovingly toward their Children, mixing
their Mercies with loving Rebukes, and their loving Rebukes with Fatherly and
Motherly Compassions, they are more likely to save their Children, than by
being churlish and severe toward them: but if they do not save them, if their
mercy does them no good, yet it will greatly ease them at the day of death, to
consider; I have done by love as much as I could, to save and deliver my child
from Hell.


Atten. Well I yield. But pray let us return again to Mr. Badman: You say, that
his Father gave him a piece of money that he might set up for himself.


Wise. Yes, his Father did give him a piece of money, Mr. Badman sets up for
himself, and quickly runs to the lands end.
and he did set up, and almost as soon set down again: for he was not long set
up, but by his ill managing of his matters at home, together with his
extravagant expenses abroad, he was got so far into debt, and had so little in
his shop to pay, that he was hard put to it to keep himself out of prison. But
when his Creditors understood that he was about to marry, and in a fair way to
get a rich Wife, they said among themselves, We will not be hasty with him, if
he gets a rich Wife he will pay us all.


Atten. But how could he so quickly run out, for I perceive 'twas in little
time, by what you say?


Wise. 'Twas in little time indeed, I think he was not above two years and an
half in doing of it: but the reason is apparent; The reason of his running out.
for he being a wild young man, and now having the bridle loose before him, and
being wholly subjected to his lusts and vices, he gave himself up to the way of
his heart, and to the sight of his eye, forgetting that for all these things
God will bring him to Judgment; Eccle. 11, 9.
and he that does thus, you may be sure, shall not be able long to stand on his
legs.

Besides, he had now an addition of New companions.
new companions; companions you must think, most like himself in Manners, and
so such that cared not who sunk, if they themselves might swim. These would
often be haunting of him, and of his shop too when he was absent. They would
commonly egg him to the Alehouse, but yet make him Jackpay-for-all; They would
be borrowing also money of him, but take no care to pay again, except it was
with more of their company, which also he liked very well; and so his poverty
came like one that travelleth, and his want like an armed man.

But all the while they studied his temper; Mr. Badmans temper.
he loved to be flattered, praised and commended for Wit, Manhood and
Personage; and this was like stroking him over the face. Thus they Collogued
with him, and got yet more and more into him, and so (like Horse-leaches) they
drew away that little that his father had given him, and brought him quickly
down, almost to dwell next door to the beggar.


Atten. Then was the saying of the wise man fulfilled, Pro 29. 3.
He that keeps company with harlots, Chap. 13. 20.
and a companion of fools, shall be destroyed.


Wise. Ay, and that too, A companion of riotous persons shameth his father;
Pro. 28. 7.
For he, poor man, had both grief and shame, to see how his son (now at his own
hand) be haved himself in the enjoyment of those good things, in and under the
lawful ^use of which he might have lived to Gods glory, his own comfort, and
credit among his neighbors. But he that follows vain persons, Pro. 28. 29.
shall have poverty enough. The way that he took, led him directly into this
condition; for who can expect other things of one that follows such courses?
Besides, when he was in his Shop, he could not abide to be doing; He was
naturally given to Idleness: He loved to live high, but his hands refused to
labor; and what else can the end of such an one be, but that which the wise
man says? Pro. 23. 21.
The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall
cloth a man with rags.


Atten. But now, methinks, when he was brought thus low, he should have
considered the hand of God that was gone out against him, and should have smote
upon the breast, and have returned.


Wise. Consideration, His Behavior under his decays.
good consideration was far from him, he was as stout and proud now, as ever in
all his life, and was as high too in the pursuit of his sin, as when he was in
the midst of his fullness; only he went now like a tired Jade, the Devil had rid
him almost off of his legs.


Atten. Well, but what did he do when all was almost gone?


Wise. Two things were now his play. How he covered his decays.
1. He bore all in hand by Swearing, and Cracking and Lying, that he was as
well to pass, as he was the first day he set up for himself, yea that he had
rather got than lost; and he had at his beck some of his Companions that would
swear to confirm it as fast as he.


Atten. This was double wickedness, 'twas a sin to say it, and another to swear
it.


Wise. That Is true, but what evil is that that he will not do, that is left of
God, as I believe Mr. Badman was?


Atten. And what was the other thing?


Wise. Why, Badman is for a rich Wife.
that which I hinted before, he was for looking out for a rich Wife: and now I
am come to some more of his invented, devised, designed, and abominable
Roguery, such that will yet declare him to be a most desperate sinner.

The thing was this: A Wife he wanted, or rather Money; for as for a woman, he
could have Whores enough at his whistle. But, as I said, he wanted Money, and
that must be got by a Wife, Badman has a godly Maid in his eye.
or no way; nor could he so easily get a Wife neither, except he became an
Artist at the way of dissembling; nor would dissembling do among that people
that could dissemble as well as he. He seeks to get her, why, and how.
But there dwelt a Maid not far from him, that was both godly, and one that had
a good Portion, but how to get her, there lay all the craft. Well, He calls his
Companions together, and they advise him how to get her.
he calls a Council of some of his most trusty and cunning Companions, and
breaks his mind to them; to wit, that he had a mind to marry: and he also told
them to whom; But, said he, how shall I accomplish my end, she is Religious,
and I am not? Then one of them made reply, saying, Since she is Religious, you
must pretend to be so likewise, and that for some time before you go to her:
Mark therefore whither she goes daily to hear, and do you go thither also; but
there you must be sure to behave your self soberly, and make as if you liked
the Word wonderful well; stand also where she may see you, and when you come
home, be sure that you walk the street very soberly, and go within sight of
her: This done for a while, then go to her, and first talk of how sorry you are
for your sins, and show great love to the Religion that she is of; still
speaking well of her Preachers and of her godly acquaintance, bewailing your
hard hap, that it was not your lot to be acquainted with her and her
fellow-Professors sooner; and this is the way to get her. Also you must write
down Sermons, talk of Scriptures, and protest that you came a wooing to her,
only because she is Godly, and because you should count it your greatest
happiness if you might but have such an one: As for her Money, slight it, it
will be never the further off, that is the way to come soonest at it, for she
will be jealous at first that you come for her Money; you know what she has,
but make not a word about it. Do this, and you shall see if you do not entangle
the Lass.

Thus was the snare laid for this poor honest Maid, and she was quickly catched
in his pit.


Atten. Why, did he take this counsel?


Wise. Did he! Badman goes to the Damosel as his Counsel advised him
yes, and after a while, went as boldly to her, and that under a Vizzard of
Religion, as if he had been for Honesty and Godliness, one of the most sincere
and upright-hearted in England. He observed all his points, and followed the
advice of his Counselors, and quickly obtained her too; for natural parts he
had, he was tall, and fair, and had plain, but very good Clothes on his back;
and his Religion was the more easily attained; for he had seen something in the
house of his Father, and first Master, and so could the more readily put
himself into the Form and Show thereof.

So he appointed his day, Badmans complement, his lying complement.
and went to her, as that he might easily do, for she had neither father nor
mother to oppose. Well, when he was come, and had given her a civil Complement,
to let her understand why he was come, then he began and told her, That he had
found in his heart a great deal of love to her Person; and that, of all the
Damsels in the world he had pitched upon her, if she thought fit, to make her
his beloved wife. The reasons, as he told her, why he had pitched upon her
were, her Religious and personal Excellencies; and therefore entreated her to
take his condition into her tender and loving consideration. As for the world,
quoth he, I have a very good trade, and can maintain my self and Family well,
while my wife sits still on her seat; I have got thus, and thus much already,
and feel money come in every day, but that is not the thing that I aim at, it is
an honest and godly Wife. Then he would present her with a good Book or two,
pretending how much good he had got by them himself. He would also be often
speaking well of godly Ministers, especially of those that he perceived she
liked, and loved most. Besides, he would be often telling of her, what a godly
Father he had, and what a new man he was also become himself; and thus did this
treacherous Dealer, deal with this honest and good Girl, to her great grief and
sorrow, as afterward you shall hear.


Atten. But had the maid no friend to look after her?


Wise. Her Father and Mother were dead, and that he knew well enough, and so
she was the more easily overcome by his naughty lying tongue. But if she had
never so many friends, Neglect of Counsel about marriage dangerous
she might have been beguiled by him. It is too much the custom of young people
now, to think themselves wise enough to make their own Choice, and that they
need not ask counsel of those that are older and also wiser then they: but this
is a great fault in them, and many of them have paid dear for it. Well, to be
short, in little time Mr. Badman obtains his desire, gets this honest Girl and
her money, Badman obtains his desire, is married, etc.
is married to her, brings her home, makes a Feast, entertains her royally, but
her Portion must pay for all.


Atten. This was wonderful deceitful doings, a man shall seldom hear of the
like.


Wise. By this his doing, he showed how little he feared God, and what little
dread he had of his Judgments. For all this carriage, His carriage judged
ungodly and wicked.
and all these words were by him premeditated evil, he knew he lied he knew he
dissembled; yea, he knew that he made use of the name of God, of Religion, good
Men, and good Books, but as a stalking-Horse, thereby the better to catch his
game. In all this his glorious pretense of Religion, he was but a glorious
painted Hypocrite, and hypocrisy is the highest sin that a poor carnal wretch
can attain unto; it is also a sin that most dares God, and that also brings
the greater damnation. Now was he a whited Wall, now was he a painted
Sepulcher; Mat. 23.
now was he a grave that appeared not; for this poor honest, The erat a^^ertion
that quickly happened to Badmens wife.
godly Damosel, little thought that both her peace, and comfort, and estate,
and liberty, and person, and all, were going to her burial, when she was going
to be married to Mr. Badman; And yet so it was, she enjoyed her self but little
afterward; she was as if she was dead and buried, to what she enjoyed before.


Atten. Certainly some wonderful Judgment of God must attend and overtake such
wicked men as these.


Wise. You may be sure that they shall have Judgment to the full, for all these
things, when the day of Judgment is come. But as for Judgment upon them in this
life, it does not always come, no not upon those that are worthy thereof. They
that tempt God are delivered, Mala. 3. 15.
and they that work wickedness are set up: Expectation of Judgment is for such
things.
But they are reserved to the day of wrath, and then for their wickedness, God
will repay them to their faces. The wicked is reserved to the day of
destruction, Job. 21. 30, 31, 32.
they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath; who shall declare his way to
his face? and who shall repay him what he has done? yet shall he be brought to
the grave, and remain in the tomb. That is, ordinarily they escape Gods hand in
this life, save only a few Examples are made, that others may be cautioned, and
take warning thereby: But at the day of Judgment they must be rebuked for their
evil with the lashes of devouring fire.


Atten. Can you give me no examples of Gods wrath upon men that have acted this
tragical wicked deed of Mr. Badman.


Wise. Yes; Hamor and Shechem, An example of Gods anger on such as have
heretofore committed this sin of Mr. Badman.
and all the men of their City, for attempting to make God and Religion the
stalking-Horse to get Jacobs daughters to wife, were together slain with the
edge of the sword. A Judgment of God upon them, Genesis 34.
no doubt, for their dissembling in that matter. All manner of lying and
dissembling is dreadful, but to make God and Religion a Disguise, therewith to
blind thy Dissimulation from others eyes, is highly provoking to the Divine
Majesty.

I knew one that dwelt not far off from our Town,
that got him a wife as Mr. Badman got his; but he did not enjoy her long: for
one night as he was riding home (from his companions, where he had been at a
neighboring Town) his horse threw him to the ground, where he was found dead
at break of day; frightfully and lamentably mangled with his fall, and
besmeared with his own blood.


Atten. Well, but pray return again to Mr. Badman, how did he carry it to his
wife, after he was married to her?


Wise. Nay, let us take things along as we go. He had not been married but a
little while, but his Creditors came upon him for their money: After Badman is
married, his Creditors come upon him, and his wives Portion pays for that which
his whores were feasted with before he was married.
He deferred them a little while, but at last things were come to that point,
that pay he must, or must do worse; so he appointed them a time, and they came
for their money, and he paid them down with her money before her eyes, for
those goods that he had profusely spent among his Whores long before, (besides
the portion that his Father gave him) to the value of two hundred pounds.


Atten. This beginning was bad; but what shall I say? 'twas like Mr. Badman
himself. Poor woman, this was but a bad beginning for her, I fear it filled her
with trouble enough, as I think such a beginning would have done, one, perhaps
much stronger than she.


Wise. Trouble, ay, you may be sure of it, but now 'twas too late to repent,
she should have looked better to her self, Now she reaps the Fruits of her
unadvisedness.
when being wary would have done her good; her harms may be an advantage to
others, that will learn to take heed thereby; but for her self, she must take
what follows, even such a life now as Mr. Badman her Husband will lead her, and
that will be bad enough.


Atten. This beginning was bad, and yet I fear it was but the beginning of bad.


Wise. You may be sure, Now Badman has got him a wise by Religion, he hangs it
by as a thing out of use, and entertains his old Companions.
that it was but the beginning of badness, for other evils came on apace; as
for instance: it was but a little while after he was married, but he hangs his
Religion upon the hedge, or rather dealt with it as men deal with their old
Cloths, who cast them off, or leave them to others to wear, for his part he
would be Religions no longer.

Now therefore he had pulled off his Vizzard, and began to show himself in his
old shape, a base, wicked, debauched fellow, (and now the poor woman saw that
she was betrayed indeed;) now also his old Companions begin to flock about him,
and to haunt his house and Shop as formerly: And who with them but Mr. Badman?
and who with him again but they?

Now those good people that used to company with his Wife, He drives good
company from his wife.
began to be amated and discouraged; also he would frown and gloat upon them,
as if he abhorred the appearance of them: so that in little time he drove all
good company from her, and made her s^t solitary by her self. He goes to his
Whores.
He also began now to go out a nights to those Drabs who were his Familiars
before, with whom he would stay sometimes till midnight, and sometimes till
almost morning, and then would come home as drunk as a Swine; and this was the
course of Mr. Badman.

Now, when he came home in this case, if his wife did but speak a word to him,
about where he had been, and why he had so abused himself, He rails at his wife.
though her words were spoken in never so much meekness and love, then she was
Whore, and Bitch, and Jade; and 'twas well if she missed his fingers and heels.
Sometimes also he would bring his Puncks home to his house, and woe be to his
wife when they were gone, if she did not entertain them with all varieties
possible, and also carry it lovingly to them.

Thus this good woman was made by Badman her Husband, to possess nothing but
disappointments as to all that he had promised her, or that she hoped to have
at his hands.

But that that added pressing weight to all her sorrow, He seeks to force his
wife from her Religion.
was, that, as he had cast away all Religion himself, so he attempted, if
possible, to make her do so too. He would not suffer her to go out to the
Preaching of the Word of Christ, nor to the rest of his Appointments, for the
health and salvation of her Soul: he would now taunt at, He mocks at her
Preachers.
and reflectingly speak of her Preachers; and would receive, yea raise scandals
of them, to her very great grief and affliction.

Now she scarce durst go to an honest Neighbors house, or have a good Book in
her hand; specially when he had his companions in his house, or had got a
little drink in his head. He would also, when he perceived that she was
dejected, speak tauntingly, He mocks his wife in her dejections.
and mockingly to her in the presence of his Companions, calling of her his
Religious Wife, his demure Dame, and the like; also he would make a sport of
her among his wanton ones abroad.

If she did ask him (as sometimes she would) to let her go out to a Sermon, He
refuses to let her go out to good company.
he would in a currish manner reply, Keep at home, keep at home, and look to
your business, we cannot live by hearing of Sermons. If she still urged that he
would let her go, then he would say to her, Go if you dare. He would also
charge her with giving of what he had to her Ministers, when, vile wretch, he
had spent it on his vain Companions before.

This was the life that Mr. Badmans good wife lived, within few months after he
had married her.


Atten. This was a disappointment indeed.


Wise. A disappointment indeed, as ever, I think, poor woman had. One would
think that the Knave. might a little let her have had her will, since it was
nothing but to be honest, and since she brought him so sweet, so lumping a
Portion, for she brought hundreds into his house: I say, one would think he
should have let her had her own will a little, since she desired it only in the
Service and Worship of God: but could she win him to grant her that? no, She
gets out sometimes by stealth.
not a bit if it would have saved her life. True, sometimes she would steal out
when he was from home, on a Journey, or among his drunken companions, but with
all privacy imaginable, and, poor woman, this advantage she had, she carried it
so to all her Neighbors, that, though many of them were but carnal, yet they
would not betray her, or tell of her going out to the Word, if they saw it, but
would rather endeavor to hide it from Mr. Badman himself.


Atten. This carriage of his to her, was enough to break her heart.


Wise. It was enough to do it indeed, yea it did effectually do it. It killed
her in time, yea it was all the time a killing of her. She would oftentimes
when she sat by her self, Her repentance and complaint.
thus mournfully bewail her condition: Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech,
Psalm. 120.
and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar; my soul has long time dwelt with him
that hates peace. O what shall be given unto thee, thou deceitful tongue? or
what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? I am a Woman grieved in
spirit, my Husband has bought me and sold me for his lusts: 'Twas not me, but
my Money that he wanted: O that he had had it, so I had had my liberty!

This she said, not of comtempt of his Person, but of his Conditions, and
because she saw that by his hypocritical tongue, he had brought her not only
almost to beggary, but robbed her of the Word of God.


Atten. It is a deadly thing, The evil of being unequally yoaked together.
I see, to be unequally yoaked with Vnpelievers. If this woman had had (...)
good Husband, h^^ happlly might they have lived together! Such (...) one would
have prayed for her, (...) her, and also would have encouraged her in the
Faith, and ways of God: But now poor cr^^ur^, instead of this, there is nothing
but the quite contrary.


Wise. It is a deadly thing indeed, and therefore, by the Word of God his
people are forbid to be joined in marriage with them. Cor. 6. 13.
Be not, says it, unequally yoaked together with unbelievers; for what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has
light with darkness? And what Concord has Christ with Belial? or what part
has he that believes with an Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? There can be no agreement where such Matches are made, even God
himself has declared the contrary, from the beginning of the world. I (says
he) will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman, Genesis 3. 15.
betwixt thy seed and her seed. Therefore he says in another place, they can
mix no better than Iron and Clay. Deuteronomy. 2. 43.
I say, they cannot agree, they cannot be one, and therefore they should be
aware at first, and not lightly receive such into their affections. God has
often made such Matches bitter, especially to his own. Such matches are, as God
said of Elic's Sons that were spared, to consume the eyes, and to grieve the
heart. Oh the wailing, and lamentation that they have made that have been thus
yoaked, especially if they were such as would be so yoaked, against their
light, and good counsel to the contrary.


Atten. Alas! he deluded her with his tongue, and feigned reformation.


Wise. Well, Good counsel to those godly mai^^ that are to marry.
well; she should have gone more warily to work: what if she had acquainted
some of her best, most knowing, and godly friends therewith? what if she had
engaged a Godly Minister or two to have talked with Mr. Badman? Also, what if
she had laid wait round about him, to epsy if he was not otherwise behind her
back than he was before her face? And besides, I verily think (since in the
multitude of Counselors there is safety) that if she had acquainted the
Congregation with it, and desired them to spend some time in prayer to God
about it, and if she must have had him, to have received him as to his
godliness, upon the Judgment of others, rather than her own, (she knowing them
to be Godly and Judicious, and unbiassed men) she had had more peace all her
life after; than to trust to her own poor, raw, womanish Judgment, as she did.
Love is blind, and will see nothing amiss, where others may see an hundred
faults. Therefore I say, she should not have trusted to her own thoughts in the
matter of his Goodness.

As to his Person, there she was fittest to judge, because she was to be the
person pleased, but as to his Godliness, there the Word was the fittest Judge,
and they that could best understand it, because God was therein to be pleased.
I wish A caution to young Maidens.
that all young Maidens will take heed of being beguiled with flattering words,
with feigning and lying speeches, and take the best way to preserve themselves
from being bought and sold by wicked men, as she was; lest they repent with
her, when (as to this) repentance will do them no good, but for their
unadvisedness go sorrowing to their graves.


Atten. Well, things are past with this poor woman, and cannot be called back,
let others Let Mr. Badmans wife be your (...).
beware, ^y her ^^fortunes, lest they also fall into her distress.


Wise. That is the thing that I say, let them take heed, lest for their
unadvisedness they smart, as this poor woman has done. And ah! methinks, that
they that yet are single persons, and that are tempted to marry to such as Mr.
Badman; would, to inform, and warn themselves in this matter, before they
entangle themselves, but go to some that already are in the snare, and ask
them how it is with them, as to the suitable, or unsuitableness of their
marriage, and desire their advice. Surely they would ring such a peal in their
ears about the uneqality, unsuitableness, disadvantages, and disquietments, and
sins that attend such marriages, that would make them beware as long as they
live. But the bird in the air, knows not the notes of the bird in the snare,
until she comes thither her self: Besides, to make up such marriages, Satan,
and carnal Reason, and Lust, or at least Inconsiderateness, has the chiefest
hand; and where these things bear sway, designs, though never so destructive,
will go headlong on: and therefore I fear, that but little warning will be
taken by young Girls, at Mr. Badmans wives affliction.


Atten. But are there no disswasive arguments to lay before such, to prevent
their future misery.


Wise. Yes: There is the Law of God, that forbids marriage with unbelievers.
These kind of marriages also are condemned even by irrational creatures. 1. It
is forbidden by the Law of God both in the Old Testament and in the New. 1. In
the Old. Deuteronomy. 7. 4, 5.
Thou shall not make Marriages with them; Thy daughter thou shall not give unto
his son, nor his daughter shall thou take unto thy son, Deuteronomy. 7. 4, 5. 2. In
the New Testament it is forbidden. 1 Cor. 7. 39.
Be not unequally yoaked together with unbelievers; 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.
Let them marry to whom they will, Rules for those that are to marry.
only in the Lord.

Here now is a prohibition, plainly forbidding the Believer to marry with the
Unbeliever, therefore they should not do it. Again, these unwarrantable
Marriages, are, as I may so say, condemned by irrational creatures, who will
not couple but with their own sort: Will the Sheep couple with a Dog, the
Partridge with a Crow, or the Feasant with an Owl? No, they will strictly tie
up themselves to those of their own sort only: Yea, it sets all the world a
wondering, when they see or hear the contrary. Man only is most subject to wink
at, and allow of these unlawful mixtures of men and women; Because man only is
a sinful Beast, a sinful Bird, therefore he, above all, will take upon him by
rebellious actions to answer, or rather to oppose and violate the Law of his
God and Creator; nor shall these, or other Interogatories, [ What fellowship?
what concord? what agreement? what communion can there be in such Marriages?]
be counted of weight, or thought worth the answering by him.

But further. If you love your Sou^s take heed.
The dangers that such do commonly run themselves into, should be to others a
disswasive argument to stop them from doing the like: for besides the
distresses of Mr. Badmans wife, many that have had very hopeful beginnings for
heaven, have by virtue of the mischiefs that have attended these unlawful
marriages, miserably and fearfully miscarried. Soon after such marriages,
Conviction (the first step toward heaven) has ceased; Prayer (the next step
toward Heaven) has ceased; Hungrings and thirstings after salvation (another
step toward the Kingdom of Heaven) have ceased. In a word, such marriages have
estranged them from the Word, from their godly and faithful Friends, and have
brought them again into carnal company, among carnal Friends, and also into
carnal Delights, where, and with whom they have in conclusion both sinfully
abode, and miserably perished.

And this is one reason why God has forbidden this kind of unequal marriages.
For they, says he, meaning the ungodly, will turn away thy son from following
me, Deuteronomy. 7.
that they may serve other Gods, so will the anger of the Lord be kindled
against you, and destroy you suddenly. Now mark, there were some in Israel,
that would, notwithstanding this prohibition, venture to marry to the Heathens
and Unbelievers: But what followed? They served their Idols, they sacrificed
their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils. Thus were they defiled with their
own works, and went a whoring with their own Inventions: Therefore was the
wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, Psalm. 106. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40.
insomuch that he abhorred his own Inheritance.


Atten. But let us return again to Mr. Badman; had be any Children by his wife?


Wise. Yes, seven.


Atten. I doubt they were but badly brought up.


Wise. One of them loved its Mother dearly, Badmans Children that he had by
this good wom^n.
and would constantly harken to her voice. Now that Child she had the
opportunity to instruct in the Principles of Christian Religion, and it became
a very gracious child. But that child Mr. Badman could not abide, he would
seldom afford it a pleasant word, but would scowl and frown upon it, speak
churlishly and doggedly to it, and though as to Nature it was the most feeble
of the seven, yet it oftenest felt the weight of its Fathers fingers. Three of
his Children did directly follow his steps, and began to be as vile as (in his
youth) he was himself. The other that remained became a kind of mungrel
Professors, not so bad as their Father, nor so good as their Mother, but were
betwixt them both. They had their Mothers Notions, and their Fathers Actions,
and were much like those that you read of in the Book of Nehemiah; Nehem. 13.
24.
These children spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the
Jews language, but according to the language of each people.


Atten. What you say in this matter, is observable, and if I take not my mark
amiss, it often happens after this manner where such unlawful Marriages are
contracted.


Wise. It sometimes does so, How the ungodly Father and godly M^ther do strive
for the Children that God does give them.
and the reason, with respect to their Parents, is this: Where the one of the
Parents is godly, and the other ungodly and vile, (though they can agree in
begetting of Children, yet) they strive for their Children when they are born.
The godly Parent strives for the child, and by Prayers, Counsel and good
Examples, labors to make it holy in body and soul, and so fit for the Kingdom
of Heaven; but the 'ungodly would have it like himself, wicked and base and
sinful; and so they both give instructions accordingly: instructions did I say?
yea, and Examples too, according to their minds. Thus the godly, as Hannah, is
presenting her Samuel unto the Lord: but the ungodly, like them that went
before them, are for offering their Children to Moloch, to an Idol, to sin, to
the Devil, and to Hell. Thus one harkeneth to the Law of their Mother, and is
preserved from destruction, but as for the other, as their Fathers did, so do
they. Thus did Mr. Badman and his wife part some of their Children betwixt
them; but as for the other three that were as 'twere Mungrels, betwixt both,
they were like unto those that you read of in Kings, They feared the Lord, 2
King. 17.
but served their own Idols. They had, as I said, their Mothers Notions, and I
will add, Profession too; but their Fathers Lusts, and something of his Life.
Now their Father did not like them, because they had their Mothers tongue; and
the Mother did not like them because they had still their Fathers heart and
life; nor were they indeed fit company for good or bad. The Good would not
trust them because they were bad, the Bad would not trust them because they
were good, viz. The good would not trust them because they were bad in their
Lives, and the bad would not trust them because they were good in their Words:
So they were forced with Esau to join in affinity with Ishmad; to wit, to look
out a people that were Hypocrites like themselves, and with them they matched,
and lived and died.


Atten. Poor woman, she could not but have much perplexity.


Wise. Yea, and poor Children, that ever they were sent into the world as the
fruit of the loins, and under the government of such a father as Mr. Badman.


Atten. You say right, for such children, lie, almost under all manner of
disadvantages: but we must say nothing, because this also is the sovereign Will
of God.


Wise. We may not by any means object against God: yet we may talk of the
advantages, and disadvantages that Children have by having for their Parents
such as are either Godly, or the contary.


Atten. You say right, we may so, and pray now, since we are about it, speak
something in brief unto it, that is, unto this; What advantage those Children
have above others, that have for their Parents such as indeed are Godly.


Wise. So I will, The advantages that Children have, whose Parents are both
godly.
only I must first premise these two or three things.

1. They have not the advantage of Election for their fathers sakes.

2. They are born, as others, the children of wrath, though they come of Godly
Parents.

3. Grace comes not unto them as an Inheritance, because they have Godly
Parents. These things premised I shall now proceed.

1. The children of Godly Parents are the children of many Prayers: they are
prayed for before, and Prayed for after they are born, and the Prayer of a
godly Father and godly Mother does much.

2. They have the advantage of what restraint is possible, from what evils
their Parents see them inclinable to, and that is a second mercy.

3. They have the advantage of Godly instruction, and of being told which be,
and which be not the right ways of the Lord.

4. They have also those ways commended unto them, and spoken well of in their
hearing, that are good.

5. Such are also, what may be, kept out of evil company, from evil Books, and
from being taught the way of Swearing, Lying, and the like, as
Sabbath-breaking, and mocking at good men, and good things, and this is a very
great mercy.

6. They have also the benefit of a godly life set before them doctrinally by
their Parents, and that doctrine backed with a godly and holy example: and all
these are very great advantages.

Now all these advantages, The disadvantages that the Children of ungodly
Parent have.
the children of ungodly Parents want; and so are more in danger of being
carried away with the error of the wicked. For ungodly Parents neither Pray for
their Children, nor do, nor can they heartily instruct them; they do not after
a godly manner restrain them from evil, nor do they keep them from evil
company. They are not grieved at, nor yet do they forewarn their children to
beware of such evil actions that are abomination to God, and to all good men.
They let their children break the Sabbath, swear, lie, be wicked and vain. They
commend not to their children an holy life, nor set a good example before their
eyes. No, they do in all things contrary: Estranging of their children what
they can, from the love of God and all good men, so soon as they are born.
Therefore it is a very great Judgment of God upon children to be the Offspring
of base and ungodly men. Job. 30. 8.



Atten. Well, but before we leave Mr. Badmans wife and children, I have a mind,
if you please, to enquire a little more after one thing, the which I am sure
you can satisfy me in.


Wise. What is that?


Atten. You said a while ago, that this Mr. Badman would not suffer his wife to
go out to hear such godly Ministers as she liked, but said if she did, she had
as good never come home any more. Did he often carry it thus to her?


Wise. He did say so, he did often say so. This I told you then, and had also
then told you more, but that other things put me out.


Atten. Well said, pray therefore now go on.


Wise. So I will. Upon a time, she was on a Lords day for going to hear a
Sermon, and Mr. Badman was unwilling she should: but she at that time, as it
seems, did put on more courage than she was wont; and therefore, after she had
spent upon him, a great many fair words and entreaties, A contest betwixt Mr.
Badman and his wife.
if perhaps she might have prevailed by them, but all to no purpose at all: At
last she said she would go, and rendered this reason for it; I have an Husband,
but also a God; my God has commanded me, and that upon pain of damnation, to be
a continual Worshipper of him, and that in the way of his own Apppointments: I
have an Husband, but also a Soul, and my Soul ought to be more unto me, than
all the world besides. This soul of mine I will look after, care for, and (if I
can) provide it an Heaven for its habitation. You are commanded to love me,
Ephesians. 5. 28.
as you love your own body, and so do I love you; but I tell you true, I
prefer my Soul before all the world, and its Salvation I will seek.

At this, With what weapons Badman did deal with his wife.
first, he gave her an ugly wish, and then fell into a fearful rage, and swear
moreover that if she did go, he would make both her, and all her damnable
Brotherhood (for so he was pleased to call them) to repent their coming thither.


Atten. But what should be mean by that?


Wise. You may easily guess what he meant: he meant, he would turn Informer,
and so either weary out those that she loved, from meeting together to Worship
God; or make them pay dearly for their so doing; the which if he did, he knew
it would vex every vein of her tender heart.


Atten. But do you think Mr. Badman would have been so base?


Wise. Truly he had malice, and enmity enough in his heart to do it, only he
was a Tradesman; also he knew that he must live by his neighbors, and so he
had that little wit in his anger, that he refrained himself, and did it not.
But, as I said, he had malice and envy enough in his heart to have made him to
do it, Mr. Badmans heart discovered as to its enmity against the friends of his
wife.
only he thought it would worst him in his trade: yet these three things he
would be doing.

1. He would be putting of others on to molest and abuse her friends.

2. He would be glad when he heard that any mischief befell them.

3. And would laughed at her, when he saw her troubled for them. And now I have
told you Mr. Badmans way as to this.


Atten. But was he not afraid of the Judgments of God, that did fly about at
that time?


Wise. He regarded not the Judgment nor Mercy of God, for had he at all done
that, he could not have done as he did. But what Judgments do you mean?


Atten. Such Judgments, that if Mr Badman himself had taken but sober notice
of, they might have made him a hung down his ears.


Wise. Why, have you heard of any such persons that the Judgments of God have
overtaken.


Atten. Yes, and so, I believe, have you too, though you make so strange about
it.


Wise. I have so indeed, to my astonishment and wonder.


Atten. Pray therefore, if you please, tell me what it is, as to this, that you
know; and then, herhaps, I may also say something to you of the same.


Wise. In our Town there was one W. S. Mark.
a man of a very wicked life;
and he, when there seemed to be countenance given to it, would needs turn
Informer. Well, so he did, and was as diligent in his business as most of them
could be; he would watch a nights, climb Trees, and range the Woods a days, if
possible, to find out the Meeters, for then they were forced to meet in the
Fields: yea, he would curse them bitterly, and swear most fearfully what he
would do to them when he found them. Well, after he had gone on like a Bedlam
in his course a while, and had done some mischiefs to the people, he was
stricken by the hand of God, and that in this manner.

1. Although he had his tongue naturally at will, now he was taken with a
faultering in his speech, and could not for weeks together speak otherwise,
than just like a man that was drunk.

2. Then he was taken with a drauling, or slabbering at his mouth, which
slabber sometimes would hang at his mouth well nigh half way down to the ground.

3. Then he had such a weakness in the back sinews of his Neck, that often times
he could not look up before him, unless he clapped his hand hard upon his
forehead, and held up his head that way, by strength of hand.

4. After this his speech went quite away, and he could speak no more than a
Swine or a Bear. Therefore, like one of them, he would gruntle and make an ugly
noise, according as he was offended, or pleased, or would have any thing done,
etc.

In this posture he continued for the space of half a year, or thereabouts, all
the while otherwise well, and could go about his business, save once that he
had a fall from the Bell as it hangs in our Steeple, which 'twas a wonder it
did not kill him: But after that he also walked about, till God had made him a
sufficient spectacle of his Judgment for his sin, and then on a sudden he was
stricken and dyed miserably: and so there was an end of him and his doings.

I will tell you of another.
About four miles from St. Neots, there was a Gentleman had a man, and he would
needs be an Informer, and a lusty young man he was. Well, an Informer he was,
and did much distress some people, and had perfected his Informations so
effectually against some, that there was nothing further to do, but for the
Constables to make distress on the people, that he might have the Money or
Goods; and as I heard, he hastened them much to do it. Now while he was in the
heat of his work, as he stood one day by the Fireside, he had (it should seem)
a mind to a Sop in the Pan, (for the Spit was then at the fire,) so he went to
make him one; but behold, a Dog (some say his own Dog) took distaste at
something, and bit his Master by the Leg; the which bite, notwithstanding all
the means that was used to cure him, turned (as was said) to a Gangrene;
however, that wound was his death, and that a dreadful one too: for my Relator
said, that he lay in such a condition by this bite, (as the beginning) till his
flesh rotted from off him before he went out of the world. But what need I
instance in particular persons, when the Judgment of God against this kind of
people was made manifest, I think I may say, if not in all, yet in most of the
Counties in England where such poor Creatures were. But I would, if it had been
the will of God, that neither I nor any body else, could tell you more of these
Stories: True stories, that are neither Lie, nor Romance.


Atten. Well, I also heard of both these my self, and of more too, as
remarkable in their kind as these, if I had any list to tell them; but let us
leave those that are behind to others, or to the coming of Christ, who then
will justify or condemn them as the merit of their work shall require; or if
they repented, and found mercy, I shall be glad when I know it, for I wish not
a curse to the Soul of mine Enemy.


Wise. There can be no pleasure in the telling of such stories, though to hear
of them may do us a pleasure: They may put us in mind that there is a God that
judges in the earth, and that does not always forget nor defer to hear the
Cry of the destitute; They also carry along with them both Caution and Counsel
to those that are the survivers of such. Let us tremble at the Judgments of
God, and be afraid of sinning against him, and it shall be our protection. It
shall go well with them that fear God, that fear before him.


Atten. Well Sir, as you have intimated, so I think we have in this place
spoken enough about these kind of men; if you please, let us return again to
Mr. Badman himself, if you have any more to say of him.


Wise. More! we have yet scarce thoroughly begun with Any thing that we have
said. All the particulars are in themselves so full of badness, that we have
rather only looked in them, than indeed said any thing to them: but we will
pass them, and proceed. You have heard of the sins of his Youth, of his
Apprentiship, and how he set up, and married, and what a life he has led his
wife; and now I will tell you some more of his pranks. New discourse of Mr.
Badman.
He had the very knack of Knavery; had he, as I said before, been bound to
serve an Apprentiship to all these things, he could not have been more cunning,
he could not have been more artificial at it.


Atten. Nor perhaps so artificially neither. For as none can teach Goodness
like to God himself, so concerning Sin and Knavery, none can teach a man it
like the Devil, to whom, as I perceive, Mr. Badman went to School from his
Childhood to the end of his life. But pray Sir, make a beginning.


Wise. Well so I will. You may remember that I told you what a condition he was
in for Money before he did marry, and how he got a rich Wife, with whose Money
he paid his debts: Now when he had paid his debts, he having some Moneys left,
he sets up again as briskly as ever, keeps a great Shop, drives a great Trade,
and runs again a great way into debt; Mr. Badman plays a new prank.
but now not into the debt of one or two, but into the debt of many, so that at
last he came to owe some thousands; and thus he went on a good while. And to
pursue his ends the better, he began now to study to please all men, and to
suit himself to any company; he could now be as they, say as they, that is, if
he listed; and then he would list, when he perceived that by so doing, he might
either make them his Customers or Creditors for his Commodities. If he dealt
with honest men, (as with some honest men he did) then he would be as they;
talk as they, seem to be sober as they, talk of Justice and Religion as they,
and against Debauchery as they; yea, and would too seem to show a dislike of
them that said, did, or were otherwise than honest.

Again, when he did light among those that were bad, then he would be as they,
but yet more close and cautiously, except he were sure of his company: Then he
would carry it openly, be as they; say, Damn 'em and Sink 'em, as they. If they
railed on Good men, so could he; if they railed on Religion, so could he: Mr.
Badmans perfection.
if they talked beastly, vainly, idly, so would he; if they were for
drinking, swearing, whoring, or any the like Villainies, so was he. This was now
the path he trod in, and could do all artificially, as any man alive. And now
he thought himself a perfect man, he thought he was always a Boy till now. What
think you now of Mr. Badman?


Atten. Think! why, I think he was an Atheist: For no man but an Atheist can do
this. I say, it cannot be, but that the man that is such as this Mr. Badman,
must be a rank and stinking Atheist; for he that believes that there is either
God or Devil, Heaven or Hell, or Death, and Judgment after, cannot do as Mr.
Badman did; I mean, if he could do these things without reluctance and check of
Conscience; yea, if he had not sorrow and remorse for such abominable sins as
these.


Wise. Nay, he was so far off from reluctancies and remorse of Conscience for
these things, that he counted them the excellency of his Seize, the
quintessence of his Wit, his rare and singular virtues, such as but few besides
himself could be the Masters of. Therefore, as for those that made boggle and
stop at things, and that could not in Conscience, and for fear of Death and
Judgment, do such things as he; he would call them Fools and Noddies, and
charge them for being frighted with the talk of unseen Bugbears; and would
encourage them, if they would be men indeed, to labor after the attainment of
this his excellent art. He would oftentimes please himself with the thoughts
of what he could do in this matter, saying within himself; How Mr. Badman came
to enjoy himself.
I can be religious, and irreligious, I can be any thing, or nothing; I can
swear, and speak against swearing; I can lie, and speak against lying; I can
drink, wench, be unclean, and defraud, and not be troubled for it: Now I enjoy
my self, and am Master of mine own ways, and not they of me. This I have
attained with much study, great care, and more pains. But this his talk should
be only with himself, to his wife, who he knew durst not divulge it; or among
his Intimates, to whom he knew he might say any thing.


Atten. Did I call him before an Atheist? I may call him now a Devil, or a man
possessed with one, if not with many. I think that there cannot be found in
every corner such an one as this. 2 Chronicles. 28. 22.
True, it is said of King Ahaz, that he sinned more and more; and of Ahab, 1
King 21. 25.
that he sold himself to work wickedness; and of the men of Sodom, Genesis 13. 1^.
that they were sinners exceedingly before the Lord.


Wise. An Atheist he was no doubt, if there be such a thing as an Atheist in
the world, but for all his brags of perfection and security in his wickedness,
Job. 21. 1^.
I believe that at times God did let down fire from Heaven into his Conscience.
True, I believe he would quickly put it out again, and grow more desperate and
wicked afterward, but this also turned to his destruction, as afterward you may
hear.

But I am not of your mind, to think that there are but few such in the world;
except you mean as to the Degree of wickedness unto which he had attained. For
otherwise, no doubt, There are abundance like Mr. Badman.
there is abundance of such as he: men of the same mind, of the same
principles, and of the same conscience too, to put them into practice. Yea, I
believe that there are many that are endeavoring to attain to the same pitch
of wickedness; and all them are such as he, in the Judgment of the Law; nor
will their want of hellish wit to attain thereto, excuse them at the day of
Judgment. You know that in all Science, some are more arch than some; and so it
is in the art, as well as in the practice of wickedness: some are two fold, and
some sevenfold more the children of Hell than others, (and yet all the
children of Hell,) else they would all be Masters, and none scholars in the
school of wickedness. But there must be Masters, and there must be Learners;
Mr. Badman was a master in this art, and therefore it follows that he must be
an arch and chief one in that mystery.


Atten. You are in the right, for I perceive that some men, though they desire
it, cannot be so arch in the practice thereof as others, but are (as I suppose
they call them) fools and dunces to the rest, their heads and capacities will
not serve them to act and do so wickedly. But Mr. Badman wanted not a wicked
head to contrive, as well as a wicked heart to do his wickedness.


Wise. True, but yet I say, such men shall at the day of Judgment, be judged,
not only for what they are, but also for what they would be. Pro. 24. 9.
For if the thought of foolishness is sin, doubtless the desire of foolishness
is more sin: and if the desire be more, the endeavor after it must needs be
more and more. He that would be bad is bad.
He then that is not an artificial Atheist and Transgressor, yet if he desires
to be so, if he endeavors to be so, he shall be Judged and condemned to Hell
for such an one. For the Law Judges men, as I said, according to what they
would be. Matt. 5. 29.
He that looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart. By the same rule, he that would steal, does steal; he
that would cheat, does cheat; he that would swear, does swear; and he that
would commit adultery, does do so. For God Judges men according to the working
of their minds, and says; Pro. 23. 7.
As he thinks, so is he. That is, so is he in his heart, Mat. 5.
in his intentions, in his desires, in his endeavors; Romans 7. 7.
and Gods Law, I say, lays hold of the desires, intentions and endeavors, even
as it lays hold of the act of wickedness it self. A man then that desires to be
as bad as Mr. Badman, (and desires to be so wicked have many in their hearts)
though he never attains to that proficiency in wickedness as he, shall yet be
Judged for as bad a man as he, because 'twas in his desires to be such a wicked
one.


Atten. Bu^ this height of wickedness in Mr. Badman, will not yet out of my
mind. This hard, desperate, or what shall I call it, diababolicall frame of
heart, was in him a foundation, a groundwork to all acts and deeds that were
evil.


Wise. The heart, and the desperate wickedness of it, is the foundation and
groundwork of all. Atheism, professed and practical, A bad heart makes a bad
man.
spring both out of the heart, yea and all manner of evils besides. For they be
not bad deeds that make a bad man, but he is already a bad man that does bad
deeds. A man must be wicked before he can do wickedness. 1 Samuel 24. 13.
Wickedness proceeds from the wicked. It Is an evil tree that bears evil
fruit, Mat. 7. 16, 17, 18.
men gather no grapes of thorns; the heart therefore must be evil, before the
man can do evil, and good before the man does good.


Atten. Now I see the reason why Mr. Badman was so base, as to get a Wife by
dissimulation, and to abuse her so like a Villain when he had got her, it was
because he was before by a wicked heart prepared to act wickedness.


Wise. You may be sure of it; for from within, out of the heart of man
proceeds evil thoughts, Adulteries, Mar. 7. 20, 21, 22, 23.
Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Coveteousness, Wickedness, Deceit,
Lasciviousness, an evil Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness. All these things
come from within, and defile a man. And a man, as his naughty mind inclines
him, makes use of these, or any of these, to gratify his lust, to promote his
designs, to revenge his malice, to enrich, or to wallow himself in the foolish
pleasures and pastimes of this life: And all these did Mr. Badman do, even to
the utmost, if either opportunity, or purse, or perfidiousness, would help him
to the obtaining of his purpose.


Atten. Purse! Why he could not but have Purse to do almost what he would,
having married a wife with so much money.


Wise. Hold you there; some of Mr. Badmans sins were costly, as his drinking,
and whoring, and keeping other bad company; though he was a man that had ways
too many to get money, as well as ways too many to spend it.


Atten. Had he then such a good Trade, for all he was such a bad man? or was
his Calling so gainful to him, as always to keep his Purses belly full,
though he was himself a great spender?


Wise. No: It was not his Trade that did it, though he had a pretty trade too.
He had another way to get Money, and that by hatfulls and pocketfulls at a time.


Atten. Why I trow he was no Highway man, was he?


Wise. I will be sparing in my speech as to that, though some have muttered as
if he could ride out now and then, about no body but himself knew what, over
night, and come home all dirty and weary next morning. But that is not the
thing I aim at.


Atten. Pray let me know it, if you think it convenient that I should.


Wise. I will tell you: It was this, he had an art to Break, and get hatfulls
of money by breaking.


Atten. But what do you mean by Mr. Badmans Breaking? Mr. Badman had an art to
break, and to get money that way.
you speak mystically, do you not?


Wise. No, no, I speak plainly. Or, if you will have it in plainer language,
it is this: When Mr. Badman had swaggered and whored away most of his wifes
portion, he began to feel that he could not much longer stand upon his legs in
this course of life, and keep up his Trade and Repute (such as he had) in the
world; but by the new Engine of Breaking. Wherefore, upon a time, he gives a
great, and sudden How he managed things in order to his breaking.
rush into several men's debts, to the value of about four or five thousand
pound, driving at the same time a very great trade, by selling many things for
less than they cost him, to get him custom, therewith to blind his Creditors
eyes. His Creditors therefore seeing that he had a great employ, and dreaming
that it must needs at length turn to a very good account to them, trusted him
freely without mistrust, and so did others too, to the value of what was
mentioned before. Well, when Mr. Badman had well feathered his Nest with other
men's goods and money, after a little time He breaks.
he breaks. And by and by it is noysed abroad that Mr. Badman had shut up Shop,
was gone, and could trade no longer. Now, by that time his breaking was come to
his Creditors ears, he had by Craft and Knavery made so sure of what he had,
that his Creditors could not touch a penny. Well, when he had done, he sends
his mournful sugered letters to his Creditors, to let them understand what had
happened unto him, and desired them not to be severe with him; Mr. Badmans
sugar words to his Creditors.
for he bore toward all men an honest mind, and would pay so far as he was
able. Now he sends his letters by a man Badmans friend.
confederate with him, who could make both the worst, and best of Mr. Badmans
case: The best for Mr. Badman, and the worst for his Creditors. So when he
comes to them, he both bemoans them, and condoles Mr. Badmans condition:
Telling of them, that without a speedy bringing of things to a conclusion, Mr.
Badman would be able to make them no satisfaction, but at present he both
could, and would, and that to the utmost of his power: and to that end, he
desired that they would come over to him. Well, his Creditors appoint him a
time, and come over; and he, mean while, authorizes another to treat with them,
but will not be seen himself, unless it was on a Sunday, lest they should snap
him with a Writ. So his deputed friend treats with them about their concern
with Mr. Badman, first telling them of the great care that Mr. Badman took to
satisfy them and all men for whatsoever he ought, as far as in him lay, and,
how little he thought a while since to be in this low condition. He pleaded
also the greatness of his Charge, the greatness of Taxes, the Badness of the
times, and the great Losses that he had by many of his customers, some of which
died in his debt, others were run away, and for many that were alive, he never
expected a farthing from them. Yet nevertheless he would show himself an honest
man, and would pay as far as he was able; and if they were willing to come to
terms, he would make a composition with them, (for he was not able to pay them
all.) What Mr. Badman propounds to his Creditors.
The Creditors asked what he would give? 'Twas replied, Half a crown in the
pound. At this they began to huff, and he to renew his complaint and entreaty;
but the Creditors would not hear, and so for that time their meeting without
success broke up. But after his Creditors were in cool blood, and admitting of
second thoughts, and fearing lest delays should make them lose all, they admit
of a second debate, come together again, and by many words, and great ado, They
at last agree, and Mr. Badman gains by breaking,
they obtained five shillings in the pound. So the money was produced, Releases
and Discharges drawn, signed, and sealed, Books crossed, and all things
confirmed; and then Mr. Badman can put his head out a doors again, and be a
better man than when he shut up Shop, by several thousands of pounds.


Atten. And did he do thus indeed?


Wise. Yes, once, and again. I think he brake twice or thrice.


Atten. And did he do it before he had need to do it?


Wise. Need! What do you mean by need? there is no need at any time for a man
to play the knave. He did it of a wicked mind, to defraud and beguile his
Creditors: There is no plea for his dishonesty.
he had wherewithal of his Father, and also by his Wife, to have lived upon,
with lawful labor, like an honest man. He had also when he made this wicked
Break (though he had been a profuse and prodigal spender) to have paid his
creditors their own to a farthing. But had he done so, he had not done like
himself, like Mr. Badman; had he, I say, dealt like an honest man, he had then
gone out of Mr. Badmans road. He did it therefore of a dishonest mind, and to a
wicked end; to wit, that he might have wherewithal, howsoever unlawfully
gotten, to follow his Cups and Queans, and to live in the full swinge of his
lusts, even as he did before.


Atten. Why this was a mere Cheat.


Wise. It was a cheat indeed. This way of breaking, it is nothing else but a
more neat way of Thieving, of picking of pockets, of breaking open of shops,
and of taking from men what one has nothing to do with. But though it seem
easy, it is hard to learn, no man that has conscience to God or man, can ever
be his Crafts Master in this Hellish art.


Atten. Oh! Sirs! what a wicked man was this!


Wise. A wicked man indeed. By this art he could tell how to make men send
their goods to his shop, and then be glad to take a penny for that for which he
had promised before it came thither, to give them a Groat: I say, he could make
them glad to take a Crown for a pounds worth, and a thousand for that for which
he had promised before to give them four thousand pounds.


Atten. This arguet that Mr. Badman had but little conscience.


Wise. This argued that Mr. Badman had No Conscience at all; for Conscience,
the least spark of a good Conscience cannot endure this.


Atten. Before we go any further in Mr. Badmans matters, let me desire you, if
you please, to give me an answer to these two questions. An answer to two
questions.


1. What do you find in the Word of God against such a practice, as this of Mr.
Badmans is?

2. What would you have a man do that is in his Creditors debt, and can neither
pay him what he owes him, nor go on in a trade any longer?


Wise. I will answer you as well as I can. And first to the first of your
questions: To wit, 1. Qestion,
What I find in the Word of God against such a practice, as this of Mr. Badmans
is.


Answ. The Word of God does forbid this wickedness; and to make it the more
odious in our eyes, it joins it with Theft and Robbery: Thou shall not, Levit.
19. 13.
says God, defraud thy neighbor, nor rob him. Thou shall not defraud, that is,
deceive or beguile. Now thus to break, is to defraud, deceive and beguile;
which is, as you see, forbidden by the God of Heaven: Thou shall not defraud
thy neighbor, nor rob him. It is a kind of theft and robbery, thus to defraud,
and beguile. It is a wilely robbing of his shop, The hainousnes^ of this sin.
and picking of his pocket: a thing odious to Reason and Conscience, and
contrary to the Law of nature. It is a designed piece of wickedness, and
therefore a double sin. A man cannot do this great wickedness on a sudden, and
through a violent assault of Satan. He that will commit this sin, must have
time to deliberate, that by invention he may make it formidable, and that with
lies and high dissimulations. He that commits this wickedness, must first hatch
it upon his bed, beat his head about it, and lay his plot strong: So that to
the completing of such a wickedness, there must be adjoined many sins, and
they too, must go hand in hand until it be completed. But what says the
Scripture? 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.
fair warning.
Let no man go beyond, and defraud his Brother in any, matter, because the Lord
is the avenger of all such. But this kind of Breaking is a going beyond my
Brother; This is a compassing of him about that I may catch him in my net; and
as I said, an art to rob my Brother, and to pick his pocket, and that with his
consent. Which does not therefore mitigate, but so much the more greaten and
make odious the offense. For men that are thus wilily abused cannot help
themselves, they are taken in a deceitful net. But God will here concern
himself, he will be the avenger, he will be the avenger of all such either here
or in another world.

And this, the Apostle testifies again, where he says; Colos. 3. 25.
But he that does wrong, shall recieve for the wrong that he has done, ^ Fair
warning again.
and there is no respect of persons. That is, there is no man, be he what he
will, if he will be guilty of this sin, of going beyond, of beguiling of, and
doing wrong to his Brother, but God will call him to an account for it, and
will pay him with vengeance for it too; for there is no respect for persons.

I might add, that this sin of wronging, of going beyond, and defranding of my
Neighbor, it is like that first prank that the Devil played with our first
Parents, (as the Altar that Vriah built for Ahaz, was taken from the fashion of
that that stood at Damascus, He that designedly commits this sin is like the
Devil.
to be the very pattern of it.) The Serpent beguiled me, says Eve; Mr. Badman
beguiles his Creditors. The Serpent beguiled Eve with lying promises of gain;
and so did Mr. Badman beguile his Creditors. The Serpent said one thing and
meant another, when he beguiled Eve; and so did Mr. Badman when he beguiled his
Creditors.

That man therefore that does thus deceive and beguile his neighbor, imitateth
the Devil; he takes his examples from him, and not from God, the Word, or good
men: and this did Mr. Badman.

And now to your second question: To wit, 2 Question.
What I would have a man do, that is in his Creditors debt, and that can
neither pay him, nor go on in a trade any longer?


Answ. First of all: If this be his case, and he knows it, let him not run one
penny further in his Creditors debt. For that cannot be done with good
conscience. He that knows he cannot pay, and yet will run into debt; does
knowingly wrong and defraud his neighbor, and falls under that sentence of the
Word of God, How those that are B^^ckrupts (...) deal with their consciencies.
The wicked borrows and pays not again. Yea worse, he borrows though at the
very same time he knows that he cannot pay again. He does also craftily take
away what is his Neighbors. That is therefore the first thing that I would
propound to such: Let him not run any further into his Creditors debt.

Secondly, Good advice.
After this, let him consider, how, and by what means he was brought into such
a condition, that he could not pay his just debts. To wit, whether it was by
his own remisness in his Calling, by living too high in Diet or Apparel, by
lending too lavishingly that which was none of his own, to his loss; or whether
by the immediate hand and Judgment of God.

If by searching, he finds, that this is come upon him through remisness in
his Calling, Extravagancies in his Family, or the like; let him labor for a
sense of his sin and wickedness, for he has sinned against the Lord: First, in
his being slothful in business, Romans 12. 11. 1 Timothy 5. 8.
and in not providing, to wit, of his own, by the sweat of his brows, or other
honest ways, for those of his own house. And secondly, in being lavishing in
Diet and Apparel in the Family, or in lending to others that which was none of
his own. This cannot be done with good conscience: it is both against reason
and nature, and therefore must be a sin against God. I say therefore, if thus
this debtor has done, if ever he would live quietly in conscience, and
comfortably in his condition for the future, let him humble himself before God,
and repent of this his wickedness. For he that is slothful in his work, Pro.
18. 9.
is brother to him that is a great waster. To be slothful and a waster too, is
to be as it were a double sinner.

But again, as this man should enquire into these things, so he should also
into this. How came I into this way of dealing in which I have now miscarried?
is it a way that my Parents brought me up in, put me Apprentice to, or that by
providence I was first thrust into? or is it a way into which I have twisted my
self, as not being contented with my first lot, that by God and my Parents I
was cast into? This ought duly to be considered. Good coun^^^ again.
And if upon search, a man shall find that he is out of the place and Calling
into which he was put by his Parents, or the Providence of God, and has
miscarried in a new way, that through pride and dislike of his first state he
has chose rather to embrace; his miscarriage is his sin, the fruit of his
Pride, and a token of the Judgment of God upon him for his leaving of his first
state. And for this he ought, as for the former, to be humble and penitent
before the Lord.

But if by search, he finds, How to find that thy decay came by the Judgment
of God, or by thy miscarriage.
that his poverty came by none of these; if by honest search, he finds it so,
and can say with good conscience, I went not out of my place and state in which
God by his providence had put me; but have abode with God in the calling
wherein I was called, and have wrought hard, and fared meanly, been civilly
apparelled, and have not directly, nor indirectly made away with my Creditors
goods: Then has his fall come upon him by the immediate hand of God, whether by
visible or invisible ways. For sometimes it comes by visible ways, to wit, by
Fire, by Thieves, by loss of Cattle, or the wickedness of sinful dealers, etc.
And sometimes by means invisible, and then no man knows how; we only see things
are going, but cannot see by what way they go. Well, Now suppose that a man, by
an immediate hand of God is brought to a morsel of Bread, what must he do now?
Another question.


I answer: His surest way is still to think, that this is the fruit of some
sin, though possibly not sin in the management of his calling, yet of some
other sin. God casts away the substance of the wicked. Pro. 10. 3.
Therefore let him still humble himself before his God, 1 Pet. 5. 6.
because his hand is upon him, and say, What sin is this, for which this hand
of God is upon me? and let him be diligent to find it out, for some sin is the
cause of this Judgment; L^^. 3. 33.
for God does not willingly afflict nor grieve the children of men. Either the
heart is too much set upon the world, or Religion is too much neglected in thy
Family, or some thing. There is a Snake in the grass, a Worm in the gourd; some
sin in thy bosom, for the sake of which God does thus deal with thee.

Thirdly, Good advice again.
This thus done, let that man again consider thus with himself: Perhaps God is
now changing of my Condition and state in the world; he has let me live in
fashion, in ^ulness, and abundance of worldly glory, and I did not to his glory
improve, as I should, that his good dispensation to me. But when I lived in
full and fat pasture, I did there lift up the heel: Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
Therefore he will now turn me into hard Commons, that with leanness, and
hunger, and meanness, and want, I may spend the rest of my days. But let him do
this without murmering, and repining; let him do it in a godly manner,
submitting himself to the Judgment of God. James 1. 9^ 10.
Let the rich rejoice in that he is made low.

This is duty, and it may be privilege to those that are under this hand of
God. And for thy encouragement to this hard work, (for this is a hard work)
consider of these four things.

1. This is right lying down under Gods hand, Consider four things.
and the way to be exalted in Gods time: when God would have Job embrace the
Dunghill, he embraces it, Job. 1. 2^. Chap. 2. 8.
and says, The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name
of the Lord.

2. Consider, That there are blessings also that attend a low condition, more
than all the world are aware of. A poor condition has preventing mercy
attending of it. The poor, because they are poor, are not capable of sinning
against God as the rich man does.

3. The Poor can more clearly see himself preserved by the providence of God
than the rich, Psalm. 49. 6.
for he trusts in the abundance of his riches.

4. It may be God has made thee poor, Jam. 2. 5.
because he would make thee rich. Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God
chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs of a Kingdom which God
has promised to them that love him?

I am persuaded, if men upon whom this hand of God is, would thus quietly lie
down, and humble themselves under it, they would find more peace, yea, more
blessing of God attending them in it, than the most of men are aware of. But
this is an hard Chapter, and therefore I do not expect that many should either
read it with pleasure, or desire to take my counsel.

Having thus spoken to the Broken man, with reference to his own self; I will
now speak to him as he stands related to his Creditors.

In the next place therefore, let him fall upon the most Honest dealing with
Creditors.
honest way of dealing with his Creditors, and that I think must be this.

First, Let him timely make them acquainted with his condition, and also do to
them these three things.

1. Let him heartily, and unfeignedly ask them forgiveness for the wrong that
he has done them.

2. Let him proffer them all, and the whole all that ever he has in the world;
let him hide nothing, let him strip himself to his raiment for them; let him
not keep a Ring, a Spoon, or any thing from them.

3. If none of these two will satisfy them, let him proffer them his Body, to
be at their dispose, to wit, either to abide imprisonment their pleasure, or to
be at their service, till by labor and travel he has made them such amends as
they in reason think fit, (only reserving something for the succor of his poor
and distressed Family out of his labor, which in Reason, and Conscience, and
Nature, he is bound also to take care of:) Thus shall he make them what amends
he is able, for the Wrong that he has done them in wasting and spending of
their Estates.

By thus doing, he submits himself to Gods rod, commits himself to the dispose
of his Providence; yea, by thus doing, he casts the lot of his present and
future condition into the lap of his Creditors, and leaves the whole dispose
thereof to the Lord, Pro. 16. 33.
even as he shall order and incline their hearrs to do with him. And let that
be either to forgive him; or to take that which he has for satisfaction; or to
lay his body under affliction, this way or that, according to Law; can he, I
say, thus leave the whole dispose to God, let the issue be what it will, that
man shall have peace in his mind afterward. And the comforts of that state,
(which will be comforts that attend Equity, Justice, and Duty,) will be more
unto him, because more according to Godliness, than can be the comforts that
are the fruits of Injustice, Fraudulency, and Deceit. Besides, this is the way
to engage God to favor him by the sentence of his Creditors; (for He can
entreat them to use him kindly,) Jer. 15. 10, 11.
and he will do it when his ways are pleasing in his sight: When a man's ways
please the Lord, Pro. 16. 7.
his enemies shall be at peace with him; And surely, for a man to seek to make
restitution for wrongs done, to the utmost of his power, by what he is, has,
and enjoys in this world, is the best way, in that capacity, and with reference
to that thing, that a man can at this time be found active in.

But he that does otherwise, abides in his sin, refuses to be disposed of by
the Providence of God, chooses an high Estate, though not attained in Gods way;
when Gods Will is, that he should descend into a low one: yea, he desperately
says in his heart and actions, I will be mine own chooser, and that in mine
own way, whatever happens or follows thereupon.


Atten. You have said well, in my mind. But suppose now, that Mr. Badman was
here, could he not object as to what you have said, saying, Go and teach your
Brethren, that are Professors, this lesson, for they, as I am, are guilty of
Breaking; yea I am apt to think, of that which you call my Knavish way of
breaking; A heavy blot upon Religion.
to wit, of breaking before they have need to break. But if not so, yet they
are guilty of neglect in their Calling, of living higher, both in Fare and
Apparel, than their Trade or Income will maintain. Besides, that they do
break, all the world very well knows, and that they have the art to plead for
a composition, is very well known to men; and that it is usual with them, to
bide their Linen, their Plate, their Jewels, and ('it is to be thought,
sometimes Money and Goods besides,) is as common as four eggs a penny. And thus
they beguile men, debauch their consciencies, sin against their Profession, and
make, it is to be feared, their lusts in all this, and the fulfilling of them,
their end, I say, if Mr. Badman was here to object thus unto you, what would be
your reply?


Wise. What! Why I would say, I hope no Good man, no man of good conscience, no
man that either fearfeareth God, regards the credit of Religion, the peace of
Gods people, or the salvation of his own soul, will do thus.

Professors, such perhaps there may be, and who, upon earth can help it? Jades
there be of all colors. If Knaves will make profession their cloak to be vile,
who can help it?
If men will profess, and make their profession a stalking-Horse to beguile
their neighbors of their estates, as Mr. Badman himself did, when he beguiled
her that now is with sorrow his wife, who can help it? The Churches of old were
pestered with such, and therefore no marvel if these perilous difficult times
be so. But mark how the Apostle words it: 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10.
Nay you do wrong and defraud, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and that your Brethren: Know you not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicator, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God.

None of these shall be saved in this state, nor shall profession deliver them
from the censure of the Godly, when they shall be manifest such to be. But
their profession we cannot help: How can we help it, if men should ascribe to
themselves the title of Holy ones, Godly ones, Zealous one, Self-denying ones,
or any other such glorious title? and while they thus call themselves, they
should be the veryest Rogues for all evil, sin, and villainy imaginable, who
could help it? True, they are a scandal to Religion, a grief to the honest
hearted, an offense to the world, and a stumbling stone to the weak, and these
offenses have come, do come, and will come, do what all the world can; but woe
be to them through whom they come; Matt. 18. 6, 7, 8.
let such professors therefore be disowned by all true Christians, and let them
be reckoned among those base men of the world which by such actions they most
resemble: They are Mr. Badmans Kindred.

Let such be (...) men.
For they are a shame to Religion, I say there slithy, rob-Shop, pick-pocket
men, they are a shame to Religion, and religious men should be ashamed of them.
God puts such an one among the Fools of the world, therefore let not Christians
put them among those that are wise for heaven. Jer. 17. 11.
As the Partridge sits on eggs, and hatcheth them not, so he that gets
riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his
end shall be a fool. And the man under consideration is one of these, and
therefore must look to fall by this Judgment.

A professor! and practice such villianies as these! such an one is not worthy
to bear that name any longer. We may say to such as the Prophet spoke to their
like, to wit, to the rebellious that were in the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 20. 38,
39.
Go ye, serve every man his Idols: -- If ye will not hearken to the Law and
Testament of God, to lead your lives thereafter: but pollute Gods holy name no
more with your Gifts, and with your Idols.

Go professors, Go; leave off profession, unless you will lead your lives
according to your profession. Better never profess, than to make profession a
stalking-horse to sin, Deceit, to the Devil, and Hell.

The ground and rules of Religion allow not any such thing: Receive us, says
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 2.
we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no man.
Intimating, that those that are guilty of wronging, corrupting or defrauding of
any, should not be admitted to the fellowship of Saints, no nor into the common
catalogue of Brethren with them.

Nor can men with all their Rhetoric, and Eloquent speaking p^ove themselves
sit for the Kingdom of Heaven, Mar. 10. 19.
or men of good conscience on earth. O that godly plea of Samuel: Behold here I
am, says he, 1 Samuel 12. 3.
witness against me, before the Lord, and before his Anointed, whose Ox have I
taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I defrauded, whom have I
oppressed, etc? This was to do like a man of good conscience indeed. And in
this his Appeal, he was so Justified in the consciencies of the whole
Congregation, that they could not but with one voice, as with one mouth, break
out jointly and say, Ver. 4.
Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us.

A Professor, and defraud, away with him! a Professor should not owe any man
any thing, but love. A professor should provide things, not of other men's, but
of his own, of his own honest getting, and that not only in the sight of God,
but of all men; that he may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.


Atten. A question.
But suppose God should blow upon a Professor in his Estate, and Calling, and
he should be run out before he is aware, must he be accounted to be like Mr.
Badman, and lie under the same reproach as he?


Wise. An answer.
No: If he has dutifully done what he could to avoid it. It is possible for a
Ship to sink at sea, notwithstanding the most faithful endeavor of the most
skilful Pilot under Heaven. And thus, as I suppose, it was with the Prophet
that left his wife in debt to the hazarding the slavery of her children by the
Creditors. 2 King. 4. 1, 2.
He was no profuse man, nor one that was given to defraud, for the Text says he
feared God; yet, as I said, he was run out more than she could pay.

If God would blow upon a man, who can help it? and he will do so sometimes,
Hag. 1. 9.
because he will change dispensations with men, God does sometimes blow upon
his own people. How they should do at that time.
and because he will try their Graces. Yea, also because he will overthrow the
wicked with his Judgments; and all these things are seen in Job. But then the
consideration of this, should bid men have a care that they be honest, lest
this comes upon them for their sin: It should also bid them beware of launching
further into the world, than in an honest way by ordinary means they can
Godlily make their retreat; for the further in, the greater fall. It should
also teach them, to beg of God his blessing upon their endeavors, their
honest and lawful endeavors. And it should put them upon a diligent looking
to their steps, that if in their going they should hear the Ice crack, they may
timely go back again.

These things considered, and duly put in practice, if God will blow upon a
man, then let him be content, and with Job embrace the dunghill; let him give
unto all their dues, and not fight against the Providence of God, (but humble
himself rather under his mighty hand,) which comes to strip him naked and bare:
for he that does otherwise, fights against God; and declares that he is a
stranger to that of Paul; Philip. 4. 12.
I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, in all
things, I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and
to suffer need.


Atten. But Mr. Badman would not, I believe, have put this difference 'twixt
things feigned, and those that fall of necessity.


Wise. If he will not, God will, Conscience will; and that not thine own only,
but the Consciences of all those that have seen the way, and that have known
the truth of the condition of such an one.


Atten. Well: Let us at this time leave this matter, and return again to Mr.
Badman.


Wise. With all my heart will I proceed to give you a relation of what is yet
behind of his Life, in order to our discourse of his Death.


Atten. But pray do it with as much brevity as you can.


Wise. Why? are you a weary of my relating of things?


Atten. No. But it pleases me to hear a great deal in few words.


Wise. I profess not my self an artist that way, but yet as briefly as I can, I
will pass through what of his Life is behind; and again I shall begin with his
fraudulent dealing (as before I have showed with his Creditors, so now) with
his Customers, and those that he had otherwise to deal withal.

He dealt by deceitful Weights and Measures. Mo^ of Mr. (...) dealing (...)
and (...).
He kept weights to buy by, and weights to sell by; measures to buy by, and
measures to sell by: those he bought by were too big, those he sold by were too
little.

Besides, he could use a thing called slight of hand, if he had to do with
other men's weights and measures, and by that means make them whether he did buy
or sell, yea though his Customer or Chapman looked on, turn to his own
advantage.

Moreover, he had the art to misreckon men in their Accounts whether by weight,
or measure, or money, and would often do it to his worldly advantage, and their
loss: What say you to Mr. Badman now?

And if a question was made of his faithful dealing, he had his servants
ready, that to his purpose he had brought up, that would avouch and swear to
his Book, or word: this was Mr. Badmans practice; What think you of Mr. Badman
now?


Atten. Think! Why I can think no other but that he was a man left to himself,
a naughty man; for these, as his other, were naughty things; if the tree, as
indeed it may, ought to be judged, what it is by its fruits; then Mr. Badman
must needs be a bad Tree. But pray, for my further satisfaction, show me now by
the Word of God, the evil of this his practice: and first of his using false
Weights and Measures.


Wise. The evil of that! why the evil of that appears to every eye: the
Heathens, that live like Beasts and Bruits in many things, do abominate and
abhor such wickedness as this. Let a man but look upon these things as he goes
by, and he shall see enough in them from the light of nature to make him loath
so base a practice; although Mr. Badman loved it.


Atten. But show me something out of the Word against it, will you?


Wise. I will willingly do it. And first we will look into the Old Testament:
Levit. 19. 35, 36.
You shall, says God there, do no unrighteousness in Judgment, in mete-yard,
in weights or in measures, a just Balance, a just Weight, a just Ephah, and a
just Hin shall you have. Of Just weights and measures.
This is the Law of God, and that which all men according to the Law of the
land ought to obey. So again: Ezekiel. 45. 10.
Ye shall have just Balances, and a just Ephah, etc.

Now having showed you the Law, I will also show you how God takes swerving
therefrom. Pro. 20. 23.
A false Balance is not good; Chap. 11. 1.
a false Balance is an abomination to the Lord. The evil of deceitful
Balances, Weights and Measures.
Some have just Weights but false Balances, and by virtue of those false
Balances, by their just Weights, they deceive the Country: Wherefore, God
first of all commands that the Balance be made Just: A just Balance shall
thou have. Else they may be, yea are, decievers, notwithstanding their just
weights.

Now, having commanded that men have a just Balance, and testifying that a
false one is an abomination to the Lord, he proceeds also unto weight and
measure.

Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small; that is
one to buy by, and another to sell by, Deuteronomy. 25. 13, 14, 15, 16.
as Mr. Badman had. Thou shall not have in thy house diverse measures, a great
and a small, (and these had Mr. Badman also) but thou shall have a perfect and
a just weight; a perfect and a just measure shall thou have, that thy days may
be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee. For all that do
such things, (that is, that use false Weights and Measures) and all that do
unrighteously are abomination to the Lord. See now both how plentiful, and how
punctual the Scripture is in this matter. But perhaps it may be objected, that
all this is old Law, and therefore has nothing to do with us under the New
Testament. (Not that I think you, neighbor, will object thus:) Well, to this
foolish objection, let us make an Answer. First, he that makes this objection,
if he does it to overthrow the authority of those Texts, The Old and New Law
commands all men to be honest and upright in their weights and measures.
discovers that himself is first cosen to Mr. Badman: For a Just man is
willing to speak reverently of those commands. That man therefore has, I
doubt, but little conscience, if any at all that is good, that thus objecteth
against the Text: but let us look into the New Testament, and there we shall
see how Christ confirms the same: Where he commands that men make to others
good measure, including also that they make good weight; telling such that do
thus, or those that do it not, that they may be encouraged to do it; Luke 6. 8^.
Good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, shall men give
into your bosom; for with the same measure that ye mete withal, it shall be
measured to you again: To wit, both from God and man. For as God will show his
indignation against the false man, by taking away even that he has, so he will
deliver up the false man to the Oppressor, and the Extortioner shall catch from
him, as well as he has catched from his neighbor; therefore another Scripture
says, When thou shall cease to deal treacherously, they shall deal
treacherously with thee. That the New Testament also, has an inspection into
men's Trading, yea even with their weights and measures, is evident from these
general exhortations. Defraud not; Pat Scriptures for our purpose.
lie not one to another; let no man go beyond his brother in any matter, for
God is the avenger of all such: whatsoever you do, do it heartily, as unto the
Lord, doing all in his name, to his glory; and the like. All these injunctions
and commandments do respect our life and conversation among men, with reference
to our dealing, trading, and so consequently they forbid false, deceitful, yea
all doings that are corrupt.

Having thus in a word or two showed you, Where false weights and measures are
to be found.
that these things are bad; I will next, for the conviction of those that use
them, show you, where God says they are to be found.

1. They are not to be found in the house of the good and godly man, 1. With
evil doers.
for he, as his God, abhorrs them; but they are to be found in the house of
evil doers, Mic. 6. 12.
such as Mr. Badmans is. Are there, says the Prophet, yet the treasures of
wickedness in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is
abomination? Are they there yet, notwithstanding Gods forbidding,
notwithstanding Gods tokens of anger against those that do such things? O how
loath is a wicked man to let go a sweet, a gainful sin, when he has hold of
it! They hold fast deceit, they refuse to let it go.

2. 2. With the (...) and Oppressors.
These deceitful Weights and Measures are not to be found in the house of the
Merciful, but in the house of the Cruel; in the house of them that love to
oppress. Eos. 12. 7.
The Balances of deceit are in his hand, he loves to oppress. He is given to
oppression and cruelty, therefore he uses such wicked things in his calling.
Yea he is a very cheat, and as was hinted before, concerning Mr. Badmans
breaking, so I say now, concerning his using these deceitful weights and
measures, it is as bad, as base, as to take a purse, or pick a pocket; for it
is a plain robbery, it takes away from a man that which is his own, even the
price of his money.

3. 3. With such as would swallo^ up the poor.
The deceitful Weights and Measures are not to be found in the house of such as
relieve the belly, and that cover the loins of the poor, but of such as indeed
would swallow them up. Amos 8. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Hear ye this, ye that swallow up the needy, and that make the poor of the land
to fail, saying, When will the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn, and the
Sabbath that we may set forth Wheat, making the Ephah small and the Sheckle
great, ( making the Measure small, and the Price great) and falsifying the
Balances by deceit, that ye may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a
pair of shoes, and sell the refuse of the Wheat. The Lord has sworn by the
exellencie of Jacob, surely I will not forget any of their works. So detestable
and vile a thing is this in the sight of God.

4. God abominates the thoughts of calling of those that use false weights and
measures, by any other term than, 4. With impure ones.
that they be Impure ones, or the like: Shall I count them pure (says he) with
the bag of deceitful weights? M^^ 6. 11.
no by no means, they are impure ones, their hands are defiled, deceitful gain
is in their houses, they have gotten what they have by coveting an evil
Covetousness, and therefore must and shall be counted among the impure, among
the wicked of the world.

Thus you see how full and plain the Word of God is, against this sin, and them
that use it. And therefore Mr. Badman, for that he used by these things thus to
rook and cheat his neighbors, is rightly rejected from having his Name in, and
among the catalogue of the godly.


Atten. But I am persuaded, that the using of these things, and the doing by
them thus deceitfully, is not counted so great an evil by some.


Wise. Whether it be counted an evil or a virtue, by men, it mattereth not; you
see by the Scriptures, the Judgment of God upon it. It was not counted an evil
by Mr. Badman, nor is it by any that still are treading in his steps. But, I
say, it is no matter how men esteem of things, let us adhere to the Judgment of
God. And the rather, because when we our selves have done weighing and
measuring to others, then God will weigh and measure both us and our actions.
And when he does so, as he will do shortly, then woe be to him to whom, and of
whose actions it shall be thus said by him: D^ut. 5. 27.
Tekel, Thou art weighed in the Balances, and art found wanting. God will then
recompense their evil of deceiving upon their own head, when he shall shut them
out of his presence, favor, and kingdom, for ever and ever.


Atten. But it is a wonder, that since Mr. Badmans common practice was to do
thus, that some one or more did not find him out, and blame him for this his
wickedness.


Wise. For the generality of people, he went away clever with his Knavery. For
what with his Balance, his false Balance, and good weight, and what with his
slight of hand to boot, he beguiled, sometimes a little, and sometimes more,
most that he had to deal with: Besides, those that use this naughty trade, are
either such as blind men with a show of Religion, or by hectoring the buyer out
by words. I must confess Mr. Badman was not so arch at the first; How Mr.
Badman did cheat, and hide his cheating.
that is, to do it by show of Religion; for now he began to grow threadbare,
(though some of his brethren are arch enough this way, yea and of his sisters
too, for I told you at first that there was a great many of them, and never a
one of them good:) but for hectoring, for swearing, for lying, if these things
would make weight and measure, they should not be wanting to Mr. Badmans
Customers.


Atten. Then it seems he kept good Weights, and a bad Balance; well that was
better than that both should be bad.


Wise. Not at all. There lay the depth of his deceit: For if any at any time
found fault, that he used them hardly, and that they wanted their weight of
things; he would reply: Good Weights and a bad Balance a deep piece of Knavery.
Why did you not see them weighed? will you not believe your own eyes: If you
question my weights, pray carry them whether you will, I will maintain them to
be good and just. The same he would say of his scales. So he blinded, all, by
his Balance.


Atten. This is cunning indeed: but as you say, there must be also something
done or said, to blind therewith, and this I perceive Mr. Badman had.


Wise. Yes. He had many ways to blind, but he was never clever at it, by making
a show of Religion, (though he cheated his wife therewith:) for he was,
especially by those that dwelt near him, too well known to do that, though he
would bungle at it as well as he could. But there are some that are arch
villains this way; they shall to view live a whole life Religiously, and yet
shall be guilty of these most horrible sins: And yet Religion in it self is
never the worse, nor yet the true professors of it. But as Luther says, In the
name of God begins all mischief. For Hypocrites have no other way to bring
their evils to maturity, but by using and mixing the Name of God and Religion
therewith. Thus they become whited Walls; Mat. 23.
for by this white, A cloak of Religion to blind Mr. Ch^ats Knavery.
the white of Religion, the dirt of their actions is hid. Thus also they become
graves that appear not, and they that go over them, (that have to do with
them) are not aware of them, but suffer themselves to be deluded by them. Yea,
if there shall, as there will sometimes, rise a doubt in the heart of the buyer
about the weight and measure he should have, why, he suffers his very senses
to be also deluded, by recalling of his Chapmans Religion to mind, and thinks
verily that not his good chapman but himself is out; for he dreams not that his
chapman can deceive. But if the buyer shall find it out, and shall make it
apparent, that he is beguiled; then shall he be healed by having amends made,
and perhaps fault shall be laid upon servants, etc. and so Master Cheat shall
stand for a right honest man in the eye of his Customer, though the next time
he shall pick his pocket again.

Some Some plead Custom to cheat.
plead Custom for their Cheat, as if that could acquit them before the Tribunal
of God: And others say, it came to them for so much, and therefore another must
take it for so much, though there is wanting both as to weight and measure: but
in all these things there are Juggles; or if not, such must know, Deuteronomy. 16. 20.
That that which is altogather just, they must do. Suppose that I be cheated
my self with a brass half-Crown, must I therefore cheat another therewith? if
this be bad in the whole, it is also bad in the parts. Therefore however thou
art dealt withal in thy buying, yet thou must deal justly in selling, or thou
sinnest against thy soul, and art become as Mr. Badman. And know, that a
pretense to custom is nothing worth. It Is not custom, but good conscience that
will help at Gods Tribunal.


Atten. But I am persuaded, that that which is gotten by men this way, does
them but little good.


Wise. I am of your mind for that, but this is not considered by those thus
minded. For if they can get it, though they get, as we say, the Devil and all,
by their getting, yet they are content, and count that their getting is much.

Little good! Why do you think they consider that? No: no more than they
consider what they shall do in the Judgment, at the day of God Almighty, They
get nothing that e^^n and cheat.
for their wrong getting of what they get, and that is just nothing at all.

But to give you a more direct answer. This kind of getting, is so far off from
doing them little good, that it does them no good at all; because thereby they
lose their own souls; Mar. 9.
What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? He loses then, he loses greatly that gets after this fashion. This
is the man that is penny-wise and pound-foolish; this is he that loses his
good Sheep for a half pennyworth of tarr; that loses a soul for a little of
the world. And then what does he get thereby, but loss and damage? Thus he
gets, or rather loses about the world to come: But what does he get in this
world, Prove. 10. 3.
more than travel and sorrow, Jer. 15. 13.
vexation of spirit, Chap. 17. 3.
and disappointment? Men aim at blessedness in getting, I mean, at temporal
blessedness; but the man that thus gets, shall not have that. For though an
Inheritance after this manner may be hastily gotten at the beginning, yet the
end thereof shall not be blessed. They gather it indeed, and think to keep it
too, but what says Solomon? God casts it away. The Lord will not suffer the
soul of the righteous to famish, but he casts away the substance of the
wicked.

The time, as I said, that they do enjoy it, it shall do them no good at all;
but long to be sure they must not have it. For God will either take it away in
their life time, or else in the generation following, according to that of Job:
He, the wicked, may prepare it, Job 27. 17.
but the just s^all put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.

Consider that also that is written in the Proverbs: A good man leaves an
Inheritance to his childrens children, and the wealth of the sinner is laid up
for the just. Pro. 13. 22.
What then does he get thereby, that gets by dishonest means? why he gets
Sin and Wrath, Hell and Damnation; and now tell me how much he does get.

This, I say, is his getting; so that as David says, we may be bold to say too:
I beheld the wicked in great prosperity, and presently I cursed his habitation:
for it cannot prosper with him. Fluster and huff, and make a do for a while he
may, but God has determined that both he and it shall melt like grease, and
any observing man may see it so. Behold, the unrighteous man in a way of
Injustice gets much, and loadeth himself with thick Clay, but anon it
withers, it decays, and even he, or the Generation following decline, and
return to beggary.

And this Mr. Badman, notwithstanding his cunning and crafty tricks to get
money, did dye, no body can tell whether worth a farthing or no.


Atten. He had all the bad tricks, I think, that it was possible for a man to
have, to get money; one would think that he should a been rich.


Wise. You reckon too fast, More of Mr. Badmans Bad tricks.
if you count these all his bad tricks to get money: For he had more besides.

If his customers were in his Books (as it should go hard but he would have
them there; at least, if he thought he could make any advantage of them,) then,
then would he be sure to impose upon them his worst, even very bad Comodity,
yet set down for it the price that the best was sold at: like those that sold
the Refuse Wheat, or the worst of the wheat; making the Sheckle great, Amos 8.
yet hoisting up the price: This was Mr. Badmans way. Another art to cheat
withal.
He would sell goods that cost him not the best price by far, for as much as he
sold his best of all for. He had also a trick to mingle his comodity, that that
which was bad might go off with the less mistrust.

Besides, if his customers at any time paid him money, let them look to
themselves, and to their Acquitances, for he would usually attempt to call for
that payment again, specially if he thought that there was hopes of making a
prize thereby, and then to be sure if they could not produce good and
sufficient ground of the payment, a hundred to one but they paid it again.
Sometimes the honest Chapman would appeal to his servants for proof of the
payment of money, but they were trained up by him to say after his mind, right
or wrong: so that, relief that way, he could get none.


Atten. It is a bad, yea an abominable thing for a man to have such servants.
For by such means a poor customer may be undone and not know how to help
himself. Alas! if the master be so unconscionable, as I percieve Mr. Badman
was, to call for his money twice, and if his servant will swear that it is a
due debt, where is any help for such a man? he must sink, there is no remedy.


Wise. This is very bad, but this has been a practice, and that hundreds of
years ago. Zeph. 1. 9.
But what says the Word of God? I will pu^ish all those that leap upon the
threshold, Servants, observe these words.
which fill their masters houses with violence and deceit.

Mr. Badman also had this art; could he get a man at advantage, that is, if his
chapman durst not go from him, or if the comodity he wanted could not for the
present be conveniently had elsewhere; Then let him look to himself, he would
surely make his purse-strings crack; he would exact upon him without any pity
or conscience.


Atten. That was Extortion, was it not? I pray let me hear your Judgmen of
Extortion, what it is, and when committed?


Wise. Extortion is a screwing from men more than by the Law of God or men is
right; Of Extortion.
and it is committed sometimes by them in Office, about Fees, Rewards, and the
like: but it is most commonly committed by men of Trade, who without all
conscience, when they have the advantage, will make a prey of their neighbor.
And thus was Mr. Badman an Extortioner; for although he did not exact, and
force away, as Bailiss and C^arks have used to do; yet he had his
opportunities, and such cruelty to make use of them, that he would often, in
his way, be Extorting, and forcing of money out of his Neighbors pocket. For
every man that makes a prey of his advantage upon his neighbors necessities,
to force from him more than in reason and conscience, according to the present
prizes of things such comodity is worth; may very well be called an
Extortioner, and Judged for one that has No inheritance in the Kingdom of God.
1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.



Atten. Well, this Badman was a s^d wretch.


Wise. Thus you have often said before. But now we are in discourse of this,
give me leave a little to go on. We have a great many people in the Country
too that live all their days in the practice, and so under the guilt of
Extortion: people, alas! that think scorn to be so accounted.

As for Example: Who are Extor^ioners.
There is a poor body that dwells, we will suppose, so many miles from the
Market; and this man wants a Bushel of Grist, a pound of Butter, or a Cheese
for himself, his wife and poor children: But dwelling so far from the Market,
if he goes thither, he shall lose his days work, which will be eight pence or
ten pence damage to him, and that is something to a poor man. So he goes to
one of his Masters or Dames for what he wants, and asks them to help him with
such a thing: Yes, say they, you may have it; but withal they will give him a
gripe, perhaps make him pay as much (or more) for it at home, as they can get
when they have carried it five miles to a Market, yea and that too for the
Refuse of their Commodity. But in this the Women are especially faulty, in the
sale of their Butter and Cheese, etc. Now this is a kind of Extortion, it is a
making a prey of the necessity of the poor, it is a grinding of their faces, a
buying and selling of them.

But above all, your Hucksters, Hucksters.
that buy up the poor man's Victuals by wholesale, and sell it to him again for
unreasonable gains, by retale, and as we call it, by piecemeal; they are got
into a way, after a stingeing rate, to play their game upon such by Extortion:
I mean such who buy up Butter, Cheese, Eggs, Bacon, etc. by whole sale, and
sell it again (as they call it) by penny worths, two penny worths, a half penny
worth, or the like, to the poor, all the week after the market is past.

These, though I will not condemn them all, do, many of them, bite and pinch
the poor by this kind of evil dealing. Pro. 22. 16, 22.
These destroy the poor because he is poor, and that is a grievious sin. He
that oppresses the poor to increase his riches, and that gives to the rich,
shall surely come to want. Therefore he says again, Rob not the poor because
he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate; for the Lord will plead
their cause, and spoil the soul of them that spoil them.

Oh that he that gripeth and grindeth the face of the poor, would take notice
of these two Scriptures! Here is threatened the destruction of the Estate, yea
and of the Soul too, of them that oppress the poor. Their Soul we shall better
see where, and in what condition that is in, when the day of Doom is come; but
for the Estates of such, they usually quickly moulter; and that sometimes all
men, and sometimes no man knows how.

Besides, Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
these are Usurers, yea they take usury for victuals, which thing the Lord has
forbidden. And because they cannot so well do it on the Market Day, therefore
they do it, as I said, when the market is over; for then the poor falls into
their mouths, and are necessitated to have, as they can, for their need, and
they are resolved they shall pay soundly for it. Perhaps some will find fault
for my meddling thus with other folks matters, and for my thus prying into the
secrets of their iniquity. But to such I would say, since such actions are
evil, it is time they were hissed out of the world. For all that do such
things, offend against God, wrong their neighbor, and like Mr. Badman do
provoke God to Judgment. God knows, there is abundance of deceit in the world!


Wise. Deceit! Aie, but I have not told you the thousandth part of it; nor is
it my business now to rake to the bottom of that dunghill: what would you say,
if I should anatomize some of those vile wretches called Pawn-Brokers, that
lend Money and Goods to poor people, who are by necessity forced to such an
inconvenience; and will make, by one trick or other, the Interest of what they
so lend, amount to thirty, forty, yea sometimes fifty pound by the year;
notwithstanding the Principal is secured by a susficient pawn; which they will
keep too at last, if they can find any shift to cheat the wretched borrower.


Atten. Say! Why such Miscreants are the pest and Vermin of the Commonwealth,
not fit for the society of men; but methinks by some of those things you
Discoursed before, you seem to import that it is not lawful for a man to make
the best of his own.


Wise. If by making the best, you mean, Whether it be lawful for a man to make
the best of his own.
to sell for as much as by hook or crook he can get for his comodity; Proved in
negative by 8 reasons
then I say, it is not lawful. And if I should say the contrary, I should
justify Mr. Badman and all the rest of that Gang: but that I never shall do,
for the Word of God condemns them. But that it is not lawful for a man at all
times, to sell his commodity for as much as he can, I prove by these reasons.

First, If it be lawful for me always to sell my commodity as dear, or for as
much as I can, then it is lawful for me to lay aside in my dealing with others,
good conscience, to them, and to God: but it is not lawful for me, in my
dealing with others, to lay aside good conscience, etc. Therefore it is not
lawful for me always to sell my commodity as dear, or for as much as I can.

That Good conscience must be used in selling.
it is not lawful to lay aside good conscience in our dealings, has already
been proved in the former part of our discourse: but that a man must lay it
aside that will sell his commodity always as dear or for as much as he can, is
plainly manifest thus.

1. We must not (...) a prey of our (...).
He that will (as is mentioned before) sell his commodity as dear as he can,
must sometimes make a prey of the ignorance of his chapman: but that he cannot
do with a good conscience (for that is to overreach, and to go beyond my
chapman, and is forbidden, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.) Therefore he that will sell his
commodity, as before, as dear, or for as much as he can, must of necessity lay
aside good conscience.

2. He that will sell his commodity always as dear as he can, Nor of his
Neighbors (...).
must needs, sometimes make a prey of his neighbors necessity; but that he
cannot do with a good conscience, (for that is to go beyond and defraud his
neighbor, contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6.) Therefore he that will sell his
commodity, as before, as dear, or for as much as he can, must needs cast off and
lay aside a good conscience.

3. He that will (as before) sell his commodity as dear, Nor of his (...).
or for as much as he can, must, if need be, make a prey of his neighbors
fondness; but that a man cannot do with a good (...), for that is still a
going beyond him, contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 4. ^.) Therefore, he that will sell his
commodity as dear, or for as much as he can must needs cast off, and lay aside
good conscience.

The same also may be said for buying; We must use good conscience in buying.
no man may always buy as cheap as he can, but must also use good conscience in
buying; The which he can by no means use and keep, if he buys always as cheap
as he can, and that for the reasons urged before. For such will make a prey of
the ignorance, necessity, and fondness of their chapman, the which they cannot
do with a good conscience.

When Abraham would buy a Burying place of the Sons of Heth, thus he said unto
them. Entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, that he may give me the cave
of Machpelah, which he has, in the end of his field. For as much as it is
worth shall be give it me. Genesis 23. 8, 9,
Genesis 23. 8, 9. He would not have it under foot, he scorned it, he abhored it:
It stood not with his Religion, Credit, nor Conscience. So also when David,
would buy a field of Ornon the Jebusite: Thus he said unto him: Grant me the
place of the threshingfloor, 1 Crhon. 21, 22. 24.
that I may build an Altar there unto the Lord. Thou shall give it me for the
full price. He also, as Abraham, made conscience of this kind of dealing: he
would not lie at catch to go beyond, no not the Jebusite, but will give him his
full price for his field. For he knew that there was wickedness, as in selling
too dear so in buying too cheap, therefore he would not do it.

There ought therefore to be good conscience used, as in selling, so in buying;
for it is also unlawful for a man to go beyond or to defraud his neighbor in
buying; yea it is unlawful to do it in any matter, and God will plentifully
avenge that wrong: as I also before have forewarned and testified. See also the
Levit. 25. 14.
text in the margent. But,

Secondly, if it be lawful for me always to sell my commodity as dear, Charity
must be used in our dealings.
or for as much as I can, then it is lawful for me to deal with my neighbor
without the use of * charity: but it is not lawful for me to lay aside, or to
deal with my neighbor without the use of charity, therefore it is not lawful
for me always to sell my commodity to my neighbor for as much as I can. A man
in dealing should as really design his Neighbors good, profit, and advantage,
as his own: For this is to exercise Charity in his dealing.

That I should thus use, or exercise charity toward my Neighbor in my buying
and selling, etc. with him, is evident from the general command: [ Let all your
things be done in charity:] 1 Cor. 16. 14.
But that a man cannot live in the exercise of chatity, that sells, as before,
as dear, or that buyeth as cheap as he can, is evident by these reasons.

1. He that sells his commodity as dear, or for as much money (always) as he
can, seeks himself, and himself only; ( but charity seeks nor her own, 1 Cor.
13.
nor her own only:) So then, he that seeks himself, and himself only, as he
that sells (as before) as dear as he can, does; makes not use of, nor does he
exercise charity, in his so dealing.

2. He that sells his commodity (always) for as much as (...) get, hardens
his heart against all reasonable entreaties of the buyer. But he that does so,
cannot exercise charity in his dealing; therefore it is not lawful for a man to
sell his commodity, as before, as dear as he can.

Thirdly, If it be lawful for me to sell my commodity, as before, as dear as I
can, then there can be no sin in my Trading, Ephesians. 4. 25.
how unreasonably soever I manage my calling, whether by Lying, There may be
and is sin in trading.
Swearing, Cursing, Cheating; for all this is but to sell my commodity as dear
as I can: but that there is sin in these, is evident, therefore I may not sell
my commodity always as dear as I can.

Fourthly, He that sells, as before, as dear as he can, offers violence to the
law of Nature: for that says, Do unto all men, Matt. 7. 12.
even as ye would that they should do unto you. A man in trading must not
offer violence to the Law of nature.
Now, was the Seller a Buyer, he would not that he of whom he buys, should
sell him always as dear as he can; therefore he should not sell so himself,
Jo^. 37. 7.
when it is his lot to sell, and others to buy of him.

Fifthly, We must not abuse the (...) we have in the knowledge of earthly
things.
He that sells, as before, as dear as he can, makes use of that instruction,
that God has not given to others, but sealed up in his hand, to abuse his Law,
and to wrong his neighbor withal: which indeed is contrary to God. God has
given thee more skill, more knowledge and understanding in thy commodity than
he has given to him that would buy of thee. But what! can thou think, that
God has given thee this, that thou might thereby make a prey of thy
neighbor? that thou might thereby go beyond and beguile thy neighbor? No,
verily; but he has given thee it, for his help; that thou might in this, be
eyes to the blind, and save thy neighbor from that damage, that his
ignorance, or necessity, or fondness would betray him into the hands of.

Sixthly, In all that a man does, 1 Cor. 10. 1^
An eye ^ the glory ^ God in all we should have.
he should have an eye to the glory of God, but that he cannot have that sells
his commodity always for as much as he can, for the reasons urged before.

Seventhly, All that a man does, he should do in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ; that is, as being commanded, Colo. 3. 1^
and authorized to do it by him: but he that sells always as dear as he can,
cannot so much as pretend to this, without horrid blaspheming of that Name,
because commanded by him to do otherwise.

Eighthly, and lastly, In all that a man does, he should have an eye to the day
of Judgment, and to the consideration of how his actions will be esteemed of in
that day. Acts. 24. 15, 16.
Therefore there is not any man can or ought to sell always as dear as he can:
unless he will, yea he must say, in so doing, I will run the hazard of the
trial of that day,

If thou sell ought unto thy neighbor, Levit. 25. 14.
or buyest ought of thy neighbor, ye shall not oppress one another.


Atten. But why do you put in those cautionary words? They must not sell
[always] as dear, nor buy [always] as cheap as they can: do you not thereby
intimate that a man may sometimes do so?


Wise. I do indeed intimate that sometimes the seller may sell as dear, and the
buyer buy as cheap as he can; but this is allowable only in these cases: When
he that sells is a Knave, and lays aside all good conscience in selling; or
when ^^e buyer is a Knave, and lays aside all good conscience in buying. If
the buyer therefore lights of a Knave, or if the seller lights of a Knave, then
let them look to themselves: but yet so, as not to lay aside conscience,
because he that thou dealest with does so: but how vile or base soever the
chapman is, do thou keep thy commodity at a reasonable price: or if thou
buyest, offer reaso^able gain for the thing thou would have: and if this
will not do with the buyer or seller, then seek thee a more honest chapman: If
thou objectest, But I have not skill to know when a pennyworth is before me: Get
some that have more skill than thy self in that affair, and let them in that
matter dispose of thy money. But if there were no Knaves in the world, these
objections need not be made.

And thus, my very good neighbor, have I given you a few of my reasons, why a
man that has it, should not always sell too dear, nor buy as cheap as he can:
but should use good Conscience to God, and Charity to his Neighbor in both:


Atten. But were some men hexe, to hear you, I believe they would laugh you to
scorn.


Wise. I question not that at all, for so, Badman used to laugh at them that
told him of his faults.
Mr. Badman used to do, when any man told him of his faults: he used to think
himself wiser than any, and would count, as I have hinted before, that he was
not arrived to a manly spirit that did stick or boggle at any wickedness. But
let Mr. Badman and his fellows laugh, I will bear it, and still give them good
counsel. But I will remember also, for my further relief and comfort, that thus
they that were covetous of old, served the Son of God himself. (...) 14, 15.
^ap. 6. 25.
It is their time to laugh now, that they may mourn in time to come. And, I say
again, when they have laughed out their laugh; He that uses not good
conscience to God, and charity to his neighbor, in buying and selling, dwells
next door to an Infidel, and is near of ki^to Mr. Badman.


Atten. Well, but what will you say to this question? (...)
(you know that there is no settled price set by God upon any Commodity that is
bought or sold under the Sun; but all things ^ that we buy and sell, do ebb
and slow, as to price, like the Tide:) How (then) shall a man of a tender
conscience do, neither to wrong the seller, buyer, nor himself, in buying and
selling of commodities?


Wise. This Question is thought An answers.
to be frivolous by all that are of Mr. Badmans way; it is also difficult in it
self: yet I will endeavor to shape you an Answer, and that first to the matter
of the question; to wit, How a Tradesman should, in Trading, keep a good
conscience; (A buyer or seller either.) Secondly, How he should prepare himself
to this work, and live in the practice of it.

For the first: Preparations to be a good dealer.
He must observe what has been said before, to wit, he must have conscience to
God, charity to his neighbor; and I will add, much moderation in dealing. Let
him therefore keep within the bounds of the affirmative of those eight reasons
that before were urged to prove, that men ought not in their Dealing, but to do
Justly and mercifully 'twixt man and, man; and then there will be no great fear
of wronging the seller, buyer, or himself.

But particularly to prepare, or instruct a man to this work:

1. Let the Tradesman or others consider, that there is not that in great
Gettings, and in abundance, which the most of men do suppose: For all that a
man has over and above what serves for his present necessity and supply, serves
only to seed the lusts of the eye. ^ccle. 5. 10, 11.
For what good is there to the owners thereof, save the beholding of them with
their eyes? 1 Timothy 6. 7, 8, 9.
Men also, many times, in getting of riches, get therewith a snare to their
soul: But few get good by getting of them. But this consideration, Mr. Badman
could not abide.

2. Consider, that the getting of wealth dishonestly (as he does, that gets
it without good conscience and charity to his neighbor,) is a great offender
against God. Hence he says, Ezekiel. 2. 13.
I have smitten mine hands at thy dishonest gain, which thou have made. It is a
manner of speech that shows anger in the very making of mention of the Crime.
Therefore,

3. Consider, that a little honestly gotten, though it may yield thee but a
dinner of herbs at a time, will yield more peace therewith, than will a stalled
Ox, ill gotten. Pro. 15. 17.
Better is a little with righteousness, Chap. 16. 8.
than great revenues without right. 1 Samuel 2. 5.


4. Be thou confident, Pro. 5. 21.
that Gods eyes are upon all thy ways, and that he po^dereth all thy goings,
and also that he marks them, writes them down, and seals them up in a bag, Job.
14. 17.
against the time to come.

5. Be thou sure that thou remembrest, that thou know not the day of thy
death. Remember also, that when death comes, God will give thy substance, for
the which thou have labored, and for the which perhaps thou have hazarded thy
soul, to one, thou know not who, nor whether he shall be a wise man or a
fool. And then, Eccles. 5. 13, 14, 15.
what profit has he that labors for the wind?

Besides, thou shall have nothing that thou may so much as carry away in
thine hand. Guilt shall go with thee, if thou have got it dishonestly, and
they also to whom thou shall leave it, shall receive it to their hurt.

These things duly considered, and made use of by thee to the preparing of thy
heart to thy calling of buying or selling; I come in the next place to show
thee how thou should live in the practick part of this art. Art thou to buy
or sell?

1. If thou sellest, do not commend; if thou buyest, do not dispraise, any
otherwise, but to give the thing that thou have to do with, its just value and
worth; for thou can not do otherwise knowingly, but of a covetous and wicked
mind. Wherefore else are commodities overvalued by the Seller, and also
undervalued by the Buyer. Prove. 2^ 14.
It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he has got his bargain
he boasts thereof. What has this man done now but lied in the dispraising of
his bargain? and why did he dispraise it, but of a covetous mind, to wrong and
beguile the seller?

2. Art thou a seller, and do things grow dear? set not thy hand to help, or
hold them up higher; this cannot be done without wickedness neither; for this
is a making of the sheekle great: Am^^, 8. ^.
Art thou a buyer, and do things grow dear? use no cunning or deceitful
language to pull them down: for that cannot be done but wickedly too. What then
shall we do? will you say. Why I answer: Leave things to the providence of God,
and do thou with moderation submit to his hand. But since, when they are
growing dear, the hand that upholds the price, is, for the time, more strong
than that which would pull it down; That being the hand of the seller, who
loves to have it dear, specially if it shall rise in his hand: therefore I
say, do thou take heed, and have not a hand in it. The which thou may have
to thine own and thy neighbors hurt, these three ways:

1. By crying out scaroity, scarcity, beyond the truth and state of things:
especially take heed of doing of this by way of a prognostic for time to come.
I was for A Judgment of God. 2 King. 7.
this for which he was trodden to death in the gate of Samaria, that you read
of in the book of Kings. This sin has a double evil in it. 1. It belieth the
present blessing of God amongst us: and, 2. It undervalueth the riches of his
goodness, which can make all good things to abound toward us.

2. This wicked thing may be done by hoa^ding up, when the hunger and Necessity
of the poor calls for it. Now that God may show his dislike against this, he
does, as it were, license the people to curse such an hoarder up. Pro. 11. 26.
He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him, but blessing shall be
upon the head of him that sells it.

3. But if things will rise, do thou be grieved; Be also moderate in all thy
sellings, and be sure let the poor have a pennyworth, and sell thy Corn to
those in necessity: Which then thou will do, when thou show mercy to the
poor in thy selling to him, and when thou for his sake, because he is poor,
undersellest the market. This is to buy and sell with good conscience; thy
buyer thou wrongest not, thy Conscience thou wrongest not, Isa. 58. 6, 7, 8.
thy self thou wrongest not, for God will surely recompense thee.

I have spoken concerning Corn, but thy duty is, to let thy moderation in all
things be known unto all men, Philip. 4. 5.
the Lord is at hand.


Atten. Well, Sir, now I have heard enough of Mr. Badmans naughtiness, pray now
proceed to his Death.


Wise. Why Sir, the Sun is not so low, we have yet three hours to night.


Atten. Nay; I am not in any great have, but I thought you had even now done
with his Life.


Wise. Done! no, I have yet much more to say.


Atten. Then he has much more wickedness than I thought he had.


Wise. That may be. Mr Badman a very proud man.
But let us proceed: This Mr. Badman, added to all his wickedness this, He was
a very proud man, a Very proud man. He was exceeding proud and haughty in mind;
He looked, that what he said, ought not, must not be contradicted or opposed.
He counted himself as wise as the wisest in the Country, as good as the best,
and as beautiful as he that had most of it. He took great delight in praising
of himself, and as much in the praises that others gave him. He could not abide
that any should think themselves above him, or that their wit or personage
should by others be set before his. Of pride in ^eneral.
He had scarce a fellowly carriage for his equals. But for those that were of
an inferior rank, he would look over them in great contempt. And if at any
time he had any remote occasion of having to do with them, he would show great
height, and a very domineering spirit. So that in this it may be said that
Solomon gave a characteristical note of him, when he said: Pro. 21. 24.
Proud and haughty scorner i^ his name, who deals in proud wrath. He never
thought his Diet well enough dressed, his Clothes fine enough made, or his
Praise enough refined.


Atten. This Pride, is a sin that sticks as close to nature I think, as most
sins. There is Uncleanness and Pride, I know not of any two gross sins that
stick closer to men then they. They have, as I may call it, an interest in
Nature; it likes them because they most suit its lusts and fancies: and
therefore no marvel though Mr. Badman was tainted with pride, since he had so
wickedly given up himself to work all iniquity with greediness.


Wise. You say right; Pride, is a sin that sticks close to Nature, and is one
of the first follies wherein it shows it self to be polluted. Pride sticks
clo^e to nature.
For even in Childhood, even in little children, Pride will first of all show
it self; it is a hasty, an early appearance of the sin of the soul. It, as I
may say, is that corruption that strives for predominancy in the heart, and
therefore usually comes out first. But though children are so incident to it,
yet methinks those of more years, should be ashamed thereof. I might at the
first have begun with Mr. Badmans Pride, only I think it is not the Pride in
Infancy, that begins to make a difference betwixt one and another, as did, and
do those wherewith I began my relation of his life: therefore I passed it over,
but now, since he had no more consideration of himself, and of his vile and
sinful state, but to be proud when come to years; I have taken the occasion in
this place to make mention of his pride.


Atten. But pray, if you can remember them, tell me of some places of Scripture
that speak^ against pride. I the rather desire this, because that pride is now
a reigning sin, and I happen sometimes to fall into the company of them that in
my conscience are proud, very much, and I have a mind also to tell them of
their sin; now when I tell them of it, unless I bring Gods word too, I doubt
they will laugh me to scorn.


Wise. Laugh you to scorn! the Proud man will laugh you to scorn, bring to him
what Text you can, except God shall smite him in his conscience by the Word:
Mr. Badman did use to serve them so that did use to tell him of his: and
besides, when you have said what you can, they will tell you they are not
proud, and that you are rather the proud man, else you would not judge, nor so
malapertly meddle with other men's matters as you do. Nevertheless, since you
desire it, I will mention two or three texts: They are these. Pro. 8. 13.
Pride and arrogance do I hate. Chap. 29. 23.
A man's pride shall bring him low. And he shall bring down their pride. Isa.
25. 11.
And all the proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, Mal. 4. 1.
and the day that comes shall burn them up. This last, is a dreadful Text; it
is enough to make a proud man shake: God, says he, will make the proud ones as
stubble; that is, as fuel for the fire, and the day that comes shall be like a
burning oven, and that day shall burn them up, says the Lord. But Mr. Badman
could never abide to hear pride spoken against, nor that any should say of him,
He is a proud man.


Atten. What should be the reason of that?


Wise. He did not tell me the reason; Proud men do not love to b^ called proud.
but I suppose it to be that which is common to all vile persons. They love
this Vice, but care not to bear its name. The Drunkard loves the sin, but loves
not to be called a drunkard. The Thief loves to steal, but cannot abide to be
called a thief, the whore loves to commit uncleanness, but loves not to be
called a Whore: And so Mr. Badman loved to be proud, but could not abide to be
called a proud man. The sweet of sin, is desirable to polluted and corrupted
man, but the name thereof, is a blot in his Scutcheon.


Atten. It Is true that you have said: but pray how many sorts of pride are
there?


Wise. There are two sorts of Pride; Two sorts of pride.
Pride of Spirit, and Pride of Body. The first of these is thus made mention of
in the Scriptures. Pro. 16. 5
Every one that is proud in heart is abomination Ch^p. 21. 4.
to the Lord. Eccle. ^. 8.
A high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked is sin. The
patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit. Bodily pride these
Scriptures mention. In that day the Lord shall take away the bravery of their
tinckling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires
like the Moon, the chains, and the bracelets, and the mussters, the bonnets,
and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the
earrings, the rings, Isa. ^. 17. 18, 1^, 20, 21, 22.
and the Nose-jewels: The changable suits of Apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping pins, the glasses, and the sine linen, and the hoods
and the vails. By these expressions it is evident that there is Pride of Body,
as well as Pride of Spirit, and that both are sin, and so abominable to the
Lord. But these Texts Mr. Badman could never abide to read, they were to him as
Mcaiah was to Ahab, they never spoke good of him, but evil.


Atten. I suppose that it was not Wicked men do hate that word that reproves
their vice.
Mr. Badmans case alone even to malign those Texts that speak against their
vices: For I believe, that most ungodly men, (where the Scriptures are) have a
secret antipathy against those Words of God that do most plainly and fully
rebuke them for their sins.


Wise. That is out of doubt, and by that antipathy, they show, that sin and
Satan are more welcome to them than are the wholesome instructions of life and
godliness.


Atten. Well, but not to go off from our discourse of Mr. Badman. You say he
was proud: but will you show me now some symptoms of one that is proud?


Wise. Yes, Signs of a proud man in general.
that I will: And first I will show you some symptoms of Pride of Heart. Pride
of heart, is seen by outward things, as Pride of Body in general, is a sign of
pride of heart; for all proud gestures of the body slow from Pride of heart:
Pro. 32. 13.
therefore Solomon says; There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes,
and their eyelids are lifted up: And again; Pro. 17. 19.
There is that exalts their gate, their going. Now these lofty eyes, Mar. 7.
and this exalting of the gate, is a sign of a Proud heart: for both these
actions come from the heart: for out of the heart comes Pride, in all the
visible appearances of it. In particular.
But more particularly:

1. Heart Pride is discovered by a stretched out Neck, and by mincing as they
go. For the wicked, the Proud, have a proud Neck, a proud Foot, a proud Tongue,
by which this their going is exalted. This is that which makes them look
scornfully, speak ruggedly, and carry it huffingly among their Neighbors.

2. A proud heart, is a persecuting one: Psalm. 1^. 2.
The wicked through his pride does persecute the poor.

3. A prayerless man is a proud man. Psalm. 10. 4.


4. A contentions man is a proud man. Pro. 1^. 10.


5. The disdainful man is a proud man. Psalm. 11. 51.


6. The man that oppresses his neighbor is a proud man. Ver. 122.


7. He that hearkeneth not to Gods Word with reverence and fear, Jer. 13. 17.
is a proud man.

8. And he that calls the proud happy, Chap. 43. 2.
is, Mal. 3. 15.
be sure, a proud man. All these are proud in heart, and this their pride of
heart does thus discover it self.

As to bodily Of outward pride.
pride, it is discovered, that is, something of it, by all the particulars
mentioned before; for though they are said to be symptoms of pride of heart,
yet they are symptoms of that pride, by their showing of themselves in the
Body. You know diseases that are within, are seen oft-times by outward and
visible Signs, yet by them very signs even the outside is defiled also. So all
those visible signs of heartpride, are signs of bodily pride also. But to come
to more outward signs: The putting on of Gold, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
and Pearls, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5.
and costly array; the pleating of the hair, the following of fashions, the
seeking by gestures to imitate the proud, either by speech, looks, dresses,
goings, or other fools baubles, (of which at this time the world is full) all
these, and many more, are signs, as of a proud heart, so of bodily pride also.

But Mr. Badman would not allow, Mr. Badman was not for having pride called
pride.
by any means, that this should be called Pride, but rather neatness,
handsonmess, comeliness, cleanliness, etc. neither would he allow that
following of fashions was any thing else, but because he would not be proud,
singular, and esteemed fantastical by his neighbors.


Atten. But I have been told, that when some have been rebuked for their pride,
they have turned it again upon the brotherhood of those by whom they have been
rebuked: saying, Physician heal thy Friends, look at home, among your
Brotherhood, even among the wisest of you, and see if you your selves be clear,
even you professors: for who is prouder than you professors? searcesly the
Devil himself.


Wise. My heart aches at this answer, (...)
because there is too much cause for it. This very Answer would Mr. Badman give
his wife, when she (as she would sometimes) reproved him for his pride: We
shall have, says he, great amendments in living now, for the Devil is turned a
corrector of vice: For no sin reigns more in the world, quoth he, than pride
among professors. And who can contradict him? let us give the Devil his due,
the thing is too apparent for any man to deny.

And I doubt not but the same answer is ready in the mouths of Mr. Badmans
friends; for they may and do see pride display it self in the Apparel and
carriages of professors; one may say, almost as much, as among any people in
the Land, the more is the pity. Ay, and I fear that even their Extravagancies
in this, has hardened the heart of many a one, as I perceive it did somewhat
the heart of Mr. Badman himself.

For mine own part, I have seen many my self, and those Church Members too, so
decked and bedaubed with their Fangles and Toys, and that when they have been
at the solemn Appointments of God, in the way of his Worship, that I have
wondered with what face such painted persons could sit in the place where they
were without swounding. But certainly the holiness of God, and also the
pollution of themselves by sin, must needs be very far out of the minds of such
people, what profession soever they make.

I have read of an Whores forehead, Jer. ^. 3.
and I have read of christianshamefacedness; 1 Timothy 2. 9.
I have read of costly array, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3.
and of that which becomes women professing Godliness, Jer. 23. 15.
with good works; but if I might speak, I know what I know, and could say, and
yet do no wrong, that which would make some professors stink in their places;
but now I forbear.


Atten. Sir, you seem to be greatly concerned at this, but what if I shall say
more? it is whispered, that some good Ministers have countenanced their people
in their light and wanton. Apparel, yea have pleaded for their Gold, and
Pearls, and costly array, etc.


Wise. I know not what they have pleaded for, but it is easily seen that they
tolerate, or at least wise, wink and connive at such things, both in their
Wives and Children. And so from the Prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone
forth into all the land. Ezra. 9. 2.
And when the hand of the Rulers are chief in a trespass, who can keep their
people from being drowned in that trespass?


Atten. This is a lamentation, and must stand for a lamentation.


Wise. So it is, and so it must. Pride in profe^^ors a shame and
stumbling block to the world.
And I will add, it is a shame, it is a reproach, it is a stumbling block to
the blind; for though men be as blind as Mr. Badman himself, yet they can see
the foolish lightness that must needs be the bottom of all these apish and
wanton extravagancies. But many have their excuses ready; to wit, their
Parents, their Husbands, and their breeding calls for it, and the like: yea,
the examples of good people prompt them to it: but all these will be but the
Spiders webb, when the thunder of the Word of the great God shall rattle from
Heaven against them, as it will at Death or Judgment; but I wish it might do it
before. But alas! these excuses are but bare pretenses, these proud ones love
to have it so. I once talked with a Maid, by way of reproof, for her fond and
gaudy garment. But she told me,
The Tailor would wake it so: when alas, poor proud Girl, she gave order to
the Tailor so to make it. Many make Parents, and Husbands, and Tailors, etc.
the Blind to others, but their naughty hearts, and their giving of way thereto,
that is the original cause of all these evils.


Atten. Now you are speaking of the cause of pride, Why pride is in such
request.
pray show me yet further why pride is now so much in request?


Wise. I will show you what I think are the reasons of it. 1 Reason.


1. The first is, Because such persons are led by their own hearts, Mar. 7. 22,
23.
rather than by the Word of God. I told you before, that the original fountain
of pride is the heart. For out of the heart comes pride; it is therefore
because they are led by their hearts, Obad. 3.
which naturally tends to lift them up in pride. This pride of heart, tempts
them, and by its deceits overcomes them; yea it does put a bewitching virtue
into their Peacocks feathers, and then they are swallowed up with the vanity of
them.

2. Another reason why professors are so proud, (for those we are talking of
now) is because they are more apt to take example by those that are of the
World, than they are to take example of those that are Saints indeed. Pride is
of the world. For all that is of the world, 1 John 2. 16.
the lusts of the slesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, are not
of the Father but of the world. Of the world therefore Professors learn to be
proud. But they should not take them for example. It will be objected, No, nor
your saints neither, for you are as proud as others: Well, let them take shame
that are guilty. But when I say, professors should take example for their life
by those that are saints indeed, I mean as Peter says: They should take example
of those that were in old time, the saints; for saints of old time were the
best, therefore to these he directs us for our patrern. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 3, 4, 5.
Let the wives conversation be chaste, and also coupled with fear. Whose
adorning, says Peter, let it not be that outward adorning, of pleating the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of Apparel: but let it be the
hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of
a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. For after
this manner, in the old time, the holy women also who trusted in God, adorned
themselves, being in subjection to their own husband. 3 Reason.


3. Another reason is, Because they have forgotten the pollution of their
Nature. For the remembrance of that, must needs keep us humble, and being kept
humble, we shall be at a distance from pride. The proud and the humble are set
in opposition; (God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.) And
can it be imagined, that a sensible Christian should be a proud one; sense of
baseness tends to lay us low, not to list us up with pride; not with pride of
Heart, nor pride of Life: But when a man begins to forget what he is, then he,
if ever, begins to be proud.

Methinks it is one of the most senceless and ridiculous things in the world,
that a man should be proud of that which is given him on purpose to cover the
shame of his nakedness with.

4. Persons that are proud, 4 Reason.
have gotten God and his Holiness out of their sight. If God was before them,
as he is behind their back; And if they saw him in his holiness, as he sees
them in their sins and shame, they would take but little pleasure in their
apisn Knacks. The Holiness of God makes the Angels cover their faces, Isa. 6.
crumbles Christians, when they behold it, into dust and ashes: and as his
Majesty is, such is his Word; Therefore they abuse it, that bring it to
countenance pride.

Lastly, 5 Reason.
But what can be the end of those that are proud, in the decking of themselves
after their antic manner? why are they for going with their Bulls-foretops,
with their naked shoulders, and Paps hanging out like a Cows bag? why are they
for painting their faces, for stretching out their necks, and for putting of
themselves into all the Formalities which proud Fancy leads them to? Is it
because they would honor God? because they would adorn the Gospel? because
they would beautify Religion, and make sinners to fall in love with their own
salvation? No, no. It is rather to please their lusts, to satisfy their wild
and extravagant fancies; and I wish none does it to stir up lust in others, to
the end they may commit uncleanness with them. I believe, whatever is their
end, this is one of the great designs of the Devil: and I believe also, that
Satan has drawn more into the sin of uncleanness, by the spangling show of fine
clothes, than he could possibly have drawn unto it, without them. I wonder what
it was, that of old was called the Attire of an Harlot: certainly it could not
be more bewitching and tempting than are the garments of many professors this
day.


Atten. I like what you say very well, and I wish that all the proud Dames in
England that profess, were within the reach and sound of your words.


Wise. What I have said, I believe is true; but as for the proud Dames in
England that profess, they have Moses and the Prophets, and if they will not
hear them, how then can we hope that they should receive good by such a dull
sounding Ramshorn as I am? However, I have said my mind, and now if you will,
we will proceed to some other of Mr. Badmans doings.


Atten. No: The evil effects of the sin of Pride.
pray before you show me any thing else of Mr. Badman, show me yet more
particularly the evil effects of this sin of Pride.


Wise. With all my heart, I will answer your request.

1. Then: It Is pride that makes poor Man so like the Devil in Hell, 1 Evil
effect.
that he cannot in it be known to be the Image and similitude of God. The
Angels when they became Devils, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
'twas through their being lifted or puffed up with pride. It Is pride also that
lifts or puffs up the heart of the sinner, and so makes him to bear the
very image of the Devil.

2. Pride makes a man so odious in the sight of God, 2 Evil effect.
that he shall not, must not come nigh his Majesty. Though the Lord be high,
Psalm. 138. 9.
yet has he respect to the lowly, but the proud he knows afar off. Pride sets
God and the Soul at a distrance; pride will not let a man come nigh God, nor
God will not let a proud man come nigh unto him: Now this is a dreadful thing.

3. As pride sets, ^ Evil effect.
so it keeps God and the Soul at a distance. God resists the proud; resists,
that is, he opposes him, he thrusts him from him, he contemns his person and
all his performances. Come in to Gods Ordinances, the proud man may; but come
into his presence, have communion with him, ^a^. 4. 6.
or blessing from him, he shall not. For the high God does resist him.

4. The Word says, 4 Evil effect.
that The Lord will destroy the House of the proud. Pro. 16. 25.
He will destroy his House; it may be understood, he will destroy him and his.
So he destroyed proud Pharaoh, so he destroyed proud Corah, and many others.

5. Pride, 5 Evil effect.
where it comes, and is entertained, is a certain forerunner of some Judgment
that is not far behind. Pro. 11. 2.
When pride goes before, shame and destruction will follow after. Prove. 16. 8.
When pride comes, then comes shame. Pride goes before destruction, and a
haughty spirit before a fall.

6. Persisting in pride makes the 6 Evil effect.
condition of a poor man as remediless as is that of the Devils themselves. 1 Timothy 3. 6.


And this I fear was Mr. Badmans condition, and that was the reason that he
died so as he did; as I shall show you anon.

But what need I thus talk of the particular actions, A general character of
Mr. Badman.
or rather prodigious sins of Mr. Badman, when his whole Life and all his
actions, went as it were to the making up one massy body of sin? Instead of
believing that there was a God, his Mouth, his Life and Actions declared, that
he believed no such thing. His transgression said within my heart, Psalm. 36. 1.
that there was no fear of God before his eyes. A brief relation of Mr. Badmans
ways.
Instead of honoring of God, and of giving glory to him for any of his
Mercies, or under any of his good Providence toward him (for God is good to
all, and lets his Sun shine, and his Rain fall upon the unthankful and unholy,)
he would ascribe the glory to other causes. If they were Mercies, he would
ascribe them (if the open face of the providence did not give him the lie) to
his own wit, labor, care, industry, cunning, or the like: if they were
Crosses, he would ascribe them, or count them the offspring of Fortune, ill
Luck, Chance, the ill mannagement of matters, the ill will of neighbors, or to
his wifes being Religious, and spending, as he called it, too much time in
Reading, Praying, or, the like. I was not in his way to acknowledge God, (that
is, graciously) or his hand in things. But, Isa. 26. 10.
as the Prophet says; Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not
learn righteousness. And again, They returned not to him that smote them, Isa.
9. 13.
nor did they seek the Lord of hosts. This was Mr. Badmans temper, Isa. 26. 11.
neither Mercies nor Judgment would make him seek the Lord. Nay, as another
Scripture says, Psalm. 29. 5.
he would not see the works of God, nor regard the operations of his hands
either in mercies or in Judgments. But further, when by Providence he has been
cast under the best Means for his soul, (for, as was showed before, he having
had a good master, and before him a good father, and after all a good wife, and
being sometimes upon a Journey, and cast under the hearing of a good Sermon, as
he would sometimes for novelties sake go to hear a good Preacher; Pro. 17. 6.
) he was always without heart to make use thereof: Isa. 26. 10.
In this land of righteousness he would deal unjustly, and would not behold the
majesty of the Lord.

Instead of reverencing the Word, Mr. Badmans judgment of the Scriptures.
when he heard it preached, read, or discoursed of, he would sleep, talk of
other Business, or else object against the authority, harmony, and wisdom of
the Scriptures. Saying, How do you know them to be the Word of God? how do you
know that these sayings are true? The Scriptures, he would say, were as a Nose
of Wax, and a man may turn them whithersoever he lists: one Scripture says one
thing, and another says the quite contrary; Besides, they make mention of a
thousand imposibilities; they are the cause of all dissensions and discords
that are in the Land: Therefore you may (would he say) still think what you
will, but in my mind they are best at ease that have least to do with them.

Instead of loving and honoring of them that did bear in their Foreheads the
Name, Good men Mr. Badmans lon^.
and in their Lives the Image of Christ, they should be his Song, the matter of
his Jests, and the objects of his slanders. He would either make a mock at
their sober deportment, their gracious language, quiet behavior, or else
desperately swear that they did all in deceit and hypocrisy. He would
endeavor to render godly men as odious and contemptable as he could; any lies
that were made by any, to their disgrace, those he would avouch for truth, and
would not endure to be controlled. Psalm. 5^. 19. 20.
He was much like those that the prophet speaks of, that would sit and slander
his mothers son; yea, he would speak reproachfully of his wife, though his
conscience told him, and many would testify, that she was a very virtuous
woman. He would also raise slanders of his wives friends himself, affirming
that their doctrine tended to lasciviousness, and that in their assemblies they
acted and did unbeseeming men and women, that they committed uncleanness, etc.
He was much like those that affirmed the Apostle should say, Romans 3. 7, 8.
Let us do evil that good may come: Or like those of whom it is thus written;
Report, Jer. 23. 10.
say they, and we will report it. And if he could get any thing by the end that
had scandal in it, if it did but touch professors, how falsely soever reported;
Oh! then he would glory, laugh, and be glad, and lay it upon the whole party:
Saying, Hang them Rogues, there is not a barrel better Herring of all the holy
Brotherhood of them: Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier, this is your
precise Crew. And then he would send all home with a curse.


Atten. If those that make profession of Religion be wise, Mr. Badmans
watchings and words will make them the more wary and careful in all things.


Wise. You say true. When the wicked watch, Gods people should be wary.
For when we see men do watch for our halting, and rejoice to see us stumble
and fall, it should make us so much abundance the more careful.

I do think it was as delightful to Mr. Badman to hear, raise, and tell lies,
and lying stories of them that fear the Lord, as it was for him to go to bed
when a weary. But we will at this time let these things pass. For as he was in
these things bad enough, so he added to these, many more the like.

He was an Badman an angry, envious man.
angry, wra^^ full, envious man, a man that knew not what meekness or
gentleness meant, nor did he desire to learn. His natural temper was to be
surly, huffie, and rugged, and worse; and he so gave way to his temper, as to
this, that it brought him to be furious and outrageous in all things, specially
against goodness it self, and against other things too, when he was displeased.


Atten. Solomon says, Pro. 14. 16.
He is a fool that rages.


Wise. He does so; and says moreover, Eccle. 7. 9.
That anger rests in the bosom of fools. And truly, if it be a sign of a Fool
to have anger rest in his bosom, then was Mr. Badman, notwithstanding the
conceit that he had of his own abilities, a Fool of no small size.


Atten. Fools are mostly most wise in their own eyes.


Wise. True. But I was a saying, that if it be a sign that a man is a Fool,
when Anger rests in his bosom; Then what is it a sign of, think you, when
Malice and Envy rests there? For to my knowledge Mr. Badman was as malicious
and as envious a man as commonly you can hear of.


Atten. Certainly, Whence Envy flows.
malice and envy flow from pride and arrogance, and they again from ignorance,
and ignorance from the Devil; And I thought, that since you spoke of the pride
of Mr. Badman before, we should have something of these before we had done.


Wise. Envy flows from Ignorance indeed. And this Mr. Badman was so envious an
one, where he set against, that he would swell with it, as a Toad, as we say,
swells with poison. He whom he maligned, might at any time even read envy in
his face wherever he met with him, or in whatever he had to do with him.

His envy was so rank and strong, that if it at any time turned its head
against a man, it would hardly ever be pulled in again: He would watch over
that man to do him mischief, as the Cat watches over the Mouse to destroy it;
yea, he would wait seven years, but he would have an opportunity to hurt him,
and when he had it, he would make him feel the weight of his Envy.

Envy is a devilish thing, the Scripture intimates that none can stand before
it. Pro. 27. 3, 4.
A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier than them
both. Wrath is cruel, Envy the worst of the four.
and anger is outrageous, but who can stand before envy?

This Envy, for the foulness of it, is reckoned among the foulest Villainies
that are, Gal. 5. 19, 2
as adultery, murder, drunkenness, revellings, witchcrafts, heresies,
seditions, etc. Yea, it is so malignant a corruption, that it rots the very
bones of him in whom it dwells. Pro. 14. 30.
A sound heart is life to the flesh, but envy the rottenness of the hones.


Atten. This envy is the very Father and Mother of a great many hideous and
prodigious wickednesses: I say, it is the very Envy is the father and mother of
a many wickednesses.
Father and Mother of them; it both begets them, and also nourishes them up,
till they come to their cursed maturity in the bosom of him that entertains
them.


Wise. You have given it a very right description, in calling of it the Father
and Mother of a great many other prodigious wickednesses: for it is so venomous
and vile a thing, that it puts the whole course of Nature out of order, and
makes it fit for nothing but confusion, and a hold for every evil thing. Jam.
3. 14, 15.
For where envy and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work.
Wherefore, I say, you have rightly called it, The very Father and Mother of a
great many other sins. And now for our further edification, I will reckon up
some of the births of Envy. Some of the births of Envy.


1. Envy, as I told you before, it rotteth the very bones of him that
entertains it. And,

2. As you have also hinted, it is heavier than a Stone, than Sand; yea, and I
will add, It falls like a Millstone upon the head. Therefore,

3. It kills him that throws it, and him at whom it is thrown. Envy slays the
silly one. Job. 5. 2.
That is, him in whom it resides, and him who is its object.

4. 'Twas that also that slew Jesus Matt. 27. 18.
Christ himself; Mar. 15. 10.
for his adversaries persecuted him through their envy.

5. Envy was that by virtue of which Joseph was sold by his Brethren Acts. 7. 9.
into Egypt.

6. It Is envy that has the hand Isa. 11. 13.
in making of variance among Gods Saints.

7. It Is envy in the hearts of Sinners, Acts 13. 14.
that stirs them up to thrust Gods Ministers out of their coasts.

8. What shall I say? It Is envy that is the very Nursery of whisperings,
debates, backbitings, slanders, reproaches, murders, etc.

It Is not possible to repeat all the particular fruits of this sinful root.
Therefore, it is no marvel that Mr. Badman was such an ill natured man, for the
great roots of all manner of wickedness were in him, unmortified, unmaimed,
untouched.


Atten. But it is A rare thing. (...)
a rare case, even this of Mr. Badman, that he should never in all his life be
touched with remorse for his ill-spent life.


Wise. Remorse, I cannot say he ever had, if by remorse you mean repentance for
his evils. Mr. Badman under some trouble of mind.
Yet twice I remember he was under some trouble of mind about his condition:
Once when he broke his leg as he came home drunk from the Alehouse; and
another time when he fell sick, and thought he should die: Besides these two
times, I do not remember any more.


Atten. Did he break his leg then?


Wise. Yes: Once, as he came home drunk from the Alehouse.


Atten. Pray how did he break it?


Wise. Why upon a time he was at an Alehouse, Mr. Badman brake his leg.
that wicked house, about two or three miles from home, and having there drank
hard the greatest part of the day, when night was come, he would stay no
longer, but calls for his horse, gets up, and like a Madman (as drunken
persons usually ride) away he goes, as hard as horse could lay legs to the
ground. Thus he rid, till coming to a dirty place, where his horse flouncing
in, fell, threw his master, and with his fall broke his leg: so there he lay.
But you would not think how he He swears.
swore at first. But after a while, he comeing to himself, and feeling by his
pain, and the uselesness of his leg, what case he was in, and also fearing
that this bout might be his death; he began to cry out after the manner of
such; He prays.
Lord help me, Lord have mercy upon me, good God deliver me, and the like. So
there he lay, till some came by, who took him up, carried him home, where he
lay for some time, before he could go abroad again.


Atten. And then, you say, he called upon God.


Wise. He cried out in his pain, and would say, O God, and O Lord, help me: but
whether it was that his sin might be pardoned, and his soul saved, or whether
to be rid of his pain, I will not positively determine; though I fear it was
but for the last; It has no good effect upon him.
because, when his pain was gone, and he had got hopes of mending, even before
he could go abroad, he cast off prayer, and began his old game; to wit, to be
as bad as he was before. He then would send for his old campanions; his Sluts
also would come to his house to see him, and with them he would be, as well as
he could for his lame leg, as vicious as they could be for their hearts.


Atten. 'Twas a wonder he did not break his neck.


Wise. His neck had gone instead of his leg, but that God was long-suffering
toward him; he had deserved it ten thousand times over. There have been many,
as I have heard, and as I have hinted to you before, that have taken their
Horses when drunk, as he; but they have gone from the pot to the grave; for
they have broken their necks 'twixt the Alehouse and home. One hard by us also
drunk himself dead; he drank, and dyed in his drink.


Atten. It Is a sad thing to dye drunk.


Wise. So it is: But yet I wonder thar no more do so. For considering the
hainousness of that sin, and with how many other sins it is accompanied, How
many sins do accompany drunkenness.
as with oaths, blasphemies, lies, revellings, whoreings, brawlings, etc. it is
a wonder to me, that any that live in that sin should escape such a blow from
heaven that should tumble them into their graves. Besides, when I consider also
how, when they are as drunk as beasts, they, without all fear of danger, will
ride like Bedlams and mad men, even as if they did dare God to meddle with them
if he durst, for their being drunk^ I say, I wonder that he does not withdraw
his protecting providence from them, and leave them to those Dangers and
Destructions that by their sin they have deserved, and that by their Bedlam
madness they would rush themelves into: only I consider again, that he has
appointed a day wherein he will reckon with them, A^ts 1^. 30, 31, 3^.
and does al^o commonly make Examples of some, to show that he takes notice of
their sin, abhorrs their way, and will count with them for it at the set time.


Atten. It is worthy of our remark, to take notice how God, to show his dislike
of the sins of men, strikes some of them down with a blow; as the breaking of
Mr. Badmans leg, for doubtless that was a stroke from heaven.


Wise. It is worth our remark indeed. It was an open stroke, it fell upon him
while he was in the height of his sin: And it looks much like to that in Job;
Job 34. 24, 25, 26.
Therefore he knows their works, and overturneth them in the night, so that
they are destroyed. He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of others:
Or as the Margent reads it, in the place of beholders. He lays them with his
stroke in the place of beholders. There was Mr. Badman laid, his stroke was
taken notice of by every one: his broken leg was at this time the Town-talk.
An open (...).
Mr. Badman has broken his leg, says one: How did he break it? says another:
As he came home drunk from such an Alehouse, said a third; A Judgment of God
upon him, said a fourth. This his sin, his shame, and punishment, are all made
conspicuous to all that are about him. I will here tell you another story or
two.

I have read in Mr. Clark's Looking-glass page 41.
for Sinners; That upon a time, a certain drunken fellow boasted in his Cups,
that there was neither Heaven nor Hell; also he said, He believed, that man had
no Soul, and that for his own part, he would sell his soul to any that would
buy it. Then did one of his companions buy it of him for a cup of Wine; and
presently the Devil in man's shape bought it of that man again at the the same
price; and so in the presence of them all laid hold on this Soul-seller, and
carried him away through the Air, so that he was never more heard of.

In page 148. he tells us also: That there was one at Salisbury, in the midst
of his health drinking and carousing in a Tavern; and he drank a health to the
Devil, saying, That if the Devil would not come and pledge him, he would not
believe that there was either God or Devil. Whereupon his companions stricken
with fear, hastened out of the room: and presently after, hearing a hideous
noise, and smelling a stinking savor, the Vintner ran up into the chamber; and
coming in, he missed his Guest, and found the window broken, the Iron bar in
it bowed, and all bloody: But the man was never heard of afterward.

Again, in page 149. he tells us of a Bailiff of Hedly: Who upon a Lords Day
being drunk at Melford, got upon his horse, to ride through the streets,
saying, That his horse would carry him to the Devil: and presently his hor^e
threw him, and broke his neck. These things are worse than the breaking of Mr.
Badmans Leg, and should be a caution to all of his friends that are living,
lest they also fall by their sin into these sad Judgments of God.

But, as I said, Mr. Badman quickly forgot all, his conscience was choked,
before his leg was healed. And therefore, before he was well of the fruit of
one sin, he tempts God to send another Judgment to seize upon him: And so he
did quickly after. For not many months after his leg was well, he had a very
dangerous fit of sickness, Mr. Badman fallen sick.
insomuch that now he began to think he must dye in very deed.


Atten. Well, and what did he think and do then?


Wise. He thought he must go to Hell; His conscience is wounded.
this I know, for he could not forbear but say so. To my best remembrance, he
lay crying out all one night for fear, and at times he would so tremble, that
he would make the very bed shake under him. He cries out in his sickness.
But, Oh! how the thoughts of Death, of Hellfire, and of eternal Judgment, did
then wrack his conscience. Fear might be seen in his face, and in his tossings
to and fro: It might also be heard in his words, and be understood by his heavy
groans. He would often cry, I am undone, I am undone; my vile life has undone
me.


Atten. Then his former atheistical thoughts and principles, were too weak now
to support him from the fears of eternal damnation.


Wise. Aie! they were too weak indeed. They may serve to stifle conscience,
when a man is in the midst of his prosperity, and to harden the heart against
all good counsel when a man is left of God, and given up to his reprobate mind:
His Atheism will not help him now.
But alas, atheistical thoughts, Notions and Opinions, must shrink and melt
away, when God sends, yea comes with sickness to visit the soul of such a
sinner for his sin. There was a man dwelt abour 12 miles off from us, that had
so trained up himself in his atheistical Notions, that at last he attempted to
write a book against Jesus Christ, and against the divine Authority of the
Scriptures. (But I think it was not printed:) Well, after many days God struck
him with sickness, whereof he dyed. So, being sick, and musing upon his former
doings, the Book that he had written came into his mind, and with it such a
sense of his evil in writing of it, that it tore his Conscience as a Lion would
tare a Kid. He lay therefore upon his deathbed in sad case, A dreadful example
of Gods anger.
and much affliction of conscience: some of my friends also went to see him;
and as they were in his chamber one day, he hastily called for Pen Ink and
Paper, which when it was given him, he took it and writ to this purpose. I,
such an one, in such a Town, must go to Hellfire, for writing a Book against
Jesus Christ, and against the Holy Scriptures:
And would also have leaped out of the window of his house to have killed
himself, but was by them prevented of that: so he dyed in his bed, such a death
as it was. 'Twill be well if others take warning by him.


Atten. This is a remarkable story.


Wise. It Is as true as remarkable; I had it from them that I dare believe, who
also themselves were eye and ear witnesses; and also that caught him in their
arms, and saved him when he would have leaped out of his chamber-window, to
have destroyed himself.


Atten. Well, you have told me what were Mr. Badmans thoughts (now, being sick)
of his condition; pray tell me also what he then did when he was sick?


Wise. Did! he did many things, which I am sure he never thought to have done,
and which, to be sure, was not looked for of his wife and children.

In this fit of sickness, What Mr. Badman did more when he was sick.
his Thoughts were quite altered about his wife; I say his Thoughts, so far as
could be judged by his words and carriages to her. For now she was his good
wife, his godly wife, his honest wife, his duck, and dear, and all. Now he told
her, that she had the best of it, she having a good Life to stand by her, while
his debaucheries and ungodly Life did always stare him in the face. Now he told
her, the counsel that she often gave him, was good; though he was so bad as not
to take it.

Now he would hear her talk to him, Great alteration made in Mr. Badman.
and he would lie sighing by her while she so did. Now he would bid her pray
for him, that he might be delivered from Hell.

He would also now consent, that some of her good Ministers might come to him
to comfort him; and he would seem to show them kindness when they came, for he
would treat them kindly with words, and hearken diligently to what they said,
only he did not care that they should talk much of his ill spent life, because
his conscience was clogged with that already; he cared not now to see his old
companions, the thoughts of them was a torment to him: and now he would speak
kindly to that child of his that took after its mothers steps, though he could
not at all abide it before.

He also desired the prayers of good people, that God of his mercy would spare
him a little longer, promising that if God would but let him recover this once,
what a new, what a penitent man he would be toward God, and what a loving
husband he would be to his wife: what liberty he would give her, yea how he
would go with her himself to hear her Ministers, and how they should go hand
in hand in the way to heaven together.


Atten. Here was a fine show of things; I Will warrant you, his wife was glad for
this.


Wise. His wife! Aie, The Towntalk of Mr. Badmans change.
and a many good people besides: it was noysed all over the Town, what a great
change there was wrought upon Mr. Badman; how sorry he was for his sins, how he
began to love his wife, how he desired good men should pray to God to spare
him; and what promises he now made to God in his sickness, that if ever he
should raise him from his sick bed to health again, what a new penitent man he
would be toward God, and what a loving husband to his good wife.

Well, ministers prayed, and good people rejoiced, thinking verily that they
now had gotten a man from the Devil; nay, some of the weaker sort did not stick
to say that God had began a work of Grace in his heart; His wife is comforted.
and his wife, poor woman, you cannot think how apt she was to believe it so;
she rejoiced, and she hoped as she would have it. But, alas! alas! in little
time things all proved otherwise.

After he had kept his Bed a while, Mr. Badman recovers and returns to his old
course.
his distemper began to abate, and he to feel himself better, so he in little
time was so finely mended, that he could walk about the house, and also
obtained a very fine stomach to his food: and now did his wife and her good
friends stand gaping, to see Mr. Badman fulfill his promise of becoming new
toward God, and loving to his wife: but the contrary only showed it self. For
so soon as ever he had hopes of mending, and found that his strength began to
renew, his trouble began to go off his heart, and he grew as great a stranger
to his frights and fears, as if he had never had them.

But verily, I am apt to think, that one reason of his no more regarding, or
remembering of his sickbed fears, and of being no better for them, was, some
words that the Doctor that supplied him with Physic said to him when he was
mending. For as soon as Mr. Badman began to mend, the Doctor comes and sits him
down by him in his house, and there fell into discourse with him about the
nature of his disease; and among other things they talked of Badmans trouble,
and how he would cry out, tremble, and express his fears of going to Hell when
his sickness lay pretty hard upon him. To which the Doctor replied: Ignorant
physicians kill souls while they cure bodies.
That those fears and Outcries did arise from the height of his distemper, for
that disease was often attended with lightness of the head, by reason the sick
party could not sleep, and for that the vapors disturbed the brain: But you
see Sir, quoth he, that so soon as you got sleep and betook your self to rest,
you quickly mended, and your head settled, and so those frenzies left you.

And was it so indeed, thought Mr. Badman; was my troubles, only the effects of
my distemper, and because ill vapors got up into my brain? Then surely, since
my Physician was my Savior, my Lust again shall be my God. So he never minded
Religion more, but betook him again to the world, his lusts and wicked
companions: And there was an end of Mr. Badmans Conversion.


Atten. I thought, (as you told me of him) that this would be the result of the
whole; for I discerned by your relating of things, that the true symptoms of
conversion were wanting in him, and that those that appeared to be any thing
like them, were only such as the reprobates may have,


Wise. You say right, for there wanted in him, when he was most sensible, a
sense of the pollution of his Nature; Genesis 4. 12. 14.
he only had guilt for his sinful actions, the which Cain, Exo. 9. 27.
and Pharaoh, 1 Samuel 1^. ^4.
and Saul, and Judas, those reprobates, Matt. 27. 3, 4, 5.
have had before him.

Besides, the great things that he desired, The true symptoms of conversion
wanting in all Mr. Badmans sense of sin and desires of mercy.
were, to be delivered from going to Hell, (and who would willingly?) and that
his life might be lengthened in this world. We find not by all that he said or
did, that Jesus Christ the Savior was desired by him, from a sense of his need
of his Righteousness to cloth him, and of his Spirit to sanctify him.

His own strength was whole in him, he saw nothing of the treachery of his own
heart; for had he, he would never have been so free to make promises to God of
amendment. He would rather have been afraid, that if he had mended, he should
have turned with the dog to his vomit, and have begged prayers of Saints, and
assistance from heaven upon that account, that he might have been kept from
doing so.

It Is true he did beg prayers of good people, Exo. 19. 28.
and so did Pharaoh of Moses and Aaron, A^ts 8. 24.
and Simon Magus of Simon Peter,

His mind also seemed to be turned to his wife and child; but alas! 'twas
rather from conviction that God had given him concerning their happy estate
over his, than for that he had any true love to the work of God that was in
them. True, some shows of kindness he seemed to have for them, and so had rich
Dives, when in Hell, Luke 16. 27, 28.
to his five brethren that were yet in the world; yea he had such love, as to
wish them in Heaven, that they might not come thither to be tormented.


Atten. Sickbed Repentance is seldom good for anything.


Wise. O^sick-bed repentance, and that it is to be suspected.
You say true, it is very rarely good for any thing indeed. Death is unwelcom
to Nature, and usually when sickness and death visit the sinner; the first
taking of him by the shoulder, and the second standing at the Bedchamber door
to receive him; then the sinner begins to look about him, and to bethink with
himself, These will have me away before God; and I know that my Life has not
been as it should, how shall I do to appear before God! Or if it be more the
sense of the punishment, and the place of the punishment of sinners, that also
is starting to a desiled conscience, now rouzed by deaths lumbring at the door.

And hence usually is sickbed Repentance, and the matter of it: To wit, to be
saved from Hell, and from Death, and that God will restore again to health till
they mend; concluding that it is in their power to mend, as is evident by their
large and lavishing promises to do it.

I have known many, that, when they have been sick, have had large measures of
this kind of Repentance, and while it has lasted, the noise and sound thereof,
has made the Town to ring again: but alas! how long has it lasted? oft-times
scarce so long as until the party now sick has been well. It has passed away
like a mist or a vapor, it has been a thing of no continuance. But this kind
of Repentance is by God compared to the howling of a dog. And they have not
cried unto me with their heart, Hos. 7. 14
when they howled upon their bed.


Atten. Yet one may see, A sign of the desperateness of man's heart.
by this, the desperateness of man's heart: for what is it but desperate
wickedness, to make promise to God of amendment, if he will but spare them; and
yet so soon as they are recovered (or quickly after,) fall to sin as they did
before, and never to regard their promise more.


Wise. It is a sign of desperateness indeed; Deuteronomy. 1. 34, 35.
yea, of desperate madness. For surely, they must needs think, that God took
notice of their promise, that he heard the words that they spoke, and that he
has laid them up against the time to come; and will then bring out, and
testify to their faces, that they flattered him with their mouth, and lied
unto him with their tongue, when they lay sick, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37.
to their thinking, upon their deathbed, and promised him that if he would
recover them they would repent and amend their ways. But thus, as I have told
you, Mr. Badman did. He made great promises that he would be a New man, that he
would leave his sins, and become a Convert, that he would love, etc. his godly
wife, etc. Yea many fine words had Mr. Badman in his sickness, but no good
actions when he was well.


Atten. And how did his good wife take it, when she saw that he had no
Amendment, but that he returned with the Dog to his vomit, to his old courses
again?


Wise. Why it Mr. Badmans wi^^s heart is broken.
broke her heart, it was a worse disappointment to her than the cheat that he
gave her in marriage: At least she laid it more to heart, and could not so well
grapple with it. You must think that she had put up many a prayer to God for
him before, even all the time that he had carried it so badly to her, and now
when he was so a^^righted in his sickness, and so desired that he might live
and me^d, poor woman, she thought that the time was come for God to answer her
prayers; nay, she did not let with gladness, to whisper it out amongst her
Friends, that 'twas so: but when she saw her self disappointed by her husbands
turning Rebel again, she could not stand up under it, but falls into a
languishing distemper, and in a few weeks gave up the Ghost.


Atten. Pray how did she dye?


Wise. Die! she dyed bravely; full of comfort of the faith of her Interest in
Christ, and by him, of the world to come: she had many brave Expressions in her
sickness, and gave to those that came to visit her many signs of her salvation;
the thoughts of the Grave, but specially of her Rising again, were sweet
thoughts to her. She would long for Death, because she knew it would be her
Friend. She behaved her self like to some that were making of them ready to go
meet their Bridegroom. Her Christian speech.
Now, said she, I am going to rest from my sorrows, my sighs, my tears, my
mournings and complaints: I have heretofore longed to be among the Saints, but
might by no means be suffered to go, but now I am going, (and no man can stop
me) to the great Meeting, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
to the general Assembly, and Church of the firstborn which are written in
Heaven. Her talk to her friends.
There I shall have my hearts desire; there I shall worship without Temptation
or other impediment; there I shall see the face of my Jesus, whom I have loved,
whom I have served, and who now, I know, will save my soul. I have prayed often
for my husband, that he might be converted, but there has been no answer of God
in that matter; Are my prayers lost? are they forgotten? are they thrown over
the bar? No; they are hanged upon the horns of the golden Altar, and I must
have the benefit of them my self, that moment that I shall enter into the
gates, in at which the righteous Nation that keeps truth shall enter: I say,
I shall have the benefit of them. I can say as holy David; I say, I can say of
my husband, as he could of his enemies. Psalm. (...) 13.
As for me, when they were sick my clothing was of sackcloth, I humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into my bosom. My prayers are not
lost, my tears are yet in Gods bottle; I would have had a Crown, and Glory for
my husband, and for those of my children that follow his steps; but so far as I
can see yet, I must rest in the hope of having all my self.


Atten. Did she talk thus openly?


Wise. No; this she spoke but to one or two of her most intimate acquaintance,
who were permitted to come and see her, when she lay languishing upon her
deathbed.


Atten. Well, but pray go on in your relation, this is good: I am glad to hear
it, this is as a cordial to my heart while we sit thus talking under this tree.


Wise. When she drew near her end, Her call to her husband.
she called for her husband, and when he was come to her, she told him, That
now he and she must part, and said she, God knows, and thou shall know, that I
have been a loving, faithful Wife unto thee; my prayers have been many for
thee; and as for all the abuses that I have received at thy hand, those I
freely and heartily forgive, and still shall pray for thy conversion, even as
long as I breathe in this world. But husband, I am going thither, where no bad
man shall come, and if thou do not convert, thou will never see me more with
comfort; let not my plain words offend thee: I am thy dying wife, and of my
faithfulness to thee, would leave this Exhortation with thee: Break off thy
sins, fly to God for mercy while mercies gate stands open; remember, that the
day is coming, when thou, though now lusty and well, must lie at the gates of
death, as I do: And what will thou then do, if thou shall be found with a naked
soul, to meet with the Cherubims with their flaming swords? yea, what will thou
then do, if Death and Hell shall come to visit thee, and thou in thy sins, and
under the Curse of the Law?


Atten. This was honest and plain: but what said Mr. Badman to her?


Wise. He did what he could to divert her talk, He diverts her discourse.
by throwing in other things; he also showed some kind of pity to her now, and
would ask her, What she would have? and with various kind of words put her out
of her talk; for when she see that she was not regarded, she fetched a deep
sigh, and lay still. So he went down, and then she called for her Children, and
began to talk to them. Her speech to her children that were rude.
And first she spoke to those that were rude, and told them the danger of dying
before they had grace in their hearts. She told them also, that Death might be
nearer them than they were aware of; and bid them look, when they went through
the Churchyard again, if there was not little graves there. And, ah children,
said she, will it not be dreadful to you, if we only shall meet at the day of
Judgment, and then part again, and never see each other more? And with that she
wept, the Children (also) wept; so she held on her discourse: Children, said
she, I am going from you, Rev. 7. 16.
I am going to Jesus Christ, and with him there is neither sorrow, Chap. 21. 3,
4.
nor sighing, nor pain, nor tears, nor death. Thither would I have you go also,
but I can neither carry you, nor fetch you thither; but if you shall turn from
your sins to God, and shall beg mercy at his hands by Jesus Christ, you shall
follow me, and shall, when you dye, come to the place where I am going, that
blessed place of Rest: and then we shall be for ever together, beholding the
face of our Redeemer, to our mutual and eternal joy. So she bid them remember
the words of a dying mother when she was cold in her grave, and themselves were
hot in their sins, if perhaps her words might put check to their vice, and that
they might remember and turn to God.

Then they all went down; but her Her (...) to her d^rling.
Darling, to wit, the child that she had most love for, because it followed her
ways. So she addressed her self to that. Come to me, said she, my sweet child,
thou art the child of my joy: I have lived to see thee a Servant of God; thou
shall have eternal life. I, my sweet heart, shall go before, and thou shall
follow after; Heb. 3. 14.
if thou shall hold the beginning of thy confidence steadfast to the end. When I
am gone, do thou still remember my words, love thy Bible, follow my Ministers,
deny ungodliness still, and if troublous times shall come, set an higher price
upon Christ, his Word and Ways, and the testimony of a good conscience, than
upon all the world besides. Carry it kindly and dutifully to thy Father, but
choose none of his ways. If thou may, go to service, choose that, rather
than to stay at home; but then be sure to choose a service where thou may be
helped forwards in the way to heaven; and that thou may have such a service,
speak to my Minister, he will help thee, if possible, to such an one.

I would have thee also, my dear child, to love thy Brothers and Sisters, but
learn none of their naughty tricks. Ephesians. 5. 11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them. Thou have Grace, they have none: do thou therefore beautify the way of
salvation before their eyes, by a godly life and conformable conversation to
the revealed will of God, that thy Brothers and Sisters may see and be the more
pleased with the good ways of the Lord.

If thou shall live to marry, take heed of being served as I was; that is, of
being beguiled with fair words, and the flatteries of a lying tongue. But first
be sure of godliness. Yea, as sure as it is possible for one to be in this
world: trust not thine own eyes, nor thine own Judgment; I mean as to that
persons godliness that thou art invited to marry. Ask counsel of good men, and
do nothing therein, if he lives, without my Ministers advice. I have also my
self desired him to look after thee. Thus she talked to her children, and gave
them counsel, and after she had talked to this a little longer, she kissed it,
and bid it go down.

Well, in short, her time drew on, and the day that she must die. So she Her
death
died with a soul full of Grace, an heart full of comfort, and by her death
ended a life full of trouble. Her husband made a Funeral for her, perhaps
because he was glad he was rid of her, but we will leave that to be manifest at
Judgment.


Atten. This Woman died well: And now we are talking of the dying of
Christians, I will tell you a story of one that died some time since in our
Town. The man was a godly old Puritan, for so the godly were called in time
past. This man after a long, and godly life, fell sick, of the sickness whereof
he died. And as he lay drawing on, the woman that looked to him thought she
heard Music, and that the sweetest that ever she heard in her life, which also
continued until he gave up the Ghost: now when his soul departed from him,
the Music seemed to withdraw and to go further and further off from the
house, and so it went until the sound was quite gone out of hearing.


Wise. What do you think that might be?


Atten. For ought I know, the melodious Notes of Angels, that were sent of God
to fetch him to Heaven.


Wise. I cannot say but that God goes out of his Ordinary Road with us poor
mortals sometimes. I cannot say this of this woman, but yet she had better
music in her heart than sounded in this woman's ears.


Atten. I believe so; but pray tell me, did any of her other children hearken
to her words, so as to be bettered in their souls thereby?


Wise. One of them did, One of her children converted by her dying words.
and became a very hopeful young man: but for the rest I can say nothing.


Atten. And what did Badman do after his wife was dead?


Wise. Why even as he did before, he scarce mourned a fortnight for her, and
his mourning then was, I doubt, more in fashion than in heart.


Atten. Would he not sometimes talk of his Wife, when she was dead?


Wise. Yes, when the fit took him, and could commend her too extremely; saying,
she was a good, godly, virtuous woman. But this is not a thing to be wondered
at: It is common with wicked men, to hate Gods Servants while alive, and to
commend them when they are dead. So served the Pharisees the Prophets: Mat. 23.
Those of the Prophets that were dead, they commended; and those of them that
were alive they condemned.


Atten. But did not Mr. Badman marry again quickly?


Wise. No, Mr. Badmans base language.
not a good while after: and when he was asked the reason, he would make this
slighty answer, Who would keep a Cow of their own, that can have a quart of
milk for a penny? Meaning, Who would be at the charge to have a Wife, that can
have a Whore when he lists? So villainous, so abominable did he continue after
the death of his wife. Yet at last there was one was too hard for him. For,
getting of him to her upon a time, He marryes again, and how he got this last
wife.
and making of him sufficiently drunk, she was so cunning as to get a promise
of marriage of him, and so held him to it, and forced him to marry her. What
she was, and how they lived.
And she, as the saying is, was as good as he, at all his vile and ranting
tricks: she had her companions as well as he had his, and she would meet them
too at the Tavern and Alehouse, more commonly than he was aware of. To be
plain, she was a very Whore, and had as great resort came to her, where time
and place was appointed, as any of them all. Aie, and he smelt it too, but
could not tell how to help it. For if he began to talk, she could lay in his
dish the whores that she knew he haunted, and she could fit him also with
cursing and swearing, for she would give him Oath for Oath, and Curse for Curse.


Atten. What kind of Oaths would she have?


Wise. Why damn her, and sink her, and the like.


Atten. These are provoking things.


Wise. So they are: but God does not altogether let such things go unpunished
in this life. Something of this I have showed you already, and will here give
you one or two Instances more.

There lived, says one, in the year 1551. in a City of Savoy, Clarks
Looking-Glass.
a man who was a monstrous Curser and Swearer, and though he was often
admonished and blamed for it, yet would he by no means mend his manners. At
length a great plague happening in the City, he withdrew himself into a Garden,
where being again admonished to give over his wickedness, he hardened his heart
more, Swearing, Blaspheming God, and giving himself to the Devil: And
immediately the Devil snatched him up suddenly, his wife and kinswoman looking
on, and carried him quite away. The Magistrates advertised hereof, went to the
place and examined the Woman, who justified the truth of it.

Also at Oster in the Duchy of Magalapole, (says Mr. Clark) a wicked Woman,
used in her cursing to give her self body and soul to the Devil, and being
reproved for it, still continued the same; till (being at a Wedding-Feast) the
Devil came in person, and carried her up into the Air, with most horrible
outcries and roarings: And in that sort carried her round about the Town, that
the Inhabitants were ready to dye for fear: And by and by he tore her in four
pieces, leaving her four quarters in four several highways; and then brought
her Bowels to the Marriage Feast, and threw them upon the Table before the
Mayor of the Town, saying, Behold, these dishes of meat belong to thee, whom
the like destruction waits for, if thou do not amend thy wicked life.


Atten. Though God forbears to deal thus with all men that thus rend and tare
his Name, and that immediate Judgments do not overtake them; yet he makes their
lives by other Judgments bitter to them, does he not?


Wise. Yes, yes. And for proof, I need go no further than to this Badman and
his wife; for their railing, and cursing, and swearing ended not in words: They
would fight and fly at each other, and that like Cats and Dogs. But it must be
looked upon as the hand and Judgment of God upon him for his villainy; he had an
honest woman before, but she would not serve his turn, and therefore God took
her away, and gave him one as bad as himself. Thus that measure that he meted
to his first wife, this last did mete to him again. And this is a punishment,
wherewith sometimes God will punish wicked men. So said Amos to Amaziah: Thy
wife shall be an Harlot in the City. Amo. 7. 16, 17.
With this last wife Mr. Badman lived a pretty while; but, as I told you
before, in a most sad and hellish manner. And now he would bewail his first
wifes death: not of love that he had to her Godliness, for that he could never
abide, but for that she used always to keep home, whereas this would go
abroad; his first wife was also honest, and true to that Relation, but this
last was a Whore of her Body: The first woman loved to keep things together,
but this last would whirl them about as well as he: The first would be silent
when he chid, and would take it patiently when he abused her, but this would
give him word for word, blow for blow, curse for curse; so that now Mr. Badman
had met with his match: He is punished in his last wife for his bad carriages
toward his first.
God had a mind to make him see the baseness of his own life, in the wickedness
of his wives. He is not at all the better.
But all would not do with Mr. Badman, he would be Mr. Badman still: This
Judgment did not work any reformation upon him, no, not to God nor man.


Atten. I warrant you that Mr. Badman thought when his wife was dead, that next
time he would match far better.


Wise. What he thought I cannot tell, but he could not hope for it in this
match. For here he knew himself to be caught, he knew that he was by this woman
entangled, and would therefore have gone back again, but could not. He knew
her, I say, to be a Whore before, and therefore could not promise himself a
happy life with her. For he or she that will not be true to their own soul,
will neither be true to husband nor wife. And he knew that she was not true to
her own soul, and therefore could not expect she should be true to him: but
Solomon says, An whore is a deep pit, and Mr. Badman found it true. For when
she had caught him in her pit, she would never leave him till she had got him
to promise her Marriage; and when she had taken him so for, she forced him to
marry indeed: And after that, they lived that life that I have told you.


Atten. But did not the neighbors take notice of this alteration that Mr.
Badman had made?


Wise. Yes; None did pity him for his sorrow, but* looked upon it as a just
reward.
and many of his Neighbors, yea, many of those that were carnal said, It Is a
righteous Judgment of God upon him, for his abusive carriage and language to
his other wife: for they were all convinced that she was a virtuous woman, and
that he, vile wretch, had killed her, I will not say, with, but with the want
of kindness.


Atten. And how long I pray did they live thus together?


Wise. Some fourteen or sixteen years, Badman and this last wife part as poor
as Howlets.
even until (though she also brought something with her) they had sinned all
away, and parted as poor as Howlets. And, in reason, how could it be otherwise?
he would have his way, and she would have hers; he among his companions, and
she among hers; he with his Whores, and she with her Rogues; and so they
brought their Noble to Nine-pence.


Atten. Pray of what disease did Mr. Badman die, for now I percieve we are come
up to his death?


Wise. I cannot so properly say that he died of one disease, Mr. Badmans
sickness and diseases of which he died.
for there were many that had consented, and laid their heads together to bring
him to his end. He was dropsical, he was consumptive, he was surfeited, was
gouty, and, as some say, he had a tang of the Pox in his bowels. Yet the
Captain of all these men of death that came against him to take him away, was
the Consumption, for 'twas that that brought him down to the grave.


Atten. Although I will not say, but the best men may die of a consumption, a
dropsy, or a fu^feit; yea, that these may meet upon a man to end him: yet I
will say again, that many times these diseases come through man's inordinate use
of things. Much drinking brings dropsies, consumptions, surfeits, and many
other diseases; and I doubt, that Mr. Badmans death did come by his abuse of
himself in the use of lawful and unlawful things. I ground this my sentence
upon that report of his life that you at large have given me.


Wise. I think verily that you need not call back your sentence; for it is
thought by many, that by his Cups and his Queans he brought himself to this his
destruction: he was not an old man when he dyed, nor was he naturally very
feeble, but strong, and of a healthy complexion: Yet, as I said, he moultered
away, and went, when he set a going, rotten to his Grave. And that which made
him stink when he was dead, I mean, that made him stink in his Name and Fame,
was, that he died with a spice of the foul disease upon him: A man whose life
was full of sin, and whose death was without repentance.


Atten. These were blemishes sufficient to make him stink indeed.


Wise. They were so, and they did do it. No man could speak well of him when he
was gone. Badmans name stinks when he is dead.
His Name rotted above ground, as his Carcass rotted under. And this is
according to the saying of the wise man: Pro. 10. 7.
The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.

This Text, in both the parts of it, was fulfilled upon him and the woman that
he married first. For her Name still did flourish, though she had been dead
almost seventeen years; but his began to stink and rot, before he had been
buried seventeen days.


Atten. That man that dies with a lif^ full of sin, and with an heart void ^f
repentance, although he should die of the most Golden disease (if there were
any that might be so called) I will warrant him his Name shall stink, and that
in Heaven and Earth.


Wise. You say true; and therefore does the name of Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, Judas,
and the Pharisees, though dead thousands of years ago, s^ink as fresh in the
nostrils of the world as if they were but newly dead.


Atten. I do fully acquiesce with you in this. But, That Mr. ^^dman dies (...)
is proved.
Sir, since you have charged him with dying impenitent, pray let me see how you
will prove it: not that I altogether doubt it, because you have affirmed it,
but yet I love to have proof for what men say in such weighty matters.


Wise. When I said, he died without repentance, I meant, so far as those that
knew him, could judge, when they compared his Life, the Word, and his Death
together.


Atten. Well said, they went the right way to find out whether he had, that is,
did manifest that he had repentance or no. Now then show me how they did prove
he had none?


Wise. So I will: And first, this was urged to prove it. 1 Proof that he died
impenitent.
He had not in all the time of his sickness, a sight and sense of his sins, but
was as secure, and as much at quiet, as if he had never sinned in all his life.


Atten. I must needs confess that this is a sign he had none. For how can a man
repent of that of which he has neither sight nor sense? But it is strange that
he had neither sight nor sense of sin now, when he had such a sight and sense
of his evil before: I mean when he was sick before.


Wise. He was, as I said, as secure now, as if he had been as sinless as an
Angel; though all men knew what a sinner he was, for he carried his Sins in his
Forehead. His debauched Life was read and known of all men; but his Reputation
was read and known of no man; for, as I said, he had none. And for ought I
know, the reason why he had no sense of his sins now, was because he profited
not by that sense that he had of them before. He liked not to retain that
knowledge of God then, that caused his sins to come to remembrance: Therefore
God gave him up now to a reprobate mind, to hardness and stupidity of Spirit;
and so was that Scripture fulfilled upon him, Isa. 6.
He has blinded their eyes. And that, Let their eyes be darkened that they may
not see. To. 11.
Oh! for a man to live in sin, and to go out of the world without Repentance
for it, is the saddest Judgment that can overtake a man.


Atten. But, Sir, although both you and I have consented that No sense of sin,
no repentance, proved.
without a sight and sense of sin there can be do Repentance, yet that is but
our bare Say-so; let us therefore now see if by the Scripture we can make it
good.


Wise. That is easily done. The three thousand that were converted, ( Acts the
second,) repented not, Acts 2.
till they had sight and sense of their sins: Paul repented not till he had
sight and sense of his sins: Chap. 9.
the Jailor repented not till he had sight ^^d sense of his sins: Chap. 16.
nor could the^. For of what should a man repent? The Answer is, of Sin. What
is it to Repent of sin? The answer is, Psalm. 38. 18.
To be sorry for it, to turn from it. But how can a man be sorry for it, that
has neither sight nor sense of it. David did, not only commit sins, but abode
impenitent for them, until Nathan the Prophet was sent from God to give him a
sight and sense of them; 2 Samuel 12.
and then, but not till then, he indeed repented of them. Job, in order to his
Repentance, cries unto God, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. Job 10.
2.
And again, That which I see not teach thou me, Chap. 34. 32.
I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more: That is, not in what I
know, for I will repent of it; nor yet in what I know not, when thou shall show
me it.

Also Ephraims Repentance was after he was turned to the sight and sense of his
sins, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.
and after he was instructed about the evil of them.


Atten. These are good testimonies of this truth, and do (if matter of fact,
with which Mr. Badman is charged, b^ true,) prove indeed that he did not
repent, but as he lived, so he dyed in his sin: Job 20. 11.
For without Repentance a man is sure to dye in his sin; for they will lie down
in the dust with him, rise at the Judgment with him, hang about his Neck like
Cords and Chains when he stands at the Bar of Gods Tribunal, P^ov. 5. 22.
and go with him too, when he goes away from the Judgment Seat, with a Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, Matt. 25.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; and there shall fret and gnaw his
Conscience, Isa. 66. 21.
because they will be to him a ne^er-dying worm. Mar. 9. 44.



Wise. You say well, and I will add a word or two more to what I have said:
Repentance, as it is not produced without a sight and sense of sin, so every
sight and sense of sin cannot produce it: I mean, every sight and sense of sin
Every sight and sense of sin cannot produce repentance.
cannot produce that Repentance, that is Repentance unto salvation; repentance
never to be repented of. For it is yet fresh before us, that Mr. Badman had a
sight and sense of sin, in that fit of sickness that he had before, but it dyed
without procuring any such godly fruit; as was manifest by his so soon
returning with the Dog to his Vomit. Many people think also that Repentance
stands in Confession of sin only, but they are very much mistaken* For
Repentance, as was said before, is a being sorry for, and a turning from
transgression to God by Jesus Christ. Now, if this be true, that every sight
and sense of sin will not produce Repentance, then Repentance cannot be
produced there where there is no sight and sense of sin. That every sight and
sense of sin will not produce repentance, to wit, the godly repentance that we
are speaking of, is manifest in Cain, Pharaoh, Saul and Judas, who all of them
had sense, great sense of sin, but none of them repentance unto life.

Now I conclude, that Mr. Badman did die impenitent, and so a death most
miserable.


Atten. But pray now, before we conclude our discourse of Mr. Badman, give me
another proof of his dying in his sins.


Wise. Another proof is this. He did not desire a sight and sense of sins, 2
proof that he died impenitent.
that he might have repentance for them. Did I say he did not desire it, I will
add, he greatly desired to remain in his security: and that I shall prove by
that which follows. First, He could not endure that any man, now, should talk
to him of his sinful life, and yet that was the way to beget a sight and sense
of sin, and so of repentance from it, in his soul. But, I say, he could not
endure such discourse. Those men that did offer to talk unto him of his
ill-spent Life, they were as little welcome to him in the time of his last
sickness, 1 King. 21. 17. 18, 19, 20, 21.
as was Elijah when he went to meet with Ahab, as he went down to take
possession of Naboths Vineyard. Have thou found me, said Ahab, O mine enemy? So
would Mr. Badman say in his heart to and of those that thus did come to him,
though indeed they came even of love, to convince him of his evil life, that he
might have repented thereof, and have obtained mercy.


Atten. Did good men then go to see him in his last sickness?


Wise. Yes: Those that were his first wifes acquaintance, they went to see him,
and to talk with, and to him, if perhaps he might now, at last, bethink
himself, and cry to God for mercy.


Atten. They did well to try now at last if they could save his soul from Hell:
But pray how can you tell that he did not care for the company of such?


Wise. Because of the differing Carriage that he had for them, from what he had
when his old carnal companions came to see him: When his old Campanions came to
see him, he would stir up himself as much as he could both by words and looks,
to signify they were welcome to him; he would also talk with them freely, and
look pleasantly upon them, though the talk of such could be none other but such
as David said, carnal men would offer to him, when they came to visit him in
his sickness: If he comes to see me, Psalm. 41. 6.
says he, he speaks vanity, his heart gathers iniquity to it self. But
these kind of talks, I say, Mr. Badman better brooked, than he did the company
of better men.

But I will more particularly give you a Character How Badman carried it to
good men when they came to visit him in his last sickness.
of his carriage to good men (and good talk) when they came to see him.

1. When they were come, he would seem to fail in his spirits at the sight of
them.

2. He would not care to answer them to any of those questions that they would
at times put to him, to feel what sense he had of sin, death, Hell, and
Judgment: But would either say nothing, or answer them by way of evasion, or
else by telling of them he was so weak and spent that he could not speak much.

3. He would never show forwardness to speak to, or talk with them, but was
glad when they held their tongues. He would ask them no question about his
state and another world, or how he should escape that damnation that he had
deserved.

4. He had got a haunt at last to bid his wife and keeper, when these good
people attempted to come to see him, to tell them that he was asleep or
inclining to sleep, or so weak for want thereof, that he could not abide any
noise. And so they would serve them time after time, till at last they were
discouraged from coming to see him any more.

5. He was so hardened, now, in this time of his sickness, that he would talk,
when his companions came unto him, to the disparagement of those good men (and
of their good doctrine too) that of love did come to see him, and that did
labor to convert him.

6. When these good men went away from him, he would never say, Pray when will
you be pleased to come again, for I have a desire to more of your company, and
to hear more of your good instruction? No not a word of that, but when they
were going would scarce bid them drink, or say, Thank you for your good
company, and good instruction.

7. His talk in his sickness with his companions, would be of the World, as
Trades, Houses, Lands, great Men, great Titles, great places, outward
Prosperity, or outward Adversity, or some such carnal thing.

By all which I conclude, that he did not desire a sense and sight of his sin,
that he might repent and be saved.


Atten. It must needs be so as you say, if these things be true that you have
asserted of him. And I do the rather believe them, because I think you dare not
tell a lie of the dead.


Wise. I was one of them that went to him, and that beheld his carriage and
manner of way, and this is a true relation of it that I have given you.


Atten. I am satisfied. But pray if you can, show me now by the Word, what
sentence of God does pass upon such men?


Wise. Why, the man that is thus averse to repentance, that desires not to^hear
of his sins, that he might repent and be saved; is said to be a man that says
unto God, Job. 21. 14.
Depart from me, for I desire not the knowledge of thy ways. He is a man that
says in his heart and with his actions, I have loved strangers, Jer. 2. 25.
(sins) and after them I will go. He is a man that shuts his eyes, Zech. 7.
11, 12.
stops his ears, and that turns his spirit against God. Acts. (...). 26, 27.
Yea he is the man that is at enmity with God, and that abhorres him with his
soul.


Atten. What other sign can you give me that Mr. Badman died without
repentance?


Wise. Why, 3 Proof that he died impenitent.
he did never heartily cry to God for mercy all the time of his affliction.
True, when sinking fits, stitches, or pains took hold upon him, then he would
say as other carnal men use to do, Lord help me, Lord strengthen me, Lord
deliver me, and the like: But to cry to God for mercy, that he did not, but
lay, as I hinted before, as if he never had sinned.


Atten. That is another bad sign indeed; for crying to God for mercy, is one of
the first signs of repentance. When Paul lay repenting of his sin, upon his
bed, the Holy Ghost said of him, Acts 9. 11.
Behold he prays. But he that has not the first signs of repentance, it is a
sign he has none of the other, and so indeed none at all. I do not say, but
there may be crying, where there may be no sign of repentance. They cried, says
David, to the Lord, Psalm. 18. 41.
but he answered them not; but that he would have done, if their cry had been
the fruit of repentance. But, I say, if men may cry and yet have no repentance,
be sure, they have none, that cry not at all. It is said in Job, Job 36. 13.
They cry not when he binds them; that is, because they have no repentance;
no repentance, no cries; false repentance, false cries; true repentance, true
cries.


Wise. I know that it is as possible for a man to forbear crying that has
repentance, as it is for a man to forbear groaning that feels deadly pain. He
that looks into the Book of Psalms, (where repentance is most lively set
forth even in its true and proper effects,) shall there find, that crying,
strong crying, hearty crying, great crying, and uncessant crying, has been the
fruits of repentance: (But none of this had this Mr. Badman, therefore he dyed
in his sins.)

That Crying is an inseparable effect of repentance, is seen in these
Scriptures. Psalm. 51. 1.
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies,
blot out my transgressions. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither
chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Psalm. 6, 1, 2, 3, 4.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak. O Lord, heal me for my bones are
vexed. My soul is also vexed, but thou, O Lord, how long: Return, O Lord,
deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake: Psalm. 38.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure;
for thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an
heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. My wounds stink and are corrupt;
because of my foolishness. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go
mourning all the day long. My loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and
there is no soundness in my flesh. I am feeble, and sore broken, I have roared
by reason of the disquietness of my heart.

I might give you a great number more of the holy sayings of good men, whereby
they express how they were, what they felt, and whether they cried or no, when
repentance was wrought in them. Alas, alas, it is as possible for a man, when
the pangs of Guilt are upon him to forbear praying, as it is for a woman when
pangs of travel are upon her to forbear crying. If all the world should tell me
that such a man has repentance, yet if he is not a praying man, I should not
be persuaded to believe it.


Atten. I know no reason why you should: for there is nothing can demonstrate
that such a man has it. But pray Sir, what other sign have you, by which you
can prove that Mr. Badman died in his sins, and so in a state of damnation?


Wise. I have this to prove it. 4 Proof that he died impenitent.
Those who were his old sinful companions in the time of his health, were
those whose company and carnal talk he most delighted in, in the time of his
sickness. I did occasionally hint this before, but now I make it an argument of
his want of grace: for where there is indeed a work of Grace in the heart, that
work does not only change the heart, thoughts and desires, but the conversation
also; yea conversation and company too. When Paul had a work of grace in his
soul, he assayed to Join himself to the Disciples. He was for his old
companions in their abominations no longer: he was now a Disciple, Acts. 9. 26.
28.
and was for the company of Disciples. And he was with them coming in and going
out in Jerusalem.


Atten. I thought something when I heard you make mention of it before. Thought
I, this is a shrewd sign that he had not grace in his heart. Birds of a
feather, thought I, will flock together* If this man was one of Gods child^en,
he would heard with Gods children, his delight would be with, and in the
company of Gods children. As David said, Psalm. 119. 63.
I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
precepts.


Wise. You say well, for what fellowship has he that believes with an
Infidel? And although it be true, that all that join to the godly are not
godly, yet they that shall inwardly choose the company of the ungodly and open
profane, rather than the company of the godly, as Mr. Badman did; surely are
not godly men, but profane. He was, as I told you, out of his element, when
good men did come to visit him, but then he was where he would be, when he had
his vain companions about him. Alas! grace, as I said, alters all, heart,
life, company, and all; for by it the heart and man is made new: and a new
heart, a new man, must have objects of delight that are new, and like himself:
2 Cor. ^. 17.
Old things are passed away; Why? For all things are become new. Now if all
things are become new, to wit, heart, mind, thoughts, desires, and delights, it
follows by consequence that the company must be answerable: hence it is said,
That they that believed were together; Acts. 4. 32, 33.
that they went to their own company; Chap. 2. 44, 45, 46, 47.
that they were added to the Church; that they were of one heart and of one
soul; and the like. Now if it be objected, that Mr. Badman was sick, and so
could not go to the godly, yet he had a tongue in his head, and could, had he
had an heart, have spoken to some to call or send for the godly to come to him.
Yea, he would have done so; yea the company of all others, specially his fellow
sinners, would, even in every appearance of them before him, have been a burden
and a grief unto him. His heart and affection standing bent to good, good
companions would have suited him best. But his Companions were his old
Associates, his delight was in them, therefore his heart and soul were yet
ungodly.


Atten. Pray how was he when he drew near his end? for I perceive that what you
say of him now, has reference to him, and to his actions, at the beginning of
his sickness? Then he could endure company, and much talk; besides, perhaps
then he thought he should recover and not die, as afterward he had cause to
think, when he was quite wasted with pining sickness, when he was at the graves
mouth. But how was he, I say, when he was (as we say) at the graves mouth,
within a step of death? when he saw, and knew, and could not but know, that
shortly he must dye, and appear before the Judgment of God?


Wise. Why How Mr. Badman was when ^ear his End.
there was not any other alteration in him, than what was made by his disease
upon his body: sickness, you know, will alter the body, also pains and stitches
will make men groan; but for his mind, he had no alteration there. His mind was
the same, his heart was the same. He was the self-same Mr. Badman still: not
only in Name but Conditions, and that to the very day of his death: yea, so
f^r as could be gathered to the very moment in which he died.


Atten. Pray how was he in his death? was Death strong upon him? or did he dye
with ^ase, quietly?


Wise. As quietly as a (...)
Lamb. There seemed* not to b^ in it, to standers by, so much as a strong
struggle of Nature: and as for his Mind, it seemed to be wholly at quiet. But
pray why do you ask me this question?


Atten. Not for mine own sake, but for others. For there is such The opinion of
the Ignoront about his manner of dying.
an opinion as this among the ignorant: That if a man dies, as they call it,
like a Lamb, that is, quietly, and without that consternation of mind that
others show in their death, they conclude, and that beyond all doubt, that such
an one is gone to Heaven, and is certainly escaped the wrath to come.


Wise. There is no Judgment to be made by a quiet death, of the Eternal state
of him that so dies. Suppose one man should die quietly, another should die
suddenly, and a third should die under-great consternation of spirit; no man
can Judge of their eternal condition by the manner of any of these kinds of
deaths. He that dies quietly, suddenly, or under consternation of spirit, may
go to Heaven, or may go to Hell; no man can tell whether a man goes, by any
such manner of death. The How we must judge whether men dye well or no.
Judgment therefore that we make of the eternal condition of a man, must be
gathered from another consideration: To wit, Did the man die in his sins? did
he die in unbelief? did he die before he was born again? then he is gone to the
Devil and hell, though he died never so quietly. Again, Was the man a good man?
had he faith and holiness? was he a lover and a Worshipper of God by Christ,
according to his Word? Then he is gone to God and Heaven, how suddenly, or in
what consternation of mind soever he died: But Mr. Badman was naught, his life
was evil, his ways were evil; evil to his end: he therefore went to Hell and
to the Devil, how quietly soever he died.

Indeed there is, in some cases, a Judgment to be made of a man's eternal
condition by the manner of the death he dies. When we may judge of a man's
eternal state by the manner of his death.
As suppose now a man should murder himself, or live a wicked life, and after
that die in utter despair; these men without doubt do both of them go to Hell.
And here I will take an occasion to speak of two of Mr. Badmans Brethren, (for
you know I told you before that he had Brethren,) and of the manner of their
death. One of them killed himself, and the other after a wicked life died in
utter despair. Now I should not be afraid to conclude of both these, that they
went by, and through their death to hell.


Atten. Pray tell me concerning the first, how he made away himself?


Wise. Why, he took a knife and cut his own Throat, and immediately gave up the
Ghost and died. Now what can we judge of such a man's condition; since the
Scripture says, No murderer has eternal life, etc. but that it must be
concluded, that such an one is gone to Hell. He was a murderer, a
Self-murderer; and he is the worst murderer, one that slays his own body and
soul: nor do we find mention made of any but cursed ones that do such kind of
deeds. I say, no mention made in holy Writ of any others, but such, that murder
themselves.

And this is a sore Judgment of God upon men, when God shall; for the sins of
such, give them up to be their own Executioners, or rather to execute his
Judgment and Anger upon themselves. And let me earnestly give this Caution to
sinners. Take heed, Sirs, break off your sins, lest God serves you as he served
Mr. Badmans Brother: That is, lest he gives you up to be your own Murderers.


Atten. Now you talk of this. I did once know a man,
a Barber, that took his own Raisor, and cut his own Throat, and then put his
head out of his Chamber-window, to show the neighbors what he had done, and
after a little while died.


Wise. I can tell you a more dreadful thing than this:
I mean as to the (...) of doing the fact. (...)
There was about twelve years since, a man that lived at Brafield by
Northampto^, (named John Cox) that murdered himself; the manner of his doing of
it was thus. He was a poor man, and had for some time been sick (and the time
of his sickness was about the beginning of ^ay-time^) and taking too many
thoughts how he should live afterward, if he lost his present season of work,
he fell into deep despair about the world, and cried out to his wife the
morning before he killed himself, saying, We are undone. But quickly after, he
desired his wife to depart the room, Because, said he, I will see if I can get
any rest; so she went out: but he instead of sleeping, quickly took his Raisor,
and therewith cut up a great hole in his side, out of which he pulled, and cut
off some of his guts, and threw them, with the blood up and down the Chamber.
But this not speeding of him so soon as he desired, he took the same Raisor and
therewith cut his own throat. His wife then hearing of him sigh and fetch his
wind short, came again into the room to him, and seeing what he had done, she
ran out and called in some Neighbors, who came to him* where he lay in a
bloody manner, frightfull to behold. Then said one of them to him, Ah! John,
what have you done? are you not sorry for what you have done? He answered
roughly, It Is too late to be sorry. Then said the same person to him again, Ah!
John, pray to God to forgive thee this bloody act of thine. At the hearing of
which Exhortation, he seemed much offended, and in angry manner said, Pray! and
with that flung himself away to the wall, and so after a few gasps died
desperately. When he had turned him of his back, to the wall, the blood ran out
of his belly as out of a boul, and soaked quite through the bed to the boards,
and through the chinks to the boards it ran pouring down to the ground. Some
said, that when the neighbors came to see him, he lay ^roaping with his hand
in his bowels, reaching upward, as was thought, that he might have pulled or
cut out his heart. 'Twas said also, that some of his Liver had been by him torn
out and cast upon the boards, and that many of his guts hung out of the bed on
the side thereof. But I cannot confirm all particulars; but the general of the
story, with these circumstances above mentioned, is true; I had it from a sober
and credible person, who himself was one that saw him in this bloody state, and
that talked with him, as was hinted before.

Many other such dreadful things might be told you, but these are enough, and
too many too, if God in his wisdom had thought necessary to prevent them.


Atten. This is a dreadful Story: and I would to God that it might be a warning
to others to instruct them to fear before God, and pray, lest he gives them up
to do as John Cox has done. For surely self-murderers cannot go to Heaven:
and therefore, as you have said, he that dies by his own hands, is certainly
gone to Hell. But speak a word or two of the other man you mentioned.


Wise. What? of a wicked man dying in Despair?


Atten. Yes, of a wicked man dying in despair.


Wise. Well then: Of dying in Despair.
This Mr. Badmans other Brother was a very wicked man, both in Heart and Life;
I say in Heart, because he was so in Life, nor could any thing reclaim him;
neither good Men, good Books, good Examples, nor Gods Judgments. Well, after
he had lived a great while in his sins, God smote with a sickness of which he
died. Now in his sickness his Conscience began to be awakened, and he began to
roar out of his ill-spent Life, insomuch that the Town began to ring of him.
Now when it was noysed about, many of the Neighbors came to see him, and to
read by him, as is the common way with some; but all that they could do, could
not abate his terror, but he would lie in his Bedgnashing of his teeth,
and wringing of his wrists, concluding upon the Damnation of his Soul, and in
that horror and despair he dyed; not calling upon God; but distrusting in his
Mercy, and Blaspheming of his Name.


Atten. This brings to my mind ^^ man that a Friend of mine told me of. He had
been a wicked liver; ^^ when he came to die, he fell into despair, and having
concluded that God had no mercy for him, he addressed himself to the Devil for
favor,
saying, Good Devil be good unto me.


Wise. This is almost like Saul, (...)
who being forsaken of God, went to the Witch of Endor, and so to the Devil for
help. But alas, should I set my self to collect these dreadful Stories, it
would be easy in little time to present you with hundreds of them: But I will
conclude as I began; They that are their own Murderers, or that die in Despair,
after they have lived a life of wickedness, do surely go to Hell.

And here I would put in a Caution: Every one that dies under consternation of
spirit; that is, under amazement and great fear, do not therefore die in
Despair: For a good man may have this for his bands in his death, Psalm. 73. 4.
and yet go to Heaven and Glory. For, as I said before, He that is a good man,
a man that has Faith and Holiness, a lover and Worshipper of God by Christ,
according to his Word, may die in consternation of spirit: for Satan will not
be wanting to assault good men upon their deathbed, but they are secured by
the Word and Power of God; yea, and are also helped, though with much agony of
spirit, to exercise themselves in Faith and Prayer, the which he that dies in
Despair, can by no means do. But let us return to Mr. Badman, and enter
further Discourse of the manner of his Death.


Atten. I think you and I are both of a mind; for just now I was thinking to
call you back to him also. And pray now, since it is your own motion to return
again to him, let us discourse a little more of his quiet and still death.


Wise. With all my heart. Further discourse of Mr. Badmans death.
You know we were speaking before of the manner of Mr. Badmans death: How that
he dyed very stilly and quietly; upon which you made observation, that the
common people conclude, that if a man dies quietly, and as they call it, like a
Lamb, he is certainly gone to Heaven: when alas, if a wicked man dies quietly,
if a man that has all his days lived in notorious sin, dies quietly; his
quiet dying is so far off from being a sign of his being saved, that it is an
uncontrollable proof of his damnation. This was Mr. Badmans case, he lived
wickedly even to the last, and then went quietly out of the world: therefore
Mr. Badman is gone to Hell.


At. Well, but since you are upon it, and also so confident in it, to wit,
that a man that lives a wicked life till he dies, and then dies quietly, is
gone to Hell; let me see what show of proof you have for this your opinion.


Wise. My first argument is drawn from the Necessity of repentance: He that
after a sinful life dies quietly, that is, without repentance, goes to Hell.
No man can be saved except he repents, nor can he repent that sees not, that
knows not that he is a sinner, and he that knows himself to be a sinner, 1
Proof.
will, I will warrant him, be molested for the time by that knowledge. This, as
it is testified by all the Scriptures, so it is testified by Christian
experience. He that knows himself to be a sinner, is molested, especially if
that knowledge comes not to him until he is cast upon his deathbed; molested,
I say, before he can dye quietly. Yea, he is molested, dejected and cast down,
he is also made to cry out, to hunger and thirst after mercy by Christ, and if
at all he shall indeed come to dye quietly, I mean with that quietness that is
begotten by Faith and Hope in Gods mercy (to the which Mr. Badman and his
brethren were utter strangers,) his quietness is distinguished by all Judicious
observers, by what w^nt before it, by what it flows from, and also by what is
the fruit thereof.

I must confess I am no admirer of sickbed repentance, for I think verily it
is seldom Sickbed repentance seldom good for any thing.
good for any thing: but I say, he that has lived in sin and profaneness all
his days, as Mr. Badman did, and yet shall dye quietly, that is, without
repentance steps in 'twixt his life and death, he is assuredly gone to Hell,
and is damned.


Atten. This does look like an argument indeed; for Repentance must come, or
else we must go to Hellfire: and if a lewd liver shall (I mean that so
continues till the day of his death,) yet go out of the world quietly, it is a
sign that he dyed* without repentance, and so a sign that he is damned.


Wise. I am satisfied in it, for my part, and that from the Necessity, and
Nature of repentance. It is necessary, because God calls for it, and will not
pardon sin without it: Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 13.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
This is that which God has said, and he will prove but a foolhardy man that
shall yet think to go to Heaven and glory without it. Repent, for the Ax is
laid to the root of the tree, every tree therefore that brings not forth good
fruit, (but no good fruit can be where there is not sound repentance) shall be
hewn down, and cast into the fire. This was Mr. Badmans case, he had attending
of him a sinful life, and that to the very last, and yet dyed quietly, that
is, without repentance; he is gone to Hell and is damned. For the Nature of
repentance, I have touched upon that already, and showed, that it never was
where a quiet death is the immediate companion of a sinful life; and therefore
Mr. Badman is gone to Hell.

Secondly, 2 Proof.
My second argument is drawn from that blessed Word of Christ, While the strong
man armed keeps the house, his goods are in peace, till a stronger than he
comes: but the strong man armed kept Mr. Badmans house, that is, his heart, and
soul, and body, for he went from a sinful life quietly out of this world: the
stronger did not disturb by intercepting with sound repentance, betwixt his
sinful life and his quiet death: Therefore Mr. Badman is gone to Hell.

The strong man armed is the Devil, and quietness is his security. The Devil
never fears losing of the sinner, if he can but keep him quiet: can he but keep
him quiet in a sinful life, and quiet in his death, he is his own. Therefore
he says, his goods are in peace; that is, out of danger. There is no fear of
the Devils losing such a soul, I say, because Christ, who is the best Judge in
this matter, says, his goods are in peace, in quiet, and out of danger.


Atten. This is a good one too; for doubtless, Peace in a sinful st^te is a
sign of damnation.
peace and quiet with sin, is one of the greatest signs of a damnable state.


Wise. So it is. Therefore, when God would show the greatness of his anger
against sin and sinners in one word, he says, They are joined to Idols, Hos.
4. 17.
let them alone. Let them alone, that is, disturb them not; let them go on
without control; let the Devil enjoy them peaceably, let him carry them out of
the world unconverted quietly. This is one of the sorest of Judgments, and
bespeaketh the burning anger of God against sinful men. See also when you come
home, the fourteenth Verse of the Chapter last mentioned in the Margent: I will
not punish your daughters when they commit Whoredom. I will let them alone,
they shall live and dye in their sins. But,

Thirdly, 3 Proof.
My third argument is drawn from that saying of Christ: He has blinded their
eyes, Joh. 12. 40.
and hardened their hearts; that they should not see with their eyes, nor
understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them.

There are three things that I will take notice of from these words.

1. The first is, That there can be no conversion to God where the eye is
darkened, and the heart hardened. The eye must first be made to see, and the
heart to break and relent under and for sin, or else there can be no
conversion. He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, lest they
should see, and understand and (So) be converted. And this was clearly Mr.
Badmans case, he lived a wicked life, and also died with his eyes shut, and
heart hardened, as is manifest, in that a sinful life was joined with a quiet
death; and all for that he should not be converted, but partake of the fruit of
his sinful life in Hell fire.

2. The second thing that I take notice of from these words is, That this is a
dispensation and manifestation of Gods anger against a man for his sin. When
God is angry with men, I mean, when he is so angry with them, this among many
is one of the Judgments that he gives them up unto, to wit, to blindness of
mind, and hardness of heart, which he also suffers to accompany them till
they enter in at the gates of death. And then, and there, and not short of then
and there, their eyes come to be opened. Hence it is said of the rich man
mentioned in Luke, He dyed, and in Hell he lift up his eyes: Luke 16. 22.
Implying that he did not lift them up before: He neither saw what he had done,
nor whither he was going, till he came to the place of execution, even into
Hell. He died asleep in his soul; he dyed besotted, stupefied, and so
consequently for quietness, like a Child or Lamb, even as Mr. Badman did: this
was a sign of Gods anger; he had a mind to damn him for his sins, and therefore
would not let him see nor have an heart to repent for them, lest he should
convert, and his damnation, which God had appointed, should be frustrate: lest
they should be converted, and I should heal them.

3. The third thing that I take notice of from hence, is, That a sinful life
and a quiet death annexed to it, is the ready, the open, the beaten, the common
highway to Hell: there is no surer sign of Damnation, than for a man to dye
quietly after a sinful life. I do not say that all wicked men, that are
molested at their death with a sense of sin and fears of Hell, do therefore go
to Heaven, (for some are also made to see, and are left to despair (not
converted by seeing) that they might go roaring out of this world to their
place:) But I say, there is no surer sign of a man's Damnation, than to dye
quietly after a sinful life; than to sin, and dye with his eyes shut; than to
sin, and dye with an heart that cannot repent. Romans 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
He has blinded their eyes and hardened their heart, that they should not see
with their eyes, nor understand with their heart; Acts 28. 26, 27.
(no, not so long as they are in this world) lest they should see with their
eyes, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should
heal them.

God has a Judgment for wicked men; God will be even with wicked men: 2 Pet. 2.
God knows how to reserve the ungodly to the day of Judgment to be punished:
And this is one of his ways by which he does it. Thus it was with Mr. Badman.

4. Fourthly, 4 Proof.
It is said in the Book of Psalms, concerning the wicked, There is no b^nds in
their death, Psalm. 73. 4, 5, 6.
but their strength is firm. By no bands, he means no troubles, no gracious
chastisements, no such corrections for sin as fall to be the Lot of Gods people
for theirs; yea, that many times falls to be theirs, at the time of their
death. Therefore he adds concerning the wicked, They are not troubled (then)
like other men, neither are they plagued like other men; but go as securely out
of the world, as if they had never sinned against God, and put their own souls
into danger of damnation. There is no band in their death. They seem to go
unbound, and set at liberty, out of this world, though they have lived
notoriously wicked all their days in it. The Prisoner that is to dye at the
Gallows for his wickedness, must first have his Irons knocked off his legs; so
he seems to go most at liberty, when indeed he is going to be executed for his
transgressions. Wicked men also have no bands in their death, they seem to be
more at liberty when they are even at the Wind-up of their sinful life, than
at any time besides.

Hence you shall have them boast of their Faith and Hope in Gods Mercy, when
they lie upon their deathbed; yea, you shall have them speak as confidently of
their salvation, as if they had served God all their days: when the truth is,
the bottom of this their boasting is, because they have no bands in their death.

Their sin and base life comes not into their mind to correct them, and bring
them to repentance; but presumptuous thoughts, and an hope and faith of the
Spiders (the Devils) making, Job 8. 13, 14.
possesses their soul, to their own eternal undoing.

Hence wicked men's hope, is said to dye, not before, but with them; they give
up the Ghost together. And thus did Mr. Badman. His sins and his hope went with
him to the Gate, but there his hope left him, because it dyed there; but his
sins went in with him, to be a worm to gnaw him in his conscience for ever and
ever.

The opinion therefore of the common people concerning this kind of dying, is A
frivolous opinion.
frivolous and vain; for Mr. Badman died like a Lamb, or as they call it, like
a Chrisom child, quietly and without fear. I speak not this with reference to
the struggling of nature with death, but as to the struggling of the conscience
with the Judgment of God. I know that Nature will struggle with death. I have
seen a Dog and Sheep dye hardly: And thus may a wicked man do, because there
is an antipathy betwixt nature and death. But even while, even then, when Death
and Nature are struggling for mastery, the soul, the conscience, may be as
besotted, as benumbed, as senceless and ignorant of its miserable state, as the
block or bed on which the sick lies: And thus they may dye like a Chrisom child
in show, but indeed like one who by the Judgment of God is bound over to
eternal damnation; and that also by the same Judgment is kept from seeing what
they are, and whither they are going, till they plunge down among the flames.

And as it is a very great Judgment of God on wicked men that so dye, (for it
cuts them off from all possibility of repentance, and so of salvation) When a
wicked man dies in (...) quietly, it is a Judgment of God upon his wi^^ed
beholder.
so it is as great a Judgment upon those that are their companions that survive
them. For by the manner of their death, they dying so quietly, so like unto
chrisom children, as they call it, they are hardened, and take courage to go on
in their course.

For comparing their life with their death, their sinful cursed lives with
their child-like, Lamb-like death, they think that all is well, that no
damnation is happened to them; Though they lived like Devils incarnate, yet
they dyed like harmless ones. There was no whirlwind, no tempest, no band, nor
plague in their death: They dyed as quietly as the most godly of them all, and
had as great faith and hope of salvation, and would talk as boldly of salvation
as if they had assurance of it. But as was their hope in life, so was their
death: Their hope was without trial, because it was none of Gods working, and
their death was without molestation, because so was the Judgment of God
concerning them.

But I say, at this their survivers take heart to tread their steps, and to
continue to live in the breach of the Law of God; yea they carry it statelily
in their villainies; for so it follows in the Psalm. There is no ^ands in their
death, but their strength is firm, etc. Ver. 6.
Therefore pride compasses them (the survivors) about as a chain, violence
covers them as a garment. Therefore they take courage to do evil, therefore
they pride themselves in their iniquity. Therefore, Wherefore? Why, because
their fellows died, after they had lived long in a most profane and wicked
life, as quietly and as like to Lambs, as if they had been innocent.

Yea, they are bold, by seeing this, to conclude, that God, either does not, or
will not take notice of their sins. Ver. 8. 9, 10, 11.
They speak wickedly, they speak loftily. They speak wickedly of sin, for that
they make it better than by the Word it is pronounced to be. They speak
wickedly concerning oppression, that they commend, and count it a prudent act.
They also speak loftily: They set their mouth against the Heavens, etc. And
they say, How does God know, and is there knowledge in the most High? And all
this, so far as I can see, arises in their hearts from the beholding of the
quiet and lamb-like death of their companions.

Behold these are the ungodly that prosper in the world, Verse. 12.
( that is, by wicked ways) they increase in riches.

This therefore is a great Judgment of God, both upon that man that dies in
his sins, and also upon his companion that beholds him so to dye. He sins,
he dies in his sins, and yet dies quietly. What shall his companion say to
this? What Judgment shall he make how God will deal with him, by beholding the
lamb-like death of his companion? Be sure, he cannot, as from such a sight say,
Woe be to me, for Judgment is before him: He cannot gather, that sin is a
dreadful and a bitter thing, by the childlike death of Mr. Badman. But must
rather, if he judges according to what he sees, or according to his corrupted
reason, conclude with the wicked ones of old, That every one that does evil,
(...). 2. 17.
is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them; or where is the
God of Judgment?

Yea, this is enough to puzzle the wisest man. David himself was put to a
stand, by beholding the quiet death of ungodly men. Verily, says he, I have
cleansed my heart in vain, and have washed my hands in innocence. Psalm. 73. 13.
They, to appearance fare better by far than I: Their eyes stand out with
fatness, they have more than heart can wish; But all the day long have I been
plagued, and chastned every morning. This, I say, made David wonder, yea, and
Job and Jeremiah too: But he goes into the Sanctuary, and then he understands
their end, nor could he understand it before. I went into the Sanctuary of God:
What place was that? why there where he might enquire of God, and by him be
resolved of this matter: Then, says he, understood I their end. Then I saw,
that thou have set them in slippery places, and that thou castest them down to
destruction. Castest them down, that is, suddenly, or as the next words say, As
in a moment they are utterly consumed with terrors: which terrors did not cease
them on their sickbed, for they had no bands in their death. The terrors
therefore ceased them there, where also they are holden in them for ever. This
he found out, I say, but not without great painfulness, grief and pricking in
his reins: so deep, so hard and so difficult did he find it, rightly to come to
a determination in this matter.

And indeed, this is a deep Judgment of God toward ungodly sinners; it is
enough to stagger a whole world, only the Godly that are in the world have a
Sanctuary to go to, where the Oracle and Word of God is, by which his
Judgments, and a reason of many of them are made known to, and understood by
them.


Atten. Indeed this is a staggering dispensation. It is full of the wisdom and
anger of God. And I believe, as you have said, that it is full of Judgment to
the world. Who would have imagined, that had not known Mr. Badman, and yet had
seen him die, but that he had been a man of an holy life and conversation,
since he died so stilly, so quietly, so like a Lamb or Chrisom child? Would
they not, I say, have concluded, that he was a righteous man? or that if they
ha^ known him and his life, yet to see him die (...) quietly, would they not
have concluded t^^t he had made his peace with God? Nay fur^^er, if some had
known that he had died in his sins, and yet that he died so like a Lamb, would
they not have concluded, that either God does not know our sins, or that he
likes them; or that he wants power, or will, or heart, or skill to punish them;
since Mr. Badman himself went from a sinful life so quietly, so peaceably, and
so like a Lamb as he did?


Wise. Without controversy, this is an heavy judgment of God upon wicked men;
( Job. 21. 23.) one goes to Hell in peace, another goes to Hell in trouble; one
goes to Hell being sent thither by his own hands; another goes to Hell, being
sent thither by the hand of his companion; one goes thither with his eyes shut,
and another goes thither with his eyes open; one goes thither roaring, and
another goes thither boasting of Heaven and Happiness all the way he goes: One
goes thither like Mr. Badman himself, and others go thither as did his
Brethren. But above all, Mr. Badmans^ death, as to the manner of dying, is the
fullest of Snares and Traps to wicked men; therefore they that die as he, are
the greatest stumble to the world: They go, and go, they go on peaceably from
Youth to old Age, and thence to the Grave, and so to Hell, without noise: They
go as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of the Stocks;
that is, both sencelesly and securely. O! but being come at the gates of Hell!
O! but when they see those gates set open for them: O! but when they see that
that is their home, and that they must go in thither, then their peace and
quietness flies away for ever: Then they roar like Lions, yell like Dragons,
howl like Dogs, and tremble at their Judgment, as do the Devils themselves. Oh!
when they see they must shoot the Gulf and Throat of Hell! when they shall see
that Hell has shut her ghastly Jaws upon them! when they shall open their
eyes, and find themselves within the belly and bowels of Hell! then they will
mourn, and weep, and hack, and gnash their teeth for pain. But this must not be
(or if it must, yet very rarely) till they are gone out of the sight and
hearing of those mortals whom they do leave behind them alive in the world.


Atten. Well, my good Neighbor Wiseman, I perceive that the Sun grows low, and
that you have come to a conclusion with Mr. Badmans Life and Death; and
therefore I will take my leave of you. Only first, let me tell you, I am glad
that I have met with you to day, and that our hap was to full in with Mr.
Badmans state. I also thank you for your freedom with me, in granting of me
your reply to all my questions: I would only beg your Prayers, that God will
give me much grace, that I may neither live nor die as did Mr. Badman.


Wise. My good Neighbor Attentive, I wish your welfare in Soul and Body; and
if ought that I have said of Mr. Badmans Life and Death, may be of benefit unto
you, I shall be heartily glad; only I desire you to thank God for it, and to
pray heartily for me, that I with you may be kept by the Power of God through
Faith unto Salvation.


Atten. Amen. Farewell.


Wise. I wish you heartily Farewell.


FINIS.

