GRACE Abounding to the chief of Sinners: OR, A Brief and Faithful RELATION Of
the Exceeding Mercy of God in Christ, to his poor Servant JOHN BVNYAN. Wherein
is particularly showed, The manner of his Conversion, his sight and trouble for
Sin, his Dreadful Temptations, also how he despaired of Gods mercy, and how the
Lord at length through Christ did deliver him from all the guilt and terror
that lay upon him. Whereunto is added, A brief Relation of his Call to the Work
of the Ministry, of his Temptations therein, as also what he has met with in
Prison. All which was written by his own hand there, and now published for the
support of the weak and tempted People of God.

Come and hear, all ye that fear God; and I will declare what he has done for
my soul, Psalm. 66.16. LONDON: Printed by George Larkin. 1666.

A PREFACE: Or brief Account of the publishing of this Work: Written by the
Author thereof, and dedicated to those whom God has counted him worthy to
beget to Faith, by his Ministry in the Word.
CHildren, Grace be with you, Amen. I being taken from you in presence, and so
tied up, that I cannot perform that duty that from God does lie upon me, to
you-ward, for your further edifying and building up in Faith and Holiness, etc.
Yet that you may see my Soul has fatherly care and desire after your spiritual
and everlasting Welfare; I now once again, as from the top of Shenir and
Hermon, so from the Lions Dens, and from the Mountains of the Leopards, (Song
4.8.) do look yet after you all, greatly longing to see your safe arrival into
THE desired Haven.

I thank God upon every Remembrance of you, and rejoice even while I stick
between the Teeth of the Lions in the Wilderness, at the grace, and mercy, and
knowledge of Christ our Savior, which God has bestowed upon you, with
abundance of Faith and Love. Your hungerings and thirstings also after further
acquaintance with the Father in his Son; your tenderness of Heart, your
trembling at sin, your sober and holy deportment also, before both God and men,
is great refreshment to me: for you are my glory and joy, 1 These. 2.20.

I have sent you here enclosed a drop of that honey, that I have taken out of
the Carcass of a Lion, Judge. 14.5, 6, 7, 8. I have eaten thereof my self also,
and am much refreshed thereby. (Temptations when we meet them at first, are as
the Lion that roared upon Sampson: but if we overcome them, the next time we
see them, we shall find a Nest of Honey within them.) The Philistians
understand me not. It is a Relation of the work of God upon my own Soul, even
from the very first, till now; wherein you may perceive my castings down, and
raisings up: for he wounds, and his hands make whole. It is written in the
Scripture, Isai. 38.19. The father to the children shall make known the truth
of God. Yea, it was for this reason I lay so long at Sinai, (Lev. 4.10, 11.) to
see the fire, and the cloud, and the darkness, that I might fear the Lord all
the days of my life upon earth, and tell of his wondrous works to my children,
Psalm. 78.3, 4, 5.

Moses, Numb. 33.1, 2. writ of the Journeyings of the children of Israel from
Egypt to the Land of Canaan; and commanded also, that they did remember their
forty years travel in the wilderness. Thou shall remem-all the way which the
Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness, to humble thee, and
to prove thee, and to know what was in thine heart, whether thou would keep
his commandments or no, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3. Wherefore this I have endeavored to do;
and not only so, but to publish it also; that, if God will, others may be put
in remembrance of of what he has done for their Souls, by reading his work
upon me.

It is profitable for Christians to be often calling to mind the very
beginnings of Grace with their Souls. It is a night to be much observed to the
Lord, for bringing them out from the land of Egypt. This is that night of the
Lord to be observed of all the children of Israel in their generations, Exodus
12.42. My God, says David, Psalm. 42.6. my soul is cast down within me; but I
will remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the
hill Mizar. He remembered also the Lion and the Bear, when he went to fight with
the Giant of Gath, 1 Samuel 17.36, 37:

It was Paul's accustomed manner, Acts 22. and that when tried for his life,
Acts 24. even to open before his Judges the manner of his Conversion: He would
think of that day and that hour, in the which he first did meet with Grace: for
he found it support unto him When God had brought the children of Israel through
the Red Sea, far into the wilderness; yet they must turn quite about thither
again, to remember the drowning of their enemies there, Number. 14.25. for though
they sang his praise before, yet they soon forgot his works, Psalm. 106.11, 12.

In this Discourse of mine, you may see much; much, I say, of the Grace of God
toward me: I thank God I can count it much; for it was above my sins, and
Satan's temptations too. I can remember my fears, and doubts, and sad months,
with comfort; they are as the head of Goliath in my hand: there was nothing to
David like Goliahs sword, even that sword that should have been sheathed in his
bowels; for the very sight and remembrance of that, did preach forth Gods
Deliverance to him. O the remembrance of my great sins, of my great
temptations, and of my great fears of perishing for ever! They bring fresh into
my mind, the remembrance of my great help, my great support from Heaven, and
the great grace that God extended to such a Wretch as I.

My dear Children, call to mind the former days, the years of ancient times;
remember also your songs in the night, and commune with your own heart, Psalm.
73.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Yea, look diligently, and leave no corner therein
unsearched, for there is ^reasure hid, even the treasure of your first and
second experience of the grace of God toward you. Remember, I say, the Word
that first laid hold upon you; remember your terrors of conscience, and fear
of death and hell: remember also your tears and prayers to God; yea, how you
sighed under every hedge for mercy. Have you never a Hill Mizar to remember?
Have you forgot the Close, the Milk-house, the Stable, the Barn, and the like,
where God did visit your Soul? Remember also the Word, the Word, I say, upon
which the Lord has caused you to hope: If you have sinned against light, if
you are tempted to blaspheme, if you are down in despair, if you think God
fights against you, or if heaven is hid from your eyes; remember 'twas thus
with your Father, but out of them all the Lord delivered me.

I could have enlarged much in this my discourse of my temptations and troubles
for sin, as also of the merciful kindness and working of God with my Soul: I
could also have stepped into a style much higher then this in which I have here
discoursed, and could have adorned all things more the^ here I have seemed to
do: but I dare not: God did not play in convincing of me; the Devil did not
play in tempting of me; neither did I play when I sunk as into a bottomless
pit, when the pangs of hell caught hold upon me: wherefore I may not play in my
relating of them, but be plain and simple, and lay down the thing as i^ was: He
that likes it, let him receive it; and he that does not, let him produce a
better. Farewell.

My dear Children, The Milk and Honey is beyond this Wilderness: God be
merciful to you, and grant you be not slothful to go in to posses^ the Land.
Jo. Bunyan.

GRACE Abounding to the chief of Sinners: OR, A Brief Relation Of the exceeding
mercy of God in Christ, to his poor Servant John Bunyan.
IN this my relation of the merciful working of God upon my Soul, it will not
be amiss, if in the first place I do in a few words give you a hint of my
pedigree, and manner of bringing up; that thereby the goodness and bounty of
God toward me, ^ay be the more advanced and magnified before ^he sons of men.

2. For my descent then, it was, as is well known ^y many, of a low and
inconsiderable generation; ^y fathers house being of that rank that is mean^st,
and most despised of all the families in the ^and. Wherefore I have not here,
as others, to boast of Noble blood, or of a Highborn state according to the
flesh: though all things considered, I magnify the Heavenly Majesty, for that
by thi^ door he brought me into this world, to partake o^ the Grace and Life
that is in Christ by the Gospel.

3. But yet notwithstanding the meanness and inconsiderableness of my Parents,
it pleased God to put it into their heart, to put me to School, to learn both
to Read and Write; the which I also attained, according to the rate of other
poor men's children, though to my shame I con^ess, I did soo^ loose that little
I learnt, and that even almost utterly, and that long before the Lord did work
hi^ gracious work of conversion upon my Soul.

4. As for my own natural life, for the time that I was without God in the
world, it was, indeed, acco^ding to the course of this world, and the spirit
that now works in the children of disobedience: it was my delight to be taken
captive by the Devil at his will, being filled with all unrighteousness; the
which did also so strongly work, and put forth it self, both in my heart and
life, and tha^ from a child, that I had but few Equals, (especially
considering my yea^s, which were tender (being few) both for cu^sing, swearing,
lying and blaspheming the holy Name of God.

5. Yea, so settled and rooted was I in these things, that they became as a
second Nature to me; the which, as I also have with soberness considered since,
did so offend the Lord, that even i^ my childhood he did scare and affright me
wit^ fearful dreams, and did terrify me with dreadfu^ visions. For often,
after I had spent this and the other day in sin, I have in my bed been greatly
a^flicted, while asleep, with the apprehensions o^ Devils, and wicked spirits,
who still, as I the^ thought, labored to draw me away with them of which I
could never be rid. Also I should at ^hese years be g^eatly afflicted and
troubled with ^he thoughts of the day of Judgment, and that ^oth night and
day, and should tremble at the ^houghts of the fearful torments of Hellfire;
still ^earing that it would be my lot to be found at last amongst those Devils
and Hellish Fiends, who are ^here bound down with the chains and bonds of
eternal da^kn^ss.

6. These things, I say, when I was but a child, did so distress my Soul, that
when in the midst of my many sports and childish vanities, amidst my ^ain
companions, I was often much cast down and afflicted in my mind therewith; yet
could I not let go my sins: yea, I was so overcome with despair of life and
heaven, that then I should often wish, either that there had been no Hell, or
that I had been a Devil; supposing they were only tormentors; that if it must
needs be, that I indeed went thither, I might be rather a tormentor, then
^ormented my self.

7. A while after, these terrible dreams did leave me, which also I soon
forgot; for my pleasures did quickly cut off the remembrance of them, as if
they had never been* wherefore with more greediness, according to the strength
of Nature, I did still let loose the reins to my lusts, and delighted in all
^ransgression against the Law of God: so that until ^ came to the state of
marriage, I was the very ring-^eader of all the Youth that kept me company,
in^o all manner of vice and ungodliness.

8. Yea, such prevalency had the lusts and fruits of the flesh, in this poor
Soul of mine, that had not ^ miracle of precious grace prevented, I had not
only perished by the stroke of eternal Justice, but ^ad also laid my self open
even to the stroke of those ^aws, which bring some to disgrace and open shame
before the face of the wo^ld.

9. In these days the thoughts of Religion wa^ very grievous to me; I could
neither endure it m^ self, nor that any other should: so that when I have but
seen some read in those books that concerned Chistian piety, it would be as it
we^e a p^ison to me. T^en I said unto God, Depart from me, for I desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14, 15. (...) was now void of all good
consideration; Heaven and Hell were both out of sight and mind; an^ as for
Saving and Damning, they were least in my thoughts. O Lord, thou know my
life, and my way^ were not hid from thee.

10. Yet this I well remember, that though (...) could my self sin with
greatest delight and ease* and also take pleasure in the vileness of my
companions; yet even then, if I have at any time seen wicked things by those
that professed goodness, i^ would make my spirit tremble. As once above al^ the
rest, when I was in my height of vanity, ye^ hearing one to swear that was
reckoned for a relious man, it had so great a stroke upon my spirit, as it made
my heart to ache.

11. Presently after this, I changed my condition into a married state; and my
mercy was, to ligh^ upon a Wife whose Father was counted godly* this Woman and
I, though we came together a^ poor as poor might be, (not having so much as a
Dish or Spoon betwixt us both) yet this she had for her part, The Plain Man's
Pathway to Heaven, and The Practice of Piety, which her Father had left he^
when he died. In these two Books, I should sometimes read with her, wherein I
also found some things that were somewhat pleasing to me: (bu^ all this while I
met with no conviction.) She als^ would be often telling of me what a godly man
he^ Fat^er was, and how he would reprove and correct Vice, both in his house
and amongst his neighbors; what a strict and holy life he lived in his day,
both in word and deed.

12. Wherefore these books, with this relation, though they did not reach my
heart to awaken it about my sad and sinful state, yet they did beget within me
some desires to Religion: so that, because I knew no better, I fell in very
eagerly with the Religion of the times, to wit, to go to Church twice a day,
and that too with the foremost, and there should very devoutly both say and
sing as others did; yet retaining my wicked life: but withal, I was so overrun
with a spirit of superstition, that I adored, and that with great devotion,
even all things (both the High-place, Priest, Clerk, Vestments, Service, and
what else) belonging to the Church; counting all things holy that were therein
contained; and especially the Priest and Clerk most happy, and without doubt
greatly blessed, because they were the Servants, as I then thought, of God, and
were principal in the holy Temple, to do his work therein.

13. This conceit grew so strong in little time upon my spirit, that had I but
seen a Priest, (though never so sordid and debauched in his life) I should find
my spirit fall under him, reverence him, and knit unto him; yea, I thought for
the love I did bear unto them, (supposing they were the Ministers of my God) I
could have layn down at their feet, and have been trampled upon by them; their
Name, their Garb, and Work, did so intoxicate and bewitch me.

14. After I had been thus for some considerable time, another thought came
into my mind, and that was, Whether we were of the Israelites or no: for
finding in the Scriptures that they were once the peculiar People of God;
thought I, if I were one of this race, my Soul must needs be happy. Now again,
I found within me a great longing to be resolved about this question, but could
not tell how I should: at last, I asked my father of it, who told me, No, we
were not: wherefore then I fell in my spirit, as to the hopes of that, and so
remained.

15. But all this while I was not sensible of the danger and evil of sin; I was
kept from considering that sin would damn me, what Religion soever I followed,
unle^s I was found in Christ: nay; I never thought of him, nor whether there
was one or no. Thus man, while blind, does wander, but wearieth himself with
vanity: for he knows not the way to the City of God, Eccles. 10.15.

16. But one day (amongst all the Sermons our Parson made) his subject was to
treat of the Sabbath day, and of the evil of breaking that, either with labor,
sports, or otherwise: (now I was one that took much delight in all manner of
vice, and especially that was the Day that I did solace my self therewith).
Wherefore I fell in my conscience under his Sermon, thinking and believing that
he made that Sermon on purpose to show me my evil-doing; and at that time I
felt what guilt was, though never before, that I can remember; but then I was
for the present greatly laden therewith, and so went home when the Sermon was
ended, with a great burden on my spirit.

17. This for that instant did cut the sinews of my delights, and did imbitter
my former pleasures to me: but behold, it lasted not; for before I had well
dined, the trouble began to go off my mind, and my heart returned to its old
course: but Oh how glad was I, that this trouble was gone from me, and that the
fire was put out! Wherefore when I had sat^sfied nature with my food, I shook
the Sermon out my mind, and to my old custom^ of sports and gaming I returned
with great delight.

18. But the same day, as I was in the midst of a game at Cat, and having
struck it one blow from the hole; just as I was about to strike it the second
time, a voice did suddenly dart from Heaven into my Soul, which said, Will thou
leave thy sins, and go to Heaven? or have thy sins, and go to Hell? At this I
was put to an exceeding maze; wherefore leaving my Cat upon the ground, I
looked up to Heaven, and was as if I had with the eyes of my understanding,
seen the Lord Jesus looking down upon me, as being very hotly displeased with
me, and as if he did severely threaten me with some grievous punishment for
these, and other my ungodly practices.

19. I had no sooner thus conceived in my mind, but suddenly this conclusion
was fastened on my spirit, (for the former hint did set my sins again before my
face) That I had been a great and grievous Sinner, and that it was now too too
late for me to look after Hea^^n, for Christ would not forgive me, nor pardon
my transgressions. Then I fell to musing upon this also; and while I was
thinking on it, and fearing lest it should be so, I felt my heart sink in
despair, concluding it was too late; and therefore I resolved in my mind, I
would go on in sin: for thought I, if the case be thus, my state is surely
miserable; miserable, if I leave my sins; and but miserable, if I follow them:
I can but be damned; and if it must be so, I had as good be damned for many
sins, as to be damned for few.

20. Thus I stood in the midst of my play, before ^ll that then were present;
but yet I told them nothing: but, I say, I having made this conclusion, ^
returned to my spo^t again; and I well remem^er, that presently this kind of
despair did so possess my Soul, that I was persuaded I could never ^ttain to
other comfort then what I should get in sin; for Heaven was gone already, so
that on that I must not think: wherefore I found within me a great desire to
take my fill of sin, still studdying what sin was yet to be committed, that I
might taste the sweetness of it; and I made as much haste as I could to fill my
belly with its delicates, lest I should die before I had my desire; for that I
seared greatly. In these things, I protest before God, I ly^ not, neither do I
feign this form of speech: these were really, strongly, and with all my heart,
my desires; the good Lord, whose mercy is unsearchable, forgive me my
transgressions.

21. (And I am very confident that this temptation of the Devil is more usual
amongst poor creatures then many are aware of, even to overrun their spirits
with a scurvie and seared frame of heart, and benumming of conscience: which
frame, he stilly and slyly supplyeth with such despair, that thoug^ not much
guilt attends the Soul, yet they continually have a secret conclusion within
them, tha^ there is no hopes for them; for they have loved sins Jer. 2.25. and
18.12.)

22. Now therefore I went on in sin with great greediness of mind, still
grudging that I could no^ be so satisfied with it as I would: this did continu^
with me about a month, or more. But one-da^ as I was standing at a Neighbors
Shop-window and there cursing and swearing, and playing the Madman after my
wonted manner, there sat^ within the woman of the house, and heard me^ who
though she also was a very loose and ungodl^ Wretch, yet protested that I swore
and cursed (...) that most fearful rate, that she was made to tremb^^ to heat
me: And told me further, That I was t^^ ungodliest Fellow for swearing that
ever she heard in (...) her life; and that I by thus doing, was able to spoil
all the Youth in a whole Town, if they came but in my company.

23. At this reproof I was silenced, and put to secret shame; and that too, as
I thought, before the God of Heaven: wherefore while I there stood, and hanging
down my head, I wished with all my heart that I might be a little child again,
that my Father might learn me to speak without this wicked way of swearing: for
thought I, I am so accustomed to it, that it is but in vain for me to think of
a reformation, for I thought it could never be.

24. But how it came to pass I know not, I did from this time forward so leave
my swearing, that it was a great wonder to my self to observe it; and whereas
before I knew not how to speak unless I put an Oath before, and another behind,
to make my words have authority, now I could speak better, and with more
pleasantness then ever I could before: all this while I knew not Jesus Christ,
neither did I leave my sports and play.

25. But quickly after this, I fell in company with one poor man, that made
profession of Religion; Who, as I then thought, did talk pleasantly of the
Scriptures, and of the matters of Religion: wherefore falling into some love
and liking to what he said, I betook me to my Bible, and began to take great
pleasu^e in reading, but especially with the historical part thereof: for as
for Paul's Epistles, and Scriptures of that nature, I could not away with them,
being as yet but ignorant either of the corruptions of my nature, or of the
want and worth of Jesus Christ to save me.

26. Wherefore I fell to some outward Reformation, both in my words and life,
and did set the Commandments before me for my way to Heaven: which
Commandments. I also did strive to keep; and, as I thought, did keep them
pretty well sometimes, and then I should have comfort; yet now and then should
break one, and so afflict my Conscience; but then I should repent, and say I
was sorry for it, and promise God to do better next time, and there get help
again.

27. Thus I continued about a year, all which time our Neighbors did take me
to be a very godly man, a new and religious man, and did marvel much to see
such a great and famous alteration in my life and manners; and indeed so it
was, though yet I knew not Christ, nor Grace, nor Faith, nor Hope; and truly as
I have well seen since, had I then died, my state had been most fearful: well,
this I say, continued about a twelvemonth, or more.

28. But upon a day, the good Providence of God did cast me to Bedford, to work
on my calling; and in one of the streets of that town, I came where there was
three or four poor women sitting at a door in the Sun, and talking about the
things of God; and being now willing to hear them discourse, I drew near to
hear what they said; for I was now a brisk talker also my self in the matters
of Religion: but now I may say, I heard, but I understood not, for they were
far above out of my reach, for their talk was about a new birth, the work of
God on their hearts, also how they were convinced of their miserable stare by
nature: they talked how God had visited their souls with his love in the Lord
Jesus, and with what words and promises they had been refreshed, comforted, and
supported against the temptations of the Devil; moreover, they reasoned of the
suggestions and temptations of Satan in particular, and told to each other by
which they had been afflicted, and how they were born up under his assaults:
they also discoursed of their own wretchedness of heart, of their unbelief, and
did contemn, slight and abhor their own righteousness, as filthy, and
insufficient to do them any good.

29. And me thought they spoke as if joy did make them speak: they spoke with
such plea^antne^s of Scripture language, and with such appearance of grace in
all they said, that they were to me as if they had found a new world, as if
they were people that dwelt alone, and were not to be reckoned amongst their
Neighbou^s.

30. At this I felt my own heart began to shake, as mistrusting my condition to
be naught; for I saw that in all my thoughts about Religion and Salvation, the
New birth did never enter into my mind, neither knew I the comfort of the Word
and Promise, nor the deceitfulness and treachery of my own wicked heart. As for
secret thoughts, I took no notice of them; neither did I understand what Satan's
temptations were, nor how they were to be withstood and resisted, etc.

31. Thus therefore when I had heard and considered what they said, I left
them, and went about my employment again: but their talk and discourse went
with me, also my heart would tarry with them, for ^ was greatly affected with
their words, both because by them I was convinced that I wanted the true tokens
of a truly godly man, and also because by them I was convinced of the happy and
blessed condition of him that was such a one.

32. Therefore I should often make it my business to be going again and again
into the company of these poor people; for ^ could not stay away; and the more
I went amongst them, the more I did question my condition; and, as still I do
remember, presently I found two things within me, at which I did sometimes
marvel, (especially considering what a blind, ignorant, so^did and ungodly
Wretch but just before I was) the one was, a very great softness and tenderness
of heart, which caused me to fall under the conviction of what by Scripture,
they asserted; and the other was, a great bending in my mind to a continual
meditating on them, and on all other good things which at any time I heard or
read of.

33. My mind was now so turned, that it lay like a Horseleach at the vein,
still crying out, Give, give; yea, it was so fixed on Eternity, and on the
things about the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, so far as I knew, though as yet
God knows, I knew but little, that neither pleasures, nor profits, nor
persuasions, nor threats, could loosen it, or make it let go its hold; and,
thou^h I may speak it with shame, yet it is in very deed a certain truth, it
would then have been as difficult for me to have taken my mind from heaven to
earth, as I have found it often since to get it again from earth to heaven.

34. And now me thought I began to look into the Bible with new eyes, and read
as I never did before; and especially the Epistles of the Apostle Paul were
sweet and pleasant to me: and indeed I was then never out of the Bible, either
by reading or meditation, still crying out to God, that I might know the truth,
and way to heaven and glory.

35. And as I went on and read, I lighted on that passage, To one is given by
the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same
Spirit, and to another Faith, etc. 1 Cor. 12. And though, as I have since seen,
that by this Scripture the holy Ghost intends, in special, things
extraordinary, yet on me it then did fasten with conviction, that I did, want
things ordinary, even that understanding and wisdom that other Christians had.
On this word I mused, and could not tell what to do, for I feared it shut me
out of all the blessings that other good people had given them of God: but I
was loath to conclude I had no Faith in my soul: for if I do so, thought I,
then I shall count my self a very Castaway indeed.

36. No, said I with my self, though I am convinced that I am an ignorant Sot,
and that I want those blessed gifts of knowledge and understanding that other
good people have, yet at a venture I will conclude I am not altogether
faithless, though I know not what Faith is. For it was showed me, and that too
(as I have since seen) by Satan, That those who conclude themselves in a
faithless state, have neither rest nor quiet in their Souls; and ^ was loath to
fall quite into despair.

37. Wherefore by this suggestion, I was for a while made afraid to see my want
of Faith; but God would not suffer me thus to undo and destroy my Soul, but did
continually against this my blind and sad conclusion, create still within me
such suppositions, That I might in this deceive my self; that I could not rest
con^ent until I did now come to some certain knowledge whether I had Faith or
no; this always running in my mind, But how if you want Faith indeed? but how
can you tell you have Faith?

38. So that though I endeavored at the first to look over the business of
Faith, yet in a little time, I better considering the matter, was willing to
put my self upon the trial, whether I had Faith or no. But alas, poor Wretch!
so ignorant and brutish was I, that I knew to this day no more how to do it,
than I know how to begin and accomplish that rare and curious piece of Art,
which I never yet saw nor considered.

39. Wherefore while I was thus considering, and being put to my plunge about
it (for you must know that as yet I had in this matter broken my mind to no
man, only did hear and consider) the Tempter came in with this delusion, That
there was no way for me to know I had Faith, but by trying to work some
miracle, urging those Scriptures that seem to look that way, for the enforcing
and strengthening his Temptation. Nay, one day as I was betwixt Elstow and
Bedford, the temptation was hot upon me to try if I had Faith by doing of some
miracle; which miracle at that time was this, I must say to the puddles that
were in the horse pads, Be dry; and to the dry places, Be you the puddles: and
truly one time I was a going to say so indeed; but just as I was about to
speak, this thought came into my mind, But go under yonder Hedge, and pray
first, that God would make you able: but when I had concluded to pray, this
came hot upon me, That if I prayed and came again and tried to do it, and yet
did nothing notwithstanding, then besure I had no Faith, but was a Castaway,
and lost: Nay, thought I, if it be so, I will never try yet, but will stay a
little longer.

40. So I continued at a great loss: for I thought if they only had Faith
which could do such wonderful things, then I concluded that for the present I
neither had it, nor yet for time to come were ever like to have it. Thus I was
tossed betwixt the Devil and my own ignorance, and so perplexed, especially at
some times, that I could not tell what to do.

41. About this time, the state and happiness of these poor people at Bedford
was thus in a Dream or Vision represented to me: I saw as if they were set on
the Sunny side of some high Mountain, there refreshing themselves with the
pleasant beams of the Sun, while I was shivering and shrinking in the cold,
afflicted with frost, snow, and dark clouds; methought also betwixt me and them
I saw a wall that did compass about this Mountain; now through this wall, my
Soul did greatly desire to pass, concluding that if I could, I would go even
into the very midst of them, and there also comfort my self with the heat of
their Sun.

42. About this wall I thought my self to go again and again, still prying as
I went, to see if I could find some way or passage by which I might enter
therein, but none could I find for some time: at the last I saw as it were a
narrow gap, like a little door-way in the wall, through which I attempted to
pass: but the passage being very straight, and narrow, I made many offers to
get in, but all in vain, even until I was well nigh quite beat out by striving
to get in: at last with great striving, me thought I at first did get in my
head, and after that by a side-ling striving, my shoulders, and my whole body;
then was I exceeding glad, and went and sat down in the midst of them, and so
was comforted with the light and heat of their Sun.

43. Now this Mountain and Wall, etc. was thus made out to me; the Mountain
signified the Church of the living God; the Sun that shone thereon, the
comfortable shining of his merciful face on them that were therein: the wall I
thought was the Word that did make separa^ion between the Christians and the
world: and the gap which was in this wall, I thought was Jesus Christ, who is
the way ^o God the Father. But for as much as the passage was wonderful narrow,
even so narrow, that I ^ould not but with great difficulty, enter in there^t;
it showed me, that none could enter into life ^ut those that were in downright
earnest, and ^nless also they left this wicked world behind ^^em; for here was
only room for Body and Soul, ^ut not for Body and Soul, and Sin.

44. This resemblance abode upon my spirit many days, all which time I saw my
self in a sorlorn and sad condition, but yet was provoked to a vehement hunger,
and desire to be one of that number that did sit in this Sunshine: now also I
should pray where ever I was, whether at home or a broad, in house or field,
and should also often with lifting up of heart, sing that of the fifty first
Psalm, O Lord, consider my distress: for as yet I knew not where I was.

45. Neither as yet could I attain to any comfortable persuasion that I had
Faith in Chirst, but instead of having satisfaction, here I began to find my
Soul to be assaulted with fresth doubts about my future happiness, especially
with such as these, Whether I was elected; but how if the day of grace should
now be past and gone?

46. By these two temptations I was very much afflicted and disquieted;
sometimes by one, and sometimes by the other of them. And first, to speak of
that about my questioning my election, I found ^t this time that though I was
in a flame to find the way to Heaven and Glory, and though nothing could beat
me off from this, yet this question did so offend and discourage me, that I
was, especially at sometimes, as if the very strength of my body also had been
taken away by the force and power thereof. This Scripture also did seem to me
t^ trample upon all my desires, It is neither in him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God th^^ shows mercy, Rom 9.

47. With this Scripture I could not tell what to do for I evidently saw that
unless the great God of hi^ infinite grace and bounty, had voluntarily chos^ me
to be a vessel of mercy, though I should desire and long, and labor until my
heart did break, (...) good could come of it. Therefore this wou^^ still stick
with me, How can you tell you are ^lected? and what if you should not? how then?

48. O Lord, thought I, what if I should not indeed? it may be you are not,
laid the Tempter: it may be so indeed, thought I. Why then, said Satan, you had
as good leave off, and strive no further; for if indeed you should not be
Elected and chosen of God, there is no talk of your being saved: For it is
neither in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy.

49. By these things I was driven to my wits end, not knowing what to say, or
how to answer these temptations, (indeed I little thought that Satan had thus
assaulted me, but that rather it was my own prudence thus to start the
question) for that the Elect only attained eternal life, that I without scruple
did heartily close withal* but that my self was one of them, there lay all the
question.

50. Thus therefore for several days I was greatly assaulted and perplexed,
and was often, when I have been walking, ready to sink where I went with
faintness in my mind: but one day, after I had been so many weeks oppressed and
cast down therewith, as I was now quite giving up the Ghost of all my hopes of
ever attaining life, that sentence fell with weight upon my spirit, Look at the
generations of old, and see, did ever any trust in God and were confounded?

51. At which I was greatly lightened, and encouraged in my Soul; for thus at
that very instant it was expounded to me: Begin at the beginning of Genesis,
and read to the end of the Revelations, see if you can find that there was any
that ever trusted in the Lord, and was Confounded. So coming home, I presently
went to my Bible to see if I could find that saying, not doubting but to find
it presently, for it was so fresh, and with such strength and comfort on my
spirit, that I was as if it talked with me.

52. Well, I looked, but I found it not, only it abode upon me: then I did ask
first this good man, and then another, if they knew where it was; but they knew
no such place: at this I wondered that such a sentence should so suddenly and
with such comfort, and strength seize and abide upon my heart, and yet that
none could find it, (for I doubted not but it was in holy Scripture.)

53. Thus I continued above a year, and could not find the place, but at last,
casting my eye into the Apocrypha-Books, I sound it in Ecclesiasticus; this at
the first did somewhat daunt me, but because by this time I had got more
experience of the love and k^ndness of God, it troubled me the less; especially
when I considered, that though it was not in those Texts that we call holy and
Canonical, yet for as much as this sentence was the sum and substance of many
of the promises, it was my duty to to take the comfort of it, and I bless God
for that word, for it was of God to me: that word does still at times shine
before my face.

54. After this, that other doubt did come with strength upon me, But how if
the day of grace should be past and gone? how if you have over-stood the time
of mercy? Now I remember that one day as I was walking into the Country, I was
much in the thoughts of this, But how if the day of grace be past? and to
aggravate my trouble, the Tempter presented to my mind those good people of
Bedford, and suggested thus unto me, That these being converted already, they
were all that God would save in those parts, and that I came too late, for
these had got the blessing before I came.

55. Now was I in great distress, thinking in very deed that this might well be
so: wherefore I wen^ up and down bemoaning my sad condition, counting my self
far worse then a thousand fools, for standing off thus long, and spending so
many years in sin as I have done; still crying out! Oh that I had turned
sooner! Oh that I had turned seven years ago; it made me also angry with my
self, to think that I should have no more wit but to trifle away my time till
my Soul and Heaven were lost.

56. But when I had been long vexed with this fear, and was scarce able to take
one step more, just about the same place where I received my other
encouragement, these words broke in upon my mind, Compel them to come in, that
my house may be filled, and yet there is room, Luke 14.22, 23. These words,
but especially them, And yet there is room, were sweet words to me; for truly
I thought that by them I saw that there was place enough in Heaven for me, and
moreover, that when the Lord Jesus did speak these words, he then did think of
me, and that he knowing the time would come that I should be afflicted with
fear, that there was no place left for me in his bosom, did before speak this
word, and leave it upon record, that I might find help thereby against this
vile temptation.

57. In the light and encouragement of this word, I went a pretty while, and
the comfort was the more, when I thought that the Lord Jesus should think on me
so long ago, and that he should speak them words on purpose for my sake, for I
did then think verily that he did on purpose speak them to encourage me withal.

58. After this, I found by reading the word, that those that must be glorified
with Christ in another world, Must be called by him here. Called to the
partaking of a share in his word and righteousness, and to the comforts and
first fruits of his Spirit, and to a peculiar interest in all those Heavenly
things, which do indeed fore-fit the Soul for that rest and house of glory
which is in Heaven above.

59. Here again I was at a very great stand, not knowing what to do, fearing I
was not called; for thought I, if I be not called, what then can do me good?
But oh how I now loved those words that spoke of a Christians calling! as when
the Lord said to one, Follow me; and to another, Come after me and oh thought
I, that he would say so to me too! how gladly would I run after him.

60. I cannot now express with what longings and breakings in my Soul, I cried
to Christ to call me. Thus I continued for a time all on a flame to be
converted to Jesus Christ, and did also see at that day such glory in a
converted state, that I could not be contented without a share therein. Gold!
could it have been gotten for Gold, what could I have given for it! had I had a
whole world, it had all gone ten thousand times over, for this, that my Soul
might have been in a converted state.

61. How lovely now was every one in my eyes, that I thought to be converted
men and women? they shone, they walked like a people that carried the broad
Seal of Heaven about them. Oh I saw the lot was fallen to them in pleasant
places, and they had a goodly heritage. But that which made me sick, was that
of Christ, in Mark, He went up into a Mountain, and called to him whom he
would, and they came unto him, Mark 3.13.

62. This Scripture made me saint and fear, yet it kindled fire in my Soul.
That which made me fear, was this, lest Christ should have no liking to me, for
he called whom he would. But on the glory that I saw in that condition, did
still so engage my heart, that I could seldom read of any that Christ did
call, but I presently wished, Would I had been in their clothes, would I had
been born Peter, would I had been born John, or would I had been by, and had
heard him when he called them, how would I have cried, O Lord, call me also!
but oh I feared he would not call me.

63. And truly the Lord let me go thus many months together, and showed me
nothing, either that I was already, or should be called hereafter. But at last,
after much time spent, and many groans to God, that I might be made partaker of
the holy and heavenly calling, that word came in upon me, I will cleanse their
blood that I have not cleansed, for the Lord dwells in Zion. Joel 3.21. These
words I thought were sent to encourage me to wait still upon God, and signified
unto me, that if I were not already, yet time might come I might be in truth
converted unto Christ.

64. About this time I began to break my mind to those poor people in Gedford,
and to tell them my condition: which when they had heard, they told Mr. Gifford
of me, who himself also took occasion to talk with me, and was willing to be
persuaded of me, though I think but from little grounds; but he invited me to
his house, where I should hear him confer with others about the dealings of God
with the Soul: from all which I still received more conviction, and from that
time began to see something of the vanity and inward wretchedness of my wicked
heart, for as yet I knew no great matter therein, but now it began to be
discovered unto me, and also to work at that rate for wickedness as it never
did before. Now I evidently found, that lusts and corruptions would strongly
put forth themselves within me, in wicked thoughts and desires, which I did not
regard before: my desires also for heaven and life began to fail; I found also,
that whereas before my Soul was full of long^ngs after God, now my heart began
to hanker after every foolish vanity; yea, my heart would not be moved to mind
that that was good, it began to be careless both of my Soul and Heaven; it
would now continually hang back both to, and in every duty, and was as a clog
on the leg of a Bird to hinder her from flying.

65. Nay, thought I, now I grow worse and worse, now am I further from
conversion then ever I was before; wherefore, I began to sink greatly in my
Soul, and began to entertain such discouragement in my heart, as laid me as low
as Hell. If now I should have burned at a stake, I could not believe that
Christ had love for me. Alas, I could neither hear him, nor see him, nor feel
him, nor savor any of his things: I was driven as with a Tempest, my heart
would be unclean, the Cananites would dwell in the Land.

66. Sometimes I would tell my condition to the people of God; which when they
heard, they would pity me, and would tell me of the Promises; but they had as
good have told me that I must reach the Sun with my finger, as have bidden me
receive or rely upon the Promise, and as soon I should have done it, all my
sense and feeling was against me, and I saw I had a heart that would sin, and
lay under a Law that would condemn.

67. (These things have often made me think of that Child which the Father
brought to Christ, Who while he was yet a coming to him, was thrown down by the
Devil, and also so rent and torn by him, that he lay and wallowed foaming:)
Luke 9.42. Ma^^ 9.20.

68. Further, in these days I should find m^ heart to shut it self up against
the Lord, and against his holy Word, I have found my unbelief to set as i^ were
the shoulder to the door to keep him out and that too, even then when I have
with many (...) bitter sigh cried, Good Lord break it open; Lord break these
gates of brass, and cut these bars of iron asunder. Yet that Word would
sometime create in my heart a peaceable pause, I girded thee, though thou have
not known me.

69. But all this while, as to the act of sinning, I never was more tender then
now; I durst not take a pin or a stick, though but so big as a straw; for my
conscience now was sore, and would smart at every touch: I could not now tell
how to speak my words for fear I should mis-place them: O how gingerly did I
then go, in all I did or said! I found my self as on a miry bog, that shook if
I did but stir, and as there left both of God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and
all good things.

70. And though I was thus troubled and tossed and afflicted with the sight and
sense and terror of my own wickedness, yet I was afraid to let this sense and
sight go quite off my mind: for I found that unless guilt of Conscience was
taken off the right way, that is, by the Blood of Christ, a man grew rather
worse for the loss of his trouble of mind, than better. Wherefore if my guilt
lay hard upon me, then I should cry that the Blood of Christ might take it off:
and if it was going off without it (for the sense of sin would be sometimes as
if it would die, and go quite away) then I would also strive to fetch it upon
my heart again, by bringing the punishment for sin in Hellfire upon my Spirit;
and should cry, Lord, let it not go off my heart but the right way, but by the
Blood of Christ, and by the application of thy mercy through him to my Soul; for
that Scripture lay much upon me, Without shedding of Blood there is no
Remission, Heb. 9.22. And that which made me the more afraid of this, was,
Because I had seen some, who though when they were under Wounds of Conscience,
then they would cry and pray, but they seeking rather present Ease from their
Trouble, then Pardon for their Sin, cared not how they lost their guilt, (...)
they got it out of their mind; and therefore having got it off the wrong way,
it was not sanctifie^ unto them, but they grew harder and blinder, an^ more
wicked after their trouble. This made (...) afraid, and made me cry to God,
that it might no^ be so with me.

71. And now was I sorry that God had made m^ a man, for I feared I was a
reprobate: I counte^ man, as unconverted, the most doleful of all the
Creatures: Thus being afflicted and tossed about my sad condition, I counted my
self alone, an^ above the most of men unblest. In this condition I went a great
while, but when comforting tim^ was come, I heard one preach a Sermon upon
those words in the Song, (Song. 4.1.) Behold thou an^ fair, my Love, behold
thou art fair; but at that tim^ he made these two words, My Love, his chief an^
subject matter; from which after he had a little opened the text, he observed
these several conclusions: 1. That the Church, and so every, saved Soul, (...)
Christ's Love, when loveless: 2. Christ's Love without (...) cause: 3. Christ's
Love, when hated of the world* 4. Christ's Love when under temptation and under
di^sertion: 5. Christ's Love from first to last.

72. But I got nothing by what he said at present* only when he came to the
application of the fourth particular, this was the word he said, If it be so
th^^ the saved Soul is Christ's Love, when under temptation and dissertion; then
poor tempted Soul, when thou art assaulted and affl^cted with temptation, and
the hidings (...) Gods Face, yet think on these two words, MY LOVE still.

73. So as I was a going home, these words cam^ again into my thoughts, and I
well remember a^ they came in, I said thus in my heart, What shall I get by
thinking on these two words? this thought had no sooner passed through my heart,
but the words began thus to kindle in my Spirit, Thou art my Love, thou art my
Love, twenty times together; and still as they ran thus in my mind, they waxed
stronger and warmer, and began to make me look up; but being as yet between
hope and fear, I still replied in my heart, But is it true too? but is it true?
at which that sentence fell in upon me, He wist not that it was true which was
done unto him of the Angel, Act. 12.9.

74. Then I began to give place to the Word, which with power did over and over
make this joyful sound within my Soul, Thou art my Love, thou art my Love, and
nothing shall separate thee from my love; and with that Romans 8.39. came into my
mind. Now was my heart filled full of comfort and hope, and now I could
believe that my sins should be forgiven me; wherefore I said in my Soul with
much gladness, Well, I would I had a pen and ink here, I would write this down
before I go any further, for surely I will not forget this, forty years hence;
but alas! within less then forty days I began to question all again.

75. Yet still at times, I was helped to believe that it was a true
manifestation of Grace unto my Soul, though I had lost much of the life and
savou^ of it. Now about a week or fortnight after this, I was much followed by
this Scripture, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, Luke
22.31. and sometimes it would sound so loud within me, yea, and as it were call
so strongly after me, that once above all the rest, I turned my head over my
shoulder, thinking verily that some man had behind me called to me, being at a
great distance.

76. But so follish was I, and ignorant, that I knew not the reason of this
sound, (which as I did both see and feel soon after, was sent from heaven as an
alarm to awaken me to provide for what was coming) only it would make me muse,
and wonder in my mind to think what should be the reason that this Scripture,
and that at this rate, so often and so loud, should still be sounding and
rattling in mine ears. But, as I said before, I soon after perceived the end of
God therein.

77. For about the space of a month after, a very great storm came down upon
me, which handled me twenty times worse then all I had met with before: it came
stealing upon me, now by one piece, then by another; first all my comfort was
taken from me, then darkness seized upon me; after which, whole floods of
Blasphemies, both against God, Christ, and the Scriptures, was poured upon my
spirit, to my great confusion and astonishment. These blasphemous thoughts were
such as also, stirred up questions in me against the very being of God, and of
his only beloved Son; as whether there were in truth a God or Christ, or no?
and whether the holy Scriptures were not rather a Fable and cunning Story, then
the holy and pure Word of God?

78. The Tempter also would much assault me with this: How can you tell but
that the Turk^ had as good Scriptures to prove their Mahomet the Savior, as we
have to prove our Jesus is; and could I think that so many ten thousands in so
many Countries and Kingdoms, should be without the knowledge of the right way
to Heaven (if there were indeed a Heaven) and that we only, who live but in a
corner of the Earth, should alone be blessed therewith? Every one does think his
ow^ Religion rightest, both Jews, and Moor^, and Pagans; and how if all our
Faith, and Christ, and Scriptures, should be but a think-so too.

79. Sometime I have endeavored to argue against these suggestions, and to set
some of the Sentences of blessed Paul against them; but alas! I quickly felt
when I thus did, such arguings as these would return again upon me; Though we
made so great a matter of Paul, and of his words, yet how could I tell but that
in very deed, he, being a subtle and cunning man, might give himself up to
deceive with strong delusions, and also take both that pains and travel to undo
and destroy his fellows.

80. These suggestions (with many other which at this time I may not, nor dare
not utter, neither by word nor pen) did make such a seizure upon my spirit, and
did so over-weigh my heart, both with their number, continuance, and fiery
force, that I felt as if there were nothing else but these from morning to
night within me, and as though indeed there could be room for nothing else; and
also concluded, that God had in very wrath to my Soul given me up unto them, to
be carried away with them, as with a mighty whirlwind.

81. Only by the distaste that they gave unto my spirit, I felt there was
something in me that refused to embrace them: but this consideration I then
only had, when God gave me leave to swallow my spittle, otherwise the noise,
and strength, and force of these temptations would drown and overflow, and as
it were bury all such thoughts, or the remembrance of any such thing. While I
was in this temptation, I should find often my mind suddenly put upon it, to
curse and swear, or to speak some grievous thing of God, or Christ his Son, and
of the Scriptures.

82. Now I thought surely I am possessed of the Devil; it other times again I
thought I should be be rest of my wits, for instead of lauding and magnifying
of God the Lo^d with others, if I have but heard him spoken of, presently some
most horrible blasphemous thought or other would bolt out of my heart against
him. So that whether I did think that God was, or again did think there were no
such thing; no love, nor peace, nor gracious disposition could I feel within me.

83 These things did sink me into very deep despair, for I concluded that such
things could not possibly be sound amongst them that loved God. I often, when
these temptations have been with force upon me, did compare my self in the case
of such a Child whom some Gypsy has by force took up under her apron, and is
carrying from Friend and Country; kick sometimes I did, and also scream and
cry; but yet I was as bound in the wings of the temptation, and the wind would
carry me away. I thought also of Saul, and of the evil spirit that did possess
him, and did greatly fear that my condition was the same with that of his.

84. In these days, when I have heard others talk of what was the sin against
the Holy Ghost, then would the Tempter so provoke me to desire to sin that sin,
that I was as if I could not, must not, neither should be quiet until I had
committed that; now no sin would serve but that: if it were to be committed by
speaking of such a word, then I have been as if my mouth would have spoken that
word whether I would or no; and in so strong a measure was this temptation upon
me, that often I have been ready to clap my hand under my chin* to hold my
mouth from opening; and to that en^ also I have had thoughts at other times to
leap with my head downward into some Muckhil-hole or other, to keep my mouth
from speaking.

85. Now I blessed the condition of the Dogg^ and Toad, and counted the estate
of every thin^ that God had made, far better then this dreadful state of mine,
and such as my companions was: yea, gladly would I have been in the condition
of Dog or Horse, for I knew they had no Soul to perish under the everlasting
weights of Hell for sin, as mine was like to do: Nay, and though I saw this,
felt this, and was broken to pieces with it, yet that which added to my sorrow,
was, that I could not find that with all my Soul I did desire deliverance.
That Scripture also did tear and rend my Soul in the midst of these
distractions, The wicked are like the troubled Sea which cannot rest, whose
waters cast up mire and dirt: There is no peace the wicked, says my God, Isa.
57.20, 21.

86. While this temptation lasted, which was about a year, I could attend upon
none of the Ordinances of God, but with sore and great affliction; yea, then
was I most distressed with blasphemies: if I have been hearing the Word, then
uncleanness, blasphemies, and despair, would hold me as Captive there; if I
have been reading, then sometimes I had sudden thoughts to question all I read;
sometimes again my mind would be so strangely snatched away, and possessed with
other things, that I have neither known, nor regarded, nor remembered so much as
the sentence that but now I have read.

87. In prayer also, I have been greatly troubled at this time: sometimes I
have thought I should see the Devil, nay, thought I have felt him behind me
pull my clothes: he would be also continually at me in the time of prayer, to
have done, break off, make haste, you have prayed enough, and stay no longer;
still drawing my mind away. Sometimes ^lso he would cast in such wicked
thoughts as these, that I must pray to him, or for him: I have thought
sometimes of that, Fall down, or, If thou will fall down and worship me.

88. Also when because I have had wandering thoughts in the time of this duty,
I have labored to compose my mind, and fix it upon God; then with great force
has the Tempter labored to distract me and confound me, and to turn away my
mind, by presenting to my heart and fancy the form of a Bush, a Bull, a Besom,
or the like, as if I should pray to those, to these also he would at sometimes
especially so hold my mind, that I was as if I could think of nothing else, or
pray to nothing else but to these, or such as they.

89. Yet at times I should have some strong and heart-affecting apprehensions
of God, and the reality of the truth of his Gospel: but oh how would my heart
at such times put forth it self with unexpressable groanings! my whole Soul was
then in every word, I should cry with pangs after God, that he would be
merciful to me; but then I should be daunted again with such conceits as these,
I should think that God did mock at these my prayers, saying, and that in the
audience of the holy Angels, This poor simple Wretch does hanker after me, as
if I had nothing to do with my mercy, but to bestow it on such as he: alas poor
fool! how art thou deceived, it is not for such as thee to have favor with the
Highest.

90. Then has the Tempter come upon me also with such discouragements as
these; You are very hot for mercy, but I will cool you; this frame shall not
last always; many have been as hot as you for a spirt, but I have quenched
their Zeal (and with this such and such who were fallen off, would be set
before mine eyes) then I should be afraid that I should do so too: but, thought
I, I am glad this comes into my mind; well, I will watch and take what heed I
can: Though you do, said Satan, I shall be too hard for you, I will cool you
insensibly, by degrees, by little and little; what care I, says he, though I
be seven years in chilling your heart, if I can do it at last; continual
rocking will lull a crying Child asleep: I will ply it close, but I will have
my end accomplished: though you be burning hot at present, yet if I can pull
you from this fire, I shall have you cold before it be long. These things
brought me into great straights; for as I at present could not find my self fit
for present death, so I thought to live long would make me yet more unfit; for
time would make me forget all, and wear even the remembrance of the evil of
sin, the worth of Heaven, and the need I had of the Blood of Christ to wash me,
both out of mind and thought: But I thank Christ Jesus, these things did not at
present make me slack my crying, but rather did put me more upon it (like her
who met with the Adulterer, Deuteronomy. 22.25.) in which days that was a good word
to me, after I had suffered these things a while, I am persuaded that neither
death, nor life, etc. shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.38. And now I hoped long life should not destroy me, nor make me
miss of Heaven.

91. Yet I had some supports in this temptation, though they were then all
questioned by me: That in the third of Jeremiah, at the first, was something to
me, and so was the consideration of the fifth verse of that Chapter, that
though we have spoken and done evil things as we could, yet we should cry unto
God, My Father, thou art the Guide of my youth, and should return unto him.

92. I had also once a sweet glance from that in ^ Cor. 5.21. For he has made
him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. I remember also that one day, as I was sitting in a Neighbors
House, and there very sad at the consideration of my many blasphemies; and as I
was saying in my mind, What ground have I to think that I, who have been so
vile and abominable, should ever inherit eternal life; that word came suddenly
upon me, What shall we say to these things? If God be for us, who can be
against us? Romans 8.31. that also was an help unto me, Because I live, you shall
live also, Joh. 14.19. But these were but hints, touches, and short visits,
though very sweet when present, only they lasted not; but like to Peter's
Sheet, of a sudden were caught up from me to Heaven again, Act. 10.16.

93. But afterward the Lord did more fully and graciously discover himself
unto me, and indeed did quite not only deliver me from the guilt that by these
things was laid upon my Conscience, but also from the very filth thereof, for
the temptation was removed, and I was put into my right mind again, as other
Christians were.

94. I remember that one day as I was traveling into the Country, and musing
on the wickedness and blasphemy of my heart, and considering of the enmity that
was in me to God, that Scripture came in my mind, He has made peace by the
blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. by which I was made to see both again, and
again, and again, that day, that God and my Soul were friends by this blood;
yea, I saw that the justice of God and my sinful Soul, could embrace and kiss
each other through this blood: thi^ was a good day to me, I hope I shall not
forget it.

95. At another time, as I was set by the fi^e in my house, and musing on my
wretchedness, the Lord made that also a precious word unto me, For as much then
as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is the Devil: and deliver those who through the fear of death were
all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. I thought that the glory
of these words was then so weighty on me, that I was both once and twice ready
to swoon as I sat, yet not with grief and trouble, but with sollid joy and
peace.

96. At this time also I sat under the Ministry of holy Mr. Gifford, whose
Doctrine, by Gods grace, was much for my stability. This man made it much his
business to deliver the People of God from all those false and unsound rests
that by Nature we are prone to take and make to our Souls; he pressed us to
take special heed, that we took not up any truth upon trust, as from this or
that or another man or men, but to cry mightily to God, that he would convince
us of the reality thereof, and set us down therein by his own Spirit in the
holy Word; for, said he, if you do otherwise, when temptations come, if
strongly, you not having received them with evidence from Heaven, will find you
want that help and strength now to resist, as once you thought you had.

97. This was as seasonable to my Soul, as the former and latter rain in their
season; for I had found, and that by sad experience, the truth of these his
words. (For I had felt, no man can say, especially when tempted of the Devil,
that Jesus Christ is Lord, but by the holy Ghost.) Wherefore I found my Soul
through Grace very apt to drink in this Doctrine, and to incline to pray to God
that in nothing that pertained to Gods glory and my own eternal happiness, he
would suffer me to be without the confirmation thereof from Heaven; for now I
saw clearly there was an exceeding difference betwix the notions of flesh and
blood, and the Revelations of God in Heaven, also a great difference between
that faith that is fained, and according to man's wisdom, and of that which
comes by a man being born thereto of God, Mat. 16.15, 16. 1 John 5.1.

98. But oh! now, how was my Soul led from truth to truth by God! even from the
birth and Cradle of the Son of God, to his ascension and second coming from
Heaven to judge the World.

99. Truly I then found upon this account the great God was very Good unto me,
for to my remembrance there was not any thing that then I c^ied to God to make
known and reveal unto me, but he was pleased to do it for me, I mean not one
part of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus, but I was orderly led into it; me thought
I saw with great evidence, from the relation of the four Evangelists, the
wonderful work of God in giving Jesus Christ to save us, from his conception
and birth, even to his second coming to judgment: me thought I was as if I had
seen him born, as if I had seen him grow up, as if I had seen him walk through
this world, from the Cradle to his Cross, to which also when he came, I saw how
gently he gave himself to be hanged and nailed on it for my sins and wicked
doings; also as I was musing on this his progress, that droped on my Spirit, He
was ordained for the slaughter, 1 Pet. 1.19, 20.

100. When I have considered also the truth of his resurrection, and have
remembered that word, touch me not Mary, etc. I have seen, as if he leaped at
the Graves mouth, for joy that he was risen again, and had got the conquest
over our dreadful foes, John 20.17. I have also in the Spirit seen him a man on
the right hand of God the Father for me, and have seen the manner of his
coming from Heaven to judge the world with glory, and have been confirmed in
these things by these Scriptures following, Acts 1.9, 10. Acts. 7. 56. Act^
10.42. Heb. 7.24. Heb. 8.38. Rev. 1.18. 1 These. 4.17, 18. Once I was much
troubled to know whether the Lord Jesus was both Man as well as God, and God as
well as Man; and truly in those days, let men say what they would, unless I
had it with evidence from Heaven, all was as nothing to me, I counted not my
self set down in any truth of God; well, I was much troubled about this point,
and could not tell how to be resolved: at last, that in the fifth of the
Revelations came into my mind, And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the
Throne, and of the four Beasts, and in the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb; in
the midst of the Throne, there is his Godhead, in the midst of the Elders,
there is his man hood; but O me thought this did glister, it was a goodly touch
and gave me sweet satisfaction; that other Scripture also did help me much in
this, To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulder, and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, etc. Isa. 9.6.

101. Also besides these teachings of God in his Word, the Lord made use of two
things to confirm me in these things, the one was the errors of the Quakers,
and the other was the guilt of sin; for as the Quakers did oppose his Truth, so
God did the more confirm me in it, by leading me into the Scriptures that did
wonderfully maintain it; and as I said, the guilt of sin did help me much, for
still as that would come upon me, the blood of Christ did take it off again,
and again, and again, and that too, sweetly, according to the Scriptures; O
Friends, cry to God to reveal Jesus Christ unto you, there is none teaches
like him.

102. It would be too long for me here to stay, to tell you in particular how
God did set me down in all the things of Christ, and how he did, that he might
so do, lead me into his words, yea and also how he did open them unto me, make
them shine before me, and cause them to dwell with me, talk with me, and
comfort me over and over, both of his own being, and the being of his Son, and
Spirit, and Word, and Gospel.

103. Only this, as I said before, I will say unto you again, that in general
he was pleased to take this course with me, first to suffer me to be afflicted
with temptation concerning them, and then reveal them to me; as sometimes I
should lie under great guilt for sin, even crushed to the ground therewith, and
then the Lord would show me the death of Christ, yea and so sprinkle my
Conscience with his Blood, that I should find, and that before I was aware,
that in that Conscience, where but just now did reign and ^age the Law, even
there would rest and abide the Peace and Love of God through Christ.

104. Now had I an evidence for Heaven with many golden Seals thereon, all
hanging in my sight; now could I remember this manifestation, and the other
discovery of grace with comfort; and should often long and desire that the last
day were come, that I might for ever be inflamed with the sight, and joy, and
communion of him, whose Head was crowned with Thorns, whose Face was spit on,
and Body broken, and Soul made an offering for my sins: for whereas before ^
lay continually trembling at the mouth of Hell; now me thought I was got so far
therefrom, tha^ I could not, when I looked back, scarce discern it (...) and O
thought I, that I were fourscore years old now, that I might die quickly, that
my soul might be gone to rest.

105. But after the Lord had in this manner (...) graciously delivered me from
this great and sor^ temptation, and had set me down so sweetly in the Faith of
his holy gospel, and had given me such strong consolation and blessed evidence
from heaven touching my interest in his love through Christ; the Tempter came
upon me again, and that with a more grievous and dreadful temptation then
before.

106. And that was to sell and part with this most blessed Christ, to exchange
him for the things of this life; for any thing: the temptation lay upon me for
the space of a year, and did follow me so continually, that I was not rid of it
one day i^ a month, no not sometimes one hour in many days together, unless I
was asleep.

107. And though, in my judgment, I was persuaded, that those who were once
effectually in Christ (as I hoped, through his grace, I had seen my self) could
never lose him for ever (For the land shall not be sold for ever, for the Land
is mine, says God, Levit. 25.23.) yet it was a con^inual vexation to me, to
think that I should have so much as one such thought within me against a
Christ, a Jesus, that had done for me as he had done.

108. But it was neither my dislike of the thought, nor yet any desire and
endeavor to resist it, that in the least did shake or abate the continuation
or force and strength thereof; for it did always in almost whatever I thought,
intermix it self therewith, in such sort that I could neither eat my food,
stoop for a pin, chop a stick, or cast mine eye to look on this or that, but
still the temptation would come, Sell Christ for this, or sell Christ for that.

109. Sometimes it would run in my thoughts not so little as a hundred times
together, Sell him, sell him, sell him; against which, I may say, for whole
hours together I have been forced to stand as continually leaning and forcing
my spirit against it, lest happily before I were aware, some wicked thought might
arise in my heart that might consent thereto; and sometimes also the Tempter
would make me believe I had consented to it, then should I be as tortured on a
Rack for whole days together.

110. This temptation did put me to such scares lest I should at some times, I
say, consent thereto, and be overcome therewith, that by the very force of my
mind in laboring to gainsay and resist this wickedness; my very Body also
would be put into action or motion, by way of pushing or thrusting; still
answering, as fast as the destroyer said fell him, I will not, I will not, I
will not, I will not, no not for thousands, thousands, thousands of worlds;
this reckoning lest I should in the midst of these assaults set too low a
vallue of him, even until I scarce well knew where I was, or how to be composed
again.

111. But to be brief, one morning as I did lie in my Bed, I was, as at other
times, most fiercely assaulted with this temptation, to sell and part with
Christ; the wicked suggestion still running in my mind, sell him, sell him,
sell him, sell him, as fast as a man could speak; against which also in my
mind, as at other times I answered, No, no, not for thousands, thousands,
thousands, at least twenty times together; but at last, after much striving
even until I was almost out of breath, I felt the thought pass through my
heart, Let him go if he will and I thought also that I felt my heart consent
thereto.

112. Now was the battle won, and down fel^ I, as a Bird that is shot from the
top of a Tree, in to great guilt and fearful despair; thus gettin^ out of my
Bed, I went moping into the field but God knows with as heavy a heart as mortal
man, I think, could bear; where for the space of two hours, I was like a man
berest of life, and as now past all recovery, and bound over to eternal
punishment.

113. And withal, that Scripture did seize upon my Soul, Or profane person, as
Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his Birthright; for you know how that
afterward when he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected, for he
found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb.
12.16, 17.

114. These words were to my Soul like Fetters of Brass to my Legs, in the
continual sound of which I went for several months together. But about ten or
eleven a Clock one day, as I was walking under a Hedge, full of sorrow and
guilt God knows, and bemoaning my self for this hard hap, that such a thought
should arise within me, suddenly this sentence bolted in upon me, The Blood of
Christ remits all guilt; at this I made a stand in my Spirit: with that, this
word took hold upon me, The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses ^s from all
sin: now I began to conceive peace in my Soul, and methought I saw as if the
Tempter did hear and stea^ away from me, as being ashamed of what he had done.
At the same time also I had my sin and the Blood of Christ thus represented to
me, That my sin when compared to the Blood of Christ, was no more to it, than
this little clot or stone before me, is to this vast and wide field that here I
see: This gave me good encouragement for the space of ^wo or three hours, in
which time also me thought I saw by faith the Son of God as suffering for my
sins. But because it tarried not, I therefore sunk (...) my spirit under
exceeding guilt again.

115. Sometimes also I should have a touch from that in Luke 22.31. I have
prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not; but it would not abide upon me:
neither could I indeed, when I considered my state, find ground to conceive in
the least, that there should be the root of that Grace within me, having s^nned
as I had done. Now was I tore and rent in heavy case, for many days together.

116. Then began I with sad and careful heart, to consider of the nature and
largeness of my sin, and to search in the word of God, if I could in any place
espy a word of Promise, or any encouraging Sentence by which I might take
relief. Wherefore I began to consider that third of Mark, A^l manner of sins
and blasphemies shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, wherewith soever they
shall blaspheme: Which place me thought, at a blush, did contain a large and
glorious Promise for the pardon of high offenses; but considering the place
more fully, I thought it was rather to be understood, as relating more chiefly
to those who had, while in a natural estate, committed such things as there
mentioned, but not to me, who had not only received light and mercy, but that
had both after and also contrary to that, so slighted Christ as I had done.

117. I feared therefore that this wicked sin of mine might be that sin
unpardonable, of which he there thus speaks, But he that shall blaspheme
against the Holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal
damnation: And I did the rather give credit to this, because of that sentence
in the Hebrews, For y^u know how that afterward, when he would have inherited
the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears.

118. And now began I to labor to call again time that was past, wishing a
thousand times twice told, that the day was yet to come, when I should be
tempted to such a sin; concluding with great indignation, both against my heart
and all assaults, how I would rather have been torn in pieces, than found a
consenter thereto: but alas! these thoughts and wishings, and resolvings, were
now too late to help me; the thought had passed my heart, God has let me go,
and I am fallen: O, thought I, that it was with me as in months past, as in the
days when God preserved me! Job 29.2.

119. Then again, being loath and unwilling to perish, I began to compare my sin
with others, to see if I could find that any of those that are saved had done
as I had done. So I considered David's Adultery and Murder, and found them most
heinous crimes, and those too committed after light and grace received: but yet
by considering, I perceived that his transgressions were only such as were
against the Law of Moses, from which the Lord Christ could with the consent of
his Word deliver him: but mine was against the Gospel, yea, against the
Mediator thereof.

120. Now again should I be as if racked upon the Wheel; when I considered,
that, besides the guilt that possessed me, I should be so void of grace, so
bewitched: What, thought I, must it be no sin but this? must it needs be the
great transgression? Psalm. 19.13. must that wicked one touch my Soul, 1 John
5.18. O what stings did I find in all these Sentences!

121. After this, I came to consider of Peter's sin which he committed in
denying his Master; and indeed this came nighest to mine, of any that I could
find; for he had denied his Savior as I, and that after Light and Mercy
received; yea, and that too, after warning given him: I also considered that he
did it both once and twice, and that after time to consider betwixt. But though
I put all these circumstances together, that if possible I might find help, yet
I considered again, that his was but a denial of his Master, but mine was a
selling of my Savior. Wherefore I thought with my self, that I came nearer to
Judas, than either to David or Peter.

122. Here again, my torment would flame out, and afflict me; yea, it would
grind me as it were to powder, to discern the preservation of God toward
others, while I fell into the snare: For in my thus considering of other men's
sins, and comparing of them with my own, I could evidently see how God
preserved them notwithstanding their wickedness, and would not let them, as he
had let me, to become a son of perdition.

123. But O how did my Soul at this time prize the preservation that God did
set about his People! Ah how safely did I see them walk, whom God had hedged
in! they were within his care, protection and special providence: though they
were full as bad as I by nature, yet because he loved them, he would not suffer
them to fall without the range of Mercy: but as for me, I was gone, I had done
it, he would not preserve me, nor keep me, but suffered me, because I was a
Reprobate, to fall as I had done. Now did those blessed places that spoke of
Gods keeping his People, shine like the Sun before me, though not to comfort
me, but to show me the blessed state and heritage of those whom the Lord had
blessed.

124. Then again, I began to compare my sin with the sin of ^udas, that if
possible I might find that mine differed from that which in truth is
unpardonable; and O thought I, if it should be but the b^eadth of an hair, what
a happy condition is my Soul in! And by considering, I found that Judas did his
intentionally, but mine was against my strivings; besides, his was committed
with much, deliberation, but mine in a fearful hurry, on a ^udden. Thus I was
tossed to and fro, like the Locusts; and driven from trouble to sorrow; hearing
alwa^s the sound of Esau's fall in mine ears, and of the dreadful consequences
thereof.

125. Yet this consideration about Judas his sin, was for a while some little
relief unto me: for I saw I had not, as to the circumstances, transgressed so
soully as he: but this was quickly gone again, for I thought with my self there
might be more ways then one to commit the unpardonable sin; and that too, there
might be degrees of that, as well as of other transgressions: wherefore, for
ought I yet could perceive, this iniquity of mine might be such as might never
be passed by.

126. Then was I struck into a very great trembling, insomuch that at sometimes
I could for whole days together feel my very body as well as my mind to shake
and torter under the sense of the dreadful Judgment of God, that should fall
on those that have sinned that most fearful and unpardonable sin. I felt also
such a clogging and heat at my stomach by reason of this my terror, that I
was, especially at some times, as if my breast bone would have split in sunder.
Then I thought of that concerning Judas, Who by his falling headlong, burst
asunder, and all his bowels gushed out, Act. 1.

127. I feared also that this was the mark that the Lord did set on Cain, even
continual fear and trembling under the heavy load of guilt that he had charged
on him for the blood of his Brother Abel. Thus did I wind, and twine, and
sh^ink under the burden that was upon me; which burden also did so oppress me,
that I could neither stand nor go, nor lie either at rest or quiet.

127. Yet that saying would sometimes come to mind, He has received gifts for
the rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. The rebellious? thought I; Why surely they are
such as once were under subjection to their Prince, even those who after they
have sworn subjection to his Government, have taken up arms against him.

128. This sometimes I thought on, and should labor to take hold thereof; that
some, though small, refreshment might have been conceived by me: but in this
also I missed of my desire, I was driven with force beyond it, like a man that
is going to the place of execution, even by that place where he would fain
c^eep in, and hide himself, but may not.

129. Again, after I had thus considered the sins of the Saints in particular,
and found mine went beyond them; then I began to think thus with my self: Set
case I should put all theirs together, and mine alone against them, might I not
then find some encouragement? for if mine, though bigger than any one, yet
should but be equal to all, then there is hopes: for that Blood that has
virtue enough to wash away all th^irs, has also virtue enough to do away mine,
though this one be full as big, if no bigger, then all theirs. Here again I
should consider the sin of David, of Solomon, of Manasseh, of Peter, and the
rest of the great offenders, and should also labor what I might, with
fairness, to to aggravate and heighten their sins by several circumstances: but
alas* 'twas all in vain.

130. This one consideration would always kill my Heart, My sin was point blank
against my Savior, and that too at that height, that I had in my heart said of
him, Let him go if he will. O me thoughts, this sin was bigger than the sins of
a Country, of a Kingdom, or of the whole World, no one pardonable, nor all of
them together, was able to equal mine, mine out-went them every one.

131. Now I should feel my mind to flee from God, as from the face of a
dreadful Judge; yet thi^ was my torment, I could not escape his hand. (It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.) But blessed
be his grace, that Scripture in these flying fits would call, as running after
me, I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy
sins: Return unto me, f^r I have redeemed thee, Isa. 44.22. but I could not
return, but fled, though at some times it cried, Return, as if it did hollow
after me: for I feared to close in therewith, lest it should not come from God,
for that other was still sounding in my conscience, For you know how that
afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessi^g, he was rejected, etc.

132. All this while my life hung in doubt before me, not knowing which way I
should tip; only this I found my Soul desire, even to cast it self at the foot
of Grace by Pr^yer and Supplication. But O 'twas hard for me to bear the face
to pray to this Christ for mercy, against whom I had thus most vilely sinned!
yet I knew this must be the way, for mercy was no where else.

133. Which when the Tempte^ perceived, he strongly suggested to me, That I
ought not to pray to God, for Prayer was not for any in my case, neither could
it do me good, because I had ^ejected the Mediator, by whom all Prayers came
with acceptance to God the Father, and without whom no Prayer could come into
his presence; whe^efore now to pray, is but to add sin to sin: yea, now to
pray, seeing God has cast you off, is the next way to anger and off^nd him
more then ever you did before.

134. For God (said he) has been weary of you for these several years already,
because you a^e none of his; you bauling in his ears has been no ple^sant
voice to him, and therefore he let you sin this sin, that you might be quite
cut off, and will you pray still? This the Devil urged, and set forth by that
in Numbers, which Moses said to the Children of Israel, That because they would
not go up to possess the Land when God would have them, therefore for ever
after he did bar them out from thence, though they prayed they might with
tears, Numb. 14.36, 37, etc.

135. As it is said in another place, Exodus 21.14. The man that sins
presumptuosly, shall be taken from Gods Altar, that he may die: Even as Joab
was by King Solomon, when he thought to find shelter there, 1 King. 2.27, 28,
etc. These places did pinch me very sore; yet my case being desperate, I
thought with my self, I can but die, and if it must be so, it shall once be
said, That such a one died at the foot of Christ in Prayer: this I did, but
with great difficulty, God does know; for still that saying about Esau would be
set at my heart, even like a flaming sword, to keep the way of the tree of
Life, lest I should take thereof, and live. O who knows how hard a thing I
found it to come to God in prayer!

136. I did also desire the Prayers of the People of God for me, but I feared
that God would give them no heart to do it; yea, I trembled in my Soul to think
that some or other of them shortly would tell me, that God had said those words
to them that he once did say to the Prophet concerning the Children of Israel,
Pray not for this People, for I have rejected them, Jer. 11.14. So, Pray not
for him, for I have rejected him: Yea, I thought that he had whispered this to
some of them al^eady, only they durst not tell me so, neither durst I ask them
of it, for fear if it should be so, it would make me quite besides my self. Man
knows the beginning of sin (said Spira) but who bounds the issue's thereof?

137. Now also did the Tempter begin to mock me in my misery, saying, That
seeing I had thus parted with the Lord Jesus, and provoked him to displeasure
who should have stood between my Soul and the flame of devouring fire, the way
was now but one, and that was, to pray that God the Father would be the
Mediator betwixt his Son and me, that we might be reconciled again, and that I
might have that blessed benefit in him that his blessed Saints enjoyed.

138. Then did that Scripture seize upon my Soul, He is of one mind, and who
can turn him? Oh I saw 'twas as easy to persuade him to make a new world, a
new Covenant, or new Bible besides that we have already, as to pray for such a
thing: this was to persuade him that what he had done already was mere folly,
and to persuade with him to alter, yea, to disanul the whole way of salvation;
and then would that saying rent my Soul asunder, Neither is there salvation in
any other, for there is none other Name under heaven, given amongst men,
whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12.

139. Now the most free, and full, and gracious words of the Gospel, were the
greatest torment to me; yea, nothing so afflicted me as the thoughts of Jesus
Christ: for the remembrance of a Savior, because I had cast him off, brought
both the villainy of my sin, and my loss by it, to mind. O it is sad to be
destroyed by the grace and mercy of God; to have the Lamb, the Savior, turn
Lion and Destroyer, Rev. 6. I also trembled at the sight of the Saints of God,
especially at those that greatly loved him, and that made it their business to
walk continually with him in this world: for they did both in their words,
their carriages, and all their expressions of tenderness and fear to sin
against their precious Savior, condemn, lay guilt upon, and also add continual
affliction and shame un^o my Soul.

140. Now also the Tempter began afresh to mock my Soul, saying, That Christ
indeed did pity my case, and was sorry for my loss: but for as much as I had
sinned, and transgressed as I had done, he could by no means help me, nor save
me from what I feared; for my sin was not of the nature of theirs, for whom he
bled and died, neither was it counted with those that were laid to his charge
when he hanged on the tree; therefore unless he should come down from Heaven,
and die anew for this sin, though indeed he did greatly pity me, yet I could
have no benefit of him.

141. But O how this would add to my affliction, to conceit that I should be
guilty of such a sin, for which he did not die! These thoughts would so
confound me, and imprison me, and tie me up from Faith, that I knew not what to
do: but Oh thought I, that he would come down again, O that the work of Man's
Redemption was yet to be done by Christ; how would I pray him, and entreat him
to count and reckon this sin amongst the rest for which he died? But that would
strike me down Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more: Death has no
more D^minion over him, Romans 6.9.

142. Thus was I always sinking, whatever I did think or do. So one day I
walked to a Neighboring Town, and sat down upon a Settle in the Street, and
fell into a very deep pause about the most fearful state my sin had brought me
to; and after long musing, I lifted up my head, but me thought I saw as if the
Sun that shines in the heavens did grudge to give me light, and as if the very
stones the street, and tiles upon the house did bend themselves against me. O
how happ^ now was every creature over I was! for they stoo^ fast, and kept
their station, but I was gone an^ lost.

143. Then breaking out in the bitterness of my Soul, I said with a grievous
sigh, How can God comfort such a wretch as I? I had no sooner said it, but this
returned upon me, as an echo does answer a voice, This sin is not unto death.
At which I was as if I had been raised out of a grave, and cried out again,
Lord, how could thou find out such a word as this? For I was filled with
admiration at the firness, and also at the unexpectedness of the sentence.

144. Now I was in hopes that my sin was not unpardonable, but that there might
be hopes for me to obtain forgiveness. But O how Satan now di^ lay about him,
for to bring me down again! But he could by no means do it, neither this day,
nor the most part of the next: for this good sentence stood like a Mill-post at
my back. Yet toward the evening of the next day, I felt this word begin to
leave me, and to withdraw its supportation from me, and so I returned to my old
fears again, but with a great deal of grudging and peevishness, for I feared
the sorrow of it.

145. But the next day at evening, being under many fears, I went to seek the
Lord; and as I prayed, I cried to him in these words: O Lord, I beseech thee
show me that thou have l^ved me with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. I had no
sooner said it, but with sweetness it returned upon me, I have loved thee with
an everlasting l^ve. Now I went to bed at quiet, also when I awaked the next
morning, it was fresh upon my Soul.

146. But yet the Tempter left me not, for it could not be so little as an
hund^ed times that he that day did labor to break my peace. O the combats and
conflicts that I did then meet with as I strove to hold by this word, that of
Esau would fly in my face, like to Lightning: I should be sometimes up and
down twenty times in an hour. Yet God did bear me up, and keep my heart upon
this word, from which I had also for several days together very much sweetness
and comfortable hopes of pardon. For thus it was made out to me, I loved thee
whilst thou wast committing this sin, I loved thee before, I love thee still,
and I will love thee for ever.

147. Yet I saw my sin most barbarous, and a filthy crime, and could not but
conclude, and that with great shame and astonishment, that I had horribly
abused the holy Son of God: wherefore I felt my soul greatly to love and pity
him, and my bowels to yearn toward him: for I saw he was still my friend, and
did reward me good for evil* yea, the love and affection that then did burn
within to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, did work at this time such strong
and hot desire of revengement upon my self for the abuse I had done unto him,
that, to speak as then I thought, had I had a thousand gallons of blood within
my veins, I could freely have spilt it all at the command and feet of this my
Lord and Savior.

148. And as I was thus in musing, and in my studies how to love the Lord, and
to express my love to him, that saying came in upon me, If thou, Lord, should
mark iniquity, O Lord, who should stand? but there is forgiveness with thee,
that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. These were good words to me, especially
the latter part thereof, to wit, that there is forgiveness with the Lord; that
he might be feared; that is, as then I understood it, that he might be loved,
and had in reverence: for it was thus made out to me. That the great God did
set^ for high an esteem upon the love of his poor Creatures, th^^ rather then
he would go without their love, he would pardon their transgressions.

149. And now was that word fulfilled on me, and I was also refreshed by it,
Then shall they be ashamed and confounded, and never open their mouth any more
because of their shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have
done, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 16.36. Thus was my Soul at this time (and as I
then did think for ever) set at liberty from being again afflicted with my
former guilt and amazement.

150. But before many weeks were over, I began to dispond again, fearing lest
notwithstanding all that I had enjoyed, that yet I might be deceived and
destroyed at the last: for this consideration came strong into my mind, That
whatever comfort and peace I thought I might have from the word of the Promise
of Life; yet unless there could be found in my refreshment a concurrance and
agreement in the Scriptures, let me think what I will thereof, and hold it
never so fast, I should find no such thing at the end: For the Scriptures
cannot be broken, John 10.35.

151. Now began my heart again to take, and fear I might meet with
disappointment at the last. Wherefore I began with all seriousness to examine
my former comfort, and to consider whether one that had sinned as I have done,
might with confidence trust upon the faithfulness of God laid down in those
words by which I had been comforted, and on which I had leaned my self; but now
was brought those sayings to my mind, For it is impossible for those who were
once enlightened and have tasted the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of
the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the Powers of the
World to come; if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance,
Heb. 6. For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking
for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the advtrsaries,
Heb. 10. Even as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his Birthright; for you
know how that afterward when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was
rejected, for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully
with tears, Heb. 12.

152. Now was the word of the Gospel forced from my Soul, so that no Promise or
Encouragement was to be found in the Bible for me: and now would that saying
work upon my spirit to afflict me, Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other
People, Hos. 9.1. for I saw indeed there was cause of rejoicing for those that
held to Jesus; but as for me, I had cut my self off by my transgressions, and
left my self neither foot-hold nor hand-hold amongst all the stays and props
in the precious Word of Life.

153. And truly I did now feel my self to sink into a gulf, as an house whose
foundation is destroyed. I did liken my self in this condition unto the case of
some Child that was fallen into a Millpit, who though it could make some shift
to scrable and spraul in the water, yet because it could find neither hold for
hand nor foot, therefore at last it must die in that condition. So soon as this
fresh assault had fastened on my Soul, that Scripture came into my heart, This
is for many days, Dan. 10.14. and indeed I found it was so: for I could not be
delivered nor brought to peace again until well-nigh two years and an half were
completely finished. Wherefore these words, though in themselves they tended to
discouragement, yet to me, who feared this condition would be eternal, they
were at some times as an help and refreshment to me.

154. For, thought I, many days are not not for ever; many days will have an
end; therefore (...) I was to be afflicted not a few, but many days, (...) I
was glad it was but for many days. Thus, I say, I could recall my self
sometimes, and give my self a help: for as soon as ever the words came in, at
first I knew my trouble would be long, yet this would be but sometimes, for I
could not always think on this, nor ever be helped though I did.

155. Now while these Scriptures lay before me, and laid sin at my door, that
saying in the 18 of Luke, with others, did encourage me to prayer: then the
Tempter again laid at me very sore, suggesting, That neither the mercy of God,
nor yet the blood of Christ, did at all concern me, nor could they help me, for
my sin: yet thought I, I will pray, but said the Tempter, Your sin is
unpardonoble. Yet said I, I pray. So I went to prayer to God; and while I was
at prayer, I uttered words to this effect: Lord, Satan tells me, That neither
thy mercy nor Christ's blood is sufficient to save my soul: Lord, shall I honor
^hee most by believing thou will and can, or by believing ^hou neither wilt
nor can? Lord, I would fain honor ^hee by believing thou will and can.

156. And as I was thus before the Lord, that Scripture fastened on my heart, O
man, great is thy Faith, even as if one had clapped me on the back, as I ^ay on
my knees before God; yet I was not able to ^elieve this till almost six months
after, for I could not think that I had Faith, or that there should be ^ word
for me to act Faith on; therefore I should ^till be as sticking in the jaws of
desparation; and went mourning up and down, crying, Is his mercy ^lean gone? is
his mercy clean gone for ever? And I ^hought sometimes, even while I was
groaning in ^hese expressions, they did seem to make a question ^hether it was
or no; yet I greatly feared it was.

157. At another time I remember I was again ^uch under the Question, Whether
the blood of christ was sufficient to save my Soul? In which doubt I continued
from morning till about seven or eight at night; and at last, when I was, as it
were, quite worn out with fear lest it should not lay hold on me, those words
did sound suddenly within me, He is able: but me thought this word able, was
spoke so loud unto me, it showed such a great word, and gave such a justle to
my fear and doubt, ( I mean for the time it tarried with me, which was about a
day) as I never had from that, all my life either before or after that, Heb.
7.25.

158. But one morning when I was again at pray, and trembling under the fear of
this, that no word of God could help me, that piece of a sentence darted in
upon me, My Grace is sufficient. At this me thought I felt some stay, as if
there might be hopes: But O how good a thing is it for God to send his Word!
for about a fortnight before, I was looking on this very place, and then I
thought it could not come near my Soul with comfort, and threw down my Book in
a pet; but now it was as if it had arms of grace so wide, that it could not
only enclose me, but many more besides.

159. By these words I was sustained, yet not without exceeding conflicts, for
the space of seven or eight weeks: for my peace would be in and out sometimes
twenty times a day: Comfort now, and Trouble presently; Peace now, and before I
could go a furlong, as full of Fear and Guilt as ever heart could hold; and
this was not only now and then, but my whole seven weeks experience: for this
about the sufficiency of grace, and that of Esau's parting with his
Birthright, would be like a pair o^ scales within my mind, sometimes one end
would be uppermost, and sometimes again the other, acco^ding to which would be
my peace or trouble.

160. Therefore I still did pray to God, that (...) would come in with this
Scripture more fully (...) my heart, to wit, that he would help me to apply the
whole sentence; for as yet it only helped me thus far, My grace is sufficient;
and tho it came no farther, it answered my former question, to wit, that there
was hope; yet, because for thee, was left out, I was not contented, but prayed
to God for that also: wherefore, one day as I was in a Meeting of Gods People,
full of sadness and terror, for my fears again were strong upon me, and as I
was now thinking, my Soul was never the better, but my case most sad and
fearful, these words did with great power suddenly break in upon me, My grace
is sufficient for thee, my grace is sufficient for thee, my grace is sufficient
for thee; three times together; and, O me-thought that every word was a mighty
word unto me; as my, and grace, and sufficient, and for thee; they were then,
and sometimes are still, far bigger than others be.

162. At which time, my Understanding was so enlightened; that I was as though I
had seen the Lord Jesus look down from Heaven through the Tiles upon me, and
direct these words unto me; this sent me mourning home, it broke my heart, and
filled me full of joy, and laid me as low as the dust, only it staid not long
with me, I mean in this glory and refreshing comfort, yet it continued with me
for several weeks, and did encourage me to hope. But so soon as that powerful
operation of it was taken off my heart, that other about Esau ^eturned upon me
as before, so my soul did hang ^s in a pair of Scales again, sometimes up, and
sometimes down, now in peace, and anon again in terror.

163. Thus I went on for many weeks, some^^mes comforted, and sometimes
tormented, and specially at sometimes my torment would be very sore, for all
those Scriptures fore-nam'd in the Hebrews would be set before me, as the only
Sentences that would keep me out of Heaven. The^ again I should begin to
repent, that ever that thought went through me; I should also think thus with my
self, why, How many Scriptures are there against me? there is but three or
four, and cannot God miss them, and save me for all them? Sometimes again I
should think, O if it we^e not for these three or four words, now how might I
be comforted! and I could hardly forbear at sometimes, but to wish them out of
the Book.

164. Then methought I should see as if both Peter, and Paul, and John, and all
the Writer^ did look with scorn upon me, and hold me in derision; and as if
they said unto me, All our words are truth, one of as much force ^s another; it
is not we that have cut you off, but you have cast away your self; there is
none of our sentences that you must take hold upon but these, and such as
these; It is impossible; there remains no more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 6. And
it had been better for them not to have known the will of God, than after they
have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them, Heb. 10.
For the Scriptures cannot be broken, 2 Pet. 2.21.

165. Thus was I confounded, not knowing what to do nor how to be satisfied in
this question, whether the Scriptures could agree in the salvation of my Soul?
I quaked at the Apostles; I knew their words were true, and that they must
stand for ever.

166. And I remember one day, as I was in diverse frames of Spirit, and
considering that these frames were still ac^ording to the nature of the several
Scriptures that came in upon my mind; (...) this of Grace, then I was quiet;
but if that of Esa^ then tormented. Lord, thought I, if both these Scriptures
would meet in my heart at once, I wonder which of them would get the better of
me. So methought I had a longing mind that they might come both together upon
me; yea, I desired of God they might.

167. Well, about two or three days after, so they did indeed; they boulte^
both upon me at a time, and did work and struggle strangly in me for a while;
at last, that about Esaus, birthright began to wax weak, and withdraw, and
vanish; and this about the sufficiency of Grace prevailed, with peace and joy.
And as I was in a muse about this thing, that Scripture came home upon me,
Mercy rejoices against Judgment.

168. This was a wond^rment to me, yet truly I am apt to think it was of God,
for the Word of the Law and Wrath, must give place to the Word of Life and
Grace; because, though the Word Of Condemnation be glorious, yet the Word of
Life and Salvation, does far exceed in glory, 2 Cor. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Mar. 9.5,
6, 7. John 6.37. Also, that Moses and Elias must both vanish, and leave Christ
and his Saints alone.

169. This Scripture also did now most sweetly visit my soul; And him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. O the comfort that I have had from
this word, in no wise! as who should say, by no means, for no thing, whatever
he has done. But Satan would greatly labor ^o pull this promise from me,
telling of me, that Christ did not mean me, and such as I, but sinners of a
lower rank, that had not done as I had done. But I should answer him again,
Satan, here is in this word no such exception, but him that comes, him, ^^ny
him, him, that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. And this I well
remember still, that of all the slights that Satan used to take this Scripture
from me, yet he never did so much as put this Question, But do you come ar^ght?
And I have thought the reason was, because he thought I knew full well, what
coming was; for I saw that to come aright, was to come as I was, a vile and
ungodly sinner, and to cast my self at the feet of Mercy, condemning my self
for sin: If ever Satan and I did strive for any word, it was for this in John;
he pulled, and I pulled but God be praised, I got some sweetness from it.

170. But, notwithstanding all these helps and blessed words of grace, yet that
of Esaus selling of his birthright, would still at times distress my
Conscience; for though I had been most sweetly comforted, and that but just
before, yet when that came into mind, 'twould make me fear again. I could not
be quite rid thereof, 'twould every day be with me: wherefore now I went
another way to wo^k, even to consider the nature of this blashemous thought, I
mean if I should take the words at the largest, and give them their own natural
fo^ce and scope, even every word therein. So when I had thus considered, I
found that if they were fairly taken, they would amount to this, That I had
freely left the Lord Jesus Christ to his choice, whether he would be my Savior
or no, for the wicked words were these, Let him go if he will. Then that
Scripture gave me hope, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. O
Lord, said I, but I have left thee; then it answered again, but I will not
leave thee. For this I thank God al^o.

171. Yet I was grievous afraid he should, and found it exceeding hard to trust
him seeing I h^d so offended him: I could have been exceedin^ glad that this
thought had never be fallen, for then I thought I could with more ease and
freedom abundance have leaned upon his grace: I see it was with me as it was
with Joseph's Brethren, the guilt of their own wickedness did often fill them
with fears, that their Brother would at last despise them, Genesis 50.15, 16, 17,
18.

172. But above all the Scriptures that yet I did meet with, that in the
twentieth of Joshua, was the greatest comfort to me, which speaks of the slayer
that was to fly for refuge. And if the avenger of blood pursue the slayer,
then, says Moses, they that are the Elders of the City of Refuge, shall not
deliver him into his hand; because he smote his Neighbor unwittingly, and
hated him not afore-time. O blessed be God for this word! I was convinced that
I was the slayer, and that the avenger of blood pursued me, that I felt with
great terror; only now it remained that I enquire, whether I have ^ight to
enter the City of Refuge? So I found, That he must not, who lay in wait to shed
blood, but he who unwittingly, or that did unawars shed blood, even he who did
not hate his Neighbor before. Wherefore,

173. I thought ve^ily I was the man that must enter, for because I had smitten
my Neighbor unwittingly, and hated him not afore-time. I hated him not
afore-time, no I prayed unto him, was tender of sinning against him; yea, and
against this wicked Temptation, I had strove for a twelve-moneth before; yea,
and also when it did pass through my heart, it did it in spite of my teeth:
Wherefore I thought I had right to enter this City, and the Elders, which are
the Apostles, were not to deliver me up. This therefore was great comfort to
me, and did give me much ground of hope.

174. Yet being very critical, for my sma^t had made me that I knew not what
ground was sure enough to bear me, I had one question that my Soul did much
desire to be resolved about; and that was, Whether it be possible for any Soul
that has indeed sinned the unpardonable sin, yet after that to receive, though
but the least true spiritual comfort from God through Christ? the which, after I
had much considered, I found the answer was, No, they could not: and that for
these reasons:

175. First, Because those that have sinned that sin, they are debarred a share
in the Blood of Christ, and being shut out of that, they must needs be void of
the least ground of hope, and so of spiritual comfort; for to such there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10.26, 27. Secondly, Because they are
denied a share in the promise of Life: they shall never be forgiven, neither in
this world nor in that which is to come, Mat. 12.31. Thirdly, The Son of God
excludes them also from a share in his blessed intercession, being for ever
ashamed to own them both before his holy Father, and the blessed Angels in
heaven, Mark 8.

176. When I had with much deliberation considered of this matter, and could
not but conclude that the Lord had comforted me, and that too after this my
wicked sin: then methought I durst venture to come nigh unto those most fearful
and terrible Scriptures, with which all this while I had been so greatly
aff^ighted, and on which indeed before I durst scarce cast mine eyes, (^ea, had
much ado an hundred times to forbear wishing of them out of the Bible, for I
thought they would destroy me) but now, I say, I began to take some measure of
encouragement, to come close to them, to read them and consider them, and to
weigh their scope and tendence.

177. The which when I began to do, I found their visage changed; for they
looked not so grimly on me as before I thought they did: And first, I came to
the sixth of the Hebrews, yet trembling for fear it should strike me; which,
when I had considered, I found that the falling there intended was a falling
quite away; that is, as I conceived, a falling from, and an absolute denial of,
the Gospel of Remission of sins by Christ: for from them the Apostle begins his
argument, ver. 1, 2, 3. Secondly, I found that this falling away must be
openly, even in the view of the World, even so as to put Christ to an open
shame. Thirdly, I found that those he there intends were for ever shut up of
God both in blindness, hardness, and impenitency: It is impossible they should
be renewed again unto repentance. By all these particulars, I found, to Gods
everlasting praise, my sin was not the sin in this place intended.

178. Then I considered that in the tenth of the Hebrews; and found that the
wilful Sin there mentioned, is not every wilful sin, but that sin which does
throw off Christ, and then his Commandments too. Secondly, That must also be
done openly, before two or three witnesses, to answer that of the Law, ver. 28.
Thirdly, This sin cannot be committed but with great despite done to the Spirit
of Grace; despising both the disswasions from that sin, and the persuasions to
the contrary: But the Lord knows, though this my sin was devilish, yet it did
not amount to these.

179. And as touching that in the twelfth of the Hebrews, about Esau's selling
his Birthright, though this was that which killed me, and stood like a Spear
against me; yet now I did consider, First, That his was not a hasty thought
against the continual labor of his mind; but a thought consented to, and put
in practice likewise, and that too after some deliberation, Genesis 25. Secondly,
It was a public and open action, even before his Brother, if not before many
more; this made his sin of a far more heinous nature then otherwise it would
have been. Thirdly, He continued to slight his Birthright: He did eat and
drink, and went his way; thus Esau DESPISED his Birthright: yea, twenty year
after he was found to despise it still, And Esau said, I have enough, my
Brother, keep that thou have to thy self, Genesis 33.9.

180. Now as touching this, That Esau sought a place of repentance; thus I
thought: First, This was not for the Birthright, but for the Blessing; this is
clear from the Apostle, and is distinguished by Esau himself, He has taken
away my Birthright, (that is, formerly) and now he has taken away my Blessing
also, Genesis 27.36. Secondly, Now this being thus considered, I came again to the
Apostle, to see what might be the mind of God in a New Testament style and
sense concerning Esau's sin; and so far as I could conceive, this was the mind
of God, That the Birthright signified Regeneration, and the Blessing the
Eternal Inheritance; for so the Apostle seems to hint, Left there be any
profane person, as Esau, whose for one morsel of meat sold his Birthright: as
if he should say, Lest there be any person amongst you that shall cast off all
those blessed beginnings of God that at present are upon him, in order to a new
Birth, lest they become a Esau, even be rejected afterward, when they would
inherit the Blessing.

181. For many there are, who in the day of Grace and Mercy despise those
things which are indeed the Birthright to Heaven, who yet when the
deciding-day appears, will cry as loud as Esau, Lord, Lord, open to us; but
then, as Isaac would not repent, no more will God the Father, but will say, I
have blessed these, yea, and they shall be blessed; but as for you, Depart, you
are workers of iniquity. Genesis 27.32. Luke 13, 25, 26, 27.

182. When I had thus considered these Scriptures, and found that thus to
understand them was not against but according to other Scriptures, this still
added further to my encouragement and comfort, and also gave a great blow to
that objection, to wit, That the Scriptures could not agree in the salvation of
my Soul. And now remained only the hinder part of the Tempest, for the thunder
was gone beyond me, only some drops did still remain, that now and then would
fall upon me: but because my former frights and anguish were very sore and
deep, therefore it did often befall me still as it befalls those that have been
scared with fire, I thought every voice was fire, fire; every little touch
would hurt my tender Conscience.

183. But one day, as I was passing in the field, and that too with some dashes
on my Conscience, fearing lest yet all was not right, suddenly this sentence
fell upon my Soul, Thy righteousness is in Heaven; and methought withal, I saw
with the eyes of my Soul Jesus Christ at Gods right hand, there, I say, as my
Righteousness; so that wherever I was, or whatever I was a doing, God could
not say of me, He wants my Righteousness, for that was just before him. I also
saw moreover, that it was not my good frame of Heart that made my Righteousness
better, nor yet my bad frame that made my Righteousness worse: for my
Righteousness was Jesus Christ himself, the same yesterday, to day and for
ever, Heb. 13.8.

184. Now did my chains fall off my Legs indeed, I was loosed from my
affliction and irons, my temptations also fled away: so that from that time
those dreadful Scriptures of God left off to t^ouble me; now went I also home
rejoicing, for the grace and love of God: So when I care home, I looked to see
if I could find that Sentence, Thy Righteousness is in Heaven, but could not
find such a Saying, wherefore my Heart began to sink again, only that was
brought to my remembrance, He is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; by this word I saw the other Sentence true.

185. For by this Scripture, I saw that the Man Christ Jesus, as he is distinct
from us, as touching his bodily presence, so he is our Righteousness and
Sanctification before God: here therefore I lived, for some time, very sweetly
at peace with God through Christ; O methought Christ! Christ! there was nothing
but Christ that was before my eyes: I was not now only for looking upon this
and the other benefit of Christ apart, as of his Blood, Burial, or
Resurrection, but considered him as whole Christ; as he in whom all these, and
all his other Virtues, Relations, Offices, and Operations met together, and
that on the right hand of God in Heaven.

186. 'Twas glorious to me to see his exaltation, and the worth and prevalencie
of all his benefits, and that because of this; Now I could look from my self to
him, and should reckon that all those Graces of God that now were green in me,
were yet but like those crack'd-Groats and Four-pence-half-pennies that rich
men carry in their Purses, when their Gold is in their Trunks at home: O I saw
my Gold was in my Trunk at home! in Christ my Lord and Savior! Now Christ was
all; all my Wisdom, all my Righteousness, all my Sanctification, and all my
Redemption.

187. Further, The Lord did also lead me into the mystery of Union with this
Son of God, that I was joined to him, that I was flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone; and now was that a sweet word to me, in Ephesians. 5.3. By this also
was my faith in him, as my Righteousness, the more confirmed to me; for if he
and I were one, then his Righteousness was mine, his Merits mine* his Victory
also mine. Now could I see my self in Heaven and Earth at once; in Heaven by my
Christ, by my Head, by my Righteousness and Life, though on Earth by my Body or
Person.

188. Now I saw Christ Jesus was looked on of God, and should also be looked
upon by us as that common or public person, in whom all the whole Body of his
Elect are always to be considered and reckoned, that we fulfilled the Law by
him, died by him, rose from the dead by him, got the Victory over sin, death,
the devil, and hell, by him: when he died we died, and so of his Resurrection:
Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise, says he,
Isa. 26. and again, After two days he will revive us, and the third day we
shall live in his sight, Hos. 6.2. which is now fulfilled by the sitting down
of the Son of Man on the right hand of the Majesty in the Heavens; according to
that to the Ephesians, He has raised us up together, and made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6.

189. Ah these blessed consi^erations and Scriptures, with many other of a like
nature, were in those days made to spangle in mine eyes, Praise ye the Lord God
in his Sanctuary, praise him in the firmament of his power, praise him for his
mighty acts, praise him according to his excellent greatness, Psalm. 150.1, 2.

190. Having thus in few words gi^en you a taste of the sorrow and affliction
that my Soul went under by the guilt and terror that this my wicked thought did
lay me under; and having given you also a touch of my deliverance therefrom,
and of the sweet and blessed comfort that I met with afterward, (which comfort
dwelt about a twelvemonth with my heart, to my unspeakable admiraration) I
will now (God willing) before I proceed any further, give yo^ in a word or two,
what, as I conceive, was the cause of this Temptation; and also after tha^,
what advantage at the last it became unto my Soul.

191. For the causes, I conceived they were principally two, of which two also
I was deeply convinced all the time this trouble lay upon me. The first was,
For that I did not, when I was delive^ed from the Temptation that went before,
still pray to God to keep me from Temptations that were to come: for though, as
I can say in truth, my Soul was much in prayer before this trial seized me, yet
then I prayed only, or at the most principally, for the re^oval of present
troubles, and for f^esh discoveries of love in Christ: which I saw afte^wards
was not enough to do; I also should have prayed that the great God would keep
me from the evil that was to come.

192. Of th^s I was made deeply sensible by the Prayer of holy David, who when
he was under present mercy, yet prayed that God would hold him back from sin
and temptation to come: For then, says he, shall I be upright, and I shall be
innocent from the GREAT transgression, Psalm. 19.13. by this very word was I
gau^ed and condemned, quite through this long temptation.

193. That also was another word that did much condemn me for my folly, in the
negle^t of this duty, Heb. 4.16. Let us theref^^e come boldly to the Throne of
Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need: this I
had not done, and therefore was suffered thus to sin and fall, according to
what is written, Pray, that ye enter not into temptation: and t^uly this very
thing is to this day of such weight and awe upon me, that I dare not, when I
come before the Lo^d, go off my knees until I entreat him for help and mercy
against the temptations that are to come: and I do beseech thee, Reader, that
thou learn to beware of my negligence by the affliction that for this thing I
did for days, and months, and years, with sorrow undergo.

194. Another cause of this temptation was, That I had tempted God; and on this
manner did I do it: Upon a time my Wife was great with Child, and before her
full time was come, her pangs, as of a woman in travel, were fierce and s^rong
upon her, even as if s^e would immediately have fallen in labor, and been
delivered of an untimely birth: now at this very time it was, that I had been
so strongly tempted to question the ^eing of God; wherefore as my Wife lay
crying by me, I said, but with all secrecy immaginable, even thinking in my
heart, Lord, if thou will now remove this sad affliction from my Wife, and
cause that she be troubled no more therewith this night (and now we^e her pangs
just upon her) then shall know that thou can discern the most secret thought
of the heart.

195. I had no sooner said it in my ^ea^t, but her pangs were taken from her,
and she was cast into a deep sleep, and so she continued till morning; at this
I greatly marvelled, not knowing what to think; but after I had been awake a
good while, and heard her c^y no more, I fell to sleeping al^o: So when I waked
in the morning, it came upon me again, even what I had said in my heart the
last night, and how the Lo^d had s^ewed me that he knew my secr^t t^oughts,
which was a great astonishment unto me for several weeks after.

196. Well, about a year and an half afterward that wicked sinful thought, of
which I have spoken before, went through my wicked heart, even this thought, Let
Christ go if he will; so when I was fallen under guilt for this, the
remembrance of my other thought, and of the effect thereof, would also come
upon me with this retort, which carried also rebuke along with it, Now you
may see that God does know the most secret thoughts of the heart, now you may
see that God does know the most secret thoughts of the heart!

197. And with this, that of the passages that was betwixt the Lord, and his
servant Gideon, fell upon my spirit; how because that Gideon tempted God with
his Fleece both wet and dry, when he should have believed and ventured upon
his Word, therefore the Lord did afte^wards so try him, as to send him against
an innumerable company of Enemies, and that too, as to outward appearance,
without any strength or help, Judge. Chap. 6, 7. Thus he se^ved me, and that
justly, for I should have believed his Word, and not have put an if upon the
all-seeingness of God.

198. And now to show you something of the advantages that I also gained by
this Temptation: And first, By this I was made continually to possess in my
Soul a very wonderful sense both of the being and glory of God, and of his
beloved Son; in the temptation before, my Soul was perplexed with Atheism,
but now the case was otherwise, now was God and Christ continually before my
face, though not in a way of comfort, but in a way of exceeding dread and
terror. The glory of the Holiness of God did at this time break me to pieces,
and the Bowels and Compassion of Christ did break me as on the Wheel; for I
could not consider him but as a lost and rejected Christ, the remembrance of
which was as the continual breaking of my bones.

199. The Sc^iptures now also were wonderful things unto me; I savv that the
truth and verity of them vve^e the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; those the
Scriptures favor, they must inherit bliss; but those they oppose and condemn,
must perish for evermore: O this word, For the Scriptures cannot be broken,
would ^end the caul of my heart, and so would that other, Whose sins ye
remit, they are remitted, but whose sins ye retain, they are retained: Now I
savv the Apostles to be the Elders of the City of Refuge, Josh. 20.4. those
they were to receive in, were received to Life, but those that they shut out,
were to be slain by the avenger of blood.

200. O! one sentence of the Scripture did more afflict and terrify my mind, I
mean those sentences that stood against me, (as sometimes I thought they every
one did) more, I say, than an Army of forty thousand men that might have come
against me. Woe be to him against whom the Scriptures bend themselves.

201. By this Temptation I was made see more into the nature of the P^omise,
then ever I was before: for I lying now trembling under the mighty hand of
God, continually torn and rent by the thunderings of his Justice; this made me,
with ca^eful heart and vvatchful eye, with great seriousness to turn over
every leaf, and with much diligence mixed with trembling, to consider every
sentence, together with its natural fo^ce and latitude.

202. By this Temptation also, I was greatly bea^en often my former foolish,
practice, of putting by the Word of Promise v^hen it came into my mind: for
now, though I could not suck that comfort and sweetness from the Promise, as I
had done at other times, yet, like to a man a sinking, I should catch at all I
saw: formerly I thought I might not meddle with the Promise, unless I felt its
comfort; but now 'twas no time thus to do, the Avenger of blood too hardly did
pursue me.

203. Now therefore I was glad to catch at that word, which yet I feared I had
no ground nor right to own; and even to leap into the Bosom of that Promise,
that yet I feared did shut its heart against me. Now also I should labor to
take the wo^d as God had laid it down, without restraining the natural force of
one syllable thereof: O what did I now see in that blessed sixth of John, And
him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out! now I began to consider with
my self, that God had a bigger mouth to speak with, than I had heart to
conceive with; I thought also with my self, that he spoke not his words in
haste, or in an unadvised hear, but with infinite wisdom and judgment, and in
very truth and faithfulness, 2 Samuel 3.28.

204. I should in these days, often in my greatest agonies, even flounce
toward the Promise (as the horses do toward sound ground, that yet stick in
the mire) concluding (though as one almost bereft of his wits through fear) on
this I will rest and stay, and leave the fulfilling of it to the God of heaven
that made it. O! many a pull has my heart had with Sa^an, for that blessed
sixth of John: I did not now, as at other times, look principally for comfo^t
(though O how welcome would it have been unto me!) but now a Word, a Word to
lean a weary Soul upon, that I might not sink for ever.

205. Yea, often when I have been making to the Promise, I have seen as if the
Lord would ^efuse my Soul for ever; I was often as if I had run upon the
pikes, and as if the Lord had thrust at me, to keep me from him, as with a
flaming sword. Then I should think of Esther, who went to petition the King
contrary to the Law, Esth. 4.16. I thought also of Benhadad's servants, who
went with ropes upon their heads to their Enemies for mercy, 1 Kin. 20.31, etc.
the woman of Canaan also, that would not be daunted, though called dog by
Christ, Mat. 15.22, etc. and the man that went to borrow bread at midnight,
Luke 11.5, 6, 7, 8, etc. were great encouragements unto me.

206. I never saw those heights and depths in grace, and love, and mercy, as I
saw after this temptation: great sins do draw out great grace; and where guilt
is most terrible and fierce, there the mercy of God in Christ, when showed to
the Soul, appears most high and mighty: When Job had passed through his
captivity, he had twice as much as he had before, Job 42.10. Blessed be God for
Jesus Christ our Lord. Many other things I might here make observation of, but
I would be brief, and therefore shall at this time omit them; and do pray God
that my harms may make others fear to offend, lest they also be made to bear
the iron yoke as I.

207. Now I shall go forward to give you a relation of other of the Lords
dealings with me, of his dealings with me at sund^y other seasons, and of the
temptations I then did meet withal. I shall begin with what I met with
when I first did join in fellowship with the People of God in Bedford. After
I had propounded to the Church, that my desire was to walk in the Order and
Ordinances of Christ with them, and was also admitted by them; while I
thought of that blessed Ordinance of Christ, which was his last Supper with
his Disciples before his death, that Scripture Do this in remembrance of me,
Luke 22.19. was made a very precious word unto me; for by it the Lord did come
down upon my conscience with the discovery of his death for my sins, and as I
then felt, did as if he plunged me in the virtue of the same. But behold, I had
not been long a partaker at that Ordinance, but such fierce and sad temptations
did attend me at all times therein, both to blaspheme the Ordinance, and to
wish some deadly thing to those that then did eat thereof; that lest I should
at any time be guilty of consenting to these wicked and fearful thoughts, I was
forced to bend my self all the while to pray to God to keep me from such
blasphemies; and also to cry to God to bless the Bread and Cup to them, as it
went from mouth to mouth: The reason of this temptation I have thought since
was, because I did not with that reverence at first approach to partake thereof.

208. Thus I continued for three quarters of a year, and could never have rest
nor ease; but at last the Lord came in upon my Soul with that same Scripture by
which my Soul was visited before; and after that, I have been usually very well
and comfortable in the partaking of that blessed Ordinance, and have I trust
therein discerned the Lords Body as broken for my sins, and that his p^ecious
Blood had been shed for my transgressions.

209. Upon a time I was somewhat inclining to a Consumption, wherefore about
the Spring, I was suddenly and violently seized with much weakness in my
outward man; insomuch that I thought I could not live. Now began I afresh to
give my self up to a serious examination after my state and condition for the
future, and of my Evidences for that blessed world to come. For it has, I
bless the name of God, been my usual course, as always, so especially in the
day of affliction, to endeavor to keep my interest in Life to come, clear
before mine eye.

210. But I had no sooner began to recall to mind my former experience of the
goodness of God to my Soul, but there came flocking into my mind an innumerable
company of my sins and transgressions, amongst which these were at this time
most to my affliction, namely, my deadness, dullness, and coldness in holy
Duties, my wanderings of heart, my wearisomness in all good things, my want of
love to God, his ways and people, with this at the end of all, Are these the
fruits of Christianity? are these the tokens of a blessed man?

211. At the apprehension of these things, my sickness was doubled upon me, for
now was I sick in my inward man, my Soul was clogged with guilt, now also was
all my former experience of Gods goodness to me quite taken out of my mind, and
hid as if it had never been, nor seen: Now was my Soul greatly pinched between
these two considerations, Live I must not, Die I dare not: now I sunk and fell
in my Spirit, and was giving up all for lost; but as I was walking up and down
in the house, as a man in a most woeful state, that word of God took hold of my
he^rt, Ye are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus, Romans 3.24.

212. Now was I as one awakened out of some trou^lesome sleep and dream, and
listening to this heavenly sentence, I was as if I heard it thus expounded to
me; Sinner, thou think that because of thy sins and infirmities, I cannot
save thy Soul; but b^hold my Son is by me, and upon him I look, and not on
t^ree, and will deal with thee according as I am pleased with him: at this I
was greatly lightened in my mind, and made to understand that God could
justify a Sinner at any time, it was but looking upon Christ, and imputing of
his benefits to us, and the work was forthwith done.

213. And as I was thus in a muse, that Scripture came with great power upon my
Spirit, Not by works of righteousness that we have done, but according to his
mercy he saved us, etc. 2 Timothy 1 9. Tit. 3.5. now was I got on high, I saw my
self within the arms of Grace and Mercy; and though I was before afraid to
think of a dying hour, yet now I c^ied, Let me die; now death was lovely and
beautiful in my sight, for I saw we shall never live indeed till we be gone to
the other World: O methought this life is but a slumber in comparison of that
above: at this time also I saw more in those words, Heirs of God, Romans 8.17.
then ever I shall be able to exp^ess while I live in this world: Heirs of God!
God himself is the portion of the Saints: this I saw and wondered at, but
cannot tell you what I saw.

214. At another time, though just before I was pretty well and savoury in my
spirit, yet suddenly there fell upon me a great cloud of darkness, which did so
hide from me the things of God and Christ, that I was as if I had never seen or
known them in my life; I was also so overrun in my Soul with a senceless
heartless frame of spirit, that I could not feel my Soul to move or stir after
grace and life by Christ; I was as if my Ioyns were broken, or as if my hands
and feet had been tied or bound with chains. At this time also I felt some
weakness to seiz my outward man; which made still the other affliction the more
heavy and uncomfortable.

215. Afrer I had been in this condition some three or four days, as I was
sitting by the fire, I suddenly felt this word to sound in my heart, I must go
to Jesus; at this my former darkness and atheism fled away, and the blessed
things of heaven were set within my view; while I was on this sudden thus
overtaken with surprise; Wife, said I, is there ever a such Scripture, I must
go to Jesus? she said she could not tell; therefore I sat musing still to see
if I could remember such a place, I had not sat above two or three minutes, but
that came bolting in upon me, And to an innumerable company of Angels; and
withal Hebrews the twelfth about the mount Zion was set before mine eyes.

216. Then with joy I told my Wife, O now I know, I know! but that night was a
good night to me, I never had but few better; I longed for the company, of some
of Gods people, that I might have imparted unto them what God had showed me:
Christ was a precious Christ to my Soul that night; I could scarce lie in my
Bed for joy, and peace, and triumph, through Christ; this great glory did not
continue upon me until morning, yet that twelfth of the Author to the H^brews,
Heb. 12.21, 22, 23. was a blessed Scripture to me for many days together after
this.

217. The words are these, You are come to mount Zion, to the City of the
living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels,
to the general assembly and Church of the firstborn which are written in
heaven, to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect,
and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things than that of Abel: Through this blessed Sentence the
Lord led me over and over, first to this word, and then to that, and showed me
wonderful glory in every one of them. These words also have often ^^nce this time
been great refreshment to my Spirit. Blessed be God for having mercy on me.

A brief Account of the Authors Call to the Work of the Ministry.
218. ANd now I am speaking my Experience, I will in this place thrust in a
word or two concerning my preaching the Word, and of Gods dealing with me in
that particular also: For after I had been about five o^ six years awakened,
and helped to see both the want and worth of Jesus Christ our Lord, and enabled
to venture my Soul upon him: some of the most able among the Saints with us, I
say the most able for Judgment, and holiness of Life, as they conceived, did
pe^ceive that God had counted me worthy to understand something of his Will in
his holy and blessed Word, and had given me utte^ance in some measure to
express, what I saw, to others for edification; they desired me, and that with
much earnestness, that I would be willing at sometime to take in hand in one of
the Meetings to speak a word of Exhortation unto them.

219. The which, though at the first it did much dash and abash my spirit, yet
being still by them desired and entreated, I consented to their reques^, and
did twice at two several Assemblies (but in private) though with much weakness
and infirmity, discover my Gift amongst them; at which they not only seemed to
be, but did solemnly protest as in the sight of the great God, they were both
affected and comforted, and gave thanks to the Father of Mercies for the grace
bestowed on me.

220. After this, sometimes when some of them did go into the Count^ey to
teach, they would also that I should go with them; where, though as yet I did
not, nor durst not make use of my Gift in an open way, yet mo^e privately
still, as I came amongst the good People in those places, I did sometimes speak
a word of Admonition unto them also; the which they, as the other, received
with rejoicing at the mercy of God to me-ward, professing their Souls were
edified thereby.

221. Wherefore, to be brief, at last, being still desired by the Church, after
some solemn prayer to the Lord, with fasting, I was more particularly called
forth, and appointed to a more ordinary and public preaching the Word, not
only to and amongst them that believed, but also to offer the Gospel ^o those
that had not yet ^eceived the faith thereof: about which time I did evidently
find in my mind a secret pricking forwa^d thereto: (tho I bless God not for
desire of vain glory, for at that time I was most sorely afflicted with ^he
fiery darts of the devil, concerning my eternal state.

222. But yet could not be content unless I was found in the exercise of my
Gift, unto which also I was g^eatly animated, not only by the continual
desires of the Godly, but also by that saying of Paul to the Corinthians, I
beseech you, Brethren (ye know the household of Stephanas, that it is the first
fruits of Achaia, and that they have addicted themselves to the ministry of
the Saints) that you submit your selves unto such, and to every one that
helps with us and labors, 1 Cor. 16.15, 16.

223. By this Text I was made to see that the holy Ghost never intended that
men who have Gifts and Abilities should bury them in the earth, but rather did
command and stir up such to the exercise of their gift, and also did commend
those that were apt and ready so to do, they have addicted themselves to the
ministry of the Saints: this Scripture in these days did continually run in my
mind, to encourage me, and strengthen me in this my work for God: I have been
also encouraged from several other Scriptures and examples of the Godly, both
specified in the Word and other ancient Histories. Act. 8.4. and 18^24, 25,
etc. 1 Pet. 4.10. Romans 12.6. Fox Acts and Mon.

224. Wherefore, though of my self, of all the Saints the most unworthy, yet I,
but with great fear and trembling at the sight of my own weakness, did set upon
the work and did according to my Gift, and the proportion of my Faith, preach
that blessed Gospel that God had showed me in the holy Word of truth: which
when the Country unde^stood, they came in to hear the Word by hundreds, and
that from all parts, though upon sundry and diverse accounts.

225. And I thank God, he gave unto me some measure of bow^ls and pity for
their Souls, which also did put me forward to labor with great diligence and
earnestness to find out such a Word as might, if God would bless, lay hold of
and awaken the Conscience; in which also the good Lord had respect to the
desire of his Servant: for I had not preached long, before some began to be
touched by the Word, and to be greatly afflicted in their minds at the
apprehension of the greatness of their sin, and of t^eir need of Jesus Christ.

226. But I at first could not believe that God should speak by me to the heart
of any man, still counting my self unworthy; yet those who thus were touched,
would love me, and have a peculiar respect for me; and though I did put it
from me that they should be awakened by me, still they would confess it and
affirm it before the Saints of God, they would also bless God for me (unvvorthy
Wretch that I am!) and count me Gods Instrument that shevved to them the Way of
Salvation.

227. Wherefore seeing them in both their words and deeds to be so constant,
and also in their hearts so earnestly pressing after the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, rejoicing that ever God did send me where they were: then I began to
conclude it might be so, that God had owned in his Work such a foolish one as
I; and then came that Word of God to my heart with much sweet refreshment, The
blessing of them that were ready to perish is come upon me; yea, I caused the
widows heart to sing for joy, Job 29.13.

228. At this therefore I rejoiced; yea, the tears of those whom God did awaken
by my preaching, would be both solace and encouragement to me; for I thought on
those Sayings, Who is he that makes me glad, but the same that is made sorry
by me? 2 Cor. 2.2. and again, Though I be not an Apostle to others, yet
doubtless I am unto you, for the seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1
Cor. 9.2. These things therefore were as another argument unto me that God had
called me to and stood by me in this Work.

229. In my preaching of the Word, I took special notice of this one thing,
namely, That the Lord did lead me to begin where his Word begins with Sinners,
that is, to condemn all flesh, and to open and allege that the curse of God by
the Law does belong to and lay hold on all men as they come into the World,
because of sin. Now this part of my work I fulfilled with great sense, for the
terrors of the Law, and guilt for my transgressions, lay heavy on my
Conscience. I preached what I felt, what I smartingly did feel, even that under
which my poor Soul did groan and t^emble to astonishment.

230. Indeed I have been as one sent to them from the dead; I went my self in
chains to preach to them in chains, and carried that fire in my own conscience
that I persuaded them to beware of. I can truly say, and that without
dissembling, that when I have been to preach, I have gone full of guilt and
terror even to the Pulpit-Door, and there it has been taken off, and I have
been at liberty in my mind until I have done my work, and then immediately,
even before I could get down the Pulpit-Stairs, have been as bad as I was
before. Yet God carried me on, but surely with a strong hand: for neither guilt
nor hell could take me off my Work.

231. Thus I went for the space of two years, crying out against men's sins, and
their fea^ful state because of them. After which, the Lord came in upon my own
Soul with some staid peace and comfort through Christ; for he did give me many
sweet discoveries of his blessed Grace through him: wherefore now I altered in
my preaching (for still I preached what I saw and felt) now therefore I did
much labor to hold forth Jesus Christ in all his Offices, Relations and
Be^efits unto the World, and did strive also to discover, to condemn and remove
those false supports and props on which the World does both lean, and by them
fall and perish. On these things also I staid as long as on the other.

232. After this, God led me into something of the mystery of union with
Christ: wherefore that I discovered and showed to them also. And when I had
traveled through these three chief points of the Word of God, about the space
of five years or more; I was caught in my present practice, and c^st into
Prison, where I have lain as long to confirm the Truth by way of Suffering, as
I was before in testifying of it according to the Scriptures, in a way of
Preaching.

233. When I have been in preaching, I thank God my heart has often, all the
time of this an^ the other exercise, with great earnestness cried to God that
he would make the Word effectual to the salvation of the Soul; still being
grieved lest the Enemy would take the Word away from the Conscience, and so it
should become unfruitful: Wherefore I should labor so to speak the Word, as
that thereby (if it were possible) the sin and person guilty might be
particularized by it.

234. Also when I have done the Exercise, it has gone to my heart to think the
word should now fall as rain on stony places; still wishing from my heart, O
tha^ they who have heard me speak this day, did but see as I do, what sin,
death, hell and the curse of God, is and also what the grace, and love, and
mercy of God is, through Christ, to men in such a case as they are, who are yet
estranged from him; and indeed I did often say in my heart before the Lord,
That if to be hanged up presently before their eyes, would be a means to awaken
them, and confirm them in the truth, I gladly should be contented.

235. For I have been in my preaching, especially when I have been engaged in
the Doctrine of Life by Christ, without Works, as if an Angel of God had stood
by at my back to encourage me: O it has been with such power and heavenly
evidence upon my own Soul, while I have been laboring to unfold it, to
demonstrate it, and to fasten it upon the Conscience of others, that I could
not ^e contented with saying, I believe and am sure; methought I was more then
sure, if it be lawful so to express my self, that those things which then I
asserted, were true.

236. When I went first to preach the Word abroad, the Doctors and Priests of
the Country did open wide against me; but I was persuaded of this, not to
render railing for railing, but to see how many of their carnal Professors I
could convince of their miserable state by the Law, and of the want and worth
of Christ: for thought I, This shall answer for me in time to come, when they
shall be for my hire before their face, Genesis 30.33.

237. I never cared to meddle with things that were controverted, and in
dispute amongst the Saints, especially things of the lowest nature; yet it
pleased me much to contend with great earnestness for the Word of Faith, and
the remission of sins by the Death and Sufferings of Jesus: but I say, as to
other things, I should let them alone, because I saw they engendered strife,
and because I saw that they neither in doing, nor in leaving undone, did
commend us to God to be his: besides, I saw my Work before me did run in
another channel, even to carry an awakening-Word; to that therefore did I stick
and adhere.

238. I never endeavored to, nor durst make use of other men's lines, Romans
15.18. (though I condemn not all that do) for I verily thought, and found by
expe^ience, that what was taught me by the Word and Spirit of Christ, could be
spoken, maintained and stood ^o, by soundest and best established Conscience:
and though I will not now speak all that I know in this matter; yet my
experience has more interest in that text of Scripture Gal. 1.11, 12. than
many amongst men are aware.

239. If any of those who were awakened by my Ministry, did after that fall
back (as sometimes too many did) I can truly say their loss has been more to
me, then if one of my own Children, begotten of my body, had been going to its
grave; I think verily I may speak it without an offense to the Lord, nothing
has gone so near me as that, unless it was the fear of the loss of the
salvation of my own Soul: I have counted as if I had goodly buildings and
lordships in those places my Children were born: my heart has been so wrapped up
in the glory of this excellent work, that I counted my self more blessed and
honored of God by this, than if he had made me the Emperor of the Christian
World, or the Lord of all the glory of Earth without it: O that wo^d, He that
converteth a sinner from the error of his way, does save a soul from death!

240. I have observed, that where I have had a work to do for God, I have had
first as it were the going of God upon my Spirit to desire I might preach
there: I have also observed, that such and such Souls in particular have been
strongly set upon my heart, and I stirred up to wish for their Salvation; and
that these very Souls have after this been given in as the fruits of my
Ministry. I have also observed, that a word cast in by the by, has done more
execution in a Se^mon then all that was spoken besides: some^imes also when I
have thought I did no good, then I did most of all; and at other times when I
thought I should catch them, I have fished for nothing.

241. My great desire in my fulfilling my Ministry, was, to get into the
darkest places in the Country, even amongst those people that were furthest
off of profession; yet not because I could not endure the light (for I feared
not to show my Gospel to any) but because I found my spirit did lean most after
awakening and conve^ting Work, and the Word that I carried did lead it self
most that way; Yea, so have I strived to preach the Gospel, not where Christ
was named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation, Romans 15.20.

242. In my preaching, I have really been in pain, and have as it were
traveled to b^ing forth Children to God, neither could I be satisfied unless
some fruits did appear in my work: if I were fruitless, it mattered nor who
commended me; but if I were fruitful, I cared not who did condemn. I have
thought of that, He that wins souls is wise, Pro. 11.30. and again, Lo
Children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the Womb is his Reward:
as arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are Children of the youth; happy is
the man that has filled his quiver with them, they shall not be ashamed, but
they shall speak with the Enemies in the gate, Psalm. 127.3, 4, 5.

243. But in this work, as in all other, I had my temptations attending me, and
that of dive^s kin^s: as sometimes I should be assaulted with great
discouragement, therein fearing that I should not be able to speak the Wo^d at
all to edification, nay, that I should not be able to speak sense unto the
people; at which times I should have such a strange taintness and
strengthlesness seiz upon my body, that my legs have scarce been able to carry
me to the place of Exercise.

244. Sometimes again, when I have been preaching, I have bin violently
assaulted with thoughts of blasphemy, and st^ongly tempted to speak them with
my mouth before the Congregation. I have also at some times, even when I have
begun to speak the Word with much clearness, evidence, and liberty of speech,
yet been before the ending of that Opportunity so blinded, and so estranged
from the things I have been speaking, and have also bin so straightened in my
speech, as to utterance before the people, that I have been as if had not known
or remembered what I have been about; or as if my head had been in a bag all the
time of the exercise.

245. Again, When at sometimes I have been about to preah upon some smart and
scorching portion of the Word, I have found the tempter suggest, What! will you
preach this? this condemns your self; of this your own Soul is guilty;
wherefore preach not of it at all, or if you do, yet so mince it as to make way
for your own escape, ^est instead of awakening others, you lay that guilt upon
your own soul, as you will never get from under.

246. I have also, while found in this blessed work of Christ, been often
tempted to pride and liftings up of heart; and though I dare not say, I have
not been infected with this, yet truly the Lord of his precious mercy has so
carried it toward me, that for the most part I have had but small joy to give
way to such a thing: for it has been my everydays portion to be let into the
evil of my own heart, and still made to see such a multitude of corruptions and
infirmities therein, that it has caused hanging down of the head under all my
Gifts and Seize: I have felt this thorn in the flesh (2 Cor. 12.8, 9.)
the very mercy of God to me.

247. I have had also together with this, some notable place or other of the
Word presented before me, which word ha^h contained in it some sharp and
piercing sentence concerning the perishing of the Soul, notwithstanding gifts
and parts; as for instance, that has been of great use unto me, Though I speak
with the tongue of men and angels, and have not charity, I am become as
sounding-brass and a tinkling cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.

248. A tinkling Cymbal is an instrument of Music with which a skilful pla^er
can make such melodious and heart-inflaming Music, that all who hear him play,
can sca^cely hold from dancing; and yet, behold, the Cymbal has not life,
neither comes the music from it, but because of the art of him that playe^
the^ewith: so then the instrument at last may come to nough^ and perish, though
in times past such mus^ck has been made upon it.

249. Just thus I saw it was and will be with them who have Gifts, but want
saving-Grace; they are in the hand of Christ, as the Cymbal in the hand of
David; and as David could with the Cymbal make that mirth in the service of
God, as to elevate the hearts of the Worshippers; so Christ can use these
gifted men, as with them to affect the Souls of his People in his Church, yet
when he has done all hang them by, as lifeless, though sounding Cymbals

250. This consideration therefore, together with some others, were for the
most part as a maul on the head of pride and desire of vainglory: What,
thought I, shall I be proud because I am a sounding Brass? is it so much to be
a Fiddle? has not the least Creature that has life, more of God in it than
these? besides, I knew 'twas Love should never die, but these must cease and
vanish: So I concluded a little Grace, a little Love, a little of the true Fear
of God, is better then all these Gifts: Yea, and I am fully convinced of it,
that it is possible for a Soul that can scarce give a man an answer but with
great confusion as to method, I say it is possible for them to have a thousand
times more Grace, and so to be more in the love and favor of the Lord, then
some who by virtue of the Gift of Knowledge, can deliver themselves like Angels.

A brief Account of the Authors Imprisonment
251. HAving made profession of the glorious Gospel of Christ along time, and
had preached the same about five year; I was apprehended at a Meeting of good
People in the Country, (amongst whom, had they let me alone, I should ^^ve
preached that day, but they took me away from amongst them) and had me before a
Justice, who, after I had offered security for my appearing at the next
Sessions yet committed me, because my Sureties would not consent to be bound
that I should preach no more to the people.

252. At the Sessions after, I was indicted for an Upholder and Maintainer of
unlawful Assemblies and Conventicles, and for not conforming to the National
Wo^ship of the Church of England; and after some conference there with the
Justices, was sentenced to perpetual banishment because I refused to Conform.
So being again delivered ^p to the Goalers hands, I was had home to Prison
again, and there have lain now above five year and a quarter, waiting to see
what God will suffer these m^n to do with me.

253. In which condition I have continued wi^h much content through Grace, but
have met with many tu^nings and goi^gs upon my heart both from the Lord, Satan,
and my own corruptions; by all which (glory be to Jesus Christ) I have also
received, among many things, much conviction, instruction, and understanding,
of which at la^ge I shall not here discourse; only give you, in a hint or two,
a word that may stir up the Godly to bless God, and to pray for me; and also to
take encoura^ement, should the case be their own, Not to fear what man can do
unto them.

254. I never had in all my life so great an inle^ into the Word of God as now:
them Scr^ptures that I saw nothing in before, are made in this place and state
to shine upon me. Jesus Christ al^o was never more re^l and apparent then now;
here I have seen him, and felt him indeed: O that word, We have not preached
unto you cunningly devised fables, 2 Pet. 1 16. and that, God raised Christ
from the dead and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God, 1
Pet. 1.20. were blessed words unto me in this my imprisoned condition.

255. These three or four Scriptures also have been great refreshment, in this
condition, to me; Joh. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Joh. 16.33. Col. 3.3, 4. Heb. 12.22, 23,
24. So that sometimes, when I have been in the favor of them, I have been able
to laugh at destruction, and ^o fear neither the Horse nor his Rider. I have
had sweet sights of the forgiveness of my sins in this place, and of my being
with Jesus in another world: O the Mount Zion, the heavenly Jerusalem, the
innumerable company of Angels, and God the Judge of all, and the Spirits of
just men made perfect, and Jesus, have been sweet unto me in this place: I have
seen that here, that I am persuaded I shall never, while in this world, be able
to express; I have seen a truth in that Scripture, Whom having not seen, ye
love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

256. I never knew what it was for God to stand by me at all turns, and at
every offer of Satan, etc. as I have found him since I came in hither; for look
how fears have presented themselves, so have supports and encouragements; yea,
when I have started even as it were at nothing else but my shadow, yet God, as
being very tender of me, has not suffered me to be molested, but would with
one Scripture and another st^engthen me against all: insomuch that I have often
said, Were it lawful, I could pray for greater trouble, for the greater
comforts sake, Eccles. 7.14. 2 Cor. 1.5.

257. Before I came to Prison, I saw what was a coming, and had especially two
Considerations w^rm upon my heart; the first was, How to be able to endure,
should my imprisonment be lon^ and tedious; the second was, How to be able to
encounter death, should that be here my portion. For the first of these, that
Scripture Col. 1.11. was great information to me, namely, to pray to God to be
strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all patience
and long-suffering with joyfulness: I could seldom go to prayer before I was
imprisoned, but for not so little as a year together, this Sentence of sweet
Petition, would as it were thrust it self into my mind, and persuade me that if
ever I would go through long-suffering, I must have all patience, especially if
I would endure it joyfully.

258. As to the second Consideration, that Saying 2 Cor. 1.9. was of great use
unto me, But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we might not
trust in our selves, but in God that raises the dead: by this Scripture I was
made to see that if ever I would suffer rightly, I must first pass a sentence
of death upon every thing that can properly be called a thing of this life,
even to reckon my Self, my Wife, my Children, my health, my enjoyments and all,
as dead to me, and my self as dead to them.

259. The second was, to live upon God that is invisible; as Paul said in
another place, The way not to faint, is to look not at the things that are
seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen, are
temporal; but the things that are not seen, they are eternal: and thus I
reasoned with my self; If I provide only for a prison, then the whip comes at
unawares, and so does also the pillory; again, if I provide only for these,
then I am not fit for banishment; further, if I conclude that banishment is the
worst, then if death come, I am surprised; so that I see the best way to go
through sufferings, is to trust in God through Christ, as touching the world to
come; and as touching this world, to count the grave my house, to make my bed
in darkness, to say to Corrup^ion, Thou art my Father, and to the Worm, Thou
art my Mother and Sister; that is, to familiarize these things to me.

260. But notwithstanding these helps, I found my self a man, and compassed
with infirmities; the parting with my Wife and poor Children has often been to
me in t^is place, as the pulling the flesh from my bones; and that not only
because I am somewhat too too fond of these great mercies, but also because I
should have often brought to my mind the many hardships, mise^ies and wants
that my poor family was like to meet with, should I be taken from them,
especially my poor blind Child, who lay nea^er my heart than all I had besides;
O the thoughts of the har^ship I thought this might go under, would break my
heart to pieces.

261. Poor Child! thought I, what sorrow art thou like to have for thy portion
in this world? thou must be ^eaten, must beg, suffer hunger, cold, nakedness,
and a thousand calamities, though I cannot now endure the wind should blow upon
thee: but yet recalling my self, thought I, I must venture you all with God,
though it goes to the quick to leave you: O I saw in this condition I was as a
man who was pulling down his house upon the head of his Wife and Children; yet
thought I, I must do it, I must do it: and now I thought of those two milch
Kine that were to carry the Ark of God into another Country, and to leave their
Calves behind them, 1 Samuel 6.10, 11, 12.

262. But that which helped me in this temptation, was diverse considerations,
of which th^ee in special here I will name; the first was, the consideration of
those two Scriptures, Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them
alive, and let thy ^idows trust in me: and again, The Lord said, Verily it
shall go well with thy remnant, verily I will cause the enemy to entreat thee
well in the time of evil, etc.

263. I had also this consideration, that ^f I should now venture all for God,
I engaged God to take care of my concernments; but if I forsook him and his
ways, for fear of any trouble that should come to me or mine, then I should not
only falsify my profession, but should count also that my conce^nments were
not so sure if left at Gods feet, while I stood to and for his Name, as they
would be if they were under my own tuition, though with the denial of the way
of God. This was a smarting consideration, and was as spurs unto my flesh: that
Scripture also greatly helped it to fasten the more upon me, where Christ p^ays
against Judas, that God wou^d disappoint him in all his selfish thoughts, which
moved him to sell his Master. Pray read it soberly, Psalm. 109.6, 7, 8, etc.

264. I had also another consideration, and that was, The dread of the torments
of Hell, which I was sure they must partake of, that for fear of the Cross do
shrink from their profession of Christ, his Word and Laws, before the sons of
men: and of the glory that he had prepared for those that in faith, and love,
and patience, stood to his ways before them. These things, I say, have helped
me, when the thoughts of the misery that both my self and mine might, for the
sake of my profession, be exposed to, has lain pinching on my mind.

265. When I have indeed conceited that I might be banished for my Profes^ion,
then I have thought of that Scripture, They were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword, they wandered about in
sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the
world was not worthy, for all they thought they were too bad to dwell and abide
amongst them. I have also thought of that saying, The holy Ghost witnesses in
every city, that bonds and afflictions abide me; I have ve^ily thought that my
Soul and it, have sometimes reasoned about the sore and sad estate of a
banished and exiled condition, how they are exposed to hunger, to cold, to
perils, to nakedness, to enemies, and a thousand calamities; and at last it may
be to die in a di^ch like a poor forlorn and desolate sheep. But I thank God
hitherto I have not been moved by these most delicate reasonings, but have
rather by them more approved my heart to God.

266. I will tell you o^ a pretty business: I was once above all the rest in a
very fa^t and low condition for many weeks, at which time also I being but a
young Prisoner, and not acqu^inted with the Laws, had this lay much upon my
spirit, That my imprisonment might end at the Gallows for ought that I could
tell; now therefore Satan said hard at me to beat me out of heart, by
suggesting thus unto me: But how if when you come indeed to die, you should be
in this condition; that is, as not to savor the things of God, not to have any
evidence upon your soul for a better state hereafter (for indeed at that time
all the things of God were hid from my soul.)

267. Wherefore when I at first began to think of this, it was a great trouble
to me: for I thought with my self, that in the condition I now was in, I was
not fit to die, neither indeed did think I could if I should be called to it:
besides, I thought with my self, if I should make a scrabling shif^ to clamber
up the Ladder, yet I should either with quaking or other symptoms of faintings,
give occa^ion to the enemy to reproach the way of God and his People, for their
timerousness: this therefore lay with great trouble upon me, for methought I
was ashamed to die with a pale face, and tottering knees, for such a Cause as
this.

268. Wherefore I prayed to God that he would comfort me, and give me strength
to do and suffer what he should call me to; yet no comfort appeared but all
continued hid: I was also at this time so really possessed with the thought of
death, that often I was as if I was on the Ladder, with the Rope about my neck,
only this was some encouragement to me, I thought I might have now an
opportunity to speak my last words to a multitude which I thought would come to
see me die; and, thought I, if it must be so, if God will but convelt one Soul
by my very last words, I shall for count my life thrown away, nor lost.

269. But yet all the things of God were kept out of my sight, and still the
tempter followed me with, But whith^r must you go when you die? what will
become of you? wh^re will you be found in another world? what evidence have you
for heaven and glory, and an inheritance a^ong them that are sanctified? Thus
was I tossed for many weeks, and knew not what to do; at last this
consideration fell with weight upon me, That it was for the Word and Way of G^d
that I was in this condition, wherefore I was engaged nor to flinch a hairs
breadth from it.

270 I thought also, that God might choose whether he would give me comfort now,
or at the hour of death; but I might not therefore choose whethe^ I would hold
my profession or no: I was bound, but he was free: yea, it was my duty to stand
to his Word, whether he would ever look upon me or no, or save me a^ the last:
Wherefore, thought I, the point being thus, I am for going on, and venturing my
eternal state with Christ, whether I have comfort here or no; if God does not
come in, thought I, I will leap off the Ladder even blindfold into ^ternitie,
sin^ or swim, come heaven, come hell; Lord Jesus, if thou will catch me, do; I
will venture for thy Name.

271. I was no soo^er fixed upon this resolution, But that Word dropped upon me,
Does Job serve God for no ^ight? as if the accuser had said, Lord, Job is no
upright man, he serves thee for by respects, have thou not made a hedge about
him, etc. but put forth now thy hand, and touch all that he has, and he will
curse thee to thy face: How now? thought^, is this the sign of an upright Sou^,
to desire to serve God when all is taken from him? is he a go^lie man that
will serve God for nothing rather then give out? blessed be God, then I hope I
have a^ upright heart, for I am resolved (God give me strength) never to deny
my profession, though I have nothing at all for my pains; an^ as I was thus
considering, that Scripture was set before me, Psa. 44.12, etc.

272. Now was my heart full of comfort, for I hoped it vv^s sincere; I would
not have been without this trial for much, I am comforted every time I think
of it, and I hope shall bless God for ever for the teaching I have had by it.
Many more of the Dealings of God toward me I might relate, but these out of
the spoils vvo^ in Battle have I dedicated to maintain the House of God, 1 Chronicles. 26.27.

The CONCLUSION.
1. OF all the Temptations that ever I met with in my life to question the
being and truth of the Go^spel, i^ the worst, and worst to be born; when this
temptation comes, it takes away my girdle from me, and removes the ^oundation
from under me: O I have often thought of that word, Have your loyn^ girt about
with truth; and of that, When the foundations are destroyed what can the
Righteous do?

2. I have wondered much at this one thing, that though God does ^isit my Soul
with never so blessed a discovery of himself, yet I (...) found again, that
such hours have attended me afterward, that I have been in my spirit so filled
with darkness, that I could not so much as once conceive what that God and that
comfo^t was with which I have been refreshed.

3. I have sometimes see^ more in a line of the Bible, then I could well tell
how to stand under, and yet at another time the whole Bible has been to me
as dry as a stick, or rat^er my heart has been so dead and dry unto it, that
I could not conceive the least dram of refreshment, though I have looked it over.

4. Of all tears, the^ are the best that are made by the Blood of Christ; and
of all joy, that is the sweetest that is mixed with mourning over Christ; O it is
a goodly thing to be on our knees with Christ in our arms, before God: I hope I
know something of these things.

5. I find to th^s day seven abominations in my heart: 1. In clinings to
unbelief, 2. Suddenly to forget the love and mercy that Christ manifests,
3. A leaning to the Works of the Law, 4. Wanderings and coldness n prayer, 5. To
forget to watch for that I pray for, 6. apt to murmur because I have no more,
and yet ready to abuse what I have, 7 I can do none of th^se things which God
commands me, but my corruptions will thrust in themselves; When I would do
good, evil is present with me.

6. These things I continually see and feel, and am affl^cted and oppressed
with; yet the Wisdom of God does order the^ for my good: 1. They make me abhor
my self; 2. They keep me from trusting my heart: 3. They convince me of the
insufficiency of all inherent righteousness; 4. They show me the necessity of
fleeing to Jesus; 5. They pres^ me to pray unto God; 6. They show me the need ^
have to watch and be sober* 7. And provoke me to look to God through Christ to
help me, and carry me through this world. Amen.

FINIS.

