The Acceptable Sacrifice: OR THE EXCELLENCY OF A Broken Heart: SHOWING THE
Nature, Signs and Proper Effects OF A CONTRITE SPIRIT.

BEING The LAST WORKS of that Eminent Preacher, and Faithful Minister of Jesus
Christ, Mr. JOHN BUNYAN of Bedford.

With a Preface pre^^x^^ thereunto, by a^ Eminent Minister of the ^^^pel in
LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be Sold by George L^^ki^ at the Two Swans
without Bishopsgates. 1689.

Price Bound One Shilling.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Author of the ensuing Discourse (Now with God, reaping the Fruit of all
his Labor, Diligence and Success in his Masters Service) did experience in
himself (through the Grace of God) the Nature, Excellency and Comfort of a
truly Broken, and Contrite Spirit. So that what is here written, is but a
Transcript out of his own Heart: For God (who had much work for him to do) was
still Hewing and Hammering him by his Word, and sometimes also by more than
ordinary Temptations and Desertions: The Design, and also the Issue thereof,
through Gods Goodness, was the humbling and keeping of him Low in his own Eyes.
The truth is, (as himself sometimes acknowledged) he always needed the Thorn in
the Flesh, and God in mercy sent it him, least under his Extraordinary
Circumstances, he should be exalted above measure: which perhaps was the evil
that did more easily beset him, than any other. But the Lord was pleased to
overruled it to work for his Good, and to keep him in that Broken Frame which
is so acceptable unto him, and concerning which it is said, That he heals the
Broken in Heart, and binds up their wounds, Psalm. 147. 3. And indeed it is a
most necessary qualification that should always be found in the Disciples of
Christ, who are most eminent, and as Stars of the first Magnitude in the
Firmament of the Church: Disciples in the highest form of Profession need to be
thus qualified in the exercise of every Grace, and the performance of every
Duty: It is that which God does principally, and more especially look after, in
all our Approaches, and Accesses to him. It is to him that God will look, and
with him God will dwell, who is poor, and of a Contrite Spirit, Isa. 57. 15.
and 66. 2. And the reason why God will manifest so much respect to one so
qualified, is, because he carries it so becomingly toward him: He comes and
lies at Feet, and discovers a quickness of sense, and apprehensiveness of
whatever may be dishonorable and distasteful to God, Psalm. 38. 4. And if the
Lord does at any time but shake his Rod over him, he comes trembling, and
kisses the Rod, and says, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him Good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. He is sensible he has sinned and gone astray like a lost Sheep,
and therefore will justify God in his severest Proceedings against him. This
broken heart is also apliable, and flexible Heart, and prepared to receive
whatsoever impressions God shall make upon it, and is ready to be molded into
any frame that shall best please the Lord. He says with Samuel, Speak, Lord,
for thy Servant hears, 1 Samuel 3. 10. And with David, When thou sayedst, Seek
ye my Face; my heart said unto thee, Thy Face, Lord, will I seek: Psalm. 27. 8.
And so with Paul, who tremblingly said, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
Acts 9. 6.

Now therefore surely such a Heart as this is must needs be very delightful to
God: He says to us, My Son, give me thy Heart, Prove. 23. 16. But doubtless he
means there a Broken Heart: An unbroken Heart we may keep to our selves; it is
the Broken Heart which God will have us to give to him. For indeed it is all
the amends that the best of us are capable of making, for all the injury we
have done to God, in sinning against him: We are not able to give better
satisfaction for breaking God's Laws, then by breaking our own Hearts; this is
all that we can do of that kind, for the Blood of Christ only must give the due
and full satisfaction to the Justice of God for what Provocations we are at any
time guilty of: But all that we can do, is to accompany the acknowledgments we
make of miscarriages with a broken and Contrite Spirit. Therefore we find that
when David had committed those two foul sins of Adultery and Murder, against
God, he saw that all his Sacrifices signified nothing to the expiating of his
Guilt; therefore he brings to God a Broken Heart, which carried in it the best
expression of indignation against himself, as of the highest respect he could
show to God, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

The day in which we live, and the present circumstances which the People of
God, and these Nations are under, do loudly proclaim a very great necessity of
being in this broken and tender frame: For who can foresee what will be the
issue of these violent Fermentations that are amongst us? Who knows what will
become of the Ark of God? Therefore it is a seasonable duty, with old Eli, to
sit trembling for it. Do we not also hear the sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm
of Wars; and ought we not with the Prophet, cry out, My Bowels, My Bowels! I am
pained at my very heart; my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my Peace,
etc. Jer. 4. 19. Thus was that Holy Man affected with the consideration of what
might befall Jerusalem, the Temple and Ordinances of God, etc. as the
consequence of the present dark Dispensations they were under: Will not a
humble posture best become us when we have humbling Providence in prospect?
Mercy and Judgment seem to be struggling in the same Womb of Providence; and
which will come first out, we know not: But neither of them (...) we
comfortably meet; but with a broken and contrite Spirit. If Judgment comes,
Josiah's posture of Tenderness will be the best we can be found in; and also to
say with David, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments, Psalm. 119. 120. It is very sad when God smites, and we are not
grieved; which the Prophet complains of, Thou have stricken them, but they have
not grieved, etc. They have made their Faces harder than Rock, they have
refused to return, Jer 5. 3.

But such as know the power of his Anger, will have a deep awe of God upon
their Hearts, and observing him in all his Motions, will have the greatest
apprehensions of his Displeasure. So that when he is coming forth in any
terrible Dispensation, they will according to their duty prepare to meet him
with a humbled and broken heart. But if he should appear to us in his Goodness,
and further lengthen out the day of our Peace and Liberty, yet still the
Contrite Frame will be most seasonable; then will be a proper time, with Job,
to abhor our selves in dust and ashes: Job 42. 6. And to say with David, Who
are we, that thou have brought us (...) to! 2 Samuel 7. 18.

But we must still know that this broken tender Heart is not a Plant that grows
in our own Soil, but is the peculiar gift of God himself. He that made the
Heart, must break the heart: We may be under heartbreaking Providence, and
yet the heart remain altogether unbroken; as it was with Pharach; whose heart,
though it was under the Hammers of ten terrible Judgments, immediately
succeeding one another, yet continued hardened against God. The Heart of Man is
harder than Hardness it self, till God softneth and breaks it; Men move not,
they relent not, let God thunder never so terribly; let God in the greatest
earnest cast abroad his Firebrands, Arrows, and Death, in the most dreadful
representations of Wrath and Judgment, yet still man trembles not, nor is any
more astonished than if in all this God were but in jest, till he comes and
falls to work with him, and forces him to cry out, What have I done? What
shall I do?

Therefore let us have recourse to him, who as he gives the new heart, so also
therevvith the broken heart. And let men's hearts be never so hard, if God comes
once to deal effectually with them, they shall become mollified and tender; as
it was with those hardened Jews, who by wicked and cruel hands murdered the
Lord of Life; though they stouted it out a great while, yet how suddenly,
when God brought them under the Hammer of his Word and Spirit, in Peter's
powerful Ministry, were they broken, and being pricked in their hearts cried
out, Men and Brethren what shall we do? Acts 2. 37.

And the like instance we have in the Jailor, who was a most barbarous hard
hearted wretch; yet when God came to deal with him, he Was soon tamed, and
his heart became exceeding soft and tender, Act. 16. 29, 30.

Men may speak long enough, and the heart not at all be moved; but, The voice
of the Lord is powerful; the voice of the Lord is full of Majesty, and breaks
the Rocks and Cedars: He turns the Rock into a standing Water, the Flint into a
Fountain of Waters. And this is a Glorious work indeed, that Hearts of Stone
should be disolved and melted into waters of Godly Sorrow, working Repentance
not to be Repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

When God speaks Effectually, the stoutest Heart must melt and yield; Wait upon
God then for the Softning thy Heart, and avoid whatsoever may be a means of
Hardening it; as the Apostle cautions the Hebrews, Take heed, least ye be
Hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. Heb. 3. 1^.

Sin is Deceitful, and will Harden all those that indulge it; the more Tender
any man is to his Lust, the more will he be Hardened by it. There is a native
Hardness in every man's Heart; and though it may be softened by Gospel means, yet
if those means be afterward neglected, the Heart will fall to its Native
Hardness again; as it is with the Wax and the Clay.

Therefore how much does it behoove us to keep close to God, in the use of all
Gospel means, whereby our Hearts being once softened, may be always kept so?
Which is best done by Repeating the use of those means which were at first
blessed for the Softning of them.

The following Treatise may be of great use to the People of God (through his
Blessing accompanying it) to keep their hearts Tender and Broken, when so many
after their hardness, and impenitent heart, are treasuring up Wrath, against
the day of Wrath. Romans 2. 5.

O let none who peruse this Book, herd with that generation of Hardened Ones,
but be a companion of all those that mourn in Zion, and whose hearts are Broken
for their own, the Churches, and the Nations Provocations; who indeed are the
only likely ones that will stand in the gap to divert Judgments. When Shishack
King of Egypt with a great Host came up against Judah, and having taken their
Frontier fenced Cities, they sat down before Jerusalem, which put them all
under a great Consternation; but the King and Princes upon this, humble
themselves; the Lord sends a Gracious Message to them by Shemajah the Prophet,
the import whereof was, That because they humbled themselves, the Lord would
not destroy them, nor pour out his Wrath upon them by the hand of Shishak, 2
Chr. 12. 5, 6, 7.

The greater the Party is of Mourning Christians, the more hope we have that
the Storm impending, may be blown over, and the Blessings enjoyed may yet be
continued: As long as there is a Sighing Party, we may hope to be yet
Preserved; at least such will have the Mark set upon them selves, which shall
distinguish them from those whom the Slaughtermen shall receive Commission to
destroy. Ezekiel. 9. 4.

But I shall not further enlarge the Porch, as designing to make way for the
Readers Entrance into the House, where I doubt not but he will be pleased with
the Furniture and Provision he finds in it. And I shall only further assure
him, that this whole Book was not only prepared for, but also put unto the
Press by the Author himself, whom the Lord was pleased to Remove (to the great
Loss, and unexpressible Grief of many precious Souls) before the sheets could
be all wrought off.

And now, as I hinted in the beginning, that what was Transcribed out of the
Author's heart, into the Book, may be Transcribed out of the Book, into the
hearts of all who shall Peruse it, is the Desire and Prayer of

Sept. 21. 1699. A Lover and Honourer of all Saints as such, George Cokayn.

THE Acceptable Sacrifice: OR, THE EXCELLENCY OF A BROKEN HEART.
Psalm. 51. 17. ^he Sacrifices of God, are a Broken Spirit: A Broken and a
Contrite Heart O God thou will not despise.
THis Psalm, is David's Penitential Psalm; It may be be fitly so called,
because it is a Psalm ^y which is manifest, the Un^eigned Sorrow which he had
for his horrible Sin, in (...) of Bethsheba, and slaying Uriah her Husband: A
Relation at large, of which you have in the 11th and 12th of the Second of
Samuel.

Many workings of Heart, as this Psalm shows, this poor man had, so soon as
Conviction did fall upon his Spirit; one while he cries for Mercy, then he
confesses his heinous Offenses, then he bewails the depravity of his Nature;
sometimes he cries out, to be Washed and Sanctified, and then again, he is
afraid that God will cast him away from his Presence, and take his Holy Spirit
utterly from him: And thus he goes on till he comes to the Text, and there he
stays his mind, finding in himself that Heart and Spirit which God did not
dislike: The Sacrifices of God, says he, are a broken Spirit; as if he should
say, I thank God I have that* A Broken and a Contrite Heart, says he, O God
thou will not despise. as if he should say, I thank God I have that.

The Words consist of Two Parts.

1. An Assertion.

2. A Demonstration of that Assertion.

The Assertion is this, The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit.

The Demonstration is this, Because a Broken and a Contrite Heart God will not
despise.

In the Assertion, we have Two Things present themselves to our Consideration.

1. That a Broken Spirit is to God a Sacrifice.

2. That it is to God, as that which answers to, or goes beyond ALL
Sacrifices: The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit.

The demonstration of this is plain, for that Heart, God will not despise it; A
Broken and a Contrite Heart, O God thou will not despise.

Whence I draw this Conclusion: That a Spirit rightly broken, an Heart truly
Contrite, is to God an Excellent thing.

That is, a thing that goes beyond all External Duties whatever; for that is
intended by this saying, The Sacrifices, because it answers to all Sacrifices
which we can offer to God; yea, it serves in the room of all: All our
Sacrifices, without this, are nothing, this alone is all.

There are four things that are very acceptable to God. The

First is, The Sacrifice of the Body of Christ for our Sins, of this you read
Heb. 10. For there you have it preferred to all burnt Offerings and Sacrifices;
it is this that pleases God, it is this that Sanctifies and so sets the
People acceptable in the sight of God.

Secondly, Unseigned love O God, is counted better then all Sacrifices, or
external parts of Worship: And to love the Lord thy God with all the heart,
with all the understanding, and with all the Soul, and with all the strength,
and to love his Neighbor as himself, is better then all whole burnt-Offerings
and Sacrifices: Mar 12. 33.

Thirdly, To walk Holily, and Humbly, and Obediently toward and before God, is
another: Mich. 6. 6, 7, 8. Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-Offerings
and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to Obey is better
then Sacrifice; and to Hearken, the^ the fat of Rams. 1 Samuel 15. 22.

Fourthly, And this in our Text is the Fourth, The Sacrifices of God are a
broken Spirit: A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.

But note by the way, that this Broken, this Broken and Contrite Heart, is thus
excellent only to God: O God, says he, THOU will not despise it: by which is
employed, the World have not this esteem or respect for such a heart, or for one
that is of a broken and a contrite Spirit: No, no, a Man, a Woman, that is
blessed with a Broken Heart, is so far off from getting, by that, esteem with
the World, that they are but burdens, and trouble Houses wherever they are or
go: Such People carry with them, Molestation and Disquietment; they are in
Carnal Families, as David was to the King of Gath, Troublers of the House. 1 Samuel 21.

Their Sighs, their Tears, their day and night Groans, their Cries and Prayers
and Solitary Carriages, puts all the Carnal Family out of Order: Hence you have
them brow-beaten by some, contemned by others; ye, and their company fled from
and diserted by others: But mark the Text, A broken and a contrite heart, O GOD
thou will not despise, but rather accept; for not to despise, is with God to
esteem and set a high price upon.

But we will demonstrate by several particulars, that a Broken Spirit, a Spirit
RIGHTLY Broken, an Heart TRULY Contrite, is to God an Excellent thing.

First, This is evident from the Comparison, Thou desire not Sacrifice, else
would I give it; thou delightest not in burnt-Offerings: The Sacrifices of God,
are a broken Spirit, etc. Mark, He rejects Sacrifices, Offerings and
Sacrifices: that is, all Levitical Ceremonies under the Law, and all External
Performances under the Gospel; but accepts a Broken Heart: It is therefore
manifest by this, were there nothing else to be said, that proves, that a heart
rightly Broken a heart truly Contrite, is to God an Excellent thing; for as you
see, such a heart is set before all Sacrifice, and yet they were the Ordinances
of God, and things that he commanded: but lo, a Broken Spirit is above them
all, a Contrite Heart goes beyond them, yea beyond them, when put all together*
Thou will not have the one, thou will not despise the other; O Brethren! A
Broken and a Contrite Heart is an Excellent thing. Have I said a Broken Heart,
a Broken and a Contrite Heart is esteemed above all Sacrifices. I will add*

Secondly, It is of greater esteem with God, then is either Heaven or Earth,
and that is more then to be set before External Duties. Thus says the Lord,
Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool, where is the house that ye
build me, or where is the place of my rest? for all these things has mine
hands made, and all these things have been, says the Lord; But to this man
will I look, even to him that is poor and and of a contrite Spirit, and
trembles at my word: Isa. 66. 1, 2.

Mark, God says, He has made all these things, but he does not say, that he
will look to them, that is, take complacency and delight in them; No, there is
that wanting in all that he has made, that should take-up and delight her
heart. But now, let a Brokenhearted Sinner come before him, yea, he ranges the
world through, out to find out such an one, and and having found him, To this
man, says he, will I look: I say again, that such a man to him, is of more
value then is either Heaven or Earth; They, says he, shall wax old, they shall
perish and vanish away, but this man he continues, he, as is presented to us in
another place, under another character, he shall abide for ever. Heb. 1. 10,
11, 12. 1 John 2. 17.

To this man will I look, with this man will I be delighted; for so to look,
does sometimes signify: Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse,
says Christ to his humble hearted, thou have ravished my heart with one of
thine Eyes, (while it is as a Conduit to let the rivers out of thy broken
heart) I am taken says he, with one chain of thy Neck, Song 4. 9. Here you see
he looks and is ravished, he looks and is taken, as it says in another place,
The King is held in the Galleries, Song 7. 5. That is, is taken with his
Beloved, with the Doves Eyes of his Beloved, Chap 1. 15. with the contrite
spirit of his People.

But it is not thus reported of him with respect to heaven or earth, them he
sets more lightly by; Them he reserves unto Fire against the day of Judgment,
and P^rdation of Ungodly Men, 2 Pet. 3. 7. But the Broken in Heart are his
Beloved, his Jewels.

Wherefore what I have said as to this, must go for the Truth of God, to wit,
That a broken hearted Sinner, a Sinner with a Contrite Spirit, is of more
esteem with God, then is either heaven or earth: He says, He has made them,
but he does not say, He will look to them; He says, They are his Throne and
Footstool; but he does not say, They have taken or ravished his heart; No, it is
those that are of a Contrite Spirit do this.

But there is yet more in the words, To this man will I look; that is, For this
man will I care, about this man will I camp, I will put this man under my
Protection; for so to look to one, does sometimes signify; and I take the
meaning in this place to be such. Prove, 27. 23. Jer. 39. 12. Chap. 40. 4.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all that are bowed down.
(Psalm 145. 14.) And the Broken Hearted are of this number, wherefore he cares
for, campeth about, and has set his Eyes upon such an one for good. This
therefore is a second demonstration to prove, That the man that has his Spirit
rightly broken, his Heart truly Contrite, is of great esteem with God.

Thirdly, Yet further, God does not only prefer such an one, as* has been said,
before heaven and earth, but He loves, He desires to have that man for an
Intimate, for a Companion; He must dwell, He must Co-habit with him that is of
a Broken Heart, with such as are of a Contrite Spirit. For thus says the high
and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the
high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit,
etc. Isa. 57. 15.

Behold here, both the Majesty and Condescension of the high and lofty One; His
Majesty, in that he is high, and the inhabiter of Eternity; I am the high and
lofty One, says he, I inhabit Eternity: Verily this consideration is enough to
make the broken hearted man creep into a Mouse-hole to hide himself from such a
Majesty: But behold his Heart, his condescending Mind: I am for dwelling also
with him that has a broken heart, with him that is of a contrite Spirit:
That Is the man that I would converse with, that is the man with whom I will
Co-habit; that is He, says God. I will choose for my Companion: For to desire
to dwell with one, supposes all these things; and verily, of all the men in
the world, none have acquaintance with God, none understand what Communion with
him, and what his teachings mean, but such as are of a Broken and Contrite
Heart; He is nigh to them that are of a broken Spirit: Psalm 34. 18. These are
they intended in the 14 Psalm, where it is said, The Lord looked down from
Heaven, to see if any did understand and seek God, that he might find some body
in the world with whom he might converse; for indeed there is none else that
either understand, or that can tend to hearken to him. God, as I may say, is
forced to break men's Hearts, before he can make them willing to cry to him, or
be willing that he should have any concerns with them; the rest, shut their
Eyes, stop their Ears, withdraw their Hearts, or say unto God, Be gone: Job 21.
But now the broken in heart can tend it, he has leisure, yea, leisure and will,
and understanding, and all; and therefore he is a fit man to have to do with
God There is room also in this man's House, in this man's Heart, in this man's
Spirit, for God to dwell, for God to walk, for God to set up a Kingdom.

Here therefore is suitableness, Can two walk together, says God, except they
are agreed? Amos 33. The Broken Hearted desires Gods Company, when will thou
come unto me, says he? The Broken Hearted loves to hear God speak and talk to
him, Here is a suitableness, Cause me, says he, to hear Joy and Gladness, that
the Bones which thou have broken may rejoice: Psalm. 51. 8.

But here lies the glory, In that the high and lofty One, the God that
inhabiteth Eternity, and that has a High and Holy Place for his Habitation;
should choose to dwell with, and to be a companion of the Broken in Heart, and
of them that are of a Contrite Spirit: yea, and here also is great comfort for
such.

Fourthly, God does not only prefer such a heart before all Sacrifices, nor
esteem such a man above heaven and earth, nor yet only desire to be of his
acquaintance, but he reserveth for him his chief comforts, his Heart Reviving,
and Soul-Cherishing Cordials. I dwell says he, with such, to revive them, and
to support and comfort them, to revive the spirit of the Humble, and to revive
the heart of the Conirite Ones: Isa. 57. 15. The broken hearted man, is a
fainting man; he has his qualms, his sinking fits, he oftimes dies away with
pain and fear; he must be stayed with Flaggons, and comforted with Apples, or
else he cannot tell what to do: He pines, he pines away in his Iniquity; nor can
any thing keep him alive and make him well, but the Comforts and Cordials of
Almighty God: Wherefore with such an one God will dwell, to revive the Heart,
to revive the Spirit: To revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the
heart of the contrite ones: Ezekiel. 33. 10, 11.

God has Cordials, but they are to comfort them that are cast down; 2 Cor. 7.
6. And such are the Broken Hearted: As for them that are whole, they need not
the Physician: Mark 1. 17. They are the broken in Spirit, that stand in need of
Cordials: Physicians are men of no esteem, but with them that feel their
Sickness; and this is one Reason, why God is so little accounted of in the
World, even because they have not been made sick by the wounding stroke of God.
But now when a mau is wounded, has his Bones broken, or is made sick, and laid
at the Graves mouth; Who is of that esteem with him, as is an able Physician?
What is so much desired, as is the Cordials, Comfots and suitable Supplies of
the skilful Physician in those matters: And thus it is with the Broken Hearted;
he needs, and God has prepared for him plenty of the Comforts and Cordials of
Heaven, to succor and relieve his sinking Soul.

Wherefore such a one, lies under all the Promises, that have Succor in them,
and Consolation for men, Sick and Disponding under the sense of Sin and the
heavy wrath of God: And they, says God, shall be refreshed and revived with
them.

Yea, They are designed for them, he has therefore Broken their Hearts, he
has therefore wounded their Spirits; that he might make them apt to relish his
reviving Cordials, that he might minister to them his reviving Comforts.

For indeed, so soon as he has Broken; His Bowels yearn, and his Compassions
roll up and down within him, and will not suffer him to abide Afflicting:
Ephraim was one of these; but so so on as God had smitten him, behold his
heart, how it works toward him; Is Ephraim, says he, my dear Son? that is, he
is so; Is he a pleasant Child? that is, he is so; for since I spoke against
him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are troubled for
him, I will surely have Mercy upon him, says the Lord God: Jer. 31. 18, 19,
20. This therefore is another demonstration.

Fifthly, As God prefers such a Heart, and esteems the man that has it, above
Heaven and Earth; as he covets Intimacy with such an one, and prepares for him
his Cordials: So when he sent his Son JESUS into the world to be a Savior; He
gave him in special, a charge to take care of such; yea, that was one of the
main reasons he sent him down from Heaven, Anointed for his work on Earth.

The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, says he, because he has Anointed me
to Preach the Gospel to the Poor, he has sent me to bind up the Broken
Hearted, etc. Isa. 61. 1. Now that this is meant of Christ, is confirmed by his
own Lips; for in the days of his Flesh, he takes this Book in his hand, when he
was in the Sinagogue at Nazareth, and read this very place unto the People, and
then tells them, That that very day, that Scripture was fulfilled in their
Ears: Luke 4. 16. 17. 18.

But see, These are the Souls whose welfare is contrived in the Heavens: God
consulted their Salvation, their Deliverance, their Health, before his Son came
down from thence. Does not therefore this demonstrate, That a Broken Hearted
Man, that a Man of a Contrite Spirit, is of great esteem with God. I have often
wondered at David, that he should give Joab and the men of War a charge, that
they take heed that they carry it tenderly to that young Rebel Absalom his Son,
2. Sam. 18. 5. But that God, the High God, the God against whom we have Sinned;
should so soon as he has smitten, give his Son a Command, a Charge, a
Commission, to take care of, to bind up and heal the broken in heart; this is
that which can never be sufficienty admired, or wondered at, by Men or Angels.

And as this was his Commission, so he acted; as is evidently set forth, by the
parable of the Man who fell among Thieves: He went to him, poured into his
wounds Wine and Oil; He bound him up, took him, set him upon his own Beast,
had him to an Inn, gave the Host a charge to look well to him, with money in
hand, and a promise at his return, to recompense him in what further he should
be expensive while he was under his care. Luke 10. 30. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

Behold therefore the care of God which he has for the Broken in Heart; He has
given a charge to Christ his Son, to look well to them, and to bind up and heal
their wounds: Behold also the faithfulness of Christ, who does not hide, but
read this Commission as soon as he enters upon his Ministry, and also falls
into the practical part thereof: He heals the Broken in Heart and binds up
his wounds: Psalm 147. 3.

And behold again into whose care, a broken heart and a contrite Spirit, has
put this poor creature; He is under the care of God, the care and cure of
Christ: If a man was sure that his disease, had put him under the special care
of the King and the Queen, yet could he not be sure of Life, he might Dye under
their Sovereign hands. Ay, but here is a man in the favor of God, and under
the hand of Christ to be healed; under whose hand, none yet ever died for want
of skill and power in him to save their Life: wherefore this man must live,
Christ has in Commission not only to bind up his Wounds, but to heal him; He
has of himself so expounded it in reading his Commission: Wherefore he that has
his heart broken, and that is of a contrite Spirit; must not only be taken in
hand, but healed; Healed of his Pain, Grief, Sorrow, Sin and Fears of Death and
Hellfire: Wherefore he adds, That he must give unto such, Beauty for Ashes,
the Oil of Joy for Mourning, the Garment of Praise for the spirit of
Heaviness, and must Comfort all that Mourn: Isa. 61. 2. 3.

This I say, he has in the Commission, the Broken Hearted are put into his
hand, and he has said himself he will heal him: Hence he says of that same man.
I have seen his ways and will heal him; I will lead him also, and restore
comforts unto him, and to his mourners; and I will heal him, Isa. 57. the 15,
16, 17, 18, 19 verses. And this is a fifth demonstration.

Sixthly, As God prefers such a Heart, and so esteems the man that has it, as
he desires his Company, has provided for him his Cordials, and given a charge
(...) Christ to heal him: so he has promised in conclusion, to Save him. He
Saves such as be of a contrite Spirit; or as the mar^nt has it, that be
Contrite of spirit, Psalm. 34. 18.

And this is the conclusion of ^l; For to Save a man, is the and of all special
Meroy. (...) ^veth such as be of (...) Contrite ^irit. To Save, is to Forgive;
for without forgiveness of Sins, we cannot be Saved. To Save, is to Preserve
one in this miserable World; and to deliver one from all those Devils,
Temptations, Snares and Destructions that would, were we not kept, were we not
preserved of God, Destroy us Body and Soul for ever. To Save, is to bring a man
Body and Soul to Glory; and to give him an Eternal Mansion. House in Heaven,
that he may dwell in the presence of this good God, and the Lord Jesus, and to
sing to them the Songs of his Redemption for ever and ever. This it is to be
Saved, nor can any thing less than this, complete the Salvation of the Sinner.
Now this is to be the Lot of him tha^ is of a Broken Heart; and the End that
God will make with him that is of a Contrite Spirit He saves such as be
Contrite of Spirit: He saves such; this is Excellent.

But, Do the Broken in Heart believe this? Can they imagine, that this is to be
the End that God has designed them to, and that he intended to make with them
in the day in which he began to break their Hearts? No, no, they alas, think
the quite contrary! They are afraid that this is but the beginning of Death,
and a token, that they shall never see the face of God with Comfort, either in
this World, or that which is to come. Hence they cry, Cast me not away from thy
Presence; or, Now I am free among the Dead, whom God remembers no more, Psalm.
51. 11. Psalm. 88. 4, 5.

For indeed, there goes to the breaking of the Heart, a visible Appearance of
the Wrath of God, and a Home-charge from Heaven of the guilt of Sin to the
Conscience. This to reason, is very dreadful; for it cuts the Soul down to the
ground. For a wounded Spirit none can bear, Prove. 18. 14.

It seems also now to this Man, that this is but the beginning of Hell; but as
it were, the first step down to the Pit; when alas! All these are but the
beginnings of Love, and but that which makes way for Life. The Lord kills
before he makes alive, he wounds before his Hands make whole. Yea, he does the
one, in Order to, or because he would do the other; he wounds, because his
Purpose is to heal. He makes sore, and binds up: He wounds, and his Hands
make whole; Deuteronomy. 32. 39. 1 Samuel 2. 6. Job 5. 18.

His design, I say, is the Salvation of the Soul. He scourges, he breaks the
Heart of every Son whom he receives, and Woe be to him whose Heart God breaks
not.

And thus have I proved, what at first I asserted; namely, That a Spirit
rightly Broken, an Heart truly Contrite, is to God an Excellent Thing. A Broken
and a Contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise. For thus say I,

1. This is Evident, for that it is better than Sacrifices; than all Sacrifice.
2. The Man that has it, is of more esteem with God than Heaven and Earth. 3.
God coveteth such a Man, for his Intimate and House-Companion. 4. He Reserveth
for them his Cordials, and spiritual Comforts. 5. He has given his Son a
charge, a Commandment, to take Care that the Broken hearted be healed, and he
is resolved to heal them. 6. And concluded, that the Broken hearted, and they
that are of a Contrite Spirit, shall be saved, that is, Possessed of the Heavens.
I come now in Order, to show you, what a Broken Heart, and what a Contrite
Spirit is. This must be done, because in the Discovery of this, lies both the
Comfort of them that have it, and the Conviction of them that have it not.

Now, that I may do this the better, I must propound, and speak to these four
Things.

1. I must show you, what an one that Heart is, that is not Broken, that is not
Contrite. 2. I must show you how, or, with what the Heart is Broken and made
Contrite. 3. Show you, how, and what it is, when Broken, and made Contrite.
And, 4. I shall last of all, give you some Sign^ of a Broken and Contrite
Heart.
For the first of these, to wit, What an one that Heart is, that is not a
Broken, that is not a Contrite Heart.

1. The Heart before. ^is broken, is Hard, and Stubborn, and Obstinate against
God, and the Salvation of the Soul, Zach. 7. 12. Deuteronomy. 2 30. Chap. 9. 27. 2.
It Is an Heart full of Evil Imaginations and Darkness, Genesis 8. 12. Romans 1. 21.
3. It Is a Heart Deceitful, and subject to be deceived, especially about the
things of an Eternal Concernment, Isa. 44* 20. Deuteronomy. 11. 16. 4. It Is an Heart,
that rather gathers Iniquity and Vanity to it self, than any thing that is
good for the Soul, Psalm. 41. 6. Psalm. 94. 11. 5. It Is an Unbelieving Heart, and
one that will turn away from God to Sin, Heb. 3. 12. Deuteronomy. 17. 17. 6. It Is an
Heart, not prepared for God, being Uncircumcised, not for the Reception of his
holy Word, 2 Chronicles. 12. 14. Psalm. 78. 8. Acts 7. 51. 7. It Is an Heart not
Single, but Double: 'Twill pretend to serve God, but will withal, lean to the
Devil and Sin, Psalm. 12. 2. Ezekiel. 33. 31. 8. It Is an Heart Proud and Stout; it
loves not to be Controuled, though the Controuler be God himself, Psalm. 101. 5.
Prove. 16. 5. Mal. 3. 9. It Is an Heart that will give Place to Satan, but will
Resist the Holy Ghost, Act. 5. 3. Chap. 7. 51. 10. In a Word, It Is deceitful
above all things, and desperately Wicked: So wicked, that none can know it,
Jer. 17. 9.
That the Heart before it is broken is such, and worse than I have described it
to be, is sufficiently seen by the whole course of the World. Where is the man,
(whose Heart has not been Broken, and whose Spirit is not Contrite) that
according to the Word of God, deals honestly with his own Soul?

It is one Character of a right Heart, that it is sound in God's Statutes, and
honest, Psalm. 119. 80. Luke 8. 15.

Now, an honest Heart will not put off it self, nor be put off with that, which
will not go for current Money with the Merchant; I mean, with that which will
not go for saving Grace at the day of Judgment: But alas, alas! But few Men,
how honest soever they are to others, have honesty toward themselves; though
he is the worst of Deceivers who deceives his own Soul, as James has it, about
the things of his own Soul, Jam. 1. 22, 26. But,

Secondly, I now come to show you, with WHAT, and HOW the Heart is Broken, and
the Spirit made Contrite.

The Instrument with which the Heart is Broken, and with which the Spirit is
made Contrite* is the Word. Is not my Word* says God, like a Fire, and like ^
Hammer, that breaks the Ro^^ in pieces? Jer. 23. 29.

The Rock in his Text, is the Heart, which in another place* is compared to an
Adamant* which Adamant, is harder than Flint, Zach. ^* 11, 12. Ezekiel. 3. 9.

This Rock, this, Adamant, this Stony Heart, is Broken and made Contrite by the
Word. But it only is so, when the Word is as a Fire, and as a Hammer to break
and melt it. And then, and then only it is as a Fire, and a Hammer to the Heart
to break it, when it is managed by the Arm of God. No man can break the Heart
with the Word, no Angel can break the Heart with the Word; that is, if God
forbears to second it by mighty* Power from Heaven. This made Bala^m* go
without an Heart rightly broken, and truly con^^^te, though he was rebuked by
an Angel; and the Pharisees* die in their Sins, though rebuked for them, and
admonished to turn from them, by the Savior of the World. Wherefore, though
the Word is the Instrument with which the Heart is broken, yet it is not broken
with the Word, till that Word is managed by the Might and Power of God.

This made the Prophet Isaiah, after long Preaching, cry out, That he had
labored for Naught, and in Vain: And this made him cry to God, to Rent the
Heavens and come down; that the Mountains, or Rocky Hills, or Hearts, might be
broken, and melt at his Presence, Isa. 49. 4. Chap. 64. 1, 2.

For he found by Experience, that as to this, no effectual Work could be done,
unless the Lord put to his Hand. This also is often intimated in the
Scriptures, where it faith, When the Preachers preached effectually* to the
breaking of Men's Hearts, the Lord wrought with them; the Hand of the Lord was
with them; and the like, Mar. 16. 20. Acts 11* 21.

Now, when the Hand of the Lord is with the Word, then it is mighty; it is mighty
thorough God, to the pulling down of strong Holds. It Is sharp then, as a Sword
in the Soul and Spirit: It sti^ks like an Arrow in the Hearts of Sinners, to
the causing of the People to fall at his Foot for Mercy. Then it is, as was said
before, as a Fire, and as a Hammer, to break this Rock in Pieces, 2 Cor. 10. 4.
H^b. 4. 14. Psalm. 110. 3.

And hence the Word is made mention of, under a double Consideration.

1. As it stands by it self.

2. As attended with Power from Heaven.

As it stands by it self, and is not seconded with saving Operation from
Heaven, it is called the Word ONLY, the Word Barely, or as if it was only the
Word of Men, 1 Thessalonians. 1* 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 4. 19, 20 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

Because then, it is only as managed by men, who are not able to make it
accomplish that Work. The Word of Gods, when in a Man's hand ONLY* is like the
Father's Sword in the hand of the sucking Child; which Sword, though never so
well Pointed, and though never so sharp on the Edges, is not now able to
conquer a F^e, and to make an Enemy fall and cry out for Mercy, because it is
but in the hand of the Child.

But now, let the same Sword be put into the hand of a skilful Father, (and God
is both skilful, and able to manage his Word) and then the Sinner, and then the
proud helpers too, are both made to stoop, and submit themselves: Wherefore I
say, tho the Word be the Instrument, yet of it self does do no saving good to
the Soul, the heart is not Broken, nor the Spirit made Contrite thereby, it
only works Death, and leaves men in the chains of of their Sins, still
faster bound over to Eternal Condemnation* 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.

2. But when seconded by mighty Power, then the same word is as the roaring of
a Lion, as the piercing of a Sword, as a burning fire in the Bones, as thunder,
and as a hammer that dashes all to pieces. Jer. 25. 30. Amo. 1. 2. Chap. 3. 8.
Act. 2* 37. Jer. 20. 9. Psalm. 29. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Wherefore from hence it is to be concluded, that whoever ha^ heard the Word
preached, and has not heard the Voice of the living God therein, has not as yet
had their Hearts broken, nor their Spirits made contrite for their Sins.

And this leads me to the second thing, to wit, To show how the heart is
broken, and the spirit made, contrite by the Word; And verily it is when the
word comes home with Power. But yet this is but general: Wherefore more
particularly,

First, Then the Word works effectually to this purpose, when it finds out
the Sinner and his Sin, and shall convince him that it has found him out: Thus
it was with our first Father; when he had Sinned, he sought to hide himself
from God; he gets among the Trees of the Garden, and there he shrouds himself;
but yet not thinking himself secure, he covers himself with Fig. Leaves, and
now he lies quiet; now God shall not find me, thinks he, nor know what I have
done; but lo, by and by, he hears the Voice of the Lord God walking in the
Garden, and now Adam, what do you mean to do? Why as yet, he seulketh, and
hides his head, and seeks yet to lie undiscovered; but behold, the Voice cries
out, ADAM! And now he begins to Tremble: Adam, where art thou? Says God, and
now Adam is made to Answer: But the Voice of the Lord God does not leave him
here: No, it now begins to search, and to enquire after his doings, and to
unravel what he had wrapped together and covered, until it made him bare and
Naked in his own sight before the face of God. Genesis 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Thus therefore does the Word, when managed by the Arm of God. It finds out,
it singleth out the Sinner, the Sinner finds it so; it finds out the sins of
the Sinner, it unravels his whole Life, it strips him, and lays him Naked in
his own sight, before the face of God; neither can the Sinner, nor his
Wickedness, be longer hid and covered; and now begins the Sinner to see what he
never saw before.

2. Another instance for this, is David, the man of our Text; he sins, he sins
grossly, he sins and hides it, yea, and seeks to hide it from the sight of God
and man. Well, Nathan is sent to Preach a Preaching to him, and that in common,
and that in special; in common, by a Parable; in special, by a Particular
Application of it to him: While Nathan only Preached in common or in general,
David was fish-whole, and stood as right in his own eyes, as if he had been as
innocent and as harmless as any man alive: But God had a love for David, and
therefore Commands his Servant Nathan, to go home, not only to David's Ears, but
to David's Conscience.

Well, David now must fall: Says Nathan, Thou art the man; says David, I have
Sinned. (1 Samuel 12. 1, 5, 7, 13.) and then his heart was broken, and his spirit
made contrite, as this Psalm and our Text does show.

3. A third instance is that of Saul; he had heard many a Sermon, and was
become a great Professor, yea, he was more zealous then was many of his Equals;
but his heart was never Broken, nor his Spirit never made Contrite, till he
heard one Preach from Heaven, till* he heard God, in the word of God* making
enquiry after his Sins: Saul, Saul, Why Persecutest thou me? says Jesus; and
then he can stand no longer; for then his heart brake, then he Falls to the
Ground, then he Trembles, then he cries out, Who art thou Lord? And Lord, what
will thou have me to do? Acts 8.

Wherefore as I said, Then the Word works effectually to this purpose, when it
finds out the Sinner and his Sin, and also when it shall convince him that it
has found him out. Only I must join here a caution, for every operation of the
word upon the Conscience, is not Saving; nor does all Conviction end in the
saving Conversion of the Sinner: It is then only such an operation of the word
that is intended, namely, That shows the Sinner, not only the Evil of his ways,
but brings the heart unfeignedly over to God by Christ. And this brings me to
the third thing.

Thirdly, I am therefore come to show you, how, and what the Heart is, when
Broken and made Contrite. And this I must do, by opening unto you the two chief
Expressions in the Text.

1. What is meant by this word Broken.

2. What is meant by this word Contrite.

First, For this word Broken, Tindal renders it, a Troubled heart; but I think
there is more in it, I take it therefore to be a heart disabled; as to former
actions; even as a man whole bones are broken, is disabled, as to his way of
running, leaping, wrestling or ought else, which vainly he was wont to do;
wherefore that which was called a broken-heart in the Text, he calls his broken
Bones, in verse the eighth; Cause me, says he, to hear joy and gladness, that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice: And why is the breaking of the
heart compared to the breaking of the Bones? but because, as when the bones are
broken, the outward man is disabled as to what it was wont to do; so when the
spirit is broken, the inward man is disabled as to what Vanity and Folly it
before delighted in* hence. Feebleness is joined with this brokenness of heart,
I am feeble, says he, and sore broken; I have lost my strength and former
vigor, as to vain and sinful courses, Psalm 38. 8.

This then it is to have the heart Broken, namely to have it ^amed, Disabled,
and taken off, by sense of Gods wrath due to Sin, from that course of life it
formerly was conversant in; and to show that this work is no fancy, nor done,
but with great trouble to the Soul, it is compared to the putting the Bones out
of joint, the breaking of the Bones, the burning of the Bones with Fire; or as
the taking the natural Moisture from the Bones: The vexing of the Bones, etc.
Psalm. 22. 14. Jer. 20. 9. Lam. 1. 13. Psalm. 6. 2. Prove. 17. 22.

All which are Expressions adorned with such Similitudes, as do undeniably
declore, that to Sense and Feeling, a broken Heart is a grievous thing.

Secondly, What is meant by the Word CONTRITE. A Contrite Spirit is a Renitent
(...); one sorely grieved and deeply sorrowful for the Sins it has committed
against God, and to the Damage of the Soul; and so i^ is to be taken in all
those places where a contrite Spirit is made mention of. As in Psalm. 34. 18.
Isa. 57. 15. Chap. 66. 2.

As a Man that has by his Folly procured a broken Leg or Arm* is heartily
sorry, that ever he was so foolish, as to be engaged in such foolish Ways of
Idleness and Vanity: So he whose Heart is broken, with a sense of God's Wrath
due to his Sin, has deep sorrow in his Soul, and is greatly Repentant, that
ever he should be such a Fool, as by Rebellious doings, to bring himself and
his Soul to so much sharp Affliction. Hence, while others are sporting
themselves in Vanity, such a one does call his Sin, his greatest Folly: My
wounds stink, and are corrupt, said David, because of my Foolishness. And
again* O God, thou know my Foolishness, and my Sins are not hi^ from thee,
Psalm. 38. 5. Psalm. 69.

Men, what ever they say with (...)eir Lips, cannot Conclude, (...) yet their
Hearts want breaking, (...)at Sin is a foolish thing. Hence (...) says, The
foolishness of Fools, is (...)eir folly, Prove. 14. 24.

That is, the foolishness of (...)me Men is, that they take pleasure in their
Sins; for their (...)ns are their Foolishness, and (...)e folly of their Soul
lies in their Countenancing of this Foolishness. But the Man whose Heart (...)
broken, he is none of these, ^e cannot be one of these, no ^ore than he that
has his Bones (...)oken can rejoice that he is de(...)red to play a Match at
Football. ^ence to hear others talk foo(...)shly, is to the grief of those whom
God has wounded: Or, (...) it is in another place, Their ^ords are like the
piercings of a Sword, Psalm. 69. 26. Prove. 12. (...)

This therefore, I take to (...) the meaning of these two Word^ A Broken and a
Contrite Spirit*

Fourthly and lastly, As to (...) I now come more particularly to give you some
Signs of a Brok^^ Heart, of a broken and a contri(...) Spirit.

First, A Broken-hearted-ma^ such as is intended in the Tex(...) is a sensible
Man: He is broug(...) to the Exercise of all the Se(...) of his Soul. All
others are dea(...) senseless, and without true fee^*ing of what the
Broken-hearte^*man is sensible of.

1. He SEES himself to (...) what others are ignorant o(...) that is, he sees
himself to be, n(...) only a sinful man, but a (...) by Nature, in the Gall and
Bo(...) of Sin. In the Gall of Sin; is Peter's Expression to Sim(...) and it is
a saying common to (...) men. For every man in a State of Nature, is in the
Gall of Sin. He was shapen in it, conceived in it; it has also Possession of,
and by that Possession, infected the whole of his Soul and Body, Psalm. 51. 5.
Act. 8. 23.

This he sees, this he understands; every Professor sees not this, because the
Blessing of a broken Heart, is not bestowed on every one. David says, There is
no soundness in my Flesh. And Solomon suggests, that a Plague or running Sore,
is in the very Heart; but every one perceive* not this, Psalm. 38. 3. 1 King. 8.
38.

He says again, That his Wounds stank, and were Corrupted; that his Sore ran,
and ceased not, Psalm. 38. 5. Psalm. 77. 2.

But these things, the (...) Man, the Man whose Heart was never broken, has no
Understanding of. But the Brokenhearted, the Man that has a broken Spirit, he
sees as the Prophet has it; he sees his Sickness, he sees his Wound; when
Ephraim saw his Sickness, and Judah saw his Wound, Hos. 5. 13. he sees it to
his grief, he see it to his sorrow.

2. He FEELS what others have no sense of. He feels the Arrows of the Almighty,
and that they stick fast in him. He feels how sore and sick, by the smiting of
God's Hammer upon his Heart to break it, his poor Soul is made. He feels a
burden intolerable lying upon his Spirit. Mine Iniquities, says he, are gone
over my Head as an heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me. He feels also the
heavy hand of God upon his Soul, a thing unknown to Carnal Men. Psalm. 38. 2.
Hos. 6. 13. Psalm. 38. 4.

He feels Pain being wounded, even such Pain as others cannot understand,
because they are not broken. My Heart, says David, is sore pained within me.
Why so? Why, The Terrors of Death are fallen upon me. The Terrors of Death
causes Pain, yea Pain of the highest Nature. Hence that which is here called
Pains, is in another place called Pangs, Psalm. 55. 4. Isa. 21. ^.

You know, broken Bones occasion Pain, strong Pain; yea, Pain that will make a
Man or Woman Groan, with the Groaning of a deadly wounded Man, Ezekiel. 30. 24.

Soul-Pain is the sorest Pain, in comparison to which, the Pain of the Body is
a very tolerable thing, Prove. 18. 14.

Now, here is Soul-Pain, here is Heart-Pain, here we are discoursing of a
Wounded, of a Broken Spirit: Wherefore this is Pain to be felt to the sinking
of the whole Man; neither can any support this but God. Here is Death in this
Pain, Death for ever, without God's special Mercy: This Pain will bring the
Soul to, and this the Brokenhearted man does feel. The Sorrows of Death, said
David, Compassed me about, and the Pains of Hell got hold upon me, and I found
Trouble and Sorrow, Psalm. 116.

Aye, I Will warrant thee, poor Man, thou foundest Trouble and Sorrow indeed. For
the Pains of Hell, and Sorrows of Death, are Pains and Sorrow the most
intolerable. But this the Man is acquainted with, that has his Heart Broken.

3. As he Sees and Feels, so ^e HEARS that which augments his Woe and Sorrow.
You know, if a man has his Bones broken, he does not only See and Feel, but
oft-times also, Hears what increases his Grief; as that his Wound's uncurable,
that his Bone is not rightly set, that there is danger of a G^^green, that he
may be lost for want of looking to. These are the Voices, the Sayings, that
haunt the House of one that has his Bones broken. And a Brokenhearted Man
knows what I mean by this; he hears that which makes his Lips quiver, and at
the noise of which, he seems to feel Rottenness enter into his Bones: He
trembles in himself, and wishes that he may hear Joy and Gladness* that the
Bones, the Heart and Spirit which God has Broken. may rejoice, Hab. 3. 16.
Psalm. 51. 8.

He thinks he hears God say, the Devil say, his Conscience say, and all good
Men to whisper among themselves, saying, There is no help for him in God, Job
heard this, David heard this, Heman heard this; and this is a common sound in
the Ears of the Brokenhearted.

4. The Brokenhearted SMELL what others cannot scent: Alas! Sin never smelled
so to any man alive, as it smells to the Brokenhearted. You know, Wounds will
stink; but no stink like that of Sin, to the Brokenhearted Man: His own Sins
stink, and so does the Sins of all the World, to him. Sin is like Carrion, it is
of a stinking Nature; yea, it has the worst of smells, however some Men like
it, Psalm. 38. 5.

But none are offended with the scent thereof, but God, and the Broken hearted
Sinner; My Wounds stink and are corrupt, says he, both in God's Nostrils, and
mine own.

But, alas! Who smells the ^tink of Sin? None of the Carnal World; they, like
Carrion-Grows, seek it, love it, and eat ^t as the Child eats Bread. They ^at
up the Sin of my People, says God, and set their Heart on their ^niquity, Hos.
4. 8.

This I say, they do, because they do not smell the Nautious Scent of Sin: You
know, that what is Nautious to the smell, cannot be Pallatable to the Taste.
The Brokenhearted Man does find, that Sin is nautious, and therefore cries
out, it stinketh. They also think at times, the smell of Fire, of Fire and
Brimstone, is upon them, they are so sensible of the Wages due to Sin.

5. The Brokenhearted, is also a Tasting Man. Wounds, i^ sore, and full of
Pains, of great Pains, do sometimes alter the Taste of a Man. They make him
think, his Meat, his Drink yea, that Cordials have a bitter Taste in them. How
many times does the poor People of God, that are the only men that know what a
Broken-heart does mean, cry out, that Gravel, Wormwood, Gall and Vinegar, was
made their Meat, Lam. 3^ 15, 16, 19.

This Gravel, Gall and Wormwood, is the true temporal Taste of Sin; and God to
make them loath it for ever, does feed them with it, till their Hearts both
ache, and break therewith Wickedness is pleasant of Tast^ to the World Hence
it is said, They feed on Ashes, they feed on Wind, sa. 44. 20. Hos. 12. 1.
Lusts, or any thing that is Vile and refuse, the Carnal World think ^elishes
well; as is set out most notably in the Parable of the Prodigal Son, He would
fain have filled his Belly, says our Lord, with the Husks that the Swine did
Eat. But the Brokenhearted Man has a relish that is true as to these things;
though by reason of the anguish of his Soul, it also abhors all manner of
dainty Meat, Job 33. 19, 20. Psalm. 107. 17, 18, 19.

Thus I have showed you one sign of a Brokenhearted Man; he is a sensible Man,
he has all the Senses of his Soul awakened, he can See, Hear, Feel, Taste,
Smell, and that as none but himself can do. I come now to another sign of a
Broken and Contrite Man.

Secondly, And that is, He is a very sorrowful Man. Thus, as the other is
natural, it is natural to one that is in Pain, and that has his Bones broken, to
be a grieved and sorrowful Man.

He is none of the jolly ones of the times, nor can he, for his Bones, his
Heart, his Heart is broken.

1. He is sorry for that he feels and finds in himself, a Pravity of Nature: I
told you before, he is sensible of it, he sees it, he feels it; and here I say,
he is sorry for it. It Is this that makes him call himself wretched Man; it is
this that makes him loath and abhor himself; it is this that makes him Blush;
blush before God and be Ashamed, Romans 7. 24. Job 42. 5, 6. Ezekiel. 36. 31.

He finds by Nature, no Form nor Comllness in himself; but the more he looks in
the Glass of the Word, the more Unhandsom, the more Deformed he perceives Sin
has made him: Every Body sees not this, therefore every Body is not sorry for
it: But the broken in Heart, sees that he is by Sin corrupted, marred, full of
Lewdness and Naughtiness; he sees that in him, that is, in his Flesh dwells no
good thing; and this makes him sorry, yea, it makes him sorry at Heart. A Man
that has his Bones broken, finds he is spoiled, marred, disabled from doing as
he would and should, at which he is grieved and made sorry.

Many are sorry for actual Transgressions, because they do often bring them to
shame before Men; but, but few are sorry for the Defects that Sin has made in
Nature, because they see* not those. Defects themselves. A Man cannot be sorry
for the sinful Defects of Nature, till he sees they have rendered him
contemptible to God; nor is it any thing but a sight of God, that can make him
truly see what he is, and so be heartily sorry for being so. Now mine Eyes see
thee, said Job, now I abhor my self. Woe is me, I am undone, said the Prophet,
for mine Eyes have seen the Lord, the King. And 'twas This that made Daniel
say, his Comeliness in him was turned into Corruption; For he had now the Vision
of the Holy One, Job 42. 6. Isa. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Dan. 10. 8.

Visions of God, break the Heart, because by the sight the Soul then has of his
Perfections, it sees its own infinite, and unspeakeakable Disproportion,
because of the Vileness of its Nature.

Suppose a Company of ugly, uncomly, deformed Persons, dwelt together in one
house; and suppose, that they never yet saw any Man or Woman more than
themselves, that were Arrayed with the Splendors and Perfections of Nature:
These would not be capable of comparing themselves with any but themselves, and
consequently, would not be affected, and made sorry, for their uncomly, natural
Defections. But now, bring them out of their Cells and Holes of Darkness, where
they have been shut up by themselves, and let them take a view of the Splendour
and Perfections of Beauty that are in others; and then, if at all, they will be
sorry and dejected, at the View of their own Defects.

This is the case; Men by Sin are marred, spoiled, corrupted, depraved, but
they dwell by themselves in the dark; they see neither God, nor Angel, nor
Saint, in their excellent Nature and Beauty; and therefore, they are apt to
count even their own uncomly parts, their Ornaments and their Glory. But now,
let such, as I said, see God, see Saints, or the Ornaments of the Holy Ghost,
and themselves as they are without them; and then they cannot, but must be
affected with, and sorry for their own Deformity. When the Lord CHRIST put
forth but little of his Excellency before his Servant Peter's Face, it raised
up the Depravity of Peter's Nature before him, to his great Confusion and
Shame: and made him cry out to him in the midst of all his Fellows, Depart from
me, for I am a sinful Man, O Lord! Luke 5. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. This therefore, is
the cause of a Broken Heart; even a sight of Divine Excellencies, and a Sense
that I am a poor, depraved, spoiled, defiled Wretch: And this sight having
broken the Heart, begets sorrow in the Brokenhearted.

2. The Brokenhearted is a sorrowful Man, for that he finds his Depravity of
Nature strong in him, to the putting forth it self to oppose, and overthrow
what his changed Mind does prompt him to. When I would do Good, said Paul, Evil
is present with me, Romans 7. 21. Evil is present to oppose, to resist, and make
Head against the desires of my Soul. The Man that has his Bones broken, may
have yet a Mind to be industriously Occupied, in a lawful and honest Calling,
but he finds by Experience, that an Infirmity attends his present Condition,
that strongly resists his good Endeavors: And at this he shakes his Head,
makes Complaints, and with sorrow of Heart he sighs and says, I cannot do the
thing that I would. Romans 7. 15. Gal. 5. 17.

I am weak, I am feeble, I am not only Depraved, but by that Depravity,
Deprived of Ability to put good Motions, good Intentions and Desires into
Execution, to Compleatness; O, says he, I am ready to halt, my Sorrow is
continually before me.

You must know, the Brokenhearted loves God, loves his Soul, loves Good and
hates Evil. Now, for such an one to find in himself, an Opposition, and
continual Contradiction to this holy Passion, it must needs cause Sorrow; Godly
Sorrow, as the Apostle Paul calls it. For such are made sorry after a godly
sort. To be sorry, for that thy Nature is with Sin depraved, and that through
this Depravity, thou art deprived of Ability to do what the Word, and thy holy
Mind does prompt thee to, is to be sorry after a godly sort. For this Sorrow
works that in thee, of which thou will never have cause to Repent; no, not to
Eternity, 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11.

3. The Brokenhearted Man is sorry for those Breaches, that by Reason of the
depravity of his Nature, is made in his Life and Conversation. And this was the
Case of the Man in our Text. The vileness of his Nature had broken out to the
defiling of his Life, and to the making of him at this time, base in
Conversation. This, this was it, that all to brake his Heart.

He saw in this he had dishonored God, and that cut him. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, and done this Evil in thy Sight, Psalm. 51. 4. He saw in
this, he had caused the Enemies of God to open their Mouths and Blaspheme; and
this cut him to the Heart. This made him cry, I have sinned against thee, Lord*
This made him say, I will declare mine Iniquity, I will be sorry for my Sin,
Psalm. 38. 18.

When a man is designed to do a matter, when his Heart is set upon it (and the
Brokenhearted does design to glorify God) an Obstruction to that Design, the
spoiling of this Work makes him Sorrowful. Hannah coveted Children, but could
not have them, and this made her a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit* 1 Samuel 1. 15.

A Brokenhearted Man would be well inwardly, and do that which is well
outwardly; but he feels, he finds, he sees, he is prevented, prevented at least
in part. This makes him sorrowful, in this he Groans, groans earnestly, being
burdened with his Imperfections, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3.

You know, one with broken Bones has Imperfections many, and is more sensible
of them too, (as was said before, than any other Man;) and this makes him
sorrowful; yea, and makes him conclude, That he shall go softly all his days,
in the Bitterness of his Soul, Isa. 57. 15.

Thirdly, The Man with a broken Heart, is a very Humble Man; or true Humility,
is a sign of a Broken Heart. Hence, Brokenness of Heart, Contrition of Spirit,
and Humbleness of Mind, are put together. To revive the Heart of the humble,
and to revive the Spirit of the Contrite Ones, Isa. 57. 15.

To follow our Similitude Suppose a Man while in bodily Health, stout and
strong, and one that fears and cares for no Man; yet let this Man have but a
Leg or an Arm broken, and his Courage is quelled; he is now so far off from
hectoring of it with a Man, that he is afraid of every little Child that does
but offer to touch him: Now he will Court the most feeble that has ought to do
with him, to use him and handle him gently: Now he is become a Child in
Courage, a Child in Fear, and humbles himself as a little Child.

Why, thus it is with that Man that is of a Broken and Contrite Spirit. Time
was indeed, he could hector, even hector it with God himself, saying, What Is
the Almighty, that we should serve him? Or what Profit shall I have, if I keep
his Commandments? Job 21 15. Mal. 3. 13, 14.

Ay! But now his Heart is broken, God has wrestled with him, and given him a
fall, to the breaking of his Bones, his Heart; and now he Crouches, now he
Cringes, now he begs of God, that he will not only do him good, but do it with
tender Hands. Have Mercy upon me, O God, said David, yea, according to the
Multitude of thy TENDER Mercies, blot out my Transgressions, Psalm. 51. 1.

He stands as he sees, not only in need of Mercy, but of the tenderest Mercies;
God has several sorts of Mercies, some more rough, some more tender. God can
save a Man, and yet have him a dreadful Way to Heaven. This the Broken hearted
sees, and this the Brokenhearted dreads, and therefore pleads for the
tenderest sort of Mercies; and here we read of his gentle dealing, and that he
is very pitiful, and that he deals tenderly with his. But the Reason of such
Expressions no man knows, but he that is Brokenhearted, he has his Sores, his
running Sores, his stinking Sores: Wherefore he is pained, and therefore covets
to be handled tenderly. Thus God has broken the Pride of his Spirit, and
humbled the Loftiness of Man. And his Humility yet appears,

1. In his Thankfulness for Natural Life: He reckone^^ at Night, when he goes
to Bed, that like as a Lion, so God will tear him to pieces before the Morning
Light, Isa. 38. 13.

There is no Judgment that has fallen upon others, but he counts of right he
should be swallowed up by it, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy Judgments, Psalm. 119. 120.

But perceiving a day added to his Life, and that he in the Morning, is still
on this side Hell; he cannot choose but take notice of it, and acknowledge it
as a special Favor, saying, God be thanked for holding my Soul in Life till
now, and for keeping my Life back from the the Destroyer. Compare Job 33. 22.
and Psalm. 56. 13. Psalm. 86. 13.

Man before his Heart is broken, counts Time his own, and therefore he spends
it lavishingly, upon every idle thing. His Soul is far from fear, because the
Rod of God is not upon him; but when he sees himself under the wounding hand of
God, or when God like a Lion, is breaking all his Bones, then he humbles
himself before him, and falls at his Foot. Now he has learned to count every
Moment a Mercy, and every small Morsel a Mercy.

2. Now also, the least hopes of Mercy for his Soul, O, how Precious is it! He
that was wont to make Orts of the Gospel, and that valued Promises but a^
Stubble, and the Words of God but as Rotten Wood: Now, with what an Eye does he
loo^ on the Promise? Yea, he counts a Peradventure of Mercy, more rich, more
worth than all the World. Now as we say* He is glad to leap at a Crust; now to
be a Dog in God's House, (...) counted better by him, than to dwell in the
Tents of the Wicked, Matt. 15. 26, 27. Luke 15. 17, 18, 19.

3. Now he that was wont' to look scornfully upon the People of God, yea, that
used to scorn to show them a gentle cast of his Countenance; Now he admires and
bows before them, and is ready to lick the Dust of their Feet; and would count
it his greatest, the highest Honor, to be as one of the least of them. Make me
as one of thy Hired Servants, says he, Luke 15. 19.

4. Now he is in his own Eyes the greatest Fool in Nature, for that he sees he
has been so mistaken in his ways, and has not yet but little, if any true
Knowledge of God. Every one now, says he, has more Knowledge of God than I,
every one serves him better than I, Psalm. 73. 21, 22 Prove. 30. 2, 3.

5. Now may he be but one, though the least in the Kingdom of Heaven! Now may
he be but one, though the least in the Church on Earth! Now may he ^e but
loved, though the least beloved of Saints! How high an Account does he set
thereon!

6. Now when he talks with God or Men, how does he debase himself before
them! If with God, how does he accuse himself, and load himself with the
Acknowledgements of his own Villainies, which he committed in the days wherein
he was the Enemy of God? Lord, said Paul, that Contrite One, I Imprisoned, and
did beat in every Synagogue them that believe on thee: And when the Blood of
thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his
Death, and kept the Raiment of them that slew him, Act. 22. 19, 20. Yea, I
punished thy Saints often in every Synagogue, and Compelled them to Blaspheme:
And being exceeding mad against them, I Persecuted them ^^en unto strange
Cities, Acts (...) 9, 10, 11.

Also when he comes to speak to Saints, how does he make himself vile before
them? I am, says he, the least of the Apostles, I am not meet to be called an
Apostle; I am less then the least of all Saints; I was a Blasphemer, I was a
Persecuter, and Injurious, etc. 1 Cor 15 9. Ephesians. 3. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 13.

What Humility, what Selfabasing Thoughts, does a Broken Heart produce? When
David danced before the Ark of God also, how did he discover his Nakedness to
the disliking of his Wife? And when she taunted him for his doings, says he, It
was before the Lord, etc. And I will be yet more vile than thus, and will be
base in mine own Sight, 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21, 22.

Oh (...) Man that is, or that has been kindly broken in his Spirit, (...) that
is of a Contrite Heart, is a lowly, a humble Man.

Fourthly, The Brokenhearted Man, is a Man that sees himself in Spirituals to
be poor: Therefore as Humble and Contrite, so Poor and Contrite are put
together in the Word: But to this Man will I look, even to him that is Poor and
of a Contrite Spirit, Isa. 66. 1, 2.

And here we still pursue our Metaphor. A wounded Man, a Man with broken Bones,
concludes his Condition to be but Poor, very Poor: Ask him how he does, and he
Answers, Truly Neighbor, in a very Poor Condition. Also you have the Spiritual
Poverty of such as have, or have had their Hearts broken, and that have been of
Contrite Spirits, much made mention of in the Word. And they go by two Names to
distinguish them from others; They are called THY Poor, that is, God's Poor;
they are also called, the Poor in Spirit, Psalm. 72. 2. Psalm. 74. 9. Mat. 5. 3.

Now, the Man that is poor in his own Eyes, (for of him we now discourse, and
the Broken hearted is such an one,) is sensible of his wants. He knows he
cannot help himself, and therefore is forced to be content to live by the
Charity of others. Thus it is in Nature, thus it is in Grace.

First, The Brokenhearted now knows his wants, and he knew it not till now. As
he that has a broken Bone, knew no want of a Bone-setter, till he knew his Bone
was broken: His broken Bone makes him know it, his Pain and Anguish makes him
know it: And thus it is in Spirituals. Now he sees, to be Poor indeed, is to
want the sense of the Favor God; for his great Pain, is sense of Wrath, as has
been shown before. And the Voice of Joy would heal his broken Bones, Psalm. 51.
8.

Two things he thinks would make him Rich.

1. A Right and Title to Jesus Christ, and all his Benefits.

2. And Saving Faith therein. They that are spiritually Rich, are rich in Him,
and in the Faith of Him, 2 Cor. 8. 9. James 2. 5.

The first of these, gives us a Right to the Kingdom of Heaven; and the
second, yields the Soul the Comfort of it; and the Broken hearted Man wants the
Sense and Knowledge of his ^nterest in these. That he knows he wants them, is
plain; but that he knows he has them, is, what as yet he wants the Attainment
of. Hence he says, The Poor and Needy seek Water, and there is none, and their
Tongue fails for Thirst: There is none in their View, none in their View for
them, Isa. 41. ^7.

Hence David when he had his Broken Heart, felt he wanted Washing, he wanted
Purging, he wanted to be made White: He knew that Spiritual Riches lay there,
but he did not so well perceive, that God had washed and purged him* Yea, he
rather was afraid that all was going, that he was in danger of being cast out
of God's Presence, and that the Spirit of Grace would be utterly taken from
him. See Psalm 51.

That Is the first thing: The Brokenhearted is Poor, because he knows his Wants.

Secondly, The Brokenhearted is Poor, because he knows, he cannot help himself
to what he knows he wants. The Man that has a broken Arm, as he knows it, so he
knows of himself he cannot Set it. This therefore is a second thing, that
declares a Man is Poor, otherwise he is not so: For, suppose a Man wants never
so much, yet if he can but help himself, if he can Furnish himself, if he can
supply his own wants out of what he has, he cannot be a poor Man: Yea, the more
he wants* the greater is his Riches, if he can supply his own wants out of his
own Purse.

He then is the poor Man, that knows his spiritual want, and also knows he
cannot supply, or help himself.

But this the Brokenhearted knows, therefore he in his own Eyes, is the only
Poor Man. True, he may have something of his own, but that will not supply his
want, and therefore he is a poor man still. I have Sacrifices, says David, but
thou do not desire them, therefore my Poverty remains, Psalm 51. 16.

Led is not Gold, Led is not current Money with the Merchant: There is none has
spiritual Gold to Sell but Christ, Rev. 3. 18.

What can a Man do to procure Christ, to procure Faith or Love? Yea, had he
never so much of his own carnal Excellencies, not one Penny of it will go for
Pay, in that Market where Grace is to be had. If a Man would give all the
Substance of his House for Love, it would be utterly Contemned, Song 8. 7.

This the Brokenhearted Man perceives, and therefore he sees himself to be
spiritually poor: True, he has a broken Heart, and that is of great Esteem with
God, but that is not of Natures Goodness; that is a Gift, a Work of God, that is
the Sacrifices of God: Besides, a Man cannot remain content, and at rest with
that; for that in the nature of it, does but show him he is poor, and that his
wants are such as himself cannot supply. Besides, there is but little ease in a
broken Heart.

Thirdly, The Brokenhearted Man is poor and sees it, Because he finds he is
now disabled to live any way else, but by BEGGING.

This David betook himself to, though he was a King; for he knew as to his
Souls health, he could live no way else: This poor Man cried, says he, and the
Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his Troubles. (Psalm. 34. 6.) And this
leads me to the fifth Sign.

Fifthly, Another sign of a broken Heart, is a Crying, a Crying OUT. Pain you
know will make one cry: Go to them that have upon them the anguish of broken
Bones, and see if they don't cry; Anguish makes them cry. This, this is that
which quickly follows, if once thy Heart be Broken, and thy Spirit indeed made
Contri^e.

First, I say, Anguish will make thee cry. Trouble and Anguish, said David,
have taken hold upon me, Psalm. 119. 143. Anguish you know, does naturally
provoke to crying; now as a broken Bone has anguish, a broken Heart has
anguish: Hence the Pains of one that has a Broken Heart, are compared to the
Pangs of a Woman in Travel, John 16 20, 21, 22.

1. Anguish will make one cry alone, cry to ones self; and this is called a
bemoaning of of ones self. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, said
God, Jer. 31. 18.

That is, being at present under the breaking chastizing Hand of God: Thou have
Chastised me, says he, and I was Chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the
Yoke: This is his meaning also, who said, I mourn in my Complaint, and make a
noise; and why? Why, My Heart is Pained within me, Psalm. 53. 2, 3, 4.

This is a Self bemoaning, a bemourning themselves in Secret and Retired Places.

You know, it is common with them who are distressed with Anguish, though all
alone, to cry out to themselves of their present Pains, saying, O my Leg! O my
Arm! O my Bowels! Or as the Son of the Shun^mi^^^ Son, My Head, my Head, 2
King. 4. 19. O the Groans, the Sighs, the Cries, that the Brokenhearted have,
when by themselves or alone! O say they, my Sins, my Sins, my Soul, my Soul:
How am I laden with Guilt? How am I surrounded with Fear? O this hard, this
desperate, this unbelieving Heart! O how Sin defiles my Will, my Mind, my
Conscience! I am Afflicted and ready to die, Psalm. 88. 15.

Could some of you carnal People, but get behind the the Chamber Door, to hear
Ephraim when he is at the work of Self-bemoaning, 'twould make you stand amazed
to hear him bewail that Sin in himself, in which you take delight; and to hear
him bemoan his mispending of time, while you spend all in pursuing your filthy
Lusts; and to hear him offended with his Heart, because 'twill not better
comply with God's Holy Will, while you are afraid of his Word and ways, and
never think your selves better, than when farthest off of God. The Unruliness
of the Passions, and Lusts of the Broken hearted, make them often get into a
Corner, and thus bemoan themselves.

Secondly, As they thus cry out in a bemoaning manner of, and to themselves; so
they have their Outcries of, and against themselves, to others, As she said in
another Case, Behold and see, if there be any Sorrow like my Sorrow, Lam. 1. 12.

O the the bitter Cries and Complaints that the Brokenhearted have, and make
to one another! Still every one imagining, that his own Wounds are deepest, and
his own Sores fullest of anguish, and hardest to be Cured. Say they, If our
Iniquities be upon us, and we pine away in them, how can we then live? Ezekiel.
33. 10.

Once being at an honest Woman's House, I after some Pause, asked her how she
did, she said, Very badly; I asked her if she was sick, she answered No; What
then said I? Are any of your Children ill? She told the No: What, said I, is
your Husband amiss, or do you go back in the World? No, no, said she, But I am
afraid I shall not be saved. And brake out with hea^^ Heart, saying, Ah Goodman
Bunyan! Christ and a PITCHER; if I had Christ, though I went and begged my
Bread wtth a Pitcher, 'twould be better with me, than I think it is now.

This Woman had her Heart broken, this Woman wanted Christ, this Woman was
concerned for her Soul: There are but few Women, rich Women, that count
Christ and a Pitcher, better than the World, their Pride and Pleasures. This
VVomans Cries are worthy to be Recorded: 'Twas a Cry that carried in it, not
only a sense of the want, but also of the worth of Christ. This Cry, Christ and
a Pitcher, made a melodious Noise in the Ears of the very Angels.

But I say, few Women cry out thus; few Women are so in love with their own
Eternal Salvation, as to be willing to part with all their Lusts and Vanities,
for Jesus Christ and a Pitcher. Good Jacob alio was thus; If the Lord, said he,
will give me Bread to eat, and R^^ment to put on, then he shall be my God: Yea,
he Vowed it should be so. And Jacob ^owed a Vow, saying, If God will be with
me, and keep me in this way that I go, and will give me Bread to eat, and
Raiment to put on; so that I come again to my Father's House in Peace: Then
shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28.

3. As they bemoan themselves, and make their Complaints to one and another, so
they cry to God. O God, said Heman, I have cried Day and Night to thee: But
when? Why, when his Soul was full of trouble, and his Life grew near to the
Grave; Psalm. 88. 1, 2, 3. Or as it says in another place, Out of the Deep, out
of the Belly of Hell Cried I: By such Words, Expressing what painful Condition
they were in when they cried, Psalm. 130. 1. Jonah 2. 2.

See how God himself Words it, My Pleasant Portion, says he, is become a
Desolate Wilderness, and being desolate, it Mourns unto me, Jer. 12. 11.

And this also is natural to those whose Heart is Broken. Whether goes the
Child, when it catches harm, but to its Father, to its Mother? Where does it
lay its Head, but in their Laps? Into whose Bosom does it pour out its
Complaint, more especially, but into the Bosom of a Father, of a Mother;
because there is Bowels, there is Pity, there is Relief and Succor? And thus
it is with them, whose Bones, whose Heart is broken: It Is natural to them, they
must cry, they cannot but cry to him. Lord heal me, said David, for my Bones
are vexed; Lord heal me, for my Soul is vexed, Psalm. 6. 1, 2, 3.

He that cannot cry, feels no Pain, sees no Want, fears no Danger, or else is
Dead.

Sixthly, Another Sign of a Broken Heart, and of a Contrite Spirit, is, It
Trembles at God's Word. To him that is Poor, and of a Contrite Spirit, and
Trembles at my Word, Isa. 66. 2.

The Word of God, is an awful Word to a Brokenhearted Man. Solomon says, The
Word of a King is as the Roaring of a Lion; and if so, what is the Word of God?
(For by the Wrath and Fear, is meant the Authoritative Word of a King.)

We have a Proverb, The Burnt Child dreads the Fire; The whipped Child fears
the Rod; even so the Brokenhearted fears the Word of God. Hence you have a
Remark set upon them that Tremble at God's Word: To wit, They are they that
keep among the Godly; they are they that keep within Compass; they are they
that are aptest to Mourn, and to stand in the Gapp, when God is angry; And to
turn away his Wrath from a People.

It Is a Sign the Word of God has had Place, and wrought Powerfully, when the
Heart trembles at it, is afraid, and stands in awe of it. When Joseph's
Mistress tempted him to lie with her, he was afraid of the Word of God; How
shall I do this great Wickedness, said he, and sin against God? He stood in awe
of God's Word, durst not do it, because he kept in Remembrance, what a dreadful
thing 'twas to Rebel against God's Word. When old Eli heard that the Ark was
taken, his very Heart trembled within him; for he read by that sad loss, that
God was angry with Israel, and he knew the Anger of God, was a great and
terrible thing. When Samuel went to Bethlehem, the Elders of the Town Trembled,
for they feared that he came to them with some sad Message from God, and they
had had Experience of the dread of such things before, Genesis 39. 7, 8, 9. 1 Samuel
4. 13. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4.

When Ezra would have a Mourning in Israel for the Sins of the Land, he sent,
And there came to him every one that trembled at the Words of the God, of
Israel, because of the Transgressions of those, that had been carried away,
Ezekiel. 9. 4.

There are, I say, a sort of People, that tremble at the Words of God, and that
are afraid of doing ought that is contrary to them; but they are only such,
with whose Souls and Spirits the Word has had to do. For the rest, they are
resolved to go on their course, let God say what he will. As for the Word of
the Lord, said Rebellious Israel to Jeremiah, which thou have spoken to us in
the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto it: But we will do whatsoever
thing goes out of our own Mouth, Jer. 44. 16, 17. But, do you think, that
these People did ever feel the Power and Majesty of the Word of God, to break
their Hearts? No verily; had that been so, they would a trembled at the Words
of God, they would a been afraid of the Words of God. God may command some
People what he will, they will do what they list. What care they for God? What
care they for his Word? Neither Threats nor Promises, neither Punishments or
Favors, will make them obedient to the Word of God; and all because they have
not felt the Power of it, their Hearts have not been broken with it. When King
Josias did but read in God's Book, what Punishment God had threatened against
rebellious Israel; though he himself was a holy and good Man. He Humbled
himself, he rent his Clothes, and wept before the Lord, and was afraid of the
Judgment threatened, 2 King. 22. ^ Chron: 34.

For he knew what a dreadful thing the Word of God is. Some Men, as I said
before, dare do any thing, let the Word of God be never so much against it; but
they that tremble at the Word, dare not do so. No, they must make the Word
their rule for all they do; they must go to the Holy Bible, and there enquire
what may, or may not be done; for they tremble at the Word.

This then* is another Sign, a true Sign that the Heart has been broken,
namely, When the Heart is made afraid of, and trembles at the Word; Acts 9. 4,
5, 6. Chap. 16. 29, 30, 31.

Trembling at the Word, is caused by a belief of what is deserved, threatened,
and of what will come, if not prevented by Repentance; and therefore the Heart
melts, and breaks before the Lord.

I come in the next place, to speak to this Question.

But what necessity is there, that the Heart must be broken? Cannot a Man be
Saved unless his Heart be broken?

I answer, avoiding Secret Things, which only belongs to God, there is a
Necessity of breaking the Heart, in Order to Salvation; because a Man will not
sincerely comply with the means conducing thereunto, until his Heart is broken.
For,

First, Man, take him as he comes into the World, as to Spirituals, as to
Evangelical Things, in which mainly lies Man's Eternal Felicity, and there he
is as one Dead, and so Stupefied, and wholly in himself, as unconcerned with
it: Nor can my Call nor Admonition, that has not a Heart-breaking-Power
attending of it, bring him to a due Consideration of his present State, and so
unto an effectual Desire to be Saved.

Many ways God has Manifested this.

1. He has threatened Men with Temporal Judgments; yea, sent such Judgments upon
them, once and again, over and over, but they will not do. What says he, I have
given you cleanness of Teeth in all your Cities; I have with holden the Rain
from you; I have smitten you with Blasting and Mildew; I have sent among you
the Pestilence; I have overthrew some of you, as God Overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah: Yet have ye not not returned unto me says the Lord, Amos 4. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11.

See here! Here is Judgment upon Judgment, Stroke after Stroke, Punishment
after Punishment, but all will not do unless the Heart is broken! Yea, another
Prophet seems to say; that such things, instead of converting the Soul, sets it
further off: If Heartbreaking Work attend such strokes, Why should ye be
stricken any more, says he? Ye will Revolt more and more, Isa. 1. 5.

Man's Heart is Fenced, it is grown Gross, there is a Skin, that like a Coat of
Male has wrapped it up, and enclosed it on every side. This Skin, this Coat of
Male, unless it be cut off and taken away, the Heart remains untouched, whole;
and so as unconcerned, whatever Judgments or Afflictions light upon the Body,
Mat. 13. 15. Acts 28. 27.

This which I call the Coat of Male, the Sense of the Heart, has two great
Names in Scripture. It is called, the Foreskin of the Heart, and the Armor in
which the Devil trusts, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Luke 11. 22.

Because these Shield and Fence the Heart from all Gospel Doctrine, and from
all legal Punishments; nothing can come at it till these are removed. Therefore
in Order unto Conversion, the Heart is said to be Circumcised; that is, this
Foreskin is taken away, and this Coat of Male is spoiled. I will Circumcise
thy Heart, says he, to love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, (and then the
Devils Goods are spoiled) that thou may live, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Luke 11. 22.

And now the Heart lies open, now the Word will prick, cut and pierce it; and
it being cut, pricked and pierced, it bleeds, it faints, it falls and dies at
the Foot of God, unless it is supported by the Grace and love of God in Jesus
Christ.

Conversion you know, begins at the Heart; but if the Heart be so secured by
Sin and Satan, as I have said, all Judgments are, while that is so, in vain.
Hence, Moses after he had made a long Relation of Mercy and Judgment unto the
Children of Israel, suggests, that yet the great thing was wanting to them; and
that thing was, An Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear unto
that Day, Deuteronomy. 29. 2. 3.

Their Hearts were as yet not touched to the quick, were not awakened, and
wounded by the the Holy Word of God, and made tremble at its Truth and Terror.

But I say, before the Heart be touched, pricked, made smart, etc. How can
(...) be thought, be the Danger never so great; that it should Repent, Cry, Bow
and Break at the Foot of God, and Supplicate, there for Mercy? And yet thus it
must do; for thus God has Ordained, and thus God has appointed it; nor can Men
be saved without it.

But I say, Can a Man Spiritually Dead, a stupid Man, whose Heart is past
feeling, do this, before he has his dead and stupid Heart awakened, to see and
feel its State and Misery without it? But,

Secondly, Man, take him as he comes into the World (and how wise soever he is,
in Worldly and Temporal Things) He is yet a Fool, as to that which is Spiritual
and Heavenly. Hence, he says, The Natural Man receives not the things that are
of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him, (because he is indeed a
Fool to them,) neither, says the Text, can he know them, for they are
spiritually descerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

But, how now? Must this Fool be made Wise? Why Wisdom must be put into his
Heart, Job 38. 36.

Now none can put it there but God; and how does he put it there, but by making
room there for it, by taking away the thing which hinders, which is that Folly
and Madness which naturally dwells there? But how does he take that away, but
by a severe Chastising of his Soul for it, until he has made him weary of it?
The Whip and Stripes are provided for the Natural Fool, and so it is for him
that is Spiritually so, Prove. 19. 20.

Solomon intimates, that it is a hard thing to make a Fool become wise. Though
thou should bray a Fool in a Mortar among Wheat with a Pestil, yet will not
his Foolishness depart from him, Prove. 27. 22.

By this it appears, that it is a hard thing to make a Fool a Wise Man. To bray
one in a Mortar is a dreadful thing, to bray one there with a Pestil; and yet
it seems a Whip, a Mortar and a Pestil is the way. And if this is the way to
make one Wise in this World; and if all this will hardly do, how must the Foo^
that is so in Spirituals, be whipped and beaten, and striped before he is made
wise therein? Yea, his Heart must be put into God's Mortar, and must be beaten*
yea, Brayed there with the Pestil of the Law, before it loves to hearken unto
Heavenly Things. It is a great Word in Jeremiah, Thorough Deceit, th(...) is,
Folly, they refuse to know (...) says the Lord. And what follows? Why,
Therefore th(...) says the Lord, behold I will (...) them and try them, (that
is, wit^ Fire) for how shall I do for the Daughter of my People? Jer. 9. 6, 7.

I will melt them; I will put them into my Furnace, and there I will try them;
and there I will make them know me says the Lord. When David was under
spiritual Chastisement for his Sin, and had his Heart under the breaking Hand
of God: Then he said, God should make him know Wisdom, Psalm. 51. 6.

Now he was in the Mortar, now he was in the Furnace, now he was bruised and
melted; yea, now his Bones, his Heart was breaking; and now his Folly was
departing. Now says he, Thou shall make me to know Wisdom. If I know any thing
of the way of God with US Fools, there is nothing else will make us wise Men;
yea, a Thousand Breakings will not make us so wise as we should be.

We say, Wisdom is not good till it is bought; and he that buys it, according to
the Intention of that Proverb, usually smarts for it. The Fool is Wise in his
own Conceit; wherefore there is a double difficulty attends him, before he can
be wise indeed: Not only his Folly, but his Wisdom must be removed from him;
and how shall that be, but by a ripping up of his Heart, by some sore
Conviction, that may show him plainly, that his Wisdom is his Folly, and that
which will undo him. A Fool loves his Folly; that is, as Treasure; so much is
he in love with it. Now then, it must be a great thing that must make a Fool
forsake his folly. The foolish will not weigh, not consider, not compare Wisdom
with their Folly. Folly is joy to him that is destitute of Wisdom; As* Dog
returns to his Vomit, so a Fool returns to his Folly. So loath are they when
driven from it, to let it go, to let it depart from them, Prove. 15. 21. Chap.
26. 11.

Wherefore, there must go a great deal to the making of a Man a Christian, for
as to that, every Man's a Fool; yea, the greatest Fool, the most unconcerned
Fool, the most self-willed Fool of all Fools: Yea, one that will not be turned
from his folly, but by the breaking of his Heart. David was one of these Fools;
Manassah was on of these Fools; Saul, otherwise called Paul, was one of these
Fools; and so was I, and that the biggest of all.

Thirdly, Man, Take him as he comes into the World, and he is not only a Dead
Man, and a Fool, but a Proud Man also. Pride is one of those Sins that first
shows it self to Children; yea, and it grows up with them, and mixeth it self
with all they do: But it lies most hid, most deep in Man as to his Soul
Concerns. For the Nature of Sin as Sin, is not only to be Vile, but to hide its
Vileness from the Soul. Hence, many think they do well when they sin. Jonah
thought he did well to be angry with God. The Pharisees thought they did well,
when they said, Christ had a Devil; and Paul thought verily that he ought to do
many things against, or contrary to the Name of Jesus, which he also did with
great Madness, John 4. 9. John 8. 48. Acts 26. 9, 10.

And thus Sin puffs up Men with Pride, and a Conceit of themselves, that they
are a a Thousand times better than they are. Hence they think, they are the
Children of God, when they are the Children of the Devil; and that they are
something as to Christianity; when they neither are such, nor know what it is
that they must have to make them such. John 8. 41, 42, 43, 44. Gal. 6. 3.

Now, whence flows this, but from Pride, and a Self-conceit of themselves; and
that their State is good for another World, when they are yet in their Sins,
and under the Curse of God: Yea, and this Pride is so strong and high, and yet
so hid in them; that all the Ministers in the World cannot persuade them that
this is Pride, nor Grace, in which they are so confident.

Hence they slight all Reproofs, Rebukes, Threatenings or Admonitions that are
pressed upon them, to prevail with them to take heed, that they be not herein
deceived. Hear ye, says the Prophet, and give Ear; be not Proud, for the Lord
has spoken, Jer. 13. 15. And if ye will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in
Secret for your Pride, (verse 17.) And what was the Conclusion? Why, All the
Proud Men stood out still, and maintained their Resistance of God and his Holy
Prophet, Chap. 43. 2.

Nor is there any thing that will prevail with these, to the saving of their
Souls, until their Hearts are broken. David after he had defiled Bath-sheba and
slay'd her Husband, yet boasted himself in his Justice and Holiness, and would
by all means have the man put to Death, that had but taken the poor man's Lamb,
2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. When, alas Poor Soul! Himself was the great
Transgressour. But, would he believe it? No, no, he stood upon the vindicating
of himself to be a just Doer; nor would he be made to fall until Nathan by
Authority from God, did tell him, that he was the Man whom himself had
Condemned. Thou art the Man, said he: At which Word his Conscience was
awakened, his Heart wounded, and so his Soul made to fall under the Burden of
his Guilt, at the Feet of the God of Heaven for Mercy, Verse 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13.

Ah! Pride, Pride! Thou art that which holds many a man in the Chains of his
Sins: Thou art it, thou cursed Self-conceit, that keep them from believing
that their State is Damnable. The Wicked thorough the Pride of his Countenance,
will not seek after God, Psalm. 10. 4. And if there is so much in the Pride of
his Countenance, what is there think you, in the Pride of his Heart?

Therefore Job says, It is to hide Pride from man, and so to save his Soul from
Hell, That God Chasteneth him with Pain upon his B^d, until the Multitude of
his Bones stick out, and until his Life draws nigh to the Destroyer, Job 33.
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

It Is an hard thing to take a man off of his Pride, and make him, instead of
trusting in, and boasting of his Goodness, Wisdom, Honesty, and the like; to
see himself a Sinner, a Fool; yea, a man that is cruel as to his own Immortal
Soul.

Pride of Heart has a Power in it, and is therefore compared to an Iron Sinew,
and an Iron Chain, by which they are made stout; and with which, they are held
in that stoutness, to oppose the Lord, and drive his Word from their Hearts,
Levit. ^6. 19. Psalm. 73. 6.

This was the Sin of Devils, and it is the Sin of Man; and the Sin, I say, from
which no man can be delivered until his Heart is broken; and then his Pride is
spoiled, then he will be glad to yield.

If a man be Proud of his Strength or Manhood, a broken Leg will maul him: And
if a man be proud of his Goodness, a broken Heart will maul him; because, as
has been said, a broken Heart comes by the Discovery and charge of Sin, by the
Power of God upon the Conscience.

Fourthly, Man, take him as he comes into the World, and he is not only a dead
man, a Fool, and Proud; but also Self-willed and Headstrong, 2 Pet. 2. 10.

A stubborn ungain Creature is man, before his Heart is broken. Hence they are
so often called Rebels, Rebellious and Disobedient: They will only do what they
list. All day long, says God, have I stretched out my Hand, to a disobedient
and gainsaying People.

And hence again, they are compared to a Self-willed or Headstrong Horse, that
will in spite of his Rider, rush into the Battle. Every one, says God, turns
to his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle, Jer. 8. 16.

They say, With our Tongues we will prevail, our Lips are our own; Who is Lord
over us, Psalm. 12. 4.

Hence, they are said to stop their Ear, to pull away their Shoulder, to shut
their Eyes, and harden their Hearts against the Words of God, and to Contemn
the Counsel of the most High, Zech. 7. 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 107. 11.

They are fitly compared to the Rebellious Son, who would not be ruled by his
Parents; or to the Prodigal, who would have all in his own Hand, and remove
himself far away from Father, and Father's House, Deuteronomy. 21. 20. Luke 15. 13.

Now for such Creatures, nothing will do but Violence. The stubborn Son, must
be stoned till he dies; and the Prodigal, must be Famished out of all: Nothing
else, I say, will do. Their Self-willed, stubborn Heart, will not comply with
the Will of God, before it is broken, Deuteronomy. 21. 21. Luke 15. 14, 15, 16, 17.

These are they that are called the Stout-hearted; these are said to be far
from Righteousness, and so will remain until their Hearts are broken; for so
they must be made to know themselves, Isa. 9. 9, 10, 11.

Fifthly, Man, as he comes into the World, is not only a Dead Man, a Fool,
Proud and Selfwilled; but also a Fearless Creature. There is, says the Text,
no Fear of God before their Eyes, Romans 3. 18.

No fear of God. There is fear of Man, fear of losing his Favor, his Love, his
good Will, his Help, his Friendship: This is seen every where; how does the
Poor fear the Rich, the Weak, fear the Strong; and those that are Threatened,
them that Threaten? But come now to God, why, none Fears him, that is, by
Nature, none Reverence him; they neither fear his Frowns, nor seek his Favor,
nor enquire, how they may escape his revenging Hand, that is lifted up against
their Sins, and their Souls, because of Sin. Little things, they fear the
losing of them; but the Soul, they are not afraid to lose. They fear not me
says the Lord, Mal. 3. 5.

How many times are some men put in mind of DEATH, by Sickness upon themselves,
by Graves, by the Death of others?

How many times are they put in mind of HELL, by reading the Word, by lashes of
Conscience; and by some, that go roaring in Despair out of this World?

How many times are they put in mind of the Day of Judgment? As,

1. By God's binding the Fallen Angels over to Judgment.

2. By the Drowning of the Old World, 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5. Jude 6. 7.

3. By the Burning of Sodom and Gomorrah with Fire from Heaven, 2 Pet. 2. 6.
Jude 7.

4. By Appointing a Day, Acts 17. 29, 30, 31.

5. By Appointing a Judge, Acts 10. 40, 41, 42.

6. By Reserving their Crimes in Records, Isa. 30. 8. Revel. 20. 12.

7. By Appointing and Preparing of Witnesses, Romans 2. 15.

8. And by Promising, yea, Threatening, yea, Resolving to call the whole World
to his Bar, there to be judged, for all which they have done and said; and for
every Secret Thing, Mat. 25. 31, 32, 33. Chap. 12. 36. Eccles. 11. 9. Chap. 12.
14.

And yet they fear not God: Alas! They believe not these things: These things,
to carnal Men, are like Lot's Preaching to his Sons and Daughters, that were in
Sodom. When he told them, that God would destroy that Place, He seemed unto
them as one that mocked; and his Words, to them, were as idle ^ales, Genesis 19.
14.

Fearless Men are not won by Words: Blows, Wounds and Killings, are the things
that must bring them under fear. How many struggling fits, had Israel with God
in the Wilderness? How many times did they declare, that there they feared him
not? And observe, they were seldom, if ever, brought to fear and dread his
Glorious Name, unless he beset them round with Death and the Grave: Nothing,
nothing but a severe Hand, will make the fearless fear. Hence, to speak after
the manner of Men, God is put upon it, to go this way with Sinners, when he
would save their Souls; even bring them, and lay them at the Mouth, and within
sight of Hell and Everlasting Damnation; and there also charge them with Sin
and Guilt, to the breaking of their Hearts, before they will fear his Name.

Sixthly, Man, as he comes into the World, is not only a Dead Man, a Fool,
Proud, Selfwilled and Fearless; But he is a false Believer concerning God. Let
God report of himself never so plainly, Man, by Nature, will not believe this
Report of him: No, They are become vain in their Imaginations, and their
foolish Heart is darkened: Wherefore they turn the Glory of God, which is his
Truth, into a Lie, Romans 1. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

1. God says, He sees; They say, He sees not: God says, He knows; They say,
He does not know: God says, None is like Himself; Yet they say, He is
altogether like to them: God says, None shall keep his Door for naught, They
say, It Is in Vain, and to no Profit to serve Him: He says, He will do Good;
They say, He will neither do Good nor Evil, Job 22. 13, 14. Psalm. 50. 21. Job
21. 14, 15. Mal. 3. 14. Zeph. 1. 12.

Thus they falsely believe concerning God; Yea, as to the Word of his Grace, and
the Revelation of his Mercy in Christ. They stick not to say by their Practice,
(for a wicked Man, speaks with his Feet, Prove. 6. 13.) that that is a stark
Lie, and not to be trusted to, 1 John 5. 10.

Now, what shall God do to save these Men? If he hides himself, and conceals
his Glory, They Perish: If he sends to them by his Messengers, and forbears to
come to them himself, They Perish: If he comes to them, and forbears to work
upon them by his Word, They Perish: If he works on them, but not effectually,
They Perish: If he works effectually, he must break their Hearts, and make
them, as men wounded to Death, fall at his Feet for Mercy, or there can be no
good done on them; they will not rightly Believe, until he fires them out of
their Mis-belief; and makes them to know, by the breaking of their Bones for
their false Faith, that he is, and will be what he has said of himself, in his
Holy Word. The Heart therefore must be broken, before the man can come to good.

Seventhly, Man as he comes into the World, is not only a Dead Man, a Fool,
Proud, Selfwilled, Fearless and false Believer, but a great Lover of Sin. He is
Captivated, Ravished, Drowned in the Delights of it. Hence it says, They love
Sin, delight in Lies, do take Pleasure in Iniquity, and in them that do it;
that they Sport themselves in their own Deceivings, and Glory in their Shame,
John 3. 19. Psalm. 62. 4. Romans 1. 32. 2 Pet. 2. 13. Phil. 3. 19.

This is the temper of Man by Nature, for Sin is mixed with, and has the
Mastery of all the Powers of his Soul. Hence, they are said to be Captives to
it, and to be led Captive into the Pleasures of it, at the will of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

And you know, it is not an easy thing to break Love, or to take the Affections
off of that Object, on which they are so deeply set, in which they are so
deeply rooted, as Man's Heart is in his Sins. Alas! How many are there, that
Contemn all the Allurements of Heaven, and that Trample upon all the
Threatenings of God, and that say Tush, at all the Flames of Hell, when ever
they are propounded, as Motives to work them off their sinful Delights? So
Fixed are they, so Mad are they, upon these beastly Idols: Yea, he that shall
take in hand, to stop their course, in this their Way, is, as he that shall
attempt to prevent the raging Waves of the Sea, from their course, when driven
by the mighty Winds.

When Men are somewhat put to it, when Reason and Conscience shall begin a
little to hearken to a Preacher, or a Judgment, that shall begin to hunt for
Iniquity; how many Tricks, Evasions, Excuses, Demurs, Delays and hiding Holes,
will they make, invent, and find, to hide and preserve their sweet Sins, with
themselves, and their Souls, in the delights of them, to their own Eternal
Perdition. Hence they endeavor to stifle Conscience, to choke Convictions, to
forget God, to make themselves Atheists, to contradict Preachers that are plain
and honest, and to heap to themselves such of them only, as are like
themselves, That speak unto them smooth things, and Prophecy Deceits; Yea,
they say themselves to such Preachers, Get ye out of the way; turn aside out of
the Path; cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us, Isa. 30. 8, 9,
10, 11.

If they be followed still, and Conscience and Guilt shall, like Bloodhounds,
find them out in their Secret Places, and Roar against them for their wicked
Lives; then they will flatter, cogg, dissemble and lie against their Souls,
promising to mend, to turn, to repent, and grow better shortly; and all to
daff-off Convictions and Molestations, in their wicked ways; that they may yet
pursue their Lusts, their Pleasures and sinful Delights in quiet, and without
Control.

Yea further, I have known some that have been made to Roar like Bears, to Yell
like Dragons, and to Howl like Dogs, by reason of the weight of Guilt, and the
lashes of Hell upon their Conscience, for their evil deeds; who have, so soon
as their present, Torments and Fears were gone, returned again with the Dog to
his Vomit; or as the Sow that was washed, to her Wallowing in the Mire, Hos 7.
14. 2 Pet. ^. 20, 21, 22.

Once again, Some have been made taste of the good Word of God, of the Joy of
Heaven, and of the Powers of the World to come; and yet could not by any one,
nay, by all of these, be made to break their League for ever with their Lusts
and Sins, Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Luke 8. 13. John 5. 33, 34, 35.

O Lord! What Is Man, that thou art mindful of him? Wherein is he to be
accounted of? He has sinned against thee, he loves his Sins more than thee. He
is a lover of Pleasures, more than he is a Lover of God.

But now, how shall this man be Reclaimed from this Sin? How shall he be
brought, wrought, and made to be out of Love with it? Doubtless, it can be by
no other means, by what we can see in the Word, but by the wounding, breaking,
and disabling of the Heart that loves it; and by that means, making it a Plague
and Gall unto it. Sin may be made an Affliction, and as Gall and Wormwood to
them that love it; but the making of it so bitter a thing to such a Man, will
not be done, but by great and ^ore means. I remember we had in our Town, some
time since, a little Girl, that loved to eat the heads of foul Tobacco-Pipes,
and neither Rod, nor good words could reclaim her, and make her leave them: So
her Father takes advice of a Doctor, to wean her from them; and 'twas this:
Take, says he, a great many of the foulest Tobacco Pipe Heads you can get, and
boil them in Milk, and make a Posset of that Milk, and make your Daughter drink
the Posset Drink up. He did so, and gave his Girl it, and made her drink it up;
the which, became SO irksome and nautious to her Stomach, and made her SO sick,
that she could never abide to meddle with Tobacco-Pipe Heads any more, and so
was cured of that Disease.

Thou love thy Sin, and neither Rod, nor good Words will as yet reclaim thee;
well, take heed; if thou will not be Reclaimed, God will make thee a Posset of
them, which shall be so bitter to thy Soul, so irksome to thy Taste, so
loathsome to thy Mind, and so afflicting to thy Heart, that it shall break it
with Sickness and Grief, till it be loathsome to thee: I say, thus he will do,
if he loves thee: If not, he will suffer thee to take thy course, and will let
thee go on with thy Tobacco-Pipe-Heads.

The Children of Israel will have Flesh, must have Flesh; they Weep, Cry and
Murmur, because they have not Flesh. The Bread of Heaven, that is but light and
sorry stuff in their Esteem, Number. 11. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Moses goes and tells God, how the People despised his Heavenly Bread, and how
they longed, lusted, and desired to be fed with Flesh. Well, says God, They
shall have Flesh, they shall have their fill of Flesh: I will feed them with
it; they shall have to the full; and that, Not for a day, or two days, or five
days, neither ten days, nor twenty days: But even a whole Month, until it come
out at their Nostrils, and it be loathsome unto them; because they have
despised the Lord, Number. 11. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

He can tell how to make that loathsome to thee, on which thou most do set
thine evil Heart: And he will do so, if he loves thee; else, as I said, he will
not make thee sick by smiting of thee; nor punish thee for, or when thou
committest Whoredom; but will let thee alone till the Judgment day, and call
thee to a reckoning for all thy Sins then. But to pass this.

Eighthly, Man as he comes into the World, is not only a Dead Man, a Fool,
Proud, Selfwilled, Fearless, a false Believer and a Lover of Sin; but a Wild
Man. He is of the wild Olive Tree, of that which is wild by Nature, Romans 11.
17, 24.

So in another place, Man by Nature is compared to the Ass, to a wild Ass: For
vain or empty Man would be Wise, though Man be born as a wild Asses Colt, Job
11. 12.

Isaac was a Figure of Christ, and of all Converted Men, Gal. 4. 28.

But Ishmael was a Figure of Man by Nature: And the Holy Ghost as to that,
says this of him; And he will be a wild Man, Genesis 16. 12. This man, I say, was
a Figure of all carnal Men in their Wildness, or Estranged-ness from God. Hence
it is said of the Prodigal at his Conversion, That he came to himself then;
implying, that he was Mad, Wild, or out of his WITS before, Luke 15. 17.

I know there is a Difference sometimes, betwixt ones being wild and mad: Yet,
sometimes wildness arriveth to that Degree, as to give one rightly the
Denomination of being mad: And it is always true in Spirituals; namely, that he
that is wild, as to God, is mad, or besides himself; and so not capable, before
he is tamed, of minding his own Eternal good as he should.

There are these several things, that are tokens of one Wild or Mad; and they
all meet in a Carnal Man.

1. A wild or mad Man, gives no heed to good Counsel: The Frenzy of his Head
shuts all out, and by its Force, leads him away from men that are Wise and
Sober; and thus it is with Carnal Men. Good Counsel is to them, as Pearls are,
that are cast before Swine. It is trampled under Foot of them, and the man is
despised that brings it. The poor Man's Wisdom is despised, and his Words are
not heard, Mat. 7. 6. Eccl. 9. 16.

2. A wild or mad Man, let him alone, and he will greatly busy himself all his
Life, to accomplish that, which when it is completed, amounts to nothing. The
Work, the Toil, the Travel of such an one, comes to nothing, save to declare,
that he was out of his Wits that did it. David imitating of such an one,
Scrabled upon the Gate of the King, as Fools do with Chalk; and like to this,
is all the Work, of all Carnal Men in the World, 1 Samuel 21. 12, 13.

Hence, such an one is said to labor for the Wind, or for what will amount to
no more, than if he filled his Belly with the East Wind, Eccles. 5. 16. Job 15.
2.

3. A wild or mad Man, if you set him to do any thing, and he does it; he will
yet do it, not by, or according to your bidding, but after the folly of his own
wild fancy; even as Jehu Executed the Commandment of the Lord; he did it in his
own madness, taking no heed to the Commandment of the Lord, 2 Kings 9. 20.
Chap. 10. 31.

And thus do carnal Men do, when they meddle with any of God's matters; as
Hearing, Praying, Reading, Professing; they do all according to their own wild
Fancy: They take no heed to do these, after the Commandment of the Lord.

4. Wild or Mad Men, if they deck or array themselves with ought, as many times
they do, why, the Spirit of their Wildness or Frenzy, appears even in the mode
and way, in which they do it. Either the things themselves, which they make use
of for that purpose, are very Toys and Trifles; or if they seem to be better,
they are put on after an Antic manner; rather to the rendering of them
ridiculous, than to bespeak them sober, judicious or wise: And so do natural
Men array themselves, with what they would be accepted in with God. Would one
in his Wits, think to make himself fine or acceptable to men, by arraying
himself in Menstruous Clothes, or by painting his Face* with Dross and Dung?
And yet, this is the Finery of carnal men, when they approach for Acceptance
into the presence of God, Isa. 64. 6 Phil. 3. 7, 8.

O the Wildness, the Frenzy, the Madness that possesses the Heart and Mind of
Carnal Men! They walk according to the course of this World, according to, or
after that Spirit, which is in Truth, the Spirit of the Devil, which works in
the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.

But, do they believe, that thus it is with them? No, they are in their own
Account, as other mad men are, the only ones in the World. Hence they are so
taken, and tickled with their own frantic Motions, and deride all else that
dwell in the World.

But which is the way to make one that is Wild, or a Mad man, Sober? To let him
alone, will not do it; to give him good Words only, will not do it. No, he must
be tamed, means must be used to tame him. He brought down their Heart with
Labor, or by continual Molestation; as you have it, Psalm. 107. 10, 11, 12. He
speaks there of Madmen, That are kept up in Darkness, and bound in
Afflictions and Irons, because they Rebelled against the Words of God, and
Contemned the Counsel of the most High.

This therefore is the way to deal with such, and none but God can so deal with
them. They must be taken, they must be separated from men; they must be laid in
Chains, in Darkness, Afflictions and Irons: They must be blooded, half starved,
whipped, purged, and be dealt with, as mad People are dealt with. And thus they
must be dealt with, till they come to themselves, and cry out in their
Distresses; And then they cry to the Lord in their Troubles, and he saves them
out of their Distresses; Then he brings them out of Darkness, and the Shadow of
Death; and breaks their Bands in sunder, Psalm. 107. 13, 14, 15.

Thus, I say, God Tames the Wild, and brings Mad Prodigals to themselves, and
so to him for Mercy.

Ninthly, Man as he comes into the World, is not only a Dead Man, a Fool,
Proud, Self-willed, Fearless, a false Believer, a Lover of Sin, and a Wild Man;
but a Man, that Dis-relishes the things of the Kingdom of God. I told you
before, that Unconverted man, is such as did not taste things: But now I add,
that he disrelishes things, he calls bitter things, sweet; and sweet, bitter;
he judges quite amiss These are they God threatens with a Woe. Woe to them that
call Evil Good, and Good, Evil; that put Darkness for Light, and Light for
Darkness: That put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa. 5. 20.

This latter part of this Text, shows us evidently, that the things of God are
Disrelished by some. They call his sweet things, bitter; and the Devils bitter
things, sweet; and all this is for want of a broken Heart. A broken Heart,
relishes otherwise than an whole, or unbroken one does.

A man that has no Pain, or Bodily Distress, cannot find, or feel Virtue or
good, in the most Sovereign Plaster, were it applied to Arm or Leg; no, he
rather says, Away with these stinking, daubing things. O! But lay the same
Plasters where there is need, and the Patient will Relish, and Taste, and
Savor the goodness of them; yea, will prize and commend them to others.

Thus it is in Spirituals. The World, they know not what the Anguish or Pain
of a broken Heart means; They say, Who will show us any good that is better
than we find in our Sports, Pleasures, Estates and Preferments? There be many,
says the Psalmist, speak after this sort: But what says the distressed man?
Why, Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us. And then adds,
Thou hact put Gladness in our Heart; namely, by the light of thy Countenance,
for that is the Plaster for a broken Heart. Thou have put Gladness in our
Heart, more than in the Time, that their Corn and their Wine increases, Psalm.
4. 1, 6, 7.

O! A broken Heart can savor Pardon, can savor the Consolations of the Holy
Ghost. Yea, as a hungry or thirsty man, prizes Bread and Water, in the want
thereof, so do the broken in Heart, prize, and set an high esteem on the things
of the Lord Jesus: His Flesh, his Blood, his Promise, and the light of his
Countenance, are the only sweet things both to Scent and Taste, to those that
are of a wounded Spirit. The full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb; the whole
despise the Gospel, they savor not the things that are of God.

If twenty Men were to hear a Pardon Read, and but one of those Twenty were
condemned to die; and the Pardon was for none but such; which of these Men,
think you, would taste the Sweetness of that Pardon, they who were not, or he
that was Condemned? The Condemned Man doubtless.

This is the Case in Hand: The broken in Heart is a Condemned Man; yea, it is
sense of Condemnation, with other things, that has indeed broken his Heart; nor
is there any thing but sense of Forgiveness, that can bind it up, or heal it.
But could that heal it, could he not taste, truly taste, or rightly relish this
Forgiveness? No. Forgiveness would be to him, as it is to him that has not
sense of want of it.

But I say, what is the Reason some so prize what others so despise, since they
both stand in need of the same Grace, and Mercy of God in Christ? Why, the one
sees, and the other sees nothing of this woeful, miserable State. And thus have
I showed you the necessity of a Broken Heart.

1. Man is Dead, and must be Quickened. 2. Man is a Fool, and must be made Wise.
3. Man is Proud, and must be Humbled. 4. Man is Self-willed, and must be
Broken. 5. Man is Fearless, and must be made to Consider. 6. Man is a False
Believer, and must be Rectified. 7. Man is a Lover of Sin, and must be Weaned
from it. 8. Man is Wild, and must be Tamed. 9. Man Disrelishes the things of
God, and can take no savor in them, until his Heart is Broken.
And thus I have done with this, and shall next come to the Reasons of the
Point; namely, to show you, Why, or how it comes to pass, that a Broken Heart,
a Heart truly Contrite, is to God such an Excellent thing.

That to him it is so, we have proved by six Demonstrations: What it is, we
have showed by the six Signs thereof: That it must be, is manifest by those
Nine Reasons, but now urged: And WHY it is with God, or in his Esteem, an
Excellent Thing, that is shown by that which follows.

First, A Broken Heart is the Handiwork of God; an Heart of his OWN Preparing,
for his own Service: It is a Sacrifice of his own providing, of his providing
for Himself. As Abraham said in another Case, God will provide himself a Lamb,
Genesis 22. 8.

Hence it is said, The Preparation of the Heart in Man, etc. is from the Lord.
And again, God makes my Heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me, Job 23. 16.

The Heart, as it is by Nature Hard, Stupid and Impenitrable; so it remains,
and so will remain, until God, as was said, Bruiseth it with his Hammer, and
Melts it with his Fire.

The stony Nature of it, is therefore said to be taken away of God. I will take
away the stony Heart out of your Flesh, and will give you, says he, an Heart
of Flesh, Ezel^. 36. 26.

I will take away the stony Heart, or the Stoniness, or the the Hardness of
your Heart, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh; that is, I will make your
Heart sensible, soft, wieldable, governable and penitent. Sometimes he bids Men
rent their Hearts, not because they can, but to convince them rather, that
though it must be so, they cannot do it: So he bids them make themselves a New
Heart, and a New Spirit, for the same purpose also; for if God does not Rent
it, it remains Unrent; if God makes it not new, it abides an old one still.

This is that that is meant, by his Bending of Men for Himself, and of his
working in them, that which is pleasing in his Sight, Zach. 9. 13.

The Heart, Soul or Spirit, as in it self, as it came from God's Fingers, a
Precious Thing, a thing in God's Account, worth more than all the World; this
Heart, Soul or Spirit, Sin has hardened, the Devil has bewitched, the World has
deceived. This Heart thus beguiled, God, Coveteth and Desires: My Son faith
he, give me thy Heart, and let thine Eyes observe my Ways, Prove. 33. 26.

This Man cannot do this thing, for that his Heart has the Mastery of him, will
not but carry him after all manner of Vanity. What now must be done? Why, God
must take the Heart by Storm, by Power, and bring it to a Compliance with the
Word: But the Heart of it self, will not, it is deluded, carried away to
another, than God. Wherefore, God now betakes him to his Sword, and brings down
the Heart with Labor; opens it, and drives out the strong Man Armed, that did
keep it; wounds it, and makes it smart for its Rebellion, that it may cry; so
he rectifies it for himself. He makes sore, and binds up; he Wounds, and
his Hands make whole, Job 5. 18.

Thus having wrought it for himself, it becomes his Habitation, his
Dewlling Place; That Christ might dwell in your Heart by Faith.

But I would not swerve from the thing in Hand. I have told you, a broken Heart
is the handiwork of God, a Sacrifice of his own Preparing; a Material fitted
for himself.

1. By breaking of the Heart, he opens it, and makes it a Receptacle for the
Graces of his Spirit; that is the Cabinet, when unlocked, where God lays up the
Jewels of the Gospel: There he puts his Fear; I will put my Fear in their
Heart: There he writes his Law; I will write my Law in their Heart: There he
puts his Spirit, I will put my Spirit within you, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33. Chap.
32. 39, 40, 41. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.

The Heart, I say, God chooses for his Cabinet: There he hides his Treasure,
there is the Seat of Justice, Mercy, and of every Grace of God: I mean, when
it is Broken, made Contrite, and so Regulated by the Holy Word.

2. The Heart when Broken, is like sweet Gums and Spices, when beaten: For as
such cast their fragrant Scent into the Nostrils of Men; so the Heart when
Broken, casts its sweet Smells in the Nostrils of God. The Incense, which was a
Type of Prayer of Old, was to be beaten or bruised, and so to be burned in the
Censer. The Heart must be beaten or bruised, and then the sweet Scent will come
out; even Groans, and Cries, and Sighs for the Mercy of God; which Cries, etc.
to him, area very Excellent thing, and pleasing in his Nostrils.

Secondly, A Broken Heart, is in the sight of God, an Excellent Thing: Because
a Broken Heart is submissive; it falls before God, and gives to him his
Glory. All this is true from a Multitude of Scriptures, which I need not here
mention. Hence such an Heart, is called an honest Heart, a good Heart, a
perfect Heart, a Heart fearing God; and such as is sound in God's Statutes.

Now this cannot but be an Excellent Thing, if we consider that by such a
Heart, unseigned Obedience is yielded unto him that calls for it. You have
obeyed from the Heart, says Paul to them at Rome, that Form of Doctrine, which
was delivered unto you, Romans 6.

Alas! The Heart before it is Broken and made Contrite, is quite of another
Temper; It Is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. The great
stir before the Heart is broken, is about who shall be Lord, God or the Sinner;
True, the right of dominion is the Lords, but the Sinner will not suffer it,
but will be ALL himself; saying, Who is Lord over us; and again say they to
God, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee. Psalm. 12. 4. Jer. 2. 31.

This also is evident by their Practice; God may say what he will, but they
will do what they list. Keep my Sabbath, says God, I will not, says the Sinner.
Leave your Whoring, says God. I will not, says the Sinner. Do not tell Lies,
nor Swear, nor Curse, nor Blaspheme my holy Name, says God: O but I will, says
the Sinner. Turn to me, says God; I will not, says the Sinner. The right of
dominion is mine, says God; but like that young Rebel, 1 King 1. 5. I will be
King, says the Sinner. Now this is intolerable, this is unsufferable, and yet
every sinner by practice says thus; For they have not submitted themselves unto
the Righteousness of God.

Here can be no Concord, no Communion, no Agreement, no Felloship. Here, here
is Enmity on the one side, and flaming Justice on the other, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15,
16. Zech. 11. 8.

And what delight, what content, what pleasure can God take in such men? None
at all* No, tho they should be mingled with the best of the Saints of God; yea,
tho the best of Saints should Supplicate for them. Thus, says Jeremiah, said
the Lord unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, that is, to Pray for
them, yet my mind could not be toward this People, cast them out of my sight
and let them go forth, Jer. 14. 1.

Here is naught but open War, acts of Hostility, and shameful Rebellion on the
Sinners side; and what delight can God take in that? Wherefore if God will bend
and buckle the spirit of such an one, he must shoot an Arrow at him, a bearded
Arrow, such as may not be plucked out of the wound; an arrow that will stick
fast, (Psalm. 38. 1, 2.) and cause that the Sinner falls down as dead at Gods
foot; then will the Sinner deliver up his arms, and surrender up himself, as
one conquered, into the hand of, and beg for the Lords Pardon, and not till
then, I mean not sincerely.

And now God has overcome, and his Right Hand, and his Holy Arm has gotten him
the Victory. Now he rides in Triumph, with his Captive at his Charroit Wheel:
Now he glories, now the Bells in Heaven do ring, now the Angels shout for Joy:
yea, are bid to do so; Rejoice with me for I have found my sheep which was
lost. Luke 1^ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Now also the Sinner, as a token of being overcome, lies grovling at his foot,
saying, Thine Arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings Enemies, whereby the
People fall under thee, Psalm. 45 3, 4, 5*

Now the Sinner submits, now he follows his Conqueror in Chains, now he seeks
Peace, and would give all the World, were it his own, to be in the favor of
God, and to have hopes by Christ of being Saved.

Now this must be pleasing, this cannot but be a thing acceptable in Gods
sight. A Broken and a Contrite Heart, O God, thou will not despise: For it is
the desire of his own heart, the work of his own hands.

Thirdly, Another Reason, why a Broken Heart is to God such an Excellent Thing;
is this, A Broken Heart prizes Christ, and has an high Esteem for him. The
whole have no need of the Physician, but the Sick; this Sick man, is the Broken
Hearted in the Text. For God makes men Sick by smiting of them, by Breaking of
their Hearts. Hence Sickness and Wounds are put together, for that the one is a
true effect of the other. Mark 2. 17. Micah 6. 13. Hos. 5. 13.

Can any think that God should be pleased, when men despise his Son; saying* He
has no Form nor Comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty that
we should desire him? And yet so say* they of him whose hearts God has not
molified; yea, the Elect themselves confess, that before their Hearts were
Broken, they set light by him also. He is, say they, Despised and Rejected of
men, and WE hid as it were our Faces from him; he was despised, and WE esteemed
him not, Isa. 53. 2, 3.

He is indeed the Great Deliverer: But what is a Deliverer to them that never
saw themselves in Bondage, as was said before? Hence it is said of him that
Delivered the City, No man remembered that same poor man, Eccles. 9. 14, 15.

He has sorely Suffered, and been Bruised for the Transgression of man, that
they might not receive the smart, and Hell, which by their Sins they have
procured to themselves: But what is that to them that never saw ought but
Beauty, and that never tasted any thing but sweetness in Sin?

It Is he that holds by his Intercession, the hands of God; and that causes
him to forbear to cut off the Drunkard, the Liar, and unclean Person, even when
they are in the very act and work of their Abomination: But their hard Heart,
their stupefied Heart, has no sense of such kindness as this, and therefore
they take no notice of it. How many times has God said to this Dresser of his
Vinyard, Cut down the barren Figstree; while he yet by his Intercession, has
prevailed for a Reprieve for another year? But no notice is taken of this, no
thanks is from them returned to him for such kindness of Christ. Wherefore such
Ungrateful, Unthankful, Inconsiderate Wretches as these, must needs be a
continual Eye sore, as I may say, and great provocation to God. And yet thus
men will do before their Hearts are Broken, Luke 13. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Christ, as I said, is called a Physician; yea, he is the only Soul Physician.
He heals, how desperate soever the Disease be; yea, and heals who he undertakes
for ever. I give unto them Eternal Life, (John 10. 27, 28.) and does all of
free Cost, of mere Mercy and Compassion.

But what is all this to one that neither sees his Sickness, that sees nothing
of a Wound? What is the best Physician alive, or all the Physicans in the
World* put all together, to him that knows no Sickness, that is sensible of no
Disease? Physicians, as was said, may go a begging, for all the healthful;
Physicians are of no esteem save only to the Sick, or upon a supposition of
being so now, or at any other time.

Why, this is the cause Christ is so little set by in the World, God has not
made them sick by smiting of them; his Sword has not given them the wound, his
Dart has not been struck through their Liver, they have not been broken with
his Hammer, nor melted with his Fire. So they have no regard to his Physician,
so they slight all the provision which God has made for the Salvation of the
Soul.

But now, let such a Soul be wounded, let such a man's heart be broken; let such
a man be made sick through the sting of guilt, and be made to wallow himself in
ashes under the burden of his Transgressions; and then who but Christ (as has
been showed before) Then the Physician; then, Wash me Lord; then, Supple my
Wounds; then, Pour thy Wine and Oil into my Sore. Then, Lord Jesus cause me to
hear the Voice of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which thou have broken may
Rejoice. Nothing now so welcome as healing; and so nothing, no man so desirable
now as Christ: His name to such, is the best of names; His Love to such is the
best of Love; himself being now, not only in himself, but also to such a Soul,
the chiefest of Ten Thousands, Song 5.

As Bread to the Hungry, as Water to the Thirsty, as Light to the Blind, and
Liberty to the Imprisoned: So, and a thousand times more, is Jesus Christ to
the Wounded, and to them that are Broken Hearted.

Now, as was said, this must needs be Excellent in Gods Eyes, since Christ
Jesus is so glorious in his Eyes. To contemn what a man counts Excellent, is an
offense to him; but to vallue, esteem, or think highly of that which is of
esteem with me, this is pleasing to me, such an opinion is excellent in my
sight.

What says Christ, My Father loves you, because ye loved me. Who has an high
esteem for Christ, the Father has an high esteem for them. Hence it is said, He
that has the Son, has the Father; the Father will be his, and will do for him
as a Father, who receives and sets an honorable esteem on his Son, John 16.
27.

But none will, none can do this, but the Brokenhearted; because they, and
they only, are sensible of the want and worth of an intrest in him.

I dare appeal to all the World as to the truth of this, and do say again, That
these and none but these, have hearts of esteem in the sight of God. Alas! the
heart of the wicked is little worth, (Pov. 10. 20.) for it is destitute of a
precious esteem of Christ, and cannot but be destitute, because it is not
wounded, broken, and made sensible of the want of mercy by him.

Fourthly, A Broken Heart, is of great esteem with God, because it is A
thankful heart for that sense of sin and of grace it has received.

The Broken Heart is a sensible heart. This we touched upon before. It is
sensible of the dangers which Sin leads to; yea, and has cause to be sensible
thereof, because it has seen and felt what Sin is, both in the guilt and
punishment that by Law is due thereto. As a Broken heart is sensible of Sin, in
the evil nature and consequences of it; so it is also sensible of the way of
Gods delivering the Soul from the day of Judgment; consequently, it must be a
thankful heart. Now he that Praises me, glorifies me, says God; and God loves
to be glorified, Gods glory is dear unto him, he will not part with that, Psalm.
50. 23. Isa. 42. 8.

The Brokenhearted, say I, forasmuch as he is the sensible Soul, it follows,
that he is the Thankful Soul. Bless the Lord O my Soul, said David, and all
that is within me, Bless his holy Name. Behold what Blessing of God is here!
And yet not content here with, he goes on with it again, saying, Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits. Psalm. 103. 1, 2. But what is
the matter? Oh, he has forgiven all thine Iniquities, and healed all thy
Diseases. He has redeemed thy Life from Destruction, and Crowns thee with
loving kindness* and tender Mercies, Verse 3. 4. But how came he to be affected
with this? Why, he knew what it was to hang over the mouth of Hell for Sin:
Yea, he knew what it was for Death and Hell to beset and compass him about:
Yea, they took hold of him, as we have said, and were pulling of him down into
the deep; this ^e saw to the breaking of his heart. He saw also the way of
Life, and had his Soul relieved with faith and sense of that, and that made him
a thankful man. If a man who has had a broken Leg, is but made to understand,
that by the breaking of that, he kept from breaking of his Neck, he will be
thankful to God for a broken Leg. It Is good for me, said David, that I have
been Afflicted. I was by that preserved from a great danger; for before that, I
went astray. Psalm. 119. 67. 71.

And who can be thankful for a mercy, that is not sensible that they want it,
have it, and have it of Mercy. Now this the Brokenhearted, this the man that
is of a Contrite Spirit is sensible of; and that with reference to Mercies of
the best sort, and therefore must needs be a thankful man, and so have an heart
of esteem with God, because it is a thankful heart.

Fifthly, A Broken Heart is (...) great esteem with, or an excellent thing in
the sight of God, Because it is an heart that desires now to become a
receptacle, or habitation for the Spirit and Graces of the Spirit of God. It
was the Devils hold before, and was contented so to be. But now it is for
entertaining of, for being possessed with the holy Spirit of God. Create in me
a clean heart, said David, and renew a a right spirit within me. Take not thy
holy Spirit from me, uphold me with thy free Spirit, Psalm. 51. 10, 11, 12.

Now he was for a clean heart, and a right Spirit; now he was for the
sanctifyings of the blessed Spirit of Grace: A thing which the uncircumcised in
heart resists, and do despite unto, Acts 7. 51. Heb. 10. 29.

A Broken Heart therefore suiteth with the heart of God, a Contrite Spirit is
one Spirit with him. God, as I told you before, covets to dwell with the Broken
in Heart, and the Broken in Heart desires communion with him. Now here is an
agreement, an oneness of mind; now the same mind is in thee which was also in
Christ Jesus. This must needs be an excellent Spirit; this must needs be better
with God, and in his Sight, Then thousands of Rams, or Ten thousand Rivers of
Oil.

But does the Carnal World covet this, this Spirit, and the blessed Graces of
it? No, they despise it, as I said before, they mock at it, they prefer and
countenance any sorry dirty Lust rather; and the reason is, because they want a
Broken Heart, that Heart so highly in esteem with God; and remain for want
thereof, in their enmity to God.

The Brokenhearted knows that the sanctifyings of the Spirit, is a good means
to keep from that relaps, out of which a man cannot come, unless his heart be
wounded a second time. Doubtless David had a Broken Heart at first Conversion,
and if that Brokenness had remained, that is, had he not given way to hardness
of heart again, he had never fallen into that Sin out of which he could not be
recovered, but by the breaking of his Bones a second time. Therefore I say, a
Broken Heart is of great esteem with God; for it (and I will add, so long as it
retains its tenderness) covets none but God, and the things of his holy Spirit,
Sin is an abomination to it.

And here, as in a fit place, before I go any further, I will show you some of
the advantages that a Christian gets by keeping of his Heart tender. For,

As to have a Broken Heart, is to have an excellent thing, so to keep this
broken heart tender, is also very advantagio us.

First, This is the way to maintain in thy Soul always a fear of Sinning
against God. Christians do not wink at, or give way to Sin, until their hearts
begin to lose their Tenderness. A Tender Heart will be afflicted at the Sin of
another, much more it will be afraid of committing of Sin it self. 2 King 22.
19.

Secondly, A Tender Heart quickly yields to Prayer; yea, prompteth to it,
puts an edge and fire into it; we never are backward to Prayer, until our heart
has lost its Tenderness, ^ho then it grows cold, flat and formal, and so carnal
to and in that holy duty.

Thirdly, A Tender Heart, has always Repentance at hand for the least fault or
slip or sinful thought that the Soul is guilty of; in many things the best
offend: But if a Christian loses his Tenderness, if he says he has his
Repentance to seek, his heart is grown hard; has lost that Spirit, that kind
Spirit of Repentance it was wont to have. Thus it was with the Corinthians,
they were decayed, and lost their Tenderness; wherefore their Sin, yea, great
Sins, remained unrepented of, 2 Cor. 12, 20, 21.

Fourthly, A Tender Heart, is for receiving often its Communion with God; when
he that is hardened, tho the seed of Grace is in him, will be content to Eat,
Drink, Sleep, wake, and go days without number without him Isa. 17. 10. 18.
Jer. 2. 32.

Fifthly, A Tender Heart, is a wakeful watchful heart. It watches against Sin
in the Soul, Sin in the Family, Sin in the Calling, Sin in Spiritual duties and
performances, etc. It watches against Satan, against the World, against the
Flesh, etc.

But now when the Heart is not Tender; there is Sleepiness, Unwatchfulness,
Idleness, a Suffering the heart, the Family, and Calling to be much defiled,
spotted and blemished with Sin; for a heart departs from God, and turns aside
in all these things.

Sixthly, A Tender Heart will deny it self, and that in lawful things, and will
forhear even that which may be done, for some Jew, or Gentile, or the Church of
God, or any member of it should be offended, or made weak thereby: whereas the
Christian that is not tender, that has lost his tenderness, is so far off of
denying himself in lawful things, that he will even adventure to meddle in
things utterly forbidden, whoever is offended, grieved, or made weak thereby:
For an instance for this, we need go no further then to the man in the Text,
who while he was Tender, trembled at little things, but when his heart was
hardened, he could take Bethsheba, to satisfy his Lust, and kill her husband
to cover his Wickedness.

Seventhly, A Tender Heart, I mean the heart kept tender, preserves from many a
blow, lash, and fatherly chastisement; because it shuns the causes, which is
sin, of the scourging hand of God. With the upright thou will show thy self
upright, but with the froward thou will show thy self unsavory, 2 Samuel 22. 27.
Psalm. 18. 25, 26, 27.

Many a needless rebuke and wound, does happen to the Saints of God through
their unwise behavior; when I say needless, I mean, they are not necessary,
but to reclaim us from our vanities, for we should not feel the smart of them,
were it not for our follies. Hence the afflicted is called a fool, because his
folly brings his affliction upon him. Fools, says David, Because of their
transgressions, and because of their Iniquities, are afflicted. Psalm. 107. 17.
And therefore it is, as was said before, that he calls his Sin his foolishness.
And again, God will speak peace to his people and his saints, but let not them
return again to folly. Psalm. 38. 5. Psalm. 85. 8.

If his Children transgress my Laws, I will visit their Transgressions with a
R^d, and their Iniquities with Stripes.

Quest. But what should a Christian do, when God has broke his heart, to keep
it tender?

Answ. To this I will speak briefly. And

First, Give you several Cautions.

Secondly, Several Directions.

For Cautions:

1. Take heed, that you choke not those Convictions that at present do break
your hearts, by laboring to put those things out of your minds which were the
cause of such Convictions, but rather nourish and cherish those things in a
deep and sober remembrance of them. Think therefore with thy self thus, What
was it that at first did wound my heart? And let that still be there, until by
the Grace of God, and the Redeemed blood of Christ, it is removed.

2. Shun Vain Company; the keeping of Vain Company has stifled many a
Conviction, killed many a desire, and made many a Soul fall into Hell, that
once was hot in looking after Heaven. A Companion that is not profitable to the
Soul, is hurtful. He that walks with wise men shallbe wise, but a Companion
of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20.

3. Take heed of Idle Talk, that thou neither hear nor join with it. Go from
the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of
Knowledge, Prove. 14. 7. Evil Communication corrup^s good manners. And a fools*
Lips are a snare to his Soul. Wherefore take heed of these things, Prove. 18. 7.
1 Cor. 15. 33.

4. Beware of the least motion to Sin, that it be not countenanced, lest the
countenancing of that, makes way for a bigger: David's eye took his heart, and
so his heart nourishing the thought, made way for the Woman's company, the act
of Adultry, and bloody Murder. Take heed therefore Brethren, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. Heb. 3. 12, 13.

And remember, that he that will rend the block, puts the thin end of the wedge
first thereto, and so by driving does his work.

5. Take heed of Evil Examples among the Godly, learn of no man to do that
which the word of God forbids. Sometimes Satan makes use of a good man's bad
ways, to spoil and harden the heart of them that come after: Peter's false
doing had like to have spoiled Barnabas, yea, and several others more.
Wherefore take heed of men, of good men's ways, and measure both theirs and
thine own, by no other rule but the holy Word of God. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13.

6. Take heed of Unbelief, or Atheistical thoughts; make no question of the
truth and reality of Heavenly things: For know, Unbelief is the worst of Evils;
nor can the heart be Tender, that nourishes or gives place unto it. Take heed
therefore least there be in any of you an evil heart of Unbelief, in departing
from the Living God, Heb. 3. 12.

These Cautions are necessary to be observed with all diligence, of all them
that would, when their Heart is made Tender, keep it so.

And now to come to the Directions.

1. Labor after a deep knowledge of God to keep it warm upon thy heart.
Knowledge of his Presence, that is every where. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth
says the Lord? Jer. 23. 24.

2. Knowledge of his piercing Eye. That it runs too and srow thorough the
Earth, beholding in every place, the Evil and the Good. That his Eyes behold,
and his Eye lids try the Children of Men. Prove. 15. 3.

3. The knowledge of his Power, that he is able to turn and dissolve Heaven and
Earth into dust and ashes; and that they are in his hand but as a Scrole or
Vesture, Heb. 1, 11, 12.

4 The knowledge of his Justice, that the rebukes of it are as devouring Fire.
Heb. 12, 29.

5. The knowledge of his Faithfulness, in fulfilling Promises to them to whom
they are made, and of his threatenings on the Impenitent, Mat. 5. 18. Chap. 24.
35. Mark 13. 31.

Secondly, Labor to get, and keep a deep sense of Sin in its Evil Nature, and
in its Soul-destroying Effects upon thy heart; be persuaded, that it is the
only Enemy of God, and that none hate, or are hated of God, but through that.

1. Remember, it turned Angels into Devils, thrust them down from Heaven to
Hell.

2. That it is the chain in which they are held and bound over to Judgment. 2
Pet. 2 4. Jud. 6.

3. That 'twas for that that Adam was turned out of Paradise: That for which
the Old World was Drowned: That for which Sodom and Gomorrah was burned with
Fire from Heaven: And that which cost Christ his Blood to Redeem thee from the
curse it has brought upon thee: And that, if any thing, will keep thee out of
Heaven for Ever and Ever.

4. Consider the pains of Hell, Christ makes use of that as an argument to keep
the heart tender, yea, to that end repeats and repeats, and repeats both the
Nature and durableness of the burning Flame thereof, and of the gnawing of the
never-dyingworm that dwells there, Mar. 9. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.

Thirdly, Consider of Death, both as to the certainty of thy dying, and
uncertainty of the time when. We must dye, we must needs dye, our days are
determined, the number of our months are with God, tho not with us; nor can we
pass them, would we, had we them, give a thousand worlds to do it, 2 Samuel 14.
14. Job 7. 1. Chap. 1^. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Consider thou must dye but once, I mean but once as to this world, for if
thou, when thou go hence, do not dye well, thou can not come back again
and dye better. ' I is appointed unto all men once to dye and after this the
Judgment, Heb. 9. 27.

Fourthly, Consider also of the certainty and terribleness of the day of
Judgment, when Christ shall sit upon his Great White Throne; when the dead
shall, by the sound of the Trump of God, be raised up; when the Elements, with-
Heaven and Earth, shall be on a burning Flame; when Christ shall separate men
one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, when the the
Books shall be opened, the Witness produced, and every man be Judged according
to his works; when Heaven Gate shall stand open to them that shall be Saved,
and the Jaws of Hell stand gaping for them that shall be Damned. Acts 7 30, 31.
Chap. 10. 42. Matt. 25. 30, 31. Revel. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. Revel. 20. 12.
2 Pet. 3. 7, 10, 12. Mat. 25. 32. Romans 2. 15, 16. Revel. 22. 12. Matt. 25. 34,
41. Revel. 20. 15.

Fifthly, Consider, Christ Jesus did use no means to harden his heart against
doing and suffering those sorrows which were necessary for the Redemption of
thy Soul: No, though he could have hardened his heart against thee, in the way
of Justice and Righteousness, because thou had Sinned against him; he rather
awakened himself, and put on all Pity, Bowels, and Compassion, yea, Tender
Mercies, and did it. In his Love and in his Pity he saved us. His Tender
Mercies from on high has visited us. He loved us, and gave himself for us.

Learn then of Christ, to be Tender of thy self, and to endeavor to keep thy
Heart Tender to Godward, and to the Salvation of thy Soul. But to draw to a
Conclusion.

The USE
LEt us now then make some use of this Doctrine: As, First, From the truth of
the matter, namely, That the man who is truly come to God, has had his Heart
Broken, his Heart Broken in order to his coming to him; and this shows us what
to judge of the league that is between Sin and the Soul; to wit, that it is so
firm, so strong, so inviolable, as that nothing can break, disannul, or make it
void, unless the heart be broken for it. 'Twas so with David, yea, his new
league with it, could not be broken, until his heart was Broken.

It Is amazing to Consider, what hold Sin has on some men's Souls, Spirits, Will
and Affections. It Is to them better then Heaven, better then God, then the
Soul, ay, then Salvation; as is evident, because, tho all these are offered
them upon this condition, if they will but leave their Sins; yet they will
choose rather to abide in them, to stand and fall by them. How say thou
Sinner? Is not this a Truth? How many times have thou had Heaven and Salvation
offered to thee freely, would thou but break thy league with this great enemy
of God? Of God, do I say? If thou would but break this league with this great
Enemy of thy Soul; but could never yet be brought unto it: No, neither by
Threatening, nor by Promise could thou ever yet be brought unto it.

It Is said of Ahab, He sold himself to work wickedness: And in another place,
Yea, for your Iniquities have ye sold your selves, 1 King 21. 25. Isa. 50. 1.

But what is this Iniquity? Why, a thing of naught, nay, worse then naught a
thousand times; but because naught, is as we say naught; therefore it goes
under that term, where God says again to the People, Ye have sold your selves
for naught, Isa. 52. 3.

But I say, What an amazing thing is this? That a Rational Creature should make
no better a Bargain; That one that is so wise in all terene things, should be
such afool in the thing that is most weighty: And yet such a fool he is, and he
tells every one that goes by the way, that he is such an one, because he will
not break his league with Sin, until his heart is broken for it.

Men love Darkness rather then Light: Ay, they make it manifest they love it,
since so great a profer will not prevail with them to leave it.

Secondly, Is this a truth? That the man that truly comes to God in order
thereto, has had his Heart broken? Then this shows us a reason, why some men's
hearts are Broken; even a reason, why God breaks some men's hearts for Sin;
namely, because he would not have them dye in it, but rather come to God that
they might be Saved.

Behold therefore in this, how God resolved as to the saving of some men's
Souls! He will have them, he will save them, he will break their Hearts, but he
will Save them; He will kill them, that they may Live; He will wound them, that
he may heal them.

And it seems by our discourse, that now there is no way left but this; fair
means, as we say, will not do; good words, a Glorious Gospel, Entreatings,
Bseeching with Blood and Tears, will not do: Men are resolved to put God to the
utmost of it; if he will have them, he must fetch them, follow them, catch
them, Lame them; yea, break their Bones, or else he shall not save them.

Some men think an invitation, an outward call, a rational discourse will do;
but they are much deceived. There must a Power, an exceeding great and mighty
Power attend the Word, or it works not effectually to the Salvation of the
Soul. I know these things are enough to leave men without excuse; but yet they
are not enough to bring men home to God. Sin has hold of them, they have sold
themselves to it; the Power of the Devil has hold of of them, they are his
Captives at his will, yea, and more then all this, their will is one with Sin
and with the Devil to be held Captive thereby: And if God gives not Contrition,
Repentance, or a Broken Heart for Sin, there will not be, no, not so much as a
mind in man, to forsake this so horrible a Confederacy and Plot against his
Soul. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.

Hence men are said to be drawn from these breasts, that come, or that are
brought to him. Isa. 26 9. Joh. 6. 44.

Wherefore John might well say, Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon! us Here is Cost bestowed, Pains bestowed, Labor bestowed,
Repentance bestowed, yea, and an Heart made sore, wounded, broken, and filled
with pain and sorrow, in order to the Salvation of the Soul.

Thirdly, This then may teach us what estemation to set upon a Broken Heart. A
Broken Heart, is such as God esteems, yea, as God counts better then all
external Service. A Broken Heart is that which is in order to Salvation; in
order to thy coming to Christ for Life.

The World know not what to make of it, not what to say to one that has a
Broken Heart, and therefore do despise it, and count that man that carries it
in his bosom a moping fool, a miserable wretch, an undone Soul. But a Broken
and a Contrite Spirit, O God, thou will not despise. A Broken Heart takes thine
Eye, thy Heart; thou choosest it for thy Companion, yea, have given thy Son a
charge to look well to such a man, and have promised him thy Salvation, as has
before been proved.

Sinner, Have thou obtained a broken Heart? has God bestowed a Contrite Spirit
upon thee? He has given thee what himself is pleased with; He has given thee a
Cabinet to hold his Grace in, He has given thee an heart, that can heartily
desire his Salvation, an heart, after his own Heart, that is, such as suits his
mind.

True, it is Painful now, Sorrowful now, Penitent now, grieved now; now it is
Broken, now it Bleeds, now, now it Sobs, now it Sighs, now it mourns and cries
unto God. Well, very well. All this is because he has a mind to make thee
laugh; he has made thee Sorry on Earth, that thou might Rejoice in Heaven.
Blessed are ye that Mourn, for ye shall be Comforted. Blessed are ye that Weep
now, for ye shall Laugh, Mat. 5. 4. Luke 6 21.

But Soul, be sure thou have this Broken Heart; all Hearts are not Broken
Hearts, nor is every heart that seems to have a wound, an Heart that is truly
Broken: A man may be cut to, yet not into the Heart; a man may have another,
yet not a broken Heart. Acts 7. 54. 1 Samuel 10 9. We know there is a difference
betwixt a wound in the Flesh, and a wound in the Spirit; yea, a man's Sin may be
wounded, and yet his Heart not Broken; so was Pharoahs, so was Saul's, so was
Ahabs; but they had none of them the mercy of a Broken Heart: Therefore, I say,
Take heed every scratch with a Pin, every prick with a Thorn; nay, every blow
that God gives with his Word upon the heart of Sinners, does not therefore
break them. God gave Ahab such a blow, that he made him stoop, fast, humble
himself, gird himself with, and lay in Sackcloth, which was a great matter for
a King; and go softly, and yet he never had a Broken Heart, 1 King 21. 27, 29.

What shall I say, Pharaoh and Saul Confessed their Sin, Judas Repented himself
of his doings, Esau sought the Blessing, and that carefully with Tears; yet
none of these had an Heart rightly Broken, or a Spirit truly Contrite; Pharaoh,
Saul and Judas, were Pharaoh, Saul, and Judas still; Esau, was Esau still;
there was no gracious change, no thorough turn to God, no unfeigned parting
with their Sins; no hearty flight for Refuge, to lay hold on the hope of Glory,
tho they indeed had thus been touched. Exodus 10. 16. 1 Samuel 26. 21. Mat. 27. 3.
Heb. 12. 14, 15, 16, 17.

The consideration of these things, call a loud to us to take heed, that we
take not that for a Broken and a Contrite Spirit, that will not go for one at
the day of Death and Judgment.

Wherefore, seeking Soul, let me advise thee, that thou may not be decieved
as to this thing of so great weight.

1. To go back toward the beginning of this book, and compare thy self with
those six or seven signs of a Broken and a Contrite Heart, which there I have,
according to the word of God, given to thee for that end; and deal with thy
Soul impartially about them.

2. Or, which may, and will be great help to thee, if thou shall be sincere
therein; namely, to betake thy self to the search of the Word, especially where
thou read of the Conversion of men, and try if thy Conversation be like, or
has a good resemblance or oneness with theirs: But in this have a care, that
thou do not compare thy self with those good Folk, of whose Conversion thou
read not, or of the breaking of whose Heart, there is no mention made in
Scripture; for all that are recorded in the Scripture for Saints, have not
their Conversion as to the manner or nature of it, recorded in the Scripture.

3. Or else, Do thou consider truly, of the true signs of Repentance, which are
laid down in Scripture, for that is the true effect of a Broken Heart, and of a
wounded Spirit. And for this see, Mat. 3. 5, 6. Luke 18. 13. Chap. 19. 8. Act;
2. 37, 38, 39, 40, etc. Chap. 16. 29, 30. Chap. 19. 18, 19. 2 Cor. 7 8, 9, 10,
11.

4. Or else, Take into Consideration, how God has said, they shall be in their
Spirits, that he intends to Save. And for this, read these Scriptures.

1. That in the One and Thirtieth of Jeremiah, They shall come with Weeping;
and with Supplication will I l^^d them, etc. V. 9.

2. Read Jer. 50. 4, 5. In those days, and at that time, the Children of Israel
shall come, they and the Children of Judah together, going and weeping: They
shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way to Zion with
their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join our-selves to the Lord,
in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten.

3. Read Ezekiel. 6. 9. And they that escape of you shall remember me among the
Nations, whither they shall be carried Captives, because I am broken with their
who^ rish Heart; which have departed from me, and with their eyes which go a
whoring after their Idols: And they shall loath themselves for the Evils which
they have committed in all their Abominations.

4. Read Ezekiel. 7. 16. But they that escape of them, shall escape, and shall be
on the Mountains like Doves of the Valleys, all of them Mourning, every one for
his Iniquity.

5. Read Ezekiel. 20. 43. And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your
doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loath your selves in your
own sight, for all your evils that ye have committed

6. Read Ezekiel. 36. 31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your
doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for
your Iniquities, and for your Abominations.

7. Read Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of Suplications: And they
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is
in bitterness for his firstborn.

Now all these are the fruits of the Spirit of God, and of the Heart, when it
is Broken: Wherefore Soul, Take notice of them, and because these are Texts by
which God promises, that those whom he saves, shall have this Heart, this
Spirit, and these holy effects in them: Therefore consider again, and examine
thy self, whether this is the state and condition of thy Soul.

And that thou may do it fully, consider again, and do thou,

1. Remember that here is such a sense of Sin, and of the irksomness thereof,
as makes the man, not only to abhor that, but himself, because of that: This
is worth the noting by thee.

2 Remember again, That here is not only a Self-abhorrence, but a sorrowful,
kind mourning unto God, at the consideration, that the Soul by Sin has
affront^d, contemned disregarded, and set at naught, both God and his holy Word.

3. Remember also, That here are Prayers and Tears for Mercy, with desires, to
be now out of love with Sin for ever, and to be in Heart and Soul, firmly
joined and knit unto God.

4. Remember also, That this People here spoken of, have all the way, from
Satan to God, from Sin to Grace, from Death to Life, scattered with Tears and
Prayers, with Weeping and Supplication: They shall go weeping, and seeking the
Lord their God.

5. Remember that these People, as Strangers and Pilgrims do, are not ashamed
to ask the way of those they meet with, to Zion, or the Heavenly Country;
whereby they confess their ignorance as became them, and their desire to know
the way to Life, yea, thereby they declare, that there is nothing in this
world, under the Sun, or this side Heaven, that can satisfy the longings, the
desires and cravings, of a Broken and Contrite Spirit.

Reader, be advised, and consider of these things seriously, and compare thy
Soul with them, and with what else thou shall find here written, for thy
Conviction and Instruction.

Fourthly, If a broken Heart, and a contrite Spirit, be of such esteem with
God, Then this should encourage them that have it, to come to God with it. I
know the GREAT encouragement for men to come to God, is, for that there is a
Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. (1 Timothy ^. 5.) This I say,
is the GREAT Encouragement, and in its place, there is none but that; but there
are other Encouragements subordinate to that, and a Broken, and a Contrite
Spirit is one of them; this is evident from several places of Scripture.

Wherefore, thou that can carry a Broken Heart, and a Sorrowful Spirit with
thee; when thou go to God, tell him, thy Heart is wounded within thee, that
thou have Sorrow in thy Heart, and art Sorry for thy Sins, but take heed of
Lying. Confess also thy Sins unto him, and tell him, they are continually
before thee. David made an argument of these things, when he went to God by
Prayer. O Lord, says he, Rebuke me not in thine Anger, neither chasten me in
thy sore displeasure. But why so? O, says he, thine Arrows stick fast in me,
and thy hand ^resseth me sore. There is no soundness in my Flesh, because of
thine Anger, neither is there any rest in my bones because of my Sin. For mine
iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for
me. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness. I am troubled,
I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day long. For my loins are
filled with a lothsom disease: and there is no soundness in my Flesh. I am
feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my
heart. Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from
thee. My heart pants, my strength fails me: As for the light of mine Eyes,
it also is gone from me: My lovers and friends stand aloof from my sore. And so
he goes on, Psalm. 38. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

These are the Words, Sighs, Complaints, Prayers, and Arguments of a Broken
Heart to God for Mercy; And so are they. Have Mercy upon me, O God, according
to thy loving kindness: According to the multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot
out my Transgressions. Wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity, and cleanse me
from my Sin. For I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sins are ever before
me. Psalm. 51. 1, 2, 3.

God allows poor Creatures, that can without lying, thus to plead and argue
with him. I am poor and sorrowful, said the good man to him, let thy Salvation
set me on high, Psalm. 69. 29.

Wherefore, Thou that have a Broken Heart, take courage, God bids thee take
courage; say therefore to thy Soul, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul: As
usually the Brokenhearted are: And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
thou in God. I had fainted, if I had not been of good courage; therefore be of
good courage and he shall strengthen thine heart, Psalm. 42. 11. Psalm. 43. 5.
Psalm. 27. 12, 13, 14.

But Alas! The Brokenhearted are far off from this, they faint, they reckon
themselves among the dead, they think God will remember them no more; the
thoughts of the greatness of God and his holiness, and their own Sins and
Vilenesses, will certainly consume them; they feel guilt and anguish of Soul,
they go Mourning all the day long; their Mouth is full of gravil and gaul, and
they are made to drink draughts of Wormwood and Gaul: So that he must be an
artist indeed at believing, who can come to God under his guilt and horror, and
plead in faith, that the Sacrifices of God are a Broken Heart, such as he had,
and that a Broken and a Contrite Spirit, God will not despise.

Fifthly, If a Broken Heart, if a Broken and a Contrite Spirit, is of such
esteem with God; Then why should some be, as they are, so afraid of a Broken
Heart, and so shy of a Contrite Spirit?

I have observed, that some men are as fraid of a Broken Heart, or that they
for their sins should have their hearts Broken, as the Dog is of the Whip. O!
They cannot away with such Books, with such Sermons, with such Preachers, or
with such talk, as tends to make a man sensible of, and to Break his Heart, and
to make him Contrite for his Sins. Hence they heap to themselves such Teachers,
get such Books, Love such Company, and delight in such Discourse, as rather
tends to harden, then soften; to make desperate in, then sorrowful for their
Sins: They say to such Sermons, Books and Preachers, as Amaziah said to Amos. O
thou seer, go, flee thou away into the land of Judah, and there eat Bread, and
Prophecy there, but Prophecy not again any more at Bethel, etc. Amos 7. 12,
13.

But do these People know what they do? Yes, think they, for such Preachers,
such Books, such Discourses, tend to make one Melancholy or Mad; they make us,
that we cannot take pleasure in our Selves, in our Concerns, in our Lives.

But, Oh Fool in grain! Let me speak unto thee, Is it a time to take Pleasure,
and to Recreate thy self in any thing, before thou have Mourned and been Sorry
for thy Sins? That Mirth that is before Repentance for Sin, will certainly end
in heaviness. Wherefore the Wise Man putting both together, says, that Mourning
must be first. There is a time to Weep, and a time to Laugh, a time to Mourn,
and a time to Dance, Eccles. 3. 4.

What! An Unconverted Man, and Laugh! Should thou see one Singing merry
Songs, that is riding up Holbourn, to Tyburn, to be hanged for Felony; would
thou not count him besides himself, if not worse; and yet thus it is with him
that is for Mirth, while he stands Condemned by the Book of God for his
Trespasses. Man! Man! Thou have cause to Mourn; yea, thou must Mourn, if ever
thou art Saved. Wherefore my advice is, that instead of shuning, thou covet
both such Books, such Preachers, and such Discourses, as has a tendency to make
a man sensible of, and to break his Heart for Sin; and the reason is, because
thou will never be as thou shoud'st, concerned about, nor seek the Salvation of
thine own Soul, before thou have a Broken Heart, a Broken and a Contrite Spirit.

Wherefore, be not afraid of a Broken Heart, be not shy of a Contrite Spirit:
It is one of the greatest Mercies that God bestows upon a Man or a Woman. The
Heart Rightly Broken at the sense of, and made Truly Contrite for
Trransgression, is a certain forerunner of Salvation. This is evident from
these six demonstrations, which was laid down to prove the point in hand at
first.

And for thy awaking in this matter, Let me tell thee, and thou will find it
so, Thou must have thy heart Broken, whether thou will or no. God is resolved
to break ALL hearts for Sin, some time or other.

Can it be imagined, Sin being what it is, and God what he is, to wit, a
Revenger of Disobedience, but that one time or other, man must smart for Sin:
Smart, I say, either to Repentance, or to Condemnation. He that Mourns not now,
while the Door of Mercy's open; must Mourn for Sin when the door of Mercy's
shut.

Shall men despise God, Break his Law, Contemn his Threats, Abuse his Grace,
yea, Shut their Eyes when he says, See; and Stop their Ears, when he says,
Hear; and shall they SO escape? No, no, Because he called, and they refused; he
stretched out his hand, and they regarded it not: Therefore shall Calamity come
upon them as upon one in Travel, and they shall cry in their Destruction, and
then God will laugh at their Destruction, and mock when their Fear comes. Then
says he, They shall cry, Prove. 1. 24. 25, 26, etc.

I have often observed, that this threatening is repeated at least seven times
in the new Testament, saying, There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth;
There shall be wailing and gnashing of Teeth, as Mat. 8. 12. Chap. 13. 42. and
50. Chap. 22. 13. Chap. 24* 51. Chap. 25. 30. Luke 13. 28.

There, where; in Hell, and at the bar of Christ's Tribunal, when he comes to
judge the World, and shall have shut too the door to keep them out of Glory,
that have here despised the offer of his Grace, and overlooked the day of his
Patience: There shall be wailing and gnashing* of Teeth. They shall weep and
wail for this.

There are but two Scriptures that I shall use more, and then I shall draw
toward a Conclusion. One, is that in Proverbs, where Solomon is counseling of
Young Men to beware of Strange, that is of wanton, light, and ensnaring women.
Take heed of such, said he, Lest thou mourn at last, that is, in Hell, when
thou art dead, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, and say, how have I
hated Instruction, and despised Reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my
Teachers, nor inclined mine ears to them that Instructed me, Prove. 5. 1, 2, 3,
etc.

The other Scripture is that in Isaiah, where he says, Because when I Called,
ye did not Answer, when I Spoke, ye did not Hear, but did evil before mine
Eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted not. Therefore, thus says the
Lord God, Behold, my Servant shall eat, but ye shall be hungrey; behold, my
Servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my Servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; behold, my Servants shall sing for joy of
Heart, but ye shall cry for Sorrow of Heart, and howl for Vexation of Spirit,
Isa. 65. 12, 13, 14.

How many beholds are here? And every behold, is not only a call to careless
ones to Consider, but as a declaration from Heaven, that thus at last it shall
be with all Impenitent Sinners, That is, when others sing for Joy in the
Kingdom of Heaven, they, they shall Sorrow in Hell, and howl for vexation of
Spirit there.

Wherefore let me advise, that you be not afraid of, but that ye rather covet a
Broken Heart, and prize a Contrite Spirit; I say, covet it now, now the White
Flag is hung out, now the Golden Scepter of Grace is held forth to you. Better
mourn now God enclines to Mercy and Pardon, then mourn when the door is quite
shut up. And take notice, that this is not the first time that I have given you
this Advice.

Lastly, If a Broken Heart be a thing of so great esteem with God, as has been
said, and if duties cannot be rightly performed by a heart that has not been
Broken. Then this shows the vanity of those Peoples minds, and also the
invalidity of their pretended divine Services, who worship God with an heart
that was never Broken, and without a Contrite Spirit. There has indeed at all
times been great flocks of such Professors in the World in every Age; but to
little purpose, unless to deceive themselves, to mock God, and lay stumbling
blocks in the way of others; for a man whose heart was never truly Broken, and
whose Spirit was never Contrite, cannot profess Christ in earnest, cannot love
his own Soul in earnest: I mean, he cannot do these things in truth, and seek
his own good the right way, for he wants a bottom for it, to wit, a Broken
Heart for sin, and a Contrite Spirit.

That which makes a man an hearty, an unfeigned, a sincere seeker after the
good of his own Soul, is sense of sin, and a Godly fear of being overtaken with
the danger which it brings a man into. This makes him Contrite, or Repentant,
and puts him up on seeking of Christ the Savior, with heart- aching, and heart-
breaking Considerations.

But this cannot be, where this sense, this godly fear, and this holy
contrition is wanting: profess men may, and make a noise, as the empty Barrel
makes the bigest sound; but prove them, and they are full of air, full of
emptiness, and that is all.

Nor are such Professors tender of God's Name, nor of the Credit of that Gospel
which they profess; nor can they, for they want that which should Oblidge them
thereunto; which is a sense of Pardon and Forgiveness; by the which their
broken Hearts have been replenished, succored, and made hope in God. Paul said,
The Love of Christ constrained him. But what was Paul, but a broken Hearted and
a contrite Sinner? See Acts 9. 3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14.

When God shows a man the Sin he has committed, the Hell he has deserved, the
Heaven he has lost: and yet that Christ, and Grace, and Pardon may be had; this
will make him serious, this will make him melt, this will break his heart, this
will show him that there is more than Air, than a Noise, than an Empty Sound in
Religion; and this is the man whose Heart, whose Life, whose Conversation and
All, will be engaged in the matters of the Eternal Salvation of his Precious
and Immortal Soul.

Object. But some may object, That in this saying I seem to ridged and
censorious; and will, if I moderate not these Lines with something milder
afterward, discourage many an honest Soul.

I Answer, Not a jot; not an honest Soul in all the World will be offended at
my words, for not one can be an honest Soul, I mean with reference to its
concerns in another World, that has not had a broken Heart, that never had a
Contrite Spirit. This I will say, because I would be understood aright; That
all attain-not to the same degree of trouble, nor lie so long there under, as
some of their Brethren do: But to go to Heaven without a Broken Heart, or to be
forgiven sin without a Contrite Spirit, is no Article of my Belief. We speak
not now of what is secret, revealed things belong to us and our Children; nor
must we venture to go further in our Faith. Does not Christ say* The whole have
no need of the Phsiti an; that is they see NO need, but Christ will make them
see their need before he ministers his Sovereign Grace unto them; and good
reason, otherwise he will have but little thanks for his kindness.

Object. But there are that are godly educated from their Childhood, and so
drink in the Principles of Christianity they know net how.

Answer. I count it one thing to receive the Faith of Christ from men only, and
another to receive it from God by the means. If thou art taught by an Angel,
yet if not taught of God, thou will never come to Christ; I do not say thou will never profess him. But if God speaks, and thou shall hear and understand
him, that voice will make such work within thee as was never made before. The
Voice of God is a Voice by it self, and is so distinguished by them that are
taught thereby. Joh. 6. 44, 45. Psalm. 29. Hab. 3. 15, 16. Ephesians. 4. 20, 21. 1
Pet. 2. 2, 3.

Object. But some men are not so debauched and profane as some, and so need not
to be so hammered and fired as others: so broken and wounded as others.

Answ. God knows best what we need. Paul was as righteous, before conversion,
as any that can pretend to Civility now, I suppose: and yet, that
notwithstanding, he was made shake, and was astonished at himself, at his
Conversion. And truly, I think, the more righteous any is in his own eyes
before conversion, the more need he has of heart breaking work, in order to his
salvation, because a man is not by nature so easily convinced that his
righteousness is to God abominable, as he is that his debauchery and
prosaneness is.

A man's goodness is that which blinds him most, is dearest to him, and hardly
parted with; and therefore when such an one is converted that thinks he has
goodness of his own enough to commend him in whole, or in part to God. (but,
but few such are converted) there is required a great deal of breaking work
upon his heart to make him come to Paul's conclusion, What! are we better than
they? No, in no wise, Romans 3. 9. I say, before he can be brought to see, his
glorious Robes are filthy Rags, and his gainful things but loss and dung, Isa.
64. Phil. 3.

This is also gathered from these words, Publicans and Harlots enter into the
Kingdom of God before the Pharisees, Mat. 21. 31.

Why before them, but because they lie fairer for the word, are easier
convinced of their need of Christ, and so are brought home to him without (as I
may) all that ado, that the Holy Ghost does make to bring home one of these to
him.

True, nothing is hard or difficult to God. But I speak after the manner of
men. And let who will take to task a man debauched in this Life, and one that
is not so, and he shall see, if he labors to convince them both that they
are in a state of Condemnation by nature; that the Pharisee will make his
appeals to God, with a great many, God I thank thee's, while the Publican hangs
his Head, shakes at Heart, and smites upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful
to me a sinner, Luke 18. 11, 12, 13.

Wherefore a self-righteous man, is but a painted Satan, or a Devil in fine
Clothes; but thinks he so of himself? No! no! He says to others, Stand back,
come not near* me, I am holier than thou. It Is almost impossible, that a
self-righteous man should be saved. But he that can drive a Camel through the
eye of a Needle, can cause, that even such a one shall see his lost condition,
and that he needs the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus
Christ. He can make him see, I say, that his own goodness did stand more in his
way to the Kingdom of Heaven, than he was aware of; and can make him feel too,
that his leaning to that is as great iniquity, as any immorality that men
commit. The sum then is, That men that are converted to God by Christ, through
the Word and Spirit (for all this must go to Effectual Conversion) must have
their Hearts broken, and Spirits made contrite. I say, it MUST be so, for the
reasons showed before.

Yea, and all decayed, apostatised and backsliden. Christians must, in order to
their recovery again to God, have their Hearts broken, their Souls wounded,
their Spirits made contrite, and sorry for their sins. Come, come, Conversion
to God is not SO easy, and SO smooth a thing, as some would have men believe
it is. Why is man's Heart compared to fallow ground; Gods Word to a Plow, and
his Ministers to Plow-men; if the Heart indeed has no need of breaking, in
order to the receiving of the Seed of God unto Eternal Life? Jer. 4, 3. Luke 9.
62. 1 Cor. 9. 10.

Who knows not that Fallowground must be Plowed, and Plowed too, before the
Husbandman will venture his Seed; yea, and after that often soundly harrowed, or
else he will have but a slender Harvest?

Why is the Conversion of the Soul compared to the grafting of a Tree if that
may be done without cutting?

The Word is the Graft, the Soul is the Tree, and the word as the Sien must be
let in by a wound; for to stick on the outside, or to be tied on with a string,
will do no good here; heart must be set to heart, and back to back, or your
pretended ingrafting will come to nothing. Romans 11. 17, 24. Jam. 1. 20.

I say, heart must be set to heart, and back to back, or the sap will not be
conveyed from the root to the branch. And I say, This must be done by a wound.
The Lord opened the heart of Lidia, as a man opens the stock to graft in the
siens, and so the word was let into her soul, and so the word and her heart
comented, and became one, Acts 16. 14.

Why is Christ bid to gird his. Sword upon his Thigh? And why must he make his
Arrows sharp, and all that the Heart may with this Sword and these Arrows, he
shot, wounded, and made to bleed? Yea, why is he commanded to let it be so, if
the People would bow and fall kindly under him, and heartily implore his Grace
without it? Psa. 45. 3, 4, 5. Alas, men are too lofty, too proud, too wild, too
devilishly resolved in the ways of their own Destruction; in their occasions
they are like the wild Asses upon the wild Mountains; nothing can break them of
their purposes, or hinder them from ruining of their own precious and immortal
Souls, but the breaking of their hearts.

Why is a broken heart put in the room of all Sacrifices which we can offer to
God; and a contrite Spirit, put in the room of all offerings, as they are (and
you may see it so if you compare the Text with that Verse which goes before it)
I say, why is it counted better than all, were they all put together, if any
one part, or if all external parts of Worship were they put together, could be
able to render the man a found, and a rightly made New Creature without it? A
broken heart, a contrite Spirit, God will not despise; but both thou, and all
thy Service he will certainly slight and reject; if when thou come to him, a
broken heart be wanting: Wherefore here is the point, Come Broken, come
Contrite, come Sensible of, and Sorry for thy Sins, or thy coming will be
counted no coming to God aright; and if so, consequently thou will get no
benefit thereby.

FINIS

