I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also: OR,
A DISCOVRSE Touching PRAYER.

From 1 Cor. 14. 15. Wherein is briefly discovered,

1. What PRAYER is.

2. What it is to pray with the Spirit.

3. What it is to pray with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also.

By JOHN BUNYAN.

The Second Edition.

But, we know not what we should pray for as we ought; only the Spirit helps
our infirmities, Romans 8. 26. London, Printed for the Author, 1663.

I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also.
PRAYER is an Ordinance of God, and that to be used both in Public and
Private; yea, such an Ordinance, as brings those that have the Spirit of
Supplication, into great familiarity with God; and is also so prevalent an
action, that it gets of God, both for the person that prays, and for them
that are prayed for, great things. It is the opener of the heart of God, and a
means by which the soul, though empty, is filled. By Prayer the Christian can
open his heart to God as to a Friend, and obtain fresh testimony of God's
Friendship to him. I might spend many words in distinguishing between public
and private Prayer; as also between that in the Heart, and that with the vocal
Voice: Something also might be spoken to distinguish between the Gifts and
Graces of Prayer; but eschewing this method, my business shall be at this time,
only to show you the very heart of Prayer, without which all your lifting up,
both of hands, and eyes, and voices, will be to no purpose at all. I will pray
with the Spirit.

The method that I shall go in at this time, shall be,

First, To show you what true Prayer is.

Secondly, To show you what it is to pray with the Spirit.

Thirdly, What it is to pray with the Spirit, and Understanding also.

And so, fourthly, to make some short Use and Application of what shall be
spoken.

I. What Prayer is.
For the first, What Prayer is.

Prayer is a sincere, sensible, affectionate pouring out of the heart or soul
to God through Christ, in the strength and assistance of the holy Spirit, for
such things as God has promised, or, according to the Word, for the good of
the Church, with submission, in Faith, to the Will of God.

In this Description are these seven things.

1. It is a sincere, 2. A sensible, 3. An affectionate pouring out of the soul
to God through Christ, 4. By the strength or assistance of the Spirit, 5. For
such things as God has promised, or, according to his Word, 6. For the good of
the Church, 7. With submission in Faith to the Will of God.
For the First of these, It is a sincere pouring out of the soul to God.

Sincerity is such a Grace as runs through all the Graces of God in us, and
through all the actings of a Christian, and has the sway in them too, or else
their actings are not any thing regarded of God, and so of and in Prayer, of
which particularly David speaks, when he mentions Prayer, Psalm. 66. 17, 18.
I cried unto the Lord with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue. If I
regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer, Psalm. 17. 1, 2,
3, 4. Part of the exercise of Prayer is sincerity, without which God looks not
upon it as Prayer in a good sense: Then shall you seek me and find me, when you
shall search for me with your whole heart, Jer. 29. 12, 13.

The want of this made the Lord reject their prayers in Hos. 7. 14. where he
says, They have not cried unto me with their heart (that is, in sincerity)
when they howled upon their beds. But for a pretense, for a show in hypocrisy,
to be seen of men, and applauded for the same, they pray.

Sincerity was that which Christ commended in Nathaniel, when he was under the
fig tree; Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile. Probably this
good man was pouring out of his soul to God in Prayer under the figtree, and
that in a sincere and unfeigned spirit before the Lord. The Prayer that has
this in it, as one of the principal ingredients, is the Prayer that God looks
at. Thus, the Prayer of the Upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8.

And why must Sincerity be one of the essentials of Prayer which is accepted of
God, but because sincerity carries the soul in all simplicity to open its heart
to God, and to tell him the case plainly without equivocation; to condemn it
self plainly without dissembling; to cry to God heartily without complementing.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoning himself thus: Thou have chastized me, and
I was chastized, as a bullock unaccustommed to the yoke, Jer. 31. 18. Sincerity
is the same in a corner alone as it is before the face of all the world. It
knows not how to wear two vizards, one for an appearance before men, and
another for a short snatch in a corner; but it must have God, and be with him
in the duty of Prayer. It is not a liplabour that it does regard, for it is the
heart that God looks at, and that which sincerity looks at, and that which
Prayer comes from, if it be that Prayer which is accompanied with sincerity.

Secondly, It is a sincere and sensible pouring out of the heart or soul. It is
not, as many take it to be, even a few babbling, prating, complementory
expressions, but a sensible feeling there is in the heart. Prayer has in it a
sensibleness of diverse things: Sometimes sense of sin, sometimes of mercy
received, sometimes of the readiness of God to give mercy, etc.

First, a sense of the want of mercy, by reason of the danger of sin. The soul,
I say, feels, and from feeling, sighs, groans, and breaks at the heart. For
right Prayer bubleth out of the heart when it is over-pressed with grief and
bitterness, as blood is forced out of the flesh, by reason of some heavy
burden that lies upon it, 1 Samuel 1. 10. David roars, cries, weeps, faints at
the heart, fails at the eyes, loses his moisture, etc. Psalm. 69. 3. and 38. 8,
9, 10. Hezekiah mourns like a dove, Isa. 38. 14. Ephraim bemoans himself, Jer.
31. 18. Peter weeps bitterly, Mat. 26. 57. Christ has ( Heb. 5. 7.) strong
cryings and tears; and all this from a sense of the justice of God, the guilt
of sin, the pains of Hell and destruction. The sorrows of Death compassed me
about, the pains of Hell got hold upon me, and I found trouble and sorrow. Then
cried I unto the Lord, Psalm. 116. 3, 4. And in another place, Psalm. 77. 2. My
sore ran in the night. Again, Psalm. 38. 6. I am bowed down greatly, I go
mourning all the day long. In all these instances, and in hundreds more that
might be named, you may see, that Prayer carries it in a sensible feeling
disposition, and that first from a sense of sin.

2dly, Sometimes there is a sweet sense of mercy received; encouraging,
comforting, strengthening, enlivening, enlightening mercy, etc.

Thus David pours out his soul to bless and praise, and admire the great God
for his loving kindness to such poor vile wretches. Psalm. 103. 1, 2. Bless the
Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord,
O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities,
who heals all thy diseases, and crowns thee with loving kindness and tender
mercies; who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who satisfies thy mouth with
good things, so that thy youth is renewed as the Eagles. And thus is the Prayer
of Saints sometimes turned into praise and thanksgiving, and yet are Prayers
still.

This is a Mystery, God's people pray with their praises, as it is written,
Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer, with
supplication and thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. A
sensible thanksgiving for mercies received, is a mighty Prayer in the sight of
God; it prevails with him unspeakably.

3dly, In Prayer, there is sometimes in the soul, a sense of Mercy to be
received. This again sets the soul all on a flame. Thou, O Lord God, (says
David, 2 Samuel 7. 27.) have revealed unto thy Servant, saying, I will build thee
an house; therefore has thy Servant found in his heart to pray unto thee.

This provoked Jacob, David, Daniel, with others, even a sense of Mercies to be
received, as you may see, Genesis 32. 9, 10, 11, 12. Dan. 9. 2, 3, 4. which caused
them, not by fits and starts, nor yet in a foolish frothy way to babble over a
few words written in a paper; but mightily, fervently, and continually, to
groan out their conditions before the Lord, as being sensible; sensible, I say,
of their wants, their misery, and the willingness of God to show mercy.

A good sense of sin, and the wrath of God, with some encouragement from God to
come unto him, is a better Common Prayer Book, than that which is taken out of
the Papistical See Mr. Fox his citation of the Mass, in the last Volumn of the
Book of Martyrs.
Mass Book; being the Scraps and Fragments of the devices of some Popes, some
Friars, and I wot not what.

3. Prayer is a sincere, sensible, and an affectionate pouring out of the soul
to God. O the heat, strength, life, vigor, and affection that is in right
Prayer.

As the heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so longs my soul after thee, O
God, Psalm. 42. 1. I have longed for thy Precepts; I have longed after thy
Salvation, Psalm. 119. 40. My soul longs, yea, faints for the Courts of the
Lord; my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God, Psalm. 84. 2. My soul
breaks for the longing that it has unto thy Judgments at all times, Psalm.
119. 20. Mark ye here, My soul longs, it longs, it longs, etc. Oh what
affection is here discovered in Prayer!

The like you have in Daniel, Dan. 9. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord
hearken and do; defer not for thy Names sake, O my God. Every syllable carries
a mighty vehemence in it.

This is called the fervent, or the working Prayer, by James, Jam. 5. And so
again, Luke 22. 44. And being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly; or had his
affections more and more drawn out after God for his helping hand.

Oh how wide are the most of men with their Prayers, from this Prayer, that is
Prayer in God's account. Alas, the greatest part of men make no conscience at
all of the duty; and as for them that do, it is to be feared, that many of them
are very great strangers to a sencere, sensible, and affectionate pouring out
their hearts or souls to God; but even content themselves with a little
lip-labor, and bodily exercise, mumbling over a few imaginary Prayers.

When the Affections are indeed engaged in Prayer, then, then the whole man is
engaged, and that in such sort, that the soul will spend it self to nothing, as
it were, rather than it will go without that good desired, even communion and
solace with Christ. And hence it is, that the Saints have spent their
strengths, and lost their lives, rather than go without the blessing, Psalm. 69.
3. Psalm. 38. 9, 10. Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26.

All this is too too evident by the ignorance, profaneness, and spirit of envy,
that reigns in the hearts of those men that are so hot for the Forms, and not
the Power of prayer: Scarce one of forty among them, know what it is to be born
again, to have communion with the Father through the Son; to feel the power of
Grace sanctifying their hearts: but for all their prayers, they still live
cursed, drunken, whorish, and abominable Lives, full of Malice, Envy, Deceit,
Persecuting of the dear Children of God. Oh what a dreadful after-clap is
coming upon them! which all their hypocritical assembling themselves together,
with all their prayers, shall never be able to help them against, or shelter
them from.

Again, It is a pouring out of the Heart or Soul: There is in Prayer, an
unbosoming of a man's self, an opening of the Heart to God, an affectionate
pouring out of the Soul in requests, sighs, and groans. All my desires are
before thee (says David, Psalm. 38. 9.) my groanings are not hid from thee. And
again, My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: When shall I come
and appear before God? When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me,
Psalm. 42. 2, 3. Mark; I pour out my Soul: It is an Expression signifying, that
in Prayer, there goes the very life and whole strength to God. As in another
place, Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your hearts
before him. This is the Prayer to which the Promise is made, for the delivering
of a poor Creature out of captivity and thraldom. If from thence thou shall
seek the Lord, thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 29.

Again, It is a pouring out of the heart or soul to God. This shows also the
Excellency of the Spirit of prayer: it is the great God to which it retires;
When shall I come and appear before God? And it argues, that the Soul that
thus prays indeed, sees an emptiness in all things under heaven; That in God
alone there is rest and satisfaction for the Soul. Now she that is a Widow, and
desolate, trusts in God, 1 Timothy 5. 5. So says David, In thee, O Lord, do I
put my trust, let me never be put to confusion; deliver me in thy
Righteousness, and cause me to escape; incline thine ear to me, and save me: be
thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: For thou art my
rock and my fortress; deliver me, O God, out of the hand of the unrighteous and
cruel man: For thou art my hope, O Lord my God, thou art my trust from my
mouth. Many in a wording way, speak of God, but right Prayer makes God his
hope, stay, and all. Right Prayer sees nothing substantial, and worth the
looking after, but God: And that (as I said before) it does in a sincere,
sensible, and affectionate way.

Again, It is a sincere, sensible, affectionate pouring out of the heart, or
soul to God, through Christ. This, through Christ, must needs be added, or else
it is to be questioned, whether it be Prayer, though in appearance it be never
so eminent, or eloquent.

Christ is the way through whom the Soul has admittance to God, John 14. 6.
and without whom, it is impossible that so much, as one desire, should come
into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. If you ask any thing in my Name,
whatsoever you ask the Father in my Name, I will do it, Joh. 14. 13, 14. This
was Daniels way in praying for the People of God; he did it in the Name of
Christ, Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate,
for the Lords sake, Dan. 9. 17. And so David, for thy Names sake, (that is, for
thy Christ's sake) pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, Psalm. 25. 11.

But now, it is not every one that makes mention of Christ's Name in prayer,
that does indeed and in truth effectually pray to God in the Name of Christ, or
through him. This coming to God through Christ, is the hardest part that is
found in Prayer: A man may more easily be sensible of his works, I, and
sincerely too desire mercy, and yet not be able to come to God by Christ. That
man that comes to God by Christ, he must first have the knowledge of him: For
he that comes to God, must believe that he is, Heb. 11. 6. And so he that comes
to God through Christ, must be enabled to know Christ. Lord (says Moses, Exodus
33. 11.) show me thy Way, that I may know thee.

This Christ, none but the Father can reveal, Mat. 11. 27. Mat. 16. 16. And to
come through Christ, is for the soul to be enabledo^ God, to shroud it self
under the shadow of the Lord Jesus, as a man shroudeth himself under a thing
for safeguard.

Hence it is that David so often terms Christ his shield, buckler, tower,
fortress, rock of defense, etc. Psalm. 18. 2. Psalm. 27. 1. Psalm. 28. 1. not only
because by him he overcame his enemies, but because through him he found favor
with God the Father. And so he says to Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. Fear not, I am thy
shield, etc.

The man then that comes to God through Christ, must have faith by which he
puts on Christ, and in him appears before God. Now he that has Faith, is born
of God ( John 3. 5. 7.) born again, and so become one of the Sons of God ( John
1. 12.) by virtue of which he is joined to Christ, and made a member of him,
Ephesians. 5. 30. And therefore, Secondly, He, as a member of Christ, comes to God,
I say, as a member of him, so that God looks on that man as part of Christ,
part of his Body, flesh and bones, united to him by election, conversion,
illumination, the Spirit being conveyed into the heart of that poor man by God;
so that now he comes to God in Christ's merits, in his blood, righteousness,
victory, intercession, and so stands before him; being accepted in his beloved,
Ephesians. 1. 6. And because this poor creature is thus a member of the Lord Jesus,
and under this consideration, has admittance to come to God: therefore, by
virtue of this union, also, is the holy Sprit, conveyed into him, whereby he is
able to pour out himself (to wit) his soul before God, with his audience. And
this leads me to the next, or fourth particular.

4. Prayer is a sincere, sensible, affectionate pouring out of the heart or
soul to God through Christ, by the strength or assistance of the Spirit. For
these things do so depend one upon another, that it is impossible that it
should be Prayer without there be a joint concurrence of them: for though it be
never so famous, yet without these things, it is only such Prayer as is
rejected of God. For without a sincere, sensible, affectionate pouring out of
the heart to God, it is but lip-labor; and if it be not through Christ, it
falls far short of ever sounding well in the ears of God. So also, if it be
not in the strength and assistance of the Spirit, it is but like the Sons of
Aaron, offering with strange fire, Levit. 10. 1, 2. But I shall speak more to
this under the second head; and therefore in the mean time, That which is not
petitioned through the teaching and assistance of the Spirit, it is not
possible that it should be according to the will of God, Romans 8. 26, 27.

But to proceed.

5. Prayer is a sincere, sensible, affectionate pouring out of the heart or
soul to God, through Christ, in the strength and assistance of the Spirit, for
such things as God has promised, etc. Mat. 6. 6, 7, 8. Prayer it is, when it
is within the compass of God's word; and it is blasphemy, or at best, vain
babbling, when the Petition is beside the Book.

David therefore still in his prayer, kept his eye on the Word of God. My soul,
says he, cleaves to the dust; quicken me according to thy word, Psalm. 119.
25, 28. And again, Psalm. 119. 41, 42, 58, 65, 74, 81, 82, 107, 147, 154, 169,
170. My soul melts for heaviness; strengthen me according to thy Word. And,
Remember thy word unto thy servant, on which thou have caused me to hope. And
indeed, the holy Ghost does not immediately quicken and stir up the heart of
the Christian without, but by, with, and through the word, by bringing that to
the heart, and by opening of that whereby the man is provoked to go to the
Lord, and to tell him, how it is with him; and also to argue, and supplicate,
according to the Word.

Thus it was with Daniel, that mighty Prophet of the Lord. He understanding by
Books, that the Captivity of the Children of Israel was hard at an end; Then
according unto that word, he makes his prayer to God.

I Daniel, (says he, Dan. 9. 2, 3.) understood by Books, (viz. the Writings of
Jeremiah) the number of the years whereof the Word of the Lord came to
Jeremiah, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolation of
Jerusalem. And I set my face to the Lord God, to seek by prayer and
supplication, with fasting, and sackcloth and ashes. So that, I say, as the
Spirit is the helper and the governor of the Soul, when it prays according
to the Will of God; so it guides by and according to the Word of God, and his
Promise. Hence it is that our Lord Jesus Christ himself did make a stop,
although his Life lay at stake for it. I could now pray to my Father, and he
should give me more than twelve legions of Angels; but how then must the
Scripture be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Mat. 26. 53, 54. As who should
say, were there but a word for it in the Scripture, I should soon be out of the
hands of mine enemies, I should be helped by Angels; but the Scripture will not
warrant this kind of praying, for that says otherwise: It is a praying then
according to the word and promise. The Spirit by the Word must direct, as well
in the manner, as in the matter of Prayer. I will pray with the Spirit, and I
will pray with the Understanding also. But there is no understanding without
the Word; For if they reject the Word of the Lord, what wisdom is in them? Jer.
8. 9.

6. For the good of the Church. This clause reaches in whatsoever tends
either to the honor of God, Christ's advancement, or his Peoples benefit. For
God, and Christ, and his People, are so linked together, that if the Good of
one be prayed for, to wit, the Church, the glory of God, and advancement of
Christ must needs be included. For as Christ is in the Father, so the Saints
are in Christ, John 17. 23. And he that touches the Saints, touches the Apple
of God's Eye, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Psalm. 17. 8. Zach. 2. 8. And therefore pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem, and you pray for all that is required of you, Psalm. 122. 6.
Psalm. 51. 8. Isa. 62. 6, 7. For Jerusalem will never be in perfect peace, until
she be in Heaven; and there is nothing that Christ does more desire, than to
have her there. That also is the place, that God through Christ has given to
her. He then that prays for the peace and good of Sion, or the Church, does
ask that in prayer which Christ has purchased with his Blood; and also, that
which the Father has given to him as the price thereof. Now he that prays
for this, must pray for abundance of Grace for the Church, for help against all
its temptations, that God would let nothing be too hard for it, and that all
things might work together for its good; that God would keep them blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God, to his glory, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Nation. And this is the substance of Christ's own Prayer in the seventeenth of
John. And all Paul's Prayers did run that way, as one of his Prayers do
eminently show, in Ephesians. 1. 16, to the 21. and Chap. 3. ver. 14, to the 19th.
with Col. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11. he says, And this I
pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in all knowledge, and in all
judgment; that ye may approve things that are excellent; that you may be
sincere, and without offense until the day of Christ. Being filled with the
fruits of Righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of
God.

But a short Prayer you see, and yet full of good desires for the Church, from
the beginning to the end: That it may stand and go on, and that in the most
excellent frame of spirit, even without blame, sincere, and without offense,
until the day of Christ, let its temptations or persecutions be what they will.
And because, as I said, Prayer does submit to the will of God, and say, Thy
Will be done, as Christ has taught us, Matthew. 6. 10. therefore the People of
the Lord in humility are to lay themselves and their prayers, and all that they
have, at the foot of their God, to be disposed of by him as he in his heavenly
wisdom sees best; Yet not doubting but God will answer the desire of his
People, that way that shall be most for their advantage, and his glory. When
the Saints therefore do pray with submission to the Will of God, it does not
argue that they are to doubt or question Gods love and kindness to them. But
because they at all times are not so wise, but that sometimes Satan may get
that advantage of them, as to tempt them to pray for that, which if they had
it, would neither prove to God's glory, nor his Peoples good: 1 John 5. 14, 15.
Yet this is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his Will, he hears us: And if we know that he hears us, whatsoever we
ask, we know that we have the Petition that we ask of him; that is, we asking
in the Spirit of grace and supplication. For, as I said before, that Petition
that is not put up in and through the Spirit, it is not to be answered, because
it is beside the Will of God. For the Spirit only knows that, and so
consequently knows how to pray according to that Will of God. For what man
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is in him? even so
the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. But more
of this hereafter.

Thus you see, first, what Prayer is. Now to proceed.

II. I will pray with the Spirit.
Now to pray with the Spirit; for that is the praying man, and none else, so as
to be accepted of God: It is for a man (as aforesaid) sincerely and sensibly,
with affection to come to God through Christ, etc. which sincere, sensible, and
affectionate coming, must be by the working of God's Spirit.

There is no man, nor Church in the world, that can come to God in Prayer but
by the assistance of the holy Spirit; For (Ephesians. 2. 18.) through Christ we all
have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Wherefore Paul says, We know not
what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession
for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searches the
heart, knows the meaning of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for
the Saints according to the will of God. And because there is in this Scripture
so full a discovery of the Spirit of Prayer, and of man's inability to pray
without it; therefore I shall in a few words comment upon it.

Romans 15. 16. For we.] Consider first the person speaking, even Paul, and in
his person all the Apostles. We Apostles, we extraordinary Officers, the wise
Master Builders, that have some of us been caught up into Paradise, 1 Cor. 3.
10. 2 Cor. 12. 4. We know not what we should pray for.

Surely there is no man but will confess, that Paul and his Companions were as
able to have done any work for God, as any Pope or proud Prelate in the Church
of Rome, and could as well have made a See Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments. Volumn
2.
Common Prayer Book, as those who at first composed this; as being not a whit
behind them, either in grace or gifts.

For we know not what we should pray for.] We know not the Matter of the things
for which we should pray, neither the Object to whom we pray, nor the Medium
by, or through whom we pray; none of these things know we, but by the help and
assistance of the Spirit, Mat. 11. 27. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11. Should we pray for
Communion with God through Christ; should we pray for Faith, for Justification
by Grace, and a truly sanctified heart? None of these things know we. For, As
no man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is in him;
even so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11.
But here (alas!) the Apostles speak of inward and spiritual things, which the
world knows not, Isa. 29. 11.

Again, As they know not the Matter, etc. of Prayer, without the help of the
Spirit, so neither know they the Manner thereof without the same; and therefore
he adds, We know not what we should pray for as we ought; but, the Spirit
helps our infirmities, with sighs and groans which cannot be uttered. Mark
here, they could not so well and so fully come off in the manner of performing
this duty, as these in our days think they can.

The Apostles when they were at the best, yea, when the holy Ghost assisted
them, yet then they were fain to come off with sighs and groans; falling short
of expressing their mind, but with sighs and groans, which cannot be uttered.

But here now, the wise men of our days are so well skilled, as that they have
both the Manner and Matter of their Prayers at their fingers ends; setting such
a Prayer for such a day, and that twenty years before it comes. One for
Christmas, another for Easter, and six days after that. They have also
bounded how many syllables must be said in every one of them at their public
Exercises. For each Saints day also, they have them ready for the generations
yet unborn to say. They can tell you also, when you shall kneel, when you
should stand, when you should abide in your seats, when you should go up into
the Chancel, and what you should do when you come there. All which the Apostles
came short of, as not being able to compose so profound a manner. And that for
this reason included in this Scripture, because the fear of God tied them to
pray as they ought.

For we know not what we should pray for as we ought.] Mark this, As we ought.
For the not thinking of this word, or at least, the not understanding it, in
the spirit and truth of it, has occasioned these men to devise, as Jeroboam
did (1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.) another way of Worship, both
for matter and manner, than is revealed in the Word of God. But says Paul, We
must pray as we ought; and this we cannot do by all the art, skill, cunning and
device of Men or Angels. For we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit; nay further, it must be the Spirit it self that helps our
infirmities; not the Spirit and man's lusts. What man of his own brain may
imagine and devise, is one thing; and what they are commanded and ought to do,
is another. Many ask and have not, because they ask amiss, Jam. 4. 3. and so
are never the nearer the enjoying of those things they petition for. It is not
to pray at random, that will put off God, or cause him to answer.

While Prayer is making, God is searching the heart, to see from what root and
spirit it does arise. And he that searches the heart, knows (that is,
approves only) the meaning of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for
the Saints according to the will of God, 1 John 5. 14. For in that which is
according to his Will only he hears us, and in nothing else. And it is the
Spirit only that can teach us so to ask; it only being able to search out all
things, even the deep things of God. Without which Spirit, though we had a
thousand Common-Prayer-Books, yet we know not what we should pray for as we
ought, being accompanied with those infirmities that make us absolutely
incapable of such a work. Which infirmities, although it is a hard thing to
name them all, yet some of them are these that follow.

First, Without the Spirit, man is so infirm, that he cannot with all other
means whatsoever, be enabled to think one right saving thought of God, of
Christ, or of his blessed things; and therefore he says of the wicked, God is
not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. Unless it be that they imagine him
altogether such a one as themselves, Psalm. 50. 20. For every imagination of the
thought of their heart, is only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6. 5. Genesis 8.
21.

They then, not being able to conceive aright of God to whom they pray, of
Christ through whom they pray, nor of the things for which they pray, as is
before showed, how shall they be able to address themselves to God, without the
Spirit help this infirmity?

Peradventure you will say, By the help of the Common Prayer Book: but, that
cannot do it unless it can open the eyes, and reveal to the soul all these
things before touched. Which, that it cannot, it is evident; because that is
the work of the Spirit only: The Spirit it self is the revealer of these things
to poor souls, and that which does give us to understand them; wherefore,
Christ tells his Disciples, when he promised to send the Spirit, the Comforter,
He shall take of mine, and show unto you; as if he had said, I know you are
naturally dark and ignorant, as to the understanding any of my things; though
ye try this course and the other, yet your ignorance will still remain; the
vail is spread over your heart, and there is none can take away the same, nor
give you spiritual understanding, but the Spirit. The Common Prayer Book will
not do it, neither can any man expect that it should be instrumental that way,
it being none of God's Ordinances; but a thing since the Scriptures were
written, patched together, one piece at one time, and another at another; a
mere mane invention and institution, which God is so far from owning of, that
he expressly forbids it, with any other such like, and that by manyfold sayings
in his most holy and blessed Word. See Mark 7. verse. 7, 8. and Col. 2. verse.
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 12. 30, 31, 32. Prove. 30. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Rev. 22. 18. For right prayer, must as well in the outward part of it, in the
outward expression, as in the inward intention, come from what the soul does
apprehend in the Light of the Spirit; otherwise it is condemned as vain and an
abomination; ( Mark 7.) because the heart and tongue do not go along jointly in
the same, Prove. 21. 9. Isa. 29. 13. neither indeed can they, unless the Spirit
help our infirmities. And this David knew full well, which did make him cry,
Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise, Psalm. 51.
10, 11.

I suppose, there is none can imagine, but that David could speak, and express
himself as well as others, nay, as any in our generation, as is clearly
manifested by his word, and his works. Nevertheless, when this good man, this
Prophet, comes into God's Worship, then the Lord must help, or he can do
nothing; Lord open thou my lips, and then my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
He could not speak one right word, except the Spirit it self gave utterance:
For we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self
helps our infirmities.

But Secondly, It must be a praying with the Spirit, that is the effectual
praying; because, without that, as men are senceless, so hypocritical, cold,
and unseemly in their prayers; and so, they with their prayers, are both
rendered abominable to God, Mat. 23. 14. Mark 12. 40. It is not the excellency
of the voice, nor the seeming affection, and earnestness of him that prays,
that is any thing regarded of God without it, Luke 18. 11, 12. Isa. 58. 2, 3.
For man, as man, is so full of all manner of wickedness, that as he cannot keep
a word, or thought, so much less a piece of prayer clean, and acceptable to God
through Christ. And for this cause, the Pharisees, with their prayers, were
rejected. No question, but they were excellently able to express themselves in
words, and also for length of time too they were very notable; but they had not
the Spirit of Jesus Christ to help them, and therefore they did what they did
with their infirmities or weaknesses only, and so fell short of a sincere,
sensible, affectionate pouring out of their souls to God through the strength
of the Spirit. That is the prayer that goes to Heaven, that is sent thither in
the strength of the Spirit. For,

Thirdly, Nothing but the Spirit can show a man clearly his misery by nature,
and so put a man into a posture of prayer. Talk is but talk, as we use to say,
and so it is but mouth-worship, if there be not a sense of misery, and that
effectually too.

O the cursed hypocrisy that is in most hearts, and that accompanies many
thousands of praying men, that would be so looked upon in this day, and all for
want of a sense of their misery! But now the Spirit, that will sweetly show the
soul its misery, where it is, and what is like to become of it; also the
intolerableness of that condition: For it is the Spirit that does effectually
convince of sin and misery, without the Lord Jesus, John 16. 7, 8, 9. and so
puts the soul into a sweet, serious, sensible, affectionate way of praying to
God according to his Word.

Fourthly, If men did see their sins, yet without the help of the Spirit, they
would not pray: For they would run away from God, with Cain and Judas, and
utterly despair of mercy, were it not for the Spirit. When a man is indeed
sensible of his sin, and God's curse, then it is an hard thing to persuade him
to pray; For says his heart, There is no hope, It is in vain to seek God, Jer.
2. 25. Jer. 18. 12. I am so vile, so wretched, and so cursed a creature, that I
shall never be regarded. Now here comes the Spirit, and stays the soul,
helps it to hold up its face to God, by letting into the heart some small
sense of mercy, to encourage it to go to God; and hence it is called the
Comforter, John 14. 26.

Fifthly, It must be in, or with the Spirit; For without that, no man can know
how he should come to God the right way. Men may easily say, they come to God
in his Son: but it is the hardest thing of a thousand to come to God aright and
in his own way, without the Spirit. It is the Spirit that searches all things,
yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. It is the Spirit that must show us
the way of coming to God, and also what there is in God that makes him
desirable. I beseech thee (says Moses) show me thy way, that I may know thee,
Exodus 33. 13. And Joh. 16. 14. He shall take of mine, and shall show it unto
you.

Sixthly, Because without the Spirit, though a man did see his misery, and also
the way to come to God; yet he would never be able to claim a share in either
God, Christ, or Mercy, with Gods approbation. O how great a task is it, for a
poor soul that comes sensible of sin, and the wrath of God, to say in Faith,
but this one word, Father! I tell you, how ever hypocrites think, yet the
Christian, that is so indeed, finds all the difficulty in this very thing, it
cannot say, God is its Father.

Oh! says he, I dare not call him Father; and hence it is, that the Spirit
must be sent into the hearts of Gods people for this very thing, to cry,
Father, Gal. 4. 6. it being too great a work for any man to do knowingly, and
believingly, without it. When I say, knowingly, I mean, knowing what it is to
be a Child of God, and to be born again. And when I say, believingly, I mean,
for the soul to believe, and that from good experience, that the work of Grace
is wrought in him: this is the right calling of God Father; and not as many do,
to say in a babbling way, the Lords Prayer (so called) by heart, as it lies in
the words of the Book. No, here is the life of Prayer, when in, or with the
Spirit, a man being made sensible of sin, and how to come to the Lord for
mercy; he comes, I say, in the strength of the Spirit, and cries, Father.

That one word spoken in Faith, is better than a thousand prayers, as men call
them, written and read, in a formal, cold, lukewarm way.

Oh how far short are those people of being sensible of this, who count it
enough to teach themselves and children, to say the Lords Prayer, the Creed,
with other sayings; when as Gods knows they are senceless of themselves, their
misery, or what it is to be brought to God through Christ!

Ah poor souls! study your misery, and cry to God to show you your confused
blindness and ignorance, before you be to rife in calling God your Father, or
learning your children either so to say. And know, that to say, God is your
Father, in a way of prayer, or conference, without an experiment of the work of
grace on your souls, it is to say, you are Jews, and are not, and so to lie.

You say, Our Father, God says you blaspheme. You say, you are Jews, that is,
true Christians: God says, you lie. Behold I will make them of the Synagogue
of Satan, which say, they are Jews, and are not, but do lie. And I know the
blasphemy of them that say, they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue
of Satan, Rev. 3. 9. Rev. 2. 9.

And so much the greater the sin is, by how much the more the sinner boasts it
with a pretended sanctity, as the Jews did to Christ, in John 8. 41, to 45.
which made Christ even in plain terms to tell them their doom, for all their
hypocritical pretenses. And yet forsooth, every cursed whoremaster, thief and
drunkard, swearer, and perjured person, they that have not only been such in
times past, but are even so still; these, I say, by some must be counted the
only honest men, and all because, with their blasphemous throats and
hypocritical hearts, they will come to Church and say, Our Father. Nay further,
these men, though every time they say to God, our Father, do most abominably
blaspheme, yet they must be compelled thus to do. And because others that are
of more sober Principles, scruple the truth of such vain Traditions; therefore
they must be looked upon to be the only Enemies of God and the Nation, Isa. 53.
10. when as it is their own cursed Superstition, that does set the great God
against them, and cause him to count them for his enemies. And yet, just like
to Bonner, that blood-red Persecutor, they commend (I say) these wretches,
although never so vile (if they close in with their Traditions) to be good
Churchmen, the honest subjects; while God's People are (as it has always
been, Ezra 4. 12, to 16.) looked upon to be a turbulent, seditious, and
factious people.

Therefore give me leave a little to reason with thee, thou poor, blind,
ignorant Sot; It may be, thy great prayer is to say, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc. Do thou know the meaning of the very first words of this Prayer?
Can thou indeed, with the rest of the Saints, cry, Our Father? Art thou truly
born again? have thou received the Spirit of Adoption? do thou see thy self
in Christ? and can thou come to God as a Member of him? Or, art thou ignorant
of these things, and yet dare say, Our Father? Is not the Devil thy Father, (
John 8. 44.) and do thou not do the deeds of the flesh? and yet dare thou
say to God, Our Father? Nay, art thou not a desperate Persecutor of the
Children of God? have thou not cursed them in thy heart many a time? And yet,
do thou out of thy blasphemous throat suffer these words to come, even, Our
Father?

He is their Father, whom thou hate and persecutest.

But as the Devil presented himself amongst the Sons or God, Job 1. when they
were to present themselves before the Father, even our Father; so is it now:
because the Saints are commanded to say, Our Father; therefore all the blind
ignorant rabble in the world, they must also use the same words, Our Father.

Secondly, And do thou indeed say, Hallowed be thy Name, with thy heart? Do
thou study by all honest and lawful ways, to advance the Name, Holiness and
Majesty of God? Does thy heart and conversation agree with this passage? Do
thou strive to imitate Christ in all the works of Righteousness, which God does
command of thee, and prompt thee forwards to? It is so, if thou be one that
can truly with God's allowance cry, Our Father.

Or, is it not the least of thy thoughts all the day? and do thou not clearly
make it appear that thou art a cursed Hypocrite, by condemning that with thy
daily practice, which thou pretendest in thy praying with thy dissembling
tongue?

Thirdly, Would thou have the Kingdom of God come indeed, and also his Will
to be done in Earth as it is in Heaven? Nay, notwithstanding, thou, according
to the form, say, Thy Kingdom come; yet, would it not make thee ready to run
mad, to hear the Trumpet sound, to see the Dead arise, and thy self just now to
go and appear before God, to reckon for all the deeds thou have done in the
Body? Nay, are not the very thoughts of it altogether displeasing to thee? And
if God's Will should be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, must it not be thy
ruin?

There is never a Rebel in Heaven* against God; and if he should so deal on
Earth, must he not whirle thee down to Hell?

And so of the rest of the Petitions.

Ah! how sadly would even those men look, and with what terror would they walk
up and down the world, if they did but know the lying and blaspheming that
proceeds out of their mouth, even in their most pretended sanctity?

The Lord awaken you, and learn your poor souls, in all humility, to take heed,
that you be not rash and unadvised with your heart, and much more with your
mouth; when you appear before God (as the wise man says) Be not rash with thy
mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing; especially to call
God Father, without some blessed experience when thou come before God. But I
pass this.

Seventhly, It must be a praying with the Spirit if it be accepted; because,
there is nothing but the Spirit can lift up the soul or heart to God in Prayer.
The preparation of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is from the
Lord, Prove. 16. 1. That is, In every work for God (and especially in Prayer) if
the heart run with the tongue, it must be prepared by the Spirit of God.

Indeed the tongue is very apt (of it self) to run without either Fear or
Wisdom. But when it is the answer of the heart, and that such an heart as is
prepared by the Spirit of God; then it speaks so as God commands and does
desire.

They are mighty words of David, where he says, That he lifts his heart and
his soul to God, Psalm. 25. 1.

It is a great work for any man without the strength of the Spirit; and
therefore I conceive that this is one of the great reasons why the Spirit of
God is called a Spirit of Supplication, Zech. 12. 11. because it is that which
helps the heart when it supplicates indeed, to do it.

And therefore says Paul, Ephesians. 6. 18. -- Praying with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit. And so in my Text, I will pray with the Spirit.

Prayer, without the heart be in it, is like a sound without life; and a heart,
without it be lifted up of the Spirit, will never pray to God.

Eighthly, As the heart must be lifted up by the Spirit if it pray aright; so
also it must be held up by the Spirit when it is up, if it continue to pray
aright.

I do not know what, or how, it is with others hearts, whether they be lifted
up by the Spirit of God, and so continued, or no: But this I am sure of;

First, That it is impossible that all the Prayer-Books that men have made in
the world, should lift up or prepare the heart; that is the work of the great
God himself.

And in the Second place, I am sure, that they are as far from keeping it up,
when it is up.

And indeed, here is the life of Prayer, to have the heart kept with God in the
duty.

Exodus 17. 12. It was a great matter for Moses to keep his hands lifted up to
God in Prayer; but how much more then to keep the heart in it!

The want of this is that which God complains of, Ezekiel. 33. That they draw nigh
to him with their mouth, and honor him with their lips, but their hearts were
far from him, (but chiefly) they that walk after the Commandments and
Traditions of men: as the scope of Matthew. 15. 8, 9. does testify.

And verily, may I but speak my own Experience, and from that tell you the
difficulty of Praying to God as I ought; it is enough to make your poor, blind,
carnal men, to entertain strange thoughts of me. For, as for my heart, when I
go to pray, I find it so loath to go to God, and when it is with him, so loath to
stay with him, that many times I am forced in my Prayers; first, to beg of God
that he would take mine heart, and set it on himself in Christ, and when it is
there, that he would keep it there ( Psalm. 86. 11.) Nay, many times I know not
what to pray for, I am so blind, nor how to pray I am so ignorant; only
(blessed be Grace) the Spirit helps our infirmities.

Oh the starting-holes that the heart has in the time of Prayer! none knows
how many by-ways the heart has, and back-lains, to slip away from the
presence of God. How much pride also, if enabled with expressions? how much
hypocrisy, if before others? And how little conscience is there made of Prayer
between God and the Soul in secret, unless the Spirit of Supplication be there
to help?

When the Spirit gets into the heart then there is Prayer indeed, and not till
then.

Ninthly, The soul that does rightly pray, it must be in and with the help and
strength of the Spirit; because it is impossible that a man should express
himself in Prayer without it: when I say it is impossible for a man to express
himself in prayer without it, I mean that it is impossible that the heart in a
sincere and sensible, affectionate way, should pour out it self before God,
with those groans and sighs that come from a truly praying heart, without the
assistance of the Spirit. It is not the mouth that is the main thing to be
looked at in Prayer, but whether the heart be so full of affection and
earnestness in Prayer with God, that it is impossible to express their sense
and desire. For then a man desires indeed, when his desires are so strong, many
and mighty, that all the words, tears and groans that can come from the heart,
cannot utter them. The Spirit helps our infirmities, and makes intercession
for us with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered.

That is but poor prayer, which is only discovered in so many words.

A man that truly prays one Prayer, shall after that never be able to express
with his mouth or pen, the unutterable desires, sense, affection and longing,
that went to God in that Prayer.

The best Prayers have often more groans than words; and those words that it
has, are but a lean and shallow representation of the heart, life, and spirit
of that Prayer. You do not find any words of Prayer that we read of, come out
of the mouth of Moses, when he was going out of Egypt, and was followed by
Pharaoh, Exodus 14. 15. and yet he made Heaven ring again with his cry: But it
was the unexpressible, and unsearchable groans, and cryings of his soul, in and
with the Spirit.

God is the God of Spirits, Numb. 16. 22. and his eyes look further than the
ourside of any duty whatsoever, 1 Samuel 16. 7.

I doubt this is but little thought on by the most of them that would be looked
upon as a praying people.

The nearer a man comes in any work that God commands him, to the doing of it
according to his will; so much the more hard and difficult it is. And the
reason is, because man, as man, is not able to do it.

But Prayer (as aforesaid) is not only a duty, but one of the most eminent
duties; and therefore so much the more difficult. Therefore Paul knew what he
said, when he said, I will pray with the Spirit. He knew well, it was not what
others writ or said, that could make him a praying person; nothing less than
the Spirit could do it.

Tenthly, It must be with the Spirit, or else, as there will be a failing in
the act it self, so there will be a failing, yea a fainting in the prosecution
of the work. Prayer is an Ordinance of God, that must continue with a soul so
long as it is on this side glory.

But as I said before, it is not possible for a man to get up his heart to God
in Prayer; so it is as difficult to keep it there, without the assistance of
the Spirit.

And if so, then for a man to continue from time to time in Prayer with God, it
must of necessity be with the Spirit.

Christ tells us, That men ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18. 1,
2. And again tells us, that this is one definition of an Hypocrite, That either
he will not continue in Prayer, or else, if he do, it will not be in the power,
( Job 27. 10.) that is, in the Spirit of Prayer, but in the Form, for a
pretense only, Mat. 23. 14.

It is the easiest thing of an hundred, to fall from the Power to the Form; but
it is the hardest thing of many, to keep in the Life, Spirit and Power of any
one duty, especially Prayer: That is such a work, that a man without the help
of the Spirit cannot so much as pray once; much less, continue without it in a
sweet praying frame, and in praying, so to pray, as to have his Prayers to
ascend into the ears of the Lord God of Sabbath.

Jacob did not only begin, but held it; I will not let thee go, unless thou
bless me, Genesis 32.

So did the rest of the Godly, Hos. 12. 4. But this could not be without the
Spirit of Prayer. It is through the Spirit that we have access to the Father,
Ephesians. 2. 18.

That same is a remarkable place in Jude, when he stirs up the Saints by the
Judgment of God upon the Wicked, to stand fast, and continue or hold out in
the Faith of the Gospel, as one excellent means thereto, without which he knew
they would never be able to do it. Says he, Build up your selves in your most
holy Faith, praying in the holy Ghost, Jude 20. As if he had said, Brethren, as
eternal Life is laid up for the persons that hold out only, so you cannot hold
out, unless you continue praying in the Spirit.

The great cheat that the Devil and Antichrist deludes the World withal, it is
to make them continue in the form of any Duty, the Form of Preaching, of
Hearing, of Praying, etc. These are they that have a Form of Godliness, but
deny the Power; from such turn away, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Here follows the Third Thing; to wit,
What it is to pray with the Spirit, and with understanding.
And now to the next thing, What it is to pray with the Spirit, and to pray
with the Understanding also. For the Apostle put a clear distinction between
praying with the Spirit, and praying with the Spirit and Understanding.
Therefore when he says, he will pray with the Spirit, he adds, and I will
pray with the Understanding [ also.] This distinction was occasioned through
the Corinthians not observing, that it was their duty to do what they did to
the Edification of themselves, and others too; whereas they did it for their
own commendations. So I judge. For many of them having extraordinary gifts, as
to speak with diverse tongues, etc. therefore they were more for those mighty
gifts, than they were for the edifying of their Brethren; which was the cause
that Paul wrote this Chapter to them, to let them understand, that though
extraordinary gifts were excellent, yet, to do what they did to the edification
of the Church, was more excellent. For (says the Apostle) if I will pray in an
unknown tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding (and also the
understanding of others) is unfruitful. Therefore, I will pray with the Spirit,
and I will pray with the Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 4, 5, - 12, 13, 14, 15,
etc. read the scope of the whole Chapter.

It is expedient then that the Understanding should be occupied in Prayer, as
well as the heart and mouth; I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with
the Understanding also. That which is done with Understanding, is done more
effectually, sensibly and heartily, (as I shall further show anon) than that
which is done without it. Which made the Apostle pray for the Colossians, That
God would fill them with the knowledge of his Will, in all wisdom, and
spiritual understanding, Col. 1. 9. And for the Ephesians, That God would give
unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him, Ephesians.
1. 17. And so for the Philippians, That God would make them abound in
knowledge, and in all judgment, Phil. 1. 9.

A suitable understanding is good in every thing a man undertakes, either Civil
or Spiritual; and therefore it must be desired by all them that would be a
Praying people.

In my speaking to this, I shall show you what it is to pray with Understanding.

Understanding is to be taken both for speaking in our mother tongue; and also
experimentally.

I shall pass the first, and treat only on the second.

For the making of right Prayers, it is to be required that there should be a
good or spiritual understanding in all them who pray to God.

First, To pray with Understanding, is to pray as being instructed by the
Spirit, in the understanding of the want of those things which the soul is to
pray for.

Though a man be in never so much need of pardon of sin, and deliverance from
wrath to come, yet if he understand not this, he will either not desire them at
all, or else be so cold and lukewarm in his desires after them, that God will
even loath their frame of spirit in asking for them. Thus it was with the
Church of the Laodiceans, they wanted knowledge or spiritual understanding;
They knew not that they were poor, wretched, blind and naked: The cause
whereof, made them, and all their services, so loathsome to Christ, that he
threatens to spue them out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 17.

Men without understanding, may say the same words in prayer as others do, but
if there be an understanding in the one, and none in the other; there is, Oh
there is a mighty difference in speaking the very same words! The one speaking
it from a spiritual understanding of those things, that he in words desires;
and the other words it only, and there is all.

Secondly, Spiritual understanding, Espieth in the heart of God, a readiness
and willingness to give those things to the soul, that it stands in need of.

David by this could guess at the very thoughts of God toward him, Psalm. 40. 5.

And thus it was with the woman of Canaan ( Mat. 15. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28.) she did by Faith and a right Understanding, discern (beyond all the rough
carriage of Christ) tenderness and willingness in his heart to save, which
caused her to be vehement and earnest, yea, restless, until she did enjoy the
mercy she stood in need of.

An understanding of the willingness that is in the heart of God to save
sinners, there is nothing will press the soul more to seek after God, and to
cry for pardon, than it. If a man should see a Pearl, worth an hundred pounds,
lie in a ditch, yet, if he understood not the value of it, he would lightly
pass it by; but if he once get the knowledge of it, he would venture up to the
neck for it.

So it is with souls concerning the things of God; If a man once get an
understanding of the worth of them, then his heart, nay, the very strength of
his soul runs after them, and he will never leave crying till he have them.

The two blind men in the Gospel, because they did certainly know that Jesus
who was going by them, was both able and willing to heal such infirmities as
they were afflicted with, therefore they cried, and the more they were rebuked,
the more they cried, Mat. 20. 29, 30, 31.

Thirdly, The understanding being spiritually enlightened, hereby there is the
way (as aforesaid) discovered, through which the soul should come unto God;
which gives great encouragement unto it.

It is else with a poor soul, as with one who has a work to do, and if it be
not done, the danger is great; if it be done, so is the advantage: but he knows
not how to begin, nor how to proceed, and so through discouragement, lets all
alone, and runs the hazard.

Fourthly, The enlightened Understanding, sees largeness enough in the Promises
to encourage it to pray, which still adds to it strength to strength. As when
men promise such and such things to all that will come for them, it is great
encouragement to those that know what promises are made, to come and ask for
them.

Fifthly, The Understanding being enlightened, way is made for the soul to come
to God with suitable arguments.

Sometimes in a way of expostulation, as Jacob, Genesis 32. 9. Sometimes in way of
supplication; yet not in a verbal way only, but even from the heart there is
forced by the Spirit, through the understanding, such effectual Arguments, as
moves the heart of God.

When Ephraim gets a right Understanding of his own unseemly carriages toward
the Lord, then he begins to bemoan himself, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. and in
bemoaning of himself, he uses such Arguments with the Lord, that it affects
his heart, draws out forgiveness, and makes Ephraim pleasant in his eyes,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself
thus (says God) Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised; as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the
Lord my God. Surely after I was turned, I repented, and after I was instructed
(or had a right understanding of my self) I smote upon my thigh. I was ashamed,
yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

These be Ephraim's complaints and bemoanings of himself; at which the Lord
breaks forth into these heart-melting expressions, saying,

Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Chlld? For since I spoke unto him, I
do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him: I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Thus you see, that as it is required to pray with the Spirit, so it is to pray
with the Understanding also.

And to illustrate what has been spoken by a similitude;

Set the case there should come two a begging to your door, the one is a poor,
lame, wounded, and almost starved creature; the other is a healthful lusty
person.

These two use the same words in their begging, the one says he is almost
starved, so does the other; but yet the man that is indeed the poor, lame, or
maimed person, he speaks with more sense, feeling and understanding of the
misery that is mentioned in their begging, than the other can do; and it is
discovered more by his affectionate speaking, his bemoaning himself: His pain
and poverty makes him speak more in a spirit of lamentation than the other, and
he shall be pitied sooner than the other, by all those that have the least
dram of natural affection or pity.

Just thus it is with God.

There are some who out of custom and formality, go and pray; there are
others, who go in the bitterness of their spirit: The one he prays out of bare
notion, and naked knowledge; the other has his words forced from him by the
anguish of his soul. Surely, that is the man that God will look at, even him
that is of a humble and contrite spirit, and that trembles at his word, Isa.
66. 2.

Sixthly, An Understanding well enlightened, is of admirable use also, both as
to the matter and manner of Prayer.

He that has his understanding well exercised, to discern between good and
evil, and in it placed a sense, either of the misery of man, or the mercy of
God; that soul has no need of the Writings of other men, to teach him by Forms
of Prayer: For as he that feels the pain, needs not to be learned to cry, Oh!
Even so he that has his Understanding opened by the Spirit, needs not so to be
taught of other men's prayers, as that he cannot pray without them: the present
sense, feeling, and pressure that lies upon his spirit, provokes him to groan
out his requests unto the Lord.

When David had the pains of hell catching hold on him, and the sorrows of hell
compassing him about, he needed not a Bishop in a Surplice, to learn him to
say, O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul, Psalm. 116. 3, 4. Or to look into a
Book, to teach him in a Form to pour out his heart before God.

It is the nature of the heart of sick men, in their pain and sickness, to vent
it self for ease, by dolorous groans and complaints to them that stand by.

Thus it was with David, in Psalm. 38. to the 12. verse. And thus, Blessed be the
Lord, it is with them that are endued with the Grace of God.

Seventhly, It is necessary that there be an enlightened Understanding, to the
end that the soul be kept in a continuation of the duty of Prayer.

The People of God are not ignorant how many wiles, tricks, and temptations the
Devil has to make a poor soul, who is truly willing to have the Lord Jesus
Christ, and that upon Christ's terms too; I say, to tempt that soul to be weary
of seeking the face of God, and to think that God is not willing to have mercy
on such a one as him. I, says Satan, thou may pray indeed, but thou shall
not prevail. Thou see thine heart is hard, cold, dull and dead, thou do not
pray with the Spirit, thou do not pray in good earnest, thy thoughts are
running after other things, when thou pretendest to pray to God. Away
hypocrite, go no further, it is but in vain to strive any longer.

Here now, if the soul be not well informed in its understanding, it will
presently cry out, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me,
Isa. 45. 27. Whereas the soul rightly informed and enlightened, says, Well, I
will seek the Lord, and wait; I will not leave off, though the Lord keep
silence, and speak not one word of comfort, Isa. 49. 14.

He loved Jacob dearly, and yet he made him wrestle before he had the blessing,
Genesis 32. 25, 26, 27.

Seeming delays in God are no tokens of his displeasure; he may hide his face
from his dearest Saints, Isa. 8. 17. He loves to keep his People praying, and
to find them ever knocking at the gate of Heaven: It may be, says the soul,
the Lord tries me, or he loves to hear me groan out my condition before him.

The woman of Canaan would not take seeming denyals for real ones; she knew the
Lord was gracious, Luke 18. 1, to 6. And the Lord will avenge his People,
though he bear long with them. The Lord has waited longer upon me, than I have
waited on him* And thus it was with David, I waited patiently, says he: That
is, It was long before the Lord answered me, though at the last he inclined his
ear unto me, and heard my cry, Psalm. 40. 1.

And the most excellent remedy for this, is an understanding well informed and
enlightened.

Alas, how many poor souls are there in the world, that truly fear the Lord;
who, because they are not well informed in their understanding, are often ready
to give up all for lost, upon almost every trick and temptation of Satan! The
Lord pity them, and help them to pray with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also.

Much of mine own experience could I here discover; when I have been in my fits
of agonies of spirit, I have been strongly persuaded to leave off, and to seek
the Lord no longer; but being made to understand, what great sinners the Lord
has had mercy upon; and how large his Promises were still to sinners; and that
it was not the whole, but the sick, not the righteous, but the sinner, not the
full, but the empty, that he extended his Grace and Mercy unto.

This made me, through the assistance of his holy Spirit, to cleave to him, to
hang upon him, and yet to cry, though for the present he made no answer; and
the Lord help all his poor tempted and afflicted People to do the like, and to
continue, though it be long, according to the saying of the Prophet, Hab. 2. 3.
And to help them (to that end) to pray not by the inventions of men, and their
stinted Forms, but with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also.

And now to answer a Query or two, and so to pass on to the next thing.

Query 1.
But what would you have us poor creatures to do, that cannot tell how to pray;
the Lord knows, I know not either how to pray, or what to pray for?

Answer.
Poor heart! Thou can not (thou complainest) pray. Can thou see thy misery?
Has God showed thee that thou art by nature under the Curse of his Law? If so,
do not mistake, I know thou do groan, and that most bitterly. I am persuaded,
thou can scarcely be found doing any thing in thy calling, but Prayer breaks
from thy heart, Romans 8. 28. Have not thy groans gone up to Heaven from every
corner of thy house? I know it is thus; and so also, does thine own sorrowful
heart witness thy tears, thy forgetfulness of thy calling, etc? Is not thy
heart so full of desires after the things of another World, that many times
thou do even forget the things of this World? Prithee read this Scripture,
Job 23. 12.

Query 2.
Yea, but when I go into secret, and intend to pour out my soul before God, I
can scarce say any thing at all.

Answer.
Ah sweet soul! It is not thy words, that God so much regards, as that he will
not mind thee, except thou come before him with some eloquent Oration. His
eye is on the brokenness of thine heart, and that it is, that makes the very
bowels of the Lord run over, A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will
not despise, Psalm. 51. 17.

2. The stopping of thy words may arise from over much trouble in thy heart.
David was so troubled sometimes, that he could not speak, Psalm. 77. 3, 4. But
this may comfort all such sorrowful hearts as thou art, that though thou can
not through the anguish of thy spirit speak much, yet the holy Spirit stirs up
in thine heart groans and sighs, so much the more vehement; when the mouth is
hindered, yet the Spirit is not.

Moses, as aforesaid, made Heaven ring again with his Prayers, when (that we
read of) not one word come out of his mouth. But.

3. If thou would more fully express thy self before the Lord; study,

First, Thy filthy Estate.

Secondly, Gods Promises.

Thirdly, The Heart of Christ.

Which thou may know or discern;

1. By his condescension and bloodshed.

2. By the mercy he has extended to great sinners formerly; and plead thine
own vileness by way of bemoaning, Christ's blood by way of expostulation; and in
thy prayers, let the mercy that he has extended to other great sinners,
together with his rich promises of grace, be much upon thy heart. Yet let me
counsel thee.

1. Take heed that thou content not thy self with words.

2. That thou do not think that God looks only at them neither. But.

3. However, whether thy words be few or many, let thine heart go with them;
And then shall thou seek him, and find him, when thou shall seek him with thy
whole heart, Jer. 29. 13.

Object. 1.
But though you have seemed to speak against any other way of praying but by
the Spirit, yet here you your self can give direction how to pray.

Answ.
We ought to prompt one another forward to Prayer, though we ought not to make
for each other Forms of Prayer.

To exhort to pray with Christian direction is one thing, and to make stinted
Forms for the tying up of the Spirit of God to them, is another thing.

The Apostle gives them no form to pray withal, yet directs to Prayer, Ephesians.
6. 18. Romans 15. 30, 31, 32.

Let no man therefore conclude, that because we may with allowance give
instructions and directions to pray; that therefore it is lawful to make for
each other Forms of Prayer.

Object. 2.
But if we do not use Forms of Prayer, how shall we teach our Children to pray?

Answ.
My judgment is, that men go the wrong way to learn their Children to pray, in
going about so soon to learn them any set company of words, as is the common
use of poor creatures to do.

For to me it seems to be a better way for people betimes to tell their
Children what cursed creatures they are, and how they are under the wrath of
God by reason of original and actual sin: also to tell them the nature of God's
wrath, and the duration of the misery; which if they conscientiously do, they
would sooner learn their Children to pray than they do.

The way that men learn to pray, it is by conviction for sin; and this is the
way to make our sweet babes do so too. But the other way, namely, to be busy
in learning Children forms of prayer, before they know any thing else, it is
the next way to make them cursed hypocrites, and to puff them up with pride.
Learn therefore your Children to know their wretched state, and condition; tell
them of hell fire, and their sins, of damnation, and salvation: the way to
escape the one, and to enjoy the other (if you know it your selves) and this
will make tears run down your sweet babes eyes, and hearty groans flow from
their hearts; and then also you may tell them to whom they should pray, and
through whom they should pray; you may tell them also of Gods promises, and his
former grace extended to sinners, according to the word.

Ah! poor sweet babes, the Lord open their eyes, and make them holy Christians.
Says David, Come ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear
of the Lord, Psalm 34. 11.

He does not say, I will nuzle you up in a form of Prayer; but, I will teach
you the fear of the Lord; Which is to see their sad states by nature, and to be
instructed in the Truth of the Gospel, which does through the Spirit beget
Prayer in every one that in Truth learns it: And the more you learn them this,
the more will their hearts run out to God in Prayer.

God did never account Paul a praying man, until he was a convinced and
converted man, Acts 9. 11. no more will it be with any else.

Object. 3.
But we find that the Disciples desired that Christ would teach them to pray,
as John also taught his Disciples; and, that thereupon he taught them that
form, called the Lord's Prayer.

Answ.
First, To be taught by Christ, is that which not only they, but we desire; and
seeing he is not here in his person to teach us, the Lord teach us by his Word
and Spirit; for the Spirit is it which he has said he would send to supply in
his room when he went away, as it is, John 14. 16. and 16. 7.

Secondly, As to that called a Form, I cannot think that Christ intended it as
a stinted Form of Prayer.

First, Because he himself lays it down diversely, as is to be seen, if you
compare Matthew. 6. with Luke 11. Whereas, if he intended it as a setform, it
must not have been so laid down: for a set-form is so many words and no more.

Secondly, We do not find that the Apostles did ever observe it as such,
neither did they admonish others so to do: Search all their Epistles: Yet
surely they, both for knowledge to discern, and faithfulness to practice, were
as eminent as any He ever since in the World which would impose it.

But in a word; Christ by those words, Our Father, etc. does instruct his
People what Rules they should observe in their Prayers to God.

1. That they should pray in Faith. 2. To God in the Heavens. 3. For such
things as are according to his Will, etc. Pray thus; or, after this manner.
Object. 4.
But Christ bids, Pray for the Spirit: This implies, that men without the
Spirit, may notwithstanding pray, and be heard: See Luke 11. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Answ. 1. The speech of Christ there is directed to his own, verse. 1.

2. Christ his telling of them, that God would give his holy Spirit to them
that ask him, is to be understood of giving more of the holy Spirit; For still
they are the Disciples spoken to, which had a measure of the Spirit already;
for he says, When ye pray, say, Our Father, ver. 2. I say unto you, verse. 8.
And, I say unto you, verse. 9. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good
things to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy
Spirit to them that ask him?

Christians ought to pray for the Spirit, that is, for more of it, though God
has endued them with it already.

Quest.
Then would you have none pray, but those that know they are the Disciples of
Christ?

Answ. Yes.
1. Let every soul that would be saved, pour out it self to God, although it
cannot, through temptation, conclude it self a Child of God. And,

2. I know if the Grace of God be in thee, it will be as natural to thee to
groan out thy condition, as it is for a sucking Child to cry for the breast.

Prayer is one of the first things that discovers a man to be a Christian,
Acts 9. 12. But yet if it be right, it is such Prayer as follows.

First, To desire God in Christ, for Himself, for his Holiness, Love, Wisdom
and Glory. For right Prayer, as it runs only to God through Christ, so it
centers in him* and in him alone; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is
none in Earth that I desire (long for, or seek after) besides thee, Psalm. 73.
25.

Secondly, That the soul might enjoy continual Communion with him, both here
and hereafter. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thine Image, or in thy
likeness, Psalm. 17. 15. For in thee we groan earnestly, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 2.

Thirdly, Right Prayer is accompanied with a continual labor after that which
is prayed for. My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the
morning, Psalm. 130. 6. I will arise now, and seek him whom my soul loves,
Cant. 3. 2.

For mark, I beseech you, there is two things that provoke to Prayer: One is, a
detestation to sin, and the things of this life; The other is, a longing desire
after Communion with God, in an holy and undefiled state and inheritance.

Compare but this one thing with most of the Prayers that are made by men, and
you shall find them but mock-prayers, and the breathings of an abominable
spirit; for even the most of men, either not pray at all, or else only
endeavor to mock God and the world by so doing: for, do but compare their
prayer, and the course of their lives together, and you may easily see that the
thing included in their prayer is the least looked after by their lives. Oh sad
Hypocrites!

Thus have I briefly showed you,

1. What Prayer is. 2. What it is to pray with the Spirit. 3. What it is to
pray with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also.
I shall now speak a word or two of Application, and so conclude, with,

1. A word of Information. 2. A word of Encouragement. 3. A word of Rebuke.
USE I. A Word of Information.
For the first, to inform you, That as Prayer is the duty of every one of the
Children of God, and carried on by the Spirit of Christ in the soul: So every
one that does but offer to take upon him to pray to the Lord, had need be very
wary, and go about that work especially, with the Dread of God, as well as with
hopes of the Mercy of God through Jesus Christ.

Prayer is an Ordinance of God, in which a man draws very near to God; and
therefore it calls for so much the more of the assistance of the Grace of
God, to help a soul to pray, as becomes one that is in the presence of him.

It is a shame for a man to behave himself irreverently before a King but a sin
to do so before God. And a a King (if wise) is not pleased with an Oration made
up with unseemly words and gestures; So God takes no pleasure in the sacrifice
of fools, Eccles. 5. 1, 4.

It is not long discourses, nor eloquent tongues, that are the things which are
pleasing in the ears of the Lord; but a humble, broken and contrite heart, (
Psalm. 51. 17. Isa. 57. 15.) that is sweet in the nostrils of the heavenly
Majesty.

Therefore for information, know, that there are these Five Things that are
obstructions to Prayer, and even make void the requests of the creature.

First.
When men regard iniquity in their hearts, at the time of their Prayers before
God. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer, Psalm.
66. 18. For the preventing of temptation, that by the misunderstanding of this,
may seize thy heart; when there is a secret love to that very thing, which thou
with thy dissembling lips do ask for strength against. For this is the
wickedness of man's heart, that it will even love, and hold fast that, which
with the mouth it prays against; and of this sort are they, that honor God
with their mouth, but their heart is far from him, Ezekiel. 33. 31.

O how ugly would it be in our eyes, if we should see a beggar ask an alms,
with intention to throw it to the dogs! Or, that should say with one breath,
Pray you bestow this upon me; and with the next, I beseech you give it me not.
And yet thus it is with these kind of persons; with their mouth they say, Thy
Will be done; and with their hearts nothing less. With their mouth say*
Hallowed be thy Name; and with their hearts and lives, they delight to
dishonor him all the day long.

These be the prayers that become sin, Psalm. 109. 7. and though they put them
up often, yet the Lord will never answer them, 2 Samuel 22. 42.

Secondly.
When men pray for a show to be heard, and thought some body in Religion, and
the like.

These prayers also fall far short of God's approbation, and are never like to
be answered, in reference unto eternal life.

There are two sorts of men that pray to this end.

1. Your Trencher-Chaplains, that thrust themselves into great men's Families,
pretending the Worship of God, when in truth the great business is their own
Bellies: which were notably painted out by Ahab's Prophets, 1 King. 18. 19. and
also Nebuchadnezzars wise men, Dan. 2. who though they pretended great
devotion, yet their lusts and their bellies were the great things aimed at by
them in all their pieces of devotion.

2. Them also that seek repute and applause for their eloquent terms, and seek
more to tickle the ears and heads of their hearers, than any thing else. These
be they that pray to be heard and seen of men, and have all their reward
already, Mat. 6. 5.

These persons are discovered thus.

1. They eye only their Auditory in their expressions.

2. They look for Commendations when they have done.

3. Their hearts either rise or fall according to their praise or enlargement.

4. The length of their Prayer pleases them; and that it might be long, they
will vainly repeat things over and over, Matthew. 6. 7. They study for
enlargements, but look not from what heart they come. They look for returns,
but it is the windy applause o^ men; and therefore they love not to be in a
chamber, but among company and if at any time conscience thrust them into their
closet, yet hypocris^ will cause them to be heard in the streets; and when
their mouths have done going, their prayers are ended; for they wait not to
hearken what the Lord will say, Psalm. 85. 8.

Thirdly.
A third sort of prayer that will not be accepted of God, it is, When either
they pray for wrong things; or, if for right things, yet, that the thing prayed
for, might be spent upon their lusts, and laid out to wrong ends: Some have
not, because they ask not, says James; and others ask and have not, because
they ask amiss, that they may consume it upon their lusts, James 4. 2, 3, 4.

Ends contrary to God's Will, is a great Argument with God to frustrate the
Petitions presented before him. Hence it is, that so many pray for this and
that, and yet receive it not; God answers them only with silence, they have
their words for their labor, and that is all.

Object.
But God hears some persons, though their hearts be not right with him, as he
did Israel, in giving Quails, Psalm. 106. 14. though they spent them upon their
lusts.

Answer.
If he does, it is in Judgment, not in Mercy: He gave them their desire indeed,
but they had better have been without it, for he sent leanness into their
souls, Psalm. 106. 15. Woe be to that man that God answers thus.

Fourthly.
Another sort of prayers there are that are not answered, and those are such as
are made by men, and presented to God in their own persons only, without their
appearing in the Lord Jesus. For, though God has appointed Prayer, and
promised to hear the Prayer of the creature, yet not the prayer of any creature
that comes not in Christ. If you ask any thing in My Name, etc. John 14. 13.
And, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 3. 17. If you ask any thing in my Name, I will do it,
Joh. 14. 14.

Though you be never so devout, zealous, earnest and constant in prayer, yet,
it is in Christ only that you must be heard and accepted. But alas, the most of
men know not what it is to come to him in the Name of the Lord Jesus, which is
the reason they either ^ive wicked, pray wicked, and also ^ie wicked. Or else,

2. That they attain to nothing else but what a mere natural man may at^ain
unto, as to be exact in word and ^eed betwixt man and man, and only with the
righteousness of the Law, to ^ppear before God.

Fifthly.
The last thing that hinders Prayer, is, The Form of it without the Power. It
is an easy thing for men to be very hot for such things, as Forms of Prayer,
as they are written in a Book, but yet they are altogether forgetful to enquire
with themselves, whether they have the Spirit and Power of Prayer. These men
they are like a painted man, and their Prayers are like a false voice; they in
person appear as Hypocrites, and their Prayers are an Abomination, Prove. 28. 9.
When they say they have been pouring out their souls to God, he says, they
have been howling like dogs, Hos. 7. 14.

When therefore thou intendest, or art minded to pray to the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, consider these following Particulars.

1. Consider seriously what thou want; do not as many, who in their words
only beat the air, and ask for such things as indeed they do not de sire, nor
see that they stand in need thereof.

2. When thou see what thou want, keep to that, and take heed thou pray
sensibly.

Object.
But I have a sense of nothing; Then, by your Argument, I must not pray at all.

Answer.
First, If thou find thy self senseless in some sad measure, yet thou can
not complain of that senslesness, but by being sensible.

There is a sense of senslesness, according to thy sense then, that thou have
of the need of any thing, so pray, ( Luke 8. 9.) and if thou art sensible of
thy senslesness, pray the Lord to make thee sensible of whatever thou find
thine heart senseless of. This was the usual practice of the holy men of God;
Lord make me to know mine end, says David, Psalm. 39. 4. Lord, open to us this
Parable, said the Disciples, Luke 8. 9.

And to this is annexed the Promise, Call upon me, and I will hear thee, and
show thee great and mighty things that thou know not, Jer. 33. 3. that thou
art not sensible of. But,

Secondly, Take heed that thine heart go to God as well as thy mouth; let not
thy mouth go any further than thou strivest to draw thine heart along with it.
David would lift his heart and soul to the Lord, and good reason: for so far as
a man's mouth goes along without his heart, so far it is but liplabour only;
and though God calls for, and accepts the calves of the lips, yet the lips,
without the heart, argues not only senslesness, but our being without sense of
our senslesness; and therefore if thou have a mind to enlarge in Prayer before
God, see that it be with thy heart.

Thirdly, Take heed of affecting expressions, and so to please thy self with
the use of them, that thou forget not the Life of Prayer.

I shall conclude this Use with a Caution or two.

First, Take heed thou do not throw off Prayer, through sudden persuasions that
thou have not the Spirit, neither prayest thereby.

It is the great work of the Devil to do his best, or rather worst, against the
best prayers. He will flatter your false dissembling hypocrites, and feed them
with a thousand fancies of well-doing, when their very duties of Prayer, and
all other, stink in the nostrils of God; When he stands at a poor Joshua's
hand to resist him, (Isa. 66. 5. Zech. 3. 1.) that is, to persuade him, that
neither his person nor performances are accepted of God.

Take heed therefore of such false conclusions and groundless discouragements;
And though such persuasions do come in upon thy spirit, be so far from being
discouraged by them, that thou use them to put thee upon further sincerity and
restlesness of spirit in thy approaching to God.

Secondly As such sudden temptations should not stop thee from Prayer and
pouring out thy soul to God; so neither should thine own hearts corruption
hinder thee.

It may be thou may find in thee all those things beforementioned, and that
they will be endeavoring to put forth themselves in thy praying to him: thy
business then is to judge them, to pray against them, and to lay thy self so
much the more at the foot of God, in a sense of thy own viseness, and rather
make an argument from thy vileness and corruption of heart, to plead with God
for justifying and sanctifying grace, than an argument of discouragement and
despair.

David went this way; O Lord, says he, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great,
Psalm. 25.

USE II. A Word of Encouragement.
Secondly, To speak a word by way of Encouragement (to the poor tempted and
cast-down soul) to pray to God through Christ. Though all Prayer that is
accepted of God in reference to eternal life must be in the Spirit, for that
only makes intercession for us according to the Will of God, Romans 8. 27. Yet,
because many poor souls may have the holy Spirit working on them, and stirring
of them to groan unto the Lord for mercy, though through unbelief they do not,
nor for the present cannot believe that they are the People of God, such as he
delights in; yet forasmuch as the truth of Grace may be in them, therefore I
shall, to encourage them, lay down further these few particulars.

1. That Scripture in Luke 11. 8. is very encouraging to any poor soul that
does hunger after Christ Jesus. In the 5th, 6th, and 7th verses, he speaks a
parable of a man that went to his friend to borrow three loaves, who, because
he was in bed, denied him, yet for his importunity-sake he did arise and give
him; clearly signifying, that though poor souls through the weakness of their
faith cannot see that they are the friends of God, yet they should never leave
asking, seeking, and knocking at God's door for mercy, Mat. 7. 7, 8.

Mark, says Christ, I say unto you, Although he will not arise and give him,
because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity (or restless desires)
he will arise and give him as many as he needs.

Poor heart! thou cryest out that God will not regard thee, thou dosnot find
that thou art a friend to him but rather an enemy in thine heart by wicked
works, Col. 1. 21. and thou ar^ as though thou did hear the Lord saying to
thee, Trouble me not, I cannot give unto thee; as he in the parable; Yet I say,
continue knocking, crying, moaning and bewailing thy self: I tell thee, though
he will not arise and give thee, because thou art his friend; yet because of
thy importunity he will arise and give thee as many as thou need.

The same in effect you have discovered, Luke 18. in the parable of the unjust
Judge, and the poor Widow; her importunity prevailed with him.

And verily, mine own experience tells me, that there is nothing that does more
prevail with God, than importunity.

Is it not so with you in respect of your beggars that come to your door?
though you have no heart to give them any thing at their first asking, yet, if
they follow you, bemoaning themselves, and will take no nay without an alms,
you will give them; for their continual begging overcomes you.

Are there bowels in you that are wicked, and will they be wrought upon by an
importuning beggar? Go thou and do the like, Luke 11. 11.

It is a prevailing motive, and that by good experience; He will arise and give
thee as many as thou need.

2. Another Encouragement for a poor trembling convinced soul, is, To consider
the place, throne, or seat, on which the great God has placed himself to hear
the petitions and prayers of poor creatures; and that is a Throne of Grace,
Heb. 4. 16. The Mercy-Seat, Exodus 25. 22. Which signifies, that in the days
of the Gospel God has taken up his Seat, his abiding-place, in mercy and
forgiveness; and from thence he does intend to hear the sinner, and to commune
with him, as he says, Exodus 25. 22. (speaking before of the Mercy-Seat) And
there will I meet with thee. Mark; It is upon the Mercy-Seat; There will I meet
with thee, and there will I commune with thee, from above the Mercy-seat.

Poor souls! they are very apt to entertain strange thoughts of God, and his
carriage toward them, and suddenly to conclude, that God will have no regard
unto them; when yet he is upon the Mercy-Seat, and has taken up his place on
purpose there, to the end he may hear and regard the prayers of poor creatures.

If he had said, I will commune with thee from my Throne of Judgment; then
indeed you might have trembled and fled from the face of the great and glorious
Majesty. But when he says, he will hear and commune with souls upon the Throne
of Grace, or from the Mercy-Seat; this should encourage thee, and cause thee to
hope, nay to come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that thou may obtain mercy,
and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16.

3. There is yet another Encouragement to continue in Prayer with God, and that
is this.

As there is a Mercy-Seat, from whence God is willing to commune with poor
sinners; so there is also by this Mercy-seat, Jesus Christ who continually
besprinkleth it with his blood.

Hence it is called, The Blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12. 14.

When the High Priest under the Law was to go into the Holiest, where the
Mercy-seat was, he might not go in without blood, Heb. 9. 7.

Qu. Why so?

Answ. Because, though God was upon the Mercy-Seat, yet he was perfectly just
as well as merciful.

The Blood was to stop Justice from running out upon the persons concerned in
the Intercession of the High Priest, as in Levit. 16. 13, 14, 15, 16. To
signify, that all thine unworthiness that thou fear, should not hinder thee
from coming to God in Christ, for mercy.

Thou cryest out, that thou art vile, and therefore God will not regard thy
Prayers. It Is true, if thou delight in thy vileness, and come to God out of a
mere pretense. But if from a sense of thy vileness thou do pour out thy heart
to God, desiring to be saved from the guilt, and cleansed from the filth, with
all thy heart; fear not, thy vileness will not cause the Lord to stop his ear
from hearing of thee.

The value of the blood of Christ which is sprinkled upon the Mercyseat, stops
the course of Justice, and opens a flood-gate for the mercy of the Lord to be
extended unto thee.

Thou have therefore, as aforesaid, boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the
Blood of Jesus, that has made a new and living way for thee, thou shall not
dye, Heb. 10. 19, 20.

Besides, Jesus is there, not only to sprinkle the Mercy-seat with his blood;
but he speaks, and his blood speaks; he has audience, and his blood has
audience; Insomuch, that God says, when he does but see the blood, he will
pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you, etc. Exodus 12. 13.

I shall not detain you any longer. Be sober and humble; Go to the Father in
the name of the Son, and tell him your case, in the assistance of the Spirit,
and you will then feel the benefit of praying with the Spirit, and with
Understanding also.

USE III. A Word of reproof.
This speaks sadly to you who never pray at all.

I will pray, says the Apostle, and so says the heart of them that are
Christians.

Thou then art not a Christian that art not a praying person.

The promise is, That every one that is righteous shall pray, Psalm. 32. 6.

Thou then art a wicked wretch that prayest not.

Jacob got the name of Israel by wrestling with God, Genesis 32. And all his
Children bare that name with him, Gal. 6.

But the People that forget prayer, that call not on the name of the Lord, they
have prayer made for them, but it is such as this, Pour out thy fury upon the
heathen, O Lord, and upon the people that call not upon thy name, Jer. 10. 25.

How likest thou this, O thou that art so far off from pouring out thine heart
before God, that thou go to bed like a dog, and risest like an hog, or a
sot, and forgettest to call upon God?

What will thou do when thou shall be damned in Hell, because thou could not
find in thine heart to ask for Heaven?

Who will grieve for thy sorrow, that did not count mercy worth asking for?

I tell thee, the ravens, the dogs, etc. shall rise up in judgment against
thee, for they will according to their kind, make signs, and a noise for
something to refresh them when they want it; but thou have not the heart to ask
for Heaven, though thou must eternally perish in Hell, if thou have it not.

2. This rebukes you that make it your business to slight, mock at, and
undervalue the Spirit, and praying by that.

What will you do, when God shall come to reckon for these things?

You count it high Treason to speak but a word against the King. Nay, you
tremble at the thoughts of it; and yet in the mean time you will blaspheme the
Spirit of the Lord.

Is God indeed to be dallied with, and will the end be pleasant unto you?

Did God send his holy Spirit into the hearts of his People to that end, that
you should taunt at it? is this to serve God? And does this demonstrate the
Reformation of your Church? Nay, is it not the mark of implacable Reprobates?

O fearful! can you not be content to be damned for your sins against the Law,
but you must sin against the Holy Ghost?

Must the holy, harmless, and undefiled Spirit of Grace; the nature of God, the
promise of Christ, the comforter of his Children; that without which, no man
can do any service acceptable to the Father; Must this, I say, be the burden
of your Song, to taunt, deride, and mock at?

If God sent Corah and his company headlong to hell, for speaking against Moses
and Aaron, Numb. 16. do you that mock at the Spirit of Christ, think to escape
unpunished? Heb. 10. 29.

Did you never read what God did to Ananias and Saphira, for telling but one
lie against it? Acts 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Also to Simon Magus, for but undervaluing of it, Acts 8. 18, 19, 20, 21.

And will thy sin be a virtue, or go unrewarded with vengeance, that make it
thy business to rage against, and oppose its Office, Service, and Help, that it
gives unto the Children of God?

It is a fearful thing to do despite unto the Spirit of Grace: compare Mat. 12.
31. with Mark 3. 30.

3. As this is the doom of those who do openly blaspheme the holy Ghost, in a
way of disdain and reproach to its office and service: So also it is sad for
you, who resist this Spirit of Prayer, by a Form of man's inventing. A very
juggle of the Devil, that the Traditions of men should be of better esteem, and
more to be owned, than the Spirit of Prayer.

What is this less than that accursed Abomination of Jeroboam, which kept many
from going to Jerusalem, the place and way of God's Appointment to worship, 1
Kings 12. 26, etc. And by that means brought such displeasure from God upon
them, as to this day is not appeased?

One would think that God's Judgments of old upon the Hypocrites of that day,
should make them that have heard of such things, take heed and fear to do so.

Yet the Doctors of our day are so far from taking of warning by the punishment
of others, that they do most desperately rush into the same transgression (
viz.) To set up an Institution of man, neither commanded nor commended of God:
and whosoever will not obey herein, they must be driven either out of the Land,
or the World.

Has God required these things at you hands? If he has, show us where. If not
(as I am sure he has not) Then what cursed presumption is it in any, Pope,
Bishop, or other, to command that in the Worship of God which he has not
required?

Nay, further: It is not that part only of the Form, which is several Texts of
Scripture, that we are commanded to say; but even all must be confessed as the
Divine Worship of God, notwithstanding those absurdities contained therein,
which because they are at large discovered by others, I omit the rehearsal of
them.

Again, Though a man be willing to live never so peaceably; yet because he
cannot for Conscience sake own that, for one of the most eminent parts of God's
Worship, which he never commanded: therefore must that man be looked upon as
factious, seditious, erroneous, heretical; a disparagement to the Church, a
seducer of the people, and what not? Lord, what will be the fruit of these
things! when for the Doctrine of God there is imposed (that is more than
taught) the Traditions of men?

Thus is the Spirit of Prayer disowned, and the Form imposed; the Spirit
debased, and the Form extolled: they that pray with the Spirit, though never so
humble and holy, counted Phanaticks; and they that pray with the Form, though
with that only, counted the Virtuous. And how will the favorites of such a
practice, answer that Scripture, which commands, that the Church should turn
away from such as have a Form of Goaliness, but deny the Power thereof? 2 Timothy
3. 5.

And if I should say, That men that do these things aforesaid, do advance a
Form of Prayer of other men's making, above the Spirit of Prayer, it would not
take long time to prove it.

For, he that advances the Book of Common Prayer, above the Spirit of Prayer,
he does advance a Form of men's making above it.

But this do all those who banish, or desire to banish them that pray with the
Spirit of Prayer, while they hug and embrace them that pray by that Form only,
and that because they do it.

Therefore they love and advance the Form of their own, or others inventing,
before the Spirit of Prayer, which is God's special and gracious Appointment.

If you desire the clearing of the Minor, look into the Goals in England, and
into the Alehouses of the same: and I believe, you will find those that plead
for the Spirit of Prayer in the Goal, and them that look after the Form of men's
Inventions only, in the Alehouse.

It is evident also, by the silencing of God's dear Ministers, though never so
powerfully enabled by the Spirit of Prayer; if they, in conscience, cannot
admit of that Form of Common Prayer.

If this be not an exalting the Common Prayer Book above either praying by the
Spirit, or preaching the Word, I have taken my mark amiss.

It is not pleasant for me to dwell on this; the Lord in mercy turn the hearts
of the people to seek more after the Spirit of Prayer; and in the strength of
that, to pour out their souls before the Lord.

Only let me say, It is a sad sign, that that, which is one of the most eminent
parts of the pretended Worship of God, is Antichristian; when it has nothing
but Tradition of men, and the strength of Persecution to uphold, or plead for
it.

The Conclusion.
I shall conclude this Discourse with this Word of Advice to all Gods People.
I. BElieve, that as sure as you are in the Way of God, you must meet with
Temptations. II. The first day therefore that thou do enter into Christ his
Congregation, look for them. III. When they do come, beg of God to carry thee
through them. IV. Be jealous of thine own heart, that it deceive thee not in
thy Evidences for Heaven, nor in thy walking with God in this world. V. Take
heed of the flatteries of false Brethren. VI. Keep in the Life and Power of
Truth. VII. Look most at the things which are not seen. VIII. Take heed of
little sins. IX. Keep the Promise warm upon thy heart. X. Renew thy acts of
Faith in the Blood of Christ. XI. Consider the Work of thy Generation. XII.
Count to run with the foremost therein.
Grace be with thee.
THE END.

