Imprimatur

October. 16. 1663. Roger L' Estrang.

Birinthea, A ROMANCE. WRITTEN, By J. B. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Mabb, for John Playfere at the White Bear in the upper
Walk of the New Exchange. 1664.

THE PREFACE.
ALthough it may perhaps, be only an affected, or a pretended Modesty in many
others, yet it is a most severe Truth in me, when I profess I had not Published
this Romance, but at the Request and Commands of some choice Friends, being
sensible that a piece composed in my greener Youth, and most of it during the
intervals of a sharp distemper, cannot be so mature and sound in all its parts,
as it might have proved, if undertaken in a more advanced Age, and healthful
Leisure. And therefore, to decline the Vanity of such as make the Preface
rather a Panegyric to their Books, then an Advertisement to the Reader; I
declare, that this is only to desire those that shall peruse the following
Story, not to impute the Printers Faults to me, since there will be enough
besides upon my own score, to Exercise the utmost of their mercy.

Yet do I not intend by this Ingenious Confession to submit my self to every
trivial Censurer: For though I shall acquiesce in the Judgment of the Wise,
yet have I too much Spirit to endure the ignorant reproof of such busy Drones
as make a humming noise, indeed, like Bees, and often light upon the sweetest
Flowers; but yet want the faculty to extract the least drop of Honey thence
resembling such ill Constituted Bodies as convert the most wholesome Aliments
into corrupt and contagious humors.

From these, I therefore justly may appeal to sounder judgments, such as
examine with as much skill as equity, and consult with reason and
understanding, not admitting either giddy Folly, or bespattering envy to bias
them: before whom I dare affirm, that if I deserve correction in some places, I
merit no less approbation in others; For if my expression be not very Eloquent,
neither is it very Languid; and if novelty be therein pleasing, I am confident
some will find satisfaction; for though my style may seem to limp, compared to
the more Polite and Smooth Language of some others, yet does it not fall into
Rusticity or obsceness; nor leave such uneven furrows as to make the Readers
stumble, unless their prejudice or Malice lay an unhandsome block in their own
way.

Such as can relish no Romance, that is, not forced with Extravagant
Impossibilities (no less Ridiculous then improbable) will find little Gusto and
cold entertainment here; wherefore I wish such to stop at this Preface, and
make no further Progress, for I have endued my Heroes with no greater strength
or courage, then may reside in generous persons; nor do I fill their Veins with
streams of blood greater, then those small channels should contain.

I know, indeed, this were an easy task, if that were all, that is required to
gain applause; it being without dispute more facil to rough-draw a Giant (with
a fensing quil) who should singly rout whole Armies in every page, then really
disarme the veriest Coward that dares but stand in the least defensive posture.

And who sees not the fair advantage I might now take to set off the actions of
my Hero by heightning and exagerating them with swelling Hyperboles, since he
is listed one of the greatest Conquerours in the Rolls of Fame; But treating of
a real History, for the most part, though it be controverted by some, I keep
close to probability, and give him the Character of a man, who was indeed
enriched with a more then vulgar Soul, but whose body was not above the Standar
of Mortals, nor disproportionate to that condition.

For, in Truth, how current soever Fictons may pass, yet can it not be allowed
wisdom to compose such as only please and humor extravagant and irregular
fancies, but that predominant faculty of the Soul, the judgment; should limit
them within the natural bounds of Reason and Possibility; And so Romances
should be no other then the fairest Pictures and just ressemblances of Truth,
from which it is as blameable to deviate, as to add Tinctures to the Rose or
Lilly, such aids being only an ugly and gross paint, that instead of
increasing their beauty, blurs them with deformity.

But it may be Objected, that I am my self guilty of those lapses, I here
condemn, and chide so much in others; since I have feined the adventurers of so
many persons, and principally Birinthea, never mentioned by any ancient Auther.

To this I Reply, that my design, being not only to transcribe former
Historians but to take my rise from thence for fresh inventions; I think them
very pertinent and excusable, so long as they are within the compass of
probabillity, and are not found impossibilities. In fine, it may suffice to
tell you, that this is a Romance accommodated to History, to whose Text I have
added those Auxiliary Embellishments rather to Illustrate, then Disguise or
Corrupt it.

THE FIRST BOOK OF Birinthea.
IF the night had not come on and surprised them, the battle had not been so
soon ended: but the Sun, which contributes to the life of all things, seemed to
precipitate his course expressly with the greater speed (as if unwilling to be
any longer a Witness of the death of so many men) and resigned it is Empire to
the gloomy shades, that during the obscurity, they might be forced to a truce,
the Combatants loosing both the sight and knowledge of their enemies.

Never did Bellona exercise the fury of her Arms with more rage then in this
occasion; thirty thousand of the Assyrians were slain, together with their King
Labynetus; and all the remainder could do, was to fly by the favor of the
night, and steal themselves away from the victorious Persians and Medes, who
seemed to breath nothing that day but slaughter, and sought to triumph over the
lives of Men, rather then over their liberties. The King of Lydia perceiving
likewise, that the Assyrian Troops had all forsaken the Camp, thought it vain
with a feeble resistance to adventure the desperate hazard of an utter defeat
and ruin; Wherefore giving command to all his men to seek their safety by a
timely flight, of all that grand equipage which before attended him, he only
took especial care to save some women which were extremely dear to him.

On the morrow, at the first birth of day, Cyaxares King of the Medes, and
Cyrus his Nephew, were already preparing themselves to assault the enemies
Camp, when presently they found they had a pillage to make rather then a fight.
Nothing appeared to their sight, but the horrid spectacle of wounded, or dead
bodies: and some whose dying groans echoed in the Soldiers ears for pity,
called but a merciless hand to strip him of his clothes and end his life the
sooner.

The fruits of this victory relished so sweet to Cyaxares, that contenting
himself with these first favors fortune had bestowed, he exhorted Cyrus to
taste them in a quiet repose, and not hazard the loosing them in a second
adventure But, that generous Prince, in the heat of that youthful courage which
made him hope for, and aspire to the Conquest of all Asia, earnestly implored
his permission to pursue the enemy, to whom it was not safe to allow a
breathing time, lest they should set those puissant Armies on foot again which
were so formidable for their numbers, and perhaps light on some advantage to
tear those Palms of Victory out of their hands again, which they had newly
gathered with so much sweat and blood. He obtained in fine, the liberty to give
them chase with those Persians which he commanded; and such Medians likewise as
would go voluntarily, had free leave to assist him: the chiefest amongst them
very Nobly accompanied him in this expedition; and he was advanced already very
near the Enemy: when some Officers advertised him of the arrival of some
Hircanian Ambassadors, who said they were come to treat with him concerning an
affair of great importance: He commanded they should be brought into his
Presence, and understood by their Credential Letters, the design their Prince
had to quit the Assyrians party, by whom he was wronged, and to join with him.

Cyrus, that he might not be surprised by too much credulity, informed himself
by them of the posture his Enemies were in, and several other particulars,
which gave him the fuller assurance of their reality: after which he refused to
take those Hostages they profer'd; and when they pressed him to retain them, he
generously replied, that he needed them not, having power enough to punish
their perfidiousness, in case they should deceive him; as he had also
sufficient means to reward their amity by a retribution of his own, which he
promised them inviolably, if they proved faithful and constant.

He had no sooner concluded with the Hircanians, but he immediately placed some
of them in the front of his Army to serve for Guides, and so marched the whole
night; at the end of which, finding himself in fight of the Enemy, he
dispatched a Hircanian to his companions who were in the rear, to advertise
them by a word of command to rank themselves besides the rest of their Party,
which they speedily performed with acclamations of joy, which much augmented,
the fear and terror of the Assyrians. Cyrus no sooner beheld the Hircanians in
their due places, but that he might lead them on to fight during that heat, and
the Enemies confusion, he assembled all his superior Officers, and after he
had used some particular ceremonies toward his new confederates, he harangued
after this manner.

Dear Companions, it were needless to advertise you, at present, that we must
fight: As it is the cause that made you come from Cyaxares with so much haste
and resolution; so I promise my self, my companions, that none here will refuse
the present occasion, which now presents its self so fairly to us. Yea, I
should wrong you, should I exhort you to that thing, for which you followed me
with so much cheerfulness, and which you have already begun with so good
success. This Battle fellow Soldiers, and worthy Officers, will be but the
completing of that Crown, which the first victory has prepared: It might slip
from us if we should give so much respite to our Enemies as to resume their
strength and spirits; Or if the fear which but now affrights them; should be
let alone till it turned into despair. Yet do I not indeed question, but you
would have as much success, as you have true valor, though they were in a
posture to resist you more vigorously than now they can. But not to expose you
to the hazard of fortune, who refused them the advantage of a victory she might
have bestowed on them; and which they cannot now obtain, but by your
unmanliness. Let us show dear Companions, that we have no valor nor strength
now, which they shall not be a full witness to assert is irresistible. And now
that they are in disorder, having already lost the best part of their Army,
with their King; And that the Hircanians the stoutest of their friends are on
our side. Come on Friends, you shall conquer if you follow me, and by their
first flight you may judge how unable they are to resist you.

These words being pronounced with an extraordinary vehemence, the Officers and
Soldiers returned to their own places; Cyrus drew the Hircanians up to the
Front, and on each Wing two bodies of Horse. He had not advanced far, but he
was on the Enemies skirts, whilst there was yet but light enough to discover
them: never was Army more surprised with fear and dread than this of the
Assyrians, at their approach. The weakness and disorder they were reduced to by
their first defeat, made them incapable to sustain the attaque of the Persians
and Medes, who charged them with so much precipitancy and mettle, that running
here and there, allarmed they soon fell into a mighty confusion; some to
oppose, others to escape, bridled their Horses, and the nimblest mounted and
saved themselves: some took their Arms as their best security, others threw
down theirs to fly with the less encumbrance. In fine, the greatest part of the
Assyrians and their confederates being slain without any considerable
opposition, this Victory was only signalized by the illustrious names of some
of the dead: The King of Capadocia, and the King of Thrace were killed upon the
place, with many other considerable persons, both for their valor and
qualities. In this action the Hircanians gave infallible proofs of their
fidelity and courage; they were the first at the onset, and last in the
retreat: few of the Enemies that had saved themselves from Death, could escape
from Captivity; most of them being made Prisoners, and those few that fled, and
drove the richest of their booty before them, were so closely persued, that the
Hircanians returned laden with riches, and with a great number of Chariots full
of Women. Cresus was almost the only man whom they could not overtake, who
having taken the advantage of the whole night before with all his party to shun
the next days shock, retired, being winged with fear, out of their reach.

Amongst the prisoners that were presented to Cyrus, Sybaris his Lieutenant
General, the choicest of his friends, bestowed upon him by the gods for a
Companion in his fortunes, took notice of one he knew, and instantly embraced
him with testimonies of so particular an amity, that all the beholders were
amazed: And Cyrus asking him whom that was he did so much caresse; My Lord,
replied he, If this Prince were treated according to the merit of his valor
and birth, you should behold him rather with a Crown on his head, and Palms the
trophies of Victory in his hands, then in this present unhappiness of a
Captivity, which nevertheless cannot but be glorious to him, since it cannot
but be an effect of his courage.

This Elogy which Sybaris made of his friend, rendered Cyrus the more curious
to know whom he was, and having heard his Name and place of birth, with the
gallant deportment had been taken notice of in the fight, he approached him
with all the civilities that were due to so illustrious a Captive; and having
discoursed with him some time, this Prisoner answered in so brave a manner,
that it plainly appeared to him, those praises which Sybaris had spoken, were
rather the testimonies of sincere truth, than of any particular affection.

Their Complements being ended, Sybaris to whose care Cyrus especially
recommended him, conducted him to his own Tent, where he was nobly received;
and having given him for some time the liberty to repose himself alone; the
impatience he was in to learn by what adventure he was drawn into that action,
made him return and entreat him to relate the story of his life, ever since he
had left him in Margiana. Merame, who could not refuse to unlock that secret to
Sybaris, with whom he had so long since contracted a real friendship, began in
this manner.

The History of MERAME.
I Can give you no particular reason of my unhappiness, and the occasion which
brings me here, but that alone, which as I believe, generally causes the
misfortune of all men, I mean Love.

At that time when you resided in Margiana, I did not yet know the puissance of
this deity, because I had not then felt his piercing darts; and I may say, I
then lived in content, though in the Court it may seem a thing next to
impossibility, amidst the Monsters of Ambition, and Envy, whereof the one
flatters with its delusive hopes, while it conspires and plots our utter ruin;
the other bytes and knawes our hearts, because that some are happier then our
selves. I can assure you, nevertheless, that I was not at all tainted with
them, whether my blooming age were yet too green and innocent, or that I were
reserved to some more rugged Fate. But since that time, all those days which
other men have enjoyed with some tranquillity, have been so many hours of
misfortune to me; Or if I have tasted some momentory intervals of happiness, I
have been sure to pay for those little pleasures, at the dear rate of more
continued sufferings: but I am transported too much with the resentment of my
miseries, as if it were my task only to make my moanes, forgetting that you
desire to know what has happened ever since our separation, which that you may
the more fully understand, it will be very necessary that I step back a little
in my discourse, and begin it farther off.

You know that I was born in Margiana of a family, which, being of the same
blood of those Princes that are the Sovereigns, is not a little considerable in
that Country: and besides this advantage, the more then ordinary care of my
Education was added, I being the only child after twelve years marriage 'twixt
my Father and Mother. As soon as I had past my date of infancy, a learned man
was sent for from Persia to be my Governor, and to instruct me in those
Sciences which are very ordinary in your Country, but somewhat rare in ours: He
had the charge to enrich and polish my mind with learning and judgment, whilst
another Master had the care to teach me such bodily exercises as were fit for a
person of my quality. The great pains they both took in my behalf, was not
altogether fruitless. And I may without vanity affirm, that I profited much by
their learned instructions: which induced Balden, Our Prince who had a
particular esteem for me, to oblige my Father to let me be always near his
Son Senisra; and, as there are few at Court that refuse such favors, it was
accepted of as a great honor, that I was chosen to be a companion for the
young Prince: and whether it were the equality of our Age, or the assiduous
devoirs I rendered him, or only his fair and free inclination, I cannot tell,
but he expressed so great and fond an amity, that he would hardly be an hour
without me: We passed our time in all kind of divertisements: But one day, when
Senisra, being possessed with a profound sadness, would needs enjoy himself,
without the importunate throng of Courtiers which usually beseiged him, we
retired to a Castle called Coupava belonging to my Father. In that vast
solitude the Prince began to be acquainted with the nature of his Melancholy,
and found that some new entertained thoughts which perpetually invaded his
mind, was the sole cause of it; and as he cherished me with much tenderness, he
would needs impart this disquiet to me, and did me the honor to reveal, that
since the late assembly and intertainment at the marriage of his Sister, where
all the Court Stars appeared in their brightest glory, Themira was still
present in his memory, that indeed he had beheld her with more admiration, and
entertained her with much more content then any other: that since having seen
her again accidentally, he had not been able to guard his heart from a
particular inclination it resented for her beauty, nor could he part from her,
but with I know not what constraint, which filled his bosom with disquiet,
whilst he was absent from her.

We were both of us yet so young, we could not guess the name of this new
breeding passion, but in a very short time after experience fully taught it us.
The short abode we made in that Castle augmented the Princes trouble, and gave
birth to mine. I chanced to see amongst the Captives that were in the Keepers
custody, a young Maid, whose handsome mien, and the Majestic features of her
face invited me particularly to consider all her actions; the more I studied
her person, and demeanor, the more I found her rare, which caused me to bewail
her condition. From this compassion sprung up the curiosity, which made me
enquire of her Mother of what Country she was, and the sad disaster that
brought her into slavery. All that I could then learn was, that at the taking
of Sina, she fell into the hands of some of our Soldiers who had sold her to
this Keeper, and that her condition deserved no regrets, since it had never
been much better than at present. I could not be satisfied with this account,
but rather wished she might have lost many things of advantage and importance
together with her liberty, that might have spoken her of a greater quality,
though I could not have heard that neither without sorrow; and bearing to the
Court, as well the remembrance of her misery, as the Image of her beauty; I
considered them both a long time, only with a sense of tenderness and
indifferency.

In the mean time, Senisra at our return was fully acquainted, that what before
we had been ignorant of, was called Love; and whatever other passion he
esteemed that trouble in his soul, he found it answer only to that Name; and in
this knowledge he eagerly sought the opportunity to meet Themira: But the first
time he came into her presence his tongue was tied up in an unusual silence,
which put him into such a trouble, as never till then had befaln him, insomuch
that he could not salute her without a stammering impediment, and his sudden
change would have been easily remarked, if some Ladies had not put him upon the
discourse of his hunting, and those other divertisements, they imagined he had
been to seek in the Country. He endeavored afterward in many other encounters
to behave himself more confidently in her presence, and went sometimes prepared
expressly to entertain her in particular, but immediately a sudden inward
diffidence controuled his strongest resolutions, so that in two months time all
he could do, was rather to express his grief upon his face, then proclaim it
with his tongue. He often complained to me, that he knew not what respect
hindered him from declaring himself openly. In fine, consumed inwardly with a
flame, he could not handsomely bring to light, he resolved to extinguish it
absolutely, by not seeing her, knowing her presence only nourished that heat.
But when the pleasant season had invited his Mistress to return into the
Country, not being able to endure her absence, whose only memory excited such
troubles in his breast, he asked me, if I would accompany him to Coupava, that
Castle being not far distant from Themira's: I told him it would be a very
great honor to me, when ever he would vouchsafe to go there, and to receive
him in the best manner that could be; I sent my Father notice of his design,
and two days after we went, only with such attendance as might not too much
discover us. The whole journey he entertained me with his Amors, and
complained of the cruelty of his Fate, in that he foresaw his Father would
never condescend to it, though Themira should fairly correspond, which he
likewise placed amongst his doubts: I mildely told him, he ought to attempt all
means and remedies before he yielded to despair, and that I could not believe
Themira would refuse the honor of his noble affection, she having too great a
stock of wit not to discern the infinite advantages might follow, provided she
could clearly penetrate his just and honest intentions.

Ariving with the entertainment of these discourses at Coupava, we were
somewhat surprised finding Themira there, who accompanied her Mother that was
come to visit mine. Senisra was extremely joyful of that good fortune, but it
being already late, the small portion of that dying evening passed in usual
Complements and civilities. The next morning all the Nobility and Gentry that
inhabits near those parts come to pay their obedience to the Prince, and they
already talked of nothing but hunting to divert him: when having told them,
that he was desirous to taste the sweeter repose of that solitude, every one
retired to their dwellings, leaving him the free liberty to complete his
design. The first time we attempted to visit Themira, was with my Mother, but
their ceremonious respects, and the splended treatment they made for him,
hindered him from making known any thing of his passion. The next time we waited
on her, he began to discover some sparks of his great flame, though sparingly;
and my Mother and Themira's being retired, we remained alone with that beauty,
who had the charge to perform the honor of the House, and show us all the
rarities, of which Senisra took so little notice, that although there were very
many which deserved a curious survey, and might have challenged our admiration,
yet he could hardly be so much the Master of his patience and reason, as to
vouchsafe to look on them. Themira who quickly perceived his small
complaisance, told him she was extremely sorry there was nothing worthy his
view; yet she wondered not he took so little delight therein, because as it was
unworthy of his nobler fancy, so it was an abuse to his patience to strive to
entertain him any longer in that dull solitude, it being easy to judge his
more choice contentments summoned him back again to Court.

This complement wakened the Princes silence, which his soft passion had rocked
into a musing slumber, and obliged him to a reply, rather that he might not be
thought incivil, then to show himself amorous; yet his passion favorably
over-biassed his will, and persuaded him to shape his answer in these words.
If, as you tell me beauteous Themira, my satisfaction were rather to be at the
Court, than in this place, I cannot see what reason could oblige me to leave
it; the interest which called me hither, be it what it will, must needs be most
powerful still detaining me here: but I know not what strange enigmatical Fate
mine is, that having so happily found what I expressly came to seek, my
melancholy is nevertheless augmented. Truly replied she, It amazes me to think
how it is possible you should be troubled with too much contentment, for I
cannot believe you came to seek out trouble. Alas! Madam, answered he, It Is the
nature of that charm which possesses me, to find no more repose, amidst my
joys, than my afflictions.

I shall wonder now no more, replied she, since it is a cause not to be found
in nature; You have reason, said he, it is altogether divine; if it were an
ordinary thing I might withstand it: but withal Themira, if the Sun be not
guilty of their blindness, who too boldly expose their sight to his bright
rays; if the Sea be not culpable of the wracks of those many vessels which
voluntarily throw or launch themselves into its watery Empire, what cause can I
have to complain of that trouble which I have my self courted and cherished,
without the least of its allowance? It belongs to you, alone then, reparted
she, to seek the remedy; but, said he, my Cure, as well as my Malady depends on
the same Subject; So that although I alone have brought my self into this
straight, yet does not the remedy thereof reside within my self. If it be so,
answered she, then disclose your grief, perhaps it is not a thing insensible
like the Sea, or Sun: True, said Senisra, yet nevertheless it is more bright
and resplendent then the one, and more unbridled and tempestuous than the
other; in fine Themira it is Love, Love! But -- he stopped at that word,
proceeding no further, and she resumed the speech smiling, and saying: But what
Sir? Go on I beseech you -- yet, I must condemn my own curiosity, since it may
well suffice me to know, that if this place does not contribute any thing to
your delights, no more does it add to your Melancholy. It is true, answered
he, somewhat troubled, the place of it self would be indeed very indifferent to
me, if it did not contain somewhat that might be the blessed subject of my joy,
as it is now of my grief.

The Prince finding himself in so fair a path, endeavored to expound his
thoughts more intelligibly; and let her know all this discourse pointed at her:
But she having a very ready wit, sharp judgment, and present memory, ever
turned the sense of his speech another way: and whether she feigned that she
did not rightly understand him, or really believed he only spoke this out of
Gallantry and complaisance, she so handsomely warded all his complements, that
when we were returned to the Castle, having examined all her behavior, we
could not fathom any thing of her design, or lay hold of the least syllable
that might seem to sound favorably on the Princes behalf.

But, not to detain you any longer by this recital of a History, of which I
shall mention nothing, which does not some way concerned me, you must know, in
fine Sybaris, that Senisra at another time, made an ample declaration of his
affection for Themira, who yielded not immediately; That fair lady resisted for
some time, till she found his love was as real and honest, as it appeared
violent: afterward she consented to entertain his noble affection with all the
mutual correspondency that honor would allow of. But for my own part, that
passion, that made me sigh for the captivity of the fair slave, inspired me by
degrees with a design to lighten her sufferings. To this effect, I desired the
Keeper to treat her less rudely then the rest, and not dare to put her to any
unhandsome or servile labor, and to make the fellow the more observant, I
caused an old woman who had been my nurse, to tell him, that my Mother had an
intent to take her to her self.

During my residence there. I delighted much to be in the Hall, where she was
often working with many others. The pleasure I took in beholding her, made me
insensibly waste much time there, whereof Senisra many times asked me the
reason, which shame obliged me to conceal: Though I had often told him, how
much the beauty and modest gracefulness of this Captive surpassed the rest of
them. Themira returning to the Court drew us with her, for my part, I left not
Coupava, but with much repugnance, and before I went, I would needs be
acquainted with the fair Captives name, and learnt that she was called Vneria.
At that word Merame, interrupted his discourse, casting his eyes up toward
Heaven, after he had set two or three deep sighs at liberty, and then again
went on with his relation. That sweet name came as often into my mouth, as her
fair Idea into my mind. I often retired into my self to form it the more
lively, and when my imagination had done it is utmost, I entertained my self
with these soft whispers, all that I can imagine of beautiful and perfect, is
Vneria; but what? Vneria is a Captive, this reflection brought no less sorrow,
then the brightness of her Image brought content.

A while after my return to Court, I was informed that a slave belonging to
the keeper of Coupava, was come to the City to provide things necessary for his
Marriage with Vneria. I was more surprised at this novel, then I should have
been at a thunderclap, and as if I had already declared my self for her, I
resolved absolutely to oppose this match, and not considering any further what
could interess me so powerfully, I stole from the Court greedily, and being
winged with love and anger, rode all that night toward Coupava. I was
Infinitely astonished, at my arrival the next morning, to find the Castle empty
of all its inhabitants, and my astonishment sweld to despair. When it was told
me, that all the people were in the Temple, assisting at the Ceremonies of
Vneria's Marriage. I was alighted from my horse, but, as if it had been a long
journey thither, leaping into the saddle again, I pressed him forward with the
greatest speed, toward the Temple, where being hastily entered, I saw the
assembly near an Altar laden with victims, and one of the Priests of the god of
Marriage, clasping the hands of the intended husband and Vneria's together. I
knew not whether the ceremony were already completed, for the fear I had
contracted hindered me from minding that inquiry; but perceiving the Bride
melting in tears. I would needs know the reason, and it was told me, that it
was impossible to persuade her to a consent to accept of him, she not giving
any other answer, then sighs and tears: and as I would have asked her the
cause, she fell down at my feet, and folding her suppliant arms about my knees:
Ah! my Lord, cried she, protect me against a Tyranny, from which neither the
Sanctity of this place, nor the Deity that is adored could defend me: I know
the condition of my Captivity obliges me to receive what Spouse is allotted me,
upon fair terms; but I do not believe they can constrain me to take an infamous
vilain, whom my Keeper has hired to this purpose, that thereby he may complete
his own ugly designs, desiring to gain the same power over my unstained
Chastity, as he has over my Liberty. The Deity's are Witness of the truths I
tell you; and I hope for that protection from your goodness, and authority,
which I now conjure you not to refuse to persecuted innocence.

If those words in that mournful accent she pronounced them, were capable to
move the most indifferent Spectators, who now began to plead for her, I leave
you to judge what deep impressions they made in me; and whether she had need of
such powerful Advocates as her eloquent tears to implore a mercy, which I had a
more eager desire to grant, then she could have to beg for: I raised her
instantly up, and telling her the subject of her sorrow and complaint was too
just not to be allowed of; I caused the Ceremony to be abruptly broken off,
after I had highly menaced the Keeper, if ever he gave Vneria the least cause
to complain hereafter; and putting her into his Wives custody, told her, she
should give me a severe account of her. Then my devoirs which called me again
to Court, forced me with infinite regrets to leave Coupava, and I got home
again the next morning that they might not examine or guess the cause of my
absence and journey. But before I parted, I received thanks from Vneria's
Mother, for the inestimable favor I had rendered her daughter, and promised her
to continue my Protection and best service as long as ever they should remain
within the Precincts of our jurisdiction.

When I came to my Mothers presence, I related all this story to her, but in
such a dissembling manner, that she could not perceive the least interest I
had, or that I harbored any other thoughts, but only of equity and charity;
which nevertheless moved her to remove them from that lewd fellow, as indeed
she soon after did. And -- when my Mother took Vneria into her house, I
received and entertained her in my bosom and heart entirely, and Love soon
made me know he was my Sovereign Master.

You may have perhaps learned whilst you were in our Country, that we have a
natural antipathy against the Scythians who are indeed born our Enemies:
besides the frequent quarrels betwixt Princes for their interest foments that
imbred hate; so that if we sometimes put up our Swords, it was but to unsheath
them with the more fury afterward: It seemed, however, that at this time there
was a most firm Peace established; yet, as it is impossible long to smother the
flames of a natural fewd and ancient animosity, so the frontire Garrisons of
either Nation began from some particular differences betwixt their respective
inhabitants to blow the covered sparks into an open fire of contention and War,
which having ^een cherished and supplied with sewel from either party lasts
even to this day.

Balden our Prince, knowing the mighty preparation the Scythians made against
him, finding himself alone too weak to resist those formidable numbers of men
which they do ordinarily amass together, sent Ambassadors to the Prince of
Sogdiana, to put a period to all their own private differences, and secure
their States by a timely union and conjunction of their Forces, which might
defend them against the common Enemy, to whom their former unhappy dissentions
had given many great advantages, which they had found to their sad prejudice.
The Sogdian Prince opened both his arms and heart to welcome this proposition;
and to tie up their amity with the most indisoluble bands, he proffered his
daughter, a beautiful and virtuous Princess to Senisra for a Wife: So that our
Ambassadors prospering in their negotiation above their hopes, laden with
Presents, returned with those persons whom the Sogdian Prince sent to see the
Articles of Peace ratisfied, which we esteemed very advantageous, and
particularly for the proffered Match betwixt their Princess and brave Senisra.
But he, who expected no other but the public interest in this agreement, was
much astonished that they had engaged him in a business that concerned him so
particularly, without ever communicating it unto him: and finding himself
driven to this great straight, either of resolving to loose Themira, or
renounce this Match; he did me the honor to ask me what course he should take
for the establishment of his repose and satisfaction; but I was not in a
capacity to give him any solid counsel at that time, having my own heart
burdened with as great a freight of trouble. The day preceding, one of my
Uncles came to visit me, and having led me into the Palace Garden; after a
short preface, which promised me the highest felicity I could wish for in the
world, he told me that Balden had so particular an amity or affection for me,
that he would needs have me find out a Mistress for my self, that so we might
be sharers in the blessings of his Sons triumph and solemnize our Nuptials on
the same day. And if for that end, I had any inclination at Court which were
suitable to my quality, I might freely declare it, that they might use their
endeavors and care to satisfy Baldens commands and my desires. I was not
readily furnished with any other answer, but only that I had hitherto beheld
the Ladies at the Court with too much indifferency to have any particular
inclination, and that if they would allow me time, I was yet young enough to
pass some years thus single, and it would not be too late hereafter to think of
such a weighty business; Think of it then on your part, said he, and we will
consider of it on ours, and so left me. These words filled me with more
displeasure, then he had flattered me before with hopes. Amidst the strange
disorders it caused in me when I was by my self; I nicely examined all that he
had spoken, and reflecting on the Ladies of my acquaintance, Vneria only came
to my thoughts with pleasure, she only inspired me with sentiments of Love, and
did seem to me most worthy of affection.

With these thoughts I was carried, where I might behold her to confirm my self
in this truth, and I was by her presence fortified in the high opinion I had
conceived that my esteem was very rational, and that there was none could
deserve so truly to be cherished and prefered. In fine, I resolved with my
self to give no satisfaction to my Uncle in what he had proposed, nor to lend
any more an ear to such discourses; and so far was I from making any particular
address to the Ladies at Court, that I left off that freedom and familiarity I
had otherwhile practiced amongst them; I was ever of a more sullen humor, and
avoided even the conversation of those with whom I had most intimacy.

This change of behavior was soon taken notice of at Court, where most men are
rather apt to pry into others actions, than to regulate their own: every one
admired at me, especially knowing it was put to my choice to elect any she I
could best fancy. My dearest friends were hugely concerned at my black
melancholy, and could not possible imagine that to be the cause of my
affliction, which they judged rather might be a just reason to make me rejoice,
but my displeasure was utterly concealed from them all. Senisra was the only
Privado to whom I uncased my mind; but, I found him as sensibly tormented as my
self: for having lived hitherto very well satisfied in his affection, he was
now fallen into despair, because his dearest Themira, when he last went to
visit her, had nothing but reproaches for his infidelity in her discourse,
wherewith to entertain him, instead of those delightful amorous accents she was
used to sooth his passionate soul withal at former meetings: And, indeed, in
the hot fits of his resentments he would often say, Would to God Merame we were
yet both of us free from this Tyranny of Love: you would not then have a
Mistress that is a Captive, nor I a Subject, whose haughtiness or cruelty
tramples on my affection and submissions; it is those alone that thus divert
both your devoir and mine from running in the due channel of filial obedience,
we owe to our Parents; but your condition is happier yet then mine, you have
not yet been treated unhandsomely, or at least unkindly by Vneria, as I have by
Themira: For having lately understood my Fathers Will touching my Marriage with
the Sogdianian Princess; I was so infinitely surprised, that considering how
much it traversed my Love and design for Themira, I durst not attempt to visit
her for three or four days, not desiring to acquaint her with it, till I had
found some way whereby to assure her that my fidelity was unalterable: at last,
amidst that hurry and distraction which had beset me, not being able to lay
hold on any other support but my own resolved constancy, the only pillar I
could rest my hopes on, I went to see her. But, O gods, what a change did I
meet with from her; She received me as her Princes Son, not as her fond Lover.
I found her in a temper of such cold civility, as made my blood turn even to
Ice. This surprise and astonishment, instead of proving my true innocence,
appeared to her distrustful eyes, as if it had been the face of guiltiness,
which made her anger succeed in these harsh words, which she uttered in a
discomposed tone. Your visage, Senisra, betrays your intentions, it is
alteration and often shifted color speaks your persidiousness; nor can your
conscience which writes its self upon your changing Countenance, suffer your
delusions to be hid any longer, which to persist in were a weakness unworthy of
any slave, much less a Prince. But what then? I have been as highly
presumptuous in my easy faith, as you are reproveable for your hypocrisy: had
I never considered you as my Lover, but beheld you always as my Prince, I
should have no just cause to wonder, as I do now, in vain, that your heart can
adore and pay the full tribute of affection and veneration to this stranger
Princess; yet have I reason for complaint however, that you forsake Themira,
after you have so solemnly engaged your faith to her; But this is some
consolation and retribution, that I can strive to correspond with you in every
particular; and it shall suffice me, that you cannot but know, it is the noble
heart and virtuous disposition rather makes a Gentleman a Prince, then his
Birth or empty Title; whose blood if tainted, and whose spirit if degenerate,
tumbles him beneath the meanest of his Subjects in the records of Fame and
Honor. I would have answered her, but that cruel and unjust Lady stopped her
car against all my speeches, by which I might have wiped away the aspersion of
ingratitude she stuck upon me; and then suddenly quitted me in a place, where I
could neither conveniently follow her, nor be moan my self.

The Prince entertained me with this his misfortune, when Balden his Father
entered into his Chamber, and spoke thus to me, well Merame, what preparations
do you make against Senisra's wedding? you are sad methinks, may it not be,
that having a long time associated with him, as his most faithful compagnion,
and seeing him now provided of a Mistress, and your self without any, you mourn
your solitary condition. But if so, or not, I do not intend that you should
only be an idle assistant at the ceremony; but rather help to make up one of
the sweetest parts in the full harmony of joy and pleasure, Come follow me, he
went forth as he spoke these last words, and lead us to his wives Chamber,
where catching me by one hand, and taking Gerose the Daughter of his Favorite
Hylebas by the other, I do not believe said he, that you have any objections
to make against my design, and your Parents consent; The choice could not be
more equal then by this match, nor can you, according to the opinion of every
one; live happier then together: may the gods bless you with as much felicity
as your hearts can wish.

Neither of us made any other reply, but a profound obeisance, and I was very
glad the many complements we received from those that were present exempted me
from those I should have been obliged to make in particular to Gerose, on whom
in common civility I was obliged to wait upon to her own lodging, where I
quitted her coldly. Being returned to my own apartment, and freed from the
importunity of those that did exalt and bless my good fortune, I shut my self
up within my Chamber; where, what I either thought or said, during my first
transports in that Melancholy Cell, were too tedious to relate. My
resolutions, in sine, made me decree to give a clear discovery of my passion to
Vneria, and profer her Marriage if she could but consent to love me, as I did
her fair self. I left my chamber with this intent to seek her out, and though
the night were very much advanced, and most persons retired to their repose, I
descended into the Garden by a back way, and softly stealing along the wall to
a place close by Vneria's chamber, whose windows gave them the full prospect of
a long alley. I there made a stand, hoping at least to have the blessing of
being near her person. What can you think, in fine, Sybaris if the effects of
my passion? Though the night were muffled up in its thickest clouds, yet I
pryed every where hoping to meet the favor of some small beam of light,
whereby to discover her: and hearing a voice. I listened attentively and
understood it was her Mother, who was thus discoursing to her. I thought,
Daughter, that Fate had no more ways left to afflict us; and that we were
arrived at the last Stage of all our miseries; But I perceive cruel Fortune is
not yet glutted with our sufferings. He that had declared himself thy
Protector, is become thy enemy, and if he espouse (as it is to be feared) the
Fathers quarrel, with the daughters person, we must resolve to perish.
Wherefore, replied, Vneria? If you have been but as religiously secret as my
self, we have nothing to fear. Ah my dearest Daughter, answered the Mother,
those two families being united together by that strict alliance, thou can no
longer hide a face, whose features, though truly innocent, are too too
dangerous for thy safety. Mother reparted she, we must commit all to the
goodness of the deities, who have preserved us hitherto. We must not pry into
the book of destiny, the Characters are not legible to Mortals, and we find
every day, that what befalls us, is contrary to what we either feared or
guessed. Let us live, in the mean time, in hope; and since our arms are too
short to unty this marriage knot, those knots, its said, being all made fast in
heaven, we will reserve our complaints, if it must be so, till we ly under the
Evil that shall fall on us. Her Mother, could not bar her tears from falling at
this discourse, and reaching to embrace her, as I perceived by a faint light,
she said, Ah worthy Daughter, no, I cannot believe, that heaven has given thee
such a full stock of virtue and courage, to let thee continue long in this
condition.

They said something more afterward, but whispered it so softly, it did not
reach my ear perfectly: then suddenly after they were wholly silent. Yet I
remained fixed in the same place, with a most greedy attention till day break,
and then fearing discovery I returned to my Chamber: Being thrown upon my bed,
I reflected on their whole discourse a thousand times, without being able to
comprehend or fathom the depth of it. What, said I, shall I dare believe she
spoke of me? and may I flatter my self with this vanity to have had the rarest
jewel of nature in my protection? No, no, these words were meant of some other,
it being impossible but that I should love her always tenderly, so that if her
Protector is become her Enemy, they cannot be addressed to me. Nevertheless, I
am he, into whose fortunate arms she cast her blessed self at Coupava; and I am
also commanded to marry Gerose: But, what is that particular interest that
makes her apprehend this alliance so much? Thus was I weather-beaten 'twixt
these several troublesome fears and doubts, when a soft slumber, caused by my
overlong watching, and deep pensiveness, stole unawares upon me, and made a
happy truce in my mind for some few hours.

It Is, said Sybaris, the only thing that is not an enemy to us, all nature else
declares it self against the unhappy lover, when sleep as a courteous friend
many times renders him contented with a pleasing dream, which awake, the whole
world denies him: But, alas! it is too imaginary and short lived a joy, to
recompense those daily miseries.

It grew somewhat late, persu'd Merame, and I was yet bound fast in the easy
chains of sleep, when my Father commanded some to call me, that I might prepare
myself to receive Hylebus together with his Wife and Daughter whom he had
invited to dinner. I had scarce the time to slip on my clothes, when some of
the company arrived, and the pretended Mistress with them, whom I received with
the greatest civility and the least affection imaginable. I was forced,
however, to wear out that day in dissimulation, nay, and many more besides:
whilst the frequent blushes that invaded my cheeks, sent thither from my heart
as the Messengers of its trouble and perplexity, though imputed to my juvenile
modesty, opportunely concealed the indignation, and disdain which a paler face
would have told them, filled my breast against all Love for her.

Many days slipped thus away er'e I could have a happy tide of opportunity to
entertain Vneria in particular; and I took notice that since Hylebas frequented
our house, she endeavored to keep out of our presence and Society. The
impatience I was in to speak with her, taught me to send her Mother word by a
servant of whose fidelity I had many proofs, that I had somewhat to communicate
to her; this Message allarmed her, and brought her quickly to me, somewhat
affrighted, where I waited for her, with a no less troubled spirit; but her
astonishment grew above both our fears, when I enquired for what cause she and
her daughter were of late so closely confined, and seemed to be the only two in
the whole Family, that expressed no signs of joy for the hopes of my sudden
Marriage, with Gerose? That, for my part, I would continue to be still the same
I had promised them to be; and if any discontent were the just cause of their
retirement, I would engage to procure them all the satisfaction it was possible
for me to make them. I had before decreed to break the ice altogether, and
acquaint her further; but, then, had not the power to pronounce the blessed
name of Vneria, so that without any fuller discovery, I left her, after she had
answered me, that they had received many favors in our house as great as
numerous, and that if they had been so unhappy as not to attend for some days
past, the service of the Family, and their just devoirs, her Daughters
indisposition was the sole and unavoidable cause of it. I was vexed that I had
not absolutely disclosed my intention, and fearing least what I had told her,
might redouble her suspicion, as soon as she had left me, I approached their
window to hear what report she would make to Vneria, to whom she sadly spoke in
this manner. Well, Vneria, had I not reason to fear the sinister adventure I
conjectured, and could thou think the gods would have endued thee with so
much constancy, and generosity, but that they knew thou should one day stand
in need of it? Merame would never have spoken of his alliance with that Family,
in such a manner, if he had not known the certain reason why we evaded the
fatal presence of Hylebas so carefully. If Heavens indulgent goodness had but
at least preserved Soixa, perhaps he might have found out some happy Stratagem,
whereby to have released us from this Captivity. It Is in vain, said Vneria, to
contend against Fortune, whatever doom the deities have pronounced is no less
just the irrevocable; we must submit without reluctance; and then we shall have
this consolation at the least, that although our sorrows like a strong net
entangles us on every side, without any hopes of release, yet we do suffer
innocently. The event will declare the will of heaven more clearly, and since
there is no grief so bitter, which the least blessing from above cannot turn
into joy and happiness, let us not despair, our wounded spirits may yet be
cured? and for Merame I esteem him too brave and generous to lend a hand or
heart to the unworthy designs of his Father in Law.

I would stay no longer there, but thought my self sufficiently informed whereon
to ground a fuller inquiry afterward, and if I were hitherto very indifferent
to Gerose, this inspired me with a mortal aversion for her, as being
constrained to act the feigned part of a Lover toward her, who was the
daughter of my Vneria's capital enemy. This necessity of dissembling to her
did so displease me, that I fell sick of a most violent Fever. Which kept me
prisoner fifteen days together, during which time, the best means toward my
recovery, was the comfort of Gerose's absence, and the pleasing remembrance of
the beautiful Vneria, whose interests became extremely dear to me. One day as I
walked in the Garden, under a pretense of taking the fresh air to perfect my
dawning health, but indeed to have the opportunity to speak to Vneria and her
Mother. I stepped aside, and stole into their Chamber, when there were none, but
themselves; and finding them surpised, do not apprehend my presence said I to
them, you have a second Soixa in my person, and I engage, out of a true
affection only, to render you all the services that he could possibly pay you:
Let not the alliance with Hylebas disturb you, if it oppose your interest, it
does no less thwart my inclination, and if the unparralell'd Vneria vouchsafe
but to accept my faith and hearty service, and do no longer make the cause of
her misfortunes a secret to me, I hope I shall not be incapable to procure her
happiness.

They were both so surpised with this proposition and request, that they could
not for the present contrive any answer, so that renewing my discourse and
courtship, Is it your diffidence, or wonder at the unexpected novelty of what I
tell you, that makes you wrap up your minds in silence? Ah Vneria, if you
suspect my sentiments, do but examine the heart that conceived them, it is in
your possession, and you shall evidently find it contains nothing but affection
for you. The Mother would have cast her self down at my feet to have answered,
but having prevented it, she said, we never doubted Sir, of your more then
ordinary generosity, we have already found the benefits of it, in many happy
trialls, but you may be pleased not to wonder, if having falen already into so
many unexpected snares, we feared that which menaced us so evidently. And since
you have so much curiosity and noble care, as to enquire the reasons, I will
reveal such things which if made known to any other, but your worthy self,
might hazard our very lives: But I do gladly find, that heaven has placed us
under your protection, as the Tutelary Angel of a family broken and ruined by
Hylebas, of whom, as I believe and have too many reasons to fear, we are at
present the only sad remainders.

Sina is the place of our birth, Vneria had the Prince of that great City for
her Father, and I for my brother; If you have ever heard by what accident it
fell under your Princes power, you may know, that the Army which beseiged it
was commanded by Hylebas, who for his private interest, and to revenge some
corrections for his youthful insolences, engaged Balden in that war. He had
formerly made a vovage into Persia, to learn in their famous Academies those
virtues which he never put in practice. At his return, be made some stay in our
City, where his condition being known, he was very civilly treated in all
companies, As then he was but young, and truly more complete in garb and person
then in judgment or wit; for manners obliging him to wait upon the Prince
Dizman, and his wife Mayrem, he instantly transgressed in that respect that was
due to them both. As soon as he beheld that Lady, whose rare perfections had
gained this general acknowledgment through all Asia, that nature had never
brought forth so great a miracle there, as she was, he was inflamed toward
her, but with so impure a heat, as that glorious Planet had never produced in
any soul, but his. For the Majesty of her adored face, had ever imprinted and
inspired as much respect and veneration as love: only the heart of Hylebas was
susceptible of that unlawful wildfire; and he brute man, had so much
presumption, as to believe what ever he undertook in that design would prosper
as he wished it. This made him abide there longer then he intended, during which
time, he displaid all his wit and gallantry* which nevertheless was no better
received or esteemed then at the highest rate of pride and folly. Perceiving,
in the end, that his confidence had deluded him, and that Meyrem had so severe
a virtue, as would not stoop or give indeed the least audience, to his desires
and passion; to attain his pernicious design, he resolved to take in the
assistance of enchantments to allure or quell that virtuous Lady's heart, as
full of honor as his was of lust.

As there are many in that Country who make a particular profession of Magic,
it was easy for him to come to the knowledge of an old woman, who was reputed
to be very skilful in that Art; to whom he discovered his black soul, that she
might the better suit her black experiments to it: and that sorceress having,
in fine, promised him the effecting of what he so greedily desired, by her
witchcraft, he thought to seal up her lips with a gold signet which he bestowed
upon her: but his profusion by which he thought to conceal his plot, was that
which brought it first to discovery: For this old covetous witch imagined, that
if so much were given to hide a secret, others would be as liberal if she
revealed it: and considering with her self, that what she had already in
possession was her own and could not be retired, it would be both more safe and
profitable now to gain a new Fee by detecting him, and saving her self from
danger, into which possibly the performance of what she had then undertaken
might let her fall. She hastened therefore to a public Magistrate of the City,
and informed him that a stranger of quality had been to solicit her to
contrive a mischief as much beyond her power as well to perpetrate; but because
he might probably address himself to some other more cunning and less honest to
bewitch or charm Meyrem to love him as he desired; her tender heart had moved
her to give him this honest advertisement, that so he might acquaint Disman and
prevent Hylebas. The interrogatories they more particularly put to this woman,
soon brought the whole mystery of iniquity to light; but the business being
tetchy, and his condition too lofty to prosecute him the ordinary way for such
discoveries: They judged it more politic to lay hold of that woman, then to
charge it upon him, whereby he finding his design disclosed, might of himself
quit the Town, fearing the just resentments it might awake against him. All
succeeded as they had judiciously conjectured; he left the City, but did not
give over his unworthy project. At that time he made war upon the Scyth^ans,
and his Father in its first beginning was general, to which high command
himself succeeded. Your Enemies, who were already advanced far into our
Country, taking their advantage pillaged us most strangely. We made our just
complaints, but for satisfaction returning us no other answer but this only,
that our neutrality was suspicious to them, and that they would still treat us
as Enemies, unless we would openly declare our selves; This violence quickly
obliged us to take up Arms, but it was to side with yours; and our Forces being
thus united decreased the Enemies much, so that for four years successively, we
counter balanced that conquest which manifestly inclined to their side before.

These Martial employments how ever, did not take Hylebas off from the thoughts
of attaining his impure desires. He attempted to steal away Meyrem by the
assistance of some Scythians whom he had hired to that end, because it might
not be suspected he was the Author of so unhandsome an enterprise; but she
being ever attended with a numerous Guard, all those Setters forfeited either
their lives or liberties in the attaque; and one Officer of the Crew, hoping
thereby to obtain his freedom, confessed they were set on by Hylebas, and had
acted nothing but by his appointment and order. Dizman was presently made
acquainted of it, who had already found much backwardness and discontent
amongst his ^ouldiers, who though they were still set to cut out the toughest
work, had always the least pay and plunder, which your General retained to
himself. Though he had much ado to quell and keep in his indignation, yet he
would not pull off the vizard of dissimulation till he heard you had a
clandestine Treaty on Foot with the Scythians, then he thought it tameness to
bridle it any longer; wherefore waiting with Hylebas to confer about their
Warlike affairs, he complained that his good affection was very ill requited;
that they ought not to treat their associates as if they were Stipendaries, but
that all should share equally as well in the benefits of Treaties and
Agreements, as in the Troubles and Dangers they had participated largely in:
Hylebas, answered him very coldly, that having never done nor treated any
thing, but what he was a Witness of, he could not but wonder at this discourse.
Nevertheless, replied Dizman, you cannot hinder the change in your countenance
from witnessing against you, nor had I voted in the design of surprising
Meyrem, to which purpose you employed the Scythians. This made Hylebas blush
yet more, how ever with a quaint expression he replied, I understand not what
you mean: you should do well to be assured of such things before you give any
credit to them: if you speak with more truth, you would allow it more ingennity
and plainness. Say what you please, returned Dizman, but I have spoken no
Enigmaes but what you may unfold; nor can you deny the verity of these
reproaches without a manifest falsehood, which this shall vindicate when we meet
in a place convenient to dispute our interest, said he, showing his Sword.
Those that were present could not prevent this disorder, though they calmed
their swelling passions from flying higher for a time. Two days after, the
Generals quarrel had interressed the Soldiers, and that put them into
dissentions. This dissension provoked them to words, and these injurious words
begot blows. The Officers hastened to appease the tumult, but Hylebas, finding
himself well accompanied, instead of appeasing the broil, charged ours so
furiously that they were fain to give ground, till Dizman put them forward by
his presence and example: whose courage and heat did so quell your men, that
they had much ado by their retreat to save themselves, or their General
Hylebas, who received many wounds from our Princes own hands This affront out
deeper than his Sword, and therefore dispatching a Messenger to Balden, he so
disguised the whole action, that we were charged with all the guilt and blame,
as the sole Authors of this mutiny: and your General received express Orders to
conclude a Peace with the Scythians, and by their assistance to take a full
revenge upon us. Dizman, who well foresaw what would befall, had caused our
Army to retire, and gave sudden command for fresh Levies, to be in the better
posture to receive his Enemies. But before he could prepare what was fit,
Hylebas marched with his Army, and the assistance of three thousand Scythians,
and laid close siege to Sina. Though we were unprovided, yet he lost much time,
pains and men, and nothing but his treachery had success. The Daughter of that
old Hag, whom he would otherwhile have employed to enchant Meyrem, was then so
besotted with love of Hylebas, that her passion and ignorance made her imagine,
his affection to Meyrem was the only obstacle that did hinder his return of
love to her again, so that she beheld that Princess as her rival only. When she
saw Hylebas so near the City, her desires grew hotter at that her amorous
Planets approach, and her hatred became so violent against Meyrem, that she had
the confidence to undertake the delivery of the Garrison into his hands, upon
condition he would satisfy her wishes, which she presumed she partly deserved
long before, but much more if she achieved that exploir.

Hylebas, who had often felt the fury of our allies, was very eager to redeem
his bleeding honor at so easy a rate, and therefore willingly promised all
that her longing heart could prompt her to demand of him. The Gold Signet her
Mother had received of him, and the addition of wealth bestowed by Dizman for
their discovery, had so well furnished her, that she was married to the Officer
who kept the keys of the City Gates. Whose privilege did much facilitate the
means her passion had suggested to her, to let in some of the Enemies Troops
into the City.

Though she were married, yet was she very amorously persecuted by a young man,
whom she began to sooth with hopes, and in short to promise him what he sued
for if he at an appointed time, could but find the means to cast her husband
into a sound sleep, which since the siege began he seldom gave way to. Love,
as you may take some notice of, would be the only fatal Minister of our ruin.
This fellow immediately procures a strong somniferous draught, which she first
made trial of on some other, and being now provided, she sent word to Hylebas
that she expected him punctually at midnight, at the East Gate, which he should
find open and no Guards to oppose him.

At night to make her promised treachery good, she mixed some of that potion in
her Husbands drink at his supper, and was as careful to bestow some of it on
the Soldiers which had that Port that night: and at the time appointed she
waited at the place assigned whilst the whole Guard were in a profound sleep.
Hylebas failed not to send a party first to make sure of the Gate, which being
possessed and he advertised of it, he advanced with speed commanding his Troops
to follow with the stricktest silence imaginable: and being entered the Town by
this wile, he gave orders to put every one to the sword that should make the
least opposition.

The Inhabitants and Soldiers were so surprised at the terrible alarm, that
seeing no body make head, he easily marched directly toward the Palace,
whither Love, Hatred and Revenge, led him with fury and precipitation.

Imagine a Troop of enraged Wolves, that had strangled the drowzy dogs set to
guard a flock, rushing into the sold, where those timorous, but innocent
creatures, thought themselves as safe, as they were strongly guarded: such was
the poor Peoples confusion, the Soldiers disorder, and the Princes amazement,
who nevertheless caused the by streets to be instantly chained and barricado'd,
but to no end, the multitude that hurried toward his Palace as their last
refuge and Sanctuary, broke them soon down again, and left the way open for his
men to draw up in a great place which faced it. There Hylebas began to cry out
Victory, and that his blackest actions might be apparent, though Heaven had hid
its self with the thickest curtains of Clouds; that ignoble General, caused the
contiguous buildings to be fired, that the obscurity of the night might not
hide from him the objects of his vengeance. Dizman, finding the loss of the
City was inevitable, and willing at least to save what was dearest to him in
the world, ran to Meyrems Chamber which looked toward the Sea, where but a few
days before, she was delivered of Vneria: and conjuring her to embarque her
self immediately in a Ship which lay at Anchor just before them, he promised to
follow her immediately. That generous Lady, answered him, no otherwise, but
that whatever she did, she neither would fly or save her self but with him: and
if he must dye, she would as cheerfully dye, as she had lived with him: that
she would not complain of her own Fate how severe soever, provided her children
were but safe; and hastily putting Vneria into my hands, with a shower of
flowing tears, and her son Zarif, a child of two years old, into her Husbands,
go, said she, to us, embracing us with tenderness mixed with courage, and so
much love as cannot have its full expression, save these dear and innocent
creatures at least; and would to Heaven this might not be the last of our
adieu's! The noise of those that entered pell-mell into the Chamber untied
those sad embraces, and drove us down a pair of secret stairs to the Ship which
received us. Meyrem, as I have been since informed, notwithstanding her
weakness and indisposition disguising her Sex, armed her self that she might go
and relieve her Husband, who expired before her face, pierced with a thousand
wounds.

That woeful object which had doubtless been able to blunt the highest courage,
did but whethers, grown indeed less vigorous by some blood exhausted from her,
precious veins, so that hearing Hylebas, who had discovered her give command to
take her alive, she forced her way through those that were about him, who in
obedience to the command their General had given them, fearing to kill her,
hindered her not from joining him; and rushing upon him with the like fury as a
Lyoness would do on him who had robbed her of her whelps: Traitor, said she,
striking at him, do thou command them to save my life, that I may take my
just and full revenge on thee; know at least, that though I cannot redeem my
Husband from death, yet I can dye with honor for his sake: two full blows she
discharged upon him, which made him stagger, and dispensed his Soldiers from
longer obedience, who presently flew on her in multitudes, yet could they not
hinder her from making way till she came to her dear Husbands dead Corpse, on
which she made a sad shift to cast her self and die.

We being now in formed by certain other small Barks, that we were closely
persued, and that to glut his rage, the bloody Hylebas had given strickt orders
being come again to himself, that we should be sought for every where with
diligence, thought it safest to go on shore at the first place we could make
land, which we did changing our habits, and suddenly parting from each others,
that we might not be taken altogether, in case they should hear of us. But as
the decree of Fate is inevitable, Vneria and my self fell into the power of
some who were ranging about the Coasts for a prey; and we were afterward sold
to the Keeper of Coupava, whilst my Husband, who had more strength and agility,
saved himself in a little wood near hand with Zarif, whither they likewise
followed him, but how they fared I never since could have the least tidings.

And this, Sir, is the sad history of our misfortunes; the remainder of our
disconsolate lives is not unknown to you, and we are now more happy in your
goodness and esteem, then our best hopes could ever fairly promise, since after
so long a silent and mournful Captivity and concealment, you have unpinion'd
our restraint and given us leave to breath our sorrows by lending so courteous
an ear to this doleful relation.

This story moved my very soul to compassion, but I was yet more transported by
those tears the fairest Vneria let fall, whilst her Aunt made the relation of
it. Nor could I keep mine from breaking prison, before I had expressed my self
thus to her: Ah! Madam, what cause have I given you to cherish so ill an
opinion of my person; why did you not sooner make me acquainted with your
sufferings, since you could not be ignorant how much I might have lightened the
too too heavy chains of your Captivity. Can it be possible you should not have
perceived the vehement heat of my love for you? though I have kept it still
under the lock and key of a timorous silence; yet my flame having been as
bright as chaste and discreet, might well have been guessed by you: and since
you knew that I have acted nothing for Vneria, which any indifferent Judge
would not have construed more an effect of passion and affection then common
charity, why have you made your fear or scorn the cause of your own sufferings,
and those torments my own restraint has put upon me? But I should never mention
my own troubles, did I not lie under the guilt of having left her, who was the
blessing of my heart, so long under Captivity in my own Fathers house: and
then, perfidious Hylebas, do not believe, thou have escaped the justice of the
gods, Heaven has deferred its punishments only to make it fall the heavier on
thee, for though Divine Justice comes but slow, yet it comes sure, and I
believe and hope that I am chosen the just Minister of it, which I shall
inflict with so much the more security, as the interests of Vneria are dearer
to me than thy Gerose. It depends but upon you my Princess, said I, addressing
my self to her, to allow of it; and if you will not command me to execute it,
for my own respects, yet let me do it for justice and your illustrious Parents
sakes: a deep sigh, which she fetched from her heart, as the Prologue to her
following discourse, imposed a willing silence on my tongue, whilst she spoke
thus. Merame your promising goodness, which persuaded my Aunt, to tell you the
sad tale of our misfortunes, does likewise encourage me to accept of those fair
proffers you have made to me: I shall not therefore demur, but accept of them
in the best manner my unhappy condition admits of now, I mean, rather under
the notion of protection then of service. And yet, replied I, if you would but
consider your present condition in relation to me, you will soon find it
speaks you mistress and Sovereign of my soul; but perhaps, you find it an
unhappiness, that persons of more power and greater quality then my meanness
are not present to serve you. Not so, answered she, for besides that I am too
well acquainted with humility and my own abasement to harbor so uncivil an
inmate as pride, so I have already received too great a sum of obligations from
your bounty to be so ungrateful; and I assure you, that if I cannot make you a
full retribution for your favors, you must impute it more to my want of
Fortune, then good will.

This happy declaration and condescension to love was concluded with as much
satisfaction as I had ambition or love; and I took a resolution to search out
some confiding friend, who might ransom this illustrious Captive out of her
thraldom. Her confinement infinitely troubled me, yet was I forced to defer it
a while and cloak my griefs. During this restraint, all the happiness I could
reap, was to entertain her daily with my reiterated vows and promises, and
this somewhat abated the displeasure I suffered in the necessity of seeing
Gerose, toward whom she enjoined me, not to express any aversion, nor could I
afford her any syllable of pretended affection.

In fine, the Age of winter being much increased, I understood of the
preparations were making to receive the Princess of Sogdiana, whom Balden was
to send for by extraordinary Ambassadors. I entreated her to let me cast about
for some means whereby to free myself from Gerose, whom I was already bid to
look upon, as her, that was to be my wife, within the short date of two months.
The business pressed us equally, and this urgent necessity made me soon vote
the resolution to declare myself openly an Enemy to Hylebas, thereby to unty
the chain of Marriage and alliance with his daughter. He had a Son name
Zadarem, in whose company I was to go to meet the now young Princess: His
humor was as little pleasing as his Fathers, being nothing but a mere timpany
of Pride; he had few friends at Court, as being one whose favor any man would
have esteemed too dearly purchased at the cheap price of a complement: yet
thought himself too eminent to be so familiar as to receive them in quality of
friends or associates. He had been otherwise extravagantly amourous of Themira,
and because she had treated him beneath the merits he fancied in himself, his
angry love was turned into hate, which made him take occasion to disoblige and
affront her all he could.

Whilst Senisra stood fair with Themira, the least concerned had taken notice
by those assiduous addresses he made to her, that he took a more then ordinary
delight in entertaining her; but his descreet behavior rather made them guess
then certainly know his purpose and desires; Only Zadarem, who looked upon it
through the Perspective of love and jealousy, had more perfectly descried his
mind; and led on by his passion, he wrought so far by his impostures upon
Themira's spirit, that she at last was possessed with the belief of her Princes
infidelity, as you have already understood: and he likewise had informed Balden
that the inclination his son had to Themira, was the only cause he expressed so
little joy and willingness to have the Princely virgin. Balden having exactly
informed himself in this particular of so grand concernment, had prohibited
Senisra upon the penalty of his severest displeasure not to see Themira any
more, whom he also expressly commanded to confine her self to her country
habitation, to which her own troubled fancy had already caused her to retreat.

The time being come, that we were to go fetch the Sogdian Princess, I went to
take leave of Senisra, and then communicated the plot I had laid to spring up
some occasion of contest with Zadarem, whose ill contrived behavior promised
me subject enough. He condiscended, in fine, to let me lay hold of fortunes
forestep to free my self from my Gerose, and assured me of the honor of his
protection and power on al occasions, or accidents, and withal to give order
in my absence for my Vnerias liberty, which he soon after nobly procured. No
sooner were we arrived in Sogdiana, and had paid our civility to the Princess,
who was indeed rich both in beauty and virtue, but Zadarem began amongst the
praises he showred upon her, to let fall some drops of Medisance and slander
upon Themira's reputation: he went every where proclaiming that the Prince
needed not so much regret her loss, since the chaster flames this worthy Lady
might kindle in his heart, could not but extinguish those lighter fancies and
caresses of a Mistress. This malice was so apparent that every one ressented it
as very scandalous, there was not any in our company that was not well
acquainted with the fair Themira's unsoyl'd virtue, and had valor and will
enough to assert it; but they all flung their looks on me, who am allied to
her, expecting I should ty up his insolent tongue from bespattering her with
such abuses. One day after I had mildly reproved him, he had the impudence to
ask me, whether the Prince had so far loved me, as to let me share with him in
that gentle fortune, since I took upon me to vindicate him; and if so, that he
had yet so much discretion left in stock, as not to wake his sisters jealousy
with the report of it; and when I replied, that I had no farther interest in
her, but only what every Gentleman would be obliged to for his kindred, to
preserve their reputation, which therefore engaged me not to hear a person of
her high worth so unhandsomely calumniated; he promised me, but in a kind of
raillery, that since it concerned me so nearly, he would be very careful
hereafter not to let fly any thing that might call up my anger: which
nevertheless he did not observe; He could not restrain his itching tongue from
publishing a hundred wanton Tales, and noised the ressentment I had shown,
which I was forced to pocket up till we were returned into Margiana, as
unwilling to violate that respect we owe to stranger Countries.

The same day we had passed the confines of Sogdiana, about the evening I
accosted him, and having led him to a private place, where I before had sent a
gentleman with two weapons, I desired him to make choice of one, and I would
take the other. The unexpectancy astonished him more then the danger of the
combat; but as he was truly valiant, after the preparation of a few words, we
proceeded to blows; he defended himself with as much skill and courage as I
assaulted him; I received and gave several wounds, but, in fine, justice being
in my armor, I gained his sword with this advantage of being able to go off
my self, whereas he lay extended with small hopes of life, which made me send
to his servants to go and fetch him thence.

In the interim, to secure my self, I posted back from whence we came that day,
and secured my self in a Castle belonging to a Sogdian gentleman, whose
friendship I had purchased by some civilities in his Princes Court. The news of
this duel which brought astonishment to every one that heard it, cut deeper in
my parents minds then any accident that ere befell them, they having promised
themselves the best of fortunes in my alliance with Hylebas: whereas now Balden
having examined the ground of our quarrel, vowed he would satisfy the just
ressentments of his favorite by our utter ruin. I secretly made Senisra
acquainted with the place of my retreat, and the same moment wrote a letter to
Vneria, by which I conjured her to bless me with her presence at an appointed
place, within ten days time, that so my troubles might not be without some
allay of hope and consolation; and that from thence we would go to Bactriand:
But because I was to go through a part of Baldens Territories to reach this
place, I shrouded my self in a disguize so strange, that I blinded all
suspicion and discovery. Being at the exact time most prosperously arrived* I
lighted on a person whom she had charged to give me notice that she was
reposing her self in a place but very little distant thence, where she had
borrowed the benefit of a friendly shade, till the excessive heat of the day
were wasted, and being big with impatience to reach thither, I hastened to horse
and in my desires flew swiftly toward the place.

What think you now, Sybaris, of this meeting? do you not presume I must be
very happy in it? yet o gods, how are you mistaken? if you guess so, you wander
in a mistake; and miss the truth, as much as I did my hopes; I was soon
alighted indeed, and approached her with a becoming ceremony, and she advanced
to receive me in her blessed arms; when the strangest accident imaginable,
snatched her away, before I had the time to be let into her embraces! a Troop
of villains issuing out of a neighboring wood, greedily ceazed on those were
nearest to them: Vneria was the first prey they lighted on, and her they
hurried away before my eyes. Pardon me Sybaris, that I cannot keep in these
unruly sighs which interrupt my discourse. The sad, yet sweet remembrance of
that fatal enterview does almost sting my soul by the remembrance of it now, as
it did when it happened. The transport I was in, winged me with have and fury
after those wild ravishers, with my drawn sword, but being then on foot, they
galloped into the thickest of the wood, which soon sheltred them from my
longing eyes. I ran amazedly sometimes one way, then another, according as
their doleful cries directed me, often hearing my dear distressed Vneria
implore and summon her Merame for assistance. That voice hastened my pace, but
soon after, when the greater distance had lost her to my Ear, as well as Eye,
my breath and strength took flight after her, and left me to fall under my own
weight: where I lay without motion, till the noise of some horses which passed
by, having rowz'd me, I perceived turning my head that way, that one of those
fellows fled with a woman in his arms, whom I discerned to be Vnerias Aunt: He
passing back again near the place, where I was unseen by him, I caught his
horses bridle, and at the same instant gave him so full a blow with my sword,
that he soon tumbled off with the woman, whom I was striving to convey away in
the wood to shelter her from the rest: when they came rushing so suddenly upon
me, I was fain to leave her to provide for my own safety. I made all the
resistance a desperate man could levy, but was at last pressed down under their
numbers. I fell betwixt their horses feet so full of wounds, they thought that
to take me up, was but to burden themselves with a dead carcass: so they only
took away Vnerias Aunt, whose fear and amazement had kept her in a continual
fainting. I remember the effusion of so much blood as I lost so enfeebled me,
that the cries and languishing looks I endeavored to send after them, were
soon wrapped up in a deadly swoon together with the rest of my senses. Some of
Vnerias, company, who by a generous resistance had saved themselves out of
their hands, entering the wood to seek more unhappiness then they desired to
find, lighted on me in a condition that promised but little hopes of life.
How-ever, they bound up my wounds to stanch the streams of blood, and took me
up to carry me to the City, and as they feared, to my grave at once. Whilst
they were going, the agitation having a little revived my spirits, I sent forth
a sigh, which faintly told them there was yet some remainder of life dwelling
in me, but no more, then to show I was still dying. In this belief, as soon as
they entered the City, they took council about my interment, and endeavored no
longer to conceal whom I was. The Governor heard by their public regrets that
'twas Merame they mourned for, and presently dispatched away a Messenger to
advertize Balden of it, who after the death of Zadarom had given orders to all
the Frontire Garrisons to ceaze me.

Amongst those whose curiosity had invited them to see me, there happened to come
a very expert Chyrurgeon that had formerly been my Fathers household servant:
This man desired leave to search my wounds, and not finding any of them mortal,
judged that it was only the loss of so much blood at once, had brought me to so
feeble a condition; wherefore finding some sparks of life and warmth still in
me, he assayed to revive me by some potent Cordials, which he employed
unhappily for me, since his conjecture had not deceived him. He felt my heart
begin to beat a little, and some small dawning appearances in my face, which
made him proceed to such further applications as restored me once more to my
senses. The first apparent sign I gave them, was a languishing look, which I
sent as my only readiest Messenger to seek for Vneria; and that was seconded by
my tongue which at its first motion called upon her Name: but when I had
gathered a little more strength and found my self in that condition amidst so
many strangers, and began to remember how I had lost her. Oh gods, cried I, can
I be yet alive, and she that is my soul be ravished from me? Then turning my
eyes on those were helping to dress my wounds, who desired me to be quiet,
Friends said I, you are more cruel than those Villains that hurt me, it was not
without some reason they would have slain me, after they had deprived me of her
for whom only I lived; And you, whose mercy has less pity than their cruelty,
you would force me to live without her, who alone can make my life a ^lessing
to me: Restore me my Vneria, or all your care is superfluous, and what your Art
can do is only to keep my unwilling soul for some few moments in this ruinous
body, which cannot long subsist being separ^ted from its better self: do not
make me languish therefore, if you truly love me, but suffer my spirit to quit
this troublesome abode, and being uncaged take its flight, where only happiness
without disturbance can be enjoyed for ever.

Notwithstanding all these requests and moans, their care and remedy's brought
me by soft degrees to strength again; When finding I must live, I resolved to
bend all my endeavors to a research of the lost Vneria: and was already
considering the way to set about it, when all my hopes were again snatched from
me. Hylebas had some correspondants in this City, who gave him notice of my
begun recovery; and that Traitor, whom I may justly style the plague of my
life, did immediately renew the Governors Order to lay hold of me, who came
himself, and showed it me signed under Baldens own hand, excusing himself that
his office obliged him to execute this Commission, contrary to those real
desires he had to do me service.

As soon as they thought me healthy enough to undergo the fatigue of a journey,
they conducted me with a Troop of Horse to Bacheher, where I was thrust into a
Tower, in which they ordinarily kept their prisoners of quality. My Father and
Mother with my nearest relations had once the liberty to come and visit me:
Senisra, who was now married to the Princess I formerly mentioned, could not
obtain it, and what ever endeavors he made to procure my pardon, they could
not bow the angry Balden to pity; who notwithstanding had not declared how he
would deal with me, but whose concealed fury, shook my friends hearts with
fear, having indeed some more then ordinary reason to fear that clap of
thunder, which so long threatened to break forth against me, yet kept its
lightning still covered with a Cloud.

During the afflictions of my imprisonment, sometimes the lively remembrance of
my beautiful Vneria invaded my melancholy thoughts and gave them cause to make
me rejoice; but when from her bright face, I let fall my thoughts on her black
destiny, turning the other side of the leaf to read our misfortunes, my sorrow
swelled above the power of comforts to allay, and then my sighs and tears were
too abundant to be expressed in words. What shall I say more, Sybaris, when as if
there had yet wanted one weight of sorrow more to sink me to the bottom of
misery and despair; One of those that were taken with her, having made his
escape came into this disconsolate Prison, to tell me such sad tidings as
utterly extinguished the least glimpse of hope I had yet remaining in me. He
assured me, that those Thieves had found Vneria so rarely handsome, that they
had consulted to make a glorious present of her to their Prince, who had a
Palace filled with beautiful slaves, in which they were confined to satisfy
his wanton pleasures, and that Vneria having understood their ^esign,
conceiving so piercing a sorrow, that it converted into an accute Fever, which
quickly caused her death, for whom the Scythians had so much esteem and
veneration, that to express their regrets for her loss, they had erected a very
stately Monument for her, which he had often seen and lamented over.

The recital of this funest adventure, struck me into the deepest silence
possible for a long while: It ceaz'd upon my reason too, and made me so much
loose the helm of judgment, I was like to run and Shipwreck upon despair: so
that I sought for some weapon, wherewith to put a period to that heap of
miseries, which I could bear no longer on my tortured bosom: But finding that
means was denied me, I had recourse to my complaints: Ha! what said I, does
Balden withhold the execution of his vengeance only to make me linger in my
miseries? Is his cruelty become so witty, to make me taste a thousand deaths
for one? must I yet live upon this wrack of torments, and not be allowed the
mercy of a sudden death? Cruel and inexorable Butcher, you have now found out
the way of full revenge indeed, by suffering me still to live in a condition
that has more of horror than many deaths could frighten me withal; and thou,
blessed soul, do not thou charge me with backwardness and want of Love and
courage; thou see I search out all the ways I can to follow thy too hasty
flight: and since I am yet bound under the sad necessity of staying longer than
my soul desires, comfort me with thy blessed spirit, that I may not be left
thus still alone with those wild thoughts: and here again my griefs came
flowing in so fast, they quite choakt up the passage of my speech: I was thus a
long time mute, and that Gentleman taking at last his farewell, left me rather
in the possession of my sorrows than my reason.

A few days after Senisra sent a Gentleman to comfort me, whom I entreated to
tell the Prince, that the only favor he could procure me, would be, not to
follicite any longer for my pardon, but to join his pursutes with those of my
Enemies to hasten my end; and that, as this was the last, so it would be the
greatest favor I could implore, and the most welcome honor his mediation
could confer upon so miserable a person.

Contrary to the prayer of this Petition, that Generous Prince, fearing some
sinister accident from this despair, begged of his Father so earnestly, that he
obtained permission to give me a visit* He found me in a posture which begot as
much wonder as compassion in him. My Chamber was very obscure, having only the
faint light of one little window which I had half veiled over with a Curtain. I
was thrown on my bed, my arms crossing my breast, my eyes fixed upwards and so
weather-beaten with the storms of tears that bubbled from those springs, and my
visage so melancholy, wan and discomposed from its natural dress, that he
might well mistake me, as he did, and think his feet had led him unawares, into
some doleful Cell, where only grief and mourning kept their disconsolate Court;
my thoughts had buried my mind in such a deep sense of my Calamities, that I
did not perceive when he entered into the Chamber, so that he came close to me
without discovery; and after he had gazed some time upon me, I turned my head
that way, and looked upon him with an eye so full of trouble, that he believed
it furious. Being first amazed to behold me in so woeful a condition, and
perceiving me immovable, his pity made him first salute, then call upon me,
when finding I made no reply, he proceeded thus to rowze me by a gentle check,
Is it thus Merame, you mean to receive and slight the visit of Senisra, and is
it so importunate as to deserve this silence and these forbidding looks? these
words brought him to my knowledge, and striving to salute him, I hardly had the
strength to show it, by a little inclining of my head: which I followed with
these languishing accents, Noble Senisra, the infinite sorrows that overwhelm
me, are the cause of my incivility: but what Ceremonies can you expect from a
man equally in despair of life and death, who during the violent agitation of
this perpetual agony does neither live nor dye? a combat so much the more
cruel, because it continues so long in one poor heart, and does not yet quite
burst it. Gods! how merciless are your decrees against me; why should you thus
delight to oppose all my happiness, and will not send death, after you have
cursed my life, and blasted all my just designs, which how unhappily they have
succeeded you can judge: I drew Vneria from my Mothers house with the fond
hopes of delivering her from a Captivity, which was more advantageous, then
that liberty afterward proved to be: If I justly revenge her injuries on the
destroyers of her worthy Family, and her own sweet repose, that becomes the
ground work of all my misfortunes; when I imagine I am going to embrace her,
and graspe the highest felicity in my arms, I find it rudely snatched away, and
she hurried to her fatal end, whilst I am left the sport to Destiny, and
example of the greatest sufferings mortality ever tasted of and lived under.
Cruel thoughts, sorrowful remembrance, which stings my very soul with
bitterness, that I my self should be the sad cause of hers, and thereby my own
utter ruin! had I not better have continued to love and adore her in silence?
But oh -- Here the Prince interrupted me, and mildly said, Cease from becoming
yet more guilty by your loud murmerings: you must not blaspheme against so sage
a conduct as that of Heaven; Are the gods tied to let fall prosperity on all
our actions and purposes? no, they more wisely do dispose, of what we commonly
propose most wildly to our selves: Nor should we think our selves so harshly
dealt with, did we but well consider, how lamely we go about most, if not all
our designs, and how we swerve from those strickt rules of Virtue prescribed us
to walk in, to attain our just ends: Is it possible, Merame, that when you
intended to fight with Zadarem, you should not plainly foresee, my Fathers heat
of passion and anger, since you so soon fled from it? and who had ensured
Vneria's safety in her journey to meet you? the attendance appointed to convey
her, did not that show what fears you had she might fall into those
misfortunes, did afterward unhappily light on her? Believe me, Merame, you do
ill to complain so much for having reaped those thorns your self had planted:
your misadventures cannot be unravel'd again, I mean those that are past, do
not kick at Heaven, but mildly submit to what Fate and your self have cast upon
you: it is better yiedling obedience to the gods, than call more anger down by a
rebellious impatience. I, you know, made some opposition against my destiny,
but in vain, we must bow down our stubborn wills at last, therefore strive to
content your self with what Heaven does. The love, the Prince showed, in his
affectionate and rational discourse recalled my reason back to her first
temper; I found, indeed, I gave my self up to despair unnobly, and with much
weakness; and before he parted I promised him to suck at every flower that
could but promise the least probability of yiedling any comfort to me. He,
afterward sent very often to visit me, and had obtained so much favor, that
my chains of close restraint were drawn out to such an extent of liberty, that
I might now walk freely in a wide Park adjoining to my Prison, where frequently
my friends came to give me comfort, and helped to wear out the tedious hours I
spent in my confinement. One day, whilst it was yet very early, a Gentleman
came to me from Senisra, and told me, with a smiling countenance, which gave me
hopes of some approaching joy, that it was time to cheer my self, since that
black news of Vneria's death, was dispel'd by a most certain news discovery how
she was still alive, to witness which, he presented me a Letter delivered him
the foregoing night. This sudden transport from a depth of sorrow, to such a
height of joy, had almost made me loose my self in wonder: and, not minding or
caring, indeed, how, or by whom this Paper Embassy was come to hand, I kissed
it many times first, and then tore it through impatience to read its Contents.
I yet keep that precious pawn of her affection, which, I may say, was signed
with her blood. But since I cannot behold or read it without a prologue of
tears, oblige me so far Sybaris, as to ease me of that sorrow by reading it
your self. Sybaris, having unfolded it, found these words, UNERIA to MERAME.
The opinion I am possessed with of your death, may be as false, as that which I
apprehend you have of mine. I live yet Merame, thanks to Heaven, but it is only
to dye within four days: which are the remainder of as many more were given me
to resolve either to forfeit my life or honor; of which time I have wasted
this one half only in seeking an opportunity to give you notice of it. I now
expect the hour patiently which shall make me triumph both over your enemies
and mine! And if you would not have me regret my death, since it is for yours
and Virtues sake I fall, comfort your self, Merame, I conjure you by this last
and highest testimony of my Love, and live for her sake, who thus resolutely
resolves to dye for you, as being unalterably either in life or death,

Your Vneria.




Gods! Cried Sybaris, how has this Letter deluded me! I expected a quite
contrary success, and had no place to doubt, but it would have established your
happiness most firmly. Indeed, pursued Merame, the affliction this Letter
brought with it, was by so much the more sensible, as it was unexpected, it
crushed down all my young springing hopes, and the weak props my reassumed
confidence had borrowed, and so infinitely oppressed my heart, it never could
have risen from under the weight, if Senisra, having succeeded his Father, had
not quite knocked off my fetters of restraint, and used all the noble
endeavors possible to persuade me, not to throw away my life so cheaply, but
try to carve out a brave revenge for my Vneria. To this purpose he made up a
reconciliation betwixt Hylebas and me, whom he afterward commanded to quit the
Court, and doing me the honor to admit me to the same degree of favor, as my
Antagonist had enjoyed under Balden, he committed the disposal of all offices
to my Father, whom he elected for the General of his Army.

Mean time, the Scythians, who hoped for some advantage in this grand mutation,
broke out into an absolute War, which their daily pilferings and small
incursions on either side had long threatened. Senisra, finding the army his
Father had levied, in a condition to march, commended my Father to prevent the
Enemies have, on whose Frontiers he appeared before they could have leisure to
imagine it: I was impatient till we came to blows, and as soon as we had news
of them by our scouts, I went out with a party to discover, or rather to
attaque them. That first enterprise succeeding happily, for those I engaged
were all either cut off, or taken prisoners; there was not any one of those
whom I had subdued, of whom I enquired not particularly concerning Vneria; who,
I told them was that fair Captive in Margiana, they had put to death a few days
since. One only of them all, told me somewhat, he affirmed that their Prince
and his son had both been most passionately in Love with her, but that the
Father prompted by his jealousy had caused her to dye, to root up the sons
hopes of enjoyment. Since himself could not allure her to his own desires, her
noble virtue having bravely repulsed the hottest of his lustful onsets.

The report and the love I had to Vneria, together with the hate against her
enemies and my ressentment resulting from both, made me perform such acts, as
without their impulse, I should never have undertaken; but those considerations
did so animate me, that in that dreadful Battle we gained, though so dearly,
that the victory was written in Characters of our own blood and innumerable
wounds, I had engaged my self so far, in the greatest shock of it, amongst the
Enemies horse, that being unable to cut my way back again, the numerous herd
flying to save themselves hurried me away in the throng with them. The richness
of my arms and habit showed me to be of a condition which promised them a fair
ransom, which made them treat me civily enough, and secure me in a Castle
very strongly guarded, which faced the Caspian sea.

My imprisonment was not so closs, but I had sometimes the liberty to breath
the fresh air in a large enclosed pasture, at the other end whereof there stood
another Castle, where I was told they kept those fair Captives, chosen, for
their more then ordinary beauty, to satisfy their Princes lust; which awakened
my thoughts and memory of my lost Vneria, whose cruel prison I fancied it to
have been, and casting up my Eye with great attention toward the windows which
were secured with Iron grates, my mind represented that fair Planet to me with
all its luster and beauty: whilst I was feeding my self one day with these sad
contemplations, I heard a feeble voice knock at my Ear, which as I thought
called me by my name, this made me hastily gaze upwards, from whence I
perceived a note falling down rolled upon a little stick, which I soon snatched
up and reading found it was Vnerias fair hand which thus expressed it self.

To MERAME.
The Heavens, in fine, Merame, are I hope weary of persecuting me; after all
my afflictions, they seem to promise pity, I have found within the walls of
this Prison, an officer that proffers me my liberty, and expects no other
recompense, but what results from the act it self; your interests are so dear
to me, and I have evinced they are so inseparably tied to mine, that he has
engaged (to make his obligation the more complent) to set you free, the same
day with me* Meet therefore at the place he shall appoint you anon by a second
note that shall be thrown down to you. Adieu


Guess, Sybaris, for I cannot cloathe that joy in words, which then filled my
heart, knowing Vneria to be yet alive, and who to testify the true love she
still cherished for me, endeavored to restore me to that liberty, which I had
made her loose, when I thought to have procured it for her self and me.
Notwithstanding amidst this hope, and fresh assurances of her faith, I resented
some little grudgings of jealousy and distrust against him that thus undertook
her freedom: and this secret suspicion would have stifled all my joy, if the
over eager desire of seeing her, had not quite thrust it out of my mind. I
thought no more on any thing but those happy means and moments which were to
guide me to my Vnerias presence, and during this impatient longing, I watched
under the window expecting the paper that was to give me directions, which was
soon after hurld down. By reading it I understood, that about midnight a Man
would come and conduct me down a pair of private stayrs, which led to the sea
side, where I should find a small boat waiting for me, all this was punctually
performed, at the hour assigned one came and guided me thither, and no sooner
was I imbarqued but the Mariners stretched away amain, making the best use of
their Oars and Sails all night, to be by break of day at the place where I
should land, which was close by a Fishermans small cottage, where they informed
me I must go to find some certain persons who were waiting there for me.
Having set me on shore, they made away from the place with great speed, and I
with as much precipitancy, hasted to the Cabin to find my dear Vneria; whom I
soon saw indeed, but in what condition do you think Syba^is? alas! that most
beautiful creature lay extended at her full length upon the grass, weltring in
her own precious blood, which gushed from her left breast! The horror of so
ghastly a spectacle shot, such astonishment into my soul, that I remained a long
time as motionless as she, with my melting eyes fastened upon her wound! and my
hard Fate denying me the mercy of a sudden death, made me endure the agony of
many: yet was I summoned by an hollow sigh to look up; and approach nearer to
her with a tottering pace; when finding no visible sign of life remaining in
her, why my Vneria have you brought me hither, cried I, to be so sad an
eyewitness of your untimely and violent death? Could you believe I should
prefer it before your closs captivity? or if you designed that I should follow
your example, why would you not stay my coming? what has occasioned such a
sudden change, was your necessity so urgent you could not shun it one moment
longer? ah heavens, why must I behold this funest object, were it not better to
have left me still in the uncertain but more happy opinion of her former death,
then thus to blast my senses by the horrid fight? But my eyes, what is it you
see? where are those blooming roses, and fairer Lillies which created so
excellent a beauty in her Face? Where are those living stars, whose luster was
less offensive, but more glorious then the Suns, and kindled kinder he^ts in my
poor bosom? Can this be fair Vneria, and all these beauties withered? yes,
it is Vneria, but death has cropped those curious flowers, and cast a cloud over
those brightest stars! Weep therefore, weep, till you are blind, as she for
this sad funeral of all your happiness! The violence of my grief cut of all
further complaints, and sunk me down upon my knees beside her: where softly
kissing, sometimes her cold cheeks, then her colder lips, and bowing my head
down in a dejected manner sighing and shedding floods of tears, I gently took
up one of her white hands, which she had locked together, and perceived a Dagger
in it, and a piece of linen in the other, which she had torn off from her
neck, upon which these words were charactred in blood, To keep my self
entirely thine, I must dye Merame. Ha! well said I, since only I am guilty of
thy death it is but just I should be punished: and I am willing to expiate the
crime by offering my own heart thy sacrifice: but would to heaven, you rather
had hated me, than given such woeful testimonies of it! I should have no regret
in dying for you, were it not after you are dead for me, which is so stinging a
consideration, I doubt it will not leave me quiet in my grave. Too, too dear
pledge of her immortal love, pursued I, kissing the Sacred relic; whereon her
blood had left some blushings for my demerits; Receive the impressions of mine
also, which I resolve to ingrave. And then taking up the dagger, thou fatal
instrument of our discourteous destiny, bathe thy self in my blood, to wash
that sin off thou have contracted by letting out of hers. Then having again
kissed my Vneria's pale lips and reeking wound, and noted where abouts it was
made, I stabed my self as near my own heart, as that was to hers, and with the
first drops wrote thus upon the same linen, Merame dies for Uneria who is dead
for him. It Is strange, me thought that blow gave me the greatest ease I ever
felt, by disbanding that despair and load of grief that so oppressed me: and
feeling my strength decay apace, I laid my self down close by her, on the same
bed of earth, embracing her as strictly as I could, resolving to be united to
her at death.

All my senses were now taking their last farewell and flight together. When
she pressed that hand wherewith I held her fast; I strugled to raise my self
again, and willingly would have thrust death from me, since Vneria yet lived,
to have assisted her: but the loss of so much blood as gushed from my deep
wound, caused me to faint, so that I was wholly deprived of all sentiment.
Whilst I was in this trance, the owner of the little Cottage, a good ancient
man, happening to come by, was moved with compassion, and used his best means to
recover me again: by his care and helpful charity I came at length to my senses
again, and as soon as I was Master of so much strength and reason as would
guide my tongue, I enquired for Vneria, whom he told me was conveyed away by
certain strangers he never had before beheld, he being much amazed at his
return from his fishing to see a horseman bear away a woman from thence, and to
find me on the cold earth swiming in blood.

I confess I had much ado to refrain quarreling with the old man, for suffering
any to ravish her away. The uncertainty, balancing my mind betwixt hope and
fear, whether it were a friend or enemy had taken her thence, strugled so long
with my despair which solicited for death, that it, in fine, made me desire to
live till I could know the certainty: considering it would be time enough to
take that Sanctuary, when I was sure she was utterly lost, who had been as
miraculously as often preserved above all expectation.

To this purpose, I conjured the good man to transport me to some such
concealed place as might secure me; who was so sensibly touched with the
relation I made him of some feigned disasters had befaln me, that he soon
consented to put me in a place of safety, before any one could have the time to
be informed of my flight. So he, accordingly, conveyed me to a little petty
Island, where he had found within the hollow womb of a Rock, a place large
enough to lodge in conveniently, when he minded not to return to his other
habitation. His Wife was there at that time with a child or two, who received
me with the same kindness as he had brought me; and they there took such pains
and care to advance my recovery, that within fifteen days, I had acquired a
great deal of strength. In the interim, this honest fellow brought me
intelligence, that certain persons, had made inquiry for me at his Cabin,
asking him whether he could give them any notice of a man whom they described
much of my resemblance: but they not mentioning either the Lady, or the
misfortunes I had related, he thought it might be some other. However he was
resolved and did keep me hid, till thinking it convenient to remove, I got him
to conduct me to the chops of the River Oxus, not far thence, where being
safely landed, I went directly to Sina in the Province of Derbices, the
Governor whereof was one of my most intimate friends. I went afterward to
wait on and pay my duty to my Father, who being at Court, I had the opportunity
to attend Senisra at the same time; who having formerly lost his first Wife in
Childbed, was then preparing (after he had worn out a competent time in
mourning) to be at last married to his dearest Themira. Senisra, made me a
thousand expressions of welcome by his caresses, and openly declared his more
then common joy for my return: He had the goodness and patience to hear the sad
relation of my misfortunes, at which he truly grieved, and gave me
encouragement to seek again for that lost treasure, of whom they had heard no
more in those parts than what I told them.

I made a careful research all over Margiana, and Bactriana, but in vain; when
hearing that one of her relations was in Labynetus Army, I purposed to find him
out, hoping I might from him meet with that intelligence which I had so
unprofitably sought till then. I fortuned to reach the Camp, just when the two
Armies were ready to give Battle, and being wholly guided by Vneria's interest,
who had one of her kindred in that party, I thrust my self amongst the
Volunteers, and was made a Prisoner by the Hir^anians, but most happily for me,
since by my Captivity I have obtained this honor of conversing with the brave
Sybaris.



Morame having drawn all the black lines of his sad history to this conclusion;
Sybaris expressed how much the sad Epilogue touched his generous soul with
compassion: and having ratified their former protestations of friendship with
many new and hearty oaths, the seals of an inviolable amity; Sybaris returned
to his apartment, charging his people to attend Merame with the most diligent
service, who suddenly betook him to his bed, the fittest place of privacy and
retirement to entertain his thoughts with those images of sorrow, which his so
late relation had brought more freshly into his mind, as to the many diverse
accidents that had betided both him and his dear Vneria in their amors.

The next day Sybaris imparted some of these disasters to Cyrus, whom from the
beginning had cherished his Prisoner with a particular esteem: and whilst this
entertainment yet continued, Merame came to salute him, as he did also the
Armenian Prince with Artabasus, Chrysante, and all those persons of Quality,
who were at that time met in the Generals Tent to wait upon him.

These illustrious friends had scarce put an end to the Ceremonies this new
acquaintance claimed, when some advertised Cyrus that a Messenger just then
arrived from Media desired to speak with him. He commanded them to admit him,
and finding it was Abracome, he led him into a little Closet apart, to have the
greater liberty of discourse with him. This trusty confident of his affections,
whom he had left in Ecbatane to have the more punctual information of his
Princess, feigned at first that he came not from her, but to acquaint him how
his Uncle Cyaxares being passionately enamoured with her, had conveyed her to
his strong Palace at Julier, where she was so strictly guarded, it was hardly
feasible either to speak with her or see her. But perceiving how much disquiet
this novel brought with it, by the many little questions and disordered
exclamations he made, he calmed him again, for the time, with a letter he
presented which she had contrived to send him by means of an Eunuch, whom she
engaged by Oath not to deliver to him till he should find him readily disposed
to serve her.

Cyrus how ever eminently courageous and victorious, could not receive this
Embassy without a kind of trembling; and having ripped it open, his eager
impatience made his eyes slip ever all the first part unread to see whether it
were really signed by Birinthea, who wrote thus to him.

Cyrus,
your generosity which otherwhile made you preserve my Fathers life at my
request, gives me just hopes to believe you will not deny that same protection
to rescue my own* which, I am now in hazard of forfeiting, since your Vnole
Cyaxares desires that of me, which he shall never obtain; though I
Prognosticate from his wild humor, that finding his persuasions and cajoleries
vain, he will make force and violence become the Ministers of his passions,
whence you may guess in what an extremity of danger I am I do not acquaint my
brother Tygranes with it, because you only ought to free me from this Tyranny,
since it was you alone that delivered me into his hands, and you only are
conjured to assist distressed,

Birinthea.


He repeated the Lecture of this Message three or four times, as though he had
not rightly comprehended its Contents, but what might seem his difficulty was
indeed only his excess of love for her, and wonder at his Uncle, and then said,
with a soft voice: It Is true, I put you into Cyaxares hands, but, cried he, I
shall have no less power and reason to fetch you out again; do not doubt of it,
my Princess, you need not only hope, but fully promise your fair self any thing
you can desire of me, which though I am bound too by the immortal obligation of
justice and my devoiur, yet I shall undertake it with more affection than they
can prompt me to, being heated by your nobler commands.

He said no more, but smothering the struglings of his passion, and not willing
to fret away the time with empty words, he called for Sybaris to whom he
imparted the business. That choice friend instantly profer'd to go and set her
at freedom, but Cyrus could not suffer any other hand should render her that
signal service, which love and respect solicited him to act personally. He was
a long while in suspense weighing his resolutions, for the greatest concerns of
his Princess, and his affection called him into Media, but his fame and honor
bid him not quit the Army so soon: in fine floating upon these waves and
different tides of irresolution, an express came, which being from his Uncle
Cyaxares, did for a while interrupt his former thoughts.

Cyaxares the night that Cyrus parted from him, amusing himself with most of
his Nobility in a grand debauch of Wine, had not yet taken any particular
notice of the great number of Lords who had absented themselves to follow Cyrus
in his more generous employments, but the next day, missing that numerous
throng of Courtiers who always attended at his rising, and understanding they
had left him, to accompany Cyrus, he was stung with that poor envy, for this
young Conquerours virtue, which usually ceazes on those, who cannot revere that
in others, which they are incapable of themselves.

This knawing jealousy had suggested the ensuing Letter, which he addressed
both to him and the Medes, as follows.

Cyaxares to Cyrus and to the Medes.
I had thought, Cyrus, you were too well acquainted with the respect you owe
me, to entice away the chiefest of my Court: And you Medes my Subjects, that
you would never have been so perfidious as to forsake me to follow him. If my
Nepveu, according to my advice, do return hither, return also with him; But if
he persevere in his obstinacy to pursue the Assyrians, and you desire not to
incurr my highest displeasure, quit him and be at soonest with me.

Cyaxares Rex.


Cyrus having by this Letter increased the suspicion he had conceived of
Cyxares his ill will toward him, resolved, however to communicate it to the
Medes and Persians, and having summoned them together, he read it aloud to
them. After which the Medes wavering a while in a suspense, whether they should
return back to their King, or adhere to their General, considering the glory
they had acquired under the prosperous success of the one, and the duty
incumbent upon them toward the other; caused Cyrus to speak, who gave free
leave to such as urged it to go, but entreated the more indifferent to wave
their resolutions till he had given a full answer to his Uncles Letter. Till
which time he detained the Envoy that came from him, to be a Witness he acted
nothing against his Uncles interest, or his own devoir.

Which proposition having their general approbation, Cyrus wrote his letter,
which he afterward let them see in these expressions.

Cyrus to Cyaxares, King of Media.
Your Majesty will, I hope excuse me, if I tell you, that it was never the
intention of the Medes, or my self to forsake you: since, thanks to the gods,
having left you triumphant at home by the victory over the Assyrians, you enjoy
at present the prosperity of a Fortune, which can never leave you destitute of
Friends, so long as it lasts. And if to give them chase, we have been
constrained to separate our selves a while from your Majesty, and that be the
only cause of your displeasure; we desire you to consider that this should
rather stand as an argument to evince our fidelity, greater then theirs who yet
remain in your Court; since we endeavor to drive thus far the Enemy from you,
that we may keep all dangers at the biggest distance we can possibly from
interrupting your repose and Peace. But not to rely on these considerations
singly; I beseech you to call to your remembrance in what degree I have the
honor to belong to you, and, thereby you may easily judge me incapable of
ingratitude, or self designs to your prejudice; Or if you can vouchsafe to
credit the testimonies I have already given of my willingness to serve you, you
cannot with any ground entertain the least suspicion, that I am wanting in
that respect and faith, my birth and quality binds me in toward your Majesty.

What reason then, good gods, can your Majesty have to command your Subjects
away from me now, since you expressly commanded some, and gave your gracious
permission to others freely, to follow me, whilst I was present, and had
brought a puissant Army out of Persia into your dominions without any other
hostage or security, then the request you made of my Father? Nay, be pleased to
give me leave to say further that should I treat you, as you do me, I must
then beg, you would restore to me those Palms of victory remaining in your
hands, which the valor of my compagnions lately reaped, and which I bound up
in wreathes and garlands, and presented you withal: But to evidence the
sincerity of my designs, I am desirous you would be pleased to take notice, and
give me leave to make some new levies in Persia, which I beseech you to dispose
of absolutely, according to the order I have left with my Lieutenant to tender
you all the obedience and submission your Majesty can desire.

Withal, I entreat your Majesty, not to take it ill, that I presume to give
you this humble advices, not to revoke those favors you have already granted,
because thereby you would make more Enemies than friends, or obedient servants;
and if, by your menaces and commands to return, you would affrighten such as
are here, with the apprehension of your displeasure, it will not be proper to
let them know, you are left with so thin a train, since the knowledge that must
give them of your weakness, might make them careless of obeying you? It Is not
that I desire to retain these Medians that are willing to return, I have
granted them all their full liberty; but as for my self, I conjure you before I
return, to allow me only so much time, as will be most necessary to complete
that conquest, which we have so happily begun, and from which you may expect as
much advantage and increase of Dominion and Glory, as is wished by

Your Nepveu CYRUS.


Diapherne had Commission to hasten to Media with this answer, and Sybaris
undertook to make the levies in Persia; and withal to procure Birintheas
release; they parted together with Abracome, whose orders were as closely
covered, as the cause of his coming had been hid from them.

Not one of the Medes would return with them, and Cyrus, the more to chain them
to him, because they made up the best part of his Cavalry: distributed the
richest of the spoil, which had been taken from the Enemy, amongst them;
leaving the care to themselves to reserve that which they thought fitting for
their King. The Hircanians, Armenians, and the messenger whom Cyax ares had
sent, did partake with them likewise: Only the Persians took what the others
slighted, for being accustomed to hard usage and frugality, made no account of
such trifles as only contribute to vanity and outward parade, but are not
absolutely necessary to such as square their lives according to the severity of
that discipline they had lived under in their renowned Accademies.

The End of the First Book.
Birinthea The Second Book.
WHilst they were yet sharing the booty, the vigilant sentinels discovered a
great body of horse that advanced directly toward them. They were already
going to alarm the whole Camp, when three or four cavaliers leaving the gross
behind them, hastened to assure them, that their troops desired rather peace
then war.

The Prince that commanded them, was a venerable ancient gentleman called
Gobrias, who causing his man to make a halt, advanced, only with a small party
to attend him, demanding to speak with their General; the Majesty of his
countenance imprinted respect in all those that beheld him, an eminent officer
having received him, conducted him to Cyrus Tent, at whose feet he presently
cast himself down, but being instantly raised, and embraced with a more then
ordinary civility, he began to express himself in this manner.

I would not, Sir, that you should believe I present a traitor, or perfidious
man before you, if my revault were an act of baseness, I should not dare to
cast my self into the arms of the most generous Prince in the world, but the
Subject of it having the appendages of justice and honor to warrant it legal, I
hope when you are made acquainted with the reasons of my deserting the
Assyrians party to embrace yours, that I shall find a noble reception from your
infinite goodness. Cyrus having intimated how glad he should be to know the
occasion that urged him to come in such a manner, Gobrias went on thus.

I am an Assyrian by extraction, the eldest of one of the most illustrious and
puissant families, from whom their Princes are descended, I have the Sovereign
command of the Province of the Garameens, where I have many places of great
strength and plentifully stored. I came from thence with a party of thirteen
hundred horse to find out Labynetus King of the Assyrians, who was slain in the
first battle they fought against you. I was one of the most intimate friends,
and had served him diverse times in his armies in quality of General, with so
much happiness as to merit my favors from his noble acknowledgement, amongst
all which, the most advantageous was the desire he had to allie me to his
family. He have one only son, and a daughter, and I was bled with a like pair:
So that to make our kindred firm by an indissoluble knot, he ordained his son
Vectorez, the same that does now succeed in his Empire, to espouse my daughter,
and mine reciprocally his Melzune. So was my dear son named, to render his
just assiduities to the Princess, was always at the Court, where I was
likewise obliged to reside to accompany my daughter, whom the Prince
entertained every day, being entirely affected and enamored with her.

The time was near at hand to celebrate those nuptials, and all things
preparing for so illustrious a ceremony, the Court expecting the consummation
of it with much impatience when a strange accident suddenly ruffled this calm
of promising joys into a storm of unhappiness, which then swallowed up my
dearest son, and ever since all my content and felicity. The whole Court being
pressed with a general gladness, the two young amorous Princes appointed to
take the divertisement of the chase; the first beast they roused out of a
little wood was a bear at which Vectorez cast a javellin that missed, and my
son by an unfortunate address couching it dead at their feet, every one
starting into acclamations for that success, the Prince was netled with
displeasure, as if my son had given an affront, yet making the chase continue
to redeem that credit, he lanc'd a second javelling at a lion, which presented
it self, but with the same fortune as the first, and my son spurred with as
generous emulation having given this it is death wound also; Vectorez coud no
longer bridle the sinister effects of his rage, thinking those praises, the
company bestowed upon my son, reproached his want of skill, and being inflamed
with this jealousy, snatching a lance from one that was next to him, he
furiously struck it quite through the body of my son, who was the dearer to me,
because an only son, and whom in a few days I hoped to see in the blessed
arms of his fair Princess, whose daring valor and Heroic spirit promised no
less then Crown's and Scepters to my family by this alliance; and who in fine
was the only consolation of my life:

But, Sir, the rage of this degenerate Prince, was not yet glutted, though he
saw him weltring in the streams of his own blood, he would not suffer them to
carry him to the City, fearing least, his wound not being so mortal, as his
own cursed hate there might be a possibility of his recovery: and therefore to
prevent all my endeavors, and deprive me of the sad consolation to behold him
once again, he caused him to be cast into the river Tigris.

The King his Father, immediately after he had learnt this woeful accident,
came to me personally to testify the ressentment he had of my just grief,
complaining with much tenderness, of those considerations which hindered him
from punishing the Author, and seriously protested that if he had but any other
son to inherit his Crown, he would have made him the object of exemplary
justice by sacrificing him to my revenge. The Kings compassion, and the real
sorrow he had for my affliction, smoothered that hatred which I should
otherwise have kindled against that abominable assassins Father: But I remained
his friend constantly till his late death canceld that obligation and was now
going to assist him with my best endeavors against you: but having been
informed how that unhappy King was slain in the first sight; I am come
(generous Prince) to cast my self at your feet, imploring the honor of your
protection against the tyrant that succeeded him, who is so far from any sense
of pity, or repentance that in stead of denying his reason, to have consented
with his rage to perpetrate that horrid act, be triumphs in his cruelty, with
as much glory as if he had bravely defeated the tallest of his Enemies. Judge
therefore, S^r, if my intentions be not fair and equitable, and whether I can
do less without reproach of tameness, and straying from the path of nature,
and affection, then seek a retaliation for his blood. It Is from your valor
that I expect my vengeance, I shall remit it to your own discretion to dispose
wholly of my interests and life, with all that does concern me

Cyrus interrupting his discourse, assured him of that assistance he expected,
with much civility and cheerfulness, and Gobrias resuming his speech,
continuing thus: But, Sir, that you may have no cause to doubt the verities of
what I proffer you, two days journey will bring you into Garamee where you
shall take full possession of all the Towns and fortresses at your own
pleasure. My daughter the generous sister of Melzune, who was destined to be
that Tyrants wife, will gladly receive you, whose pungent sorrow will challenge
no less pity then my own. I bred her, as I have already said, to be the
Assyrian Queen, but though I had pointed out Vectorez to be formerly the object
of her love, she now considers, him only as the Subject of her deepest hate,
and and whatever that Traitor has projected to appease her indignation, yet she
had so much spirit in her, as to tell him one day aloud, before his Father,
Sabinetus that she more then admired he had the confidence to hope for any
affection, or respect from one whose brother he had basely butchered, that the
mourning vail she wore was an evident testimony of his blacker crime, and that
as she could never show too much regret, by her continual grief, for what she
had lost, so consequently she could never manifest too great a hatred against
him that had so ignobly ravished it from her, and further she would never
suffer that man, though a King, to be her husband that was her brothers
assassin, but he should rather expect the sudden effects of the severest
revenge her mortal hate, and anger could levy against him, then the least
inclination from her extinguished love.

If fine, to shun the importunate pursuites of that unworthy Prince, she
banished her self voluntarily from the Court, and returned with one of my
sisters into Garamee, that she might be no more obliged to have that detestable
object in her sight. I praised that constant resolution of my daughter, which
seconded my own ressentments, and by the firmness of her indignation perceived
she did inherit the virtues of her noble ancestors; but I was utterly ignorant
(and never should have given way to it; though my revenge clamor'd my soul to
wish it) that she had conspired against Vectorez life. She had given a private
commission for this enterprise to a Prince called Emuin, who long before had
been my daughter willing prisoner. This unhappy lover, who during Vectorez
fair correspondency had been constrained to keep his passions under ashes for
the respect, and diffidence of such a puissant rival, was ravished to find an
occasion whereby to rid him thence in serving her, hoping by this attempt, to
cut his way to his own bliss, this being the only tall cedar that hindered the
full prospect of his happiness, she having told him that the performance of
this important service should give him a just claim to her affection. In fine
this just murder was undertaken, but by misfortune not executed, the number of
those that attended Vectorez hindering the fatal blow of vengeance. Emuin was
taken in the attempt, who was master of so much constancy and resolution amidst
the tortures of the inquisitors, and imprisonment, that he never revealed my
daughter to have had the least hand in it. None could imagine that love and
hatred had combined in this enterprise, nor would he declare upon any
interrogation, for what cause he was moved to take away the Princes life, and
instead of employing his friends, who were very potent, to sue his pardon, he
persisted to declare, that he desired not to live but to perform that by a
second attempt which he had so unhappily missed in the first, it being a design
too just to be thrown by. If any other but a Prince had appeared in it, I might
perhaps have fallen under their suspicion of being confederate, but it was
above conjecture to imagine that a person of his condition would be but
another instrument, and therefore he alone was adjudged guilty*

He was condemned to pay down his head for the price of this treason, and
because this piece of justice was to be exemplary, the execution was deferred
till the Kings return, who was at that time within a days journey of Ninus,
that the whole Court might be assistant. My daughter in the interim was made
acquainted with the sentence pronounced against him, and feigning as if she
were to go a hunting, as she frequently did, being well mounted, she went
directly toward Ninus, where she arrived (just the evening before the fatal
day, which Emuin reck'ned as the last in his unhappy Calender disguised under
the shroud of such a habit, as was not usual to her sex.

The day following all the Court being assembled, with the herds of common
people, the King and his son being there present with their extraordinary guard
of soldiers, they drew the miserable Emuin forth of the prison, to end his life
and miseries at one blow, but whilst every one had their eyes fixed on him,
descanting diversely on his misfortune, they were suddenly taken off to behold a
fresh object which presented it self in that black Scene, it being a person
veiled all over, making way through the crowd with two Trumpeters marching
before.

It was the custom, of a long standing, amongst the Assyrians, that if any one
could reveal somewhat, which might aggravate the offenders crime, or could
fully clear and discharge them, they were to come thus disguised, to present
their information. According to this order the Judges instantly suspended the
execution to know what this might be, they carried the written information to
the King, who was amazed that the person which brought it, accused himself as
the sole author of the attempt, and fully discharged Emuin, as having only
undertaken the performance of it, out of a blind obedience to that persons
command.

Many had formerly been known to bring in aggravations, but hardly ever any
presented themselves so voluntarily to certain death. In this general
consternation, they caused the unknown person to approach near the King, who
was no sooner within reach, but before he gave so much time as to examine a
word, snatched off the vail which concealed the admired person* None could at
the first instant discover who it was, and truly it were difficult not to be
extremely surpised with such an unlooked for object as a Lady so generously
out-braving death it self. It Is my Daughter Azimea, who as I said before under
color of hunting stole away from me, with a full resolution to save that
Prince, and who with an incomparable courage addressed her looks and words thus
to Vectorez.

Thou would pretend, infamous man, not to know me because of this disguise,
thou find'st, my presence like thy own conscience the Monitor to reproach thy
bloody cruelties, and an authentic Witness of the justice of my enterprise to
take away thy life, which is so clear an evidence that I would almost think
Heavens justice slept when I missed of my hopes in punishing thee, for a
retaliation of my dearest Brothers life. Ah degenerate man, do not turn back
thy sight, maintain that bloody action, thou had then impudence to commit,
thou tremblest, Traitor, to see her in thy presence from whom thou did expect
the softest caresses, avouch she is thy deadly enemy, and wish she could have
buried a dagger in thy heart: but, tell me, what wonder do thou find in this
change, have not thou obliged me to it, can I manifest less revenge, and hate
against my Brothers assassin, and be a Princess still? Tell me what crime there
is in this attempt? or rather what justice does not authorize it? can less than
thy ignoble life satisfy for that worthy soul? or do thou think me so tame
and cool to pass by such an injury, and not resent it. If I be guilty it is only
for my want of due revenge, and leaving it to be committed by a hand that was
too weak, when I should rather have undertaken it my self, which Heaven,
without doubt, would not have disappointed so unhappily: but thou do make no
answer, and thy pensive silence gives a strong assent to these indictments, and
are alone sufficient to make good the justice of my intentions against thy
guilty person.

These public reproaches died with such sharp and vehement language, did so
astonish the Prince and gall his soul, that he had not the power to answer her
one Syllable, whom he yet dearly loved; but the King his Father perceiving his
confusion, stood up and spoke, to take her off from stretching her bitter
reproofs out further against that horrid crime so openly. He sent forth Emuin
to confront her, who confirmed the whole information, and all that she had
spoken, after which he was returned to the Prison again, and Azimea was carried
to the Palace, where she was strongly guarded till my arrival.

Labynetus, as I told you before, affected me extremely, and sent for me,
whilst I was in the greatest fears in the world for my absent daughter, to come
to Court and hear news of her; According to this message I hasted with the most
diligent speed, and having presented my self full of perplexity before him, he
sent for Vectorez and Azimea, and related, in the presence of his choicest
Nobility, all that had befallen; and told me, that notwithstanding all the
reasons of State and interest of his Crown, he found it equitable to pardon my
Daughters attempt, since he had been obliged to leave his own Son unpunished;
and that his regret was the more sensible, because his Successor by this
unhappy accident, was exposed to the just hatred of our generous family: but as
a satisfaction of my Sons loss, he now restored my Daughter, pretending by that
means to bury our quarrel in oblivion.

I accepted the Kings mercy to Azimea with all the testimonies of
acknowledgement my duty bound me to, without relinquishing the hate I had
conceived against his Son. I had forgot to tell you, that his Daughter was
present at this enter-view, who being no less passionate of my Sons memory,
than she had formerly been of his Person, upheld the interest of my Family
stoutly, and confessed openly that if Vectorez had not been so near of blood to
her, she would not have been so bravely prevented in the design of revenge.

During the little abode I made at Court, my Daughter in her agreement making a
superficial reconciliation with the Prince, obtained his rivals pardon, whom
they were content to banish, and withal made the Prince renounce his pretense
of Marriage with her, by an absolute refusal of that proffered love he often
made, which possessed him with as much violence as ever.

Our affairs being thus handsomely composed, I returned to Garamee, where I was
no sooner arrived, but Labynetus sent an express, for me to go and join my
troops with his, to carry on the War commenced against Cyaxares. I was already
on my way to this purpose, when I received tidings of his death, which made me
change my resolutions, and turn my course toward you, to whom I fly for
Protection against that bloody Tyrant whose cruelty, not fully gorged with my
Son's innocent blood, has often made him profess, that if he ever came to be
Sovereign, he would by force constrain us to repentance, and make my Daughter
flexible to the last of his desires.

Gorgias having thus wound up the several threads of his discourse, Cyrus again
repeated his embraces, and the promises he had made for his revenge, protesting
he should find in him the readiest person in the world to second his
resentments and his Daughters extraordinary generosity.

This conversion was not broken off, till the Medes came in a joint body, to
present him with what they thought he would esteem the richest of their
purchase lately taken.

It was a woman of Susiana, whose miraculous beauty darted astonishment and
dangerous wonder into every eye that gazed upon her, she appeared sad indeed,
but yet that sadness was mixed with so much conquering Majesty, that it was
easy to be read how little power the unhappiness of her Captivity had gained
upon her spirit, Cyrus himself, who had no eyes but for the blessed object he
adored, could not refuse them such a grateful sight, he stood still a while
wrapped with the admiration of her person, and after he had received her with all
those high expressions of civility her condition seemed to claim, he understood
she was the Wife of Abradate Prince of Susiana, whom the Assyrian King, had
sent to the King of Bactria to make a confederation of their Armies. The
knowledge of her condition put him into the same terms of respect toward her,
as her beauty had of admiration, and therefore unwilling to detain her in a
prolix discourse, which could not but displease in such a condition, he left
her the full liberty of returning to her own company, with whom she might
condole, and try to dismiss her sorrows, only giving charge to a young Persian
Lord, named Araspe, to have a particular care to treat her with that honor
which was due to her birth, and merits.

Araspe had from his youth been bred up in the Persian Academies with Cyrus, to
whose fortune he had since particularly tied himself. It seemed that Cyrus
imposing the Commission on him to guard this Woman, had consulted with his
inclination, for before she was presented to him (inspired by the secret
motions of that fatal destiny which none can avoid) Araspe had already sought
her out amongst all the other Prisoners, and being only invited to a compassion
for her Captivity, he had looked on her with a more then ordinary curiosity.

Panthea (so was the name of this beautiful Princess) at that present was but
meanly clad, sitting amongst her maids, who showed her no respect, more than to
any other, thereby to hide her quality from discovery: but raising her self
before Araspe, whom she judged to be some extraordinary person by the great
throng that followed at his heels, he presently imagined that nature had not
placed so much Majesty, as he remarked in her action, and port, to one of
ordinary birth and beauty.

His opinion did not deceive him, for the civility he expressed, having obliged
her to unvail that Divine face, which she till then had always hid behind that
cloud, his eye not only met with such a ravishing complexion, and sweet feature
as did surpass the power, and liberty of fancy to imagine: but he resented the
virtue of those charms (whose secret Magic had compelled him to seek her out)
diving into the very center of his breast with love, and all-controuling
passions. He had no sooner seen her, but he desired to eclipse her from all
others: but having such a crowd of Witnesses, he was constrained, dispite of
all repugnancy, to consent that she should be presented to Cyrus as the Medes
had propounded. This newborn passion she had shot into his soul, shook him
with apprehension least Cyrus should accept of her, and one may truly say that
he received with more joy, (though not without the allay of inward trouble) the
command of guarding her, then if they had bestowed the richest Crowns, and
Scepters in the world upon him.

Cyrus who perceived the emotions of his heart; charactred on his tell-tale
face, would have known the cause, and wished him above all things if he found
himself too feeble to withstand her charms, not to undertake the charge: the
combat being the more dangerous, because that fair enemy being ever present, he
must lie at a wary guard to defend himself each moment, and enjoying yet a
liberty that was usurped by none, it would be difficult to refuse that
bewitching Sex, invading it so sweetly: he added more-over that 'twas
impossible to behold a beauty like Pantheas and not love it, but then he must
prescribe that affection within the limits of virtue, because it did import
them, very much to preserve the reputation of their victory unstained, by right
of which, the Captives were indeed become subject to their just power, but not
to their unlawful passions.

Araspe having recovered his settled countenance, answered that it was true
indeed he had not been able to eye so many miracles in one person without
astonishment, neither could he believe that any man living could be so dull as
to behold her, and not find the like sentiments of respect toward her, as he
did in his soul; but yet he was not ignorant of the rules of his devoir, and
the trouble which might have overspread his face, being only an effect of his
admiration, he assured him that whatever inclination he should cherish for
Panthea, it should never exceed that which one ought not to deny to any
beauteous person.

Cyrus in fine recommended the constancy of this resolution to him, and told
him at parting that he should remember, it was difficult to approach the fire
and not be heated, that love dealing treacherously in all his ways, he must
suspect him, as one that never flatters but to hurt. Araspe promised on his
part dispite of all those notions in his heart that he would never go beyond an
esteem for her. But the rapid streams of his inclination drove him far beyond
all these bounds, and after a few days siege, which he maintained against
those potent passions, he was compelled to yield to their violent assaults, upon
no better composition than their uncertain mercy.

If the first sight and presence of Panthea had so powerfully charmed him, it is
easy to imagine that her noble conversation wholly vanquished him: she studied
every day, finding he treated her with such choice respect, to oblige him by a
thousand new civilities, expressing a great care for his person, and rendering
him in fine all the testimonies of love and amity that he could have expected
from a Sister. The effect of Panthea's civility was very different from what
she desired, her design aiming only to gain him for her friend, not perceiving
that she engaged him as a Lover. This poor Prince stifling the flames affection
kindled in his breast, by his discreeter silence, that he might not break the
promise he had verbally sealed to Cyrus, concealed his passion. But this
contagious malady of the mind infected his body, and fired that frail Cottage
with a burning Fever, whose flames brought those secret thoughts to light,
which he till then had kept hidden, and though there did appear some
extravagancy in his distempered speeches, yet it was easy to be known, that
the remembrance of Panthea did always feed his imagination. She went often to
visit him, and though his fits redoubled at her presence, yet he was sometimes
of a more composed spirit than when she was not there. One day when she
enquired of the Physicians of his malady, they told her that in the extremity
of his Fever he most times spoke of her, but yet she could not suspect in the
least that this was any effect of love, but was persuaded that being often in
his sight, the image of her person might often present it self to his fancy.

But coming another time into his Chamber when he was troubled in his wilder
thoughts, he turned toward her, and with a vehement speech; Well Madam, said
he to her, is it not enough to torment me with your remembrance, but you must
come to kill me by your sight? shall I have no release from those deep
sufferings? and my recovery being desperate, am I forbidden the least
consolation? Yes, continued he, turning suddenly from her, and whispering to
himself in a sad tone; Lets dye since it is the will of Heaven, for death is the
only remedy for my afflictions. Ha! Panthea, cried he again, darting his eye
upon her, after a little silence, Abradate is your husband, Cyrus has forbidden
me, I have promised it, your devoir will not permit you, I should violate my
own: But* -- I have resisted to my utmost, and it is you constrain me, is it not
true Madam? with these words which he pronounced somewhat loud, he ceased from
speaking, and cast his looks wishly upon Panthea, who being in amazement at
what he had talked with so much confusion, not being able to comprehend it, she
approached nearer to his bed, and finding him as she thought in a calmer
temper; Is it possible, said she, Araspe, that I should be so unhappy as to
have contributed any thing to your sufferings? what have I done, which is so
harsh to your remembrance? what can it import you, that Abrodate is my husband?
what has Cyrus forbidden you? what have you promised him? wherein have I
trespassed against my devoir? what have I constrained you to do, good gods,
against which you have so much resisted: Tell me, Araspe, and assure your self
that if your health depended upon me, though 'twere to be purchased with my
life, you should not be one moment longer in this languishing condition, and
though I am unhappy in my fortune, believe it, I will not lie under the guilt
of ingratitude for those noble favors I have received, but shall esteem the
fortune of my captivity a blessing, if there be any means left me at present
whereby to serve you?

Araspe after a great sigh, answered her with a soft voice, I perceive Madam,
that the violence of my Fever has made me discourse extravagantly, I am
ashamed to be so unprovided of fitting excuses for it, and beg your pardon, if
I have mentioned your self, or worthy Husband in my distempers: In that
condition you may guess, that being not the Master of my reason, I only talk
what my extravagant imagination suggests, and that, which it may be, my Devoir
would forbid me once to think on. Panthea would not press him further, and
easily believed, that what she had heard was only the effects of his troubled
fancy; Therefore after she had a while longer entertained him with much
mildness, she left the sad Araspe, more turmoiled with his passion than his
Fever, which both together set upon him with such violence, presently after
her going, that the Physicians began to despair of his life.

Cyrus, Tygranes, Artabasus, and many other persons of quality being informed
of it, came together to visit him, they found him in more danger than he had
been, and he no sooner perceived Cyrus, who drew near to his bed, but casting a
furious look upon him: It Is you likewise cruel -- said he, that seconded the
Tyranny of her Devoir; I should be less unhappy were it not for you, nor should
I meet so many obstacles to my content, were I not constrained by your
consideration. Hence, cruel, hence, what you are come to persecute me with your
presence, and take away the very liberty of complaint. Ah it is too, too much!
his sobs, and hollow sigh's blockt up all the passages of speech, and the
Physicians perceiving his transport, entreated Cyrus to withdraw, with all
those that accompanied him, to give him a little repose. He was no sooner left
alone but his reason returned to her seat, and quickly tamed the tempest of his
mind, so that he commanded one of those that waited in his Chamber, to go and
beseech Panthea in his behalf to come to him.

As soon as she arrived he caused all the rest to avoid the room, except one
Gentleman, whose fidelity he might confide in, and one of Panthea's Maids, and
then seeing himself at liberty to speak, he began thus: I find, Madam, that you
are no less surpised to see me in this tranquillity of spirit at present, than
you were before, when I had lost the helm of my reason and judgment. The same
cause nevertheless has produced these different effects, and that which
occasioned my rude distempers, does now restore me to so smooth a calm, that I
can discover a secret to you, which I should yet conceal, did I not find that
the approach of death obliged me to it. This last extremity, Madam, may excuse
me if there be any temerity in declaring it to you, which so far concerns my
life, that it is the only thing which makes me loose it now. Judge, Madam,
whether I may not reveal it without a crime, I know however you will not hear
it without some displeasure, but I am confident likewise that you are too
generous to refuse my pardon, which I implore before I dye, together with the
permission to disclose it. At these words he made a little pause, to hear what
she would answer in that vacancy, but perceiving his proposition either too
melancholy, or too obscure to gain a reply; What, Madam, said he, do you not
yet understand me, must I expound that in plain terms, which I would hide in
some manner from you, and will you not take notice of my passion, unless I say
expressly, that I love you? Ah, Madam, that word will cost me my life, I can add
no more, and it is sufficient for my satisfaction that you know it. He could not
command strength enough, either to draw out the thread of his discourse any
longer, or to expect her answer, his senses taking their flight together with
his speech, and Panthea beholding him in this condition, ressented the uproar
of many passions struggling in her breast together: modesty, anger, and
compassion invaded her mind, so that she was some moments in a deep suspense,
but seeing those that were by, so busily employed to assist him, she recovered
so much pity as to lend her best endeavors, and truly one may say that she
alone was able to revive him, as she had only been the occasion of his
troubles. So soon as she was approached, his nature gathered up its strength,
and his eyes returning to their first offices, beholding her in that obliging
employment, his tongue untied it self in these expressions.

Ha, what, Madam, will you not have me dye after so presumptuous a declaration,
do you pretend to cure me, striving to make me live. Yes, reparted Panthea, I
will not have you dye, though I do not pretend your cure, having no remedy for
your malady, you only are the cause of it your self, and if you found any
inclination to love, you ought not to have undertaken the charge of me.
Nevertheless what help I can contribute, without a prejudice to my honor, you
may justly hope for. To love is not a crime, I confess it, Araspe, and provided
you manage your affection according to the laws of virtue, I consent to it: but
do not break the rules which I prescribe you, if it suffice you, as you would
have me believe, that I should only be acquainted with it, I shall esteem it
ever real, so long as you do not offend my reputation, look to your health
only, and make it apparent to Panthea, who entreats you, that your affection
being not guilty, is capable to bring you as much repose and content, as it
has cost you trouble.

If I have ever wished to dye, replied Araspe, to end my torments, I do as
earnestly now implore the gods, to suffer me to live, since you command it,
Madam, that I may testify by my respects, and services, the immortal
obligations I owe to your infinite bounty, which does concede far more than my
most flattering hopes could ever promise, by permitting me to love you: my
ambition reached no higher but to discover it before my death, and I shall be,
if I may live, henceforth too happy, in my assiduous endeavors to make known
that the bent of all my worthiest actions tend only to the honor of your
service.

This conference gave no less ease and comfort to Araspe, than it occasioned
trouble, and astonishment to Panthea. She was no sooner alone, but examining in
her own chaste thoughts all that had passed, she accused her self of too much
complaisance, as if she had forfeited that severe virtue in which the world
does make a Ladies honor consist, and feared least the permission she had
granted him to continue his fair affections, should spur him on beyond respect
and decency. But afterward she excused her self of fondness upon that weight
of obligations which she owed, and thought she could in civility do no less,
than suffer an honest and virtuous friendship.

On the other part, Araspe had quite a contrary opinion, he construed Panthea's
civility so much to his own advantage, that taking the consent she allowed his
affection, to be meant a retaliation equal to his passion, he took a nice care
of his recovery, that he might be able to reap the fruits of his desires. This
vain presumption had almost lost him, he laid by all respect, which he till
then had observed toward her, and followed his own headstrong passions, so
that Panthea finding her self dangerously persecuted by his insolent courtship,
was constrained to prefer the bill of her complaints to Cyrus, who weighing how
important it was toward his affairs not to offend a Princess, whose Husband
with his forces might go near to turn the Scale on either side, whom he
pretended to court to a compliance by the mediation of his excellent Princess,
he took her out of his keeping, and made her all the noble satisfaction that
was possible for her to expect.

About this time Cyrus went into Garamee, hard by the City of Oroba, where
Gobrias was making preparations for his reception. He encamped there about, and
being attended with the principal Officers and Nobility of his Army, made his
entrance, which was as magnificent on his part, as it was proud and costly on
the inhabitants. The peoples loud acclamations declared with how much joy he
was received. Gobrias with a great Train of Nobles gallantly mounted, and
richly clothed, went forth to meet him, and conducted him to his Palace, where
his Daughter the generous Azimea, and all the great Ladies received them: this
ceremony being performed on either part with a thousand civil expressions. They
made him presents of a vast sum of money, and all the other rarities which the
Orient does produce, the which he nobly accepted, but it was only to restore
them to Azimea, to whom he profer'd them so gracefully, that she could not
refuse them with handsomeness, after she had long disputed with him for
generosity, and that he had protested more-over that if he commenced that War
against the Assyrians for reasons of State, the desires to serve her and to
revenge her juster interests should be henceforth the principal cause to make
him continue and carry it on, to confirm which, having given her his hand, he
followed her into many spacious rooms, whose furniture for beauty, and
magnificence gave no less wonder than delight; and afterward taking his quiet
repose for a short space (having contracted some weariness in viewing the
rarities of one of the fairest houses in all Asia, and visiting the
fortifications about the City) being somewhat refreshed of that toil, he took
his farewell of Gobrias, (who earnestly entreated him to honor him with his
presence at supper, and pass away some days in that City) and returned to his
Camp, preferring that sober frugality which the Persians observe in their diet,
before the delicacy of those exquisite messes which Gobrias prepared at his
splendid entertainments.

Amongst those whom the beauty of the Ladies of Garamee had enamored Histaspe
Lieutenant General of the Persian Cavalry, was one, being conquered by
Azimea's, but whatever advantage he promised himself from Cyrus favor, who
dearly loved him, to whom Gobrias had absolutely committed the disposal of his
Daughter, yet he durst not fly his thoughts so high as to pretend affection
toward a Princess, who had been elected for the Scepter of Assyria, and so
generously refused it. He propounded nevertheless to serve her, and to become,
if possible, the minister of her vengeance, to merit at least by that action
some acknowledgement from her goodness, if he durst not expect it from her love.

In the mean while, Cyrus was full of most strange inquietudes, he appeared so
sad, and was so troubled and impatient, that the warlike occupations for the
Conquest of Assyria, not being able to divert him from the thoughts of his dear
Princess, it seemed that Sybaris and Abracome were too slow in sending him the
news he languisht to hear. Gobrias who was unacquainted with the cause of his
trouble, and had a great desire to be informed of it, meeting Artabase in a
Garden walking with Merame, and the Hircanian Prince accosted them, and having
molded his discourse upon that subject, it tempted the Hircanian Prince, and
Merame with the like curiosity of enquiry, who jointly declaring to Artabase
the obligation it would be to instruct them in the happy knowledge of what so
nearly concerned their noble General, being all seated in a pleasant Arbor,
Artabase to feed their greedy desires and attentions, commenced his discourse
in this manner.

You may have great reason to wonder at the black melancholy of a Prince
victorious over his enemies, glorious for his heroic actions, and happy, in
fine, in all appearance, if ever any man were. A Prince to whose high valor
all others yield their powers, either in seeking his protection, or flying from
his presence. The melancholy nevertheless, which is so legible to you on his
countenance, is one of the effects of his first victory he gained in this War,
the Laurels which composed that Crown of triumph, were interlaced with those
Thorns which yet torment him, he having lost his repose and liberty amongst
those whom the chance of War had made his Captives: but that I may entirely
satisfy the curiosity which you may have to know the complete history of this
young Hero, who in his tenderest years performed such actions as are too rare
to be passed over in silence, you must permit me to take my rise from those
times.

The History of Cyrus and Birinthea.
You cannot but have heard of those celebrous Academies in Persia, where virtue
alone presides, and where they are so well taught to practice it. 'Twas in
those learned schools. Our Prince was bred and instructed, whose condition did
not dispense him from the severity of those laws which they observe, they gave
him no other but the ordinary course nourishment of bread and cresses, and
satisfied his thirst with natures plain beverage, a dish of water, thereby to
accustom him to undergo hardship when he should come to be more necessarily
acquainted with it in time of war: they taught him likewise to shoot exactly
with a bow, and cast a spear, with all those other exercises which concern the
agility and vigor of the body. In a word, he was treated with the same rigor
as all the other were, the only difference that could be noted was, the
wonderful aptitude, and readiness of his attaining every thing with facility.
Amongst all his condisciples there was not any that could parallel his activity
of body: and for learning, none ever made a greater progress in so short a
time: and concerning all those little intrigues, and differences, which ever
happen amongst children, as thefts, rapine, calumny, ingratitude, deceits, and
other such like crimes, he was made judge, and so behaved himself, that such as
are most perfect in the laws; and have a long time weilded the sword of
justice, never pronounced more equitable and judicious sentences, nor could the
ablest barrister have shaped better pleas to defend innocence, or have heaped
more pressing reasons on the head of guiltiness, then he continually did.

These rare advantages of body and mind, conjoined to his illustrious birth
made him become so famous, that Astiages his Grandfather formerly King of the
Medes, the Father of Cyaxarez having heard a recital of so many wonders, was
extreme desirous to see him. Cyrus as you know is son of Cambyses King of
Persia, and Mandane the daughter of Astiages. His Mother would needs go into
Media to conduct him to his grandfather, who found by him, that Fame, which
usually exceeds in her report of other things, wanted both mouths and breath
to proclaim all the excellent qualities of this young Prince. He found him
more complete every way then report had blazoned, the disposition of his body
and posture, was handsomer and more taking then he could possibly fancy, and
beyond that, he found so mature a judgment, and such a sparkling vivacity of
wit, as he confessed, that all what had been related, though that were many
steps above a fond belief, was yet so much beneath the exquisite indowments he
now really met with in his person, that nothing but the testimony of his own
sight, could ever have persuaded as a truth. In a word, the infinite charms
and graces of his person, and spirit were so many, that it may justly release
me from repeating them it will suffice to tell you, that in an age so tender
and Blooming, which easily receives any impression, not having yet stepped over
fourteen years, he had such solid principles of virtue, that the delicious and
soft lives they led in Media could never corrupt his nobler sentiments.

The first time he saluted his grandfather Astiages, seeing him richly
habited, having many jewels, and a sweet cloud of perfumes about him, he
freely avowed that the modest plainess the Persians observe in their vestments,
pleased him far beyond it, and he preferred the sober frugality of his former
wholesome diet, before the dainty viands they now presented to his taste. In
fine, amidst all that delicacy, he kept himself up strictly, to that rigid
virtue he had practiced at home, all that he learned amongst them was to
manage a horse, because in his country it was neither so frequent, nor so
perfectly taught, as soon as he had attained this skill, he went continually to
hunting with Cyaxares the son of Astiages, in which exercise having given many
evident proofs of his valor and activity, he added one more also of his
courage in an occasion of war which proffered it self at that time.

Astiages having been advertised that the Assyrians endammaged his frontiers by
their continual pillaging, and frequent incursions, sent Cyaxares with a
competent strength to repulse and tame them. Then was it that Cyrus felt that
generous ardour first boiling in his youthful veins, which the alarm's of war
does use to kindle in valiant breasts. In lieu of following his unckles steps
as a volunteer, he put himself in the head of their troops, as if he only had
been their Captain, so that neither Cyaxares nor the Medes had any other
conduct but his own, nor could the god of war himself have inspired them with
more courage then did his noble examples. He was so heated in the fight, and
thrust himself so far amongst the thickest of the enemies, who already began to
fly before the fury of this young Conqueror, that Cyaxares fearing least he
should too eagerly engage himself in a further pursuit, was constrained to go
in person and fetch him of. In fine all his actions bred every day new and
deserving admiration, nor did Astiages return him to his Father Cambysis, but
with regret, who coveted to have so inestimable a jewel in the possession of
his own dear embracements, having heard what a new luster and glory his fresh
victories had put upon his fame. Returning into Persia, he carried all the
hearts and affections of the Medes along with him, which they paid readily down
in myriads of happy wishes, and blessings at his departure, so generally he
acquired their love and zealous respects, by those good offices he rendered
them whilst he resided there, and the obliging carresses with which he treated
all men.

Shortly after his return from Media, Astiages died, and Cyaxares his son, and
his successor to the Empire, found himself dangerously assaulted by all the
Asian puissance at once. Labynetus King of the Assyrians having already subdued
all Siria, rendered the Arabians tributaries, and vanquished the Hircanians and
the Bactrians believed that if he could but hang his chains upon the Medes and
Persians, he should find no more enemies so powerful as to dispute his entire
conquest of Asia. He had ambition enough for this design: but doubting of his
strength to carry him through, he wrote to the King of Lydia, to him of
Capadocia, to the Phrigians, Indians, the people of Caria and Cilicia,
cajolling and entreating them to enter into confederation, and undertake a war
with him against the Medes and Persians, whose strong alliance he persuaded
them to fear, representing how necessary it was for them to knit, and unite
their force together, to invade and dissolve them, whom alone they neither
would be able to suppress, or resist, This reason engaged some of these Princes
to join with him, the others being obliged also to consent either as being
their vassalls, or their friends.

The mighty preparations which were made in all those nations for this war,
could not be so secretly managed, but Cyaxares had notice given him of it, and
least this tempest, which so horridly menaced him, should suddenly break upon
his head and overflow him unprovided, he quickly caused a numerous Army to be
levied in his own kingdom, and wrote to Cambyses King of Persia entreating him
to join forces with him, since the interest to oppose these Enemies was equal
to them both, and to constitute his son general of those men he would send,
because he was so indeared to the Medes, and they built such mighty confidence
and hopes on his magnanimity, by those early proofs he had already carved with
his sword when he was amongst them, that they believed the greatest help that
ever heaven could lend them, would be the presence, and conduct of that young
Prince.

Cambyses hugged the proposition of Cyaxares with the more willing embraces,
because the glorious esteem they set upon his son concerned himself so nearly.
He caused thirty thousand soldiers to be raised with all possible diligence
over whom Cyrus, by the full vote of the Council of war was elected general,
and the very next day having caused his army to be ranged in battalia, he
established him in this high office, whilst they were offering the sacrifices,
usual on such occasions, the air was filled with extraordinary lightning and
thunders, which seemed to speak the gods consent to this ceremony, to which the
soldiers repeated a thousand loud acclamations of joy, which they sent up to
Heaven for his prosperity.

The air in fine having recovered the beauty of its former serenity, Cyrus
imposed silence through the whole Army, and standing in an eminent place from
whence his words might reach their hearing most distinctly, he made this
following Harangue to his soldiers.

The Harangue to the Persian Army.
I am extremely glad fellow soldiers, that heaven by its happy auguries has
authorized the choice which Cyaxares, and ^ambyses have made of me, to be your
general: but though this office be due to my birth, as being son to the one,
and the others Nepveu, and that I find, in myself, courage, and resolution
sufficient to undergo it, I must confess, nevertheless, that I shall stand in
some need to be supported by yours also, and we must reciprocally, by our joint
valor, second the fortune which the gods promise felicitous to us: otherwise,
soldiers, if by our unmanliness only, the event of this war should fall short
of the hopes we have, to make it succeed according to our own desires, and the
gods should abandon us to all the misfortunes which commonly attend a shameful
defeat, we should not however have cause to complain that they were wanting in
the promise of that victory they now proclaim to us by the mouth of thunders:
For to judge aright, dear companions, these horrid claps which seem to be the
testimonies of their favorable consent to our just designs, do advertise us
likewise that they have power to avenge themselves upon their Enemies And who,
I pray you, are their Enemies, but those that turn their backs to honor, to
prop and maintain injustice and cruelty, and will you not acknowledge with me,
that if they seem to declare themselves for us against the Assyrians, because
that nation assaults us wrongfully, and with much baseness, they at the same
time menace those amongst us, who have not virtue or courage enough to defend
the honor of their country, their Princes reputation, together with their dear
parents lives, and their own families security; but not to rove so far to point
out the instruments of their threatening vengeance, do we not know already,
that the Assyrians have unsheathed their thirsty swords, and if by our ignoble
cowardice, we render our selves unworthy of heavens protection, may not those
barbarous people be made the rod to punish us. Let us therefore beware
soldiers, of betraying the interest of justice, and our own safety, let us not
pull our ruin on our own heads, since we take arms but to preserve our selves,
lets carry on the war with as much courage as we commence it with fixed
resolution; and let us show the Assyrians, that it is not without reason they
have confederated so many nations in one body against us, and set so many
thousands a foot, since they shall find it no weak opposition: and that they
are deceived in their design to invade us, we going now to prevent them, and
turn the bloody stream of war upon themselves.

The whole army answered this harangue with many redoubled shouts and
acclamations, which spoke the soldiers impatience to be facing their enemies,
against whom they now were suddenly to march. The Captains and all the most
expert offi^ers of war, confessed they never undertook a voyage with a more
promising assurance of victory, then now under this young, but hopeful General.
The orders in fine, were given to set forwards within eight days, in which
time Cyrus received the adieus from all the Nobility, and the King his Father,
and took his farewell also of his dear Mother the Queen, with the Princess
Azumane his sister. The appointed day being come, Cambyses would needs
accompany him to the borders that were contiguous to Persia, (where being
arrived a mighty Eagle appeard flying at his right hand) and having taken his
last leave of his Father, and the gods of Persia, at his entrance into Media he
adored their deities, and went to Cyaxares his uncle, who was advanced very
near the frontires to receive him, and testified by all the becoming tokens of
civility and affection, the joy and infinite content he ressented at his
arrival.

Cyrus who as yet had let in no other passions to govern his young soul, but
the ambition to improve the glory of his courage, hearing the Enemies were yet
at a great distance, employed his time in the continual exercises of war, for
which he ordained many prizes which he most commonly won fairly himself, with
more agility and skill then fortune: but at length being tired with their long
stay, fearing least the idleness and delights of that country should rust or
enervate his soldiers wonted courage, he entreated his uncle to give him
leave to march toward those Assyrians whose tedious delay showed some
unwillingness in them to come to any blows, Cyaxares who studied nothing but
to defend himself, because he knew his numbers less then the Enemies and being
ever possessed with a kind of fear, made the arrival of some Indian
Ambassadors the pretext to stay him, showing him the necessity there was that
he should know the subject of their negotiation before he precipitated his
affairs, These Ambassadors being appointed audience, declared the command they
had from their King to speak with him, and the Persian Monarch, to know, what
reasons moved them to make war, and ascertain those that should proceed most
justly, of a powerful assistance from him, on their behalf, and after they had
learned from Cyaxares own mouth, that he armed himself only to withstand the
Assyrians, and bridle their insolence, and ambition, they took their leaves of
him, and bearing away with them the pretense that detained Cyrus, they left him
full liberty to press his march with more eagerness.

Cyaxares nevertheless, who believed he wanted as much strength as he did
courage, endeavored by many considerations to keep them back still, the
chiefest there of being a want of money at that present, which is the only
soul, and life of war. But this which he propounded as an obstacle, spurred him
on with the greater speed, and gave the first motion to his generous
expeditions, which have raised him since to the proudest pitch of glory that
ever Conqueror could hope or wish: for being perfectly acquainted with all his
uncles affairs, he remembered that he had heard say Artaban the King of Armenia
had refused to pay him the tribute of fifty talents which he owed him for those
Provinces that Astiages had formerly conquered, nor was he very hasty to answer
their demands of those troops he was obliged to furnish them withal: wherefore
he told Cyaxares that he ought to begin his war first with his own rebels,
that so he might not have any domestic Enemies within his bowels, and that by
reducing Artaban to his becoming Devoir, it would cast a bridle on the
remainder of his subjects necks, and keep them in the road of due obedience.

This proposition having been canvas'd, and consulted on in the Counsel of war,
was found to be very rational, and they judged it convenient to attaque the
Armenian, who fed his stubborn insolency, only with the fair promises of
protection from the Assyrians, For this purpose Cyrus made a great match of
hunting thereby to draw some troops, under that color, near the mountains of
Armenia; and Cyaxares, to take of all suspicion of any such design, feigned
that he went to visit the frontier garrisons in person, in each of which he
left a good number of soldiers, which Cyrus afterward secretly sent under the
command of Chrysante to possess themselves of some passages, in the mountains,
of great importance.

Before Artaban could be informed of their enterprise, Cyrus dispatched a
Courier to him, by whom he gave him notice that he was entered upon his
dominions to receive that money, and those soldiers he was obliged to furnish
his uncle with, or to fetch them in person at the head of a potent army, who
would soon wring this out of his hands, if he refused a present compliance.

Never was Prince more perplexed, or amazed then Artaban at this demand, he
never could imagine that Cyaxares having such puissant Enemies could think of
any thing but to defend himself: the promise he had made to the Assyrians not
to send any assistance to the Medes, and the presence of a resolute Army which
threatened to force him to his devoir, suspended his judgment a while.

In fine having returned, in answer to Cyrus, many excussive delatory reasons,
protesting an impossibility to satisfy him for the present, hinting that
himself was in distress of men, and treasure for his own security, and could
not spare any to others. He thought to steal himself from their pu^suites
amongst the forests, and inaccessible mountains in that country, till by the
help of the Assyriuns, to whom he sent letters of his condition, he were in a
posture to drive them out again In this resolution he left the campania open to
his Enemies, and having caused his wife, and children, with his richest
treasures to be shelterd in the forests under the save guard of one of his
sons named Phra^rte, he gathered as many soldiers as possibly he could, to
hinder his Enemies from ranging about his lands, but Cyrus advancing with his
main body, soon dispersed those that had resisted his forerunners, and
constrained Artaban to quit the posts he was possessed of.

Cyrus, who would not give his Enemy the leisure to make his own choice of a
retreat, pursued him so closs, that notwithstanding the difficulty of the
ways and thicknes of the forests, he never lost his fight. Artaban would
willingly have made his escape by some concealed path, but the providence of
his Enemy had cut of all possibility of an escape before: so that he was at
length shut up within those mountains, which debarred all further flight, and
Cyrus no sooner found he had reduced him to the inevitable necessity of
yiedling to hunger and thirst, or throw himself into the danger of a fight, but
he sent him a Trumpetter, by whom he exhorted him to dispute for his liberty
generously, rather then pine away with meager famine, which could not be
resisted: but the Armenian defferr'd always to answer him, till he heard the
heart piercing news of his wife, and childrens, being fallen into the hands of
Chrysante.

These tidings stabbed him to the soul with grief, and staggard his former
resolution not to yield till the last extremity; he came down into the plains,
judging it now better to save or loose himself with his disconsolate famil^,
then by an obstinate and vain resistance to inflame the just anger of his
generous Conqueror, at whose triumphant feet he came and cast himself to
implore his clemency. Cyrus having received him as King, but yet as a rebel
King and prisoner, gave order for the troops, that came in with him, to be
dispersed amongst his own, and without wasting further time, according to the
express command enjoined him by his uncle Cyaxares, he assembled the principal
of his Army, before whom he summoned Artaban to appear, who having lost his
courage with his liberty, presented himself rather in the posture of a guility
person then an afflicted Prince. After several interrogations made to him, this
unhappy King could allege nothing to excuse his rebellion but the desire to
gain an absolute liberty for his successor, by shaking of the yoke of being
tributary, he made him first acknowledge how unjustly he had refused to furnish
his uncle with the men and money he demanded, having so good title to them, and
how basely he had proffered assistance to the Assyrians, with whom he had
secretly treated, and having afterward asked him how he would chastise a
vassal that should thus betray him, he drew that necessary condemnation out of
his own mouth, which sentenced him to death.

Whilst Cyrus was employed about this sad doom, Chrysante arrived, who brought
in the Armenian Queen and her children as prisoners: but to obey the command he
received from his Uncle to put that miserable Prince to death, Cyrus ordered
expressly that they should not suffer them to come together, nor let them in the
least know what was intended, to shun that conflict of compassion which their
tears, and the rigor of his duty would raise in his noble breast.

The Armenian Queen lived yet in the happy ignorance of her Husbands misery and
captivity, but when she from her Chariot, beheld him going forth from the Tent
circled within a Guard of Soldiers, with a visage whereon the expectation of
death had already epitomized all his fears and horrors, she threw her self down
suddenly with bitter cries; and renting the vail which covered her head, with
extreme violence, she furiously bent her precipitate steps toward those that
held Artaban, endeavoring with earnest prayers, and interrupted reproaches,
and threats to wrest him from their hands; when Cyrus warned of the disorder by
the sad noise and moans which reached his ear, came forth to know the Original
of it.

The fury of this almost distracted woman, whom he knew not to be the Armenian
Queen at first surpised him, and being told by one of the Soldiers who it
was, he approached to appease her: but she continued still her fruitless
violence, persisting in her mournful cries, that they should either lead her
with Artaban, or kill her presently? till being told that Cyrus was there
present, she no sooner knew him, but falling at his feet, and suppressing her
furious tone, changing it into accents of supplication; she implored him with
all the melting language those dolorous passions could suggest to one, who
having already lost her Kingdom and liberty, beheld her Husband led away in
chains, by whom alone she could conceive the smallest glimpse of hope to be
restored to any happiness again. Cyrus was stooping just to raise her up when
the noise of some approaching Cavaliers interrupted his civility. They brought
him a new prisoner, whom at first sight he had no cognizance of, but which the
Queens redoubled shrieks, and cries soon made him know. It was the Prince
Tygranes, eldest Son of Artaban, who is at present in this Army, he being then
just returned from a Voyage he had made, fell into the Persians hands, before
he was acquainted that any Enemies had footing in his Fathers Country. His
Mother no sooner spied him, but she cried out so dolefully that it increased
his astonishment, and the beholders pity; and you dear Son, will you be
likewise one addition more to our heap of sorrow? the anger of the gods would
not be fully satisfied, if their injustice had not dragged you hither, to
complete the sad catastrophe of our ruin. Come, come, approach yet nearer Son:
suffer him, said she to Cyrus, to see his Father once before he dies. Consider,
Tygranes, in what a lost condition is Artaban? and how undone your Mother,
Wife, Sister, and all relations are, and then, o tell me wherefore you came
hither? but you unmerciful and angry deities, why have you brought him to us?
is it to catch the falling Crown and Scepter, and support the reeling Throne
which your injustice batters down so cruelly. Ha! no, it is to involve the
heir, together with the other lesser relics of our unhappy Family, in one
general destruction, least any should survive our rugged fate. You gods
therefore, I do retract my former words, for I perceive there is some kind of
equity in your judgments, it being more just, if our ruin be so inevitable,
that we should fall together, then that any should be reserved to weep our sad
calamity. Come near my Son, come children, come, cried she in a sharper tone,
calling those who stood at a little distance, fetter us altogether, said she to
Cyrus, in the same chain, and if you can be so merciful in your cruelty, let
one blow put a period to all our miseries, for this will be a more welcome
favor than alone to ravish Artaban from us. Her swelling sorrows stopped the
current of further discourse, and the frequent sobs, and sighs that thronged
out of her bosom, left her no other power of expression, but her fugitive
tears.

Mean while, Cyrus was wrapped into the greatest astonishment that could be;
Tygranes had been otherwhile his particular friend, they having had their
breeding together in the Persian Academies.

The unhappiness of this Prince, and the Queens tears filled his eyes with
horror, and his heart with pity. He knew not whether he should answer the
Mothers moving plaints, to whom he had already given full assurance of her own,
and all her childrens lives, or comfort the Son whom the amazement of so
unlooked for an accident had so surprised, that of all his senses he could
command the use of none but his sight, to be the Witness of that funest
spectacle.

His Father Artaban, who had not enough constancy to stand the shock of his own
particular misfortune, seemed to increase it, when he was made acquainted with
the miserable condition of his Wife, and Children; and whether his grief were
too great for expression, or that the extremity of his affliction, seeming to
sting him beyond the help of consolation, cast him into despair, which hardens
the most timorous spirits with resolution, he now endeavored to comfort his
Wife, and his Son Tygranes, showing them that Cyrus was obliged to save the
rest of his Family by the same argument, and justice which ruined him; since
they were no way guilty of that rebellion he had alone been Author and occasion
of. That they ought confidently to expect a milder treatment from his clemency
than himself, because his death would satisfy the ressentments of Cyaxares,
and that they should endeavor by their virtues to regain the glory of his
House, which he had so eclipsed, and stained by his perfidious act, proving by
their future services, and fidelity, how free they truly were from being his
accomplices in that crime. He could not keep those tears that hung at his
blubbering eyes from stealing down his face, nor suppress a multitude of sighs
his grief tore from his heart, when he ended this generous discourse,
especially when he beheld his young Son Phraorte, his Daughter Birinthea, and
Artemisa wife to Tygranes, whom Cyrus had caused to be brought to him.

Never was any spectacle so mournful, pity had ingraved so much sorrow on each
visage, that it was difficult to discern the Conquerours from the Captives.

Tygranes, whose tongue was till now fettered with his too violent griefs,
finding himself obliged by his Parents tears, and presence, especially his
dearest Arthemisa's, went toward Cyrus, who stood mute likewise, and could not
hide some tokens of pity from appearing, speaking to him in this manner. Ah
Sir, what must we expect from this deep silence, is it an effect of the
compassion our unhappiness stirs up in your heart, or the severity of your
sentence? what, is it not enough to take away the Crown and Scepter from a
Royal Family, and so many Subjects from their King, without depriving a Woman
of her Husband, and ravishing the Father from so many children, who desire
nothing of all what they have lost, but the liberty to dye presently with them,
or to have him remain a miserable Captive amongst them? does this Petition seem
to be unjust? what right have you to deny death to us, since you believe it to
be so just toward him? or if you do conceive him to be alone guilty, wherefore
do you punish us more rigorously than him, letting us live with the regret for
loosing him which is a thousand times more sensible to us then death it self?
but I perceive what it is causes his condemnation, it is not your self, Sir, nor
the ressentment of Cyaxares, that pittiless, reason of State does murder him,
and you fondly believe there is no more cause to fear, after the Leader of a
Rebellion is thrust out of the world: a poor consideration, and weak argument
of unadvised policy, what then do you imagine the children of Kings, have such
low spirits, and so small courage that in what state soever they remain, they
will not endeavor to revenge a Fathers death (who was so dear and tender in
his affection to them) by all the means that hatred, and despair can store them
with; it is true indeed the head of such a faction is thereby taken off; but
know, Sir, it is a Hydra which still sprouts new ones forth, and of all those
you now behold in your presence, as Artabans children, expect the same fixed
resolution either to dye with him, or else perpetually to seek a full revenge.
Or if, Sir, we are not criminal in your judgment, let your virtue appear in
its full extent, do not confine it, generous Prince, within such narrow and
severe limits, let the Father taste part of that mercy your clemency confers
upon the children, who humbly implore the life of Artaban, which I perceive
your own compassionate, and noble soul prompts you to grant him; vouchsafe it
therefore, Sir, and bind a King by this immortal obligation, to endeavor by
his faithful services hereafter, to testify he holds the possession of it only
by your extraordinary goodness. And if you did believe he was able once to
prejudice you, you may as well think him not altogether useless by making him
your friend. Take away all the subjects of your apprehensions from him, place
your Soldiers in Garrison in all the places of strength in Armenia, and only
leave him and his children wherewith to serve you in their own persons, and to
the Armenians (who love him too affectionately to suffer his loss without
ressentment) the power to testify the obligation they shall so justly owe you
for their Princes life.

Cyrus pressed betwixt the Amity he had for Tygranes, and the obedience he owed
to Cyaxares, answered him, that he took the gods for witness, and wished they
might punish him, if it were not a real truth, that he was as much grieved for
his misfortune, as it was possible for a man to be, for one he so dearly
cherished, and that without those pressing arguments he had alleged, the
friendship they had contracted together during their infancy, was but too
powerful to obtain all that he could in reason desire of him, but in this
occasion, what he demanded, depending not upon his will, but the devoir of his
charge, and birth; he beseeched him to accuse his hard fate, and he should
evidently find by the treatment which the rest of the Family should receive at
his hands, that what he was compelled to now, was utterly against the
inclination he had to serve him.

He had no sooner ended these Protestations, but, fore seeing that if he gave
ear to their further complaints, which had already awakened his heart to pity,
he should not be able to resist their clamorous petitions, he would have
withdrawn himself within his Tent, commanding those that held Artaban to
conduct him where he had appointed, and Chrysante to withdraw his prisoners.
But then their cries and shreeks became most vehement, and doleful; and
Birinthea, who till then had only made her precious tears keep company with
their fruitless prayers, broke through the crowd which thronged about Cyrus,
and falling down at his knees which she embraced in her tender arms, she stopped
him with these words: Do not fly, my Lord, nor stifle all the thoughts of mercy
in your breast decide, before you go, whether the children shall follow their
Fathers doom, or the Father partake of the childrens fortune: or rather,
sacrifice them all to your just anger to expiate Artabans crime, and reserve
only him, since the gods will not gratefully accept a victime that is not truly
pure, and immaculate. And we being innocent, shall better satisfy their
justice than he can, because he is so guilty. Then stoping her speech a while
and finding he answered not a word; Ha cruel, pursued she, lifting up the vail
which covered her face, and looking on him with a countenance whereon so many
footsteps of grief and sorrow appeared, as would have melted a heart of Brass
into compassion, thou reply'st nothing, and nevertheless the proffer I make is
fair to glut thy cruelty, and if thou art so greedy after blood there is more
plenty for thee in our youthful veins, than in his aged body parched through
time and labor; speak cruel man, and if ever thou knew'st what blessing a
Father is, or have the least sentiment of nature in thee, let that work some
sense of pity in thy soul.

This last assault could be no longer withstood, it was too powerful not to
prevail, and therefore Cyrus yielded up his severity to the stronger risings of
compassion in his breast, Birinthea, had no sooner discovered her divine face,
though it were bathed in tears which bubbled from their crystal springs, but
he ressented, besides the motions of pity, all those other effects which such
an afflicted beauty can inspire in a most generous and tender heart. He revoked
the order he had given Chrysante concerning the person of Artaban, and
committed him together with his Wife and Children to Chrysantes Guard,
promising them to do his utmost to obtain his pardon from Cyaxares, to whom he
immediately wrote for that purpose.

When the Messenger, whom he had dispatched, returned and brought him word,
that he might absolutely dispose of the life of Artaban, according as he
pleased to think convenient, this news did so fill his mind with a particular
joy, and he found himself so puissantly interessed for Artabans preservation,
ever since Birinthea's mediation, that he would be himself the bearer of it. He
went to the place where they were yet detained prisoners, where their divided
fears and hopes held them in a trembling suspense what would be the event
concerning Artaban, whom at that present moment they entertained in a
conversation composed more of sighs, and tears, then words. His unexpected
visit surprised them extremely, and they were timorously weighing in their
thoughts the reasons of it, which he cleared to them, by declaring the cause
thereof: This blessed news notwithstanding did not wipe off their tears, they
wept for joy, as they had wept for grief, and in this first transport, whilst
they tendered him millions of thanks for his infinite goodness, with all the
submissive acknowledgement they were capable, Birinthea moved him no less by
the ressentment she witnessed for this favor and grace, then she had done
before, by those bitter reproaches of cruelty she charged him withal. He
afterward concluded the conditions of pardon, he vouchsafed to Artaban, by
which the King obliged himself to pay yearly double the tribute which Astiages
had formerly imposed and to give up all the places of strength into Cyaxares
hands, and voluntarily offered besides to furnish him, toward this War, with
forty thousand Foot, and eight thousand Horse, and for ransom of his person,
and his wife, he entreated him to accept of all the treasure his Father had
left him, which amounted to about three hundred talents: and seeing he had
nothing left remaining to satisfy for his children, he clasped his arms about
Cyrus knees, the tears hanging at either eye, and told him he referred them to
his own generosity, not being able to proffer any thing else but the assurance
to pay that debt, by the continual exercise of his daily services, and a
plentiful acknowledgement of all his noble obligations.

This manner of expression touched Cyrus in the most sensible part of his
virtue, who could not have suppressed his generosity in things, for which he
had less inclination, the Articles in fine were signed, and the Armenian King
obtained, besides what he had handsomely entreated, many choice favors which
his hopes could not expect, on condition however that as an assurance of this
treaty, the young Phraorte his Son, and his Daughter the Princess Birinthea,
should be sent into Media to remain as Hostages for their fidelity.

It would pose me to tell you whether Cyrus retained this Princess, for his
Uncle Cyaxares interest, or his own inclination only, but this I am certain
of, that after she had dried up her tears, and recovered the luster of her
beauteous face, which those clouds of grief and sorrow had dressed in mourning
weeds, he was first constrained to admire those fresher graces, and then to
digest his admiration into this open acknowledgement that notwithstanding the
severity of those doctrines he had learnt in the Accademies of Persia, which
denied a Conqueror to look upon his Captives with any other eyes than those of
a Victor: yet it was impossible to behold so imperious a beauty and not efform
rather sentiments of servitude and worship, then of triumph and Empire. This
declaration, nevertheless, passed only for an expression of galantry, and
perhaps himself as then, believed it sprung from his own mind on no other
consideration. He invited the Royal Family that same night to a sumptuous
Feast, and afterward requested the Prince Tygranes (amidst their other
pleasing discourse of former acquaintance to which Cyrus had engaged him with
much affection) to relate the History of his life since the time they were
separated, from whence he now came when he was taken, and particularly in what
alliance he had found so fair and virtuous a Princess as his wife, Tygranes
satisfied his curiosity to the full, and told him all the mavelous accidents
which had happened in their amors, which Cyrus heard with infinite delight, and
perhaps you would find as much content in the recital did I not fear so prolixe
a digression would tire you.

The Hircanian Prince Gobrias, and Merame having told him they should rejoice
exceedingly to be made partakers of it, he was disposing himself to tell it
them, when perceiving Hypocratides walking in the next Alley, he propounded to
hear it rather from his relation, as being one who always had a great share in
Tygranes fortune, and who was more fully acquainted with each particularity.

They went jointly to entreat him, and that Gentleman being glad of an occasion
to entertain so noble a society, first entreated them to excuse him, that he
was obliged to commence with the History of Arthemisa's Father and Brother,
because it was absolutely necessary for the intelligence of the other, and then
began after this manner.

The History of Tygranes and Arthemisa.
IF you were not already well assured by your own experiences and every days
examples, that of all passions in the soul, love and hatred are the most
potent, the recital of this History of Tygranes and Arthemisa would be
sufficient evidence to prove it.

This Princess is Daughter of Ctesiphon Prince of Colchis, whose Mother
Laodice, five years after she had brought her into the world, was constrained
to leave her by a malady, which suddenly snatched her from her husband and
pretty children Ctesiphon was not very young, and nevertheless after he had
worn out four years in widdow-hood which he thought were due to regret his dear
wife, he took a resolution to marry. He cast his looks for this purpose on all
his neighbor Princeses to find some object suitable to his condition; but
whilst he was thus in quest, his unhappiness met a woman, who under the
bewitching appearance of a florid beauty, covered the poisonous sentiments of a
most vicious soul. It was the cruel Erixone, whose lustful flames kindled that
dissension which has caused so much misfortune to her Family: having sifted
out his inclination, she knew so well how to gain that Prince by her affected
flatteries, that in fine, he married her maugre all those reasons of State
which opposed his affection, all which he trampled under foot. The blindness of
Ctesiphon's love, and Erixone's ambition, forged this ominous match: but this
unhappy woman loving nothing in his person but the vain quality of Prince and
Sovereign: being satisfied now with that, resolved unlawfully to seek elsewhere
for greater pleasure, than Ctesiphon could feed her insatiate brutality withal;
inspired with these detestable thou his and desires, she shot her poisonous
glances at every one in whom she spied any loveliness; her aspiring vanity
soothing her with the fond belief, that none could possibly resist her piercing
eye, when it was edged with so much passion, nor refuse the sweeter
correspondency with her temptations: yet fearing least the unwary indiscretion
of some, or the too reserved prudence of others should unmasque her wanton
designs, she thought it most secure to single out one alone, and she could
find none more deserving to be doated on then Theramene.

She was not mistaken in the judgment she made of the person of that young
Prince. He was then but seventeen years of age, his body, of an excellent
shape, was but the habitation of a more noble soul, and any others passion but
Erixone's, would have challenged its excuse from the catching charms of his
brave qualities, but that infamous woman instead of considering him as her own
husbands Son, believed him the fi^test person with whom she might practice her
incestuous projects most safely, because Theramene was ever in her eye, and the
familiarity which she used toward him, persuaded her she might facilly convert
the carresses of an indulgent Mother, into the strickter embraces of a dearer
Mistress, and that he was not so green in experience, but he would soon discern
and approve of it. This specious pretext was a long time the cover to disguise
her passion, and though she were most subtle in her behavior, yet could she
not make Theramene take notice of any thoughts beyond his Devoir. Not but that
she discovered her self apparently enough sometimes, as he related since; but
because the purity of his soul being incapable to let in so ungrateful and
horrid affection, he could not suspect so base an ambush then. Every one
perceived evidently that Erixone had a particular affection toward Theramene,
even Ctesiphon declared he was obliged to her for it: but never any could
imagine her more then ordinary tenderness was the Pander to her abominable lust.

In fine, after the vain pursuit of a whole year, finding her itching desires
could not be thus satisfied, she conceived as much violent hatred in the
beginnings of her despair, as she had cherished love for him in her soul, she
resolved to oppress the Princes virtue, if she could not corrupt it, and in the
means she fought to ruin him, she found the satisfaction of these two
different passions which strugled in her breast, because she fixedly intended to
throw off all dissimulation and disguise, and break through the bashful laws of
Scruple, and nice decency, by making a manifest declaration of her love, to
which if Theramene gave a willing ear, and correspondency, hers should be fully
glutted in the fruition; and if he should recoile by his too cold denials, she
voted such a deep revenge, that he should sink under her enraged displeasure,
if he became not flexible to her more soft desires.

This Princes extraordinary civility furnished her with frequent occasions to
execute her ignoble designs, there was not a day passed wherein he did not see
her, he resorted every morning to her Chamber as soon as decency permitted him
a becoming entrance. One time above the rest Cresiphon being somewhat
indisposed, sent Theramene to give her the bon-jour, and communicate certain
affairs to her, she made her maids and women retire, and though she were yet
undressed, led him to her Closset under a pretense of telling him some
important secret, and forbad any one to interrupt her. There was she assaulted
with the several passions of Love, and Hatred, Hope, and Despair Confidence,
and Fear, and after some moments silence, in which a busy eye might have read
her thoughts in her countenance, which though not truly understood by the
Prince, did somewhat raise his astonishment, and invite him to beg the
knowledge of the trouble he perused in her face, (so often shifted from its
natural sweetness, into betraying blushes) she set two or three sighs at
liberty, and darting her looks upon him fuller of Love, than Anger. Ha Prince,
(said she to him) What do you expect more! would you have a clearer evidence,
or more apparent testimonies of that which I have endeavored so long time to
reveal? are you alone insensible in the world? and nature that has enjewel'd
you with all the exquisite qualities that can render a man admirable in a
Sovereign degree, has she deprived you of all sentiments of Love, as well to
the persons of others, as your self.

The Prince was so amazed with this discourse, that he could not get his
troubled thoughts to shape out any answer, he heard indeed she mentioned the
name of Love, but could not comprehend from whence this declaration proceeded,
or why it was addressed to him, and therefore they stood gazing a long time
upon one another without pronouncing a syllable, but she recovering her spirits
again, went on thus. You are surprised methinks, as if it were news for Love to
reign in a young heart, or that a woman as I am were capable to affect, and
adore a man like you, have I now explained my self and broken the Ice enough?
do you now understand my looks, and thoughts, or must I bring more light yet to
discover so fair a flame? your silence which cannot be in you a sign of
stupidity, is it a mark and effect of the disdain you have for me? am I too
poor in beauty? or is my Age too stale, and does your busy eye, surveying me
from head to foot, meet so many defects in that short travel as to distaste
and slight the correspondency I beg? Ha Madam, answered Theramene having
recollected his disturbed fancy, is it to try, and sound me that you make this
discourse? yes certainly, you have too great ^ stock of eminent virtues to be
capable of such a criminal love, but tell me Madam, what is that grand
miscarriage, which has so falsely persuaded you, I harbord any sentiments so
contrary to my devoir The respect I have ever rendered you, can that have
betrayed my intention, and can my excess therein testify any thing beyond what
I do owe you? just heavens you know at least the purity of my soul. Erixone
interrupting the current of his discourse told him, no Theramene you need not
wander so far for testimonies of that, there never was in you the least spark
of love for me, I have but too long watched to epsy that, do not complain of
the excess of your esteem since I reproach only your want of it, had that been
but true in the smallest portion you could not have been so insensible, and you
might well have judged that though I had not merited your affection for any
handsome quality in my self, yet I at least deserved it as a retaliation for
mine to you. Insensible, or ungrateful man, which of the two shall I reproach
you of, shall I excuse one, to accuse of the other, declare it Theramene, and
acknowledge the verity of my passion from its excess,

The Prince, who could no longer find the least shadow of doubt after she had
unclothed her thoughts so nakedly, replied, Madam, I now find that true which
had been ever said of love, if it be possible that you love me in such a manner
as you have expressed your self, the blindness of that passion has so
hood-winkt your sight and memory, that you have quite forgotten who I am, you
do not remember, Madam, that I am Ctesiphons son, that Ctesiphon is your dearer
husband, and you his lawful wife: this is enough, and this weighty
consideration alone were sufficient to instruct you that I have been as little
capable of ingratitude as insensibility on your behalf, since I ought not to be
susceptible of any love for you, as I must needs believe you do but feign
toward me: but, Madam, it was unnecessary to represent you these
considerations, to make you see a fault of which surely you are no ways
guilty, it is only I am so by those unhappy suspicions you have started, that I
should be so rashly insolent to hatch such base desires contrary to my duty,
and respect; this declaration must be only to try me, I should wrong your
virtue to believe otherwise, for you have too much judgment. Say too much
love, replied she interrupting him, cruel; what then must I give faith to it,
said he: what reason answered she, should make you doubt it; nay rather, replied
he, what reason would not condemn such a belief, the opinion I have of your
virtue, Madam, your devoir, and my own, do not all these forbid my boldest
thoughts to let in the least shadow of such a suspicion; is this all, said
she, that thou can oppose, do I transgress in my devoir by loving you, since
the gods having created you so lovely, inspire me with a secret passion toward
thy person, besides that which all the world is bound to cherish for their most
perfect works?

She stopped her speech a while to fix her looks more stead fastly upon him,
hoping by those hot glances to melt his frozen bosom, at which she had so
vainly knocked for entrance with her alluring words, but finding the sweetness
of her amorous beams had not that powerful influence she presumed, and only
excited more aversion in him, she resumed her speech again, and tuning her
tongue to the recovered gaiety of her smiling countenance, said to him in a
cajoling accent; And wherefore would I not love you, since the devoir and
virtue you object are, but bugg bear Chymera's, which the base jealousy of men
invented? I being more forcibly obliged to obey that fatality which ordains me
to love you, then their poor fancies; Ctesiphon is not wronged in this, I love
him enough to correspond with his affection, and how little so ere I have for
him, young as I am, I do but satisfy, too much the passion of an old decrepit
man. Then it is in earnest, replied the Prince, and far from acknowledging your
fault, you would couple sacrilege to incest, and make the gods accomplices of
your infidelity: ha do you charm my Father with your false caresses but only
to betray him; and are you so perfidious in your design as to desire his son,
for your compagnon in the crime you have addressed your self unhappily Erixone,
you will miss your aim, Theramene will act the duty of a child better then you
do of a wife, and I could almost strangle those considerations which tie my
hands up from speedily revenging the affront you cast on Ctesiphon, did I not
cherish his honor more then you, my exasperated indignation should immediately
light on your head. He went out hastily after he had ended these words, and
though he endeavored to compose his countenance, yet every one perceived his
trouble and alteration.

Erixone deeper galled with shame for having been rejected then at the foulness
of her crime, followed him still with her eyes, and looked steadfastly on the
door which let him out, when one of her maids whom she most favored entered
into the closet, and found her yet in the same posture as Theramene had left
her; but with far other sentiments. Love had resigned its throne to hatred
with which instantly suggested a thousand ways to ruin him, of which her rage
chose the most bitter, but the most expedient for her purpose, intending to
employ the Father as an unhappy instrument to destroy his own son, as she
before designed to make the child sin against his Fathers honor. She resolved
to anticipate the complaints which Theramene might make, and the same moment
this came into her mind she left her closet to prepare her self to go ta
Ctesiphon.

During the little portion of time she wasted in dressing her self, she
consulted how she might most cunningly prepossess her husbands mind: flattery
and sweetness seemed the most catching, and deceitful, and so she having
decreed that, and being come in his presence before he could have time to note
the trouble in her face, she prevented him by a most earnest prayer whereby she
desired him to grant her one favor.

The particulars which I shall now tell you, were discovered to me by one of my
friends who was then present, whom she was glad to have for witness to publish
her rare virtues, and the crime she fastened on Theramene. Ctesiphon who was not
accustomed to refuse her any thing, nor could deny the least of her desires,
without informing himself of the particulars of her request, gave her a full
assurance that having an absolure ascendant over his will, she might safely
promise her self all that was possible for him to grant. The better to delude
Ctesiphon, she would not rely on his bare promises, she made him first solemnly
swear that he should not pretend any ressentment for a great injury which had
been designed against him, and that what she now desired with so much
importunity was a full pardon for it. These words of injury and pardon
astonished Ctesiphon, he knew not where to fix his thoughts, but Erixone who
had as much subtilty as malice, having protested by some tokens of affection,
which seemed to be interwoven with more truth then falsehood, that her interests
being inseparably united to his, she would never have desired the pardon of a
fault, which were not excusable in its nature, and especially in a person whom
of all the world must be most dear unto him, she thus prepared his spirit as
she pleased, and told him the crime was love, the most venial of all sins, and
the subject Theramene that was guilty, who best of all men deserved a free
pardon, having imprudently suffered himself to be surprised with that passion
toward her: but the violence of it having constrained him to make an open
declaration, she hoped that she had cured his distemper by those remonstrances
she had made to him on that subject.

Here she broke of her discourse to see what effects it wrought in Ctesiphon's
spirit, who could not keep in his anger. He loved Theramene indeed, but not so
passionately as he did Erixone, the render goodness which that woman had
feigned toward his son, imploring his mercy for an act, which wounded him so
mortally, touched him with the more fondness toward her, and vehemence against
him, what, cried he Theramene is my greatest Enemy, and my only son? He, he
alone will ravish from me my chiefest joy, you have too great a bounty, Madam,
for so ignoble a person: if this crime were pardonable, it would be so in any
other but himself, and if you truly love me, you will permit me to revoke the
grace I had conceded at your petition, and shut my eyes on all the sentiments
of nature, for a son who tramples on them all toward his Father. What
Theramene! Erixone who found it not so fitting to let him proceed any further
at that time, stopped him with her dissembled tears, and gently sweetened his
savage fury with these words. The gods know, Ctesiphon, whether I love you, and
without seeking other witness you likewise know it your self, the excess of my
affection is sufficiently evident in this occasion, seeing the infinite care I
take to preserve your son. It Is that inspires me with these desires for him,
though I am far more sensibly offended then if he had attempted against my
life, I acknowledge he does wrong you? but it is in my own person, and you must
confess likewise the highest affront is given to my devoir and virtue:
nevertheless, sir, if ever you had any esteem for me, and if there be the
smallest root of it remaining, vouchsafe the pardon for a fault which he
committed involuntarily, since my unhappy beauty is the cause, and that it is a
sin of youth, rather then of his person; and if you do deny this favor, never
expect any content again from Erixone, her grief would be above the remedy of
consolation, if after having caused unwittingly your son to love, she should be
likewise the occasion of his disgrace, therefore if ere you purpose to endear
me, prevent this last misfortune. Ctesiphon demonstrated that Erixone was more
choice to him in all respects then Theramene, and as her interests was the
chief subject of his anger, her prayers in fine calmed his spirits, and she
wrought him so pliable to her will, that she made him vow, he would never
testify any displeasure unless Theramene should impudently repeat his base
pursuites, which if he offered, she promised him not to hinder his just anger
and revenge.

You may note in this occasion, that if sometimes jealousy has been more
powerful then love, love in this did triumph over jealousy; she did not intend
to smoother his ressentments altogether, but only bridle their violence for a
time. Erixone had so much sway over her husbands passions, that she not only
fully persuaded him to her mind, but having made him capable to be the minister
of her vengeance, she confirmed him still the more in his fond belief of her
affection by the interest she dissembled in the pardoning his dear son. Some
small time afterward, which she had purposely slipped over to hide her malice,
having pent in her husbands wrath only to make it burst forth with the greater
violence when she thought fitting, she judged it would not be convenient to
defer it any longer, least the Princes more severe virtue, who omitted to
complain out of respect, being stirred with the importunity of new
solicitations should be forced to break his modest silence, she declared to
Ctesiphon that not being any longer able to endure the daily insolences of his
son, she wished him to provide for the security of her honor, and to abuse him
the more neatly, she councel'd him to employ, if it were feesible, no other
means but sweetness to reclaim him.

This unhappy Father whose judgment was corrupted through his jealousy, and
who from his sons countenance, that never could appear in Erixones presence,
but with much change and alteration, had falsely guessed it to be an effect of
love and not that noble indignation he conceived against her, resolved to
sacrifice him to his passion, and sent the Captain of his guards for that
purpose to ceaze upon his person, with strickt command to secure him in a
Castle, a little distant from the City, till he should further determine how to
dispose of him.

I was with Theramene when they first took him, that Prince having ever
perfectly honored his Father, submitted without resistance to those who had the
order to apprehend him, and not being able to imagine the cause of his
restraint, told them aloud, that though he knew himself to be purely innocent,
he would freely follow them even to his own death, to satisfy his Father,
toward whom perhaps he was too guilty, since he was so unhappy, as to have
given him cause to think so. I accompanied this poor Prince into the Prison,
where his guards likewise kept me till they had order for my freedom; whilst I
was with him, he communicated all that passed twixt himself and Erixone to me,
and not finding himself fat all guilty of any thing, but the disdain of her
base lust, he knew he could incurr only the hatred his aversion had bred in
her, and could conceive no other reason for his imprisonment, but that she who
had been so wicked, as to entertain so detestable a passion, taking a pique at
his refusal, had certainly accused him of some horrid crime against his Father;
these words bred new astonishment within me, for the opinion every one had
lived in of Erixone's excelling virtues, seemed to render this impossible; she
had so craftily managed her affection, that none had ever discovered the least
spark: but it was more impossible for Theramene to speak falsely; I had a
particular esteem for him, and the amity he honored me withal as his Privado,
and confident in his most secret actions, was capable to persuade me to any
thing. After I had made some short reflections on so strange an accident, and
had proffered him all that depended on my best services, on the assurance he
was entirely possessed of my Faith, he commanded me to see Learchus the same,
that was present, as I told you, when Erixone accused Theramene before his
Father, and because he was intimate with Ctesiphon, and that he alone was his
chief counselor, he thought I might learn some thing from him concerning his
confinement.

Learchus was extremely my friend, an honest man, and one that had testified as
much affection as respect toward the Prince, I went immediately to visit him,
and having spoken somewhat of Theramene's imprisonment, he protested he was a
stranger in the knowledge of it. The little astonishment however which appeared
in his words and actions, persuaded me that he was not altogether ignorant of
the reason; therefore I sifted him more narrowly, and conjured him at last in
the Princes name, to tell me what he knew. Learchus at this, looking earnestly
upon me, answered, he much admired the Prince doubted of the cause, and sought
to learn it from others, because he could not believe that Ctesiphon who loved
him so tenderly would treat him so severely, unless he had most urgent reasons
for it, and that his own conscience could better inform him, then any one
beside. When I perceived he spoke so sparingly, I told him what Theramene
suspected, he answered me, that there was more disguise then verity in that
suspicion, and that if the Prince were not minded to conceal his thoughts, I
might as he believed easily guess the subject of his disfavour. Not being able
in fine to discover any further at that time, I made a faithful report of all
he said to Theramene, and Learchus was as ready in relating all what I had
asked him for Ctesiphon.

The Father blinded under the double vail of love and jealousy together,
commanded Learchus to go to the Prince, and reproach him how much his crime
was offensive without adding this impudent disguise, and the effrontery to
accuse her, whose innocence was fully enough vindicated, by the more then
common care and goodness she employed to excuse him. Learchus, speaking to
Theramene on the behalf of Ctesiphon, punctually discharged the duty of a
faithful subject: his amity toward the Prince could not make him swerve, and
though it did imprint compassion for his misfortunes, his due obedience and the
blackness of the crime, of which he was accused, obliged him to represent, with
bitter reproaches, that guilt which moved him the more sensib^^, because he was
most innocent of it.

The small change it wrought upon the Prince; abated the edge of his severity,
he read the motions of just anger upon his visage, and beheld the lineaments
of persecuted virtue there, but not the least character of a guilty conscience,
which usually imprints it selfs condemnation on the face, and therefore he gave
a very willing and patient ear to the discourse he made in his own defense.
And whether, or no, he were before persuaded of Theramenes fault, he now
returned in some doubt of his innocence, and was moreover inclining to a full
belief of it, if that imbecility which so ordinarily prepossesses men to
credit the first impressions, had not yet suspended his opinion. The relation
he made to Ctesiphon found not the same success, he rather would fasten the
crime upon his son, then his wife, and Learchus had no small a do to oppose
the resolution he had taken to put him instantly to death, by showing him how
necessary it was to have more certain evidence, and stronger proofs.

Erixone who well foresaw, that if he had the leisure to divest himself of
passion, and lure his reason to her seat again, which now did wildly flutter,
he would scent out her secret projects, and turn the horrid tempest of revenge
upon her head, mightily pressed to have him punished; Learchus deferred it
always, and knew so wisely to interpose the importance of such a chastisement
to Ctesiphon, that he yielded to the Princes friends, and especially, to the
Princess Arthemisa's moving prayers, to have him confronted with Erixone.

To this effect they brought Theramene forth of his prison, who appeared before
his father, and those that were assembled there, with as much noble confidence,
as Erixone did with trembling fear: this infamous wretch had woven her subtle
accusation with so many soft expressions of love toward her husband; and the
Prince shaped his with such becoming respects for his dear Father, that as I
have already hinted, every one having so fair an opinion of both their
virtues, would needs believe they were both innocent, and could not tell on
whom to lay the guilt. The necessity hoever of deciding this controversy,
divided their opinions, and as it is impossible our inclinations should be
balanced so equally, as not to weigh more toward one then another, either of
them had partisans, who did suspect the others crime and defend their believed
innocence.

Amongst those who more particularly interressed themselves, one Tarsus
embraced Erixone's cause, and Learchus stood for the Princes: the first
insisted with more noise and heat, but the second with more plenty of reason,
insomuch that the difficulty to give a certain judgment plunged Ctesiphon into
such strange perplexities, that according to the various motions of his
trouble, he sensibly touched the Peoples hearts with pity. What said he, have
I summoned you here to leave me in the labyrinth of a doubt, I thought your
judgments would have soon unravil'd? And if we have no cleerer proofs of the
crime and innocence, with what justice can we chastise the one, and recompense
the other? Cruel inquietudes, how am I involved what to judge of my wife, or
son? Oh sad necessity which fatally ordains me to loose one or other, if heaven
would needs find me an enemy, could it not with more justice have cul'd out any
others, but such as owes me as much love, as I did cherish for them; but what
shall we deliberate in fine? Speak wife, reply my Son? to which of you am I
become so hateful, which must I loose of the two that are so infinitely dear
unto me, and to whom I never wanted in my affection. The love I bear to her,
makes him appear as guilty; and when I turn my thoughts on him, she stands a
criminal offender in my eye? love? -- Nature? Come hither jointly to defend
your rights. Nature thy plea, is first, but love thine is more pressing you,
both solicit with extreme earnestness: but which must I obey? The one moves
with more tenderness, the other with more vehemence. Shall I bow to compassion?
Or give the reins up to my raging anger? Oh gods? He gave passage to three or
four sighs, which stopped the further enlarging his complaints, viewing them
both with looks which beamed with love and hatred together, whilst Theramene
wholly interrupted him saying, Cease dear Father, cease these cruel moanes
that torment you, you may at the same moment satisfy both your compassion and
revenge, I am worthy of the one, but am not culpable of the other, and if
nevertheless Erixone or Theramene must perish to appease you, never make it a
doubt to which of these you are to give the pre-eminence, though I am clearly
innocent of the crime I am accused of, yet I will joyfully sacrifice a life to
your repose, of which I hold the lease only from heaven, and you my, death may
justly expiate for Erixones crime, since I am cause of it, and if the
consideration of loosing a child do hinder, she is young enough to bring you
many more, and perhaps you may never meet another woman that you could love
with so much heat of passion.

Erixone would have spoken likewise* who during his discourse had by her often
shifted countenance given many infallible tokens of her crime, if any one had
studiously perused it: but Ctesiphon starting up, much troubled, commanded the
Officers to return with the Prince, and retired himself to his Closet, whence
coming forth again, Erixone who attended him, threw her self at his feet, and
feigning a despair, fearing her life in danger, she sob'd forth these words
before a great number of people. Wherefore do you defer my death, my Lord, if
you esteem me guilty? Is it because you know, that it would be a more welcome
punishment than the suspicion you have of my infidelity: Yes my Lord, I have
plainly discerned, that Theramene 's artificial plea has gained more credit
than my single virtue, it is fit you should ruin a woman to preserve a Traitor,
because he is your only Son and heir, I shall appeal no farther, but to give
this last assured and becoming testimony of my love, I am resolved to dye for
him, since in the doubt you dwell, I can no longer be affected by you.
Ctesiphon would not suffer her to say any more, but amorously embracing and
raising her up, he replied thus: It is too true, Madam, that I offend your
virtue extremely by not punishing your false accuser: but pardon a Fathers
tenderness toward his Son. I wronged my self most in this case, since I
opposed my own hottest desires, which makes me languish to deserve as great
returns of love from you, as I cherish for you: the evidences which you give me
of your affection, oblige me to a full retaliation, and are sufficient to
assert the crime of that perfidious child, whose sudden chastisement shall
satisfy your virtue, and my provoked anger. He told her a great deal more,
which we heard not, because he led her into an adjoining Chamber, where he
spent some time alone with her.

There he resolved poor Theramene should dye, but the most secretly that might
be possible, to prevent the clamor, and commotions of the people, and some
Officers who dearly respected him. This black design however could not be
contrived so secretly, but one might easily see it on wicked Erixones joyful
face, which she endeavored notwithstanding to hide, by a dissembled
intermissive sorrow for her Husbands trouble. Arthemisa who watched incessantly
to preserve her brother, was advertised secretly by some that Theramene had but
a short space to live, and that it was high time to set all possible means a
work to save him.

She had discovered a clandestine intelligence betwixt Erixone and Tarsus,
which gave her much apprehension, because she knew that man ambitious in the
highest nature, and one capable of any mischief. In this straight of necessity,
she endeavored by several stratagems to deliver her brother, she tried to
tempt his Keepers with the, seldom failing, power of Gold and Silver, and
courted many people of worth and quality to steal him thence: but finding all
those ways blocked up with too much difficulty, and that it would but make him
more guilty in his Fathers jealous mind to attempt escape, she decreed to
hazard one means, which she did honor me with, the knowledge of the
performance, of which generous design, she showed as much judgment, as
affection and tenderness to Theramene.

Ctesiphon the closer to conceal his pernicious intentions against his Son,
treated him with less severity then he had done before, his friends had the
liberty to visit him, and Arthemisa feigning to go for some days to a Country
House, twenty Leagues distant from the City, would take her farewell of him.
The respect all gave her, facilitated her Noble design: every one retired when
she came to the Prince, and then seeing her self alone, she in a few words
propounded the intention she had to change habits with him, that she might
remain in his stead in the Prison, whilst he escaped in her disguise. Theramene
being at first surpised with this proposition, would have offered some
considerations on this enterprise, and especially the peril he should leave
her under: but Arthemisa not giving him the leisure to consult his prudence,
quickly made him disroabe himself, and dressed him in her own clothes. If their
separation had not been so sudden, Theramene would have expressed more fully to
his dearest Sister, how much this rare effect of love obliged him: but finding
himself compelled to be gone, after they had embraced with infinite affection,
he quitted her, and passing through the midst of the two first Courts of Guard,
he acted her part and gesture so handsomely, that the Soldiers deluded by the
perfect resemblance of his visage, which nevertheless he hid in part, and his
shape and habit, thought him to be Arthemisa.

He was already descended into the first Court, and now thought he had no more
to fear, when looking toward the Gate he perceived Sitalces coming, the Nepveu
of Tarsus, who in the Confrontation had pleaded for Erixone: This sight at
first amazed him, but quickly recovering and imboldning himself, he hastened his
pace to meet him under the Gate, which being more obscure he judged it would
the better cover his disguise; yet he could not prevent Sitalces from abording
him before he came to it, who espying him afar off, and thinking him to be the
Princess, had imediately alighted, and came with more then ordinary speed to
meet him. I am confident you are in as much impatience to know the success of
this rencontre as Theramene was in fear, however he counterfeited as well as he
could possibly the Princess Civility, and excusing his great haste, because it
was very late, went with a winged diligence to his Sisters Chariot, which
waited at the Gate, without being discovered.

I attended near that Road by which the Princess went to the Castle, with a
dozen of my intimate friends, about two miles distant in a thick wood, where as
soon as he arrived, not staying so long as to change his Clothes, we mounted
him on Horseback, and swiftly galloped through many by-ways to a little Town
whereof I was Governor, reaching thither after midnight: And after we had
there refreshed our Selves alittle while changing our Horses, we bent our
course toward Armenia, where we were received by Artaban and Tygranes his Son,
with all the civil respect we could desire. But whilst Theramene is in
security, and puts the whole Court to their wonder at his rare qualities, let
us step back alittle to Arthemisa, and see in what manner she receives
Sitalces, who instantly demanded to see the Prince, and whom she had discovered
out of her Window when he aborded her brother, not knowing what had passed
since. The fear which that doubt had thrown on her, taught her to send him word
that being somewhat indisposed, and desiring to take alittle rest, there was no
possibility of receiving a visit that day. Sitalces satisfied with that excuse,
without suspecting any further, returned to Court again, with the news of this
feigned Malady: Erixone was presently Alarmed with it, and fearing this
sickness might rob her of the Subject of her revenge, she went immediately to
Ctesiphon and solicited him to send to know the verity. The Messenger could not
come to see her, because She made as if She soundly slept, the longer to
conceal her self, and give her Brother the more scope to get away, so that
after he had thoroughly informed himself of those that waited usually on
Theramene, he reported to Ctesiphon that the Prince was taken ill, but since
the departure of Arthemisa.

Erixone who was of an extraordinary malicious and distrustful Spirit, began to
entertain some doubts, that the Princes indisposition was only a pretense
whereby to forge some means for an escape, which perhaps Arthemisa or some
other had undertaken to manage for him. The absence of that Princess, mine and
my friends together increased her Inquietudes and Conjectures, so that she
resolved either to lose her hopes of full revenge, or bring it to effect the
night following. At the same moment she sought out Ctesiphon, and knew so well
by pressing discourses, to represent the likelihood of her suspicions, and hide
her own guilt of conscience, that the unhappy father consented to put his Son
to death before he should have opportunity to perfect his Intended flight,
which they believed was projected, and which the Subtle Erixone had urged would
be her husbands ruin. Ctesiphon gave warrant presently, and Tarsus had the
Commission to provide Executioners, and see it performed; the night was
extremely tenebrous, and I believe the Heavens had spread their blackest Sables
to masque their sight from such a horrid spectacle, and withal secure
Theramene in his Journey: when Athemisa heard a rude knocking at her Chamber
Door, where none had yet entered since she dissembled sleep. This Insolence,
and the sufficient time she thought she had procured her brother for his
safety, made her fling open the Door immediately: When the Captain of the Guard
advancing himself, presented her a Letter, which contained the Sentence for
Theramene to dye, signed with his Fathers own hand. She had no sooner read it,
but ere that Officer could have the time to discover her, she with a gallant
Confidence asked for the Executioners which were appointed, and he that had
brought the Order; When Tarsus approached to make a bad excuse, that against
the inclination he had to serve him, he was constrained to obey the Kings
absolute command, who would needs by this Act make a particular trial of his
Fidelity. Arthemisa could not contain her self any longer, but was confirmed in
the Opinion she had conceived, that the close Intellegence this Wicked Fellow
held with Erixone was an effect of Love and Inclination: I had reason,
Hangman, said she to him, to expect this Commission sooner from thee then any
other, it is this thou have so long been hammering with Erixone, and sure enough
thou have promised Theramene 's Head to that Lustful Adultresse for an
acknowledgement of her wanton Favors, but thanks to Heaven and their Justice,
thou art deceived Tarsus, thou shall not this day take away my Dearest Brothers
Life: But if thy black Commission extends to Arthemisa, fulfill it Traitor,
come Command thy cruel Ministers to Destroy me, I will not oppose, provided I
can but save my Theramene; Here she discovered her self, and surprised all that
were present with that astonishment, which you may better guess then I
discribe. Tarsus wrapped with amazement at this Accident, and the just reproaches
she assaulted him withal, retreated sneakingly without a word, and presently
gave information thereof to Ctesiphon and Erixone, whom he found together; the
one buried in sadness and discontent for being obliged to murder a Son, the
other netled with impatience to hear the certainty of his death, whose life was
so obnoxious to her. It seemed that Ctesiphon, though he were not yet penitent
for his fault, showed no great signs of displeasure for his Child's escape by
Arthemisa's aid, but keeping his wonted posture of deep Melancholy, he told
Erixone she must excuse a Sisters indulgent affection toward her Brother,
because it sprung but from the root of Nature and Reason: but that she must
expect the punishment of his crime would fall upon his head from Heaven it
self, since 'twas not in their power, and he believed the gods reserved this
vengeance to themselves to make it the more weighty, and exemplary.

Whilst this disconsolate Father, after his trouble had made him choose his bed,
began to think of tenderness toward his Children; Erixone's Sentiments flowed
from another Spring, her despair made her distracted with rage, she entertained
no other designs, but to sacrifice all she could to her own safety, and to
Authorize her first crime by a greater, she wrote a Ticket to Tarsus, by which
she enjoined him to come to her, as soon as day appeared, to settle their
affairs, it being no longer convenient to boggle or dissemble, but to secure
their lives and their contentment, to the destruction and cost of all those
that might oppose them. The trouble and perplexity she was in, made her utterly
forget the strickt order which Ctesiphon, at her importunate Solicitation, had
given that evening, to suffer none to go forth least they should use some means
to stop the Execution of his Son: so that it happened to be intercepted, though
he that carried it had Authorized his Message with the name of Erixone, and it
was immediately delivered to Ctesiphon, according to the command imposed on all
the Officers. There was no need to rouse him from his sleep, the wracking
thoughts which were his bed-fellows with their unquietness had ever kept him
waking, and when they presented the Ticket to him, the passions he had toward
Erixone were newly entered in his mind. He was powerfully surpised, finding
such secret correspondence twixt her and Tarsus, which he was ignorant of
before: but prepossessed with love and fondness, he at first imagined that she
summoned him rather to assert her innocence, then to back her crime: but
presently these thoughts were shouldered out again, to make way for the
suspicions, his jealousy began to inspire, and till morning was renewed; he
lay in a most cruel agony of trouble, and then hastily arose to speak with
Erixone, who expected Tarsus with a strange impatience.

I must impose a necessary silence on my tongue, and entreat your Judgments to
conceive how infinitely she was surpised when Ctesiphon entered her Chamber,
and accosted her with this demand, What need She had of Tarsus for her safety,
and if he were not sufficient to protect her from any Enemy, what disorder she
apprehended in her affairs, what business she had concealed so secretly, which
the present conjuncture obliged her no longer to dissemble; in a word, who were
those that durst have attempted against her life? This discourse so affrighted
her, that being admonished by her guilty conscience, she wanted little of
casting her self at his feet, to supplicate for pardon of those crimes she
thought he had discovered: but being extremely impudent, with the same bold
confidence she had undertaken them, she pleaded excuse for having been obliged
to ask the council of Tarsus, whom she knew to be a man so faithful, and
affectionate in his Princes Service, to defend her innocence openly, which was
the more subject to suspicion, because persecuted by his own Children, whose
interest she knew his own natural instinct would sooner incline him to
vindicate then hers: and that it was not the care to save her life that
troubled her, but to maintain her honor, to prevent his unjust jealousy from
charging her excessive love with blame, which she preserved so devoutly toward
him. Ctesiphon having answered her dissembled expressions of feigned affection
with his more sincere acknowledgements, returned thence, as fully persuaded and
satisfied, as was possible with her discourse, As soon as ere he had quitted
the Chamber, Tarsus arrived there, to whom she made ample relation of the
success of that accident, which so much startled him that she began to fear he
would not have the resolution to perform what she had already projected.

In this apprehension she courted and solicited him by all the probable
considerations, and especially those of ambition and love, to consent to her
design; and in fine, perceiving he still waver'd, she represented the danger
and last extremity of their affairs so pressingly, that as despair steeles the
most leaden courage, she engaged him in all her undertakings, and least his
blood should cool, or his Spirit turn edge through long delay, she put him
immediately to carry on the Plot, going to her Husband, just when Arthemisa was
come out of the Prison, to justify what she had acted to save her Brothers
Life. And ere she gave her leisure to take any notice, she highly praised her
for the generous amity she had shown to Theramene, esteeming her self unhappy
the severe Laws of honor forbid her the like pity, Arthemisa who could no
longer endure the perfidious hypocrisy of that Woman, broke forth into bitter
reproaches, and had undoubtedly convinced her, if Ctesiphon who was offended
they should Characterize the person he loved, so detestably infamous, had not
imposed silence, and told her, she should be contented to have robbed her
Brother from his just vengeance, without maintaining his crime so insolently:
the obedience she owed her father, made her silent, and Ctesiphon having
withdrawn himself into his Closet, she disdainfully left Erixone, who would
have entertained her, and whom this discourtesie precipitated to that horrid
attempt she studied against Ctesiphon, with the more eagerness and spite.

Of all the ways she had bethought her self for her cruel purpose, the most
secret seemed the most facile Her inclination feeding her with the sad delight
of mischief, she had particularly bent her mind to know many experiments of
poison, and amongst the secrets which you know those of Colchus are very
curious to study; She found one which she thought most fit to employ in this
design, the virtue whereof was to make the person miserably languish upon whom
it was practiced, casting them after some time into a Lethargy past cure. None
could suspect her in the least to have caused that consumption which daily
wasted Ctesiphon, the world attributing his malady to those displeasures and
misfortunes which invaded his Family.

In the mean time the news came, that Theramene was refugiated in Armenia, and
Arthemisa received Letters by an express, who informed her that Artaban was
sending Ambassadors to her Father, either to clear the innocence of his Son,
or to obtain the pardon for his offense if any were. These tidings did somewhat
alleviate the affliction she was in for her Fathers indisposition, who every
day sensibly decayed. Soon after the Armenian Ambassadors Arrived together
with the Prince Tygranes, who would needs accompany them in person the better
to Solicit for Theramenes favor and return, whose eminent virtues had
particularly acquired his Friendship. Had not Ctesiphon been in the extremity
of danger for his life, their coming would absolutely have thrown the wicked
Erixone into despair: that unhappy Father began to regret the absence of his
Son, and blame his own rash have, that had condemned him without any other
evidence then his own passionate anger, and his Wives interest, who knowing
well that if he once returned, her impostures would be unmasqu'd, and laid open
to every eye, was preparing to impede his coming, or prevent it, when the poor
Ctesiphon by his death left her a power and fit opportunity to maintain that
crime, and commit many fresh ones.

Every one bemoaned this loss with sigh's and tears, but Erixone did so far
out-Act a Theatrical dissimulation in her regret and mournings, that even
Arthemisa who perfectly knew her false heart, and had her own Soul filled with
the sharpest grief, could not but be moved with it, and for a while doubted if
it were possible that a woman could show so many signs of deep affliction for
a husband she had betrayed her self so treacherously, and whose impudent deceit
stretched so much further, as to entreat the Prince Tygranes and the
Ambassadors, to hasten Theramene's return withal convenient speed, whom she
most willingly pardoned, that he might come and settle himself in his due
Succession, thereby to ease her of the cares and troubles of Governing the
State, which she had took into her management only to keep things in good order
till his Arrival: that afterward in a more solitary retreat, she might have
full scope sadly to bewail, with becoming Tears and Sorrows, the loss of that
Dear Husband, who during Life, she loved with all the respect and tenderness
that any woman is capable of.

Who ever could believe Treason should lurk under such specious shows; her
Crocodile craft deluded the most prudent and concerned. The Ambassadors
returned better satisfied from her, then they had been by Ctesiphon, and
Tygranes remained charmed with Arthemisa's excelling beauties, to whom he had
already protested the assurance of his Love and Services.

How be it when every thing seemed to be hushed in peace, and all their
troubles in Colchus buried with Ctesiphon, Erixone who continually watched the
issue of her projects, being informed the Prince was coming from Armenia, sent
the choicest of the Country to receive him on the borders, whom Tygranes at her
request, and to oblige Arthemisa accompanied with much State and Magnificence:
But Oh gods what a Reception, what Entertainment was it, what Treason more
black, or detestable, then she now dipped her hands in, could the most cursed
instrument of malice ever have invented? The Young Prince who thought he was
fairly invited to come and take the full possession of his Inheritance, and
that Erixone by a generous and sincere repentance had wiped out her grievous
faults, had already drowned the remembrance of all his troubles in the Sea of
promised hopes to enjoy a more tranquil Life, when the execrable rage which
Erixone and Tarsus had hatched against him, burst forth. He thought of nothing
less, and only studied handsomely to answer the many Testimonies of his Friends
affections, and especially Tygranes. Here, Hippocratides interrupted his
Discourse, and they were all obliged to put off the continuation till another
opportunity, to meet Cyrus whom they saw coming toward them through another
alley, with an action which had the face of much inquietude and anger.



They were not long without knowing the Cause, Cyrus as soon as he came near
them, complained as if Artabase had contributed somewhat toward his
discontent, because Cyaxares had given him that ancient Prince his kinsman as a
pledge of their good intelligence, and faithful correspondence. Artabase said
he to him, Give me an Account of my Uncles intentions, tell me pray what
designs had he when he put the sword into my hands, and what reason at
present, whilst he at ease enjoyes the Sweetness and benefit of that Victory I
purchased, to blast the Laurels of my Triumph, and blemish the beauty of my
Glory by the unhandsome treatements, and ignoble pursutes he practices to
ravish the Honor of Tygranes Sister.

Write to him Artabase, that his passion misguides him, and makes him forget
how I put Birinthea into his hands as a most virtuous Princess, in quality of
an hostage, and not as a slave, and that without infringing the respect I owe
him, I will protect fair virtue, and punctually satisfy those promises I have
sworn, to answer for her fitting entertainment where ever she be. And you,
continued he, generous Prince, addressing his Speech to Tygranes: Suffer me to
join my interests to yours, and leave me the care to preserve your Sisters
Honor, I shall have power enough, since I have so much Justice, and reason to
tame my Uncles unruly passion; Yes said he, Turning again to Artabase, I give
all the Medes that will, free leave to return, I shall not desire to with hold
one here; Conduct them, Artabase, to their Prince, against whose passion I
openly declare my self an Enemy.

Artabase having protested he would never forsake him, complained at the same
time for the ill opinion he had of him, in that he thought him so weak, as to
abandon virtues cause, to embrace vices, as if he wanted judgment to
distinguish what obedience he owed to his Prince to whose will he must be
indispensably subject, only so long as he maintained it reasonable. The Medes
that waited upon Cyrus repeated the very same, and they immediately went to the
Camp, professing by their shouts and acclamations they would never leave him.

In the mean time Artabase who was ignorant of the Cause of Cyrus's anger, and
patiently received his reproaches, was very Joyful to understand it from a
friend who had been in presence when the Messenger that Abracome had sent to
Cyrus from Media related how Cyaxares tired with his vain pursuits, and
Birinthea's constant virtue, was resolved to satisfy his beastly passion what
ever happened, and having already raised a doubtful comment on Abracomes Journey
to Cyrus, the further Intelligence of an old woman, whom he had placed as a
wary spy over all her Actions, had made him absolutely jealous: and being
confirmed in those fears and doubts, he had privately sent her into some
concealed place, which could not yet be discovered.

When Artabase, whose long experience had taught him much prudence, heard this
News, he presently guessed the importance of that quarrel this might beget
betwixt the Uncle and his Nepveu, if the interest of their passions should
foment it, the one having the subject of the injury in his power, and the other
the means to revenge it: therefore he dispatched a Messenger of his own with
him that Cyrus sent back to Cyaxares, to inform him by diverse considerations of
the many disorders that would inevitably follow, the unwarrantable rashness of
his affection, and the unhandsome blemish it would cast upon his Nepveus
victory and reputation.

Cyrus cruelly combated betwixt his love, for Birinthea, and choler at her
imprisonment, so concealed, was almost resolved under a disguise to go and
learn further concerning it, and if the uncertainty to find her had not stopped
him, he had given up the advantage his sword had already gained upon the
Assyrians, to render the homages and service to his Princes which were secretly
vowed. He nevertheless, was balanced a long time on the thoughts of going into
Media, the letter from Birinthea pressing him so earnestly, and believing his
presence would have more influence then Abracomes: but when he was in some
manner fully resolved, the incertainty whether it were best to go secretly to
release her, or openly declare himself her Protector, or rather her lover
suspended him: he feared if he should hide his person with his passion, he
could not become considerable enough to perform any thing: and on the other
hand, he apprehended to make too clear a discovery of his heart to that man,
whose bare suspicions made him already jealous, and if he did resolve on either
of these ways, then a new doubt stepped in, whether he should employ persuasion,
or power for her liberty, though he were confident, amity would never be able
to match his unckles love. In fine, pruning himself with better hopes from
Birintheas prudence, and noble virtue, then any expectation of what he might
perform: he designed to march toward his Enemies, and divert his sadness by
some other actions against the Assyrians (on whom he discharged the effects of
a smart anger) till he might hear some gentler news of his Princess.

To this purpose, he gave order next day for all his men to be in a readiness
to march, and being withdrawn together with the Hircanian Prince, and Gobrias
on whose experience he leaned very much, he inquired of many particulars
concerning the country, that might advantage his design of breaking and
shattering the Assyrian puissance, who seemed to refuse to cope with him ever
since their first defeat, endeavoring without open force or opposition, to
ruin and moulder away his army by idleness, which in a strange Country does
oft-times come to pass for want of action.

The Counsel of these two great men outweigh'd the generosity of his ambition
which blindly prompted him to undertake every thing that seemed to contribute
to his glory, he joined in opinion with them, to tempt the division of their
forces by enticing away a great party of their men who served the Assyrians
only out of fear and constraint. The Hircanian Prince promised to gain the
Sacques and Caducians, if they could find the way to approach but near them,
which was full of difficulty, because they were to cross a great part of Syria:
but Gobrias levelled that hindrance, and assured Cyrus that Gadate who was
principal Governor of most part of the Country they were to pass by, would not
at all molest them, being confident to draw him on their fide, knowing of a
long time that he desired to avenge himself on Vectorez, by whom he was
inhumanely affronted, and this fit opportunity being presented, he nothing
doubted, but that worthy Prince would gladly lay hold of it with as much
courage as ressentment, and that he freely proffered himself to this purpose to
treat with him, but only one obstacle interposed, which would be a main rub in
this negotiation, for which he saw no remedy but was very hazardous. Gadate was
at that instant in Babylon, whose gates were closs shut up and guarded, into
which place it was no less difficult to send letters then men, besides that
Cyrus could not well get into his Countries without passing his Army very near
that great City, which enclosed the whole Assyrian power within her walls whose
numbers swelled far above that of the Persians and Medes

Cyrus who could endure nothing, which opposed his valor, and took all for
affronts that thwarted his designs, made Gobrias know by many urgent
considerations, that what he reckoned as so many blocks in his way to conquer,
were but steps which would the sooner raise him to his noble ends, the
Assyrians having locked themselves within the bull-warks of that City, only
out of principles of fear, and this would but augment it doubly, if he drew up
so near them; that their numbers were rather an argument to despise and
slight, then apprehend a danger from thence, because as amongst generous
soldiers, the more their are of them, the greater is their confidence and
courage, so likewise amongst degenerate Cowards, their multitudes does but
augment their dread and terror, and he doubted not but their present fright,
would at his presence turn to a general confusion, when they beheld him before
their gates, circled with that victorious Army that had already defeated them,
when they were in the height of confidence and pride, and far more numerous, it
being likely that the sick, and wounded soldiers, and such as yet wept the
loss of their dear friends in the last battle, made up a greater number in
Babylon, then those that were in a fit condition to make any considerable
salley upon them at that time, whereby to hinder the present design and
expedition.

The End of the Second Book.
Birinthea The Third Book.
THe next morning at the first birth of day he led his Army directly toward
the province of Babylon, and arrived at the confines thereof, after four days
march, and there having reserved those whom he judged to be the choicest, and
most faithful of his troops to remain with himself, he commanded the rest to
ravage and scour the Country, and not give quarter to any that were found in
arm's The spoil which these plunderers brought in was very considerable, and
after the Priests had made choice of what they esteemed most precious for their
gods, and that he had distributed somewhat to the soldiers, he bestowed the
remainder, with the consent, and in the name of the Army, freely upon Gobrias,
in retaliation of that noble treatment they had all received at his hands. He
afterward ranged his Army in Battalia, which he caused to march within sight
of that proud City, toward which he dispatched a trumpetter with Gobrias; who
being approached near the walls, told an Officer whom the sentinel had
advertised, that he came on the behalf of Cyrus to challenge Vectorez to a
single combat, or if he desired rather to have a general one, the Persians and
Medes would be ready to meet him in the next plain. This generous defy did not
so much gall the Assyrian King, as the dispite of having it brought by a man
that was borne his Subject, and to whom he was so inveterate an Enemy. He
returned him answer by the advice of his chief Counselors, whom he
straightway-assembled for this purpose, that concerning the proposition of a
Combat, he was so surprised, that he found himself not yet disposed either to
receive, or give it, till a month after, at which time he promised to satisfy
Cyrus his desire, and that for his own particular, the most sensible
displeasure he felt was to have let Gobrias survive one moment after Melzune.

Cyrus having heard this answer, thought that his honor obliged him to give
the Assyrians the leisure to be able to make his Victory the more complete and
glorious by a more vigorous resistance, and therefore drew off his Army: but
not to let them rust in idleness, he took a resolution to go into Gadates
Countries, thereby to oblige him to come out and defend them, and by this means
find some opportunity to treat with him. Gadate who was within Babylon, had no
sooner intelligence of the Enemies march, but he straight went forth with those
forces which he commanded, to oppose Cyrus; which Gobrias having immediately
understood by his scouts, he sent him a Gentleman of a tried fidelity, who
making a show of plundring the Country with some few troopers, was willingly
taken by the Assyrians, who conducted him into the presence of Gadate, by whom
he was known to belong to Gobrias whose intimate friend he was, and having
received him very civilly, he inquired of his Masters health and affairs, upon
which the Gentleman taking an occasion to speak with him in private, presented
him a letter of Credence from Gobrias, and assured him by word of mouth of the
protection which Cyrus proffered him against Vectorez if he would quit his
party, as he had abundant reason to do. This proposition presently awakened
the desires Gadate had to revenge himself of that Tyrant, and therefore without
much consultation, he instantly resolved to send the Gentleman back secretly,
to certify Cyrus that he would suddenly come in to him: but not to give my body
cause to suspect their private intelligence, he craved only the time to dispose
of those things which might prove obstacles to his design, and in the interim
it appeared very requisite to him that Cyrus should draw near, and make as if
he would besiedge a place which he named, that so getting into it under a
color of relieving it, he might by some small salies dispute the delivering of
the place, till such time as he should find occasion to surrender it handsomely
into his possession: as he very plausibly did after he had made a capitulation
that was honorable, feigning that he yielded out of necessity of provisions, to
which they had reduced him. At his leaving of this City, he went to wait on
Cyrus, before whom he prostrated himself according to the custom of that
Nation with the most profound adorations.

If the respect wherewith Gadate saluted Cyrus were extraordinary, the civility
that was returned him was no less; he expres'd so much affability and honor by
his caresses, that Gadate was fully satisfied and comforted in finding so
generous a Protector against the Tyrant Vectorez.

Cyrus after he had a while entertained him, was desirous to know the cause
which could excuse that infidelity and rebellion against a Prince, whom nature
and his birth had made to be his Sovereign. Gadate would have made the relation
to him: but Cyrus entreated him to repose himself in a Tent, prepared for him
after the toiles of his siege, whilst he would hear the story from those of
his servants, who best knew the secrets of it. So Gadate taking his leave to
retire, commanded his Esquire to rehearse all the particulars, who approaching
near Cyrus, began in this manner.

The History of Gadate and Chryseide.
MY Master upon less grounds then now he has, might very justly have dispensed
with the Obedience he owes Victorez, and you will quickly find, that he is too
generous to have forsaken that party, if that Tyrant had not constrained him by
such cruelty as is above all example, in not only denying his Subjects the
Liberty of innocent actions: but even the most becoming and Ligitimate desires
as will appear by the following discourse.

You may have remarked, that besides the advantages of his Birth and Condition,
there are other very considerable qualities in my Masters person, which Nature
has with a liberal hand bestowed upon him, which made him esteemed amongst all
the Grandees in the Assyrian Court. He was especially respected of all the
Ladies in General: but amongst those whose affection he had particularly
acquired, she who was the most passionately in Love with him, was also the most
unhappy. She was the Widow of a great Lord, who had lived but five or six
months with her: but Young, and Handsome if ever any were. The King Affected
her above all the Ladies of the Court, and Chryseide, so was she named, who was
prepossess'ed with the affection she had toward Gadate, generously refused
that which so many others eagerly sought to obtain with all the Arts they could.

Vectorez who was as much concerned for her disdain as her beauty, first sought
all the means imaginable to make her read and understand his passion: he
employed a thousand grateful passtimes to charm that god, who has nothing of
Childishness in him but his stature, and who in his littleness may justly vaunt
he is the great Father, and Universal cause of all things. But finding her
entertainment very cold, and at a distance, and having an opinion, that he
should rather be courted then denied, he judged that what opposed his
contentment, must needs be the consideration of some rival, who had taken
possession of her heart and fancy. These thoughts prompted him to ordain spies
to uncover that fair Ladies Actions: but what vigilance or care so ere they
used, they could not lay hold of the least conjecture of her Love; she having
ever concealed it with great discretion, believing it was not befitting the
Reputation of a Woman, to anticipate Gadate by a too evident sign, or any
Declaration that might leave the Print of her shame written in the blushes of
her Cheeks.

The King having lost a great deal of time without any hope of success to his
content that way, imagined that to make her sensible of the worth of his esteem
for her, he must feign it lost as toward her, and bestow it upon one of her
Neeces, whose Name was Prinea, with whom she entertained a strickt League of
Amity: that being moved with envy, and the disdain he should testify toward
her, she might ressent the loss of his Affection, and endeavor to redeem his
favor again. This Plot might perhaps have taken effect had it been practiced
toward any other but Chryseide, because that fair Sex, to whom the highest
respect is due, are the less able to suffer disdain, by how much they challenge
respect as a particular Tribute due to them. But it wrought no change in her,
only in stead of receiving a sensible displeasure for having lost that Noble
prey out of her toils and chains, she manifested how much his love was
troublesome, and importunate to her that could by no means correspond in the
same terms with him again, though he were a person to whom she owed the
greatest respect and reverence of any in the World.

The success of this stratagem in fine betrayed the intention of Vectorez, and
instead of subduing the Will and Affections of Chryseide to him by this craft,
he engaged Prinea by those false Testimonies of love he acted to a most violent
passion for him, and this Bizarre event caused infinite disorder and trouble to
him, for that his dissimulation had produced a real love in the one, and his
real love had not been powerful enough to gain a civil Correspondency from the
other. This made him despair, the other was importunate and clamorous, and that
which added most to his trouble was to have raised such an Enemy against her,
he so dearly loved. Prinea knowing what a bar the remembrance of Chryseide was
to her affection, beheld her as a rival who disputed her the Crown and Scepter:
So that she perpetually watched to hinder Victorez from Meeting and Conferring
with her; who had not so well dissembled, but some flames of that Love he
cherished, for Chryseide appeared through his false masque: Insomuch that the
unadvised Prince seemed in this Act to become his own cruel Executioner:
himself having twisted that fatal Cord of his own misfortune which even
strangled his greatest hopes; for had not he feined Love to Prinea, she never
had opposed or struggled so much against his desires and content. He was many
times in the mind to discover his mind, end cast himself at Chryseides feet to
implore her pardon: but knowing her to be extreme haughty, and Nobly Generous,
the fear to reveal those poor unhandsome Arts he had practiced to vanquish her,
which in all probability would but increase her aversion, hindered him for some
time: But as his shame did moderate and curb his impatience, so his Love
pressed and spurred him with a most strange violence. And he in fine was
constrained to declare himself openly; but not having so much resolution as to
present himself before her, whom he had seemingly slighted, he rather chose to
write a letter, in these following expressions.

Victorez to Chryseide.
Beauteous Chryfeide, I do not ask your pardon, before I ask your Punishment
for a fault, which the excess of my Love might nevertheless excuse, since that
alone is guilty: acknowledge it Chryfeide, you having given it Birth, and if
the disguise I have made use of to cover it, have wronged your merit; do you
ordain the punishment and satisfastion, being my Sovereign, and I shall have
this one advantage at least, that you will be obliged to recompense the
perseverance, after you have chastized the Crime. Let not that which I feined
toward Prinea, offend you Chryseide, those false appearances betrayed the
Sentiments of my Soul, and I have already suffered enough in the constraint I
was engaged to, rendering her the Testimonies of an Affection which never were
truly addressed to any but your self: but if you are not yet satisfied with my
Repentance; I will present my self in person before you, my Dear Princess, to
receive from your fair Mouth the Punishment, you shall vouchsafe to pronounce,
and hope by that Submission you shall find, that I am the most real, and most
affectionate of all your slaves.

Vectorez.


If Chryseide received this Letter with a great deal of wonder, not imagining
the King thought now in the least of Love to her, she read it with no less
displeasure, finding her self again persecuted by one, from whose importunate
suite she blessed her late hoped delivery. She sent him word, That it seemed he
relied very strongly upon her discretion, since he did not fear least she
might, Publish that Embassy to Prinea, who alone received offense by his
dissimulation: if it were true he had fein'd Love to a person, whose Beauty
merited a more true passion, and whose ambition would hardly brook so great an
affront; that for her part she would never be wanting in her devoir, which was
ever to bear a greater respect and veneration, then Love toward her Sovereign
Prince.

This Answer brought the amorous Vectorez into the opinion which flattered his
passion, he now thought Chryseide had been more civil then cruel, and that
having perceived the difference there is between the receiving the adorations
or disdain of her Sovereign, she had acknowledged her error by that word of
respect, which ought to be construed in the mouth of a Subject, and a woman for
an expression of Love, which the mear modesty of that sex forbids them to
express more plainly. He could give himself no repose or respit till he waited
on her, to be confirmed in his flattering opinion: but the presence of
Chryseide which he guessed so favorable to his interpretation, quickly
undeceived him. Not that she was wanting in what she had promised: for at his
reception, she treated him as a King: but as soon as he laid by that Magistick
Garb to assume the Person of a Lover, she expressed all that froideur and
coins, which is practiced ordinarily by such as have not the least sentiment
or spark of affection. Vectorez was most sensibly netled at this entertainment;
and perceiving all his submissions and Cajolleries were fruitless, he proceeded
to Menaces; and told her at parting, that since he was better treated when he
acted as King toward her, he would henceforth never change that quality, that
so he might make use of the power that pre-eminence gave him, to obtain that
which she refused so proudly both to his Prayers, and submissions.

These threats imprinted so much fear in Chryseide's heart, who was acquainted
with Vectorez violent Nature if provoked, that she decreed absolutely to seek
all possible means whereby she might decently make known her inclination to
Gadate: that so obliging him by affection to join to her interests, she might
be the more able to resist all that Vectorez could endeavor and design against
her repose and honor. Gadate who had all the Sentiments of a heart truly
generous, quickly perceiving by the looks Chryseide secretly levelled at him to
invade his liberty, what it was she desired from him, would not dispute the
Conquest much; but having seriously considered the Merits and Virtue of that
amiable Woman: bestowed all his affections on her as a person whom he was bound
to Love and Honor entirely.

On the other hand Prinea, whose envious jealousy made her continually watch
and study her ruin, that seemed to rob her of Vectorez heart, whose false-hood
since he forsook her, had sensibly affronted her Reputation, was the first that
discovered the affection which these two Lovers would yet have clouded from the
eye of the World, till such time as they had settled their affairs in such a
posture as to out-bid all fear and opposition when it were Published. One day
whilst she was complaining to the King of that Infidelity, she pretended he had
committed against her, and strove to lure him back to her desires again. She
showed him how hood-winkt his passions were to despise her that cherished him
so tenderly, and to give his respect and cast away his love upon an ungrateful
Woman who disregarded him, and from whom it was fruitless to expect any return
of affection, because she had already made a gift of it to Gadate, who also
loved her most passionately again.

This Intelligence was the Fire, and Stubble, and bellows which wholly inflamed
the Rage and Jealousy that had so long been smoothering in the Passionate
Kings bosom, and which his late visit to Chryseide had already begun to stir
and awaken; he entreated Prinea to be the Minister, as having a principal
interest, to ruin and take away that obstacle to her felicity. And he engaged
that provided she would give him more certainty of this intrigue, that he would
acknowledge her affection by a just retaliation of his own, and the ressentment
of the Injury he would cast upon that ungrateful Creature that had slighted
him. Vectorez might have sought long enough in vain amongst all those Friends,
in whom he most confided, before he could have met with a person more careful
and exact to perform this Commission. She immediately learnt by one of Gadate's
Servants whom she had bribed with money, the ordinary time when he every day
secretly left his House, and she was informed by a Chambermaid belonging to
Chryseide, her acquaintance of old, that just at that hour Gadate visited and
waited on Chryseide in a private place, where they had the liberty of a free
entertainment. This led her afterward to the knowledge of the party, to whom
they both confided the secrets which they wrote of their affection, and by whom
they sent the paper Messages of their appointments, and as She narrowly watched
his goings and comings betwixt these lovers by her many trusty spies: one day
as she returned from Chryseide, whither Gadate had dispatched him: She caused
him to be ceazed on by some unknown persons, who having searched his pockets,
took away a note, by which she entreated him to come to one of her Aunts, where
she would be infallibly that evening to meet him.

Vectorez whose Jealousy had rendered him a mortal Enemy to Gadate, had no
sooner knowledge of their Randez-vows, but he resolved to way-lay him himself,
with some of his Confidents in a place, which he must necessarily pass, that by
one blow he might rid himself of the object of Chryseide's love, and his own
vengeance by depriving him of life. He went very early to the place appointed,
in a disguise; and sent some unknown persons, who were very well acquainted
with Gadates face, to spy, when he entered, and take notice of his habit and
person: for fear least at his return they should fasten upon some other by
mistake. These Scouts saw Chryseide go in and several other people, without
perceiving Gadate, whom one of his kindred had carried thither in her Coach,
dressed in a woman's habit; they were yet expecting his coming, when Vectorez
excited by his impatient jealousy went to them; and understanding that they
had not seen his Rival yet come by, he fixed his resolve to steal away
Chryseide, or rather ravish her thence by force, if Gadate escaped his hands.
During these thoughts and deliberations, he staid till all the company came
forth of that house; and perceiving he could not discover him, against whose
life the Plot was framed, when Chryseide's Coach had advanced some distance
from him, he presently made after and assaulted it. The Cries and Moans of
those within the Coach, was all their defense, and though most times those
feeble Succors are altogether ineffectual: yet now they were so powerful and
successful as to preserve them, by alarming Gadate who was not very far of.
That Lover presently flew with speed at his Ladies first doleful Summons, and
prompted with the interest of that love, he had in her whom they would ravish
from him, he fell upon one of those that seconded the Kings violence, and
having wrung the Sword out of his hand, he ran directly to the throng that had
attaqu'd them, who not expecting from one that appeared to be a Woman, any
other resistance but noise and clamours were unawares disordered and amazed at
his furious blows.

There Love on either part exercised its rage and fury. The King who had the
greatest interest in this action, did first oppose Gadate: but wanting the
assistance of Justice in this quarrel, he began to give way to his rivals fury,
whose vigerous arm he had already felt: when those that accompanied him,
leaving Chryseide to save Vectorez, gave her opportunity to escape from them,
and took away all means from Gadate to complete his full revenge. Their number
in fine, ore'whelm'd him, and after a brave resistance equal, both to his love
and valor, whereby he had laid three at his feet, himself sunk down pierced
with wounds amidst his Enemies, Vectorez was in so grand a confusion for this
defeat, and so enfeebled by those wounds he had received, that not remembering
or minding to discover who this was, he left him in the Street, commanding them
to convey away his men, and was himself presently carried to his Palace, no
less covered with blood then shame; and to hide it from all knowledge, he
commanded his Physicians and Chyrurgeons, to give for a pretense that he was
not seen abroad, that 'twas some other indisposition which afflicted him, and
forbad those who had assisted him therein, ever to whisper the least word of it
to any other. You may guess with what disquiet he passed the rest of the night,
his anger gave him less repose then his wounds, and his jealousy quickly
suggested to his thoughts, that the tutelary Demon which had robbed him of his
Chryseide, must assuredly be Gadate: who the better to hide his amors,
disguised himself under the feined shape of a Woman.

Whilst he was wracked with these suspicions Chryseide, who notwithstanding her
danger and fright could not go far from him, but through fear of his disaster
had concealed her self at the corner of the street, to see the event of the
combat returned as soon as the noise was over to seek for him. The night was not
so dark, but that at some short intervals the wind sweeping the clouds with
some impetuosity left the face of Heaven so clear and starry, that by their
charitable light, this unhappy lover soon found what she sought, for with so
much fear and grief, and which nevertheless she expected, as now appeared too
true. He lay stretched upon the pavement closs by a door toward which he had
trail'd himself, but the loss of his blood and strength stopped him before he
arrived there.

The cries which this woeful spectacle made her at first direct toward heaven,
which she with melting eyes petitioned for justice against the cruel
assassins, were loud enough to be heard in the loftiest star Chamber of the
gods above, who reserved the vengeance, surely, to be performed by the hands of
Cyrus. Her sobs interrupted those first clamours, and letting fall her looks
upon the object of her misery, after she had some moments fixed them there, she
softly bowed her head upon him, calling him with an accent compounded of love
and sorrow both together, Gadata, Gadate, said she, my dearest life: and
raising her self up a little, pursued she or rather my dearer death, since thou
reply nothing, thou art no longer to be counted amongst the living; but if
it be true that thou have loved me, can thy fair soul be gone and leave mine
here? and wherefore must I live since I have lost him who alone inspired me,
where is thy soul fled, my Gadate, can it be that which makes me live still:
here take it then again, said she Kissing his lips affectionately, I breath it
back into thee with all my heart.

She felt a little breath remaining in him, which the faint motion of his heart
attested, which made her stoop to mark with more attention, whether it were
truly some small remainder of life yet in him, or the last knell of her
expiring lover: but finding it continued still apparently, I hear thee, said
she, my dear soul, thou answerest me: but is it to take thy last adieu, or to
call me to follow thee? saying this, she softly laid her trembling hand upon
his heart, and finding it beat and throb a little; let us not die my Dear
Gadata, since I yet feel the motions of our soul within thy bosom: live for
my sake, unless you will have me straightway die for yours. And having said this,
she perceived her hand was bathed in blood: wherewith being again afrighted,
she sought for that wound whence so much blood did issue.

But oh strange! she seemed to show, more trouble for this same wound, then she
had done whilst she believed him dead, and tearing the linen she had on her
head, she made a shift to stop the blood from flowing, whilst with her tears
that washed and bathed his face, she strove to call him from his swoun'd to
life again: but finding her endeavors all in vain, she sent her careful looks
abroad to find some other assistance: when instantly a man presenting himself,
told her, that being moved with her doleful cries, he came to lend her all the
service he was able, and asking the cause of that funestuous accident? she
briefly related the truth of that sad story, and then beseeched him, by all
that was most dear to him on earth, to help her carry her dear Gadate
instantly to some near place, who without speedy remedy would breath his last.
The man whom she believed heaven it self had sent to her assistance professing
solemnly he shared in her griefs, stooped down as 'twere to help her take him
up, when suddenly the barbarous vilain, instead of performing that charitable
office, unsheathed a dagger and endeavored to plunge it into Gadates heart.

The unhappy blow was so much the more cruel to Chryseide, because it deluded
the hopes she had joyfully conceived of his timely assistance: yet she
immediately flew at him, and being transported with a kind of fury, cried
aloud, Traitor, thou have mistaken, if thou would murder Gadate, strike my
breast for here his soul is housed, and he does live in me; but thou have now
killed only me infernal Monster, in his person. Love had lent so much strength
to Chryseide, and this just reproach struck so much terror into that base
butchers heart, that he had force enough to stay him, though he mainly
struggled to escape out of her hands, till those that had bafore fled from the
danger, sent some armed men thither to rescue her, who finding her striving
with this assassin, soon ended that unequal combat, by killing her Enemy. His
death contributed very much to Gadates life; Chryseide was no sooner delivered
from that Traitor, but she hastily ran to him, and perceiving that he lived
yet, and that the last wound he received was not so dangerous as her fears had
made her doubt, finding her self too weak, to carry that dear burden alone,
which nevertheless she eagerly coveted to do: she admitted of their assistance
that were present to bear him thence: till the coach she had sent for, met
them; in which they laid him, reposing his head upon her panting breast. Whilst
they were thus going, as if Gadate had been in a condition to answer her: she
entertained him, with what her love, sometimes trembling for fear, and
othertimes flattering with hope, did suggest to her thoughts; and being at last
arrived at his own dwelling, she would not leave him till the Chirurgians had
given her a confident assurance of his recovery, and that himself having
happily recovered his spirits and knowledge again, earnestly conjured her to
go and repose her self.

In the interim, the King full of impatience that he saw no return of the party
he had sent to dispatch the poor Gadate if he were yet alive, secretly
commanded another to go and make a discovery what had passed, who brought him
word how he found him dead on the pavement. What ever plaints and moanes the
smart of his wounds tore from his mouth and breast, his jealousy and passion
troubled him more when he understood that he whose valor had carried the prize
of Chryseide from his weaker arm, and whom he guessed assuredly to be Gadate,
had yet escaped. what Demon, cried he; for there can be no men so bold and
temerary, has fetched away my Enemy, and traversing my intentions, has slain
my faithful Ministers? Gods, do you create Kings to make them so unhappy, and
do you grant them so much power, to have so little use, and command of it,
when they have need to employ it. Take back the Crown which you have placed on
my head, I will not hold the Scepter: if that be the bar which separates me
from Chryseides love, the advantage of swaying it; bringing the more confusion,
by the shame for not being puissant enough to subdue the spirit of a woman, to
the same compliance which she yields to one that is but my subject. How unjust
you are, all the power you give me, is it but only to commit murders and
assassinations? and the absolute dominion I have over the lives of men, might
it not better have been limited only, to reach the wills of those that are my
vassals? Or had you but seconded that violence I undertook by the authority I
hold from heaven, which is to have no other law but my own will; I should
acquiesce in your decrees: but to deride and better scoff at me, or rather in
truth, to bring contempt and scorn upon your selves, since I am your own Image
here beneath, you bring a woman in the lists whom I cannot overcome, and if you
send a man in for her second, he too must be disguised under the habit of that
timorous sex. But no, I wrongfully complain of you; the irregularity of my
passion does abuse me; let us make open trial of that Sovereignty is given us,
that, that alone can be effectual: since soothings and deceits have proved
vain; let Chryseide be instantly sent for, and what resistance soere she make,
let her be brought whether she condescend or not. Some of those that were
present in his Chamber, were already putting themselves in a posture to obey
him, whom he again stopped by these words: Stay, said he, I do not think on
what I undertake: if there were only Chryseide with Gadate to resist me, my
passion might be quickly satisfied: but I have love to conquer; nor have I any
cause at all of shame, if the highest gods having bowed to his yoke, I also
yield to his inevitable doom. However let us try to traverse his intents in all
that can be possible, and have no more respect to that divinity at all that
uses so much cruelty.

His Physicians and Chyrurgians perceiving him much heated with these bosom
contests, beseeched him to calm his thoughts a little, least it should cause
some inflammation in his wounds, which otherwise were out of the reach of death
and danger. He could hardly contain himself: but reflecting afterward upon the
design he had proposed to hide his passion, he quarreled with his own rash
tongue, for having proclaimed so much, and strictly enjoined those that
overheard-him, never to impart those secrets.

They all observed this command so religiously, that none could imagine for
what reason Vectorez would not be seen, nor suspect him to have consorted in
the rape of Chryseide, and the foul attempt against Gadates life. What ever
informations they could make were lost labors; and it would be locked up in
silent secresy still, if she who it rather seemed had most cause to cover it
since she had managed all the bloody tragedy, had not revealed it first. Prinea
having heard no news from the King, who had through neglect wholly forgotten
her, but only as an instrument that had caused his shame and unhappiness, and
having certain intelligence that Vectorez had a full intent to have stolen
away Chryseide, was even pined to death with grief when she remembered that her
self had procured that happy occasion, as she judged it, for her rival; and
beginning to shake off the fond opinion of the Kings affection to her, she
thought it would be the more complete revenge for his disdain, and falsehood,
by rendering him the more hateful to her whose love he hunted for through so
much trouble and danger. And that to this purpose it would be best to let
Chryseide and Gadate be acquainted that 'twas Vectorez who had attempted the
rape of the one, and murder of the other; and at the first visit she made her
cousin, she revealed the whole secret to her.

Though Chryseide were struck with amazement, yet she was easily induced to
believe it, because she was no stranger to the Kings violence and passion; and
knowing it was now too late to conceal her affection to Gadate, and his
reciprocally to her again, she gave him immediate notice thereof. Gadate who
was extremely generous, could hardly believe the design of so black a deed
could be hatched in the mind of such a man, who was borne a Prince, and to whom
the gods had given so much Authority, only that he might do justice to his
subjects. The notice however they had taken of the villain that was last
killed, who was well known to be one of the Kings Officers, before they had
carried him thence, was a strong argument of this truth, besides many other
particularities which she told him, to which he had not till then lent any
observation, or belief.

Vectorez notwithstanding to take away all suspicion, and wipe out all those
impressions that Chryseide might stamp in his mind, sent to visit him, and let
him know, that if he had not been constrained to confine himself to his
Chamber, by reason of a slight indisposition, which hindered him from going
abroad, he would have come in person to witness his sorrow for that accident,
entreating him only to be careful of his recovery, whilst himself would take
care to seek out his Enemies, to make an exemplary Justice by which it should
appear that they had mortally offended him in his person.

To combat these malicious impostures, Chryseide was forced to discover the
secret of the Kings passion, toward her, to Gadate in that excess which he as
yet had not imagined, and the testimony and Seals his letter contained which
she imparted to him, and what Prinea had related as a farther proof in this
point.

The certain knowledge of such a puissant rival began to disquiet his soul, and
would have wholly discomposed his mind, if that fair Creature who soon read it
by the alterations in his face, had not quickly dispel'd the tempest which his
jealousy was gathering, by these Words; Fear not Gadate, you have no cause to
fear, I know what the sadness of your looks express, but let not the highest
proofs of his love I have revealed, raise any doubts. If this puissant rival
whom you dread, have found no greater obstacle to his love then the
dispositions I had toward you, when by his respects and adorations he
endeavored to alure my soul to himself: What can you apprehend now since he
has affronted and wronged me so basely, and that the inclination I had for your
dear self is converted into love: but what love Gadate, alas shall I dare name
it, you know it enough already, and the last evidence I have given you cannot
but place your belief above all doubts, if there were room for any. What
greater proofs can you demand, Speak Gadate, must I die to gain your full
belief: Ah, what was there wanting, tell me prithee, did I not seek for death,
when I durst cope with him that came to quench that small remaining spark of
life in the streams of your own blood.

I know indeed, replied Gadate, that I have nothing to fear, since you forbid
it, But, Madam, I have neither Crown, nor Scepter to reward your affection, nor
with my person can you espouse any thing, but the hatred of a King, who now can
make you a worthy Queen. The regret that you should loose those advantages in
consideration of me, and that I am not able to recompense that loss, but by the
Grandeur of an affection, which truly has no parallel (but which nevertheless
can procure you nothing else suitable to it) is that which casts me into so
much trouble. That Chryseide should refuse Uectorez, to embrace Gadate, put by
a King, to entertain a Subject; is a Prodigy of grace and goodness which should
surpass, the hopes of ambition it self, notwithstanding my Dear Chryseide,
these are not only things which I may fondly hope for; but such as your
assurance crowns me with* Most rare effect of love, but yet produced by a
cause more rare: Adorable Chryseide, at least permit me as an earnest of my
affection, to avenge the base attempt of that ignoble King, you have less
reason to endure the affront he would have acted, then to refuse the Crown he
prostrates at your feet by this means you shall no longer have that loathsome
object of your batred in your Eye, nor I have further cause of any
apprehension. Chryseide would not suffer him to go on, but absoluttly forbad
him to express any ressentment toward the King, who seemed to repent his
crime, since he confessed his shame by hiding it. They afterward vowed an
eternal love, to which they called the gods for witness, and resolved to secure
their felicity at soonest by a speedy marriage.

At the same time that they propounded to root and establish their content,
Vectorez studied to undermine it. As soon as he was cured of his wounds, he
went to visit Gadate, and repeated over to him personally what he had formerly
sent him word off. The Kings sanity troubled these lovers happiness, Chryseide
seldom saw Gadate; and the fear least Vectorez should renew his love together
with his inseparable jealousy, made her not visit him, but with much caution
and secrecy, till he was able to go abroad, and visit her himself, without
openly declaring himself her lover.

Vectorez being faithfuly advertised of these enterviews, became so jealous,
that not able to suffer another to enjoy that fullness of happy repose, which he
could by no means taste, he resolved to separate these two lovers, before they
could have the blessed opportunity to tie themselves closer by the indissoluble
and holy knot of marriage which he apprehended above all things, and which he
nevertheless foresaw would be inevitable, unless he hastily cast in some
impediment to obstruct it. As he was forecasting this ugly design, a fit
occasion presented it self to him to put in execution; the inhabitants of a
remote Province did insolently raise a mutiny; and it being necessary to elect
some person of eminency and Authority, as well as of ability and courage, to
quell these seditious spirits and range, them to their just Devoir, his
jealousy easily suggested him instantly to impose this Commission on Gadate,
thereby to snatch him away and part him from Chryseide. He propounded it to his
Council, who soon approved his choice, as the fittest person of his Court; and
not considering the particular interests that lead him to it, immediately
dispatched all the orders required toward this expedition.

This business did indeed call for a diligent disposing of affairs: but yet the
jealous impatiency that nettled Vectorez made him precipitate that departure
the more suddenly; so that his rival had scarcely time, to set his own
domestic business in order, because the King feigned to have received fresh
intelligence, that without a very quick remedy, that fire of rebellion which
kindled more and more, might perhaps suddenly inflame his neighboring
Provinces.

Gadate plainly perceived what posted him from Babylon, and that his dear,
Dear Chryseide who made him part with so much trouble and unwillingness, was
the sole cause; yet he was forced to yield to Sovereign command, and obey the
Kings absolute power without delay, least he should utterly ruin his hopes and
future fortunes.

The evening before his departure, he waited on his Chryseide: where though
these two faithful friends had very much to say to each other, yet were they so
overwhelmed with grief, that for a long time, they could demand no other
expressions but mournful sighs and tears: but when they perceived the fatal
moment of their separation approached, Gadate in fine broke silence with these
words. We must part, fair Chryseide; it is heavens decree, as well as the Kings
will: but what must we expect in so long and tedious an absence, if we find so
much trouble only to say adieu? A love replied Chryseide, which shall never
untye the union of our souls, whatever fortune plot or contrive against us;
love me still Gadate, but as I shall, and do, love you; and we shall thus
triumph over all opposition, and make them know, our constancy and promised
Faith, is firmer rooted and founded, then their obstinate and unhandsome malice.

That I should love you for ever reparted Gadate, is to command me a thing from
which I cannot possibly decline, since no object can ever possibly be so lovely
as Chryseide, as nothing can be so pleasing and charming as the sweet, and, too
sorrowful remembrance of your presence. Gods, who know future events, and can
read all our actions, 'ere we conceive them, or write them in our intentions,
strike me with thunder immediately, rather then suffer me to be false to her:
but no you shall never chastise me for that crime, what power soere you have
over us, for since you cannot shape a beauty more glorious, nor furnish a soul
with more perfection, she shall be eternally the only object of my affection
and veneration. Yet I must leave you dearest Chryseide; to please the jealous
humor of a rival who tears me from you, rather then for that interest of
State which is pretended, I must be my own Enemy by this self banishment, to
humor him, and under the pretense of serving my King and Country abandon you,
to the danger of a Tyrant. But let it be so, I must away, and I leave all to
your undaunted constancy; which I dare rely upon, though I foresee what trials
there will be to undermine and shake it; and remember, best of Ladies, that
having promised me your entire love, if you now faulter in your faithful
resolve, you stain your own white soul, and spot that innocence that yet is
cleerer then the unsoiled Lilly. But you will never sin so highly against your
own celebrated virtue; is it not true Madam? the very thoughts I have dressed
in these words, a^e therefore criminal; and I go from you with the
consolation, and assurance, that whatsoever distance parts our bodies, yet our
souls will ever dwell together, and you continue mine, as inseparably, and as
long as I am yours; that to say to all Eternity, replied she, and more, said
Gadate, if it were possible.

A deep and violent sigh on either side, ended this sad discourse; and they had
no more power of speech left after it, but only to give a Melancholy farewell
at the last. Gadate at parting left her his picture, and in a noble Exchange
was enriched with hers. If the trouble, and displeasure of this cruel
separation, disturbed them of that repose, which sleep might otherwise have
afforded them: the joy that flowd in Vectorez mind, did the same to him. The
pleasing thought of having procured their parting kept him still waking; and
the impatience of seeing him, though night were almost near its end, so
wracked him, that he accused the Sun of sloth and laziness, for not driving
away the clouds of darkness sooner and appearing in that Horizon, to usher in
the longed for morning, that should absent his rival.

Hardly was the night dismissed, but he sent Gadate word he must consult with
him; not that he had any new business; but only he thereby meant to rob him of
the opportunity of being with Chryseide; and when he was come, he entertained
him with a thousand dissembled caresses and civilities: even till the hour of
his departure, and then would see him mounted and conducted out of the Palace
Gates, after which he immediately desired an Assembly of all the Court Ladies,
where Chryseide could not but appear.

What disorder and torments, good heaven, did she not suffer, when she beheld
him near, that had absented her choicest friend so far from her? however she
dissembled the best she could, not to irritate him, from whom she had already
received such testimony of anger and Tyranny, and of whom she feared worse: But
to shun his importunities for the time to come, she resolved to banish her self
from the City, and entreated one of her kindred to pity her misfortunes, and
by carrying her into a remote dwelling, where her husband was in the Country to
free her from one part of those troubles that fit so heavy on her spirit.
Vectorez, who was informed of her intent immediately summoned that ladies
husband to the Court; and having taken away the pretense of Chryseides journey,
detained her in Babylon; and to engage her the more to that abode, he bestowd
an office at Court on the Uncle she sojourned with, which tied and confined
her consequently within his own walls. But finding his most sedulous endeavors
could gain him no advantage upon her inflexible Spirit, and that whatever art
he used to conquer her, she countermined and made shift to defeat his
expectations, he was fired with rage and anger; and having found out that these
two lovers kept a diligent correspondency by paper Embassies, he bethought
himself of a Stratagem, to breed a disaffection in their hearts, by the same
means that they made use of to confirm and cherish the affection they had so
solemnly vowed each other. To this effect he sought to corrupt the fidelity of
of a woman to whom Chryseide and Gadate confided the sweet commerce of their
amors; and having gained her by the brightness of that glorious mettle, which
corrupts the integrity of most people, she delivered up those letters which
they interchangeably sent to one another, in whose innocent lines, he quickly
read the resolution which Chryseide had taken to fly to my Master, for
Sanctuary, against his Persecutions, and enjoy that rest in his bosom, she did
in vain expect from the others restless importunity. He caused Gadates hand to
be exactly counterfeited in a Letter, wherein he entreated her not to spur on
her design with so much have, and this he closed up with a Seal of theirs,
left in their unworthy She-Secretari's hands, to make this false Coin pass the
better by that current stamp. It need not beget your wonder, that Chryseide did
not discover this forgery, Lovers read over their welcome Letters with too much
have and passionate interest to examine so nicely; She, in fine, returned him
Answer, that She waited for his appointment with an impatience, great as her
Love.

And to delude Gadate, as they had Chryseide: he caused her writing to be
perfectly well imitated, and informing him, that being necessarily detained at
Court for somewhat, that much concerned their happiness: she beseeched him to
let her defer her Journey yet a while, that so she might contrive to do it
afterward with the more safety, and less trouble. Thus was the fair intentions
of these two lovers betrayed and frustrated, with as much malice as dexterity;
and though Vectorez had more of anger and rage, then love in the passion he
cherished for Chryseide, yet could he not endure she should have the least
inclination for any else. And to make the most advantage every way of their
absence, he gained such of eithers Friends, as they most confidently relied
upon, whom having once seduced, he caused a report to be blown about, that he
was going to have Chryseide matched to one of his Kindred; and at the same
time, in retribution of my Masters eminent Services, that he would bestow upon
him the Daughter of a Prince, who resided in that Province, which his late
approved Valor and Prudence had happily ranged and settled in the obedience
they justly owed their King.

These persecuted Lovers were first advertised of the odd report that had been
raised; and soon after their false Friends confirmed this falser same, by their
infamous Messages, and withal added, that the short and feeble resistance that
either had made to the first assault and proposition of renouncing their first
Love, to let in a new guest, which should be confirmed by sudden Marriage,
proved evidently that they had given a full assent. This News being conveyed to
both, by such as they highly respected, and heartily believed, made up the
fullness of that trouble, which their long absence had but begun; and as the
hopes of either was anchored, only upon their mutually sworn Faith and
Stability, so the newborn jealousy this treachery had brought forth, cast them
almost into despair.

What, -- whispred the mournful Chryseide, -- Is it possible that Gadate should
prove unfaithful; that Gadate whom a few days since my Love, rescued from that
death which his Rival was dragging him to. Gods, if you be just, why do you not
show it on this Traitor; where is your Thunder? or for whom do you keep it that
can so highly deserve it? since your selves are witness of the faith he vowed
to me: But no, stop yet a while your avenging hands; suspend the effects of
your Justice, perhaps it is not true that he betrays me, and I may wish your
Judgments should fall on him, who keeps as much Love for me still as I can
have desires. Rather strike him that is the Author of my doubts, and suspicion:
Has not that Tyrant yet exasperated your anger long enough to make you dart
your Punishments at him? Or may he, because a King, escape unpunished by
Heaven, for those black and deep crimes he commits upon Earth? It Is he,
Unworthy he, that certainly still persecutes our harmless Souls, he without
peradventure tempts my Gadates faith, with the same specious proposition of an
advantageous Marriage, as he does mine: But it is no matter, for if that Noble
Object of my affection be but truly mine, as he so willingly and solemnly
engaged, so long as I continue inviolably his, he still loves his spotless
Chryseide, since constant Chryseide adores Gadate, nor will his Courage and
discretion loose that Victory, which she dare promise shall still triumph over
the cursed Vectorez's malice and darkest Plots.

About the same time, that this Unfortunate Lady was bemoaning her hard fate,
Gadate being assaulted with no less inquietudes, because he had no less
tenderness and respect for her, expressed his bitter sorrows thus. Whether the
beauteous Chryseide continue me her sincere Love, or not, Said he, (sighing
with a profound sadness) Her Infidelity would not excuse my breach of promise;
and if it be a Truth they write me, yet that Fair-false-one, deceiving me,
deceives her self far more, it being less evil to be unfortunate then Criminal.
But I must love her still, my heart, said he, ( knocking his hand on his breast)
though she prove inconstant: for the Testimonies she gave me of that excellent
affection, which she however protested to Eternize, proceeding from so divine a
person, are a sufficient Obligation for me not to cease to Love her, till I
cease to Live; and though she be faithless, yet is she the happiest copy of
Angelick beauty to my eye that Mortality is capable of: and besides, why should
not I consecrate that poor life to her daily service, though slighted, which
she alone, with hazard of her own, did rescue from a violent sudden end? But
a^, is it possible Chryseide, that the sole inclination you once had for me,
should ^ake you undervalue Crowns and Scepters; and that the violence of the
passion which you were pleased to make me believe should live within the Grave
it self, should not now have he strength to resist the cold and single
proposition of a husband, whom I dare without pride compare with in all
respects; and Challenge as inferior in point and degree of affection?

After they had thus on either part entertained their sad thoughts, they
dispatched Messages to each other in these, or the like terms.

Chryseide to Gadate.
I have been informed that you were profer'd a Wife where you now reside; and
which is more, if I would readily give credit to all that is reported, I must
believe that you are willing to accept her: But I have not this easy Faith;
and till you signify your Levity, and Infidelity with your own hand, I shall
persevere in the more pleasing opinion that you are still entirely mine, as I
am unchangeably yours: Remember, I beseech you Gadate, before what sacred
Witness, and with what repeated Oaths you swore Love to me: But perhaps it was
to cover your Crime, that you stopped my Journey to you: My presence would ever
have reproached you of a disloyalty unworthy of Affection; and that happy
Creature whom you design to espouse, would, no doubt have had more generosity
then to bestow her heart upon a deceiver, from whom she could hope for no other
then the like treachery, that you commit toward her, whom you are engaged to
love with as much Constancy, as you have Honor, Reason or Religion in you.

Chryseide.


Gadate to his Chryseide.
It was needless to give me so many Testimonies of Affection, if you intend to
abuse me: the charms of beauty and wit, would have had dominion enough over
the Liberty of my Soul, without the prodigal addition of so many flattering
vows and promises, to confirm a Love which your change condemns of perjury, if
it be true, that you will marry him, to whom you have already given the earnest
of your Troth: But -- Chryseide, will not your Infidelity become a greater
prejudice to your own Soul and Honor, then the performance of your Oaths? And
shall I know so much unhappiness as to be ascertained that your heart did not
prompt your tongue, and lips when you pronounced those assurances of an Eternal
Amity and Love? Yes Lady, I must believe it, and undergo the penalty of shame
for having so long worshipped and adored an inconstant, cruel Woman; and
complain only that you defeat and betray the hopes you made my Credulous heart
conceive of your sincerity, who then behold her as the object of his highest
felicity and bliss, who now is become the only cause of his trouble and
misfortune. But I forfeit the respect I ow you by these murmurings, it were not
true Love for you, if I should hinder you of those satisfactions; take whom you
will then, Chryseide into your Lawful bed, if you can thereby please your self,
and espouse true happiness in his person: these are such wishes as you cannot
forbid or chide me for, and my true Love at least, inspite of your severity and
my sad fate, shall derive this consolation to rejoice that you are blessed,
though that be the subject of my despair, which rises from the same source, and
if I importune you in continuing my more then common respect, I shall thereby
reap this advantage that my more then Feminine perseverance will be some small
revenge, for the unfaithfulness wherewith you treat Your most Faithful

Gadate.


Vectorez caused these Letters likewise to be intercepted that so these Lovers
might still wander in darkness and error, and that their despair might be
increased by the want of true intelligence. Gadate in fine, absolutely
persuaded of the infidelity of his Mistress, dispatched me with a Letter equally
composed of love and anger, wherein he desired she would restore his picture,
without the least mention of any reason that urged him to it. Chryseide who had
missed the former complaints which my Master had addressed to her; believed
infallably that he was false, and that because he desired not to leave any
tokens of his engagement to her in her possession, he now sent for this. She
first tore his Letter in my presence, and afterward told me, with all the
reproaches her violent passion could suggest, that I should return to my
Master, and assure him, that she would not send back his Picture, but keeping
it ever in her eye, that unworthy person it represented as he had once been the
true Object of her Love, should now be the Subject of her hate.

But as I was acquainted with the fidelity of my Master, I could not suffer the
unjust reproaches she flung at him, which he as verily believed might have been
stuck on her, wherefore I calmly and with a becoming respect let her know, that
this offense was indeed too sensible and grossly misapplied, to lay that
inconstancy to his charge, of which she was only guilty, since she might
plainly read the verity of his affection, in that he had not sent for that
Copy, but only to take away the ressemblance of one, whom he rationally
believed could not be pleasing to her that ceased to cherish the Original.

These last words stung Chryseide to the Soul, and inflamed her with anger, in
which heat and transport, having hastily related all she had heard of Gadate,
she unfolded that Letter to me, which Vectorez had counterfeited, wherein he
entreated her to defer her Journey to the place he was at, because, Said She,
My troublesome company might not disturb his fresh Amors, and Courtship. To
undeceive her of this prejudicate opinion; I replied that he thought he had the
same ground to complain of her, and that he had honored me with the s^ght and
perusal of the Letter she had sent him, to excuse the retarding of her Journey.
Chryseide scarce gave me leisure to end those words, before She changed her
Countenance and harsh Language, into this sweet tone of, -- Pardon me, Sir,
Said She, If I do tell you, that it is not true I ever wrote to Gadate what you
affirm: on the contrary, I burned with desire and impatience to know the
reasons why he would stop me. And I can assure you in his behalf, returned I,
that he was no less amazed, and at a nonplus, when he read what you wrote.
Then I repeated at length all what my Master had learned touching her promise
of Marriage, and how he having sent her a Message, to which her silence was the
only answer, he began to credit what report had proclaimed, and what he for a
long while before had only let into his ear, which he after silence could not
but suffer to enter into his heart as a real Truth.

What Demon, cried She, does thus betray our intents? the trouble and
dissatisfaction for not procuring his Answer to me, about the same Melancholy
inquiry, first brought upon me this fit of misbelief, which I perceive is his
chief Malady and distemper too, proceeding from the same Cause. Ha! Would he
had contracted no more guilt then I in this particular, and you, happy
Messenger, if I dare believe what you affirm, how truly blessed am I; What
then, it seems Gadate is faithful still, and yet he could suppose that I had
falsified my vows to him; Let some body fly to him, if you cannot Post thither
your self, to ease and inform his Noble mind, least he become more sinful, by
longer thinking I am so.

At the same moment she wrote to him of all this, and I hurried a faithful
bearer away with those refreshing tidings, whilst we were guessing afterward
who could be the persons that had so ignobly, and subtily ruffled the quiet and
till then, sweet commerce of these Lovers: to find this out the more facilely,
Chryseide sent for that woman, I already mentioned, by whose management they
conveyed all their secrets, who was not a little surprised at my appearance,
because she was of my acquaintance. Chryseide, having required an account of
the letters they had written to each other, but had not been delivered, and of
those that had been counterfeited in their stead, this unhappy woman had no
less impudence to excuse the fact, then she had malice in the acting it, and
maintained boldly, that her change being only to send the papers, she had
punctually delivered all those that came to her hands, but could not give any
account of what they did contain.

We could not, in fine, get any thing else from her, and the diligent care we
took to gain some exact knowledge of this covered Mystery, pulled down the last
and heaviest mischief on these Lovers heads, and made way for the Enemies of
their happiness to complete the design of their absolute ruin. This wicked
instrument was no sooner freed from Examination, but she went directly and
informed the King, that it was time to put in practice, what he had contrived,
to divert and destroy the inclination of these Lovers: because there was a
Gentleman sent from Gadate, who could easily wipe out those apprehensions and
impressions which his feigned Letters might have left upon her Spirit.

The words of this Malicious woman, who feared to be discovered, soon blowed
his rage and jealousy into a storm, which at first made him think to send away
immediately to have my Master murdered, but one of his Confidents, less
passionate then himself, to whom he had opened his fowl design, having wisely
pointed out the difficulty, and danger of enterprizing on the life of so
considerable a person, who was so well armed against all assaults with the
Forces he then commanded, moderated somewhat of that first fury, and resolved
to watch and spy me circumspectly, and learn what time he meant to begin his
Journey, that so they might ceaze on my Master. And likewise he confirmed the
old woman in her unworthy employment, by new presents, whilst himself contrived
to press forward the pretended Match between Gadate and the before mentioned
Princess, and Chryseide with his own Kinsman.

To this intent he wrote to my Master, and to the Princesses Father to let them
know his purpose was they should marry before he returned to Court, he sent
likewise to Chryseides Friends at the same time; all she could do, when they
brought her the Kings errand, was to implore some time to consult about it, and
to dispatch me suddenly to my Master: but I was staid in my passages, and my
Letters ceazed upon, which discovered to Vectorez, how Chryseide desired Gadate
to come in secret to one of her Ants houses, she being a woman that favored
their design; where she promised to meet in a short time, thereby a happy
conclusion of their Nuptials to prevent, that cross match the King so labored
to complete.

The diligent King, had already presented the person to Chryseide that was
appointed to be her husband, and as well to fathom her thoughts, as to obstruct
Gadates intervening, he told her, Gadate was likewise preparing for his
espousals, to which she having replied, that she that should possess so
Illustrious and Noble a Husband, would be happy above the ordinary rate of
Sovereigns, he conceived so strange a jealousy upon the value she set on his
merit and affection, that not able to quel the impetuous humor, he absolutely
resolved to reduce him to the condition of incapacity to be her husband. To
accomplish this, he set People in every place where Chryseide or Gadate could
possibly pass, who continually watched to prevent their intended rendezvous,
with express order to arrest both or either of them. Gadate fell the first into
their snare as being the most forward and eager; and by a most inhumane
violence (the particulars whereof, I shall step over, as not so decent to be
related) two hours before his Ladies Arrival, they deprived him of the means
of ever after being an able husband.

Chryseide knew as yet nothing, when she came into the Chamber, where he was
shut up; but having understood the brutish effects of the Kings jealousy, she
resolved to make it appear that she had a virtue above his rage, and protested
openly, that since Gadates merits had been the only subject of her affection,
the Kings inhumanity which could not lessen or ruin that, should not hinder
her from marrying him; Nay they did complete the Wedding instantly after, and
she ever lived his Constant Wife and Associate: till Vectorez who incessantly
persecuted her with his unruly passion, having been informed one day that
Gadate was absent, forcibly entered into the House, and having threatened to
violate her, if She were not flexible to his rude desires: finding her self in
this straight, that her Honor was inevitably ruined, unless She did Redeem it,
at the price and forfeit of her precious Life, She with a Generous and
Undaunted Resolution caught up a Dagger that lay near, and with a stab buried
it in her Noble Breast, Sacrificing thus the fairest Life, to save the most
exemplary chastity, that age could boast of.

This fatal blow which extinguished Vectorez burning lust, with the sprinklings
of her more temperate blood, augmented the unhappy Gadate's misfortunes: yet
had he the discretion to bear up against this swelling torrent of Affliction;
and though he testified the highest regret, was due to one so much deserving,
and so dear to him, yet did his courage surmount and moderate the first rapid
motions of his dolours, because he then found himself not in a fitting posture
to make his ressentments Public. He withdrew himself nevertheless from the
Court, and amidst the throngs of his displeasure, he knew so well how to cloak
his design of revenge under the habit of dissimulation, that Vectorez was apt
to believe, time had effaced the memory of those injuries he had acted, and
that he might as well confide in his person as his valor, to trust him with
those employments he gave him in his Army, endeavoring to renew his Friendship
by the dignity of those commands he heaped on him: But as the affronts and
injuries Gadate had received, were too recent and sensible to be put in
oblivion, he soon took advantage of the occasion Gobrias offered, in the
assurance he had to meet in your excellent person, that Prince whom it seems
the Heavens have sent to protect injured goodness, and deliver the Assyrians
from the Tyrant that so sharply oppresses them.



Sambaulas, having thus closed up his story, Cyrus rescented the motions of a
particular indignation against Vectorez, and protested openly that thence
forward the interest of his Glory should not animate him more against that
degenerate King, then the desire of taking a just revenge, for such a Friend.
He also renewed the assurances he had already given to Gobrias, he being then
present, and sought out Gadate to confirm him in what he expected, and hoped
for from his protection, who to make the Assyrians know to their sorrow, what a
lose he should prove to them, and advantage to Cyrus, he would needs put all
those places of strength into his hands, whereof he was Master at that time:
but because he conjectured, that as soon as Vectorez had the least intimation
of his deserting that party, he would immediately send some Troopers to plunder
and destroy his Country, he meant to prevent him, and propounded to Cyrus to
permit him to go with a party of Cavalry, to oppose the Enemies passage, and
secure his Subjects, whom his presence would hold up in a posture of Loyalty
toward him. Yet was it not without some reluctance that Cyrus did suffer him
to go, only attended by his own Forces: but considering that a numerous party
as that of the Medes and Persians, laden with much provisions, could not arrive
there soon enough, he let him set out first with speed and diligence, whilst
himself disposed his forces to march after him.

The Soldiers had already conceived so high an esteem of Gadates merits, that
they likewise gave testimonies of their impatience to assist him. Cyrus
perceiving them in this heat of willingness, gave hasty order for the Armies
March, and having recommended the Lady's and Provisions to Gobrias care in
whose protection and charge he left them with a sufficient Guard, he offered
the customary Sacrifices on such occasion, and disposed his Troops in this
following order.

Chrysante had the Command of the Vanguard, and that all the party, might
follow conveniently, he placed the Curiassiers, which were armed heaviest
there, at the head of whom he Commanded the Centureons to March. Artabaze had
Command over the Persians that bare Bows and Bucklers; Adramias was ordered to
follow with the Median Infantry; and Embas with the Armenian. After these came
Artuchas who conducted the Hircanians; Thambrades the Sacques on foot, and
Damates the Cadusians, which two Nations had lately deserted the Assyrians.

All those that carried Bucklers, had the right wing, and the Archers or
Bow-men the left, with the Centurions at their head. Next these came on the
Troops that guarded the bagage and necessary provisions. In the Rear Guard,
Madate led the Persian Cavalry (whom their Centurions had order to dispose as
the Infantry) Jerosombate the Median: Tygranes the Armenian: and in the Train
of all were, the Sacques and Cadusians.

This puissant Army being thus ranged, Cyrus bravely mounted upon a white
Horse, who by his stately gate, seemed to be proud, of having him for Rider
that Commanded so many Worthy's, rode all about to take a review, and after
some Speech to them, he particularly required them to be silent, as being to
March by night, in which there would be more need of their eyes then tongues,
and set Scouts abroad, whom he often relieved: fearing too wearisom a duty
might render them less vigilant. The Soldiers, mean while, had leave to rest
themselves, till a March were sounded, but they had been so powerfully animated
by their Generals presence, that they waited for that hour, with desire and
huge impatiency. Cyrus having again surveyed the several Troops, and called to
them all, or the most part, by their particular names, he begot such high
thoughts in them, of their own worth by such a fortunate mention and knowledge,
that they heartily aspired to make him better acquainted by some rare proofs,
of their deserts and valor: and nothing in effect can be a greater spur to
worthy actions, then the ambition and policy to show, before those that are
Lovers of such Gallantry, the proofs of their expected prouesse, as their
confusion and disgrace is greatest, that have such Heroic Spectators for their
Witness, when they do things unhandsomly. Besides, that the Commands given in
such a ^ro^^ of Men, and more readily executed, when those that are appointed,
are so particularly nominated by their Chief.

About the middle portion of the Night, when darkness covered the whole face of
Heaven, Cyrus gave the word to March, and having provided experienced guides to
attend on Chrysante, who led the Van, he caused them to go slowly forward,
whilst he made the others advance after: and then having put them all in a
posture to follow, they began to quicken their pace. At the break of day,
seeing that the Cadusian Infantry, who were in the Rear, were not seconded with
any Horse, he drew up some Squadrons to join with them, and be assistant in
case the Enemy should attaque them, and sent out fresh Scouts to discover their
Quarters. At the same time, that he was going to secure his Friend, the
unworthy person that had formerly betrayed Gadate in his amors, and who had
sent that false Intelligence to Chryseide, how he was forsaking her, was
consulting how he might ruin him, and give him up into the hands and custody
of the Assyrians. He was well acquainted with his Masters most Important
Affairs, who had dispatched him before, to advertize his Friends, that he was
hastening to their protection, with a potent Army: But this perfidious wretch,
instead of performing that Commission, sent speedy notice to the Assyrians of
Gadates design, and his approaching Forces; and gave strickt command to the
Lieutenant of a well Fortified Castle in their passage, of which himself was
Governor, to admit them, and give them fair entertainment, till he next
morning could lead Gadate into that Ambush he had prepared for him, and wherein
he, indeed, inevitably fell.

Gadate being arrived on his own spot; and not finding the face of any Enemy or
Opposer, excepting a few Chariots, and some run-aways, whom his Forlorn-Hope
still beat before them, undertook with the small handful of men he had, to
pursue a flying party of Horse, who still fought retreating, till they had
drawn him and his eager followers into the ambush they had prepared. He hoped
to save himself by beating his way into the Castle, which this false fellow had
surrendered to the Enemies, where he had indeed a willing entrance, but with the
hazard of his life, which had been there paid for it, had not the impetuous
have of the first Court of Guard who flew with fury at him, given him notice,
that he was in the hands of Enemies, where he thought to find a sanctuary, and
had not four or five that scorned so base a murder put themselves in a posture
to defend him. By their assistance; Gadate had, indeed, saved himself without
hurt, and escaped from the Castle, had he not unfortunately in his retreat met
with the cursed fellow that betrayed him, whom he approaching as a friend, from
whom he expected that succor, he so much needed, instead of it, met with an
unexpected wound from him in his shoulder, which the other would have directed
to his heart, who suddenly wheeling from him, spurred toward those Assyrians
that had left the Ambush to ceaze upon Gadate, who yet feared not to pursue
them with that inconsiderable Remnant of Friends that were remaining: and had
there certainly bravely sold his life, had not the Enemy been alarmed with the
approach of Cyrus and his whole Army, which made them soon change their ignoble
assault upon Gadate, (who had already laid his false Friend dead at his feet)
into a more needful flight to save themselves. Their have, however, could not
carry them away so fortunately, but that some fell in the pursuit, and the
rest were made Prisoners with a great part of the bagage they had deserted,
taken.

Cyrus having caused the retreat to be sounded, to Rally his dispersed men, who
returned to the Joyful Camp laden with Spoil, was in some apprehension for
Gadate, because he had not seen him: whom presently after he spied coming
toward him; and whilst he was pleading excuse for not sooner arriving to
assist him; Gadate was returning him millions of thanks for the succor that
had preserved a Life, which he infallably had otherwise lost, amidst their
numbers.

Whilst these illustrious warriors gave a breathing and refreshing
intermission to their men, the Caducian Prince, who was in the reare-guard,
having not arrived so timely as to be at the engagement, thought it somewhat
imported his reputation to signalize the valor of his soldiers, by some
generous enterprise, since he had no share in the fresh Victory they had
obtained. To this effect, without communicating ought to Cyrus, he secretly
drew off from his quarters by the favor of the night, and desperately made his
approaches near the, City where the Assyrians had locked themselves up: before
which place, he remained sometime urging them to a combat by his bitter
threats; but none appeared to answer him, the Enemy being so feared with their
last defeat, they durst not issue out, till being certainly made acquainted,
that the Cadusians were there alone, they made a vigorous sally, and after a
hot fight, which hung a long while doubtfully between them, the Caducians
having, in fine, lost their Prince, were distressed to a retreat.

The troops which Cyrus sent to relieve them, met them at their return
toward the Camp, whilst every countenance displayed the sorrows which filled
their hearts for their lost Prince, but the judicious Cyrus, to divert the
shame of their defeit, received them with as honorable caresses, as if they had
returned victorious and triumphant, and consoling them for their dead General,
attributed all to the fortune and giddy chance of war, which had so
unsuccessfully seconded their attempt: and afterward commanded his Chyrurgions
to have a very great care of such as were wounded: there was not one
considerable person but he did personally visit, and promised them all, that in
revenge, he would not give the Assyrians any long leasures to brag of their
advantage. In effect, he went with a strong party to fetch off the slain, in
sight of the conquering Enemy within the town: to whom he propounded an equal
combat, to redeem the honor of his associates, of whom he had no little
jealousy and especially, these now mentioned, because he had acquired them but
of late: but finding that not any appeared to answer his summons, he caused the
whole Country to be spoiled and pillaged, and commanded to cut off all the
straggling Enemies they should meet, as a sacrifice for his compagnions Ghost.

The Assyrians on the other hand, retired toward Babylon, and left him the
campaign free: of which when he perceived himself the absolute Master, he
considered, that to oblige the Enemy, and preserve those Provinces that had so
freely tendered themselves to him, he should do well to call back those
Free-booters he had let loose; thereby to give no just occasion to the
Assyrians, to act the like upon his conquered neighbourhoods, when he should be
at too great a distance from them, to save them from plunder. To this end
having summoned in his men, whilst they replenished all his garrisons with
necessary provisions, he dispatched a Trumpetter toward Babylon, to propound
to Vectorez, that if he loved or regarded the welfare of his people, he was
contented not to hinder the laborers from freely cultivating the grounds under
his power; till the harvest time, and then the longest sword should reap it,
provided that he would engage to give the same allowance of liberty in those
Provinces, which the right of Conquests had made him master of.

Vectorez who conjectured his own advantage in this proposition, because he had
the greatest share of the Country. Subject to pillage, and less forces to
defend them from the Enemies frequent incursions, willingly accepted the
proposal; and Cyrus likewise assented to a Truce for some days, at the request
of Gadates Mother, who begged that time of him, to have the convenience of
putting her affairs in order, land so dispose of them, as to be in a capacity
of following her son wherever he removed. This good Lady was accompanied with
her daughter Cephisa, who gave Cyrus no less cause to wonder at the excellency
of her beauty, then her brother had at the effects of his rare courage. And
indeed many of those that were obliged to approach her with becoming
salutations, were much taken with her charming mien, though there appeared some
Characters and lines of sadness and trouble in her looks, which gave the
beholders a perfect knowledge of some inclination she left behind, whilst she
was forced to wait and absent her self with her Mother.

This quiet interval gave way to the passion of Cyrus to show its utmost power:
the apprehensions for not hearing any thing of his Birinthea, which had been
silenced by the diversions of war, now ceazed strongly, on his soul. One day as
with these thoughts, he entertained himself on the Margen of a pretty river,
which led its current through a shady Grove, having no other company, but such
as were his obliged attendants for his guard, he caused them to stay at
distance, that he might with more liberty give himself up to his Melancholy
reflections, and after a long and silent thought fullness, which can be better
guessed at, then discribed, but which as since appeared was altogether fixed
upon his dearest Princess, he pronounced her fair name in a bemoaning accent,
which yet had not the liberty to get out of his lips, without the interruption
of a thousand sighs that ushered and attended it.

Whilst he was in this uncomfortable posture, he casts his looks beyond the
river and beheld some Cavaliers, with drawn weapons, that attaqu'd three or
four other men in rustique habits, who did defend a woman in the like garb,
with more valor then could be hoped for, in persons of their coats; the
inequality of the combatants did quickly rowse and call up his generosity, he
laid by his thoughts of love to make use of his courage, and mounting his horse
as hastily as he could, he swam him cross the water, together with these that
attended him, but though his diligence were great, he could not get in time
enough to save the woman from being hurried away; however he posted after those
Cavaliers, and having demanded, as he past along, of one of the company that
came with the woman, what person it was, they thus forced from them; he was
amazed to hear Abracome cry aloud, (whom he discovered by his voice) that it
was Birinthea, they thus ravished thence. That name hindered all other
discourse, it was alone more then he would have heard, and being led now, more
by the violence of his passion, then he was ere while by his valor, it may be
said, he rather flew then rode after those theves, that carried thence that
treasure (he esteemed above all Diadems) out of his sight and presence, whom he
at last oretook long before any of his company could reach thither.

It were a task next to impossibility to relate; with what fury he set on them:
three or four of them instantly made head against him, to give their associates
the opportunity of getting into a little City near hand: but he beat thorough
them, and as lightning, darting forwards, when he had scattered those opposing
swords, he overtook the others just at their entrance into the gates. Though
they were many that resisted Cyrus, yet had they need of the first corpse de
guard to assist them, but the rest of his followers being joined with him did
so gallantly second his valor that after they had laid many on the earth, they
entered pell-mell with their Enemies, who to avoid their blows retreated
further within the City.

The hurry and confusion was so great, that few disputed his attempt to get in
the City, and as if it had been taken by assault, the report soon came to his
ear, that had the chief commanded there. He was so surpised with this alarm,
that without staying for his company's to be drawn up, he ran hastily toward
the Gate, where he was told the Enemies had made their way: and there found
most of his men flying some one way, others another, whilst Cyrus eagerly
pressed those that yet durst hinder him. He soon knew by his valor, that he
was head of that enterprise: and therefore having reproached the cowardice of
his guards, that could not stand against so small a power, he made them wheel
off, and crying aloud to Cyrus, that it was he must be first conquered, if they
would gain the place; he discharged such a blow that Cyrus had much a do to
save himself, whereby he found that he had now a more dangerous Enemy to deal
with: and then, indeed, as if he had before reserved his chiefest strength, he
joined all his courage and resolution to his former hear, to buckle with this
fresh and vigorous apponent:

Never had Combat been written in deeper wounds, had they not been as skilful
to avoid, as they were desparate to give them; nor had they ended this duel but
with death, if some of the Governors Officers then arriving, finding him so
overmatch'd by Cyrus, had not overpoured him by their numbers, who having lost
much blood, seemed to be only animated with his love, and after a while sunk on
his horses neck and then rol'd off, under his feet.

Zorbas, who was this Governor, instead of taking advantage of this fall, was
angry with those that caused it, whose generosity not brooking, what his Valor
had not purchased, caused him straigtwayes to be lifted up, and finding him
covered with blood that streamed from several wounds, commanded he should be
carried to the next Captains house, adjoined to the gate, where he came in, and
there took special care to have both him, and all his followers dressed by his
best Chryrurgions before he left the place. He also gave order to have the
Gates secured* having waited some time to see if any other Forces would appear,
not having faith enough to believe that those few Prisoners could have alone
the confidence to force his Guards. After a while he returned again to Cyrus,
who notwithstanding the smart of his wounds, and the shame of his Captivity,
testified, he thought nothing troublesome compared to his fears for Birinthea,
after whom he often inquired of those that were in presence.

Zorbas aborded him so civily, that although he were prepossessed with those
griefs, he could not but observe something in him, which is not to be met with
in ordinary persons, and from which he derived (setting aside his interests) no
small or mean hopes of all the favor that can be expected from a Noble Enemy.
Their first discourses were nothing but just and mutual praises they paid each
others valors: in fine, Cyrus prompted by his affection, beseeched Zorbas to
let him give him in particular, an account of the reasons that had urged and
drawn him to this pursuit of his men even within his Gates, and Zorbat being
first informed that Cyrus might use the liberty of his Speech without any
detriment to his health; after he had cleared the Chamber of other Auditors,
Cyrus spoke thus to him. Generous Warrior, I should have reason to conceal the
Cause and Subject of my present condition. if I were not to relate it to a
person who has the gifts of too many other brave quality's, to be a stranger to
the experience of what has thus engaged me.

Love is that puissant Deity whose power your Soldiers could not withstand, he
fought in my person, nor should I ever have admitted the least thought of
violating the Articles of Truce, had I not unhappily beheld her, brought into
this City, who alone has the absolute and entire posse^sion of my Heart and
Liberty. Judge you, what reason I had to follow her, and whether it were not
stricktly just, finding her in my Enemies hands, in a time when I was impatient
to know her condition to endeavor to save and recover that treasure of my
Soul: but since my design was defeated by your means, it is from your only
favor that I can hope to attain the blessing of beholding her and to you alone
must I owe the O^ligation for that immense, and more then ordinary savor. You
have expressed and practiced too much the Laws of generosity in my behalf
already, to refuse this addition of Grace, and I dare trust your Virtue so far
as to be confident that you will suffer some Messeng^r to go and wait on her in
the behalf of a Persian Gentleman; and also assure her from you, that she may
safely disband all her fears, so long as she is under your happy protection.

Who ever you are Answered Zorbas, though I were not Witness of your
extraordinary Valor, yet to say you fought under the Standard of that potent
God, were alone enough to make me quickly resign my Sword and yield.

I should not have offered to oppose you, had I known what Interest inspired
and enflamed your courage, and I do much regret to have resisted one that was
so bravely busied in his quarrel, who is my Sovereign Lord, no less then he is
yours. Dispatch whom you please to that honored Lady, and I will personally
accompany him, to disengage and free her from those infamous ravishers, and if
you take it for a favor that I should help you to her sight and presence, I
shall expect no other reward, then only that you would obtain the pardon I now
crave for my Men's Insolence, which I shall expiate by any satisfaction she and
your self can further demand of them or me, and that you may enjoy the full
Liberty of her converse and society, I leave you, and so adue, Generous Lover,
and would to Heaven, that I could ever hope for the same happy fate, I now
procure you, by this willing Observance and Civility. -- He passed out after
these words, and commanding the Captain that had charge of the Prisoners to
give them all full liberty to be by themselves, he went along with him whom
Cyrus had appointed to fetch his Byrinthea.

This Excellent Lady, who little knew she had such interested Protectors so
near, was confined to a close Chamber, wherein she was locked up with a Wench
and a Soldier that stirred not from the door. The barbarous Villain scarce gave
her liberty to bemoan her condition, or breath a sigh, but seeing her in a
habit suitable to that disasterous Captivity, he proffered his comforts, and
impertinent frenzies to abate her sorrows, and told her, to dry up her trifling
and fruitless tears, that she was but too happy in being valued by him that had
brought her to this pass: this insolent Courtship sensibly offended her; who
must needs be Mistress of a rare patience to endure it, that knew her self to be
adored by the greatest of Princes: but she had reason in that distress to
suffer all this and more, rather then discover unreasonably what she was; and
Zorbas stepped into the room, just when she was defending her self against the
rude caresses of this rough fellow: She was truly joy'd that his presence put
an end to the others insolence: but yet another fear stepped in to make her
fortune less complete, which was an apprehension that this was the person had
surpised her for his own base ends: nevertheless the civility of his mild
approach, promised more good, and gave her way to reassume her first fair
hopes; and as he was very discreet, he had no sooner met her, and performed the
most usual and becoming Ceremonies of Salutation, but he entreated she would
be conducted to a Friends house, where, he doubted not, but she would find a
greater satisfa^^ion, and con^ent, then she could probably expect in such an
invitation.

Though these words spoke of happiness she seemed to fear the contrary by her
amaze; a sudden bashfulness orespread her face, which carried rather the marks
of virtue then of shame in the beholders opinion, and only answering what he
said, with a respectfull silence: Whither do you lead me said she to the other,
that proffered her his hand to that intent. May I tread confidently where you
guide me without offense to Virtue? Or were it not better to let me dye in this
same Place? Ha! My Lord Continued she, turning toward Zorbas, if you have as
much true sense of Honor, as you persuade me: leave me not in these
apprehensions, but assure me, before I go, that I shall meet no danger in the
Obedience I now pay you.

To remove these Scruples and Threatening Apprehensions, Zorbas promised
faithfully, she should be treated with all the respect and decency she could
desire, or that Country could afford: but his deepest oaths could not gain her
belief; so that she went forward with much dread and diffidence, and with a
positive resolution to dye, rather then yield to any dishonor or undecent
attempt against her innocent person, for which she had no Guard or Security
besides that noble intent, as Heroic and Gallant, as she was Chaste and
beautiful. At her first entrance into Cyrus's Chamber, whom she as yet knew not
to be there, she found her fears increased by the sight of one in Bed, from
which she was steping back by a trembling retreat, fancying they had brought
her there for that which she apprehended a thousand times more then death it
self, but Cyrus perceiving it, informed her better by these words, Fear not to
approach me, Madam, You need not doubt you shall hazard that now; which I
endeavored to save at the price of my Life: it was to hinder and prevent the
unhappiness you start from, that put me into this wounded condition. In a Word,
let it suffice to tell you, that you here meet with him, who in the first
moment of beholding your fair shape, and being blessed with an early knowledge of
your great quality, and greater virtues, could not deny you his heart and
liberty, together with your Fathers forfeited Life, who yet breaths only to
tell you, nay and make it appear by more Eminent and becoming Services, that he
lives only for you, and to whom you have, by an express Message, done the high
Favor to command his assistance in the like occasion against Cyaxares. If my
unhappiness, Madam, has not permitted me to effect it, as you desired, accuse
naught but the rigor of my Fate, for whose perverseness I am at present too
much recompensed, since the Gods have favorably seconded my intentions, and
have honored me with the Satisfaction and advantage of signing your decree and
service with my blood.

Birinthea was so surprised at this accident, that although she knew him by his
voice and visage, yet she made it a question whether she might safely credit
the joyful, but unexpected Intelligence of her ears and eyes. In fine, having
fastened her steady looks upon him, and made a more minute survey of those known
features: What, said she, Generous Prince, Will misfortune never cease
struggling against our inclinations: Must I still owe my Obligations singly to
you; and yet be forced to remain ungrateful, Ah, how unjustly fortune rewards
your merits, by denying me the power to retribute those high favors I am
indebted for; those worthy services you have performed, requires with justice
the love that I had made you hope for; but I am now necessitated to recall it;
and therefore employ no more either your care or courage, if you make that your
pretense and aim, for my devoir forbids me now to harbor affection toward
you; Nay so far is it from that, as I am bound to declare, that its not
altogether convenient, I should admit you to love me. We are both equally
unfortunate in this estate; I being obliged to ingratitude, after so great a
sum of goodness paid by your valor and clemency to me; and you for having been
so liberal of your Noble virtues without the meanest of returns in
satisfaction. I might nevertheless, flatter your hopes a new with some fresh
pretenses, in the necessity I am in, to engage your protection against those
rude hands I am fallen into: but know Sir, at least, if I cannot repay the
acknowledgements you desire of me, yet I can be so just and reasonable as not
to delude you in it. I doubt not but this discourse begets your wonder: and
truly it will not be expected other from him who had such fair hopes of the
contrary: But it requires more time and strength then we are Master of at
present to make it known, I should unriddle these Enigmaes if you were in a
sitting posture: be careful therefore only of your care, and if my Honor or
Life are of any value to you, preserve your own with tenderness.

Preserve my Life replied he, After these killings words, Madam, you impose
impossibilities; before you enjoined me to live, you took away the means, by
taking away my hopes. How cruel you are, Birinthea, to wish me to live, and yet
forbid me to Love, which are things above my power. Indeed, Said she
interrupting him, I desire you would love me with less heat and passion: but
you expound my thoughts ill; and you reproach that as a cruelty, which is
indeed compassion; Since I command it only for your quiet and ease, to shelter
you from those storms of trouble will otherwise fall upon you. Ah no, reparted
he, cease I beseech you, Madam, to be pitiful in this manner, the peace and
repose you wish me, would be more insupportable a thousand times, then the
sufferings of my passion, and to testify how dear they are in my esteem,
whilst I endure them for you. I will struggle to live and obey you to undergo
them the longer. That cannot be obedience as I expect Answered She, to desire
to suffer, I enjoin you to live, that you may live happier: but to remove the
doubts you may entertain of the verity of what I have already made known, I
perceive it will be necessary I should relate to you all that has occurred in
Media and Armenia, that so you may approve my reasons, when I have produced
them*

Since you departed from Ecbatane your Uncle Cyaxares thought fit to come and
see my Mother, whom he had not yet visited in the apartment allotted by him for
us, where he paid her more respect and civilitie then formerly he was wont,
Phraorte and Arthemisa had also a share in this honor, and only I, of all our
family, missed of this Ceremony, detained in my chamber by a slight Malady But
as I was the person he chiefly design^d to wait on, he made a particular
enquiry for me, and being informed that I was indisposed, and not in a
condition to admit his Society, it pleased him to send me a complement by one
of my Maids, which I then interpreted an effect of civility.

Pheretime, My Mother, was so highly satisfied with this Visit, that he no
sooner left the place, but without delay she came with Phraorte and Arthemisa
to give me the News, and promise the hopes of a quite contrary treatment then
what we since tasted; and two short days, which were required to put me in a
condition of health, were thought by her too long to stay from giving him
thanks for that Courtesy. She went the very next day, together with my Brother
and Sister; and not to omit the least punctilio, She carried my excuse for not
being in a capacity of performing that devoir which seemed too weighty to be
neglected.

Having quitted him, they went to his Queen, whither he would needs accompany
them; and that good Princess gave them so favorable a welcome, and showed such
singular testimonies of affection, that Pheretime charmed with her caresses,
and the affable sweetness of her entertainment, begged the permission to repeat
her visits frequently: In a short time afterward she carried me to kiss her
hands; and She made me so pleased with her winning and hearty reception, that
it out-bad the indulgence and fondness of most Mothers. I cannot express,
indeed, what Respect and Affection this insprired in me toward her, no more
then I can tell you her tenderness toward me: I was her dearest Daughter, so
She ever termed me, and I was more Conversant, and much more constantly
attendant on her, then on Pheretime.

But as the Queen loved me with so great Affection, so the King fancied me with
no less Passion; and I was compelled at length to make the ones Amity a buckler
to defend me from the others Amors. Nor do I well know how to guess what had,
ere this, been become of Birinthea, if the Virtue and Discretion of so generous
a wife had not shielded me from the violent attempts of so unsuitable a Husband,
who yet, practiced a long reserved silence, ere she would make her tongue my
advocate. We still were sharers in all the divertizements and pasttimes at
Court, no Assembly could be thought complete that had not brought us in, and
those that had been unacquainted with our condition, would sooner have judged
us to be Princesses of his blood, then distressed Captives, and truly I must
needs confess the Noble Usage we then had, made our condition very supportable,
and setting aside, the liberty of residing at our own home, my Mother still
remained in the Rank of a Queen; and her Children of Royal Princes. The soft
cords of our Captivity admitted but few Pressures or Regrets, and Cyaxares took
so hearty a delight in chearing and diverting us, that we had scarce the
leisure to reflect on our late troubles: but as no excess or violence lasts
long: our fair days were soon over-cast with blackness, and those early
blossoms nipt at their first pretty blooming; for I then began to know that
Pheretime, Phraorte and Arthemisa owed all the goodness and respect paid them
in that Court, to the wild passion Cyaxares till then kept clossested in his
heart for me.

One day, when the purity of the air, had tempted me to walk with my Maids in,
those pleasant allies, through the Royal park, which lead toward the brook, he
happened to be very near me, ere I was aware: which gave him opportunity to
overhear what I spoke to my Maid named Diomar, who has ever been my chiefest
confident, and taking occasion to continue the very same discourse rather then
seem to interrupt what then my thoughts were busied with, he presented me his
hand, and leading me still in the same walk, as well as words, cunningly
wiredrawd them to his own ends, which having engaged me to attention he
prosecuted thus.

If all these pleasing objects in this Park, the pretty children and products
of Art and Nature were not inanimate, how glorious would they esteem themselves
to be so honored with your fancy and delight in them: but give me leave to
answer for them to all you say, the satisfaction you expressed concerns me,
since I am Master of them, who am too happy that there is any thing belonging
to me has the power to please or content you. Your Majesty, replied I, not
knowing whither his discourse tended, does almost rob me of the means to thank
you for those favors you impart, by endeavoring to persuade me that it is
some advantage to you that I am so well satisfied with these objects. But my
opin^on must take the confidence to dispute this a little with your civility,
and you, I know, will pardon me, when I dare tell you: that it is some wrong to
your own virtue, to make your felicity consist in my sole approbation, rather
then seek for it, in its own proper origin and center, since none, I humbly
think can be expected from me sufficiently correspondent to your great bounty.
It Is I, that with more reason should value it able sing to be in such a
Monarch's power, who takes no other advantage of our Captivity, then the
frequent occasions to make known his generosity, and who is so profuse of his
grace and favors, that we may reckon it a gain to have left our liberty, which
cannot be so highly prized by any one, but they would freely forfeit it, to
enjoy what you so readily confer each moment.

Spare, Madam replied, the King, spare this discourse for something that better
deserves it, and if I have been so fortunate as to oblige you to tell me so:
believe Birinthea, that all the cheap observances you have yet met with, are
but the small effects of that greater inclination I have for the honor of your
service. But what must I now hope for after this declaration, can you with
justice disesteem a cause, whose effects you praise so rarely, Great King, said
I, those two things have too far engaged me already: but the acquaintance you
have with my present condition and your own, will tell you, that it is less in
my power to correspond with the one then the other, and besides what can you
rationally expect from a Princess that has not so much as her own liberty. That
she should, answered he to interrupt me, accept of the present I now make of
mine in retaliation, that she would vouchsafe to be my Sovereign, and suffer me
to be her servant. You have a mind to prove, reparted I, whether I am capable
of presumption your Majesty delights in this trial, but I beseech you to
believe, that the honors you have baited your temptations withal, are too
weak to violate my Respect and Modesty, and I shall borrow so much Humility
from my Virtue as to assure you, that I shall never own so great a vanity,
since I am instructed by my own defects to declare, that I have not a stock
sufficient to claim the merit of the meanest favor, I would now thank you
for. These evasions, Birinthea; are witty, replied he, and I perceive that I
must court you rather with effectual services then words, and I will follow
that method hereafter, and make good what I intend for your satisfaction by
more authentic performances, which shall write my affection in more, noble
characters, since you believe but slightly when I speak them.

He left me with this compliment, and Diamar, who had taken notice that our
converse was too eager to be of an ordinary concern only, came to me as soon as
he was absented, and desired to know, what might be the discourse; that had
called so much color into my face. I would not hide the truth of it from her,
to prevent her judgment by my instructions from being seduced by the King, who
I was confident would endeavor to corrupt her, and having summoned all our
reason to aid us in our consultation what to do in this case, I resolved to
dissemble, and make the King know, I reckned all this but as gallantry and
formal complaisance, and strictly commanded her not to discover it to any
other, and likewise to give me an exact account if ever the King made any
discourse to her concerning it.

Many days past over in which Cyazares said no more of this passion, whilst he
continued to do us all the good offices could be expected: but in the end
being tired with such a fruitless patience, and spurd on by desires, he
repeated all those former protestations, with such pressing words, and vehement
motions, that I apprehended he would have forgoteen all sobriety and sense of
honor. In this conflict, I had much ado to manage his reason, if I treated him
civilly he became insolent, if I checqued his insolence, he flew into violence,
so that by the frequent changes of our looks, and the alterations of our
voices when we met, the judicious soon conjectured the matter of our discourse,
The Queen who is extremely discreet was one of the first that guessed it, and
conversing with me once in private, relying on the conjectures she had made,
she endeavored quaintly to know the certainty: but missed her design, for I
pretended not to understand her and turned the current of the inquiry into
another channel.

The doubt I dwelt upon whether I should make known the truth or not to her,
held me sometime in suspense. I feared she might become my Enemy if I declared
my self her rival, and on the other hand, I apprehended that if I should
conclude my privacy was but a token of my confederacy with the King. In the
conclusion, knowing the solidity of his virtue, I thought most convenient to
inform her fully of it, and beseeched her, when I had related every title to
believe that it was made a secret, only upon the account of freeing her from
the trouble such a report must needs have left upon the spirit of a Princess
that so entirely honored her husband.

This worthy Queen in lieu of showing any disturbance, told me mildly, She was
sorry her present condition proved an obstacle to my advancement, and that the
quality of the Kings mife should block up my way to the Median throne, where my
great merti^ would have placed me with more justice, and the Kings possion with
more satisfaction, but to repair the wrong her fortune did me, I might safely
promise my self all the favor she could possibly with honor compass for me,
above all she remmended the love and practice of virtue to me, as the only
assistance I could expect to league with against her husbands illegal flames
and attempts, and she forbad me also to disclese it either to my own Mother or
sister till she found it convenienter.

I was highly satisfied with her temper and goodness, she bearing so great a
share of the trouble; and to shun the Kings importunate courtship, who
persecuted me with a perpetual expostulation, I kept my self the most that I
could with her, because in her presence he could not so well have the liberty
of a secret speech, or more open address: but when he perceived that I avoided
those opportunities, he made use of a new Stratagem and engine, having gained
and notably instructed one of the Queens maids of her Chamber to solicit and
plead for him, who was so over diligent in her duty; that I had scarce a minute
of intermission when the Queen was absent. I told the Queen of this new
instrument, but she was forced to suffer her, to keep the King in temper, who
nevertheless began to show some anger, and sometimes borrowed the threatenings
of severity to quell my braving constancy, which beat off all the essaillants
he so long had kept in action against me.

What troubles, good gods, did I not suffer, and what considerations did I not
produce to sattisfy his passion, the fear he was in to displease me did
sometimes qualify his fury; but, in the end, being one day come to visit me at
the Queens, where I had lodged, hearing me answer him somewhat freely, not as a
slave, but a Princes, he likewise grew sharp, and turning away discontented,
he told me, that since I made no better use of the honor he was willing to
confer, in treating me so civilly, he would thenceforth make me know I was his
prisoner, and that his proffers were not so despicable, to be thus scorned and
refused, by a Captive as I was,

I protest, had he staid by me after this speech, I would have answered those
insolences, in a language fit for one of my birth and breeding: but he
withdrew so suddenly, that all I could do, was to wait on the Queen, where
without taking any notice which was present, I cast my self at her feet; and
let her know more by my sighs and tears, then any words I could utter, what
the now cause of my affliction was; every one much admired to see me in this
disorder, knowing the singular respect, and favors I so frequently received at
Court. She only knew what sorrows did oppress me; and to be the more
particularly informed, she caused all the rest to withdraw, into the
Antichamber: when I had related all the King had threatened, she endeavored by
a thousand persuasions and caresses to wipe away my tears: and thinking it no
longer necessary, to hide this unhappiness from Pheretime; she sent for her
with Phraorte and Arthemisa. Imagine, Cyrus, what their astonishment was, when
they were told the occasion of their coming. Had not the Queen of Media assured
my Mother of it, it would have hardly gained her belief, but in fine, as it
concerned us much to find a speedy remedy to allay the Kings violent heat and
resolution, they concluded together, that it was best for us to remove for a
while into the Country, that by my absence I might take away the effect of his
anger, with the cause of it, in which time, the Queen engaged to make it her
only endeavor to sooth and reclaim him to his wonted mildness again. To this
purpose, She proffered to carry us to one of her Country Houses, not above a
days Journey from Ecbatane. This resolution being fixed, to depart within a day
or two, I retired my self with my Mother, who was mightily troubled at this
disaster, and who would needs be exactly acquainted of every Circumstance
relating to this sad story.

The Evening before the day appointed, Phraorte being in my Chamber, we were
advertized that the King demanded to see me, I ran hastily into my Mothers, for
fear least he should surprise me in my own. Pheretime would needs go to receive
him, but he ascended with so much precipitation, that he entered into her
Chamber before she could get out to meet him, and having saluted her very
coldly, he came directly toward me, and said, That since I had an intent to
go into the Country, he was unwilling the Queen should rob him of the
advantage to procure me that divertisement.

I would have replied, but he gave me not the time, for taking me by the hand,
he entreated I would follow him. Then Pheretime and Arthemisa would have staid
me, Phraorte likewise ceazed on a Sword to rescue me, but was with held with
the rest, whose strugglings were too weak to oppose the violence of his Guards,
who by his order forced me thence into a Litter that waited at the Gate. He was
inexorable to all my tears and prayers, pity had left the lodging in his
heart, for a more rash and resolute guest, so after he had recommended the care
of my person, particularly to those were to convoy me, he sent me to a Castle,
whither I arrived about two hours after our setting forth. I know not what
became of Pheretime, Phraorte and Arthemisa, or how they behaved themselves
afterward, having heard no tidings of them ever since: But for my own part, I
was entertained in that Castle, with more respect, then if I had been the
Median Queen; I had Eunuques for m^ Guard, and Gentlewomen to attend me: I was
conducted to an apartment no less beautiful then splended, where Cyaxares had
contrived, that I should meet with all the delights imaginable to charm and
dispel those sorrows and troubles, which are incident to those in my condition.
Nothing that yields pleasure either to a curious ear or eye was omitted: for
when I had sullenly refused to taste of a choice Supper and Banquet, being
withdrawn into a pretty Closet to weep my fate at liberty, they sung so
harmoniously in the next Room, that at any other time I should both have
admired, and equally loved it, but I was wholly possessed with grief, and
besides that portion of vexation, I ressented a particular hate and disdain for
those entertainments, designed to delude and tempt me from my too just
apprehensions and fears of following dangers; if not ruin. This made their
subtle endeavors become so importunate, that it but raised up more, those
Spirits they would have laid, and instead of soothing me, urged me to send them
word by an attendant, that if their orders were to procure my content, they
could not find a more ready means then by their sudden silence.

Night was grown old, when I went to my bed, where I passed the remaining
tedious moments of it, in bitter sighs and tears, and not without the dreadful
suspicions of some following violence to succeed from Cyaxares. With the early
Light came an Eunuque into my Chamber, before I could start up, to bring me the
wish of a happy morning from him; and told me, that he had already waited a
long time for my rising. It would have been in vain to refuse his visit, since
it was as much out of my power, as it was in my will to hinder it; Therefore I
converted necessity into Policy, and received him with a more outward show of
Civility and Respect, then aversion.

As soon as he had Saluted me, he demanded if I were satisfied, with the
entertainment I had found, to which I replied, That if I might be allowed the
freedom to tell the unfeigned Truth, I should rather have elected to be treated
like a Captive and mean Slave, provided he had not torn me out of the Sanctuary
of my Mothers Arms and Bosom, then to be the unwilling and unhappy partaker of
all his Princely Entertainments, in this separation, upon which he made this
repartie, That excepting the presence of Pheretime, I should miss nothing of
that usual tenderness and care she still had for me.

A^l his discourse kept, thus, within the confines of modesty and respect, till
I was ready to go into the Litter again, then he commenced, but with a steady
moderation to Court me, and declare his love, and he implored me to excuse the
troubles and fatigues of that Journey, to which the necessity of his affairs,
as well as his reason and passion made him hurry me. I heartily insisted also
to conjure him, by all the powers of that affection he professed toward me, to
suffer either Pheretime or Arthemisa to come to me, but all I could obtain was
an assurance, that I should rest in as much security where he would leave me,
as if I were still in their eye and Guardianship.

At length I arrived, where he designed to lead me, The place was rarely
pleasant for its situation, The Castle being built on a little rising ground,
fastened to the foot of Mount Orontus, from whence lies a brave prospect
Eastward, being a large Champagne, and upon one hand a fertile Vale, whose
border is fringed with a pure Silver Stream, which wantonizing, with a
Serpentine, or indented Figure, and a slow stately pace, creepes through a
sumptuous Garden, where Art has turned it to a thousand Rivolets and Fountains,
to imbellish that New Eden, whose united streams meeting, again, together at
the lower end of this Paradize make a pleasing murmur, as if rejoicing at each
others sight after so long a separation, and swelling to their first breadth
make a Channel that divides this spacious Garden from the well-stored Park: but
as there is nothing can make a Prison delightful, where Golden shackles are no
less ponderous then Iron Gyves, the very restraint putting a stamp of
discontent and aversion on all those lesser diversions, so these served only
accidentally to augment my griefs. One of the greatest troubles I sustained in
this solitary confinement, was the want of a Compagnon, in whose faithful breast
I might deposi^e my secret thoughts, and I had ever languish'd in this
unhappiness, if the virtuous Queen, your Aunt, had not sent me the blessing of
a Letter by an Eunuque, who was entirely her Creature, and for whose fidelity
she was responsible. Narsetes, so was he called, in delivering me the Letter,
she favored me withal, told me the strickt and noble charge he had to be at my
devotion and command to the utmost of his ability.

The good Offices this Fellow rendered me, did much deminish my Melancholy, by
his means I often received and returned Messages to the Queen, and my Dear
Mother, and I was informed, that Cyaxares who had a good while left me,
intended shortly to renew his visit. I confess, also that, had it not been for
his Counsel, I should have been more refractory and stubborn at his summons to
receive him. I resolved indeed, to let him know my anger, and distaste; but to
moderate it so, withal, as not to exasperate his too much; but when he was
present, my slights were not proof against his passions, he discovered my
Stratagem and defeated it, and had certainly proceeded to violence, if Narsetes
had not prudently interposed, and stepped between my virtue and his lust, so that
for my part, I believe, I owe the preservation both of my Honor and Life to
that faithful Eunuque, since the King should never have robbed or deprived me of
the one, but with the other. Narsetes amuzed him with the promise of tempting
me to a compliance, as flexible as his desire was solicitous, if he would but
allow him a convenient time to effect it, Cyaxares consented, though with some
reluctance, to this trial; but he prescribed him so exact and short an
interval, that in the urgent necessity, not knowing what to act to divert this
ugly fate, I remembered that you had left Abracome in Ecbatane, to serve me, in
any thing my fortune might challenge of you.

Can I tell you without a blush, Cyrus, that you were the first I cast my eyes
and hopes upon, as the Protector of our shatterd Family. Your generosity, from
whose plentiful stock I had already gathered so much benefit, and the fair
Amity you had vowed with honor to me, created a most probable belief in me,
that as you alone were most able, so you would be most ready and wiling to
rescue her, who seemd to stand a favorite in your esteem. Upon these, hopes I
wrote that Letter, which came safe to your hand^, upon that Subject, and
addressing it covertly to my Mother; by Narsetes assistance, she gave Abracome
Commission to convey it to your self, which he performed with that faithful
diligence, that has obliged us both extremely to him. It was some time, before
I received the news of your loss, which that trusty Servant brought me, and
this was obstructed by the jealousies of a woman, whom the King kept as a spy
upon me, who had given him so many hints of distrust for you, that he once more
secretly conveyed me to a place unknown to any of my Relations. Narsetes was a
while suspended through fear from giving my Mother any notice of it, but
redoubling his design to save me, as Cyaxares did to ruin me, he cast about
till he had news of Abracomes return, and foreseeing the need he should stand
in of his person and assistance to complete his project of freeing me, his
industry happily light upon a handsome plot to bring it about.

Birinthea, would have pursued her History, when Zorbas entered the chamber, and
told them that the General of the Medes and Persians had sent in a Trumpetter,
to demand his prisonners.

The remainder of Cyrus's company, who could not get into the City time enough
with him, being returned to the Camp with Abracome, quickly gave intelligence
of his being taken: Tygranes, Artabase, Gadate, Gobrias and the chief Officers
of the Army, being assembled speedily to consult about this important accident,
resolved first to keep secret the absence of their General, whom they thought
Zorbas could not well detain, and send to redemand him as a private Officer,
whom he could not withold without a breach of the Articles of truce.

To induce Zorbas the more to restore him blindfold, and prevent the curiosity
he might have to seek the knowledge of him, they entreated a Lady, whom he loved
passionately, and who was at that time in their power and Camp, to write a
Ticket to him, which that generous Lady, to recompense the inestimable
obligations she owed Cyrus, immediately traced in these words.

Zorbas, if the opportunity of doing me a favor be pleasing or welcome, hardly
can you ever expect to meet with a fairer then this, or make a greater or
happier advantage of it then by returning those Persians speedily to the Camp,
that are now in your hands, whom you cannot justly detain, as not being
prisoners by Article, and whom you should deliver, because I request it.

Though this Ticket were not signed, Zorbas was so happy in the acquaintance of
the Characters, that he no sooner received and read it, but he immediately went
to Cyrus; to whom he said; showing him the paper, that he was hugely sorry to
part with him so soon, and wanted the due time to confirm so strickt an amity
as he much longed to contract with him, but that the decree he held in his
hand, had hastened him to come and let him know, he was at liberty with all his
party to return when they pleased: provided his wounded body could admit of a
remove. Cyrus not being able to conceive from whence Zorbas had so suddenly
received these orders, beseeched him to tell it; and Zorbas after he had read
it, assured him, it came from a person so much his Sovereign, that he would
count his life but a mean loss, if compared to her favor; and therefore could
consult no reason but hers in what concerned his obedience toward her, which
he would never forfeit, whilst in his power to perform; and therefore
earnestly entreated him to let her know at his return, how diligent and zealous
he had been to accomplish her injunctions.

Cyrus having replied, with as much generosity as Courtship, that this was the
least service he could pay to requite so much civility, desired him, that on
the next morning he might free him from the trouble of his unhandsome, because
unhealthy company; by reason of his wounds: Zorbas however consented not to it,
till the Chyrurgions had assured he might be removed without danger, and having
ended his complements with Cyrus, he renewed them by a fresh address to
Birinthea, shaping a thousand excuses for his men's insolences, and prayed her
to declare what satisfaction she thought fit to demand, knowing an ordinary
death was too cheap a justice and payment for so daring a crime, wherefore he
left them to her sentence. This Princess, whose mercy swayd above all other
sentiments, told him, that it would seem to relish of ingratitude, if after
such choice obligations, which wiped out all the other scores of injury, she
should be so unjust as to demand their lives. Wherefore as she had reason to be
concerned in all that related to him, so she not only would profess it, but
evidently prove it by begging their lives of him, as a particular grace and
mercy.

The night was now much wasted, and therefore Zorbas having answered in a few
words, that she might absolutely dispose of the lives and fortunes of those
insolent fellows, took his leave, and commanded the mistress of that house
where they lodged, to prepare a bed with all things convenient for Birinthea,
who immediately retired, to prevent any scandal might be taken, if she made any
longer stay with Cyrus. Zorbas likewise dispatched away the Trumpetter to the
Persian Army, to take order against the next morning for fetching away his
prisonners, and gave them special charge of the letter he returned in answer to
his Lady.

In the mean while, our Hero's excessive joy for the sight of his dear
Princess, was so great it quelled for some time the alarm which the beginning
of her discourse had disquieted and threatened him withal, and as one highly
satisfied with his own prosperous affection, he consumed the remainder of that
night with the pleasing fancies of happy lovers. But then the sadder
remembrance of those less promising speeches entering again into his mind, when
the first light of day peeped into his bed; Ah, cried he, Am I so much a false
friend to my self, as yet to flatter my hopes, did not Birinthea tell me, that
she could not love me? Nay which is more, that she ought not to encourage or
suffer me to love her? Great gods, wherefore then did she come to seek me out?
Does she expect the protection of one whose affection she cannot entertain? and
does she cast her self into his arms, whose flames she must and will banish
out of her heart? How unjust and cruel are you Birinthea, if you intend
seriously to re^ect my fair pretenses, since you know I cannot cherish life,
but as you cherish my love: But in fine, what is it you aim at? Must I employ
the unlucky residue of my power to advance the prosperity and bliss of some
triumphant rival? Must all my Army fight to tear of my own glorious Wreaths and
Crowns, and set them on another prouder head? What mean you, Birinthea, by
these services you claim? But -- O how impudent is this curiosity and
struggling? and how offensive to that respect and reverence I owe you; pardon
dear Princess, come lets obey, and serve her with a religious and blindfold
submission, and whether life or death be the success, bow under fate, since she
commands the trial; she is my Sovereign and may dispose of all my Fortunes,
and it must needs be as glorious, as it is doubtful now to Cyrus, to have
contributed toward her felicity, what ever be the event.

He was disturbed with these perplexing reflections, even whilst he slumbred,
till some attendants came to his bedside to tell him, if he had reposed enough,
he might be going thence as soon as he desired. The first inquiry he made, was
for his Princess, and to be informed whether she were yet ready, but
understanding that Zorbas entertained her till his uprising, he sent to excuse
his laziness, and being dressed and his wounds looked to, which were the least
of his pains, they carried him in a chayr to the place where Zorbas yet
conversed with Birinthea, and there having paid his best civilities and thanks
for the favors received at the Governors hands, who repented he was no more
prodigal of them, since the occasion of adding to the store was now removing
from him, they mutually embraced and bad farewell, and Cyrus was placed in a
litter which waited him, whilst Birinthea was not sparing of her compliments to
court Zorbas, who attended and helped her into the Chariot he had prepared, and
all those Persians that were in a fit posture to accompany them, had such
convenience as made their journey no less easy, then joyful, in regard of their
liberty, to them.

Cyrus and Birinthea would have taken their last adieu of Zorbas, at the Gates,
but he would needs convoy them till they meet the little troop which hastened to
fetch and guide them to the Camp, which were but few in number to avoid all
suspicion and inquiry. Then they repeated -- Myriads of new protestations and
vows of never dying friendship, and made their closs embraces the last
ceremonies and seals of future amity. When Cyrus had passed the verge of that
River, where he first discovered the ravishers of his dear Princess, Tygranes,
Artabase, Gadate and all the prime Officers of his Army, who waited at the
wood-side, came to congratulate his safe return. The Soldiers, all this time,
knew nothing till their General was in his Tent, then it was publishd openly
and they declared by their loud welcomes and acclamations, the hearty joy for
his return so fully, that by it may be guessed, what trouble and discontent
would have possessed each soul, had they not lived in the more happy ignorance
of his late absence.

The End.

