A Confession of my Faith, And A Reason of my Practice: OR, With who, and who
not, I can hold Church Fellowship, or the Communion of Saints. Showing, By
diverse Arguments, that though I dare not Communicate with the open Profane,
yet I can with those visible Saints that differ about WATER BAPTISM. Wherein Is
also discoursed whether that be the entering Ordinance into Fellowship, or no.

I believed and therefore have I spoken.

Psalm. 116.10. London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle
without Temple Bar. 1672.

TO THE READER.
SIR,
I Marvail not that both your self, and others do think my long Imprisonment
strange (or rather strangely of me for the sake of that) for verily I should
also have done it my self, had not the Holy Ghost long since forbidden me. 1
Pet. 4, 12. 1 John 3.13. Nay verily that notwithstanding, ad the adversary but
fastened the supposition of guilt upon me; my long trials might by this time
have put it beyond dispute: for I have not hitherto been so sordid, as to stand
to a Doctrine right or wrong; much less when so weighty an argument, as above
eleven years imprisonment, is continually dogging of me to weigh and pause, and
pause again, the grounds and foundation of those principles, for which I thus
have suffered: but having not only at my trial asserted them, but also since,
even all this tedious tract of time, in cool blood, a thousand times by the
word of God examined them, and found them good; I cannot, I dare not now revolt
or deny the same, on pain of eternal damnation.

And that my principles, and practice may be open to the view and judgment of
all men (though they stand, and fall to none but the word of God alone) I have
in this small treatise presented to this generation, A Confession of my Faith,
and a Reason of my Practice in the Worship of God; by which although it be
brief; Candid Christians, may I hope, without a violation to faith or love,
judge, I may have the root of the matter found in me.

Neither have I in this relation abusively presented my Reader, with other
doctrine or practices, then what I held, professed, and preached when
apprehended, and cast in Prison. Nor did I then, or now retain a Doctrine
besides, or which is not thereon grounded. The Subject I should have Preached
upon, even then when the Constable came, was, Do thou believe on the Son of
God? from whence I intended to show, the absolute need of Faith in Jesus
Christ; and that it was also a thing of the highest concern, for men to inquire
into, and to ask their own hearts whether they had it or no.

Faith, and Holiness, are my professed principles, with an endeavor, so far as
in me lies, to be at peace with all men. What shall I say, let mine enemies
themselves be judges, if any thing in these following doctrines, or if ought
that any Man has heard me preach, does, or has according to the true intent
of my words, savoured either of heresy of rebellion. I say again, let they
themselves be judges, if ought they find in my writing or preaching, does
render me worthy of almost twelve years imprisonment, or one that deserves to
be hanged, or banished for ever, according to their tremendous Sentence. Indeed
my principles are such, as lead me to a denial to communicate in the the things
of the Kingdom of Christ, with ungodly and open profane; neither can I in, or
by the superstitious inventions of this World, consent that my Soul should be
governed, in any of my approaches to God, because commanded to the contrary,
and commended for so refusing. Wherefore excepting this one thing, for which I
ought not to be rebuked; I shall I trust in despite of slander and falsehood,
discover my self at all times a peaceable, and an obedient Subject. But if
nothing will do, unless I make of my conscience a continual butchery, and
slaughter-shop, unless putting out my own eyes I commit me to the blind to lead
me, (as I doubt is desired by some) I have determined the Almighty God being my
help, and shield, yet to suffer, if frail life might continue so long, even
till the moss shall grow on mine eyebrows rather then thus to violate my
faith and principles. Will a man leave the Snow of Lebanon, that comes from
the rock of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters, that come from another
place be forsaken? Jer. 18.14. Has a Nation changed their Gods which yet are
no Gods? For all People will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will
walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. Micah 4.5.

Touching my Practice as to Communion with visible Saints, although not
Baptized with Water; I say, it is my present Judgment so to do, and am willing
to render a farther reason thereof; shall I see the leading hand of God thereto.

Thine in Bonds for the Gospel. J. B.

ERRATA.
Page 11. l. air. loss, p. 37. r. of, p. 38. ^ 13. r. repentance, p. 42. l. 22.
r. Christ, p. 43. l. 18. r. instruct, p. 50. l. 15. r. by, p. 51. l. 2. r. and
his, l. 8. s. touch, p. 56, l. 15. r. to, p. 57. l. 22. r. liars, p. 72. l. 12.
r. not, l. 22. r. neither, p. 80. l. 9. r. are the, p. 83. l. 21. r. render, p.
85. l. 16. r. to himself, p. 97. l. 25. r. the Soul, p. 102. l. 24. r. where no
Law, etc. p. 123. l. 7^ dele be, p. 124. l. 21. r. to maintain, p. 128, l. 9.
r. is the way.

A Confession of my Faith; and a reason of my practice in worship, etc.
1 I believe, that there is but one, only true God, and there is none other
but he. To us there is but one God the Father of whom are all things. And this
is life eternal that they might know thee, the only true God, etc. Mar. 12.32.
1 Cor, 8.8. Joh. 17.3. Acts. 17.24.

2. I believe, that this God is Almighty, Eternal, Invisible, Incomprehensible,
etc. I am the Almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect. The eternal
God is thy refuge. Now unto the king eternal, Immortal, invisible, the only
wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Genesis 17.1. Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27. 1 Timothy 1.17. Job. 11.7. Romans 11.33.

3. I believe, that this God is unspeakably perfect in all his attributes of
power, wisdom, justice, truth, holiness, mercy, love, etc. his power is said to
be eternal, his understanding and wisdom, infinite; he is called the just Lord
in opposition to all things; he is said to be truth it self and the God
thereof: There is none holy as the Lord. God is love. Can thou by searching
find out God; can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? Romans 1.20. Psa.
147.5. Zeph. 3.5. 2 These. 2.10. Deuteronomy. 32. 4 Job. 11.7.

4. I believe that in the Godhead, there are three persons or subsistances.
There are three that bare record in heaven. The Father, the Word, and the holy
Ghost. 1 John 5.7. see also, Genesis 1.26. chap. 3.22. chap. 11.7. and Esa. 6.8.

5. I believe, that these three are in Nature, Essence, and Eternity, equally
one. These three are one. 1 John 5.7.

6. I believe, there is a World to come. Heb. 2.5. chap. 6.5.

7. I believe, that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the
just, and unjust. Many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt. Marvail not at
this. For the hour is coming, in the which all that are in their graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good, to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
Damnation. Act. 24.15. Dan. 12.2. Joh. 5.28.

8. I believe, that they that shall be counted worthy of that world, and of the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage, neither
can they dye any more, for they are equal to the Angels, and are the children
of God, being the children of the resurrection. Luke 10.34.35, 36. Joh. 10.27,
28, 29. Rev. 7.16. chap. 20.6.

9. I believe, that those that dye impenitent, shall be tormented with the
Devil and his Angels, and shall be cast with them into the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.
Rev. 21.8. Mar. 9.43.48. Mat. 25 41.46. Joh. 5.29.

10. I believe, that because God is naturally holy and just, even as he is Good
and Merciful; therefore (all having sinned) none can be saved, without the
means of a redeemer. Then he is gracious unto him, and says, deliver him from
going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. We have redemption through his
blood, even the forgiveness of our sins. For which out shedding of blood, is no
remission. Job. 33.24. Col. 1.14. Hebr. 9.22,

11. I believe, that Jesus Christ our Lord himself is the redeemer. They
remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redeemer. Forasmuch
as ye know, that ye were not redeemed, with corruptible things, as silver and
Gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your Fathers; But
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish; and without
spot. Psa. 78.35. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

12. I believe, that the great reason why the Lord, the second person in the
Godhead, did cloth himself with our flesh and blood, was that he might be
capable of obtaining the redemption, that before the world, was intended for
us. Forasmuch then as the children were made partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same; (mark) that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil, and deliver them
who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage. When
the fullness of the time was Come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made
under the Law to redeem them that were under the Law. Wherefore it behooved him
in all things to be made like unto his brethren; that he might be a merciful,
and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God; To make reconciliation
for the sins of the people. For in that himself has suffered being tempted, he
is able also to succor them that are tempted. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. As it is written cursed is every
one that is hanged on a tree. That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the
Gentiles, through faith in Jesus Christ. Heb. 2.14, 15. Gal. 4, 4. Heb. 2. 17,
18. Gal. 3.13, 14.

13. I believe, that the time when he clothed himself with our flesh, was in
the days of the reign of Caesar Augustus; then, I say, and not till then, was
the word made flesh, or clothed with our nature. And it came to pass in those
days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world
should be taxed; And Joseph went up from Galilee, out of the City of Nazareth
unto Judah, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem; because he was
of the house and lineage of David, to be taxed with Mary his espoused wife being
great with child; And so it was, that while they were there, the days were
accomplished, that she should be delivered. This child was he of whom godly
Simeon was told by the holy Ghost, when he said, That he should not see death
until he had seen the Lord Christ. Joh 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. Luke 2.1, 2, 3,
6.25, 26, 27.

14. I believe, therefore that this very child, as before is testified, is both
God and man; the Christ of the living God. And she brought forth her first born
son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; Because there
was no room for them in the inn. And there were in the same Country shepherds
keeping watch over their flock by night, And Lo, the Angel of the Lord came
upon them, and the Glory of the Lord shined round about them: and they were
sore afraid. And the Angel said unto them fear not; for behold I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this
day in the City of David, a savior, which is Christ the Lord.

And this shall be a sign unto you; you shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling
clothes lying in a manger. Again. But while he thought on these things, behold
the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him; saying, Joseph, thou son of David,
fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is
of the holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his
name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins. Now all this was
done, that it might be fullfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet,
saying; Behold a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and
they shall call his name Immanuel, which being interpreted is God with us. Luke
2.7 12. Mat. 1.21, 22.

15. I believe, therefore that the righteousness, and redemption, by which we,
that believe, stand just before God, as saved from the curse of the Law, is the
righteousness, and redemption, that consists in the personal acts, and
performancas of this child Jesus; this God man the Lords Christ: it consists,
I say, in his personal fulfilling the law for us, to the utmost requirement of
the justice of God. Do not think (said he) that I am come to destroy the Law,
or the Prophet; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. By which means he
became the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes. For
what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh; God sending
his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and and for sin, oondemned sin in
the flesh. So finishing transgressions and making an end of sins, and making
reconciliation for iniquity, he brought in everlasting righteousness. Math.
5.17. Romans 10.3. chap. 8, 3. 1 John 3.8. 2 Timothy 1 9. Hebr. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
^0, Dan. 9.24.

16. I believe, that for the completing of this work, he was always sinless;
did always the things that pleased God's Justice, that every one of his acts,
both of doing and suffering, and rising again from the dead, was really and
infinitely perfect, being done by him as God-man: Wherefore his acts before he
dyed, are called, the righteousness of God, his blood, the blood of God; and
herein perceive we the love of God in that he laid down his life for us. The
Godhead which gave virtue to all the acts of the humane nature, was then in
perfect union with it, when he hanged upon the cross for our sins. Heb. 4.15.
chap. 7.26, 27, 28. Joh. 8.29. Acts. 10 30. Romans 3.21, 22. Act. 20.28. 1 John
3.16. Joh. 20, 28. Romans 1.4.

17. I believe, then that the righteousness that saves the sinner from the
wrath to come, is properly and personally Christ's, and ours but as we have
union with him; God by grace imputing it to us. Yea doubtless, and I count all
things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for
whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I
may win Christ' and be found in him, not having my own righteousness, which is
of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith. For of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. For he
has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Phil. 3, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.20, 21.

18. I believe, that God, as the reward of Christ's undertakings for us, has
exalted him to his own right hand, as our mediator, and given him a name above
every name; and has made him Lord of all, and judge of quick and dead: and all
this that we who believe might take courage to believe, and hope in God. And
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself unto death, even the death
of the cross, (where he dyed for our sins) wherefore God has highly alted him;
and given him a name above every name; That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things that are
under the earth. And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord
to the glory of God the Father. And he commanded us to preach unto the people,
and to testify, that it was he that was ordained of God to be the judge of
quick and dead. Who verily was foreordained, before the foundation of the
world, but was manifest in these last times for you, who by him do believe in
God, who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory that your faith and hope
might be in God, Ph. 2.5. -- 10. Ephesians. 1.18, -- 22. Act. 10.42. chapter 17.31. 1
Pet. 1.19, 20, 21.

19. I believe, that being on the right hand of God in heaven, he does there
effectually exercise the office of his excellent priesthood, and mediatorship,
presenting himself continually before God, in the righteousness which is
accomplished for us, when he was in the world. For by the efficacy of his
blood, he nor only went into the holy place, but being there, and having by it
obtained eternal redemption for us; now, as receiving the worth and merit
thereof from the Father; does bestow upon us grace, repentance, faith, and the
remission of sins: Yea he also received for us, the holy Ghost to be sent unto
us, to ascertain us of our adoption and Glory: For if he were on earth he
should not be a Priest; seeing then we have a great high priest, that is entered
into the heavens, Jesus the son of God. Let us hold fast our profession. For
there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
For by his own blood he entered into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with
hands, which are the figure of the true; but into heaven it self, now to appear
in the presence of God for us. Therefore being by the right hand of God
exalted; and having received of the Father, the promise of the holy Ghost; he
has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. Hebr. 8.4. 1 Timothy 2 5. Hebr.
9.12.24. Act. 5.31. chap. 2 33.

20. I believe, that being there, he shall so continue till the restitution of
all things, and then he shall come again in Glory, and shall sit in judgment
upon all flesh. And I believe; that according to his sentence, so shall their
judgment be. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out when the times of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the
Lord; and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you whom
the heaven must receive, until the restitution of all things, spoken of by the
mouth of all the holy prophets, since the world began. For this same Jesus
which ye have seen go up into heaven, shall so come, in like manner, as ye have
seen him go into heaven. For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the trumphet of God, etc. When the
son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then he
shall sit upon the throne of his Glory. And before him shall be gathered all
nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides
his sheep from the Goats. And he shall set his sheep on his right hand, but the
Goats on the left. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, Depart from me ye
Cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; And these
shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.
For the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.
Seeing then that all these things must be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in all holy conversation, and godlinels; looking for and
hastening unto the coming of the day of God. Wherein the heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat. Act. 3.19,
20, 21. 1 These. 4, 16. Act. 1.11. Mat. 25.31, 32, 33, 41, 46. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11,
12.

21. I believe that when he comes, his saints shall have a reward of grace, for
all their work and labor of Love which they showed to his name in the world.
And every man shall receive his own reward, according to his own labor. And
then shall every man have praise of God. And behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, to give to every man according as his work shall be.
Wherefore my beloved brethren, be steadfast, unmovable always abounding in the
work of the Lord; for as much as ye know your labor is not in vain in the Lord,
Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of inheritance, for you
serve the Lord Christ, 1 Cor. 3.8. chap. 4.5. Rev. 22.12. 1 Cor. 15, 58. Col 3,
24.

How Christ is made ours; or by what means this or that man, has that benefit
by him, us to stand just before God now, and in the day of judgment.
1. I believe, Of justification.
we being sinful Creatures in our selves, that no good thing done by us, can
procure of God the imputation of the righteousness of Jesus Christ. But that
the imputation thereof, is an act of grace, a free gift without our deserving.
Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. He called us, and saved us, with an holy calling; Not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus. Romans 3.24. chap. 5.17. 2 Timothy 1 9.

2. I believe also, that the power of imputing righteousness resideth only in
God by Christ: 1, Sin being the transgression of the Law; 2. The soul that has
sinned, being his creature, and the righteousness also his, and his only. Even
as David also describes the blessedness of the man, to whom God imputes
righteousness without works; saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sin is covered; Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin. Hence therefore it is said again, that men shall abundantly
utter the memory of his great goodness, and sing of his righteousness. For he
says in Moses, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion, on whom I will have compassion. So then, it is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Romans 4.6, 7.
Psalm. 145.7, Romans 9.15, 16.

3. I believe, that the offer of this righteousness, as tendered in the
Gospel, is to be received by faith: we still in the very act of receiving it,
judging our selves sinners in our selves. Oh wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death. I thank God through Jesus Christ.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. The Gospel is
preached in all nations for the obedience of faith. Being justified freely by
his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation ( a sacrifice to appease the displeasure of God)
through faith in his blood. To declare his righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past through the forbearance of God; to declare I say, at this
time his righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifyer of him that
believes on Jesus. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that
through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins; And by him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses. Rom, 7.24. Act. 16.31. Rom 3.24.25. Act. 13.38,
39.

4. I believe, that this faith, as it respects the imputation of this
righteousness, for justification before God; does put forth it self in such
acts, as purely respect the offer of a gift. It receives, accepts of,
imbraceth, or trusts to it. As many as received him to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into
the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief, In whom ye also trusted, after
that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation: In whom also
after that ye believed ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise. I
believe therefore, that as to my justication from the curse of the Law, I am,
as I stand in my self, ungodly, to receive accept of, embrace, and trust to the
righteousness, that is already provided by, and wrapped up in the personal doings
and sufferings of Christ: it being faith in that, and that only, that can
justify a sinner in the sight of God. Joh. 1.12. 1 Timothy 1.15. Heb. 11.13. Ephesians.
1.13.

5. I believe, that the faith that so does is not to be found with any but
those, in whom the Spirit of God by mighty power does work it; all others being
fearful and incredulous, dare not venture their souls and eternity upon it.
And hence it is called the faith that is wrought by the exceeding great and
mighty power of God: The faith of the operation of God. And hence it is that
others are said to be fearful, and so unbelieving. These with other ungodly
sinners must have their part in the lake of fire. Ephesians. 1.18, 19. Col. 2.12.
Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.19. Rev. 21.8.

6. I bilieve, that this faith is effectually wrought in none, but those which
before the world, were appointed unto Glory. And as many as were ordained unto
eternal life believed, That he might make known the riches of his Glory, upon
the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto Glory. We give thanks
unto God always for you all, making mention always of you in our prayers;
remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of love, and patience
of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ in the sight of God; knowing brethren,
beloved, your election of God, But of the rest he says, ye believed not
because ye are not of my sheep, as I said, which latter words, relate to the
16. v. which respects the election of God. Joh. 10.26.

Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias said again: he has blinded
their eyes, and hardened their hearts that they should not see with their eyes;
nor understand with their heart, and I should heal them. Act. 13.48. Romans 9.23.
1 These. 1.2, 3, 4. Joh. 10.26. chap. 12, 38, 39, 40.

Of Election.
1. I believe that Election is free and permanent, being founded in Grace, and
the unchangeable will of God. Even so then at this present time also there is a
remnant according to the election of Grace: And if by Grace, then it is no more
of works; otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is
no more of grace, otherwise work is no more work. Nevertheless the foundation
of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows who are his. In whom
also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined, according to the
purpose of him who works all things after the conusail of his own will. Romans
11.5, 6. 2 Timothy 2.19. Ephesians. 1.11.

2. I believe that this decree, choice or election, was before the foundation
of the world; and so before the elect themselves, had being in themselves; For
God who quickens the dead, and calls those things which be not as though
they were, stays not for the being of things, to determine his eternal purpose
by; but having all things present to, and in his wisdom, he made his choice
before the world was. Romans 4.17. Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9.

3. I believe, that the decree of election is so far off, from making works in
us foreseen, the ground or cause of the choice, that it contains in the
bowels of it, not only the persons, but the graces that accompany their
salvation. And hence it is, that it is said; Wa are predestined to be
conformed to the image of his son; not because we are, but, that we should be
holy and without blame before him in love. For we are his workmanship, created
in Christ Jesus, unto Good works, which God has before ordained that we
should walk in them. He blessed us according as he chose us in Christ. And
hence it is again that the salvation and calling of which we are now made
partakers, is no other then what was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began; according to his eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our
Lord. Ephesians, 1.3, 4. chap. 2 10. chap. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 1.9. Rom 8.26.

4 I believe that Christ Jesus is he in whom the elect are always considered,
and that without him there is neither election, Grace, nor salvation. Having
predestined us to the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ to himself;
according the good pleasure of his will: to the praise of the glory of his
grace: Wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved, In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches
of his grace. That in the dispensasation of the fullness of times, he might
gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and
which are in earth even in him. Neither is their salvation in any other: for
there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be
saved. Ephesians. 1.5, 6, 7.10. Act. 4.12.

5. I believe, that there is not any impediment attending the election of God,
that can hinder their conversion, and eternal salvation. Moreover whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified;
and whom he justified them he also glorified: What shall we say to these
things; if God be for us, who can be against us? Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's eiect? It is God that justifyeth: Who is he that condemns?
etc. What then? Israel has not obta^ned that which he seeks for; but the
election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. For Israel has not been
forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the Lord of hosts; though their land was
filled with sin, against the holy one of Israel. When Ananias made intercession
against Saul, saying, Lord I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he
has done to thy saints at Jerusalem, and here he has authority from the
high priest to bind all that call upon thy name. What said God unto him? Go thy
way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles,
and Kings, and the children of Israel, Romans 8.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. chap. 11.7.
Jer. 51.5. Act. 9.12, 13, 14, 15.

6 I believe that no man can know his election, but by his calling. The vessels
of mercy, which God before prepared unto Glory, do thus claim a share sherein:
Even us, say they, whom he has called, not only of the Jews, but also of the
Gentiles; As he also says in O see; I will call them my people, which were not
my people, and her beloved, which was not beloved, Romans 9.23, 24, ^5

7 I believe therefore, that election does not forestall or prevent the means
which are of God appointed to bring us to Christ, to grace and glory; but
rather puts a necessity upon the use and effect thereof; because they are
chosen to be brought to heaven that way: that is by the faith of Jesus Christ,
which is the end of effectual calling. Wherefore the rather brethren give
diligence to make your calling and election sure. 2 These. 2.13, 1 Pet. 1.12. 2
Pet. 1.10.

Of Calling.
1. I believe, that to effectual Calling the holy Ghost must accompany the word
of the Gospel, and that with mighty power: I mean that calling, which of God is
made to be the fruit of electing love. I know says Paul, to the Thessalonians,
brethren, beloved your election of God: for our Gospel came not unto you in
word only; but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance,
etc, 1 These. 1.4.8. Otherwise men will not, cannot, hear and turn. Samuel was
called four times, before he knew the voice of him that spoke from heaven. It
is said of them in Hosea, That as the Prophets called them so they went from
them; And instead of turning to them, sacrificed to Balaam, and burnt incense
to Graven Images. 1 Samuel 4.6.10. Hos. 11.2. The reason is, because men by
nature, are not only dead in sins, but enemies in their minds by reason of
wicked works: The call then is; Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Ephesians. 5.14. Understand; therefore that
effectual calling is like that word of Christ that raised Lazarus from the
dead: A word attended with an arm, that was omnipotent. Lazarus come forth: was
a word to the dead; but not only so: It was a word for the dead; a word that
raised him from the dead; a word that outwent all opposition; and that brought
him forth of the grave, though bound hand and foot therein. Joh. 11.43. Ephesians. 2
1, 2. Heb. 10.32. Gal. 1.15. Act. 9. And hence it is that calling, is sometimes
expressed by quickening, awakening, illuminating, or bringing them forth of
darkness to light that amazeth, and astonisheth them. For as it is a strange
thing for a man that lay long dead, or never saw the light with his eyes, to be
raised out of the grave, or to be made to see that which he could not so much
as once think of before, so it is with effectual calling 1 Pet. 2.9. Hence it
is that Paul, when called, stood trembling and was astonished: and that Peter
says, he has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light Ephesians. 4.21.
Act. 7.2. In effectual calling the voice of God is heard, and the gates of
heaven are opened: when God called Abraham, he appeared to him in glory. Oh
that of Ananius to Saul is experienced but by few. The God of our Fathers has
chosen thee, says he, that thou should know his will, and see that just
one, and should hear the voice of his mouth. Act. 22.14. True; Saul's call
was out of the ordinary way, but yet as to the matter, and truth of the work,
it was no other then all the chosen have, viz.

1. An effectual awakening about the evil of sin, and especially of unbelief.
Joh. 16.9. And therefore when the Lord God called Adam, he also made unto him,
an effectual discovery of sin; insomuch that he stripped him of all his
righteousness. Genesis 3. Thus he also served the Gealer. Yea it is such an
awakening, as by it, he sees he was without Christ, without hope, and a
stranger to the commonwealth of Israel, and without God in the word. Act.
16.29, 30. Ephesians, 2.12. Oh the dread and amazement that the guilt of sin brings
with it, when it is revealed by the God of heaven: and like to it is the sight of
mercy, when it pleases God, who calls us by his grace, to reveal his son in
us.

2. In effectual calling, there is great awakenings about the world to some,
and the glory of unseen things; The resurrection of the dead; and eternal
judgment; The salvation that God has prepared for them that love him; with
the blessedness that will attend us, and be upon us, at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, are great things in the soul that is under the awakening calls of
God. And hence we are said to be called to Glory, to the obtaining of the Glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These, 2.12. 2 These. 2.13 14.

3. In effectual calling, there is also a sanctifying virtue; And hence we are
said to be called with an holy calling, with an heavenly calling: Called to
glory and virtue. But ye are a chosen Generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, that you should show forth the praises of him who
has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. Heb. 3.1. 1 These. 4
7. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. Yea effectual calling has annexed to it, as its unseparable
companion, the promise of through sanctification. Faithful is he that has
called you, who also will do it. 1 These. 5 22 23, 24.

2. I believe, that effectual calling does therefore produce, 1. Faith; and
therefore it is said, that faith comes by hearing; by hearing the word that
calls us unto the grace of Christ. For by the word that calls us is Jesus
Christ held forth to us; and offered to be our righteousness; and therefore the
Apostle says again, that God has called us unto the fellowship of his son
Jesus Christ; that is to be made partakers of the riches of grace, and the
righteousness that is in him. Romans 10.17. Gal. 1.6. 1 Cor. 1.9.

2. It produces hope; It gives a ground to hope; and therefore hope is said
to be the hope of our calling. And again, Even us you are called in one hope of
your calling. Ephesians. 1.18, 19. chap. 4 4. Now the Godly wise know, whosoever misseth
of effectual calling, misseth of eternal life; because God justifyeth none but
them whom he calls; and glorifyes none but those whom he justifyes: And
therefore it is that Peter said before, Make your calling, and (so) your
election sure: make it sure, that is prove your calling right, by the word of
God. For whosoever staggereth at the certainty of his calling, cannot comfortably
hope for a share in eternal life. Remember the word unto thy servant, whereon
thou have caused me to hope. My soul fainted for thy salvation, but I hope in
thy word. Psa. 119.49.81.

3. It produces repentance; For when a man has heaven, and hell before his
eyes, (as he will have if he be under the power of effectual calling) or when a
man has a revelation of the mercy and justice of God, with an heart-drawing
invitation, to lay hold on the tender forgiveness of sins; and being made also
to behold the goodly beauty of holiness; it must needs be, that repentance
appears, and puts forth it self, unto self-revenging acts, for all its
wickedness which in the days of ignorance, it delighted in. And hence is that
saying, I came not to call the righteous but sinners to Repentance. For the
effecting of which, the preaching of the word of the Kingdom, is most proper:
Repent for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Mar. 2.17. chap. 1.10.

1. Repentane is a turning the heart to God in Christ: Of R^pentance.
a turning of it from sin, and the Devil, and darkness; to the goodness and
grace, and holiness that is in him. Wherefore they that of old are said to
repent are said to loath, and abhor themselves, for all their abominations. I
abhor my self; said Job, and repent in dust, and ashes. Ezekiel. 6.9. chap, 2.43.
chap. 36.31. Job. 42.5, 6. Ezekiel. 16. v. last.

2. Godly repentance: does not only affect the soul with the loathsome nature
of sin that is past; but fills the heart with godly hatred of sins that yet
may come; When Moses feared that through his being overburthened, with the care
of the children of Israel, some unruly, or sinful passions might show
themselves in him; what says he? I beseech thee kill me out of hand, if I have
found grace in thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness. Number. 14.13, 14,
15.

See also, how that, that Paul calls godly repentance, wrought in the upright
Corinthians. Behold says he, this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a
Godly sort; what carefulness it wrought in you? what clearing of your selves?
yea what fear? yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what revenge? In
all things you have approved your selves to be clear in this matter. 2 Cor.
7.9, 10, 11.

4. It produces also Love: Wherefore Paul when he had put the church in
remembrance that they were called of God; adds, That concerning brotherly
Love, Of Love.
they had no need that he should write unto them. 1 These. 4.17.19. As who
should say, If God be so kind to us, to forgive us our sins, to save our souls,
and to give us the kingdom of heaven; let these be motives beyond all other, to
provoke us to love again. Farther; If we that are thus beloved of God, are made
members of one man's body, all partakers of his grace; clothed all with his
glorious righteousness; and are together appointed to be the children of the
next world; why should we not love one another? Beloved, if God so loved us we
ought also to love one another. 1 John 4.11. And truly so we shall, if the true
grace of God be upon us; because we also see them to be the called of Jesus.
Travelers, that are of the same country, love, and take pleasure one in
another, when they meet in a strange Land, why? we sojourn here in a strange
country; with them that are heirs together with us of the promised kingdom and
glory. Heb. 11.9. Now as I said, this holy love, works by love; Mark, Love in
God, and Christ, when discovered, constrains us to love, 2 Cor. 5.14.

The name, therefore, and word, and truth of God in Christ, together with the
sincerity of Grace; of faith, and holiness in us, are the delightful objects
of this love. Psa. 119.47, 127.159. Psa. 5 11, and 69.36. and 1^9.132. and
101.6. For it imbraceth with delight, and complacency, but as it discerns the
image of God, and of Christ in the Soul, his presence in the ministry; and a
suitableness in our worship to the word, and mind of Christ. Psa. 26.8. and
27.4. and 84.1 4. 1 These. 5.13. Phil. 1.3 7. Ephesians. 4.32.

Love also has a blessed faculty, and heavenly; in bearing and suffering
afflictions, putting up wrongs, overlooking the infirmities of the brethren,
and in serving in all Christian offices the necessities of the Saints Charity
suffers long, and is kind, charity envyeth not, charity vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly; seeks not her own; is not
easily provoked; thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in
the truth; hears all things, believes all things; hops all things,
endures all things; charity never fails. 1 Cor 13. 1 Pet. 4.8. Gal. 5.13. In
a word it designeth a holy conversation in this world; that God, and Christ,
and the word of may be glorified thereby. 2 Cor. 11.10, 11, 12 1 Pet. 1.12.
chap. 3.16.

Of the Scriptures.
TOuching which word of God, I thus believe and confess. 1. That all the holy
scriptures are the words of God. All scriptures is given by inspiration of God.
For the prophecy of the scripture came not in old time by the will of man; but
holy men of God, speak as they were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3 16. 2
Pet. 1.21.

2 I believe that the holy scriptures, of themselves, without the addition of
humane inventions, are able to make the man of God perfect in all things; and
thoroughly to furnish him unto all good works. They are able to make thee wise
unto salvation through faith in Jesus Christ; and to thee in all other things,
that either respect the worship of God, or thy walking before all men. 2 Timothy
3.14.17. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21.

3. I believe, the great end why God committed the Scriptures to writing was;
that we might be instructed to Christ, taught how to believe, encouraged to
patience, and hope, for the grace that is to be brought unto us, at the
revelation of Jesus Christ; also, that we might understand what is sin, and how
to avoid the commission thereof. Joh. 20.31. 1 John 5 13. Romans 15.4 Concerning
the works of men (said David) by the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the
paths of the destroyer. Through thy precepts I get understanding, therefore I
hate every false way. I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. Psa. 17.4. and 119.104. v. 11.

4. I believe that they cannot be broken, but will certainly be fulfilled in
all the prophecies, threatenings, and promises, either to the salvation, or
damnation of men. They are like that flying roll, that will go over all the
earth to cut off and curse; In them is contained also the blessing; they preach
to us also the way of salvation; Take heed therefore lest that come upon you
which is written in the prophets, Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish,
For I work a work in your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe,
though a man declare it unto you. Gal 3.8. Acts 13.40, 41. Joh. 10 35. chap.
12.37.41. chap. 3.17, 18, 19. Zach. 5.2.3, 4.

5. I believe Jesus Christ, by the word of the scriptures, will judge all men
at the day of doom; For that is the book of the Law of the Lord, according to
Paul's Gospel. Joh. 12.41, 49. Rom 2.16.

6, I believe, that this God made the world, and all things that are therein,
for in Six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them
is; also that after the time of the making thereof, be disposed of it to the
children of men, with a preserve thereof for the children of God, that should
in all ages be born thereunto. When the most high divided to the nations their
inheritance, when he separated the Sons of Adam; he set the bounds of the
people according to the number of the children of Israel, for as he made of one
blood all nations of men for to dwell upon the face of the earth, so he has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. Acts
17; 24, Exo, 24, 19, Deu, 32, 8, Acts 17, 26.

Of Magistracy.
I believe, that Magistracy is Gods ordinance, which he has appointed for the
government of the whole world; And that it is a judgment of God, to be without
those ministers of God, which he has ordained to put wickedness to shame. Judge
18.7.

Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation; For rulers are not a
terror to good works but to the evil; Will thou not then be afraid of the
power, do that which is Good and thou shall have praise of the same: For he is
the minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, For he is the minister of God, a
revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil: Wherefore, ye must needs be
subject; not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake: For this cause pay
ye tribute also; for they are Gods ministers attending continually unto this
very thing. Romans 13. Many are the mercyes we receive, by a well qualified
Magistrate, and if any shall at any time be otherwise inclined, let us show our
christianity in a patient suffering for well doing, what it shall please God to
inflict by them.

A reason of my Practice in Worship,
HAving thus made confession of my Faith, I now come to show you my practice in
Worship, with the reasons thereof. The which I shall have occasion to touch,
under two distinct heads.

1, With whom I dare not hold communion.

2. With whom I dare.

Only, first, Note, that by the word Communion I mean fellowship in the things
of the Kingdom of Christ, or that which is commonly called Church communion,
the Communion of Saints. For in civil affairs and in things of this World that
are honest, I am not altogether tied up from the fornicators thereof; ( Cor. 5
9, 10) Wherefore in my following discourse understand me in the first sense.

Now, Then, I dare not have communion with them that profess not faith and
holiness; or that are not visible Saints by calling: but note that by this
assertion, I meddle not with the elect; but as he is a visible Saint by
calling; neither do I exclude the secret Hypocrite, if he be hid from me by
visible Saint ship. Wherefore I dare not have communion with men from a single
supposition, that they may be elect, neither dare I exclude the other from a
single supposing that he may be a secret Hypocrite. I meddle not here with
these things; I only exclude him that is not a visible Saint: Now he that is
visibly or openly profane, cannot be then a visible Saint,; for he that is a
visible Saint must profess faith, and repentance, and consequently holiness of
life: And with none else dare I communicate.

First, Because God himself has so strictly put the difference, both by word
and deed; For from the beginning, he did not only put a difference between the
Seed of the woman and the children of the wicked, only the instinct of grace
and change of the mind as his own, but did cast out from his presence the
father of all the ungodly, even cursed Cain when he showed himself open
profane, and banished him to go into the Land of the Runnagate or Vagabond,
where from Gods face, and so the privileges of the communion of Saints he was
ever after hid. Genesis 3.15. chap. 4 9, 10.14, 15, 16.

Besides, when after this, through the policy of Satan, the children of Cain,
and the seed of Seth, did commix themselves in worship, and by that means had
corrupted the way of God: what followed, but first, God judged it wickedness,
raised up Noah to preach against it, and after that, because they would not be
reclaimed, he brought the flood, upon the whole world of these ungodly; and
saved only Noah alive because he had kept himself righteous. Genesis 6.1, 2 v.
3.11, 1^, 13.

Here I could enlarge abundantly, and add many more instances of alike nature,
but I am here only for a truth upon things.

Secondly, Because it is so often commanded in the Scriptures, That all the
congregation should be holy. I am the Lord your God, ye shall therefore
sanctify your selves; and ye shall be holy for I am holy. Ye shall be holy,
for I the Lord your God am holy. Sanctify your selves therefore and be ye
holy, for I am the Lord your God. Besides, 1. The Gates of the temple were to
be shut against all other. Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation, that
keeps the truth may enter in: This Gate of the Lord into which the righteous
shall enter. Thus says the Lord, no stranger uncircumcised in heart, or
uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my sanctuary of any stranger which is
amongst the children of Israel. 2. Because, the things of worship are holy; Be
ye holy that bear the vessels of the Lord. 3. Because all the limits, and
bounds of communion are holy. This is the law of the house, upon the top of the
mountain, the whole limit thereof shall be most holy: Behold this is the Law of
the house. Lev. 11.44. chap. 19.2. chap. 20.7. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Esa. 26.2. Psa.
128.20. Eze. 43.12. chap. 44.9. Esa. 52.11.

Thirdly, I dare not have communion with them; Because the example of new
testament churches before us, have been a community of visible Saints. Paul to
the Romans, writes thus: To all that are at Rome, beloved of God, called to be
Saints, And to the rest of the Churches thus: Unto the Church of God which is
at Corinth; to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints.
To the Saints that are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus; To all
the Saints that are at Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons. To the Saints and
faithful brethren which are at Colosse. To the Church of the Thessalonians,
which is in God the Father; and in our Lord Jesus Christ; etc. Thus you see
under what denomination, those persons went of old, who were counted worthy to
be members of a visible Church of Christ. Romans 1 7. 1 Cor. 1 2. Ephesians. 1.1. Col.
1.2. Phil 1.1. 1 These. 1.1. Besides, the members of such Churches, go under
such characters as these.

1. The called of Christ Jesus. Romans 1.6.

2. Men that have drank into the spirit of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 12.13.

3. Persons in whom was God the Father. Ephesians. 4 6.

4. They were all made partakers of the joy of the Gospel Phil. 1 7.

5. Persons that were circumcised inwardly. Col. 2.11.

6. Persons that turned to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God. 1
These. 1.4.

7. Those that were the body of Christ, and members in particulars that is
those that were visibly such; because they made profession of faith, of
holiness, of repentance, of love to Christ, and of self denial, at their
receiving into fellowship.

Fourthly, I dare not hold communion with the open profane:

1. Because it is promised to the Church, that she shall dwell by her self;
that is, as she is a Church, and spiritual; Lo the people shall dwell aalone,
and shall not be reckoned among the nations. Number. 23, 9.

2. Because this is their privilege. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the
praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light.
1 Pet. 1.9, 10,

3. Because this is the fruit of the death of Christ, who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem as from all iniquity; and purify unto himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works. Tit. 3.14,

4. Because this is the Commandment: Save your selves from the untoward
generation. Act, 2, 40,

5. Because with such it is not possible we should have true and spiritual
communion. Be not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: For what
fellowship has righteousness, with unrighteousness? And what communion has
light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part
has he that believes with an infidel? Or what agreement has the temple of
God with Idols? For ye are the temple of the living God, as God has said, I
will dwell in them and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be
my people. Wherefore, Come out from among them, and be ye separate says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a
Father unto you says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 6, 14 -- 18.

Fifthly, I dare not hold communion with the open profane.

1. Because this would be plowing with on Ox, and an Ass together: heavenly
things suit best for communion in heavenly matters. Deuteronomy, 22.10.

2. It subjecteth not the nature of our discipline, which is not forced, but
free, in a professed subjection to the will and commandment of Christ: others
being excluded by God's own prohibition, Levit. 1.3. Romans 6.17, 2 Cor. 8, 12.
chap. 9 7.13. chap. 8.5.

Paul also when he exhorts Timothy to follow after righteousness; Faith,
Charity, Peace, etc. (which are the bowels of Church communion) he says, do it
with those that call on the name of the Lord, out of a pure heart. 2 Timothy 2, 22.

Sithly, In a word, to hold communion with the open profane, is most
pernicious and destructive.

1, 'Twas the wicked multitude, that fell a lusting, and that tempted Christ in
the desert, Number. 11.4.

2, It was the profane, heathen, of whom Israel learned, to worship Idols.
They were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works, and served their
Idols, which were a snare to them. Psa. 106.25, 26, 27,

3, It is the mingled people that God has threatened to plague with those
deadly punishments of his, with which he has threatened to punish Babylon it
self: saying; When a sword is upon her Glyars, her mighty, her chariots and
treasures; a sword also shall be upon the mingled people that are in the
midst of her.

And no marvail: for,

1, Mixed communion polluteth the ordinances of God. Say to the rebels says
the Lord God. Let it suffice you, of all your abominations, that you have
brought into my san uary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised
in flesh; to be in my sanctuary to pollute it; even my house, when ye offered
my bread and the fat, and the blood: And they have broken my Covenant, because
of all their abominations. Eze. 44.6, 7, 8.

2. It violateth the law; her priests have violated my Law, and profaned my
holy things. (how) they have put no difference, between the holy and profane;
neither have they showed difference between the unclean, and the clean. Eze.
22.6.

3, It prophaneth the holiness of God: Judah has dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in Israel, and Jerusalem: For Judah has profaned the
holiness of the Lord which he loved, and has married the daughter of a strange
God. Mal. 2, 11.

4. It defiles the truly Gracious; Know ye not that a little Leaven, leaveneth
the whole lump: Look diligently therefore lest any root of bitterness springing
up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. 1 Cor. 5, 6, Heb. 12, 15, 16.

Lastly, To conclude, as I said before, it provokes God to punish with severe
judgments: And therefore heed well.

1. As I said before, The drowning of the whole world was occasioned, by the
sons of God commixing themselves with the daughters of men; and the corruption
of worship that followed thereupon, Genesis 6, and 7 chapters.

2, He sent a plague upon the children of Israel, for joining themselves unto
the people of Moab; and for following their abominations in worship: And let no
man think, that now I have altered the state of the question: for it is all one
with the Church to Communicate with the profane; and to sacrifice, and offer
their gifts to the Devil: the reason is, because such have by their sin
forsaken the protection of heaven, and are given up to their own heart-lusts;
and left to be overcome of the wicked to whom they have joined their selves.
Number, 25, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Jos, 22, 17, Deuteronomy, 32, 16 19, Psa. 106, 30, 40, Deuteronomy,
12, Deuteronomy, 7, 1, 2 6, Neh, 1^, 26.

Join not your selves, says God, to the wicked, neither in religion nor
marriages; for they will turn away thy son from following me, that they may
serve other Gods; so will the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and
destroy thee suddenly. Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? ye.
among many nations was there no King like him who was beloved of his God,

Hear how Paul handles the point; This I say, says he, That the things which
the Gentiles or openly profane sacrifice; they sacrifice to Devils, and not to
God: And I would not that you should have fellowship with Devils. Ye cannot
drink of the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils: Ye cannot be partakers of
the table of the Lord, and of the table of Devils, Do we provoke the Lord to
jealousy? Are we stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10, 21, 22, 23. I conclude that
therefore it is an evil, and a dangerous thing to hold Church Communion with
the open profane, and ungodly. It polluteth his ordinances: It violateth his
Law: It prophaneth his holiness: It defiles his people; and provokes the Lord
to severe, and terrible judgments.

Object. But we can prove in all ages, there have been the open profane in the
Church of God.

Answ. In many ages indeed it has been so; but mark, they appeared not such,
when first they were received unto Communion neither was they with Gods liking,
as such to be retained among them, but in order to their admonition repentance
and amendment of life: of which if they failed; God presently threatened the
Church; and either cut them off from the Church, as he did the Idolaters,
Fornicators, murmurers, Tempters, Sabbath Breakers; with Korah, Dathan, Achan
and others: or else cut of them with the Church and all, as he served the ten
tribes at one time, and the two tribes at another. My God shall cast them away,
because they did not hearken to him, and they shall be wanderers among the
nations. Exodus, 1^, 48. 2 Cor. 6, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5; 10.12, 13. Exo. 32 25. Numb,
25. 1 9. chap. 21. 5^6 chap. 1.4. 37. chap. 16. chap. 15 32 36. Josh 72 Kin.
17. Ezekiel. 22. chap 23. Hos 9.17. Neh 13.1, 2, 3, I might here greatly enlarge
but I only intend brevity; yet let me tell you, that when Nehemiah understood
by the book of the Law of the Lord, that the Ammonite, and the Moabite should
not come into the congregation of God; they separated from Israel all the mixed
multitude. Many have pleaded for the profane, that they should abide in the
Church of God; but such have not considered, that Gods wrath at all times has
with great indignation has been showed against such offenders and their
conceits. Indeed they like not for to plead for them under that notion, but
rather as Korah, and his company. All the congregation is holy every one of
them Number. 16 3. But it makes no matter by what name they are called; if by
their deeds they show themselves openly wicked: for names, and notions,
sanctify not the heart, and nature: they make not virtues of vice, neither can
it save such advocates, from the heavy curse both of God and Men. The righteous
men they shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses; and after the
manner of women that shed-blood, because they are adulteresses, and blood is in
their hands. Pro. 17.15. chap. 24 24. Eze. 23.45.

Thus have I showed you with whom I dare not have communion: And now to show
you with whom I dare. But in order thereto, I desire you first to take notice;
That touching shaddowish, or figurative ordinances; I believe that Christ has
ordained but two in his Church, viz. Water baptism and the Supper of the Lord:
both which are of excellent use to the Church, in this world; they being to us
representations of the death, and resurrection of Christ, and are as, God shall
make them helps to our faith therein; But I count them not the fundamentals of
our Christianity; nor grounds or rule to communion with Saints: servants they
are, and our mystical Ministers, to teach and instruct us, in the most weighty
matters of the Kingdom of God: I therefore here declare my reverent esteem of
them; yet dare not remove them, as some do, from the place, and end, where by
God they are set and appointed; nor ascribe unto them more, then they were
ordered to have in their first, and primitive institution: It Is possible to
commit Idolatry, even with Gods own appointments: But I pass this, and come to
the thing propounded.

Secondly, then, I dare have communion; Church communion with those that are
visible Saints by calling; with those that by the word of the Gospel, have
been brought over to faith and holiness And it makes no matter to me, what
their life was heretofore, if they now be washed, if they be sanctified. if
they ^e justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of
our God. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Now in order to the discovery of this faith and
holiness, and so to fellowship in Church communion: I hold it requisite that a
faithful relation be made thereof by the party thus to be received; yea if need
be by witnesses also, for the satisfaction of the church, that she may receive
in faith and judgment, such as best shall suit her holy profession. Acts 9.26,
27, 28. 1 Cor. 16.10. 2 Cor. 8.23. Observe it; these Texts do respect
extraordinary officers; and yet see, that in order to their reception by the
Church, there was made to them a faithful relation, of the faith and holiness
of these very persons; For no man may intrude himself upon, or thrust himself
upon, or thrust himself into a Church of Christ: without the Church have first
the knowledge, and liking of the person to be received; If otherwise there is a
door opened for all the heretics in the world; yea for Devils also if they
appear in humane shapes. But Paul shows you the manner of receiving, by
pleading (after some disgrace thrown upon him by the false Apostles) for his
own admission of his companions: Receive us, says he, we have wronged no man;
we have defrauded no man; we have corrupted no man: and so concerning Timothy;
If Timothy come, says he, see that he may be with you without fear; for he
works the work of the Lord, as I also do. 2 Cor. 7.2. 1 Cor 16 10. Also when
Paul supposed that Titus might be suspected by some; see how he pleades for
him: If any do enquire of Titus; he is my partner, and fellow helper,
concerning you; or our brethren be enquired of, they are the messengers of the
Churches, and the glory of Christ. 2 Cor. 8.23. Phaebe also when she was to be
received by the Church at Rome; see how he speaks in her behalf: I commend
unto you Phaebe our sister, which is a servant of the Church, which is at
Ceuchrea; that ye receive her in the Lord, as becomes Saints; and that you
assist her in whatsoever business she has need of you; for she has been a
succourer of many, and of my self also Romans 16.1, 2 Yea when the Apostles, and
brethren sent their Epistles, from Jerusalem to Antioch: under what characters
do those go, that were the messengers to them? It seemed good, Saul was in
Antioch before, but being brought into suspicion by false Apostles, he had need
of a new commendation.
unto the holy Ghost, and to us. to send chosen men unto you, with our beloved
Barnabas, and Saul, men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. Acts 15.25, 26, 27. Now though the occasion upon which these
commendations were written, were not simply, or only, in order to Church
relation, but also for other causes; yet because the persons concerned were of
the Churches to be received as faithful, and such who would partake of Church
privileges with them, they have therefore, their faith, and faithfulness
relate to the Churches, as those that were particularly imbodyed there. Besides
Timothy and Titus being extrordinary officers, stood as members and officers in
every Church where they were received: Likewise Barnabas, and Saul, Judas, and
Silas, abode as members, and officers there where they were sent. 'Twas
requisite therefore that the Letters of recommendation, should be in substance
the same with that relation, that ought to be made to the Church, by or for the
person, that is to be imbodyed there. But to return; I dare have communion,
Church Communion with those that are visible Saints by calling.

Quest. But by what rule would you receive him into fellowship with your selves.

Answ Even by a discovery of their faith and holiness; and their declaration of
willingness to subject themselves to the laws and government of Christ in his
Church.

Quest. But do you not count that by water baptism, and not otherwise that
being the initiating, and entering ordinance, they ought to be received into
fellowship.

Answ. No; But tarry, and take my sense with my word. For herein lies the
mistake, To think that because in time past, Baptism was administered upon
conversion, that therefore it is the initiating, and entering ordinance into
Church Communion: when by the word no such thing is testified of it. Besides,
that it is not so, will be manifest, if we consider the nature, and power of
such an ordinance.

That ordinance then, that is the initiating or entering ordinance as before,
Does give to them that partake thereof, aright to; and a being of membership,
with that particular Church, by which it is administered. I say; a right to, and
a being of membership, without the addition of another Church-Act. This is
evident by the Law of circumcision, which was the initiating Law of old; For by
the administration of that very ordinance, the partaker thereof was forthwith
member of that congregation, without the addition of another Church-act. Genesis
17. This is declared in its first institution, and therefore it is called the
token of the Covenant: The token or sign of righteousness of Abraham's Faith,
and of the visible membership of those that joined themselves to the Church
with him; the very inlet into Church Communion; that gave a being of membership
among them And thus Moses himself expounds it; Every Manservant says he, that
is bought with money when thou have circumcised him, he shall eat of the
passover: without the addition of another Church-act, to empower him there
unto; his circumcision has already given him a being there, and so a right to,
and privilege in the blessing of Church-relation: A Forreigner and an hired
servant shall not eat thereof. (because not circumcised) but when a stranger
that sojourneth with thee. will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his
males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it. (for then he is
one of the Church) and he shall be as one born in the Laad; for no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. Exo. 12.43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49. Neither
could any other thing, according to the Law of Circumcision, give the devoutest
person that breathed, a being of membership with them. He that is born in thine
house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised, and the
uncircumcised manchild, whose flesh of his foreskin is not c^rcumcised, that
Soul shall becut off from his people. Genesis 17.13, 14. Note then, that that
which is the initiating ordinance, admits none into Church Communion, but
those that first partake thereof; The Angel sought to kill Moses himself, for
attempting to make his child a member without it. Note again, that as it
admits of none to membership without it, so as I said, the very act of
circumcising them, without the addition of another Church act, gave them a
being of membership with that very Church, by whom they were circumcised. Exo.
4.24, 25, 26. But none of this can be said of Baptism: First there is none
debarred or threatened to be cutoff from the Church; if they be not first
baptized: Secondly, neither does it give to the person baptized, a being of
membership, with this or that Church, by whose members he has been baptized.
John gathered no particular Church, yet was he the first, and great baptizer
with water; he preached Christ to come, and baptized with the baptism of
repentance, and left his Disciples to be gathered by him. Acts 19.3, 4, 5. And
to him shall the gathering of the people be Gen, 49.10, Besides after Christ's
ascension, Phillip baptized the Eunuch; but made him, by that, no member of any
particular Church: We only read, that Phillip was caught away from him, and
that the Eunuch saw him no more, but went on his way rejoicing to his Masters
and country of Ethiopia. Acts 8.35.40. Neither was Cornelius made a member of
the Church at Jerusalem, by his being baptized at Peter's commandment at
Caesarea. Acts 10. chap. 11. Neither were they that were converted at Antioch,
by them that were scattered from the Church at Jerusalem, by their baptism (if
they were baptized at all) joined to the Church at Jerusalem. Acts 11.19. No,
they were after gathered, and imbodyed among themselves, by other Church acts.
Acts 16. What shall I say? Into what particular Church was Lydia baptized by
Paul, or those first converts at Philippi? Yea even in the second of the Acts,
Baptizing and adding to the Church, appear to be acts distinct: but if Baptism
were the initiating ordinance, then was he that we Baptized made a member; made
a member of a particular Church, by the very Act of water baptism: Neither
ought any by Gods ordinance to have Baptized any, but with respect to the
admitting them by that Act, to a being of membership in this particular Church.
For if it be the initiating ordinance, it enters them into the Church: What
Church? Into a visible Church; Now there is no Church visible but that which is
particular; The Universal being utterly invisible, and known to none but God.
The person then that is baptized stands by that, a member of no Church at all,
neither of the visible, nor yet of the invisible. A visible Saint he is, but
not made so by Baptism; for he must be a visible Saint before, else he ought
not to be baptized Acts 8.37. Acts 9.17. Acts 16.33.

Take it again; Baptism makes thee no member of the Church, neither particular
nor universal: neither does it make thee a visible Saint: It therefore gives
thee neither right to, nor being of membership at all,

Quest. But why then were they Baptized.

Answ. That their own Faith by that figure might be strengthened in the death
and resurrection of Christ. And that themselves might see, that they have
professed themselves, dead, and buried, and risen with him to newness of life.
It did not seal to the Church that they were so (their satisfaction as to that
arose from better arguments) but taught the party himself, that he ought so to
be. Farther, It confirmed to his own conscience the forgiveness of sins, if by
unfeigned faith he laid hold upon Jesus Christ. Col. 2.12. Romans 6.3, 4. Gal.
3.26. 1 Cor. 15.29. Acts 2.38. Acts 22.16. 1 Pet. 3.21.

Now then, if Baptism be not the initiating ordinance, we must seek for entering
some other way, by some other appointment of Christ; unless we will say, that
without rule, without order and without an appointment of Christ, we may enter
into his visible Kingdom. The Church under the Law had their initiating and
entering ordinance, it must therefore be; unless we should think that Moses was
more punctual and exact then Christ, but that also our Lord has his entering
appointment. Now that which by Christ is made the door of entrance into the
Church, by that we may doubtless enter; and seeing Baptism is not that
ordinance, we ought not to seek to enter thereby, but may with good conscience
enter without it.

Quest. But by what rule then would you gather persons into Church Communion?

Answ. Even by that rule, by which they are discovered to the Church to be
visible Saints; and willing to be gathered into their body and fellowship. By
that word of God therefore, by which their Faith, experience, and conversation
(being examined) is found Good; by that the Church should receive them into
fellowship with them. Mark; Not as they practice things that are
circumstantial; but as their faith is commended by a word of faith, and their
conversation by a moral precept. Wherefore that is observable, that after Paul
had declared himself sound of faith; he falls down to the body of the Law:
Receive us, says he, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have
defrauded no man; he says not, I am baptized; but I have wronged no man, etc.
2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, 21. chap. 7.2. And if Churches after the confession of
faith, made more use of the ten commandments, to judge of the fitness of
persons by; they might not exceed by this seeming strictness christian
tenderness toward them, they receive to communion.

I will say therefore, that by the word of faith and of good works; moral
duties Gospellized; we ought to judge of the fitness of members by, by which we
ought also to receive them to fellowship: Eor he that in these things proves
sound, he has the antitype of circumsion, which was before the entering
ordinance. For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that
circumsion which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew which is one
inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, whose praise is
not of men but of God. Romans 2.28, 29. Phil. 3.1.2 3, 4.

Now a confession of this by word and life, makes this inward circumsion
visible; When you know him therefore to be thus circumcised, you ought to admit
him to the Lords passover: he, if any has a share, not only in Church
communion, but a visible right to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Again, For the Kingdom of God, or our Service to Christ, consists not in
meats or drinks, but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; And he
that in these things serves Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men.
Romans 14 18. Deuteronomy. 23.47. By which word righteousness he means as James does;
the royal Law, the perfect Law, which is the moral precept Evangelized or
delivered to us by the hand of Christ. James 2.8 9. The Law was given twice on
Sinai; The last time it was given with a proclamation of grace and mercy of
God, and of the pardon of sins going before. Exo. 19. and chap. 34.1.10 The
second giving is here intended; for so it comes after faith, which first
receives the proclamation of forgiveness; hence we are said to do this
righteousness in the joy and peace of the holy Ghost. Now he that in these
things serves Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men. For who is he
that can justly find fault with him that fullfilleth the royal Law from a
principle of Faith and Love. If ye fulfill the royal Law according to the
Scriptures, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; ye do well; ye are
approved of men. Again, he that has loved another has fullfilled the Law, for
love is the fulfilling of the Law. He then that serves Christ, according to
the royal Law, from faith and love going before, he is a fit person for
Church Communion; God accepts him, Men approve him. Now that the royal Law,
is the moral precept; read the place. James 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. It is also
called the law of liberty, because the bondage is taken away by forgiveness
going before; and this is it by which we are judged, as is said, meet or unmeet
for Church Communion, ande.

Therefore I say; the rule by which we receive Church Members; it is the word
of the Faith of Christ, and of the moral precept Evangelized, as I said before,
I am under the Law to Christ, says Paul. So when he forbideth us, communion
with men, they be such as are destitute of the Faith of Christ, and live in the
transgression of a moral precept: I have written unto you, says he, not to
keep company, if any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with
such an one no not to eat. He says not, if any man be not Baptized, have not
hands laid on him, or join with the unbaptized: these are fictions,
scriptureless notions. For this, Thou shall not commit Adultery; Thou shall not
Kill; Thou shall not Steal; Thou shall not bear false witness; Thou shall not
Covet. And if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
this saying, Thou shall Love thy Neighbor as thy self. Love thinks no ill to
his Neighbor; therefore Love is the fullfilling of the Law. Romans 13.9, 10.

The word of Faith, and the moral precept, is that which Paul injoyns the
Galathians and Philippians; still avoiding outward circumstances: hence
therefore when he had to the Galathians treated of Faith, he falls point blank
upon moral duties. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature: And as many as walk according to this
rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6 15, 16.
As many as walk, according to this rule; What rule? The rule by which men are
proved new creatures: The word of Faith and the moral precept. Wherefore Paul
exhorts the Ephesians, not to walk as other Gentiles, in the vanity of their
mind; seeing they had received Christ, and had heard him, and had been taught
by him, as the truth is in Jesus; that they would put off the old man; what is
that? Why, the former conversation, which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts; Lying, Anger, Sin, giving place to the Devil, corrupt
communication, all bitterness, wrath, clamor, evil speaking, with all malice;
and that they would put on the new man; What is that? That which is created in
righteousness and true holiness; A being renewed in the spirit of their mind,
and a putting away all these things. Ephesians. 4 For in Christ Jesus, these words
are put in of purpose, to show us the nature of new Testament administrations;
And how they differ from the old: In Moses an outward conformity, to an outward
and carnal ordinance, was sufficient to give (they subjecting themselves
thereto) a being of membership with the Jews: But in Christ jesus it is not so:
of Abraham's flesh was the national Jewish congregation; but it is Abraham's
Faith that makes new testament Churches; They that are of Faith, are the
children of faithful Abraham. They that are of Faith, the same are the
children of Abraham. So then the seed being now spiritual, the rule must needs
be spiritual also viz. the word of Faith and holiness; This is the Gospel
concision knife; sharper then any two edged sword; and that by which new
testament Saints are circumcised in heart, ears, and lips. For in Christ Jesus,
no outward and circumstantial thing; but the new creature; none subjects of the
visible Kingdom of Christ but visible Saints by calling; Now that which
manifests a person to be a visible Saint, must be conformity to the word of
Faith and Holiness. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts. Hearken how delightfully Paul handles the point? The
new creatures, are the Israel of God. The new creature has a rule by himself
to walk by; And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Paul to the Philippians commands as much;
where treating of his own practice in the doctrine of Faith and Holiness;
requires them to walk by the same rule, to mind the same thing. I desire to be
found in Christ; says he, I reach forward toward the things that are before;
my conversation is in heaven, and flatly opposite to them, whose God is their
belly, who glory in their shame; and who mind earthly things. Brethren, says
he, be ye followers together with me, and mark them that walk so; Mark them;
For what? For persons that are to be received into fellowship and the choycest
communion of Saints. And indeed this is the safest way to judge of the meetness
of persons by. For take away the confession of Faith and holiness; and what can
distinguish a Christian from a Turk? He that indeed receives faith, and that
squareth his life by the royal, perfect, moral precept; and that walks there,
in the joy and peace of the holy Ghost; no man can reject him; he cannot be a
man if he object against against him; not a man in Christ; not a man in
understanding. The Law is not made for a righteous man; neither to debar him
the communion of Saints if he desire it, nor to cast him out if he were in. But
for the Lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy
and profane: For murderers of fathers and for murderers of mothers; for
manslayers, for whoremongers: for them that defile themselves with mankind; for
manstealers, for prejured persons; and if there be any other thing contrary to
sound doctrine, according to the glorious Gospel which is committtd to my
trust. 1 Timothy, 1.9, 10, 11. Paul also, wen he would leave an everlasting
conviction upon the Ephesians concerning his Faith and Holiness; treating first
of the sufficiency of Christ's blood, and the grace of God to save us; he adds,
I have coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparel, he bringth them to the
moral precept, ^o prove the sincerity of his good conversation by. Acts
20.28.32.33. And when men have juggled what they can, and made never such a
prattle about religion; yet if their greatest excellency, as to the visibility
of their Saintship, lies in an outward conformity, to an outward circumstance
in religion; their profession is not worth two mites. Let us walk honestly, as
in the day, not in rioting, and drunkenss; not in chambering and wantonness;
not in strife and envy; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 13.13, 14. And it
is observable, That after the Apostle had in the 9th and 10th verses of this
chapter told us, that the moral precept is the rule of a good conversation; and
exhorted us to make no provision for the flesh; he adds (these things provided)
we may receive any that believe in Christ Jesus, unto communion with us; how
weak soever and dark in circumstantialls; and chiefly designs the proof
thereof, in the remaining part of his Epistle. For he that is of sound Faith,
and of conversation honest in the world; no man, however he may fail in
circumstances, may lightly reproach or vilify him. And indeed such persons are
honor of Christian congregations. Indeed he is prejudiced, for want of light
in those things about which he is dark; as of Baptism or the like; but seeing
that is not the initiating ordinance, or the visible character of a Saint; yea
seeing it makes no breach in a good and holy life; nor intrencheth upon any
man's right but his own; and seeing his Faith may be effectual without it, and
his life approved by the worst of his enemies; why should his friends, while he
keeps the Law, dishonor God by breaking of the same? Speak not evil one of
another brethren: he that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his
brother; speak evil of the Law and judges the Law: But if thou judge the Law
thou art not a doer of the Law, but a judge. Jam. 4.11. He that is judged, must
needs fail somewhere in the apprehension of him that judges him, else why is
he judged, But he must not fail in substance, for then he is worthy to be
judged. 1 Cor. 5.12. his failure is then in a circumstance, for which he ought
not to be judged.

Object. But notwithstanding all that you have said: Water baptism ought to go
before Church Membership; show me one in all the New Testament, that was
received into fellowship without it.

Answ. 1. That Water Baptism has formerly gone first is granted: But that it
ought of necessity so to do, I never saw proof.

2. None ever received it without light going before, unless they did play the
Hypocrite: And besides on marvail though in the primitive times it was so
generally practiced first, for the unconverted themselves know, it belonged to
the Disciples of Jesus Christ. Joh 1.24, 25, 26, 27. Yet that all that were
received into fellowship, were even then baptized first, would strain a weak
man's wit to prove it, if arguments were closely made upon these three texts of
holy scriptures (1 Cor. 1.14, 15, 16 Gal. 37.27. Rom 6.3.) But I pass them, and
say, If you can show me the Christian, that in the primitive times remained
dark about it, I will show you the Christian that was received wthout it.

But should I grant more then can be proved; viz. That Baptism were the
initiating ordinance; and that it once did, as circumcision of old, give a
being of membership to the partakers; yea set the case that men were forbidden
then to enter into fellowship without it: yet the case may so be, that these
things notwithstanding, men might be received into fellowship without it. All
these things intailed to circumcision; That was the initiating ordinance; that
gave being of membership; that was it without which it was positively
commanded, none should be received into fellowship, Jos. 5. Yet for all this
more then six hundred thousand were received into the Church without it; yea
received, and also retained there and that by Moses and Joshua, even those to
whom the Land was promised, when the uncircumcised were cut off. But why then
were they not circumcised? Doubtless there was a reason; either they wanted
time, or opportunity, or instruments, or something. But they could not ^ender a
bigger reason then this. I have no light therein: which is the cause at this
day that many a faithful man denies to take up the ordinance of Baptism, But I
say what ever the hinderance was, it mattereth not; our brethren have a
manifest one, an invincible one, one that all the men on earth nor Angels in
heaven cannot remove; For it is God that creates light; and for them to do it
without light would but prove them unfaithful to themselves, and make them
sinners against God; For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. Romans 14. If
therefore Moses and Joshuah thought fit to communicate with six hundred
thousand uncircumcised persons; when by the Law not one such ought to have been
received among them; why may not I have communion, the closest communion with
visible Saints as before described, although they want light in, and so cannot
submit to that, which of God was never made the wall of division betwixt us. I
shall therefore hold communion with such.

First. Because the true visible Saint has already subjected to that which is
better; even to the righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ; by
which he stands just before God; he also has made the most exact and strict
rule under heaven, that whereby he squares his life before men. He has like
precious Faith with the best of Saints, and a conversation according to light
received, becoming the Gospel of Christ: He is therefore to be received,
received I say, not by thy light, not for that in circumstances he jumpeth with
thy opinion; but according to his own Faith which he ought to keep himself
before G^d. Conscience I say, not thine own, but of the other; For why is my
liberty judged by another man's conscience. 1 Cor. 10.29. Some indeed do object
that what the Apostles wrote, they wrote to gathered Chruches, and so to such
as were baptized. And therefore the arguments that are in the Epistles about
things circumstantial, respect not the case in hand. But I will tell such, that
as to the first part of their objection, they are utterly under a mistake. The
first to the Corinthians, The Epistle of James, both them of Peter, and the
first Epistle of John, were expressly written to all the Godly, as well as
particular Churches. Again; if Water Baptism, as the circumstances with which
the Churches were pestered of old, trouble their peace, wound the consciences
of the Godly; dismember and break their fellowships, it is although an
ordinance for the present to be prudently shunned; for the edification of the
Church as I shall show anon, is to be preferred before it.

Secondly, and observe it; One Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism (not of Water, for by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one body) one
God and Father of all, who is above all and through all, and in you all; is a
sufficient rule for us to hold communion by, and also to endeavor the
maintaining that communion, and to keep it in unity, within the bond of peace
against all attempts what soever. Ephesians. 4.1 6. 1 Cor. 12.16.

Thirdly, I am bold therefore to have communion with such Heb. 6.2. Because
they also have the doctrine of Baptisms: I say the doctrins of them; For here
you must note, I distinguish between the doctrine and practice of Water Baptism;
The Doctrine being that which by the outward sign is presented to us, or which
by the outward circumstance of the act is preached to the believer: viz. The
death of Christ; My death with Christ; also his resurrection from the Dead, and
mine with him to newness of life. This is the doctrine which Baptism preaches,
or that which by the outward action is signified to the believing receiver. Now
I say, he that believes in Jesus Christ; that richer and better then that,
viz. is dead to sin, and that lives to God by him, he has the heart, power and
doctrine of Baptism: all then that he wants, is but the sign, the shadow, or
the outward circumstance thereof; Nor yet is that despised, but forborne for
want of light: The best of Baptisms he has; he is Baptized by that one spirit;
he has the heart of Water Baptism, he wants only the outward show, which if
he had; would not prove him a truly visible Saint; it would not tell me he had
grace in his heart: It is no Characteristical note to another, of my Sonship
with God; Indeed it is a sign to the person Baptized, and an help to his own
Faith; he should know by that circumstance, that he has received remission of
sins; if his Faith be as true, as his being Baptized is felt by him. But if for
want of light, he partake not of that sign, his Faith can see it in other
things, exceeding great and precious promises. Yea as I also have hinted
already, if he appear not a Brother before, he appears not a Brother by that,
And those that shall content themselves to make that the note of visible
Church Membership; I doubt make things not much better, the note of their
sonship with God:

Fourthly, I am bold to hold communion with visible Saints as before; because
God has communion with them; whose example in the case, we are straightly
commanded to follow. Receive you one another as Christ Jesus has received you,
says Paul, to the glory of God. Romans 15.1 6. Yea though they be Saints o
opinions contrary to you; The Strongest may sometimes be out of the way.
though it goes against the mind of them that are strong. We that are strong
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak; and not to please our selves. What
infirmityes? Those that are natural are incident to all, they are infirmityes
then that are sinful, that cause a man for want of light, to err in
circumstantials; And the reason upon which he ground this admonition is, that
Christ pleased not himself; but as it is written, the reproaches of them that
reproached thee, have fallen upon me. You say, to have communion with such weak
brethren, reproacheth your opinions, and practice; Grant it, your dullness and
deadness, and imperfections also reproach the holiness of God; If you say no,
for Christ has born our sins; The answer is still the same, Their sins also
are fallen upon Christ; He then that has taken away thy sins from before the
throne of God; has taken away their shortness in conformity to an outward
circumstance in religion. Both your infirmityes are fallen upon Christ; yea if
notwithstanding thy great sins; thou stand by Christ complete before the
Throne of God; why may not thy Brother. notwithstanding his little ones, stand
complete before thee in the Church.

Vain man! Think not by the streightness of thine order, in outward and bodily
conformity, to outward and shadowish circumstances, that thy peace is
maintained with God; for peace with God is by Faith in the blood of his cross;
who has born the reproaches of you both. Wherefore he that has communion with
God for Christ's sake, is as good and as worthy of the communion of Saints as
thy self. He erreth in a circumstance, thou errest in a substance; who must
bear these errors? Upon whom must these reproaches fall? Phil. 1.10. Some of
the things of God that are excellent have not been approved by some of the
Saints: What then? Must these for this be cast out of the Church? No, these
reproaches by which the wisdom of heaven is reproached have fal^en upon me,
says Christ. But to return; God has received him, Christ has received him,
therefore do you receive him. There is more solidity in this argument, then if
all the Churches of God had received him. This receiving then, because it is
set an example to the Church is such as must needs be visible to them; and it
best described by that word which discovers the visible Saint: Who so
therefore you can by the word, judge a visible Saint, one that walks with
God; you may judge by the self same word that God has received him. Now him
that God receives and holds communion with, him you should receive and hold
communion with. Will any say we cannot believe that God has received any but
such as are Baptized? I will not suppose a Brother so stupifyed; and therefore
to that I will not answer.

Receive him to the Glory of God; [To the Glory of God] is put in on purpose,
to show what dishonor they bring to God who despise to have communion with
them; who yet they know have communion with God. For how does this man or that
Church glorify God, or count the wisdom and holiness of heaven beyond them,
when they refuse communion with them; concerning whom, they are by the word
convinced, that they have communion with God.

Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one
toward another, according to Christ Jesus. Romans 15.5. By this word Patience,
Paul insinuates how many imperfections, the choycest Christians, do mingle
their best performances with. And by this of consolation, how readily God
overlooks, passes by them and comfort you notwithstanding. Now that this
mind should be in Christians one to another, is manifest; bcause Paul prays
that it might be so. But this is an heavenly gift, and therefore must be
fetched from thence. But let the patience of God, and the willingness of Christ
to bear the reproaches of the weak, and the consolations that they have in God,
notwithstanding, moderate your passions and put you upon prayer, to be minded
like Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, Because a failure in such a circumstatce as Water does not
unchristian us; This must needs be granted, not only from what was said
before; but for that thousands of thousands that could not consent thereto, as
we have more gloriously, then we are like to do, acquitted themselves and their
Christianity before men, and are now with the innumerable company of Angels,
and the spirits of just men made perfect: What is said of Eating or the
contrary may as to this be said of Water baptism. Neither if I be Baptized, am
I the better, neither if I be not. am I the worse: Not the better before God;
not the worse before men; still meaning as Paul does, provided I walk according
to my light with God: otherwise it is false; For if a man that sees it to be
his duty, shall despisingly neglect it; or if he that has no Faith therein
shall foolishly take it up; both these are for this the worse, being convicted
in themselves for transgressors. He therefore that does it according to his
light, does well; and he that does it not, or dare not do it for want of light
does not ill; for he approves his heart to be sincere with God: he dare not do
any thing but by light in the word. If therefore he be not by Grace a partaker
of light, in that circumstance which thou professest; yet he is a partaker of
that liberty and mercy by which thou stand. He has liberty to call God
Father, as thou: And to believe he shall be saved by Jesus: His Faith, as
thine, has purifyed his heart: He is tender of the Glory of God as thou art:
and can claim by Grace an Interest in Heaven; which thou must not do because of
Water: Ye are both then Christians before God and men without it: He that can
let him preach to himself by that: He that cannot let him preach to himself by
the promises; But yet let us rejoice in God together; let us exalt his name
together, Indeed the Baptized can thank God for that, for which another cannot;
But may not he that is unbaptized thank god for that which the baptized cannot
Would thou be content that I should judge thee, because thou can not for my
light give ^hanks with me? Why then should he judge me for that I cannot give
thanks with him for his? Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but
judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or occasion of offense in
his Brothers way. Romans 14.1^. And seeing the things wherein we exceed each
other, are such as neither make nor mar Christianity; let us love one another
and walk together by that glorious rule above specifyed, leaving each other in
all such circumstances to our own Master, to our own Faith. Who art thou that
judge another man's servant? To his own Master he stands or falls; yea he
shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. Romans 14.4.

Sixthly, I am therefore for holding communion thus, because the edification of
Souls in the Faith and holiness of the Gospel, is of greater concernment, then
an agreement in outward things; I say, it is of greater concernment with us, and
of far more profit to our Brother; then our agreeing in, or contesting for the
business of Water Baptism. Joh. 16.13. 1 Cor. 14.20. 2 Cor. 10 8 chap. 12.19.
Ephesians. 4.12. 2 Timothy ^.10, 17. 1 Cor. 8.1. chap. 18.1, 2. That the edification of
Soul, is of the greatest concern, is out of measure evident: because heaven and
eternal happiness are so immediately concerned therein. Besides, this is that
for which Christ dyed, for which the holy Ghost was given, yea for which the
Scriptures and the gifts of all the Godly are given to the Church; yea and if
gifts are not bent to this very work, the persons are said to be proud or
uncharitable that have them; and stand but for ciphers or worse among the
Churches of God. Farther, Edification is that that cherishes all grace, and
makes the Christians quick and lively, and makes sin lean and dwindling, and
fills the mouth with thanksgiving to God. But to contest with gracious men,
with men that walk with God; to shut such out of the Churches; because they
will not sin against their Souls, rendereth thee uncharitable. Romans 14.15.20
Thou seek to destroy the work of God; thou begettest contentions, janglings,
murmurings, and evil surmisings; thou ministrest occasion for whisperings,
backbitings, slanders and the like, rather then godly edifying; contrary to the
whole current of the scriptures and peace of all communityes. Let us therefore
leave off these contentions, and follow after things that make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another. Romans 14.19. And know that the
edification of the Church of God depends not upon, neither is tied to this or
that circumstance. Especially when there are in the hearts of the Godly;
different persuasions about it: then it becomes them in the wisdom of God, to
take more care for their peace and unity; then to widen or make large their
uncomfortable differences.

Although Aaron transgressed the Law, because he eat not the sin offering of
the people; yet seeing he could not do it with satisfaction to his own
conscience; Moses was content that he left it undone. Lev. 10.16.20.

Joshuah was so zealous against Eldad and Medad, for prophesying in the camp;
without first going to the Lord to the door of the tabernacle, as they were
commanded, that he desired Moses to forbid them; Number. 11.16: 26. but Moses
calls his zeal, envy, and prays to God for more such Prophets; knowing that
although they failed in a circumstance, they were right in that which was
better. The edification of the people in the camp was that which pleased Moses.

In Hezekiahs time; Though the people came to the passover in an undue manner;
and did eat it otherwise then it was written; yet the wise King would not
forbid them; but rather admitted it, knowing that their edification was of
greater concern, then to hold them to a circumstance or two. 2 Chro: 30.13. --
27. Yea God himself, did like the wisdom of the King, and healed, that is,
forgave the people at the prayer of Hezekias And observe it, notwithstanding
this disorder, as to circumstances; the feast was kept with great gladness; and
the Levites and the priests praised the Lord, day by day, singing with loud
instruments unto the Lord: yea there was not the like joy in Jerusalem, from
the the time of Solomon unto that same time What shall we say, all things must
give place to the profit of the people of God. Yea sometimes Laws themselves,
or their outward preservation; much more for Godly edifying; When Christ's
disciples plucked the ears of corn on the Sabbath (no doubt for very hunger)
and were rebuked by the Pharisees for it, us for that which was unlawful; How
did their lord succor them? By excusing them, and rebuking their adversaries.
Have ye not read, said he, what David did when he was an hungered; and they that
were with him, how he entered into the house of God, and did eat the shewbread,
which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them that were with him, but
for the Priests only; or have ye not read in the Law, how that on the
Sabbath Day, the Priests in the Temple profaned the Sabbath and were
blameless. Why blameless? Because they did it in order to the edification of
the people. Mat. 12, 1. ^6. If Laws and ordinances of old, have been broken and
the breach of them born with (when yet the observance of outward things was
more strictly commanded then now) when the profit and edification of the
people, came in competition, how much more may not we have communion,
Church Communion, no Law where is transgressed thereby.

Seventhly, Therefore I am for holding communion thus, because Love, which
above all things we are commanded to put on; is of much more worth then to
break about Baptism; Love is also more discovered when it receives for the
sake of Christ, and grace; then when it refuses for want of Water: And observe
it, as I have also said before, this exhortation to Love is grounded upon the
putting on of the new creature; which new creature has swallowed up all
distinctions, that have before been common among the Churches. As I am a Jew,
you are a Greek; I am circumcicised, you are not: I am free, you are bound.
Because Christ was all in all these, Put on therefore, says he, ( as the elect
of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercyes kindness, humbleness of mind, long
suffering, that is, with reference to the infirmities of the weak, forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another, If any man have a quarrel against any;
even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye: And above all things put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness. Col, 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Which
forbearing and forgiving respects not only private and personal injuries,
but also errors in judgment about inclinations and destinctions tending to
divisions, and separating upon the grounds laid down in v. 1^th, which how
little soever they now seem to us who are beyond them, were strong, and of
weight to them who in that day were entangled with them. Some Saints then, were
not free to preach to any but the Jews; denying the word of Life to the
Gentiles, and contending with them who preferred it to them: which was a
greater error then this of Baptism. Act. 11.1, 2, 3: 19. But what should we do
with such kind of Saints? Why love them still, forgive them, bear with them,
and maintain Church Communion with them. Why? Because they are new creatures,
because they are Christ's; For these swallow up all distinctions. Farther,
because they are elect and beloved of God. Divisions and distinctions are of
shorter date then election; let not them therefore that are but momentary and
hatched in darkness, break that bond that is from everlasting It is Love, not
Baptism that discovers us to the world to be Christ's Disciples. It is Love
that is the undoubted character of our interest in, and sonship with God: I
mean when we Love as Saints, and desire communion with others, because they
have fellowship one with another, in their fellowship with God the Father, and
his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John 1.2. And now though the truth and sincerity of our
Love to God, be then discovered when we keep his commandments, in love to his
name; yet we should remember again, that the two head and chief Commandments,
are Faith in Jesus, and Love to the brethren: 1 John 3.23. So then he that
pretends to Love, and yet seeks not the profit of his Brother in chief; he
Loves, but they are his own opinions and froward notions. Jam. 4.11. Romans
14.21. Love is the fulfilling of the Law; but he fulfills it not who judges,
and sets at nou^ht his Brother; that stumbleth, offends and makes weak
his Brother, and all for the sake of a circumstance, that to which he cannot
consent, except he sin against his own Soul, or Papist like, live by an
implicit Faith. Love therefore is sometimes more seen and showed, in
forbearing to urge and press what we know, then in publishing and imposing. I
could not says Paul, (Love would not let me) speak unto you as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ: I have fed you with Milk and
not with strong meat, for hitherto you have not been able to bear it; neither
yet now are you able. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. The Apostle considered not only the
knowledge that he had in the mysteries of Christ; but the temper, the growth,
and strength of the Churches, and accordingly kept back, or communicated to
them, what might be for their profit. Act 20.18, 19, 20. So Christ, I have many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. It may be some will count
these old and threadbare texts; but such must know, that the word of the Lord
must stand for ever. Isa. 40.8. And I should dare to say to such: if the best
of thy new shifts, be to slight, and abuse old Scriptures; It shows thou art
more fond of thy unwarrantable opinion, then swift to hear, and ready to yield
to the authority that is unfallible. But to conclude this, when we attempt to
force our Brother beyond his light, or to break his heart with grief, to thrust
him beyond his Faith, or to bar him from his privilege: how can we say, I
love? What shall I say? To have fellowship one with another for the sake of an
outward circumstance, or to make that the door to fellowship which God has
not; yea to make that the including, excluding charter: The bounds, bar, and
rule of Communion, when by the word of the everlasting testament there is no
warrant for it (to speak charitably) If it be not for want of Love, it is for
want of knowledge in the mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ. Strange! Take two
Christans equal in all points but this, nay let one go beyond the other far,
for grace and holiness; yet this circumstance of Water shall drown and sweep
away all his excellencies, not counting him worthy of that reception, that with
hand and heart shall be given a novice in religion, because he consents to
Water.

Eighthly, But for Gods people to divide into parties, or to shut each other
from Church communion; though from greater points, and upon higher pretenses,
then this of Water Baptism; has heretofore been counted carnal, and the actors
herein babish Christians: Paul and Apollo, Cephas, and Christ were doubtless
higher things then those about which we contend: yet when they made divisions
for them; how sharply are they rebuked? Are ye not Carnal, Carnal, Carnal?
For whereas there are among you, envyings, strife, divisions, or factions: are
you not carnal. 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. chap. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. While one says I am of
Paul, and another I am of Apollo; are you not carnal? See therefore from
whence arise all thy, endeavors, zeal and labor to accomplish divisions,
among the Godly; Let Paul or Cephas, or Christ himself be the burden of thy
song, yet the heart from whence they flow is carnal, and thy actions,
discoveries of childishness. But doubtless when these contentions were among
the Corinthians? and one man vilifyed that another might be promoted; a lift
with a carnal Brother, was thought great wisdom to widen the breach. But why
should he be rebuked, that said he was for Christ? because he was for him in
opposition to his holy Apostles. Hence he says, Is Christ divided; or separate
from his servants Note therefore that these divisions are deserted by the
persons the divisions, were made about; Neither Paul nor Apollo, nor Cephas,
nor Christ is here. Let the cry be never so loud, Christ, order, the rule, the
command, or the like; Carnality is but the bottom, and they are but babes that
do it; their zeal is but a puff, 1 Cor, 4.6. And observe it, the great
division at Corinth, was helped forward by Water Baptism: This the Apostle
intimates by; Were ye Baptized in the name of Paul? Ah Brethren! Carnal
Christians with outward circumstances, will if they be let alone, make sad work
in the Churches of Christ, against the spiritual growth of the same. But I
thank God, says Paul, that I Baptized none of you, etc. Not, but that it was
then an ordinance of God, but they abused it, in making parties thereby. I
Baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanus; men
of note among the Brethren, men of good judgment, and reverenced by the rest;
they can tell you I intended not to make a party to my self thereby. Besides I
know not whether I Baptized any other. By this negligent relating, who were
Baptized by him; he shows that he made no such matter of Baptism, as some in
these days do; nay, that he made no matter at all thereof, with respect to
Church Communion; for if he did not heed who himself had Baptized; he much less
heeded, who were Baptized by others; but if Baptism had been the initiating or
entering ordinance, and so appointed of God; no doubt he had made more
conscience thereof, then so lightly to pass it over. For Christ sent me not to
Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel. The Gospel then may be effectually preached,
and yet Baptism neither administered nor mentioned. The Gospel being good
tidings to sinners, upon the account of free grace through Christ; but Baptism
with things of like nature, are duties enjoined such a people who received the
Gospel before: I speak not this, because I would teach men to break the least
of the Commandments of God; but to persuade my brethren of the Baptized way,
not to hold too much thereupon; not to make it an essential of the Gospel of
Christ, nor yet of communion of Saints. He sent me not to Baptize: These words
are spoken with holy indignation against them that abuse this ordinance of
Christ. So when he speaks of the Ministers themselves, which also they had
abused; in his speaking, he as it were, trampleth upon them; as if they were
nothing at all. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo? He that planteth is not
any thing; neither is he that waters: but God that gives the increase: 1
Cor. 3.5: 7. Yet for all this, the Ministers and their ministry are a glorious
appointment of God in the World. Baptism also is a holy ordinance, but when
Satan abuses it, and wrencheth it out of its place; making that which was
ordained of God, for the edification of believers; the only weapon to break in
pieces, the love, the unity, the concord of Saints; then what is Baptism; then
neither is Baptism any thing And this is no new doctrine; For God by the mouth
of his Prophets of old; cried out against his own institutions, when abused by
his people: To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me? says
the Lord, I am full of burnt offerings, of rams; and the fat of fed Beasts: I
delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of he Goats: When you
come to appear before me, Who has required these things at your hands, to
tread my Courts? Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abominatien to me:
The new Moons and the Sabbaths, and the calling of assemblyes, I cannot away
with; it is iniqui^y, even the solemn meeting. Your new Moons, and your
appointed Feasts my Soul hates, they are a trouble to me, my Soul hates, I am
even weary to bear them. Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14. And yet all these were his own
appointments. But why then did he thus abhor them? Because they retained the
evil of their doings, and used them as they did other of his appointments. viz.
For strife and debate, and to strike with the fist of wickedness. chap. 58.4.
Wherefore when that of God, that is great, is overweighed by that which is
small; it is the wisdom of them that see it, to put load to the other end of
the scale; until the things thus abused, poise in their own place. But to pass
this, and proceed.

Ninthly, If we shall reject visible Saints by calling, Saints that have
communion with God; that have received the Law, at the hand of Christ, that are
of holy conversation among men; they desiring to have communion with us, as
much as in us lies, we take from them their very privilege, and the blessings
to which they are born of God: For Paul says, not only to the gathered Church
at Corinth, but to all scattered Saints that in every place call upon the name
of the Lord: That Jesus Christ is theirs, That Paul and Apollo, and the World,
and Life, and Death, and all things are theirs, because they are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. But says he, let no man glory in men, such as Paul and Cephas,
though these were excellent: because this privilege comes to you upon another
bottom, even by Faith of Jesus Christ. Drink you all of this, is intailed to
Faith, not Baptism: Nay Baptized persons may yet be excluded this; when he that
discerns the Lords body has right, and privilege to it. 1 Cor. 11.28, 29.
But to exclude Christians from Church communion, and to debar them their
Heaven-born privileges, for the want of that which yet God never made a wall
of division between us.

1. This looks too like a spirit of persecution. Job. 19.25, 26, 27, 28.

2. It respects more a form, then the spirit, and power of Godliness. 2 Timothy
3.5.

3. This is to make Laws, where God has made none, and to be wise above what
is written; contrary to Gods word, and our own principles.

4. It is a directing of the Spirit of God.

5. It binds all men's Faith and light to mine opinion.

6. It takes away the Childrens Bread.

7. It withholdeth from them the increase of Faith.

8. It tends to harden the hearts of the wicked.

9. It tends to make wicked the Hearts of weak Christians.

10 It sets open a door to all temptations

11. It tempts the Devil to f^l upon those that are alone, and have none t^
help them.

12. It is the Nursery of all vain janglings, backbitings, and strangenes among
the Christians.

13. It occasioneth the World to reproach us.

14. It holds staggering consciences, in doubt of the right way of the Lord.

15. It gives Occasion to many to turn aside to most dangerous heresies.

16. It abuses the holy Scriptures; It wresteth Gods ordinances out of their
place.

17. It is a Prop to Antichrist.

18. Shall I add, It is not that which greatly prevailed to bring down these
judgments, which at present we feel and groan under; I will dare to say, it was
the cause thereof.

Tenthly, and Lastly. Bear with one word farther: What greater contempt can be
thrown upon the Saints; then for their Brethren to cast them off, or to debar
them Church communion? Think you not that the World may groundly say, Some
great iniquity lies hid in the skirts of your Brethren; when in truth the
transgression is yet your own? But I say what can the Church do more to the
sinner or open profane? Civil commerce you will have with the worst, and what
more have you with these? Perhaps you will say we can pray and Preach with
these, and hold them Christians, Saints, and Godly. Well but let me ask you one
word farther: Do you believe, that of very conscience, they cannot consent, as
you, to that of Water baptism? And that if they had light therein, they would
as willingly do it as you? Why then as I have showed you our refusal to hold
communion with them is without a ground from the word of God.

But can you commit your Soul to their Ministry, and join with them in Prayer;
and yet not count them meet for other Gospel p^iviledges? I would know by what
Scripture you do it? Perhaps you will say I commit not my Sou to their
Ministry, only hear them occasionally for trial. If this be all the respect
thou have for them and their Ministry, thou may have as much for the worst
that pisseth against the Wall. But if thou can hear them as Gods Ministers.
and sit under their Ministry as Gods ordinance; then show me where God has
such a Gospel Ministry, as that the persons Ministering, may not though desiring
it, be admitted with you to the closest communion of Saints. But if thou sitest
under their Ministry for fleshly politic ends; thou hear the word like an
Atheist, and art thy self, while thou judge thy Brother, in the practice of
the worst of men. But I say, where do you find this peicemeal communion with
men that profess Faith and Holiness as you, and separation from the World.

If you object that my Principles lead me to have communion with all; I answer
with all as before described; if they will have communion with me.

Object. Then you may have communion with the members of Antichrist.

Answ. If there be a visible Saint yet remaining in that Church; let him come
to us, and we will have communion with him.

Quest, What! Though he yet stand a member of that sinful number, and profess
himself one of them?

Answ. You suppose an impossibility; For it cannot be that at the same time, a
man should visibly stand a member of two bodies, diametrically opposite one to
another Wherefore it must be supposed, that he who professes himself a member
of a Church of Christ; must forthwith, nay before, forsake the Antichristian
one. The which if he refuses to do, it is evident he does not sincerely desire
to have fellowship with the Saints.

But he says he cannot see that that company to which you stand opposite, and
conclude Antichristian, is indeed the Antichristian Church.

If so: he cannot desire to join with another, if he know them to be
professedly, and directly opposite.

I hold therefore to what I said at first; That if there be any Saints in the
Antichristian Church, my heart, and the door of our Congregation is open to
receive them, into closest fellowship with us.

Object. But how if they yet retain some Antichristian principles?

Answ. If they be such as eat out the bowels of a Church, so soon as they are
detected, he must be either be kept out, while out, or cast out, if in: For it
must be the prudence of every community, to preserve its own unity with peace
and truth: The which the Churches of Christ may do; and yet as I have showed
already, receive such persons as differ upon the point of Water Baptism: For
the doing or not doing of that, neither makes nor marreth, the bowels or
foundation of Church communion.

Object. But this is receiving for opinion sake; as before you said of us.

Answ. No, We receive him for the sake of Christ, and grace, and for our mutual
edification in the Faith; and that we respect not opinions, I mean in lesser
matters, it is evident; for things wherein we differ are no breach of communion
among us; We let every man have his own Faith in such things to himself before
God.

I now come to a short Application.

I, Keep a strict separation, I pray you, from communion with the open
profane; and let no man use his liberty in Church relation, as an occasion to
the flesh; but in Love serve one another; Looking diligently least any root of
bitterness (any poisonfull herb. Deuteronomy. 29.18.) springing up trouble you, and
thereby many be defiled And let those that before were reasons for my
separation; be motives to you maintain the like: and remember that when men
have said what they can for a sinful mixture in the worship of God, the arm of
the Lord is made bare against it.

2. In the midst of your zeal for the Lord, remember that the visible Saint is
his; and is privileged in all those spiritual things, that you have in the
word, and live in the practice of, and that he is to partake thereof, according
to his light therein. Quarrel not with him about things that are
circumstantial; but receive him in the Lord as becomes Saints; if he will not
have communion with you, the neglect is his, not yours. But says the open
profane; Why cannot we be reckoned Saints also? We have been Christened, we go
to Church, we take the Communion. Poor People! This will not do; for so long as
in Life and Conversation you appear to be open profane; we cannot unless we
sin, receive you into our fellowship: For by your ungodly lives you show that
you know not Christ; and while you are such by the word, you are reputed but
Beasts: Now then judge your selves, if it be not a strange community that
consists of men and Beasts: Let Beasts be with the Beasts; you know your
selves do so; you receive not your Horse nor your Hog to your Table; you put
them in a room by themselves Besides I have showed you before, that for many
reasons we cannot have communion with you.

1. The Church of God must be Holy. Lev. 11.44. chap 19 2. chap. 20.7. 1 Pet.
1.15, 16. Isa. 26.2. Psa. 128.20 Ezekiel. 43.12. chap. 44. 9. Isa. 52.11.

2. The example of the Churches of Christ before, has been a community of
visible Saints. Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1, 2. Col. 1.1. 1 These. 1.1, 2. 2
These. 1.1. Poor carnal man, there are many other reasons urged in this little
book, that show why we cannot have communion with thee: Not that we refuse of
pride or stoutness, or because we scorn you as men: No, we pity you, and pray
to God for you; and could if you were converted, with joy receive you to
fellowship with us: Did you never read in Daniel, That Iron is not mixed with
miry Clay? Dan. 2.43. No more can the Saints with you, in the worship of God,
and fellowship of the Gospel. When those you read of in the fourth of Ezra,
attempted to join in Temple work with the children of the captivity; what said
the children of Judah? you have nothing to do with us, to build an house to the
Lord our God; but we our selves together will build unto the Lord God of
Israel. etc. Ezra. 4 1, 2, 3.

I return now to those that are visible Saints by Calling, that stand at a
distance one from another, upon the accounts before specifyed: Brethren: Close;
Close; Be one as the Father and Christ is one.

1. This the way to convince the World that you are Christ's, and the Subjects
of one Lord; whereas the contrary makes them doubt it. Joh. 13.34, 35. Joh.
17.23,

2. This is the way to increase Love; that Grace so much desired by some, and
so little enjoined by others. 2 Cor. 7.14, 15.

3. This is the way to favor and taste the Spirit of God in each others
experience; for which if you find it in truth you cannot but bless (if you be
Saints) the name our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 These. 1.2, 3, 4.

4. This is the way to increase knowledge, or to see more in the word of God:
for that may be known by two; that is not seen by one. Isa. 52.8.

5. This is the way to remove secret jealousies, and murmurings one against the
other; yea this is the way to prevent much sin, and greatly to frustrate that
design of hell, Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19.

6. This is the way to bring them out of the World into fellowship; that now
stand off from our Gospel privileges, for the sake of our vain janglings,

7. This is the way to make Antichrist shake, totter and tumble. Isa 11.13, 14.

8. This is the way to leave Babylon, as an habitation for Devils only; and to
make it an hold for soul Spirits, and a cage only for every unclean and
hateful bird.

9. This is the way to hasten the work of Christ's Kingdom in the World; and to
forward his coming to the eternal judgment.

10. And this is the way to obtain much of that Well done, Good and Faithful
Servant, when you stand before his face.

I beseech you Brethren suffer the word of exhortation; for I have written a
Letter unto you in few words. Heb, 13.22.

FINIS.

