Man in Paradise: OR, A Philosophical Discourse vindicating The Soul's
Prerogative in discerning the TRUTHS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION with the EYE of
REASON.

Printed at London by James Cottrel.

Man in Paradise.
SUch is the excellency and original of Man's Soul, brooded and hatched by the
all-enlivening breath of God, fashioned by Divine artifice after the Idea and
most perfect exemplar, co^ceived first in the mind of God, whose architype it
does faithfully resemble: such, I say, is its excellency and noble extraction,
that the contemplation hereof cannot choose but heighten our serious thoughts
into admiration, and translate the considerate mind into an ecstasy. For
whatsoever excellencies the Great Monarch of Heaven and Earth has scattered
and diffused amongst the lower species and degrees of creatures; all these has
he concentred, collected, and moulden together in man's Soul; that by union,
whose property it is always to add virtue and efficacy to the things united,
they might become more perfect here, then in the creatures singly, and, (...),
super-excellent.

The natural abilities, which are the meanest of the Souls endowments, and as
it were, the dregs of all the rest, what luster and splendour do they show in
their sweet harmony, order, disposition, and sufficiency to attain the end for
which they were bestowed?

No sooner has the Embryon all its parts and Organs woven of fine spermatical
threeds, by the industry of the plastic or formative virtue, but it receives
from this divine particle of Air, vim nutritivam, a nutritive faculty, to
maintain the substance then begun: vim auctricem, an augmentative power, to
increase and bring it to a just quantity and bulk, that the Palace wherein this
noble Prince, the Soul, is to reside, may be completely built, and furnished
with necessaries fit to entertain so great a Majesty.

These powers have other subordinate faculties, as careful and thrifty
Handmaids, waiting upon them; wherein you may see the economy of a
well-ordered house. There is an attractive faculty, as a hand, to pull
nourishment in; and a retentive, to keep carefully what is gotten. A
concoctive, to fit and prepare what is so retained, for the use of the whole
body; which concoctive has also a distributive faculty, as another subordinate
Handmaid under her, whereby there is performed a just anadosis, or distribution
of matter to each several part according to its particular exigency. And under
all these, there is an expulsive faculty, which serves as a drudge to carry out
of the body the feculent part, or caput mortum, wherein there is no convenient
chyle remaining; as also, to make way for new matter to be contained, and then
concocted, as was the former.

Thus have we that pattern and Idea which all well-ordered Families, and
well-composed Commonwealths do imitate and follow.

Yet notwithstanding, the fabric of man thus kept, would in time decay, and
the species utterly perish, unless to prevent this, a generative power were
also implanted in him. In this the Philosopher acknowledges, (...), a Spice of
Divinity; in emulation of whose eternal continuance, Nature, whose strength
cannot maintain a solitary individuum to eternity, by this help preserves the
specifical unity, and so compleateth her desire.

Here I would ask, With what curious Pencil this plastic power draws forth the
lineaments and features of that body whose structure drew the Psalmist into
such admiration? Wonderful have thou made me behind and before. With whom does
it consult, to assign a due station and place for every member, leaving no
chasme or gap unfilled, and superadding nothing superfluous or in vain? what
Euclide or Master-Geometrician does it ask counsel of, to give a fit
proportion, a just dimension, and perfect Figure to every part? by what
Arithmetic does it count the number of the parts, and then by certain
paralellisms of extuberances behind and before, does so counterpoise the whole
body, that the countenance of man, and only man, may be erected toward
Heaven, there to behold his image as in a glass; whilst all other Creatures
look prone upon the Earth, out of which their earthy souls were first extracted?

Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,

Os homini sublime dedit: calumque tueri

Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.

The sensitive faculties are sublimed to a higher pitch, and may elevate our
minds to a higher degree of admiration. Who cannot but wonder at the swiftness
of the sensible species posting with all speed to the sense, and the quickness
and readiness of the sense to receive it? here you may see a vast mountain in a
moment of time, contracted into a small model, and dwelling in an angle and
corner of the eye. Who cannot but admire the faithfulness of the sensitive
Organs? who no sooner receive, but transmit their respective species, sending
them immediately to the common sense, as into some Common-councel-house, where
the busy imagination, by spelling, joining, and compounding them together,
reads a Lecture to the appetite to prove its assent or dissent, whilst other
species are commanded to their Cells, and reserved in the storehouse of memory
till need require them? Look back, and you may see the pellucid coats wherewith
the eyes are covered, the clear waters wherewith they are bedewed, the winding
labyrinth wherein the sound received into the ear must wander, till, beating
upon that drum-like membrain which through the ingenite Air propagates the
continued sound, the sense, by a (...), interceding, is married to the object:
look forward, and you shall see the appetite no sooner awaked, but the
locomotive faculty, a most obedient servant, puts the decree in execution;
earnestly prosecuting that good, or flying that evil, which the affection for
that time president shall dispose unto. In the mean time the passions, as love,
joy, hope, anger, fear, grief, etc. as Handmaids, are subservient, according
as they are respectively concerned in the object apprehended, whether good or
evil, past, present, or to come. In this sweet agreement, we may compare man's
Soul to an artificial Lu^e, and these to be the strings of it, upon which it
plays such ravishing Tunes, as would drive the considerate ear to an
astonishment or plain ecstasy. Anima creaturarum inferiorum compendium: centrum
in quod omnes perfectionu^ lineae concurrunt: speculum in quo suam quaeque
creatura faciem, sed long pulchriorem, contempletur: echo mirabilis, quae
solitarias nudasque voces a creaturis, aliis sigillatim expressas, multiplicato
and suaviori sono refert. The Soul is an abstract of inferior creatures: a
center wherein all the lines of perfections meet: a glass wherein each creature
may behold its face, but much fairer: an admirable echo which carries back the
naked and solitary voices of other creatures, by them singly expressed, in a
multiplied and sweeter sound.

But what are all these, compared with the rational powers of the Soul? what is
the sense, which traffiques only with gross bodies, and quailities from thence
emergent, compared with reason, by which the Soul negotiates with Angels and
immateriate beings, and by metaphysical and and abstruse notions, wings it self
up into the arms of him who breathed it first into the body of man?

In this upper room and higher loft of the Soul's residence, we may contemplate
the Soul, as a Monarch, wisely restraining or giving liberty to the
misunderstanding affections according to the rule of right reason. Here have we
man ruling in man, dressing and cultivating man, as another Paradise, wherein
is all possible variety, yet no confusion, no ataxy or disorder, no passions
contradicting one another, or tyrannizing over reason; no disturbance of mind,
no distemper of body, but a most admirable harmony of all things in the whole
universe of man.

Reason is that Scepter whereby the Soul does rule without tyranny, the will
and affections. Reason is that rod wherewith the Soul is kept in awe to obey
without servile fear, the great Monarch of Heaven and Earth.

By reason, the Soul discerns that there is a God; drawing one Argument from
the Creation of the World, which either did exist of it self, or was produced
by another: but it could not give a being to it self, seeing that it is
repugnant that any thing should be the cause of it self. Therefore the
consequence is necessary, that the World was made by another; and; such
another, as was the efficient cause thereof; not produced by any other former
efficient cause, but was of himself, and by himself from eternity: which can be
no other but God.

Another Argument the Soul: draws from the necessary dependence of a finite
being upon an infinite: for every thing in the World is finite, both in respect
of its essence and efficacy. Now every thing that is finite must necessarily be
limited by another, seeing it is impossible that any thing should give bounds
to it self: and there being not in things finite a progress to infinity, we
must at length come to some certain being which is not limited by another, but
is of it self essentially and virtually infinite: which can be no other but God.

A third Demonstration is taken from the necessary dependence of a secondary
cause upon a first: for unless we do here also grant a progress to infinity,
which is absurd; in ascending the scale of subordination of causes, we must at
length meet with one primary both efficient and final cause, having no other
cause superior or before it; which is only God.

A fourth Demonstration is taken from the necessary dependence of a contingent
and temporal being, upon an absolutely necessary and eternal being: for that
which is temporal and contingent, was not always, but commenced in time, and
had a beginning of its duration. Wherefore seeing it is absurd, to grant that
there was once nothing, and that which afterward was, gave unto it self a
beginning to be; we must conclude, that there was always an absolutely
necessary, and eternal being without all beginning; which is only God.

A fifth Argument the Soul uses to prove a Deity, is the necessary dependence
of all things that are good in an inferior order, upon some primary and chief
good: for we see amongst all things in the world which are good, some are more,
and others less good. Now seeing that all things are such more or less,
according as they do more or less participate of that which is most of all
such; it follows from hence, that there must necessarily be some Fountain of
good, from whence all other goods do flow, as offsprings thereof; by which they
are also measured: and this can be none other then only God.

Not only these, but many other rational Arguments the soul uses, to satisfy
her self fully in this Truth; as, the general consent of all people and
Nations; the dictate of Conscience, when there is none to accuse; the goodly
fabric of the world; and, the continued Order of all things preserved in their
first station, through all the vicissitude of generation and corruption;
intimating a wise Rectour and Governor upon whose nod and direction all things
depend.

No sooner does the Soul by suchlike Arguments thoroughly convince her self that
there is a God, but this heavenly creature, winged with Reason, soars yet
higher, endeavoring to see God's face, and to know what God is. Here she
approaches: but such is the transcendent splendor of his bright Majesty, that
she judges it impossible to look God in the face, or to know a priori what God
is, as Cicero says in his first Book De naturae Deorum, under the person of
Cotta: Rogas me quis and qualis sit Deus: auctore utar Simonide, de quo cum
quaesivisset hoc idem tyrannus Hiero, deliberandi causa sibi unum diem
postulavit: cum idem ex eo postridie quaereret, biduum petiit. Cum saepius
duplicaret numerum dierum, admiransque Hiero, quaereret cur ita faceret? Quia,
inquit, quanto diutius considero, tanto mihi res obscurior videtur. You ask me
who and what is God: I will use the speech of Simonides, who, when King Hiero
asked him the same question, desired a days time to deliberate concerning it.
The day after, when he asked him again, he desired two days. Having in this
manner diverse times doubled the number of days, Hiero wondering at him, asked,
Wherefore he did so? Because, says he, the longer time I take to consider upon
this matter, the more obscure it appears unto me. And indeed, those Arguments
are infallible which are usually brought for this Opinion, viz. that it is
impossible for the Soul to know God a priori.

Yet though she cannot see his face, she has leave granted her to behold his
back-parts: though she cannot strictly define the Deity, yet she may in some
manner describe it: though she cannot attain to any knowledge of God by fetching
Arguments a priori ad posterius, from that which went before to that which
follows after, from the cause to the effect, from that which is insensible to
that which is sensible; yet she may argue a posteriori ad prius, from that
which follows after to that which went before, from that which is corporeal to
that which is incorporeal, from that which is compound to that which is simple,
from that which is temporal to that which is eternal, from that which is finite
to that which is infinite, from that which is natural to that which is
supernatural, from the effect to the first efficient cause. By this way of
argumentation the Soul makes a description of the Godhead, and, either by way
of negation or transcendence, attributes that unto God, which can in no wise,
without absurdity, be attributed to any of the creatures: as, that he is actus
purus, a pure act, without all potentiality; simplicissimus, most simple,
without all composition; foelicissimus, most happy: with many other. The very
Heathen Philosophers, as Cicero, Aristotle, and Plato, by the only light of
nature, have left such sentences in their writings, as may clearly demonstrate
the Soul's abilities in this kind. Aristotle in his twelfth Book of
Metaphysics, says, That God is vivens, aeternus, and optimus; living,
eternal, and transcendently good: and a little after, That he is substantia
aeterna, immobilis, magnitudinis expers, indivisibilis, infinita, impassibilis
and immutabilis, a sensibus separata. An eternal substance, immovable, without
bulk, indivisible, infinite, not capable of suffering or of alteration,
separted from the senses. Plato likewise in Timaeo, and in his Book De Legibus,
says of God, That he is Genitor Universitatis, the Begetter of this Universe:
bonus, and causa bonorum omnium; good, and the cause of all good things.

That very Attribute which Christians do, (...), after a more special manner
ascribe unto God, Cicero has left in his writings, saying, as we say, That God
is, (...), the knower of the heart. He says in 3 De not. Deorum.
one place, Obscurum Deo nihil potest esse: and in 2 De Divin.
another place, Ignorare Deus non potest, qua quisque mente sit. The same
Author, by the only light of nature, has contemplated God in the most happy
fruition of himself, as also in his providence toward the world, and has
expressed himself in a most Christianlike manner in both these respects. As
touching the fruition of himself, he says, Ea est Dei vita, qua nihil beatius,
nihil omnino bonis omnibus affluentius cogitari potest: nihil enim Cicero
nullus intellexit Deitatem absolute nihil agere: sed nostro more non agere, sc.
cum labor and molestia.
agit, nullis occupationibus est implicatus, nulla opera molitur: sua potentia
and virtute gaudet, habet exploratum fore se semper tum in maximis, tum in
aeternis voluptatibus. Such is the life of God, than which nothing is more
happy, nothing in the world can possibly be thought to abound with more good
things: for he does nothing; he is implicated in no businesses, he undergoeth
no labor, but enjoys his own power and virtue; and knows certainly, that
he shall always be in transcendent and eternal pleasures. As concerning God's
providence, he says thus: In mundo Deus est aliquis, qui regit, qui gubernat,
qui cursum astrorum, qui mutationes temporum, rerum vicissitudines ordinesque
conservat; terras and maria contemplans, hominum commoda vitasque tuetur. In
the world there is a God which rules, governs, and preserves the course of
the stars, the mutations of times, and the vicissitudes and orders of things;
who beholding both Sea and Land, does defend the goods and lives of men. I
could produce a large Catalogue of suchlike expressions from the mouths of
Heathens: but presuming that what I have already enumerated, may suffice to
vindicate the Soul 's Prerogative, as touching the knowledge of God in his
Attributes; I shall wave all manner of enlargements, and pursue my intended
brevity.

To know God in his Attributes, is a near approach to the Deity; yet the
rational Soul comes still nearer: first, prying about his essence, then
returning to her self, and contriving which way she should know more; at length
she says within her self, Operatio sequitur esse; action depends upon being.
Then she busies her self in the contemplation of God's actions, which, says
she, are either immanent or transient: the immanent actions of God, are such as
are performed within himself without respect had to the creatures, whereby he
is said to know himself, and to love himself; as Scaliger says, Deus generat
ex seipso, in seipso suiipsius intellectionem, eodem modo, eandem aequalem
sibi. God does from himself begat an understa^ding of himself in himself, after
the same manner, the same equal to himself. Here the Soul takes notice of a
reflection of the Deity upon it self, and is sublimed into the supposition of a
Trinity: for whereas God does conceive and know himself, he does beget a most
perfect image of himself, from whence also proceeds a most perfect love of
himself. Now seeing there is nothing in God, which is not God; both the image of
God, and the love of God seem to be distinct Vocabulum Graecum, (...),
multisariam accipitur; and inter varias ejus acceptiones aliquando sumitur pro
essentia entis: quo sensu Patres Concilii Sardiensis censuerunt, ut est apud
Theodoretum in Ecclesiastica Historia, lib. 2. cap. 8. unam esse hypostasin
Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti. Verum enim vero (...) pro supposito naturae
intelligentis haud obscuri Authors accipiunt: quo sensu Graeci Patres in
divina essentia tres hypostases esse asserunt; and Dionysius Areopagita, qui
Apostolorum coaetaneus fuisse perhibetur, in lib. De Caelesti Hierarchia, vocat
divinam essentiam unitatem, (...), hoc est, in tribus hypostatibus subsistentem.
Hypostases or subsistences of the same essence with him from whom they do
proceed, as if an eye should see it self: there is first the eye seeing;
secondly, the eye seen, or at least, the image or species of that eye seen:
from which action of seeing, there must necessarily proceed a desire of
enjoying; for every action has its end. This comparison of the eye does in
some sort adumbrate the Trinity; yet by showing how far short the comparison
is, the true notion of the Trinity may be more clearly demonstated. The Eye
cannot see it self, but the Deity cannot but behold it self; there being no
object beyond it, or extraneous to it. God does primarily see and know himself:
But secondarily, the creatures, who live, move, and have their being in him.

The Eye does not always see, but does in time begin, and afterward cease to
see: but the Deity cannot but always behold and know it self; and cannot but
subsist in the eternal contemplation of it self.

If we should grant that the eye could see it self; yet in propriety of speech,
we must deny our supposition; for the Eye sees not the naked essence of any
thing, but a certain accident, viz. the intentional species: but the Deity is
essentially beheld of it self, reflecting no other species or image from it
then its naked essence, whose perfection is such, that it cannot but subsist
eternally beheld and contemplated by it self.

From the reflection of the Eye upon it self, there can proceed only an
appetite of enjoying: but from the reflection of the Deity upon it self, there
cannot but proceed an absolute fruition. Actiones feruntur in bonum, says the
Philosopher: from the reflection of an eye upon it self, there can only
proceed bonum desiderii, a good of desire: but from the reflection of the Deity
upon it self, there cannot but proceed (...), or bonum complacentiae; a good of
complacency. After this manner does the Soul discourse freely and ingenuously
within her self; I mean the rational Soul not clouded with sensuality, nor
straightned and girt with prejudice. Then does she conclude, that there are
three necessary distinct subsistences, yet but one essence of the Deity; or
that the Deity, which is essentially one, is subsistentially three. The Deity
does necessarily subsist, first, in the eternal contemplation of it self;
secondly, it does subsist eternally, contemplated by it self; and thirdly, it
does subsist in an eternal complacency of it self: yet are there not three
eternals, but one eternal; because the notion we have of eternity excludes
plurality: neither do we conceive the first, second, and third subsistence, to
be one before another in time or duration, because eternity is indivisible,
having neither priority nor posteriority; but only by a priority of order or
disposition of their relation. When we say that God is merciful, or that God is
just, we speak improperly or (...), after the manner of men; there being no
real distinction betwixt God's mercy and his justice. But when we denominate
the Deity to subsist contemplating or contemplated, etc. we speak Scientia seu
contemplatio proprie competit divinae naturae, and improprie tribuitur
creaturis: notitia enim nostra est obscura and imperfecta, divina vero est
perfecta and ^bsoluta. Multo magis ab aeterno in aeternum scire and contemplari
Dei proprium est, quod nullo modo de creaturarum perfectissima predicari potest.
properly and absolutely. Wherefore, although these three subsistences be all
concentred in the Deity; yet they are Distinguntur ab invicem, quia ad invicem
referuntur. Ratio enim formalis relationis est semper supponere aliud cui
unumquodque rela^orum referatur. Quemadmodum Aristoteles, (...), etc. Et infra
subjungit, (...).
distinct each one from the other. In that they do susibst invisible in
themselves, and really distinct from each other, we may properly call them
persons: Persona est substantia individua, intelligens, incommunicabilis. Haec
definitio a Zanchic, lib. 1. De tribus Elohim, and uno Jehova. cap. 2. ex
communi Patrum Latinorum consensu affertur.
for a person according to Philosophers, is a rational or intelligible
subsistence distinct from others, and indivisible in it self.

Hither is the Soul arrived, viz. to the knowledge of three persons in one
essence of the Deity; or, to the acknowledgement of a Trinity in Unity, by the
consideration of God's immanent actions. Now does she pass from hence, unto his
transient actions, which are the Creation of the World, and the preservation
thereof. Here she does premise, that the world was not from eternity, but did
commence with time; as also, that there could be no first matter Absurdum enim
esset (...), absolutam aeternitatem and essendi necessitatem ali^ui nisi soli
Deo tribuere.
eternally coexisting with the Deity. Moreover, she does presuppose that it
would be absurd either to affirm or grant that the Deity did act positively
upon nothing; although before the Creation of the world, there was besides God,
privatively, not any thing. There was before the Creation of the world, one
only absolutely necessary infinite Being, viz. God, who by reason of his
infinity and absolute perfection, could perform no action absolutely transient:
neither had he any object besides himself to act upon. Time, and place, or
finity might have then been denominated nothing, it being contradistinct to
infinity, or a negation of that infinite being, which did only then exist.
Wherefore, time and place before the Creation of the World, could never have
been Nihil non est intelligibili nisi per notionem alterius de quo simplicitur
negatur: sed tempus and locus ante creationem mundi nihil erant: Ergo.
conceived or willed by the Deity; unless he had conceived and willed himself,
together with time and place. So that it seems to the rational Soul, that time
and place had its being by the Deities conception and volition of himself,
together with time and place; which was the position of the word of his mind
in time and place.

Here is also so clear a Demonstration of the Trinity in the Creation of the
world, that it seems impossible to the rational Soul to have the true notion of
Creation without the conceit of the Trinity: Insomuch, that the Ancients, who
were more profound Philosophers, did express the word create by an Hebrew word
consisting of three Letters, viz. Aleph, Beth, and Resch, which signify the
Father, the Son, and the Spirit: which three Letters, by addition of their
proper Vowels, either expressed or understood, are a Verb of the Preterperfect
tense, (...), signifying, the Father, the Son, and the Spirit have jointly
acted, or, they have conspired to act. This word, (...), creavit, does in it
self sufficiently express the action of the Deity, subsisting in a threefold
manner: yet the Ancients go farther, putting to it a word expressing the Deity
in the Plural Number, saying, (...), Elohim bara, the Gods have created, or
rather, God as he is personally three has created. Hermes a most profound
Rationalist, who was therefore called Trismegistus, in his Book entitled
Pimander, has ^eft a sen^ence to posterity, relating to the Creation of the
World, as some do interpret; but as others do construe it, it does only
express the Trinity. In this ambiguity, it is not difficult to decide the
controversy, by affirming that Mercurius Trismegistus did, by one and the same
sentence, primarily adumbrate the Trinity, and secondarily the Creation of the
World. For God, who is himself a pure and most simple act in the eternal
contemplation of himself absolutely infinite, does necessarily contemplate
himself, coexisting with the world, or time and place: the World being an
inclusion or parenthesis of infinity. The sentence is this: Monas genuit
monadem, and in se suum reflexit ardorem. In 1 Part summae theolog. quaest. 32.
art. 1.
Thomas understands it to be only related to the production of the world,
supposing it to be analogical to these words of his, viz. Unus Deus produxit
unum mundum propter suiipsius amorem: but most Philosophers say, that Hermes by
ratiocination came to the knowledge of the Trinity, and expressed it after the
aforesaid manner. He says not, Monas produxit monadem; but, Monas genuit
monadem. Now the world may not properly be said to have been begotten: for in
the Creation of the World by his will, the World can in no wise be called
verbum mentis, the Word of his mind; in that the world being nothing, could
not have been conceived in the mind of God, had not he conceived himself
together with the World: so that God himself, being primarily conceived of
himself, is verbum mentis Dei, the word of his own mind; by whom all things
were made, and without whom there could nothing have been made, which was made;
who, as he is conceived, is personally distinguished from himself conceiving,
although he be essentially the same. The Soul, whose property it is to try all
things, and by discourse, either to reduce her superficial conceits into
impossibilities, and so pass them by as phantasmes, or else to prove them
necessary, and then to retain and embrace them as eternal Truths, does, by
suchlike preceding discourse, prove an absolute necessity of the eternal being
of one God, whose every action is but one action, and that eternal: in which
eternal action, which is also himself, who is actus purus, he has eternally
subsisted personally three; in which personal subsistency, he has eternally
created the World.

The Soul having contemplated the World in fieri, comes now to take a survey
thereof, as it does exsist in facto esse.

In this place she does not consider it, as consisting of such and such parts,
or containing such and such particular creatures; but she only looks upon it
as a finite being, contradistinct to infinity: and first she discourses the
nature of time, defining it, according to common Philosophy, to be mensura
motus Coeli per prius and posterius. But being jealous, lest she should impose
upon her self, by a paralogism, and so be mistaken in the finding out of that
most precious Jewel, which she so earnestly seeks after, viz. Truth; she rests
not contented with this definition, but convinces her self of the nature of
time, by comparing it with Eternity.

Eternity is a duration without either beginning or ending, having neither
priority nor posteriority, but indivisible.

Time is a duration having both beginning and ending, and is in it self
divisible into priority and posteriority. Time, as time, whether we look upon
all time, or the least particle thereof, does consist of these two essential
parts, viz. the later, and the former; which have their dependence upon a point
or moment, in the midst thereof. If then; before all time, there was one only
infinite being, who by the position of his Word in time, caused time to be; the
rational Soul collects from hence, together with what is premised, that the
Word of God was, in the fullness or midst of all time, to impose a period to the
former, and a commencement to the later time; or to constitute the essential
parts of time, viz. priority and posteriority, by being in the midst thereof.
And seeing it is that middle point, which does, by dis-joyning duration, give a
being to priority and posteriority; we must necessarily conclude, that the Word
of God, which is the second Person in the Trinity, not only in his eternal
essence, but also in his existence, in the fullness of time, was (...), the
beginning of the creation of God.

Now the Soul comes to examine the nature of place; which, says she, is that
determinate and circumscribed ubi, wherein a body is contained; which can
neither be named, nor rightly understood without the presupposition of a body;
Corpus a Philosophis dicitur esse in loco bifariam, sc. vel circumscriptive,
quatenus ab alio corpore extrinsecus ambiente continetur: vel repletive,
quateuus sua m^le occupat and replet certum spatium locale. Priori modo
quicquid est corporum excepto Caelo supremo, localitatem habet. Posteriori
autem modo de omni cor^ore simpliciter localitas praedicatur. Omne enim corpus
est, quantum, and quatenus quantum, est extensum in longum, latum, and
profundum: and quatenus est extensum, habet certum situm and distantiam
partium: ac proinde certum spatium locale replet ac occupat.
insomuch, that it is impossible there should be a body which is not in place,
as also, that there should be place which does not contain a body: so that a
body and place have a relative convertibility, the one to the other; and are so
mutually reciprocated, that the one being granted, the other is necessarily
presupposed.

The Soul from hence collects, that if the Word of God did so exist in place as
to give a being thereto; the Word of God did assume a body, which being from
eternity conceived in the mind of God, as the only Idea and platform of the
whole creation, must necessarily be of the nature of the perfectest of bodies;
which is flesh.

The Soul is now arrived to the incarnation of the Word. The Word, says she,
became flesh and dwelt amongst us; yet in such a Tabernacle as might be the
pattern of the great Temple, the World, as also of other living Temples of the
Holy Ghost. Here she conceives, that though flesh in the general be the
perfectest of bodies; yet not any manner of flesh could make a fit Tabernacle
for the Word to dwell in, but such only, as should contain all the variety of
the whole world; which is the humane nature.

Here the Soul contemplates the Word incarnate to be (...), both God and Man,
having a perfect humane body, and rational Soul personally united with his
Divinity. This personal Union of the divine and humane nature of the Word, must
necessarily be the immediate act of God; and consequently, that body which the
Word did assume (although, as it was perfectly humane, it should necessarily
consist of flesh and blood, and other such essential parts as do constitute an
absolute humane body) could not be produced by generation according to the will
of man, having no need of seminality to contribute unto it its plastic or
formative virtue; not only in that it was eternally conceived in the mind of
God, as the Idea of the whole Creation; but also, in that it did exist in the
fullness of time, which is the beginning of all time, according to the true
notion thereof. In this moment or middle point, which gave time a being, which
does divide and couple time with eternity, and does dis-joyn and unite priority
with posteriority, which is in a several respect, both time and eternity: I
say, in this both temporal and eternal duration was the light created; in this
fullness of time, was the Word incarnated; which Word incarnate is both God, and
Man; the image of God, and the light of Man; and Man is the image or shadow of
that light.

This at the first view may seem mysterious and profound: yet after a more
inward scrutiny, it squares with the humane intellect, being pure
quintessentiated and sublimed reason: for time is so included in, interwoven
with, and as it were strung upon eternity, that eternity is both the center and
the circumference, the poles and the axle-tree of all time: and according to
the notion we have of time, together with its dependence upon, and connection
with eternity; we must necessarily grant some duration to be both time and
eternity; wherein we imagine the first act of the Creation to have been
performed. Which first act of the Creation, the rational Soul demonstrates to
have been the incarnation of the Word, as a cause; and the Creation of light,
or the angelical nature, under the notion of an immediate effect: for even as
the Word by existing in time and place did give a being thereto, and by
assuming a most complete and perfect body, which being both elementary,
vegetative, sensitive, etc. he did contribute essence to the Elements,
Vegetables, living Creatures, etc. even so by the personal union and perfect
conjunction of his divine and humane nature, (which personal union is to be
considered before the humane nature alone, or those other subordinate natures
comprehended in it, viz. sense, vegetation, corporeity) he has created the
Angels, which are a middle nature betwixt God and Man: so that the whole
Creation seems to be a most perfect Scheme, Image, or Shadow of the Word
incarnate; and all the variety thereof, in each particular, analogically
received from his fullness. Although, quoad nos, the Word incarnate may seem to
be the second Adam, who may seem to us to have existed in the world before him;
yet quoad Deum, he is the beginning of the Creation of God, and the protoplast
of mankind, after whose image Man was made. Who by the conjunction of his
divine and humane nature, is the Supporter and Bearer of the whole world; to
whom, each Creature ows its being; by whom, as an efficient cause; by whom, as
a final cause; and by whom, as (...), the world was made: and whithout whom, in
each of these respects, was not any thing made, that was made. Who in his
divine nature is ubiquitary; and in his humane nature, was, in the midst of
time generally taken, conversant in the midst of the then habitable world; and
in the very midst of time strictly taken, did, without doubt, locally descend,
together with all the immateriate powers of the humane nature, into the bottom,
center, or midst of all circumference; which could not be, Si unum corpus per
aliud penetraret, sequoretur corpus non esse corpus, sed substantiam
incorpoream quantitatis expert^m: quod absurdum est, and manifestam implicat
contradictionem. Quemadmodum Damascenus l. 1. Orthodoxae fidei, cap. 3. ait,
(...).
except he should have put off the material and corporeal part of his humanity,
not reassuming the same until his assent from the infernal pit. Now such must
necessarily have been the Rationi consentaneum est eam fuisse (...), corporis
illius (...), and (...), ut si omnia ossa ejus fracta fuissent, statim
conglutinarentur. Probabile autem est tam balsamica polluisse vi humores illius
corporis; ut vulnera in exterioribus inflicta mortem non conciliassent: sed
innato corporis balsamo, humoribus, sc. illuc deflu^ntibus sanari potuissent.
Methodum igitur isthanc frustrancam frangendi ossa ejus omniscia recusavit
providentia. Et ad vulnera quod attinet: previdit, ut non tantum exteriora
infligerentur, sed ut ipsum cor lancea perfoderetur: ita ut ex ipso cord
sanguis efflueret, and ab ejusdem capsula, sc. pericardio aqua dimanaret.
exact crasis or temperament of that most perfect and complete body which the
Word did assume; that it is conjecturable, that it might suffer and be deprived
of its form, by solution of continuity, rather then from any internal
principles proceeding from a depraved habit or evil constitution: and being
deprived of its form, it is probable it should be incapable of corruption, in
that it is impossible it should have been produced by generation.

The Soul is ravished with the contemplation hereof, being not able to express
a tithe of what she cannot but conceive: being so oppressed and overwhelmed
with reason, that she cannot possibly utter her notions herein, except she had
cloven tongues to multiply her expressions. For the Word incarnate is that All
in All, both of finity and infinity, wherein are all the reasons of things,
together with their beings, concentred: whereby corruption has a possibility
to put on incorruption, and mortality to put on immortality. For, as his being
in the world, caused the world to be; so the perfect conjunction and personal
union of his divine and humane nature, which can never be disjoined, gives an
eternal precarium esse to the whole humane nature; or a possibility to all
mankind to enjoy an eternal being: yet must the whole world besides
necessarily return unto its first nothing, whose existence is but as a
parenthesis in infinity; in which parenthesis the two extremes, viz. Creation
and Annihilation must necessarily be equally distant from that point in the
midst, wherein the Word did exist, to give an absolutely finite being thereto.
At the dissolution whereof, it is necessary that the Word incarnate do actually
exist in the world, to impose a period thereto (whose commencement did depend
upon his actual existence therein) by recollecting into himself that scattered
light, which is tutelary to the world, which was at first from him dispersed:
before whom the whole world must necessarily be collected, together with the
angelical nature, which is the next and immediate supporter thereof, and must
be rolled up as a Book; and then being deprived of its tutelary light, must
pass away as a Scheme; the glory whereof shall no sooner be reassumed into the
Word, then reflected upon the humane ashes, to revive the same into an
incorruptible and eternal being.

After this manner does the rational Soul ascribe the Creation of the World to
God, as the first efficient cause thereof: which one God, she does demonstrate
by reason to have subsisted personally three, in the very act of Creation: but
in a more special manner, she does ascribe the Creation to the Word, which is
the second Person in the Trinity, whose actual existence in the world, gave a
being thereto. In the contemplation whereof, she cannot but discern with the
Eye of Reason, that all those mysteries which the holy Scriptures hold forth
unto us, are not at all repugnant to Reason: As, that the Word was incarnated
in the fullness of time, having been eternally conceived by the Holy Ghost: that
he took upon him the humane nature: that he died by a violent death: that he
descended into hell; with many others.

Having found out in the Book of Nature those mysteries which are expressed in
the Scriptures, she comes in the next place to observe whether those things
less mysterious in the Scriptures, be not also written in the Book of Nature.
In the holy Scriptures, which are the written Word of God, the Soul conceives
her self chiefly concerned, as a rational creature: for there is no other
creature in the whole world, except man alone, to whom the Scriptures do
properly belong: before whom God has set the way of good and evil, upon the
only account of rationality; having breathed into him the breath of life,
whereby he became a reasonable Soul: although all other inferior creatures do
owe continual praises to God for their being; whereupon, they are commanded to
observe the Sabbath, which is by God an appointed time of thanks to him for
their Creation, wherein he is said to have rested; and is in the course of
nature a pause, period, or full stop, wherein most actions do commonly
terminate; according to the observation of Philo Judaeus, (...). I say,
although all Creatures do owe continual praises to God for their Creation, and
do in an obscure manner perform their service therein, having also certain
secret Sabbatisms in all their actions; yet man, in a more especial and
particular manner has an Engagement to perform an immediate service to God,
being the worlds high Priest, to offer sacrifice not only for himself, but
also for all other Creatures which are subjected under him; according to that
of Mr. George Herbert, sometimes Orator of the University of Cambridge: Man is
the Worlds High Priest; he does present
The Sacrifice for all, while they below
Unto the Service mutter an assent,
Such as Springs use that fall, and Winds that blow.


Man, who is the High Priest of the World, has the Scripture as a Light to
direct and guide his Soul to the high Altar, the Word, who is also the High
Priest of mankind.

Now it is necessary, that there be some proportion betwixt the Light and the
Eye; otherwise the Light would rather dazzle and blind the Eye, then help it in
its performance. If the Holy Scripture were not rational, and in some sort
proportionable to the humane intellect, it might rather induce incredulity,
then enlighten the understanding. Thus does the Soul discourse. Then does she
attempt by reason, to understand the written Word of God: conceiving it a
contradiction, that any thing should be presented, as an adequate object of the
humane intellect, not under the notion of rationality.

Herein she first observes the goodly order of the Creation, according to the
description of Moses, to be much conformable to Reason. As, that the Elements
should be created before mixed bodies; and, that out of the Elements there
should be procreated all mixed bodies in such an order and method, as does
correspond the logical series in the predicament of substance: that Creatures
more perfect should require greater time for their production out of the Earth,
then Creatures more imperfect: That first vegetables should be produced, then
living Creatures, viz. those endued with sense; and last of all Man, who is the
most perfect of all living Creatures: and that in the Creation of each species,
there should be also a gradual ascent answerable to the scale of Nature: as of
Animals, first the Fish, then the Fowl, afterward, the four-footed Beasts: and
so of Vegetables, first Grass and Herbs, then Shrubs and Trees. That Man should
be at first made up of such matter contained in the Bowels of the Earth, as is
the Embryon in the Womb, viz. of red slime, which is analogous to Blood, the
thinner parts whereof are, by virtue of its innate heat, resolved into Spirits;
whilst the grosser are converted into flesh: and so all the diversity of parts
made up answerable to the heterogeneity of the matter.

After the Heaven and the Earth were finished, and all the Host thereof, the
Scriptures tell us, That God saw every thing which he had made, and behold it
was very good. The very same we read in the Book of Nature. For Reason does
dictate unto us, that all things are good, not only because every thing in the
whole world bears some proportion or similitude with God, who is the original
of its being; but also because there is no one thing in the whole world which
is not agreeable and convenient to some other thing. Wherefore seeing that
goodness is defined to be the congruity of one thing with another, it follows
that every thing in the world is good.

There was no written, positive, or Moral Law given for the space of above two
thousand years after the Creation: then afterward the Law was given by God
unto Moses, and from him delivered unto the Children of Israel. There was
reason wherefore the Law should be so long omitted; and afterward there was
reason wherefore it should be then given. Why it was so long omitted, may
appear by the Contents thereof: for he that reads the Moral Law, and considers
all the particulars therein, may observe, that the main scope thereof, was to
establish the Children of Israel into a Commonwealth; and to preserve the same
Commonwealth, by defending each man 's propriety: that so they might, as a
peculiar people, comfortably serve the Lord, who had delivered them out of
captivity. Now there are three things required to a Commonwealth: first, that
there be a competent number of people; secondly, that this people be entire and
free, neither scattered at a distance, nor intermixed with other people; and
thirdly, that there be propriety of possessions, whereby one man may call
something his own which is not another man's. Before the Posterity of Jacob had
these three Conditions, it was impossible they should be capable of that whole
Law which was afterward given unto them. Although, when they were in Egypt they
did increase, and became numerous; yet they could have no Law unto themselves,
in regard they were not of themselves a free People, but were strangers in the
Land of Egypt, and consequently Servants unto the Egyptians, who had Task
Masters over them, as the Scriptures do inform us.

And afterward, when they were delivered from the Egyptian slavery, although
they were, in the wilderness, not only numerous, but also a free People, and
entire to themselves; yet the whole Law could in no wise belong unto them,
because they had no propriety of possessions.

To impose a Curse upon him that should remove his Neighbors Landmark, would
have been nonsense to the Children of Israel before they had marked out their
Lands, and taken to themselves proper possessions: and so to impose
proportionable penalties, if peradventure their Oxen should hurt or gore one
another, or hurt a man; would have been absurd, before they had any Oxen
belonging unto them. By this may appear the necessity wherefore the Law was so
long omitted.

Now although the Law was written whilst the Children of Israel were yet in the
Wilderness; yet it could not be in force until their Commonwealth began; but
so soon as they had a Commonwealth, they could not possibly be without a Law;
for the Law is the Soul thereof, which does both constitute and preserve the
same: whereby their confused multitude was digested into a Re-publick; and
their Re-publick was continued entire without division or confusion. The
multitude indeed might have been continued entire, without so much circumstance
of Law, whilst it did subsist as an Army, and was preserved by one common food,
Manna, which did cost them only the taking up; yet could it not possibly have
subsisted as a Commonwealth, wherein there is propriety of possessions,
without the Law, which does, by defending each man's propriety, preserve the
whole Commonwealth in the same state and condition wherein it was first
established.

If we look into the Law, we shall find it to be nothing else but a Systeme of
rational precepts, commanding or forbidding upon such proportionable penalties
or rewards as are agreeable to the dictate of Nature, or the Law of Reason.
Here we have an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, etc. Double
restitution is enjoined for Theft; and Murder is forbidden upon penalty of
Death. And in like manner for Trespasses committed, we find in the Law such
rational proceedings, as honest and understanding men would contrive for the
due administration of a Commonwealth: as for example: If men strive together
and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but
keeps his bed: if he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall
he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and
shall cause him to be thoroughly healed, Exodus 21.18, 19. If a man shall cause a
field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in
another man's field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own
vineyard shall he make restitution, Exodus 22* 6. Who can be so ignorant, as not
to understan^ this to be reason?

If we look into other Precepts of the Law, which do not concern any private
controversy betwixt man and man, nor are related to the happiness of any
particular Commonwealth, but only to the beatitude of mankind in general; we
may observe the like rationality: as for example: Thou shall not see thy
Brother's Ox nor his Sheep go astray, and hide thy self from them; thou shall
in any case bring them again unto thy Brother: and if thy Brother be not nigh
unto thee, or if thou know him not, then thou shall bring it unto thine own
house, and it shall be with thee until thy Brother seek after it; and thou
shall restore it to him again. In like manner thou shall do with his Ass, etc.
Deuteronomy 22.1, 2. Thou shall neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him; for ye were
strangers in the Land of Egypt. Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless
child, Exodus 22.21, 22. Suchlike Sentences of Humanity and Charity, are so
sweetly intermixed with the other precepts of Equity thorowout the whole Law,
that the Law of Nature, and the Moral Law, seem both to intimate the same
thing, and both to be summed up in this rational Precept: Quod tibi non vis
fieri, alteri ne feceris: Do not thou unto another, that which thou would not
have another do unto thee. As concerning those Meats which are forbidden in the
Law to be eaten, they are also such, most of them, as even Nature would
admonish all people to refrain; of which sort are Eagles, Ravens, Kites, Hawks,
Owls, Bats, Cuckows, etc. and on the contrary, those Meats which are tolerated,
are, for certain Physical Reasons, the wholesomest food; and also by natural
instinct are suggested unto mankind as esculent: of which sort are the Ox, the
Sheep, the Goat, the Heart, the Ro-Buck, the Fallow Deer, the Wild Goat, etc.

Some may object, That if the Moral Law be the same in effect with the Law of
Nature, the said Moral Law must necessarily have been observed by other Nations
before it was given by Moses unto the Children of Israel. To which I answer
affirmatively: for it is not hard to prove by Scripture, that almost every
punctillo of the same Law, though not as positive but as natural, was observed
before it was given unto Jacob's Posterity.

Murder was punishable by the Egyptian Laws, as may appear by the second of
Exodus, where we read that Moses looked this way and that way, and when he saw
that there was no man, he slew an Egyptian which was smiting an Hebrew, one of
his Brethren: and so soon as he had done it, expecting nothing but death if he
had been found out, he hid himself in the sand for his own safety: and
afterward, when Pharaoh heard of it, he fled from Pharaoh, out of Egypt, into
the Land of Midian, because. Pharaoh sought after him; being the chief
Magistrate to punish suchlike offenders.

Adultery was also accounted an offense as heinous before the Law, as it was
afterward; which is manifest by the story of Abraham and Abimelech in the
twentieth of Genesis, where we read, That Abraham supposing that the fear of
God was not in the Land of Gerar, denied his Wife because he knew that Adultery
was so odious even in those places where the fear of God was not* that they
would rather slay him, and then take his Wife, then take his Wife he being
alive: they would rather do Murder, then commit Adultery.

Another example we have in Genesis 39. of Joseph, who would by no means sin
against God in committing Adultery with Potiphar's Wife: although there was no
Moral or Positive Law to make Adultery a sin; but only the Law of Nature, or
the Rule of right Reason.

How severely simple Fornication was punished before the Law, by Jacob's two
Sons Simeon and Levi, we may read in the 22 of Genesis.

That Theft was made a Crime by the Law of Nature, may be collected out of Genesis
44. from the passage of Joseph and his Brethren concerning the Cup which was
put into Benjamin's sack, etc.

Add to all these, Jacob's vow of the tenth of all he had unto God, and his
obedience to his Father and Mother, which is in the 28 of Genesis. By all which
it is evident, that the same Law which was afterward given by Moses unto the
Israelites, had been anciently practiced both by the Hebrews and the Egyptians:
which was at first written in the Heart of Man, and was connatural unto him;
but, by degrees being obliterated, and in process of time almost wholly
defaced, it was afterward engraven upon Tables of Stone; whereby it did change
its property: being before, the Law of Nature, which did sweetly incline, and
was more arbitrary; but afterward, it became a positive or Moral Law, strictly
commanding, and leaving without excuse. Thus much shall suffice to have spoken
concerning the Precepts of Holy Writ. I come now in the last place to
demonstrate the rationality of Miracles.

A Miracle is an effect produced out of the ordinary course of Nature.

From the notion we have of a Miracle, or from its definition, we may collect,
that it is not in the power of any Creature to perform a Miracle: for the
course of Nature is a Decree gone out from God; which Decree it is impossible
that any should have power to alter, but he that made i^: so that the
exhibition of a Miracle, is a rati^nal demonstration, that he that performs the
same i^ sent of God, and has hi^ power from above. From the observa^ion of the
act, we come to the knowledge ^f the agent. We say, That to produce such or
^uch an effect, immediately to turn Water into Wine, or the like, is an action
not natural, but supernatural: wherefore the agent cannot possibly be any of
the Creatures, but must necessarily be the Creator. Now when the Soul is
convinced in Reason, that God is the Ag^nt of Miracles, a Miracle seems not
strange unto her. For, says she, He that in the beginning, by hovering upon
the Waters, could hatch them into Elements, and afterward could gi e power and
desire to the El^ments to sy^^gi^e and copulate, whereby they did generate a^l
other Creatures: H^ that without materials could erect so stately a Fabric a^
is this Universe, may very well in Reason be conceived to be able to perform
suchlike actions as are recorded in Scripture by the names of Miracles.

By this way of argumentation, which is called Regression, even Miracles do
melt into Reason, and do become so familiar to the rational Soul, that when she
does consider the circumstances thereof, viz. first, that all Miracles are
performed by the Finger of God; and secondly, that there is no Miracle recorded
in Scripture which does imply a contradiction; she cease to admire the same:
but wondreth rather, that there should be an Infidel left in the World, or any
Soul so dulled with sensuality, or deaded with prejudice, as to lose her
Prerogative in not discerning the Truths of Christian Religion with the Eye of
Reason.

FINIS.
Literato Lectori.
INterrogas forsan, Lectorum Literatissime, cujus ergo publicitus ederem
naucipendulum isthunc De Signaturis Tractatulum: quasi sagacissimos moderni
seculi Medicos lateret quicquid est, in re Medica, aut notatu dignum, aut
observatu insigne.

Nullus equidem eo inficias versatiores esse nunc dierum omnes in polydaedalae
Naturae latifundio, quam olim fuisse, Imo lubens agnosco nunc tandem eo
culminis evasisse Arts Scientiasque: ut, si in hac mundi senectute in vivis
superessent qui in Infantia ejus vitam traduxerunt, mirarentur valdopere (...)
prae omnibus autem, non mediocre additamentum sortita est Medicina, Scientiis,
ex quo cumprimis Aesculapius divi honorem adeptus est tradendo confusa quaedam,
and incerta, procul methodo, curandi Morbos programmata. O quam, tunc temporis,
tenellula, and in cunis vagiens, Medicina, impos erat peragendi e^ quae indies
hodie peragu^tur! plurima Galenus and Hippocrates habuere comperta quae
praecedentibus non nota fuerunt: and multa sapuere Successores eorum quae non
innotuerunt illis. Nonnulla nobis patesiunt quae proximum abhinc retro seculum
latuerunt. Verum enim vero, non eam adhuc Medicina tetigit perfectionis metam,
ut ulterius perfici nequeat: sed, ut sensim and pedetentim Corpora humana
vacillant indies and labascunt; ita paulatim nova suppullulant, ad supplendos
Naturae defectus, (...).

Sic visum est Providentiae, cui mortalium neminem penes est refragarier. Omnia
quidem Naturae sunt (...), sed non nobis omnia. Circulum sang^inis, novum illud
chyli receptaculum, ductus lymphaticos, and quicquid est istiusmod^; quicquid
casus reperit, aut ingenium invenit, antiquitus Natura tenuit: esto quodlibet
Naturae munus suo tempore Men's humana persentiscit. Ad eundem plane modum
Natura primitus indidit Corporibus simulachra quaedam, non frustra quidem, sed
ut ad vivum depingeret cui inserviunt usui, and quibus pollent facultatibus.
Natura primitus sanxivit ut unumquodque Corpus ageret in subjectum sibi Natura
proximum.

Omnia Corpora semper habuerunt attractricem cum magnete communem, and vice
versa. Natura semper fuit (...); quo Nomine nunquam non potis erat indigitandi
quomodo Edulia, quomodo pharmaca, quomodo venena vires suas exerunt: viz. eodem
ipsissimo modo, puta similitudine quadam substantiae inter agens and subjectum.

Haec esse, and semper fuisse, Naturae munera agnoscimus; horum vero observamen
quantulumcunque vocamus nostrum: quod non inexperti scripsimus: quare idem tum
Rationis, tum Experientiae specillo audacter credimus.

Ad hanc posteriorem quod attinet, quae j^m pr^ma in lucem prodit, opellam:
nemo asserat Theologi magis interesse quam refer nostra: Non enim Rationis
extravagamur terminos. Quod si Ratio nostra cum fide coinciderit, nihil nobis
imputandum esse speramus. Imo potius summae sunt agendae D.O.M. gratiae, qui
Animam humanam tam splendide ornavit and i^struxit, ut tam Divinae quam humana
sapiendi par esset.

Hoc unicum, literate Lector, perpendas obsecro: sc. aeque absurdum esse
Rationem (...) damnare, and Rationem improbandam esse Ratione probare. Vale.

R. B.

ERRATA.
Page 7. l. 1. for amalgamated, read amalgamates. p. 10. l. 4. for and, read
that. p. 24. l. 18. for acquainued, read acquainted. p. 30. l. 3. for Senicus,
read Seincus. p. 51. l. 6. for Gatiopsis, read Galiopsis. p. 60. l. 23. for
Figure from, read Figure proceed from. p. 61. l. 1. leave out Bodies.

Page 5. l. 8. for mortum, read mortuum. p. 24. l. 20. for separted, read
separated. p. 25. l. 11. for (...), read (...). p. 32. l. 19. (and in other
places) for then, read than. p. 36. l. 6. for invisible, read indivisible. p.
58. l. 5. for assent, read ascent.


