JOHN BUNYAN.


THE Jerusalem-Sinner Saved: OR, GOOD NEWS FOR THE Vilest of Men, Being a HELP
for DESPAIRING SOULS: SHOWING That Jesus Christ would have Mercy in the first
Place offered to the BIGGEST SINNERS. The Second Edition. In which is added, An
Answer to those Grand Objections that lie in the way of them that would
believe: For the Comfort of those that fear they have sinned against the Holy
Ghost.

By JOHN BVNYAN of Bedford.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by George Larkin, at the Two Swans without
Bishopsgates. 1689. Price Bound 1s.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
ONe reason which moved me to Write and Print this Little Book, was, because,
though there are many Excellent Heart-affecting Discourses in the World that
tends to Convert the Sinner; yet I had a desire to try this simple Method of
mine: Wherefore I Make bold thus to Invite and Encourage the Worst to come to
Christ for Life.

I have been Vile my self, but have obtained Mercy, and I would have my
Companions in Sin partake of Mercy too, and therefore I have writ this Little
Book.

The Nation does swarm with Vile Ones now, as ever it did since it was a
Nation. My Little Book in some places can scarce go from House to House, but
'twill find a suitable Subject to spend it self upon. Now since Christ Jesus is
willing to save the Vilest, why should they not by Name be somewhat acquainted
with it, and bid come to him under that Name?

A great Sinner, when Converted, seems a booty to Jesus Christ; he gets by
saving such an one; why then should both Jesus lose his Glory, and the Sinner
lose his Soul at once, and that for want of an Invitation?

I have found through God's grace, good success in Preaching upon this Subject,
and perhaps so I may, by my writing upon it too. I have, as you see, let down
this Net for a draught, the Lord catch some great Fishes by it, for the
magnifying of his Truth. There are some most Vile in all Men's eyes, and some
are so in their own eyes too; but some have their Paintings to shroud their
vileness under, yet they are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we
have to do: And for all these, God has sent a Savior Jesus: and to all these
the Door is opened.

Wherefore prithee, Profane Man, give this little Book the reading. Come;
Pardon, ana a part in Heaven and Glory, cannot be hurtful to thee. Let not thy
Lusts and Folly drive thee beyond the door of Mercy, since it is not locked nor
bolted up against thee. Manasseh was a bad Man, and Magdalen a bad Woman: To
say nothing of the Thief upon the Cross, or of the murderers of Christ; yet
they obtained mercy; Christ willingly received them.

And do thou think that those once so bad, now they are in Heaven, repent
them there, because they left their sins for Christ when they were in the word?
I cannot believe but that thou think they have verily got the best on it. Why
Sinner, do thou likewise: Christ at Heaven Gates, says to thee, come hither;
and the Devil at the gates of Hell does call thee to come to him, Sinner, what
say thou? Whether will thou go? Don't go into the Fire, there thou will be
burned! Don't let Jesus lose his longing, since it is for thy Salvation; but
come to him and live.

One word more and so I have done. Sinner, here thou do hear of Love, prithee
don't provoke it, by turning it into wantonness. He that dies for slighting
Love, sinks deepest into Hell, and will there be tormented by the remembrance
of that evil, more than by the deepest cogitation of all his other sins. Take
heed therefore, do not make Love thy Tormenter, Sinner.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THE Text opened, Page 3^ The Badness of Jerusalem unparalled, they were the
biggest sinners, P. 4, 5, 6.
DOCTRINE.
Jesus Christ would have Mercy ^ffered in the first place to the biggest
sinners, p. 9 The Doctrine proved by many Scripture Instances, p. 12, 13, 14
The amazing Grace of God, p. 16, 17 The Apostles keep to their Commission, and
offer Mercy in the first place to the biggest sinners, p. 15, 16, 17, 18
The Reasons of the Point.
1. BEcause the bigg^st sinners have most need of Mercy, p. 22 This is
Illustrated, p. 24, to 28
2. Because this redounds most to the spreading of the Fame of Christ, p. 29
Proved and amplified, p. 30, 36
3. Because by thus doing, others are the more encouraged to come to Christ for
Mercy. p. 37 Particular Instances of this, p 40 to 44
4. Because this is the way to weaken the Kingdom of Satan, p. 46 The biggest
Sinners Satan's Colonels and Captains, ibid. The bigger sinner breads most of
that horrible Vermin, Sin, p. 47 The Author's experience about it, p. 48
5. Because the biggest sinners are the best helps in the Church, when
Converted, p. 50 This is Illustrated by several particulars, p. 51. to 56
6. Because such when Converted, are apt to love Christ most, p. 56 A pleasant
Story of Martha and Mary, p. 61, to 66 Christ has but little thanks for saving
little Sinners, p. 66
7. Because Grace when received by such, finds matter to kindle upon more
freely than it finds in others, p. 69 This is Illustrated by three or four
Similitudes, p. 69, to 70 A Note upon the Debauchery of the Youth of our Times,
p. 72
8. Because by this means the finally Impenitent are left the m^re without
excuse. p. 79 No ground for the Impenitent at Judgment, for an excuse from the
greatness of their sins, why they came not to Jesus Christ, p. 78 Instances to
convince them how it will go with them then, for neglecting the grace of God
now, p. 79, 80

APPLICATION.
1. BY this Doctrine we are showed how to make a right judgment of the Heart of
Christ to Men, p. 84, 85 2. This shows also the Sufficiency of the Merits of
Christ, p. 90 Such as his Merits are, such is his Grace, the one is seen by the
other, p. 91, to 93
3. Here is encouragement for you that think your selves the worst, yet to come
to Christ, p. 93 Objections tonch'd upon and dissolved, to obstruct our coming
to Christ, p. 94, 95
4. An ^xpostulation with great Sinners to come to Christ, p. 102 Other
Objections touched, p. 103
5. There is no ground for such to despair that would be saved by Jesus Christ,
p. 106 Four kinds of Despairing, ibid. Three sorts of Despair reasonable, and
to be allowed, p. 107 The badness of that Despair that keeps us off from
closing with Christ, showed in several Particulars, p. 111, to 114 Despair the
Devil's Master, p. 112
6. Since Christ does offer means to the biggest Sinners, let them take heed
that they lay right hold thereon, p. 115 Take heed of presuming instead of
believing, p. 116 Faith, and Wild Faith, and how discovered, ibid. When
Presumption puts its self in the place of Faith, p. 116, 117 Three things to
help the Jerusalem-sinner to know when to believe in Christ, p. 119 The design
of Satan, p. 120 The danger of not Accepting, when Christ offers Mercy. p. 122
7. If it be so, then here is ground for those that are not Sinners of the
largest size, to come to Christ for Mercy, p. 122, 123 Objection answered, p.
123 A Man comparatively a little Sinner, made by Conviction a great one, p. 124
A lamentable cry for Pardon, a great thing with God, p. 125 A right Plea for
Pardon lies not in our numbering up, but arises from the sense of the
greatness of Sin, p. 125, 126 Heavenly Subtilty, p. 126 The comparison of
little and great Sinners explained, p. 127 One of the comliest Sights in the
World, p 127, 128 A Caution to the great and little Sinner, p. 128
8. By this Grace of Christ is made appear the true reason of Satan's malice
against him, p. 128 Who Satan makes use of to manage his despite against
Christ. p. 129 How they stickle for Satan unawares to themselves. p. 130, 131
9. Considering this mercifulness of Christ, let the Tempted harp hereon for
their comfort and consolation, p. 133 Satan's Masterpiece, his Club and Maul,
ibid. The way to foil the Devil, p. 134 At what season the Passover was first
eaten, p. 136 Nothing like Faith to help at a pinch, ibid. Faith the Eye, Hand,
and Mouth of the Soul, ibid.
10. Here Is encouragement for such a^ have in Word or Deed, spoke or done
badly, in a day of Trial, p.138 A comfortable Similitude for such, p. 138 Peter
instanced, ibid. Promises for such, p. 139 An Objection answered, p. 140 Christ
has Bags of Mercy yet never broken up, ibid.
11. Use for Exhortation to Ministers and Christians to carry it to the World
like their Master Christ, ibid. We should not be Austere, p. 142 We should not
affect Wo^ldly Grandeur, p. 143 We should in Life and Conversion be exemplary,
p. 144 A gentle Reproof, ibid.
The Conclusion, p. 146 An answer to those Grand Objections that lie in the way
of them that would believe: For the Comfort of those that fear they have sinned
against the Holy Ghost. p. 149, etc.
A Catalogue of Books, Printed and Sold by George Larkin, at the Two Swans
without Bishopsgate.
1. SOlomon's Temple Spiritualized: Or, Gospel Light fetched out of the Temple
at Jerusalem, to let us more easily into the Glory of New Testament Truths:
Wherein about Seventy Particulars relating to the Temple at Jerusalem, are
Explained; and what they signify in Gospel Times, U^folded, Brice Bonnd 1 s.

2. The Acceptable Sacrifice: Or the Excellency of a Broken Heart: Showing the
Nature, Signs, and Proper Effects of a Contrite Spirit, Price Bound 1 s.

3. A Discourse of the Building, Nature, Excellency and Government of the House
of God: With Counsels and Directions to the Inhabitants thereof, Price Stich'd
4 d.

4. The Jerusalem-Sinn^r Saved: Or, Good News for the Vilest of Men: Being a
Help for Despairing Souls: Showing that Jesus Christ would have Mercy in the
first Place offered to the Biggest Sinners. The Second Edition: In which is
added, An Answer to those Grand Objections that lie in the way of them that
would believe: For the Comfort of those that fear they have sinned against the
Holy Ghost, Price Bound 1 s. All Four by John Bunyan of Bedford.

5. Instructions for Children: Or, The Child's and Youth's Delight: Teaching an
easy way to Spell and Read True English: Containing the Father's Godly Advice,
directing Parents in a Right and Spiritual Manner to Educate their Children:
With a Christian Catechism, wherein all the Chief Principles of True
Christianity are clearly Opened: Together with many other things both Pleasant
and Useful for the Education of Children. Written by B. Keach Author of War
with the Devil. Recommended to the Use of all Parents and Schoolmasters, by
Hanserd Knollys, Price Bound 6 d.

6. The Tutor to True English: Or, Brief and Plain Directions, whereby all that
can Read and Write may Attain to Orthography, (or the Exact Writing of English)
as readily as if bred Scholars. Very much conducing likewise to the due
Sounding and perfect Reading all sorts of Words used in the English Tongue.
With an Introduction to Arithmetic, more easy than any yet extant. And
several other Observations of General Use: Especially for the use of either
Sex, and Foreigners. By Henry Care, Price Bound 1 s.

7. The Great Discovery: Or, A Golden Key to unlock the Greatest Points of
Divinity contained in the Old and New Testaments: Wherein the Great Design of
God for the Salvation of Sinners by Jesus Christ, in a Covenant-way, is more
fully laid open and discovered, than has ever been hitherto done by any. By G.
W. Price Bound 2 s.

GOOD NEWS For the Vilest of Men. OR, A Help for Despairing Souls.
Luke xxiv. 47. -- Beginning at Jerusalem.
THe whole Verse runs thus: And that repentance and remission of Sins should be
preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

The Words were spoken by Christ, after he rose from the Dead, and they are
here rehearsed after an Historical manner, but do contain in them a formal
Commission, with a special Clause, therein. The Commission is, as you see, for
the Preaching of the Gospel, and is very distinctly incerted in the Holy Record
by Matthew and Mark. Go teach all Nations, etc. Go ye into all the World and
preach the Gospel unto every Creature, Matt. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Only this
Clause is in special mentioned by Luke, who says, That as Christ would have
the Doctrine of Repentance and Remission of Sins preached in his Name among all
Nations, so he would have the People of Jerusalem to have the first proffer
thereof. Preach it, says Christ, in all Nations: but begin at Jerusalem.

The Apostles then, though they had a Commission so large as to give them
Warrant to go and preach the Gospel in all the World, yet by this Clause they
were limited, as to the beginning of their Ministry: They were to begin this
Work at Jerusalem. Beginning at Jerusalem.

Before I proceed to an Observation upon the Words, I must (but briefly) t^uch
upon two things: Namely,

1. Show you what Jerusalem now was.

2. Show you what it was to preach the Gospel to them.

So the first, Jerusalem is to be considered of, either,

1. With respect to the descent of her People: Or,

2. With respect to her Preference and Exaltation: Or,

3. With respect to her present State, as to her Decays.

First, As to her Descent: She was from Abraham, the Sons of Jacob, a People
that God singled out from the rest of the Nations to set his love upon them.

Secondly, As to her Preference, or Exaltation, she was the place of God's
Worship, and that which had in, and with her, the special ^okens and Signs of
God's Favor and Presence, above any other People in the Word. Hence the Tribes
went up to Jerusalem to Worship, there was God's House, God's High Priest,
God's Sacrifices accepted, and God's Eye, and God's Heart perpetually, Psalm.
76.1, 2. Psalm. 122.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 King. 9.3. But,

Thirdly, We are to consider Jerus^lem also in her Decays; for as she is to
considered, she is the proper object of our Text, as will be f^rther showed by
and by.

Jerus^lem, as I toId you, ^as the place and fea^ of God's Worship, but now
decayed, deg^n^rated, and apostatiz^d. The Word, the Rule of Worship, was
rejected of them, and in its place they had put and set up their own
Traditions: They had rejected also the most weighty Ordinances, and put in the
room thereof their own little things, ( Mat. 15. Mark 7.) Jerusalem was
therefore now greatly backslidden, and become the place where Truth and true
Religion was much defaced.

It was also now become the very sink of Sin, and seat of Hypocrisy, and gulf
where true Religion was drowned. Here also now reigned Presumption, and
groundless Confidence in God, which is the bane of Souls. Amongst its Rulers,
Doctors, and Leaders, Envy, Malice, and Blasphemy vented it self against the
Power of Godliness, in all places where it was espied: As also against the
Promoters of it; yea, their Lord and Maker could not escape them.

In a Word, Jerusalem was now become the Shambles, the very Slaughtershop for
Saints. This was the place wherein the Prophets, Christ, and his People, were
most horribly persecuted and murdered. Yea. so hardened at this time was this
Jerusalem in her Sins, that she feared not to commit the biggest, and to bind
her self by Wish under the guilt and damning evil of it; saying, when the had
murdered the Son of God, His Blood be upon us and our Children.

And though Jesus Christ did both by Doctrine Miracles, and Holiness of Life,
seek to put a stop to their Villainies; yet they shut their eyes, stopped their
ears, and rested not, till, as was hinted before, they had driven him out of
the World. Yea, that they might, if possible, have extinguished his Name, and
exploded his Doctrine out of the World, they against all Argument, and in
despite of Heaven, its mighty hand, and undeniable proof of his Resurrection,
did hire Soldiers to invent a Lie, saying, His Disciples stole him away from
the Grave; on purpose that Men might not count him the Savior of the World,
nor trust in him for the Remission of Sins.

They were, says Paul, contrary to all Men: For they did not only shut up the
Door of Life against themselves, but forbad that it should be opened to any
else. Forbidding us, says he, to preach to the Gentiles, that they might be
saved, to fill up their sin always, Matt. 23.35 chap. 15.7, 8, 9. Mar. 7. ^, 7
8, Mat. 3 7.8 9. Joh. 8.33, 41. Mat. 27.18. Mar. 3.30. Luke 265. Mat. 23. 37.
Luke 13 33, 34. Psalm. 2.22, 23. Chap. 4.10. Mat. 27.25 Chap. 20.11, 12, 13, 14,
15. 1 These. 2.14, 15, 16.

This is the City, and these are the People: This is their Character, and th^se
are their Sins. Nor can there be produced their parallel in all this World.
Nay, what World! what People! what Nation, for Sin, and Transgression, could,
or can be comp^red to Jerusalem! Especially if you join to the matter of fact,
the Light they sinned against, and the Patience which they abused. Infinite was
the Wickedness upon this account which they committed.

After all their abusings of wise Men, and Prophets, God sent unto them John
Baptist, to reduce them, and then his Son to redeem them; but they would be
neither reduced nor redeemed, but persecuted both to the Death. Nor did they,
as I said, stop here; the Holy Apostles they afterward persecuted also to
Death, even so many as they could, the rest ^he drove from them unto the utmost
Corners.

Secondly, I come now to show you what it was to preach the Gospel to them. It
was, says Luke, to preach to them Repentance and remission of Sins in Christ's
Name. Or as Mark has it, to bid them repent and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1.15.
Not that Repentance is a cause of Remission, but a sign of our hearty reception
thereof. Repentance is therefore here put to intimate, that no pretended Faith
of the Gospel is good, that is not accompanied with it. And this he does on
purpose 'cause he would not have them deceive themselves: For with what Faith
can he expect remission of Sins in the Name of Christ, that is not heartily
sorry for them? Or how shall a man be able to give to others a satisfactory
account of his unseigned subjection to the Gospel, that yet abides in his
impenitency?

Wherefore Repentance is here joined with Faith in the way of receiving the
Gospel. Faith is that without which it cannot be received at all: And
Repentance that without which it cannot be received unseignedly. When therefore
Christ says, he would have Repentance and Remission of Sins preached in his
Name among all Nations; it is as much as to say, I will that all men every
where be sorry for their sins, and accept of mercy at Gods hand through me, lest
they fall under his wrath in the Judgment. For as I said, without Repentance,
what pretense soever men have of Faith, they cannot escape the wrath to come.
Wherefore Paul says, God commands all men ev^ry where to repent (in order to
their Salvation) because he has appointed a day in the which he will Judge the
World in Righte^usness by that man whom he has ordained, Acts 17.30.

And now to come to this Clause, Beginning at Jerusalem: That is, that Christ
would have Jerusalem have the first offer of the Gospel.

1. This cannot be so commanded, because they had now any more right of
themselves thereto than had any of the Nations of the World; for their Sins had
divested them of all self-deservings.

2. Nor yet, because they stood upon the advance ground with the worst of the
Sinners of the Nations. Nay, rather the Sinners of the Nations had the
advanc^-ground of them. For Jerusalem was long, before she had added this
Iniquity to her sin, worse than the very Nations that God cast out before the
Children of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 33.

3. It must therefore follow that this Cl^use, B^gin at Jerusalem, was put into
this Commission of mere Grace and Compassion; Even from the overflowings of the
Bowels of Mercy. For indeed they were the worst, and so in the most deplorable
condition of any People under the Heavens.

Whatever therefore their relation was to Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, however
they formerly had been the People among whom God had placed his Name and
Worship, they were now degenerated from God, more than the Nations were from
their Idols, and were become guilty of the highest Sins which the People of the
World were capable of committing. Nay, none can be capable of committing of
such pardonable Sins as they committed against their God, when they slew his
Son, and persecuted his Name and Word.

From these Words therefore thus explained, we gain this Observation;

That Jesus Christ would have mercy offered in the first place to the biggest
Sinners.

That these Jerusalem Sinners were the biggest Sinners that ever were in the
World, I think none will deny, that believes that Christ was the best Man that
ever was in the World, and also was their Lord God. And that they were to have
the first offer of his Grace, the Text is as clear as the Sun; for it says,
Begin at Jerusalem. Preach, says he, Repentance and remission of sins to the
Jerusalem-sinners; to the Jerus^lem-sinners in the first place,

One would a-thought, since the J^rusalem-sinners were the worst, and greatest
Sinners, Christ's greatest enemies, and those that not only despised his
Person, Doctrine, and Miracles, but that a little before had had their hands up
to the elbows in his Heart-bloud, That he should rather have said, Go into all
the World, and preach Repentance and Remission of Sins among all Nations; and
after that, offer the same to Jerusalem. Yea, it had been infinite Grace, if he
had said so. But what Grace is this? Or what Name shall we give it, when he
commands that this Repentance and Remission of Sins, which is designed to be
preached in all Nations, should first be offered to Jerusalem, in the first
place to the worst of Sinners:

Nor was this the first time that the Grace which was in the Heart of Christ,
thus showed it self to the World. For while he was yet alive, even while he was
yet in Jerus^lem, and perceived even among these Jerusalem-sinners, which was
the most vile amongst them; he still in his preaching did signify that he had
a desire that the worst of these worst should in the first place come unto him.
The which he shows where he says to the better sort of them, The Publicans
and Harlots enter into the Kingdom of God before you, Matt. 21.31. Also when he
compared Jerusalem with the Sinners of the Nations, then he commands that the
Jerusalem-sinners should have the Gospel at present confined to them. Go not,
says he, into the way of the Gentiles, and into any of the Cities of the
Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to the lost Sheep of the house of
Israel, Matt. 10.5, 6. chap. 23.37. But go rather to them, for they were in the
most fearful plight.

These therefore must have the Cream of the Gospel, namely, the first offer
thereof in his Lifetime: Yea, when he departed out of the World, he left this
as part of his last Will with his Preachers, that they also should offer it
first to Jerusalem. He had a mind, a careful mind, as it seems, to privilege
the worst of Sinners with the first offer of Mercy, and to take from among them
a People to be the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb.

The fifteenth of Luke also is famous for this, where the Lord Jesus takes more
care, as appears there by three Parables, for the lost Sheep, lost Groat, and
the Prodigal Son, than for the other Sheep, the other Pence, or for the Son
that said he had never transgressed. Yea, he shows that there is Joy in Heaven,
among the Angels of God, at the repentance of one Sinner, more than over Ninety
and nine Just Persons, which need no repentance, Luke 15.

After this manner therefore the mind of Christ was set on the Salvation of the
biggest Sinners in his Lifetime. But join to this, this Clause, which he
carefully put into the Apostles Commission to preach, when he departed hence to
the Father; and then you shall see that his Heart was vehemently set upon it,
for these were part of his last words with them, Preach my Gospel to all
Nations, but see that you begin at Jerusalem.

Nor did the Apostles overlook this Clause, when their Lord was gone into
Heaven: They went first to them of Jerusalem, and preached Christ's Gospel to
them. They abode also there for a season and time, and preached it to no body
else, for they had regard to the Commandment of their Lord.

And it is to be observed, namely, that the first Sermon which they preached
after the Ascension of Christ, it was preached to the very worst of these
Jerusalem-sin^ers; even to those that were the murderers of Jesus Christ, Acts
2.23. For these are part of the Sermon; Ye took him, and by wicked hands have
Crucified and slain him. Yea, the next Sermon, and the next, and also the next
to that, was preached to the self-same murderers, to the end they might be
saved, Acts 3. 14, 15, 16. chap. 4, 10, 11. chap. 5, 30. chap. 7.52.

But we will return to the first Sermon that was preached to these
Jerusalem-sinners, by which will be manifest more than great Grace, if it be
duly considered.

For after that Peter and the rest of the Apostles, had in their Exhortation
persuaded these Wretches to believe that they had killed the Prince of Life,
and after they had duly fallen under the guilt of their Murder, saying, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? He replies by an universal Tender to them all in
general, considering them as Christ-killers. That if they were sorry for what
they had done, and would be Baptized for the Remission of their sins in his
Name, they should receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.37, 38.

This he said to them all, though he knew that they were such sinners. Yea, he
said it without the least stick, or stop, or p^use of Spirit, as to whether he
had best to say so or no. Nay, so far off was Peter from making an Objection
against one of them, that by a particular Clause in his Exhortation, he
endeavors, that not one of them may escape the Salvation offered. Repent,
says he, and be Baptized every one of you. I shut out never a one of you. For
I am commanded by my Lord, to deal with you, as it were, one by one, by the
Word of his Salvation. But why speaks he so particularly? Oh! there were
reasons for it. The People with whom the Apostles were now to deal, as they
were Murderers of our Lord, and to be charged in the general with his Blood, so
they had their various and particular acts of Villainy in the guilt thereof, now
lying upon their Consciences. And the guilt of these their various and
particular acts of wickedness, could not perhaps, be reached to a removal
thereof, but by this particular Application. Repent every one of you; be
Baptized every one of you, in his Name, for the Remission of Sins, and you
shall, every one of you, receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost.

Object. But I was one of them that plotted to take away his Life: May I be
saved by him?

Peter. Every one of you.

Object. But I was one of them that bare false Witness against him: Is there
Grace for me?

Peter. For every one of you.

Object. But I was one of them that cried out, Crucify, Crucify him; and that
desired that Barabas the Murderer might live, rather than him. What will become
of me, think you?

Peter. I am to preach Repentance and Remission of Sins to every one of you,
says Peter.

Object. But I was one of them that did spit in his face when he stood before
his Accusers. I also was one that mocked him, when in anguish he hanged
bleeding on the tree. Is there room for me?

Peter. For every one of you, says, Peter.

Object. But I was one of them that in his extremity said, Give him Gall and
Vinegar to drink, why may not I expect the same when anguish and guilt is upon
me?

Peter. Repent of these your wickednesses, and here is remission of sins for
every one of you.

Object. But I railed on him, I reviled him, I hated him, I rejoiced to see him
mocked at by others. Can there be hopes. for me?

Peter. There is for every one of you. Repent and be Baptized every one of you
in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive
the Gift of the Holy Ghost. Oh! what a blessed Every one of you, i^ here! How
willing was Peter and the Lord Jesus, by his Ministry, to catch these Murderers
with the Word of the Gospel, that they might be made Monuments of the Grace of
God! How unwilling, I say, was he, that any of these should escape the hand of
Mercy! Yea, what an amazing wonder is it, to think, that above all the World,
and above every body in it, These should have the first offer of Mercy!
Beginning at Jerusalem.

But was there not something of moment in this Clause of the Commission? Did
not Peter, think you, see a great deal in it, that he should thus begin with
these men, and thus offer, so particularly, this Grace to each particular man
of them?

But, as I told you, This is not all. These Jerusalem-sinners must have this
offer again and again; Every one of them, must be offered it over and over.
Christ would not take their first rejection for a denial; nor their second
repulse for a denial: But he will have Grace offered once, and twice, and
thrice, to these Jerusalem-sinners. Is not this amazing Grace! Christ will not
be put off. These are the Sinners, that are sinners indeed. They are Sinners of
the biggest sort, consequently such as Christ can, if they convert and be
saved, best serve his ends and designs upon. Of which more anon.

But what a pitch of Grace is this! Christ is minded to amaze the World, and to
show that he acts not like the Children of men. This is that which he said of
old, I will not execute the fierceness of my wrath, I will not return to
destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not Man, Hos. 11.9. This is not the manner of
Men; Men are shorter winded; Men are soon moved to take Vengeance, and to right
themselves in a way of Wrath and Indignation But God is full of Grace, full of
Patience, ready to Forgive, and one that delights in Mercy. All this is seen in
our Text. The biggest sinners must First be offered Mercy. They must, I say,
have the Cream of the Gospel offered. unto them.

But we will a little proceed. In the Third C^apter we find, that they who
escaped Converting by the first Sermon, are called upon again, to accept of
Grace and Forgiveness for their Murder committed upon this Son of God. You have
killed; yea, you have denied the Holy one and the Just, and desired a Murderer
to be granted unto you. And killed the Prince of Life. M^rk, He falls again
upon the very Men that actually were, as you have it in the Chapters following,
his very Betrayers and Murderers, Acts 3.14, 15. As being loath that they should
escape the mercy of Forgiveness. And Exhorts them again to repent, that their
sins might be blotted out, Ver. 19.20.

Ag^in, in the Fourth Chapter, he charges them afresh with this Murder, Ver.
10. But withal tells them, Salvation is in no other. Then like a heavenly
Decoy, he puts himself also among them, to draw them the better under the Net
of the Gospel; saying, There is none other Name under Heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved, Ver. 12.

In the fifth Chapter you find them railing at him, because he continued
preaching among them Salvation in the Name of Jesus. But he tells them, That
that very Jesus whom they had slain and hanged on a Tree, him God had raised
up, and exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance to Isra^l, and
Forgiveness of Sins, Vir. 29.30, 31. Still insinuating, that tho they had
killed him, and to this day rejected him, yet his business was to bestow upon
them, Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins.

It Is true, after they began to kill again, and when nothing but killing would
serve their turn; then they that were scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the Word. Yet even some of them to hankered after the Conversion of
the Jews, that they preached the Gospel only to them. Also the Apostles still
made their abode at Jerusalem, in hopes that they might yet let down their Net
for another draught of these Jerusalem-sinners. Neither did Paul and Barnabas,
who were the Ministers of God to the Gentiles, but offer the Gospel in the
first place to those of them that for their wickedness were scattered like
Vagabonds among the Nations. Yea, and when they rendered Rebellion and Blasphemy
for their Service and Love; they replied, It was necessary that the Word of God
should first have been spoken to them, Acts 1.8. chap. 13.46, 47.

Nor was this their Preaching unsuccessful among these People: But the Lord
Jesus so wrought with the Word thus spoken, that thousands of them came
flocking to him for Mercy. Three thousand of them closed with him at the first;
and afterward two thousand more; for now they were in number about five
thousand; whereas before Sermons was preached to these Murderers, the number of
the Disciples were not above a hundred and twenty, Acts 1.15. chap. 2.41. chap.
4, 4.

Also among these People that thus flocked to him for Mercy, there was a great
company of the Priests, chap. 6.7. Now the Priests were they that were the
greatest of these biggest Sinners; they were the Ringleaders, they were the
Inventors and Ringleaders in the mischief. 'T^as they that set the People
against the Lord Jesus, and that was the cause why the upro^r increased, until
Pilate had given Sentence upon him. The chief Priests and Elders, says the
Text, persuaded (the People) the multitude, that they should ask Barabas, and
destroy Jesus, Mat. 27.20. And yet behold, the Priests, yea, a great company of
the Priests became obedient to the Faith.

Oh the Greatness of the Grace of Christ!! That he should be thus in love with
the Souls of Jerusalem-sinners! That he should be thus delighted with the
Salvation of the Jerusalem-sinners! That he should not only will that his
Gospel should be offered them, but that it should be offered unto them first,
and before other Sinners were admitted to a hearing of it; Begin at Jerusalem.

Was this Doctrine well believed, where would there be place for a doubt, or a
fear of the Damnation of the Soul, if the Sinner be penitent; How bad a Life
soever he has lived, how many soever in number are his sins!

But this Grace is hid from the Eyes of Men, the Devil hides it from them; for
he knows it is alluring; he knows it has an attracting Virtue in it. For this
is it, that above all Arguments can draw the Soul to God.

I cannot help it, but must let drop another Word: The first Church, the
Jerusalem- Church, from whence the Gospel was to be sent into all the World;
was a Church made up of Jerusalem-sinners. These great Sinners were here the
most shining Monuments of the exceeding Grace of God.

Thus you see, I have proved the Doctrine; and that, not only by showing you,
that this was the practice of the Lord Jesus Christ in his Lifetime; but his
last Will, when he went up to God; saying, Begin to preach at Jerusalem.

Yea, it is yet further manifested, in that when his Ministers first began to
preach there, he joined his Power to the Word, to the Converting of thousands
of his Betrayers and Murderers; and also many of the Ringleading Priests, to
the Faith.

I shall now proceed, and shall show you,

1. The Reasons of the point.

2. And then make some Application of the whole.

The Observation you know, is this, Jesus Christ would have mercy offered in
the first place to the biggest Sinners, to the Jerusalem-sinners; preach
Repentance, and remission of sins, in my Name, among all Nations, Beginning at
Jerusalem.

The Reasons of the Point are,

First, Because the biggest Sinners have most need thereof. He that has most
need, Reason says, should be helped first. I mean, when a helping hand is
offered, and now it is. For the Gospel of the Grace of God is sent to help the
World, Acts 16.9. But the biggest sinner has most need. Therefore in reason,
when Mercy is sent down from Heaven to men, the worst of men should have the
first offer of it. Begin at Jerusalem. This is the reason which the Lord Christ
himself renders, why in his Lifetime he left the best, and turned him to the
worst; why he sat so loose from the Righteous, and stuck so close to the
Wicked. The whole, says he, have no need of the Physician, but the sick. I
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mark 2.15, 16, 17.

Above, you read, that the Scribes and Pharisees said to his Disciples, How is
it that he eats and drinks with Publicans and Sinners? Alas, they did not
know the reason. But the Lord renders them one, and such an one as is both
natural and cogent; Saying, These have need, most need. Their great necessity
requires that I should be most friendly, and show my grace first to them.

Not that the other were sinless, and so had no need of a Savior: But the
Publicans and their Companions, were the biggest sinners, they were, as to
view, worse than the Scribes, and therefore in reason should be helped first,
because they had most need of a Savior.

Men that are at the point to dye, have more need of the Physician, than they
that are but now and then troubled with are Heart-fainting-qualm. The Publicans
and Sinners were as it were, in the mouth of Death, Death was swallowing of
them down; and therefore the Lord Jesus receives them first, offers them mercy
first. The whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick. I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. The Sick, as I said, is the
biggest sinner, whether he sees his Disease or not. He is stained from Head to
Foot, from Heart to Life and Conversation. This man in every man's judgment, has
the most need of mercy. There is nothing attends him from Bed to Board, and
from Board to Bed again, but the visible characters, and obvious symptoms of
eternal damnation. This therefore is the man that has need, most need, and
therefore in reason should be helped in the first place. Thus 'twas with the
People concerned in the Text, they were the worst of sinners,
Jerusalem-sinners, sinners of the biggest size, and therefore such as had the
greatest need: Wherefore they must have mercy offered to them, before it be
offered any where else in the World. Begin at Jerusalem, offer mercy first to a
Jerusalem-sinner: This man has most need, he is farthest from God, nearest to
Hell, and so one that has most need. This man's sins are in number the most, in
cry the loudest, in weight the heaviest and consequently will sink him soonest:
Wherefore he has most need of mercy. This man is shut up in Satan's hand,
fastest bound in the cords of his sins; one that Justice is whetting his Sword
to cut off, and therefore has most need, not only of mercy, but that it should
be extended to him in the first place.

But a little further, to show you the true nature of this Reason, to wit, That
Jesus Christ would have mercy offered in the first place to the biggest sinners.

First, Mercy arises from Bowels and Compassion, from Pity, and from a feeling
of the Condition of those in misery, In his Love, and in his Pity, he saves
us, And again, The Lord is p^tiful, very petiful, and of great mercy, Isa.
63.9. Jam, 5.11.

Now where Pity and Compassion is, there is yearning of Bowels; and where there
is that, there is a readiness to help. And, I say again, The more deplorable
and dreadful the Condition is, the more directly does Bowels and Compassion
turn themselves to such, and offer help and deliverance. All this flows from
our first Scripture proof, I came to call them that have need; to call them
first, while the rest look on, and murmur.

How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? Ephraim was a Revolter from God, a man that
had given himself up to Devilism: A company of men, the ten Tribes, that
worshipped Devils, while Judah kept with his God. But how shall I give thee up,
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How
shall I set thee (...) Zeboim? (and yet thou art worse than they: nor has
Samaria committed half thy sins, Ezekiel. 16.46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51.) My heart is
turned within me, and my repentings are kindled together, Hos. 11.8.

But where do you find that ever the Lord did thus roll in his Bowels for, and
after any Self-righteous man? No, no, they are the Publicans and Harlots,
Idolaters and Jerusalem-sinners, for whom his Bowels thus yearn and tumble
about within him. For alas! poor Worms, they have most need of mercy.

Had not the good Samaritan more compassion for that man that fell among
Thieves, (though that fall was occasioned by his going from the place where
they worshipped God, to Jerico, the cursed City) than we read he had for any
other besides? His Wine was for him, his Oil was for him, his Breast for him;
his Pen^y, his Care, and his Swadling-bands for him; for alas, Wretch! he had
most need, Luke 10.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

Zacheus the Publican, the chief of the Publicans, one that had made himself
the richer by wronging of others; the Lord at that time singl^th him out from
all the rest of his brother Publicans, and that in the face of many Pharisees,
and proclaimed in the audience of them all, That that day Salvation was come to
his ^ouse, Luke 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

The Woman also that had been bound down by Satan for eighteen years together,
his compassions putting him upon it, he loosed her, though those that stood by
snarled at him for so doing, Luke 13.11, 12, 13.

And why the Woman of Sarepta, and why Naaman the Syrian, rather than Widows
and Lepers in Israel; but because their conditions were more deplorable, (for
that) they were most forlorn, and farthest from help, Luke 4.25, 27.

But I say, why all these, thus named? why have we not a Catalogue of some Holy
men that were so in their own eyes, and in the judgment of the World? Alas! if
at any time any of them are mentioned, how seemingly coldly does the Record of
Scripture present them to us? Nicodemus, a Night-Professor, and Simon the
Pharisee, with his Fifty Pence; and their great ignorance of the methods of
Grace, we have now and then touched upon.

Mercy seems to be out of his proper Chanel, when it deals with Self-righteous
men; but then it runs with a full stream when it extends it self to the biggest
sinners. As God's mercy is not regulated by Man's goodness, nor obtained by
Man's worthiness; so not much set one by saving of any such. But more of this
anon.

And here let me ask my Reader a Question: Suppose that as thou art walking by
some Pond-side, thou should espy in it, four or five Children all in danger
of drowning, and one in more danger than all the rest; judge which has most
need to be helped out first? I know thou will say, he that is nearest drowning:
Why, this is the case; the bigger Sinner, the nearer d^o^ning; therefore the
bigger sinner, the more need of mercy; yea, of help by mercy in the first
place. And to this our Text agrees, when it says, Beginning at Jerusalem. Let
the Jerusalem Sinner, says Christ, have the first offer, the first invitation,
the first tender of my grace and mercy, for he is the biggest sinner, and so
has most need thereof.

Secondly, Christ Jesus would have mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinners, because when they, any of them, receive it, it redound, most
to the fame of his Name.

Christ Jesus, as you may perceive, has, put himself under the term of a
Physician, a Doctor for curing of Diseases: And you know that Applause, and a
Fame, is a thing that Physicians much desire. That is it that helps them to
Patients, and that also that will help their Patients to commit themselves to
their Skill for Cure, with the more confidence and repose of Spirit. And the
best way for a Doctor or Physician to get themselves a Name, is in the first
place to take in hand, and Cure some such as all others have given off for lost
and dead. Physician^ get neither Name nor Fame by pricking of Wheals or pi^king
out Thistles, or by laying of Plasters to the scratch of a P^n. Every old
Woman can do this. But if they will have a Name and a Fame, if they will have
it quickly, they must, as I said, do some great and desperate Cures. Let them
fetch one to Life that was Dead; let them recover one to his Wits, that was
Mad; let them make one that was born Blind, to See; or let them give ripe Wits
to a Fool; these are ro^able Cures; and he that can do th^s, and if he does
thus first, he shall have the Name and Fame he desires; he may lie a B^d till
Noon.

Why, Christ Jesus forgiveth Sins for a Name, and so beg^ts of himself a go^d
Report in the hearts of the Children of men. And therefore in reason, he must
be willing, as also he did command, that his mercy should be offered first to
the biggest Sinners.

I will forgive their sins, iniquities, and transgressions, says he, and it
shall turn to me for a name of Joy, and a praise, and an honor, before all the
Nations of the earth, Jer. 33.8, 9.

And hence it is that at his first appearing he took upon him to do such mighty
works. He got a Fame thereby; he got a Name thereby, Mat. 4.23, 24.

When Christ had cast the legion of Devils out of the man of whom you read,
Mark 5. He bid him go home to his Friends and tell it. Go home, says he, to
thy friends, and tell them how great things God has done for thee, and has had
compassion on thee, Mark 5.19. Christ Jesus seeks a Name, and desires a Fame
in the World; and therefore, or the better to obtain that, he commands that
mercy should first be proffered to the biggest sinners, because by the saying
of one of them, he makes all men marvel. As it is said of the man l^st
mentioned, whom Christ cured toward the beginning of his Ministry: And he
departed, says the Text, and began to publish in Decapolis, how great things
Jesus had done for him, and all men did m^rvel, Ver. 20.

When John told Christ, that they saw one casting out Devils in his Name, and
they forbad him because he followed not with them: What is the answer of
Christ? Forbid him not, for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my
Name, that can lightly speak evil of me. No, they will rather cause his Praise
to be heard, and his Name to be magnified, and so put Glory on the head of
Christ.

But we will follow a little our Metaphor: Christ, as I said, has put himself
under the term of a Physician; Consequently he desires that his Fame, as to
the Salvation of sinners, may spread abroad, that the World may see what he can
do. And to this end, has not only commanded that the biggest sinners should
have the first offer of his mercy; but has, as Physicians do, put out his
Bills, and published his doings, that things may be read and talked of. Yea, he
has moreover in these his blessed Bills, the Holy Scriptures, I mean, incerted
the very Names of Persons, the places of their abode, and the great Cures that
by the means of his Salvations he has w^ought upon them to this very end: Here
is, Item, Such a one by my grace and redeeming Blood, was made a Monument of
everlasting Life: And such a one by my perfect Obedience, became an Heir of
Glory. And then he produces their Names.

Item, I s^ved Lot from the guilt and damnation that he had procured to himself
by his incest.

Item, I saved David from the Vengeance that belonged to him for committing of
Adultery and Murder.

Here is also Solomon, M^nasseh, Pet^r, Magdal^n, and many others made mention
of in this Book. Yea, here are their Names, their Sins, and their Salvations
recorded together, that you may read, and know what a Savior he is, and do him
honor in the World. For why are these things thus recorded, but to show to
Sinners what he can do, to the praise and glory of his grace?

And it is observable, as I said before, we have but very little of the
Salvation of little sinners mentioned in God's Book, because that would not
have answered the design, to wit, to bring glory and fame to the Name of the
Son of God.

What should be the reason, think you, why Christ should so easily take a
denial of the great ones, that wear the Grandeur of the World, and struggle so
hard for Hedge creepers and Highway men, (as that Parable, Luke 14. seems to
import he does) but to show forth the riches of the glory of his Grace to his
praise. This, I say, is one Reason to be sure.

They that had their Grounds, their yoke of Oxen, and their m^rriage Joys, were
invited to come; but they made their excuse, and that serv^d the turn. But when
he comes to deal with the worst, he says to his Servants, Go ye out and bring
them in higher. Go out quickly and bring in hither the poor, the maimed, the
halt, and the blind. And they did so. And he said again, Go out into the high
ways, and Hed^es, and Compel them to come in, that my house may be fill^d, Luke
14.18, 19 23. These poor, lame, maimed, blind, hedge-creepers, and high way
men, Must come in, Must be forced in. These, if saved, will make his Merits
shine.

When Christ was crucified, and hanged up between the Earth and Heavens, there
was two Thieves crucified with him; and, behold, he lays hold of one of them,
and will have him away with him to Glory. Was not this a strange act, and a
display of unthought-of grace? Were there none but Thieves there, or were the
rest of that company out of his reach? Could he not, think you, have stooped
from the Cross to the Ground, and have laid hold on some honester man if he
would? Yes, doubtless. Oh, but then he would not have displayed his Grace, nor
so have pursued his own designs; namely, to get to himself a praise and a name;
But now he has done it to purpose. For who that shall read this Story, but must
confess that the Son of God is full of grace; for a proof of the riches
ther^of, he left behind him, when upon the Cross, he took the T^ief away with
him to glory. Nor can this one act of his be buried: It will be talked of to
the end of the World to his praise. Men shall speak of the might of thy
terrible acts; and will declare thy greatness. They shall abundantly utter the
memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness. They shall
speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk, of thy power. To make known to the
Sons of men, his mighty acts, and the gl^rious Majesty of his Kingdom. Psalm.
145.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

When the Word of God came among the Conjurers and those Soothsayers, that you
read of Act. 19. and had p^evailed with some of them to accept of the grace of
Christ, the Holy Ghost records it with a boast, for that it would redound to
his praise; saying,

And many of them that used curious Arts, brought their Books together and
burned them before all men, and counted the price of them, and found it fifty
thousand piec^s of Silver. So mightily grew the Word of God and prevailed, Acts
19. 19, 20. It wrenched out of the clutches of Satan, some of those of whom he
thought himself most sure. So mightily grew the Word of God. It grew mightily,
it incroached upon the Kingdom of the Devil! It pursued him, and took the prey:
It forced him to let go his hold! It brought away captive, as Prisoners taken
by force of Arms, some of the most valiant of his Army. It fetch back from, as
it were, the confines of Hell, some of those that were his most trusty, and
that with Hell had been at an agreement. It made them come and confess their
deeds, and burn their Books before all men: So mightily grew the Word of God,
and prevailed.

Thus therefore you see why Christ will have Mercy offered in the first place
to the biggest Sinners. They have most need thereof; and this is the most ready
way to extol his name that rides upon the Heavens to our help. But,

Thirdly, Christ Jesus would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, Because by their Forgiveness and Salvation, others, hearing of
it, will be encouraged the more to come to him for Life.

For the Physi^ian by curing of the most desperate at the first, does not only
get himself a Name, but begets Encouragement in the minds of other diseased
folk to come to him for help. Hence you read of our Lord, that after, through
his tender mercy, he had Cured many of great Diseases, his Fame was spread
abroad: They brought unto him all sick People that were taken with diverse
Diseases and Torments, and those which were poss^sse^ with Devils, and those
which were Lunatic and those that had the Palsy, and he healed them; and
there followed him great multitudes of People from Galilee, and Decapolis, and
Jerusalem, and Judea, and from beyond Jordan, Mat. 4.24, 25.

See here, He first by working, gets himself a Fame, a Name, and Renown, and
now men take Encouragement, and bring from all quarters their Diseased to him,
being helped by what they had heard, to believe that their Diseased should be
healed.

Now, as he did with those outward Cures, so he does in the proffers of his
Grace and Mercy; he proffers that in the first place to the biggest Sinners,
that others may take Heart to come to him to be saved. I will give you a
Scripture or two, I mean, to show you that Christ by commanding that his Mercy
should in the first place be offered to the biggest of Sinners, has a design,
thereby to encourage and provoke others to come also to him for Mercy.

God, says Paul, who is rich in Mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved
us, even when we were dead in our sins has quickened us together with Christ.
(by Grace ye are saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. But why did he do all this? That
in the Ages to come he might show the exceeding R^ches of his Grace in his
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus,Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6, 7.

See, here is a design, God lets out his Mercy to Eph^sus of design, even to
show to the Ages to come, the exceeding Riches of his Grace in his kindness to
them through Christ Jesus. And why to show by these, the exceeding Riches of his
Grace to the Ages to come through Christ Jesus? But to alure them, and their
Children also to come to him, and to partake of the same Grace through Christ
Jesus.

But what was Paul, and the Ephesian-Sinners? (of Paul we will speak anon)
These Ephesian-Sinners, They were men dead in Sins, men that walked according
to the dictates and motions of the Devil, worshippers of Diana, that Effeminate
Godd^ss: Men far off from God, aliens and strangers to all good things, such as
were far off from that, as I s^id, and cons^quently in a most deplorable
condition. As the Jerusalem-Sinners were of the highest sort among the Jews, so
these Ephesian-Sinners were of the highest sort among the Gentiles, (Ephesians.
2.1, 2, 3. Acts 19.35. Ephesians. 2.11, 12.)

W^erefore as by the Jerusalem-Sinners, in saving them first, he had a design
to provoke others to come to him for Mercy; so, The same design is here set on
foot again, in his calling and converting the Ephesian-Sinners; that in the
Ages to come he might show the ^xceeding Riches of his Grace, says he, in his
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus. T^ere is yet one hint behind. It Is
said that God saved these FOR his love. That is, as I think for the setting
forth, for the commendations of his love, for the advance of his love in the
Hearts and minds of them that should come after. As who should say, God has had
Mercy upon, and been Gracious to you, that he might show to others for their
encouragement, that they have ground to come to him to be saved. When God saves
one great Sinner, it is to encourage another great Sinner to come to him for
Mercy.

He saved the Thief, to encourage Thieves to come to him for Mercy. He saved
Magdalen, to encourage other Magdalens to come to him for Mercy. He saved Saul,
to encourage Saul's to come to him for Mercy. And this Paul himself does say,
For this cause, says he. I obtained Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might
show forth all long suffering for a Pattern to them which should hereafter
believe on him to life everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.16.

How plain are the words! Christ in saving of me, has given to the World a
Pattern of his Grace, that they might see, and believe, and come, and be saved.
That they that are to be born hereafter, might believe on Jesus Christ to life
everlasting.

But what was Paul? Why he tells you himself, I am, says he, the chief of
Sinners; I was, says he, a Blasphemer, a Pers^cutor, an injurious Person: but I
obtained Mercy, 1 Timothy 1.14, 15. Ay, that is well for you Paul; but what
advantage have we thereby? Oh very much, says he; For, for this cause I
obtained M^rcy, that in me First, Jesus Christ might show all long suffering
for a pattern to them which shall believe on him to life everlasting.

Thus therefore you see that this third Reason is of strength, namely, That
Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest
Sinners, because, by their Forgiveness and Salvation, others, hearing of it,
will be encouraged the more to come to him for M^rcy.

It may well therefore be said to God, Thou delight^st in Mercy, and Mercy
pleases thee, Mich. 7.18.

But who believes that this was Gods design in showing Mercy of old? Namely,
That we that come after might take courage to come to him for Mercy; or that
Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest
Sinners, to stir up others to come to him for Life. This is not the manner of
men! O God!

But David saw this betimes, therefore he makes this one Argument with God,
That he would blot out his Transgressions, that he would forgive his Adultery,
his Murders, and horrible Hypocrisy. Do it, O Lord, says he, do it, And then
will I teach Trans^ressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be Converted unto thee,
Psalm. 51.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

He knew that the Conversion of Sinners would be a work highly pleasing to God,
as being that which he had designed before he made Mountain or Hill: Wherefore
he comes, and he says, Save me, O Lord; if thou will but save me, I will fall
in with thy design. I will help to bring what Sinners to thee I can. And Lord,
I am willing to be made a Preacher my self, for that I have been a horri^le
Sinner; wherefore, if thou sh^lt forgive my great Transgressions, I shall be a
fit man to tell of thy wondrous Grace to others. Yea, Lord, I dare promise,
that if thou will have mercy upon me, it shall tend to the glory of thy Grace,
and also to the increase of thy Kingdom; for I will tell it, and Sinners will
hear on'^. And there is nothing so suiteth with the hearing Sinner, as Mercy:
and to be informed that God is willing to bestow it upon him. I will teach
Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be Converted unto thee.

Nor will Christ Jesus miss of his design in profering of Mercy in the first
place to the biggest Sinners. You know what work the Lord, by laying hold of
the Woman of Samaria, made among the People there. They knew that she was a
Town-Sinner, an Adultress. Yea, one that after the most audacious manner, lived
in Uncleanness with a man that was not her Husband. But when she, from a turn
upon her Heart, went into the City, and said to her Neighbors, Come: Oh how
they came! how they flocked out of the City to Jesus Christ! Then they went out
of the City, and came to him, and many of the Samaritans (People perhaps as bad
as her self) believed on him, for the saying of the woman, which testified,
saying, He told me all that ever I did (John 4.39.)

That word, He told me all that ever I did, was a great Argument with them; for
by that they gathered, That tho he knew her to be vile, yet he did not despise
her, nor refuse to show how willing he was to communicate his Grace unto her:
And this fetched over, first, her, then them.

This woman, as I said, was a Samaritan-Sinner, a Sinner of the worst
Complexion. For the Jews abhorred to have ought to do with them ( verse 9.)
wherefore none more fit than she to be made one of the Decoys of Heaven, to
bring others of these Samaritan Wild-Fowls under the Net of the Grace of
Christ. And she did the work to purpose. Many, and many more of the Samaritans
believed on him, Verse 40, 41, 42. The Heart of man, tho set on Sin, will, when
it comes once to a persuasion that God is willing to have Mercy upon us,
incline to come to Jesus Christ for life; witness those turn-a-ways from God,
that you also read of in Jeremiah; for after they had heard three or four times
over, that God had Mercy for backsliders, they broke out and said, Behold, we
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Or as those in Hosea did, For in
thee the F^therless find mercy. (Jer. 3.22. Hos. 14.1, 2, 3.)

Mercy, and the revelation thereof, is the only Antidote against Sin. It Is of a
thawing nature: 'twill lose the Heart that is frozen up in Sin: yea, 'twill
make the Unwilling willing to come to Jesus Christ for, Life.

Wherefore do you think was it that Jesus Christ told the Adulterous woman, and
that before so many Sinners, That he had not Condemned her, but to alure her,
with them there present, to hope to find favor at his hands. (As he also says
in another place, I came not to Judge, but to Save the World), for might they
not thence most rationally conclude, That if Jesus Christ had rather save, than
damn an Harlot, there was encouragement for them to come to him for Mercy.

I heard once a story from a Soldier, who with his Company had laid Siege
against a Fort, that so long as the Besieged were persuaded their Foes would
show them no favor, they Fought like Madmen; but when they saw one of their
Fellows taken, and received to favor, they all came tumbling down from their
Fortress, and d^livered themselves into their Enemies hands.

I am persuaded, did men believe that there is that Grace and Willingness in
the Heart of Christ to save Sinners, as the Word imports there is, they would
come tumbling into his Arms: But Satan has blinded their Minds, that they
cannot see this thing. Howbeit the Lo^d Jesus has, as I said, that others might
take Heart and come to him, given out a commandment that Mercy should in the
first place be offered to the biggest Sinners. Begin, says he, at Jerusalem.
And thus I end the third Reason.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, Because that is the way, if they receive it, most to weaken
the Kingdom of Satan, and to keep it low^st in every Age of the World. The
biggest Sinners, they are Satan's Colon^ls, and Captains, the Leaders of his
People, and they that most stoutly make Head against the Son of God. Wherefore
let these first be conquered, and his Kingdom will be weak. When Ishbosheth had
lost his Abner, his Kingdom was made weak, nor did he sit but tottering then
upon his Throne. So when Satan loses his strong men, them that are mighty to
work Iniquity, and dextrous to manage others in the same, then is his Kingdom
weak (2 Samuel 3.) Therefore I say, Christ does offer Mercy in the first place to
such, the more to weaken his Kingdom. Christ Jesus was glad to see Satan f^ll
like Lightning from Heaven, that is suddenly or headlong; and it was, surely,
by casting of him out of strong Possessions, and by r^covering of some
notorious Sinners out of his Clutches, ( Luke 10.17, 18, 19.)

Samptson, when he would pull down the Philistians Temple, took hold of the two
main Pillars of it, and breaking them, down came the House. Christ came to
destroy the works of the Devil, and to destroy by converting Grace, as well as
by redeeming Blood. Now Sin swarms and lies by Legions, and whole Armies, in
the Souls of the biggest Sinners, as in Garrisons: Wherefore the way, the most
direct way to destroy it, is first to deal with such Sinners, by the Word of
his Gospel, and by the Merits of his Passion.

For Example, tho I shall give you but a homely one; Suppose a Family to be
very Lowzy, and one or two of the Family to be in chief the breeders; the way,
the quickest way, to clear that Family, or at least to weaken the so swarming
of those Vermin, is, in the first place to sweeten the Skin, Head, and Clothes
of the chief breeders: And then, though all the Family should be apt to breed
them, the number of them, and so the greatness of that Plague there, will be
the more impaired.

Why, there are some people that are in chief the Devils Sin-Breeders in the
Towns and Places where they live. The Place, Town, or Family where they live,
must needs be horrible lousy, and as it were, eaten up with Vermin: Now let
the Lord Jesus in the first place cleanse these great Breeders, and there will
be given a nip to those swarms of Sins that use to be committed in such places
throughout the Town, House, or Family where such sin-breeding Persons used to
be.

I speak by Experience; I was one of these lowzy ones, one of these great
sin-breeders; I infected all the Youth of the Town where I was born, with all
manner of youthful Vanities. The neighbors counted me so, my practice proved
me so: Wherefore Christ Jesus took me first; and taking me first, the Contagion
was much allayed all the Town over. When God made me sigh, they would harken,
and enquiringly say, What Is the matter with John? They also gave their I
various opinions of me: But as I said, Sin cooled, and failed, as to his full
carrier. When I went out to seek the Bread of Life, some of them would follow,
and the rest be put into a muse at home. Yea, almost the Town, at first, at
times, would go out to hear at the place where I found good: Yea, young and old
for a while had some reformation on them; also some of them perceiving that God
had mercy upon me* came crying to him for mercy too.

But what need I give you an Instance of poor I; I will come to Manasseh the
King: So long as he was a ringleading Sinner, the great Idolater, and chief for
Devilism, the whole Land flowed with wickedness; For he made them to sin, and
do worse than the Heathen that dwelt round about them, or that was cast out
from before them. But when God converted him, the whole Land was reformed. Down
went the Groves, the Idols, and Altars of Baal, and up went true Religion in
much of the Power and Purity of it. You Will say, The King reformed by Power. I
answer, doubtless, and by Example too; for People observe their Leaders; as
their Fathers did, so did they, 2 Chronicles. 33.2 King. 17.41.

This therefore is another Reason, why Jesus would have mercy offered in the
first place to the biggest sinners, because that is the best way, if they
receive it, most to weaken the kingdom of Satan, and to keep it poor and low.

And do you not think now, that if God would but take hold of the hearts of
some of the most notorious in your Town, in your Family, or Country, that this
thing would be verified before your faces? It would, it would, to the Joy of
you that are godly, to the making of Hell to sigh, to the great suppressing of
Sin, the glory of Christ, and the joy of the Angels of God. And Ministers
should therefore, that this Work might go on, take advantages to persuade with
the biggest Sinners to come into Christ, according to my Text, and their
Commissions: Beginning at Jerusalem.

Fifthly, Jesus Cbrist would have mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinners. Because such, when converted, are usually the best helps in
the Church against temptations, and fittest for the support of the feeble
minded there. Hence, usually, you have some such in the first plantation of
Churches; or quickly upon it. Churches would do but sorrily, if Christ Jesus
did not put such Converts among them; they are the Monuments and Mirrors of
Mercy. The very sight of such a Sinner in God's House, yea, the very thought of
him, where the sight of him cannot he had, is oft-times greatly for the help of
the Faith of the feeble.

When the Churches (said Paul) that were in Judea, heard this concerning me,
that he which persecuted them in time past, now preached the Faith which once
he destroyed, They glorified God in me, Gal. 1.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Glorified God] How is that? Why, they praised him, and took courage to believe
the more in the mercy of God: For that he had had mercy on such a great sloner
as he. They glorified God [ in me] They wondered that Grace should be so rich,
as to take hold of such a Wretch as I was; and for my sake believed in Christ
the more.

There are two things that great sinners are acquainted with, when they come to
divulge them to the Saints, that are a great relief to their Faith.

1. The Contests that they usually have with the Devil at their parting with
him.

2. Their knowledge of his Secret i^ his workings.

For the First, The biggest sins have ^sually great contests with the Devil
at their partings; and this is an help to ^aints. For ordinary Saints find
afterward what the vile ones find at first; but when at the opening of hearts
the one finds himself to be as the other, the one is a comfort to the other.
The lesser sort of sinners find but little of this, till after they have been
some time in profession; but the Vile Man meets with his at the beginning.
Wherefore he, when the other is down, is ready to tell that he has met with the
same before. For I say, he has had it before. Satan is loath to part with a
great Sinner. What, my true Servant (quoth he) my old Servant, will thou
forsake me now? Having so often sold thy self to me to work wickedness, will thou forsake me now? Thou horrible Wretch, do not know, that thou have sinned
thy self beyond the reach of Grace, and do think to find Mercy now? Art not
thou a Murderer, a Thief, a Harlot, a Witch, a sinner of the greatest size, and
do thou look for mercy now? Do thou think that Christ will foul his fingers
with thee?

It Is enough to make Angels blush, says Satan, to see so vile a one knoc^ at
Heaven gates^ or Mercy, and wilt tho^ be so abominable bold to do it? Thus
Satan dealt with me, says the great Sinner when at first I came to Jesus
Christ. An^ what did you reply, says the Tempted? Why, I granted the whole
Charge to be true, says the other. And what, did you d^spair? or how? No (says
he) I said, I am Magdalene, I am Zicheus, I am the Thief, I am the Harlot, I am
the Publican, I am the Prodigal, and one of Christ's Murderers: Yea, worse than
any of these, and yet God was so far off from rejecting of me, (as I found
afterward) that there was music and dancing in his House for me, and for Joy
that I was come home unto him. Oh blessed be God for Grace, (says the other)
for then I hope there is favor for me. Yea, as I told you, such a one is a
continual Spectacle in the Church, for every one by, to behold God's grace, and
wonder!

Secondly, And as for the Secrets of Satan, such as are Suggestions to question
the Being of God, the truth of his Word, and to be annoyed with devilish
Blasphemies: None more acquainted with these than the biggest sinners at their
Conversion; wherefore thus also they are prepared to be helps in the Church to
relieve and comfort the other.

I might also here tell you of the Contests and Battles that such are engaged
in, wherein they find the beffettings of Satan, above any other the Saints. At
which times Satan assaults the Soul with darkness, fears, frightful thoughts of
Apparitions; now they sweat, pant, cryout, and struggle for life.

The Angels now come down to behold the sight, and rejoice to see a bit of Dust
and Ashes to overcome Principalities and Powers, and Might, and Dominions. But,
as I said, when these come a little to be settled, they are prepared for help
for others, and are great Comforts unto them. Their great sins give
encouragement to the Devil to assault them, and by these temptations Christ
takes advantage to make them the more helpful to the Churches.

The biggest sinner, when he is Converted and comes into the Church, say^ to
them all, by his very coming in, Behold me, all you that are Men and Wom^n of a
low and timorous spirit; you whose hearts are narrow, for that you never had
the advantage to know, because your sins are few, the largeness of the grace of
God. Behold, I say, in me, the exceeding riches of his grace! I am a Pattern
set forth before your faces, o^ whom you may look and take hear^* This, I say,
the great sinner ^an say, to the exceeding comfort of (...) the rest.

Wherefore, as I have hinted before, when God intends to stock a place with
Saints, and to make that place excellently to flourish with the riches of his
grace; he usually begins with the Conversion of some of the most notorious
there abouts, and lays them as an Example to allure others, and to build up
when they are converted.

'Twas Paul that must go to the Gentiles, because Paul was the most outrageous
of all the Apostles, in the time of his unregeneracy: Yea, Peter must be he
that after his horrible fall, was thought fittest, when recovered again, to
comfort and strengthen his Brethren. See Luke 22.31, 32.

Some must be Pillars in God's House, and if they be Pillars of Cedar, they
must stand while they are stout and sturdy sticks in the Forest, before they
are cut down, and planted or placed there.

No man, when he builds his House, makes the principal parts thereof, of weak
or feeble Timber; for how could such bear up the rest; but of great and able
Wood. Christ Jesus also goes this way to work, he makes of the biggest
Sinners, Bearers and Supporters to the rest. This then may serve for another
Reason, why Jesus Christ gives out in Commandment, that Mercy should in the
first place be offered to the biggest Sinners, Because such when converted, are
usually the best h^lps in the Church against temptations, and fittest for the
support of the fe^ble-minded there.

Sixthly, Another reason, why Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the
first place to the biggest Sinners, is, Because They, when converted, are apt
to Live him most.

This agrees both with Scripture, and Reason. Scripture says so. To whom much
is forgiven, the same loves much. To whom little is forgiven, the same loves
little, Luke 7.47. Reason says so. For as it would be the unreasonablest thing
in the world, to render hatred for love, and contempt for forgiveness; so
'twould be as ridiculous to think that the reception of a little kindness
should lay the same obligations upon the heart to love, as the reception of a
great deal. I would not disparage the love of Christ; I know the least dram of
it, when it reaches to forgiveness, is great above all the world; But
comparatively, there i^ greater extentions of the love of Christ to one, than
to another: He that has most sin, it forgiven, is partaker of the greatest
love, of the greatest forgiveness.

I know also, that there are some, that from this very Doctrine, say, Let us do
evil, that good may come; and that turn the Grace of our God into
Lasciviousness. But I speak not of these, These will neither be ruled by Grace
nor Reason. Grace would teach them, if they know it, to deny Ungodly Courses;
and so would Reason too, if it could truly sense the Love of God, Tim. 2 11,
1^. Romans 11.1.

Does it look like what has any Coherence with Reason or Mercy, for a man to
abuse his Friend? Because Christ died for men, shall I therefore Spit in his
Face? The Bread and Water that was given by Elisha to his Enemies, that came
the Land of Israel to take him, had so much influence upon their Minds, tho
Heathens, that they returned to their homes without hurting him: Yea, it kept
them from coming again in a hostile manner into the Coasts of Israel, 2 Kings
6.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

But to forbear to Illustrate till anon; one reason why Christ Jesus shows
Mercy to Sinners, is that he might obtain their Love, that he may remove their
base affections, firm base objects, to himself. Now if he loves to be loved a
little, he loves to be loved much; but there is not any that are capable of
loving much, save those that have much forgiven them. Hence it is said of Paul,
That he labored more than them all, to wit, with a labor of love, because he
had been by Sin more vile against Christ than they all, 1 Cor. 15. He it was
that persecuted the Church of God, and wasted it, Gal. 1.13. He, of them all,
was the only raving Bedlam against the Saints: And being exceeding mad, says
he, against them, I persecuted them even to strange Cities, Acts 26.11.

This raving Bedlam, that once was so, is he that now says, I labored more
than them all; more for Christ than them all.

But Paul, what moved thee thus to do? The love of Christ, says he. It was not
I, but the grace of God that was with me. As who should say; O Grace! 'Twas
such Grace to save me! 'Twas such marvelous Grace for God to look down from
Heaven upon me, and that secured me from the wrath to come, that I am
captivated with the sense of the rich^s of it. Hence I act, hence I labor; For
how can I otherwise do, since God not only separated me from my Sins and
Companions, but separated all the powers of my Soul and Body to his Service? I
am therefore prompted on by this exceeding love, to labor as I have done; yet
not I, but the grace of God with me.

Oh! I shall never forget his love, nor the circumstances under which I was,
when his love laid hold upon me. I was going to Damascus with Letters from the
High Priest to make Havoc of God's People there, as I had made Havoc of them
in other places. These bloody Letters was not imposed upon me. I went to the
High Priest and desired them of him, Acts 9.1, 2. And yet he saved me! I was
one of the men, of the chief men that had a hand in the Blood of his Martyr
Stephen, yet he had mercy on me! When I was at Damas^us, I stunck so horribly
like a Blood-sucker, that I became a Terror to all thereabout. Yea, Ananias
(good man) made intercession to my Lord against me, yet he would have mercy
upon me! Yea, joined mercy to mercy, until he had made me a monument of Grace.
He made a Saint of the, land persuaded me, that my transgressions were forgiven
me.

When I began to preach, those that heard me were amazed; and said, Is not this
he that destroyed them that called on t^is Name in Jerusalem, and came hither
for that intent, that he might bring them bound to the High P^iest? Hell does
know that I was a Sinner; Heaven does know that I was a Singer: The World also
knows that I was a Sinner, a Sinner of the greatest size; but I obtained mercy,
Acts 9.20, 21.

Shall not this lay Obli^ation upon me? Is not Love of the greatest force to
oblige? Is it not strong as Death? Cruel as the Grave? and hotter than the
Coals of Juniper? Has it not a most vehement flame? Can the Waters quench it?
Can the Floods drown it? I am under the force of it, and this is my continual
cry, What shall I render to the Lord for all the Benefits which he has bestow^d
upon me?

Ay! Paul, this is something, thou speak like a Man, like a man affected,
and carried away with the love and gra^e of God. Now this sense, and this
affection, and this labor, gives to Christ the love that he looks for. But he
might have converted twenty little sinners, and yet not found, for grace
bestowed, ^o ^uch love in them all.

I wonder how far a man might go among the Converted Sinners of the smaller
size, before one could find one that so much as look any thing this wayward.
Where is he that is thus under pangs of love for the Grace bestowed upon him by
Jesus Christ? Excepting only some few; you may walk to the Worlds end and find
none. But, as I sail, some there are, and so there has been in every age of the
Church, great sinners, that have had much forgiven them. And they love much
upon this account.

Jesus Christ therefore knows what he does, when he lays hold on the hearts of
sinners of the biggest size. He knows that such an one will love more than many
that have not sinned half their sins.

I will tell you a Story that I have ^ead of Martha and Mary; the Name of the
Book I have forgot. I mean of the Book in which I found the Relation; but the
thing was thus:

Martha, says my Author, was a very holy Woman, much like Lazarus, her
Brother* but Mary was a loose and wan^on creature. Martha did seldom miss good
Sermons, and Lectures, when she could come at them in Jerusalem; but Mary would
frequent the house of Sports, and the company of the vilest of Men for lust.
And though Martha had often desired that her Sister would go with her to hear
her Preachers: Yea, had often entreated her with Tears, to do it, yet could she
never prevail; for still Many would make her excuse, or reject her with disdain
for her Zeal and Preciseness in Religion.

After Martha had waited long, tried many ways to bring her Sister to good, and
all proved ineffectual. At last, she comes upon her thus. Sister, quoth she, I
pray thee go with me to the Temple to day, to hear one preach a Sermon. What
kind of Preacher is he, said she? Martha replied, It is one Jesus of Nazareth,
he is the handsomest man that ever you saw with your eyes. Oh! he shines in
Beauty, and is a most excellent Preacher.

Now what does Mary? After a little pause, but goes up into her Chamber, and
with her Pins and her Clouts, decks up her self as fine as her fingers could
make her. This done, away she goes, not with her Sister Mar^ha, but as much
unobserved as she could, to the Sermon, or rather to See the Preacher.

The Hour and Preacher being come, and she having observed whereabout the
Preacher would stand, goes and sets her self so in the Temple, that she might
be sure to have the full view of this excellent Person. So he comes in, and she
looks, and the first glimps of his Person pleased her. Well, Jesus addresseth
himself to his Sermon, and she looks earnestly on him.

Now at that time, says my Author, Jesus Preached about the lost Sheep, the
lost Goat, and the prodigal Child. And when he came to show what care the
Shepherd took for one lost Sheep, and how the Woman swept to find her Piece
which was lost, and what Joy there was at their finding; she began to be taken
by the Ears, and forgot what she came about, musing what the Preacher would
make on it: But when he came to the Application, and showed that by the lost
Sheep was meant a great Sinner; by the Shepherds care was meant God's love for
great Sinners; and that by the joy of the Neighbors, was showed what joy there
was among the Angels in Heaven over one great Sinner that repents; She began
to be taken by the Heart. And as he spoke these last words, she thought he
pitched his innocent Eyes just upon her, and looked as if he spoke what was now
said, to her. Wherefore her heart began to tremble, being shaken with affection
and fear; then her Eyes run down with tears apace; wherefore she was forced to
hide her face with her Handkerchief, and so sat sobbing and crying all the rest
of the Sermon.

Sermon being done, up she gets, and away she goes, and withal, enquired where
this Jesus the Preacher dined that day? And one told her, at the house of Simon
the Pharisee. So away goes she, first to her Chamber, and there strips her self
of her wanton Attire; then falls upon her knees to ask God forgiveness for all
her wicked life. This done, in a modest dress she goes to Simon's house, where
she finds Jesus set at Dinner. So she gets behind him, and weeps, and drops her
tears upon his Feet like Rain, and washes them, and wipes them with the Hairs
of her Head. She also kiss^d his Feet with her Lips, and anointed them with
Ointment. When Simon the Pharisee perceived what the Woman did, and being
ignorant of what it was to be forgiven much (for he never was forgiven more
than Fifty Pence.) He began to think within himself, that he had been mistaken
about Jesus Christ, because he suffered such a Sinner as this Woman was, to
touch him. Surely, quoth he, this Man, if he were a Prophet, would not let this
Woman come near him, for she is a Town Sinner, (so ignorant are all
Self-righteous men of the way of Christ with Sinners) But lest Mary should be
discouraged with some clownish carriage of this Pharisee, and so desert her
good beginnings, and her new steps which she now had began to take toward
eternal Life, Jesus began thus with Simon. Simon, says he, I have somewhat to
say unto thee. And he says, Master, say on. There was, said Jesus, a certain
Creditor had two Debtors, the one owed him Five hundred Pence, and the other,
Fifty. And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me
therefore which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I sup^^se
he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou have rightly judged. And
he turned to the Woman, and said unto Simon, See thou this Woman? I entered
into thy house, thou gave me no Water for my Feet: But she has washed my
Feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gave me no
kiss, but this Woman, since the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my
Feet. My Head with Oil ^hou did not anoint, but this Woman has anointed my
Feet with Ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, Her Sins which are many, are
forgiven, for she loved much; but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves
little. And he said unto her, thy Sins are forgiven, Luke 7.36, 37, 38, 39, 40,
41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50.

Thus you have the Story. If I come short in any Circumstance, I beg Pardon of
those that can correct me. It Is three or four and twenty Years since I saw the
Book, yet I have as far as my memory will admit, given you the relation of the
Matter. However, Luke, as you see, does here present you with the Substance of
the whole.

Alas! Christ Jesus has but little thanks for the saving of the little Sinners.
To whom little is forgiven, the same lovers little. He gets not Water for his
Feet, by his saving of such Sinners. There are abundance of dry-eyed Christians
in the World, and abundance of dry eyed. Duties too: Duties that never was
wetted with the tears of Contrition and Repentance, nor ever sweetened wish the
great Sinners box of Ointment. And the reason is, such sinners have not great
sins to be saved from; or if they have, they look upon them in the
diminishing-glass of the Holy Law of God. But I rather believe that the
Professors of our days want a due sense of what they are; for verily, for the
generality of them, both before and since Conversion, they have been sinners of
a lusty size: But if their Eyes be holden, if Convictions are not shown, if
their knowledge of their sins is but like to the eyesight in twilight, the
Heart cannot be affected with that grace that has laid hold on the man, and so
Christ Jesus sows much, and has little coming in.

Wherefore His way is oft-times to step out of the way, to Jeri^o, to Samaria,
to the Country of the Gaddarens, to the Coasts of Tire and Sidon, and also to
Mount Calvary, that he may lay h^ld of such kind of Sinners as will love him to
his liking Luke 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. John 4.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, etc. Mark 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20. Matt. 15.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Luke 23.33, 34, 35, 36, 37,
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.

But thus much for the Sixth Reason, why Christ Jesus would have Mercy offered
in the first place to the biggest Sinners; to wit, because such sinners when
converted, are apt to love him most.

The Jerusalem-sinners were they that out-stript, when they were Converted, in
some things, all the Churches of the Gentiles. They were of one heart, and of
one soul, neither said any of them, that ought of the things that they
poss^ssed was their own; neither was there any among them that lacked for as
many as were possessors of Lands, or Houses, sold them, and brought the price
of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet, etc.
Acts 4.32, 33, 34, 35. Now show me such another Pattern if you can. But why did
these do thus? Oh! they were Jerusalem-sinners. These were the Men that but a
little before, had killed the Prince of Life, and those to whom he did, that
notwithstanding, send the first offer of Grace and Mercy. And the sense of
this, took them up betwixt the Earth and the Heaven, and carried them on in
such ways and methods, as could never be trodden by any since. They talk of the
Church of Rome, and set her in her Primitive state, as a Pattern, and Mother of
Churches; when the Truth is, they were the Jerusalem-sinners, when Converts,
that out-did all the Churches that ever was.

Seventhly, Christ Jesus would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinners, beacause Grace, when it is received by such, finds matter to
kindle upon more freely than it finds in other sinners. Great Sinners are like
the dry Wood, or like great Candles, which burns best and shines with biggest
light. I lay not this down, as I did those Reasons before, to show, that when
great Sinners are Converted, they will be encouragement to others, though that
is true; but to show that Christ has a delight to see Grace, the Grace we
receive, to shine. We love to see things that bear a good gloss, yea, we choose
to buy such kind of matter to work upon, as will, if wrought up to what we
intend, cast that luster that we desire. Candles that burn not bright, we like
not; Wood that is green will rather smother and spu^ter and smoke, and or^ok,
and flounce, than cast a brave light and pleasant heat. Wherefore great Folks
care not much, not so much for such kind of things, as for them that will
better answer their ends.

Hence Christ desires the biggest Sinner, in him there is Matter to work by, to
wit, a great deal of sin; for as by the Tallow of the Candle, the Fire takes
occasion to burn the brighter; so by the sin of the Soul, Grace takes occasion
to shine the clearer. Little Candles shine but little, for there wants matter
for the Fire to work upon; but in the great Sinner, here is more matter for
Grace to work by. Faith shines, when it works toward Christ, through the
sides of many and great Transgressors; and so does Love, for that much is
forgiven. And what matter can be found in the Soul for Humility to work by so
well, as by a sight that I have been and am an abominable Sinner? And the same
is to be said of Patience, Meekness, Gentleness, Self-denial, or of any other
Grace. Grace takes occasion by the vileness of the man, to shine the more; even
as by the ruggidness of a very strong Distemper, or Disease, the virtue of the
Medicine is best made manifest. Where Sin abounds, Grace much more abounds.
Romans 5.20. A black string makes the Grace burn clear. Some say when Grace and a
good Nature meet together, they do make shinning Christians; but I say, when
Grace and a great Sinner meets, and when Grace shall subdue that great Sinner
to it self, and shall operate after its kind in the Soul of that great Sinner,
then we have a shinning Christian; Witness all those of whom mention was made
before.

Abraham was among the Idolaters when in the Land of Assyria, and served Idols
with his Kindred on the other side of the Flood, Jos. 24.2. Genesis 11.31. but who
when called, was there in the World, in whom Grace shone so bright as in him?

The Thessalonians were Idolaters, before the Word of God came to them; but
when they had received it, they became examples to all that did believe, in
Macedonia and Achaia, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

God the Father and Jesus Christ his Son, are for having things seen, for
having the Word of Life held forth. They light not a Candle that it might be
put under a Bushel, or under a Bed, but on a Candlestick, that all that come in
may see the light, Matt. 5.15. Mar. 4.21. Luke 8.16. chap. 11.33.

And, I say, as I said before, in whom is it like so to shine, as in the Souls
of great sinners?

When the Jewish Pharisees dallied with the Gospel, Christ threatened to take it
from them, and to give it to the barbarous Heathens, and Idolaters. Why so? For
they, says he, will bring forth the Friends thereof in their season. Therefore
I say unto you, The Kingdom of God Shall be taken from you, and given to a
Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, Mat. 21.41, 43.

I have often marvelled at our Youth, and said in my heart, What should be the
reason that they should be so generally at this day debauched as they are! For
they are now Profane to amazement: And sometimes I have thought one thing, and
sometimes another: That is, why God should suffer it so to be. At last I have
thought of this: How if the God whose ways are past finding out, should suffer
it so to be now, that he might make of some of them the more glorious Saints
hereafter. I know Sin is of the Devil, but it cannot work in the world without
permission: and if it happens to be as I have thought, it will not be the first
time that God the Lord has caught Satan in his own design. For my part, I
believe that the time is at hand, that we shall see better Saints in the World,
than has been seen in ^t this many aday. And this Vileness that at present does
so much swallow up out Youth, is one cause of my thinking so: For out of them,
for from among them, when God sets to his Hand, as of old, you shall see what
penitent ones, what trembling ones, and what ^dmirers of Grace, will be found
to profess the Gospel, to the glory of God by Christ.

Alas! We are a company of wornout Christians, our Moon is in the Ware; we are
much more black than white, more dark than light; we shine but a little; Grace
in the most of us, is d^cayed. But I say, when they of the^e debauched ones
that are to be saved, shall be brought in; when these that look more like
Devils than Men shall be Converted to Christ, (and I believe s^veral of them
will) then will Christ be ex^lted, Grace adored, the World prized, Sions Paths
better trodden, and Men in the pursuit of their own Salvation, to the
amazement of them that are left behind.

Just before Christ came into the Flesh, the World was Degenerated as it is
now; The generality of the Men in Jerus^lem were become either high and famous
for Hypocrisy, or filthy base in their Lives. The Devil also was broke loose
in hideous manner, and had taken possession of many: Yea, I believe that there
was never Generation before nor since, that could produce so many possessed
with Devils, deformed, lame, blind, and infected with monstrous Diseases, as
that Generation could. But what was the reason thereof? I mean the reason from
God? Why one (and we may sum up more in that answer that Christ gave to his
Disciples concerning him that was born Blind) was, that the Works o^ God might
be made manifest in them and that the Son of God might be glorified thereby,
Joh. 9.2, 3. chap. 11.4.

Now if these Devils and Diseases, a^ they possessed Men then, were to mak^ way
and work for an approaching Chr^s^ in Person, and for the declaring of hi^
Power, why may we not think that now even now also, he is ready to come b^ his
Spirit in the Gospel to heal man of the Debaucheries of our Age? I can not
believe that Grace will take them a^ for there are but few that are saved: But
yet it will take some, even some of the worst of Men, and make Blessed ones of
them. But O! how these Ringleaders in Vice, will then shine in Vert^e! They
will be the very Pillars in Churches, they will be as an Ensign in the Land;
The Lord their God shall save them in that day, as the Flock of his People, for
they shall he as the Stones of a Crown, lift up as an Ensign upon the Land,
Zech. 9.16. But who are these? Even Idolatrous Ephraim, and backsliding Judah,
Ver. 13.

I know there is groand to fear, that the Iniquity of this Generation will be
pursued with heavy Judgments: But that will not hinder what we have supposed:
God took him a glorious Church out of Bloody Jerusalem, yea, out of the chief
of the Sinners there, and left the rest to be taken and spoiled, and sold
Thirty for a Penny, in the Nations where they were Cap^ives. The Gospel working
gloriously in a place, to the seizing upon many of the ringleading Sinners
thereof, promises no security to the rest, but rather threatens them with the
heaviest and smartest Judgments; as in the Instance now given, we have a full
demonstration; but in defending, the Lord will defend his People; and in
saving, he will save his Inheritance.

Nor does this speak any great comfort to a decayed and backsliding sort of
Christians, for the next time God rides Post with his Gospel, he will leave
such Christians, behind him. But I say, Christ is resolved to set up his Light
in the World; yea, he is delighted to see his Graces shine, and therefore he
commands that his Gospel should to that end, be offered in the first place to
the biggest Sinners; for by great Sins it shines most: Therefore he says,
Begin at Je^usalem.

Eighthly, And lastly, Christ Jesus will have Mercy to be offered in the first
place to the biggest Sinners, For that by that means the Impenitent that are
l^ft behind, will be at the Judgment, the more left without excuse.

God's Word has two edges, it can cut back-stroke and fore-stroke. If it does
thee no good, it will do thee hurt; It Is the savor of Life unto Life to those
that receive it, but of Death unto Death to them that refuse it, 2 Cor. 2.15,
16. But this is not all, the tender of Grace to the biggest Sinners, in the
first place, will not only leave the rest, or those that refuse it, in a
deplorable condi^ion, but will also stop their mouths, and cut off all pretense
to excuse at that day. If I had not come and spok^n unto them, says Christ,
they had not had Sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin, for their sin
of persevering in Impenitence, Job 15.22.

But what did he speak to them? Why even that which I have told you; to wit,
That he has in special, a delight in saving the biggest Sinners. He spoke this
in the way of his Doctrine, he spoke this in the way of his Practice, even to
the pouring out of his last breath before them, Luke 23.34.

Now since this is so, what can the Condemned at the Judgment say for
themselves, why Sentence of Death should not be passed upon them? I say, what
excuse can they make for themselves, when they shall be asked why they did not
in the day of S^lvation come to Christ to be saved? Will they have ground to
say to the Lord, Thou wast only for saving of little Sinners, and therefore
because they were great ones, they durst not come unto him; Or that thou had
not comp^ssion for the biggest Sinners, therefore I died in despair; will these
be excuses for them as the Case now stands with them? Is there not every
where in God's Books sl^t contradiction to this, in multitudes of Promises, of
Invitations, of Examples, and the like? Alas, alas! there will then be there
millions of Souls to confute this Plea; ready I say, to stand up and say, O!
deceived World, Heaven swarms with such, as was, when they were in the World,
to the full as bad as you.

Now this will kill all plea or excuse, why they should not perish in their
sins; yea, the Text says, they shall see them there; There shall be weeping,
when you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and you your selves thrust out. And they shall come from the
East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit
down in the Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28, 29. Out of which company it is easy to
pick such, as sometimes were as bad People as any now b^eathe on the face of
the Earth. What think you of the first Man, by whose sins there are millions
now in Hell? And so I may say, what think you of ten thousand more besides?

But if the Word will not stifle and gagg them up, I speak now for
amplification sake, the view of those who are saved shall

There comes an Incestuous Person to the Bar, and pleads that the bigness of
his Sins was a bar to his receiving the Promise; But will not his mouth be
stopped as to that, when Lot and the Incestuous Corinthian shall be set before
him, Genesis 19.33, 34, 35, 36. 1 Co^. 5.1, 2.

There comes a Thief and says, Lord! my sin of Theft, I thought, was such as
could not be pardoned by thee! But when he shall see the Thief that was saved
on the Cross, stand by, as clothed with beauteous Glory, what further can he be
able to object? Yea, the Lord will produce ten thousand of his S^ints at his
coming, who shall after this manner execute Judgment upon all, and so convince
all that are ungodly among them, of all their hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against him, Jude 15, 16. And these are hard speeches
against him, To say that he was not able or willing to save Men, because of the
greatness of their sins, or to say that they were discouraged by his Word from
Repentance, because of the heinousness of their offenses.

These things, I say, shall then be confuted; He comes with ten thousand of his
S^ints to confute them, and to stop their mouths from making objections against
their own eternal damnation.

Here is Adam the destroyer of the World; he^e is Lot that lay with both his
Daughters; here is Abraham that was sometimes an Idolater, and Jacob that was a
Supplanter, and Ruben that lay with his Fathers Concubine, and Judah that lay
^ith his Daughter-in-Law, and Levy and Simeon that wickedly slew the
Sechemites; and Aaron that made an Idol to be Worshipped, and that proclaimed a
Religious Feast unto it. Here is also Rahab the Harlot, and Bathsheba that bare
a B^stard to David. Here is Solomon that great Backslider, and Manasseh that
man of Blood, and a Witch. Time would fail to tell you of the Woman of Canaans
Daughter, of Mary Magdalen, of Matthew the Publican, and of Gideon and Sampson,
and many thousands more.

Alas, alas! I say, what will these Sinners, do, that have, through their
unbelief, eclipsed the glorious largeness of the mercy of God, and gave way to
despair of Salvation because of the bigness of their sins.

For all these, though now glorious Saints in Light, were sometimes Sinners of
the biggest size, who had sins that were of a notorious hue; Yet now, I say,
they are in their shining and heavenly Robes before the Throne of God and of
the Lamb, Blessing for ever and every, that Son of God for their Salvation, who
dyed for them upon the Tree; admiring that ever it should come into their
Hearts once to think of coming to God by Chirst: But above all, blessing God
for granting of them light to see those encouragements in his Testament;
without which, without doubt, they had be^n daunted and sunk down under guilt
of Sin and Despair, as their fellow sinn^rs have done.

B^t now they also are all Witness^s for God and for his Grace against an
unb^lieving World; for as I said, they shall come to convince the World of
their Speeches, their hard and unbelieving words, that they have spoken
concerning the mercy of God, and the merits of the Passion of his blessed Son
Jesus Christ.

But will it not, think you, strangely put to silence all such thonghts, and
words, and reasonings of the Ungodly before the Bar of God? doubtless it will;
yea, and will send them away from his presence also, with the greatest guilt,
that possibly can fallen upon the Consciences of Men.

For what will sting like this? I have through mine own foolish, narrow,
unworthy, undervaluing thoughts of the love and ability of Christ to save me,
brought my self to everlasting ruin. It Is true, I was a horrible sinner, not
one in a hundred did live so vile a life as I, but this should not have kept me
from closing, with Jesus Christ: I see now that there are abundance in Glory
that once were as bad as I have been, but they were saved by Faith, and I am
damned by Unbelief.

Wr^tch that I am! why did not I give glory to the Redeeming Blood of Jesus?
Why did I not humbly cast my Soul at his blessed foot stool for Mercy? Why did
I judge of his ability to save me by the voice of my shallow reason, and the
voice of a guilty Conscience? Why betook not I my self to the holy Word of God?
Why did I not read and pray that I might understand, since now I perceive that
God said then, He gives liberally to them that pray, and upbraideth not, Jam.
1.5.

It Is rational to think, that by such Cogitations as these, the unbelieving
World will be torn in pieces before the Judgment of Christ: Especially those
that have lived where they did or might have heard the Gospel of the Grace of
God. Oh! that saying, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom at the Judgment,
than for them, will be better understood. See Luke 10.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

This Reason therefore stands fast; Namely, That Christ, by offering mercy in
the first place to the biggest Sinners, now, will stop all mouths of the
impenitent at the day of Judgment, and cut off all excuse that shall be
attempted to be made (from the thoughts of (...) greatness of their sins) why
they ca^^ not to him.

I have often thought of the day of Judgment, and how God will deal with
sinners at that day: And I believe it will be managed with that sweetness, with
that equitableness, with that excellent Righteousness, as to every sin, and
circumstance, and aggravation thereof* that men that are damned, before the
Judgment is over, shall receive such conviction of the righteous Judgment of
God upon them, and of their deserts of Hell fire, that they shall in
themselves, conclude that there is all the reason in the world that they should
be shut out of Heaven, and go to Hellfire; These shall go away into
everlasting fire, Matt. 25.46.

Only this will tare, That they have mist of Mercy and Glory, and obtained
everlasting damnation through their unbelief. But it will tare but themselves,
but their own Souls; they will gnash upon themselves: For in that, Mercy was
offered to the chief of them in the first place, and yet they were damned for
rejecting of it: They were damned for forsaking what they had a propriety in;
for, forsaking their Own Mercy.

And thus much for the Reasons. I will conclude with a word of Application.

The APPLICATION.
FIrst, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the biggest
sinners? Then this shows us how to make a right judgment of the heart of Christ
to Men. Indeed we have advantage to guess at the goodness of his Heart, by many
things; as by his taking our nature upon him, his dying for us, his sending his
Word and Ministers to us; and all that we might be saved. But this of beginning
to offer mercy to Jerusalem, is that which heightens all the rest; for this
does not only confirm to us, that Love was the cause of his dying for us, but
it shows us yet more the depth of that Love: He might have dyed for us, and yet
have extended the benefit of his death to a few, as one might call them, of the
best-conditioned sinners, to those who (though they were weak, and so could not
but sin) yet made not a trade of sinning; To those that sinned not lavishingly:
There are in the World, as one may call them, the moderate Sinners; the sinners
that mix Righteousness with their Pollutions; the sinners that, though they be
sinners, do what on their part lies, (some that are blind would think so) that
they might be saved. I say, it had been Love, great Love, if he had dyed for
none but such, and sent his love to such: But that he should send out
conditions of Peace to the biggest of Sinners! yea, that they should be offered
to them first of all! (for so he means when he says, Begin at Jerusalem.) This
is wonderful! this shows his heart to purpose, as also the heart of God his
Father who sent him to do thus.

There is nothing more incident to Men that are awake in their Souls, than to
have wrong thoughts of God; Thoughts that are narrow, and that pinch and pen up
his Mercy to scanty and beggarly conclusions, and ridged legal conditions;
supposing that it is rude and an intrenching upon his Majesty, to come our
selves, or to invite others, until we have scraped and washed, and rubbed off
as much of our dirt from us as we think is convenient, to make us somewhat
orderly and handsome in his sight. Such never knew what these Words meant,
Begin at Jerusalem. Yea, such in their hearts have compared the Father and his
Son to niggardly rich Men, whose Money comes from them like drops of blood.
True, says such, God has Mercy, but he is loath to part with it. You must please
him well, if you get any from him: He is not so free as many suppose, nor is he
so willing to save as some pretended Gospellers imagine: But I ask such, If the
Father and Son be not unspeakably free to show Mercy, why was this Clause put
into our Commission to preach the Gospel? Yea, why did he say, Begin at
Jerusalem? For when men, through the weakness of their wits, have attempted to
show other reasons why they should have the first proffer of Mercy, yet I can
prove (by many undeniable Reasons) that they of Jerusalem (to whom the Apostles
made the First offer, according as they were commanded) were the biggest
Sinners that ever did breathe upon the face of God's earth (set the
unpardonable sin aside) upon which my Doctrine stands like a Rock, That Jesus
the Son of God would have Mercy in the first place offered to the biggest
Sinners: And if this does not show the heart of the Father and the Son to be
infinitely free in bestowing forgiveness of Sins, I confess my self mistaken.

Neither is there, set this aside, another Argument like it, to show us the
willingness of Christ to save Sinners* For, as was said before, all the rest of
the signs of Christ's mercifulness might have been limited to Sinners that are
so and so qualified; but when he says, Begin at Jerusalem, the Line is
stretched out to the utmost, no man can imagine beyond it, and it is folly here
to pinch and pare, to narrow, and seek to bring it within scanty bounds, for he
plainly says, Begin at Jerusalem. The biggest Sinner, is the biggest Sinner;
the biggest is the Jerusalem-sinner.

It Is true, he says that Repentance and Remission of sins must go together;
but yet Remission is sent no the chief, the Jerusalem sinner; nor does
Repentance lessen at all the Jerus^lem-sinners crimes; it diminishes none of
his sins, nor causes that there should be so much as half a one the fewer: It
only puts a stop to the Jerusalem-sinners course, and makes him willing to be
saved freely by Grace; and for time to come to be governed by that bl^ss^d Word
that has brought the Tidings of good things to him.

Besides, no man sh^ws himself willing to be saved that repents not of his
deeds, for he that goes on still in his trespasses, declares that he is
resolved to pu^sue his own damnation further.

Learn then to judge of the largeness of God's heart, and of the heart of his
Son Jesus Christ, by the Word: Judge not thereof by feeling, nor by the reports
of thy Conscience; Conscience is oft-times here befooled and made to go quite
besides the Word: 'Twas judging without the Word that made David say, I am cast
off from God's eyes, and shall perish one day by the hand of Saul, Psalm.
3.1.22. 1 Samuel 27.1.

The Word had told him another thing; namely, that he should be King in his
stead. Our Text says also, that Jesus Christ bids Preachers in their preaching
Repentance and Remission of Sins, Begin first at J^rusalem; Thereby declaring
most truly, the infinite largeness of the merciful heart of God and his Son, to
the sinful Children of Men.

Judge thou, I say, therefore of the goodness of the heart of God and his Son,
by this Text, and by other of the same import; so shall thou not dishonor the
grace of God, nor needlessly fright thy self, nor give away thy Faith, nor
gratify the Devil, nor lose the benefit of his Word: I speak now to weak
Believers.

Secondly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners, to the Jerusalem sinners? Th^n by this also, you must learn to
judge of the sufficiency of the merits of Christ; not that the Merits of Christ
can be comprehended, for that they are beyond the Conceptions of the whole
World, being called The unsearchable riches of Christ; but yet they may be
apprehended to a considerable degree. Now the way to apprehend them most, is to
consider what offers, after his Resurrection, he makes of his Grace to Sinners;
for to be sure he will not offer beyond the virtue of his Merits; because as
Grace is the cause of his Merits, so his Merits are the basis and bounds, upon
and by which his Grace stands good, and is let out to Sinners. Does he then
command that his Mercy should be offered in the first place to the biggest
Sinners? It declares that there is a sufficiency in his Blood to save the
biggest Sinners. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sin. And again,
Be it known unto you Men and Brethren, That through this Man (this Man's
Merits) is preached to you the forgiveness of Sins, and by him All that believe
are justified from All things from which they could not be justified by the Law
of Moses, Acts 13.38.

Observe then thy Rule to make Judgment of the Sufficiency of the blessed
Merits of thy Savior; if he had not been able to have reconciled the biggest
Sinners to his Father by his Blood, he would not have sent to them; have sent
to them in the first place the Doctrine of Remission of Sins; for Remission of
Sins is through Faith in his Blood: We are justified freely by the Grace of
God, through the Redemption that is in the Blood of Christ. Upon the square, as
I may call it, of the worthiness of the Blood of Christ, Grace Acts, and offers
Forgiveness of Sin to Men, Ephesians. 1.7. chap. 2.13, 14. Colos. 1.20, 21, 22.

Hence therefore we must gather, That the Blood of Christ is of infinite value,
for that he offers Mercy to the biggest of Sinners: Nay further, since he
offers Mercy in the first place to the biggest Sinners; Considering also that
this first act of his, is that which the World will take notice of, and expect
it should be continued unto the end; Also it is a disparagement to a Man that
seeks his own Glory in what he undertakes, to do that for a spurt, which he
cannot continue and hold out in: This is our Lord's own Argument, He began to
build, says he, but was not able to finish, Luke 14.28, 29, 30.

Should thou hear a Man say, I am resolved to be kind to the Poor, and
should begin giving with handfuls of Guinea's, you would conclude that either
he is wonderful rich, or must straighten his hand, or will soon be at the
bottom of his Riches. Why this is the Case, Christ at his Resurrection gave it
out that he would be good to the World; and first sends to the biggest Sinners,
with an intent to have Mercy on them. Now the biggest Sinners cannot be saved
but by abundance of Grace, it is not a little that will save great sinners, Romans
5.17. And I say again, since the Lord Jesus mounts thus high at the first, and
sends to the Jerusalem-sinners, that they may come first to partake of his
Mercy; it follows that either he has unsearchable Riches of Grace and Worth in
himself, or else he must straighten his hand, or his Grace and Merits will be
spent before the World's at an end. But let it be believed, as surely as
spoken, he is still as full as ever! He is not a jot the poorer for all the
Forgivenesses that he has given away to great Sinners; Also he is still as free
as at first, for he never yet called back this Word, Begin at the
Jerusalem-sinners. And as I said, since his Grace is extended according to the
worth of his Merits; I conclude, that there is the same virtue in his Merits to
save now, as there was at the very beginning.

O the Riches of the Grace of Christ! Oh the Riches of the Blood of Christ!

Thirdly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinners, Then here is encourag^ment for you that think, for wicked
hearts and lives, you have not your fellows in the World; yet to come to him.

There is a People that therefore fear lest they should be rejected of Jesus
Christ, because of the greatness of their sins; when as you see here, such are
sent to, sent to by Jesus Christ to come to him for Mercy; Begin at Jerusalem:
Never did one thing answer another more fitly in this world, than this Text
sits such kind of sinners. As Face answers Face in a Glass, so this Text
answers the necessities of such sinners. What can a Man say more, but that he
stands in the rank of the biggest sinners; let him stretch himself whether he
can, and think of himself to the utmost, he can but conclude himself to be one
of the biggest Sinners: And what then? Why the Text meets him in the very Face,
and says, Christ offers Mercy to the biggest Sinners, to the very Jerusalem
Sinners. What more can be objected? Nay, he does not only offer to such his
Mercy, but to them it is commanded to be off^red in the first place; Begin at
Jerusalem. Preach Repentance and Remission of Sins among all Nations, beginning
at Jerus^lem. Is not here encouragement for those that think, for wicked Hearts
and Lives, they have not their fellows in the World?

Objection, But I have a Heart as hard as a Rock.

Answ. Well, but this does but prove thee a biggest sinner.

Object. But my Heart continually frets against the Lord?

Answ. Well, this does but prove thee a biggest sinner.

Object. But I have been desperate in sinful courses.

Answ. Well, stand thou with the number of the biggest sinners.

Object. But my gray Head is found in the way of wickedness?

Answ. Well thou art in the rank of the biggest sinners.

Object. But I have not only a base Heart, but I have lived a debauched Life?

Ans. Stand thou also among those that are called the biggest sinners. And what
then? Why the Text swoops you all; you cannot object your selves beyond the
Text: It has a particular message to the biggest sinners. I say, it swoops you
all.

Object. But I am a Reprobate?

Ans. Now thou talkest like a fool, and medlest with what thou understandest
not: No sin; but the sin of final impenitence, can prove a Man a Reprobate. And
I am sure thou have not arrived as yet unto that: Therefore thou understandest
not what thou say, and make groundless conclusions against thy self. Say
thou art a Sinner, and I will hold with thee. Say thou art a great sinner, and
I will say so too. Yea, say thou art one of the biggest sinners and spare not,
for the Text yet is beyond thee, is yet betwixt Hell and thee; Begin at
Jerusalem, has yet a smile upon thee: And thou talkest as if thou wast a
Reprobate, and that the greatness of thy sins do prove thee so to be; when yet
they of Jerusalem were not such, whose sins I dare say, were such, both for
bigness and heinousness, as thou art not capable of committing beyond them;
unless now, after thou have received Conviction that the Lord Jesus is the only
Savior of the World, thou should wickedly and despightfully turn thy self
from him, and conclude he is not to be trusted to for Life, and so crucify him
for a Cheat afr^sh. This I must confess, will bring a Man under the Black rod,
and set him in danger of eternal Damnation, Heb. 6.6. chap. 10.29. This is
trampling under foot the Son of God, and counting his Blood an unholy thing.
This did they of Jerusalem, but they did it ignorantly in Unbelief, and so were
yet capable of Mercy: But to do this against professed Light, and to stand to
it, puts a man beyond the Text indeed, Act. 3, 14, 15, l6, 17. 1 Timothy 1.13.

But I say, what is this to him, that would fain be saved by Christ? His sins
did, as to greatness, never yet reach to the nature of the sins that the
sinners intended by the Text, had made themselves guilty of. He that would be
saved by Christ, has an honorable esteem of him, but they of Jerusalem
preferred a Murderer before him; but as for him, they cried, away away with
him,'it is not fit that he should live. Perhaps thou will object, That thy self
have a thousand times pr^ferred a stinking Lust before him. I answer, Be it so,
it is but what is common to Men to do; nor does the Lord Jesus make such a
foolish Life a Bar to thee, to forbid thy coming to him, or a Bond to his
Grace, that it might be kept from thee; but admits of thy Repentance, and
offers himself unto thee freely, as thou stand among the Jerusalem-sinners.

Take therefore encouragement, Man; Mercy is, by the Text, held forth to the
biggest sinners. Yea, put thy self into the number of the worst by reckoning,
that thou may be one of the first, and may not be put off till the
biggest sinners are served: For the biggest sinners are first invited;
consequently, if they come, they are like to be the first that shall be served.
'Twas so with Jerusalem; Jerus^lem-sinners were they that were first invited,
and those of them that came first, (and there came three thousand of them the
first day they were invited,) how many came af^erwards, none can tell) thy were
first served.

Put in thy Name, Man, among the biggest, lest thou art made to wait till they
are served. You have some men that think themselves very cunning, because they
put up their Names in their Prayers among them that feign it, saying, God, I
thank thee, I am not so bad as the worst; but believe it, if they be saved at
all, they shall be saved in the last place. The first in their own eyes shall
be served last, and the last, or worst, shall be first. The Text insinuates it,
Begin at Jerusalem; and Reason backs it, for they have most need. Behold ye
therefore, how God's ways are above ours; we are for serving the worst last,
God is for serving the worst first. The Man at the Pool, that to my thinking,
was longest in his Disease, and most helpless as to his Cure, was first healed,
yea, he only was healed; for we read that Christ healed him, but we read not
then that he healed one more there, Joh. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Wherefore if thou would soonest ^e served, put in thy Name among the very
worst of sinners. Say, when thou art upon thy knees, Lord! here is
Jerusalem-sinner! a sinner of the biggest size! one whose burden is of the
greatest bulk and heaviest weight! one that cannot stand long without sinking
into Hell, without thy supporting hand! Be not thou far from me, O Lord: O my
strength, have thou to help me.

I say, put in thy Name with Magd^l^n, with Manasseh, that thou may fare as
the Magdalen and the Manasse^-sinners do. The Man in the Gospel made the
desperate condition of his Child, an argument with Christ to haste his Cure:
Sir, Come down, says he, ere my Child die, Joh. 4 49. And Christ regarded his
haste, saying, Go thy way, thy Son lives, Ver. 50. Haste requires haste. David
was for speed; Deliver me speedily; hear me speedily, answer me speedily, Psalm.
31.2. Psalm. 69.17. Psalm. 102.2. But why speedily? I am in the Net, I am in
trouble, my days consume like smoke, Psalm. 31.4. Psalm. 69.17. Psalm. 102.3. Deep
calls unto deep, necessity calls for help; great necessity for present help.

Wherefore I say, be ruled by me in this matter; feign not thy self another
Man, if thou have been a filthy sinner, but go in thy colors to jesus Christ,
and put thy self among the most Vile, and let him alone to put thee among the
Children, Jer 3.19. Confess all that thou know^st of thy self; I know thou will
find it hard work to do thus; especially if thy mind be legal; but do it, lest
thou stay, and be def^rred with the little sinners, until the great ones have
had their alms. What do you think David intended when he said, his Wounds stunk
and were corrupted, but to hasten God to have mercy upon him, and not to defer
his Cure. Lord, says he, I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning
all the day long. I am f^eble, and sore broken by reason of the disquietment of
my heart, Psalm. 38.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

David knew what he did by all this, he knew that his making the worst of his
Case, was the way to speedy help, and that a feigning and dissembling the
matter with God, was the next way to a demurr, as to his Forgiveness.

I have one thing more to offer for thy encouragement who deemest thy self one
of the biggest sinners; And that is, Thou art as it were, called by thy Name,
in the first place, to come in for Mercy. Thou Man of Jerusalem, hearken to thy
Call; Men do so in Courts of Judicature, and presently cry out, Here, Sir; and
then they shoulder and crowd, and say, Pray give way, I am called into the
Court. Why, this is thy Case, thou great, thou Jerusal^m-sinner; be of good
cheer, he calls thee, Mark 10.46, 47, 48, 49. Wny sit thou still? arise;
why stand thou still? Come Man. Thy Call should give thee authority to come.
Begin at Jerusalem, is thy call authority to come; Wherefore up, and shoulder
it, Man: Say, Stand away Devil, Christ calls me, stand away Unbelief, Christ
calls me: Stand away all ye my discouraging Apprehensions, for my Savior calls
me to him to receive of his Mercy. Men will do thus, as I said, in Courts
below; and why should not thou approach thus to the Court above. The
Jerusalem-sinner is first in Though, first in Commission, first in the Record
of Names, and therefore should give attendance with expectation, that he is
first to receive Mercy of God.

Is not this an encouragement to the biggest sinners to make their Application
to Christ for Mercy? Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, does
also confirm this thing, that is, that the biggest sinner, and he that has the
biggest burden, is he who is first invited. Christ points over the Head of
thousands, as he sits on the Throne of Grace, directly to such a Man; and says,
Bring in hither the maimed, the halt, and the blind; Let the Jerusalem-sinner
that stands there behind, come to me. Wherefore since Christ says come, to
thee, let the Angels make a lane, and let all Men give place, that the
Jerusalem-sinner may come to Jesus Christ for Mercy.

Fourthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinners? Then come thou Profane Wretch, and let me a little enter an
argument with thee; Why will thou not come to Jesus Christ, since thou art a
Jerusalem-sinner? How can thou find in thy heart to set thy self against
Grace, against such Grace as offers Mercy to thee? What Spirit possesses
thee, and holds thee back from a sincere closure with ^hy Savior? Behold God
groaningly complains of thee, saying, But Israel would none of me. When I
called, none did answer. Psalm 81.11. Isa 66.4.

Shall God enter this Complaint against thee? Why do thou put him off? why
do thou stop thine ear? Can thou defend thy self? When thou art called to
an account for thy neglects of so great Salvation, what can thou answer? Or
do thou think thou shall escape the Judgment? Heb. 2.3.

No more such Christ's! There will be no more such Christ's, sinner! Oh! put not
the day, the day of Grace, away from thee! If it be once gone, 'twill never
come again, Sinner.

But what is it that has got thy Heart, and that keeps it from thy Savior? Who
in the Heavens can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the Sons of the Mighty
can be likened unto the Lord? Psalm. 89.6. Have thou, think thou, found any
thing so good as Jesus Christ? Is there any among thy Sins, thy Companions, and
foolish Delights, that like Christ, can help thee in the day of thy distress?
Behold, the greatness of thy sins cannot hinder; let not the stubbornness of
thy Heart hinder thee, Sinner.

Objection, But I am ashamed.

Answer, Oh! don't be ashamed to be saved, Sinner.

Object. But my old Companions will mock me.

Ans. Oh! don't be mocked out of Eternal Life, Sinner.

Thy stubbornness affects, afflicts the Heart of thy Savior. Carest thou not
for this? Of old, He beheld the City, and wept over it. Can thou hear this,
and not be concerned? Luke 19.41, 42. Shall Christ weep to see thy Soul going
on to destruction, and will thou sport thy self in That way? Yea, shall Christ,
that can be eternally Happy without thee, be more afflicted at the thoughts of
the loss of thy Soul, than thy self, who art certainly eternally miserable if
thou neglectest to come to him?

Those things that keep thee and thy Savior, on thy part, asunder, are but
Bubbles; the least prick of an affliction, will let out, as to thee, what now
thou think is worth the venture of Heaven to enjoy.

Have thou not Reason? Can thou not so much as once soberly think of thy
dyi^g hour? or of, whether thy sinful life will drive thee then? Have thou no
Conscience? or having one, is it rocked so fast asleep by Sin, or made so weary
with an unsuccessful calling upon thee, that it is laid down, and cares for
thee no more? Poor Man, thy state is to be lamented. Have no Judgmemt? Art not
able to conclude, that to be saved, is better than to burn in Hell; and that
Eternal Life, with God's favor, is better than a Temporal Life in God's
displeasure? Have no affliction but what is brutish? what, none at all? No
affection for the God that made thee? What, none for his loving Son that has
showed his love, and dyed for thee? Is not He^ven worth thy affection? O poor
Man! which is strongest, think thou, God or thee? If thou art not able to
overcom^ him, thou art a fool for standing out against him; Mat. 5.25, 26. It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God. He will gripe
hard, his Fifth is stronger than a Lions Paw; take heed of him, he will be angry
if you despise his Son; and will you stand guilty in your Trespasses, when he
offers you his Grace and Favor? Exodus 34.6, 7, (...) 10, 29, 30, 31.

Now we come to the Text, Beginning at Jerusalem. This Text, though, it be now
one of the brightest Stars that shines in the Bible, because there is in it,
as full, if not the fullest offer of Grace that can be imagined, to the Sons of
Man^, yet to them that shall perish from under this Word, even this Text will
be to such, one of ^he hottest Goals in Hell.

This Text therefore will save thee, or sin^ thee; there is no shifting of it:
If it saves thee, it will set thee high; if it sinks thee, it will set thee low.

But, I say, Why so unconcerned? Have no Soul? Or do think thou may lose
thy S^ul, and save thy self? Is it not pity, had it otherwise been the Will of
God that ever thou wast made a M^n, for that thou set so little by thy Soul?

Sinner, Take the Invitation; Thou art called upon to come to Christ: Nor art
thou called upon but by order from the Son of God, though thou should happen
to come of the biggest sinners: For he has bid us off^r Mercy, as to all the
World in general, so in the first place, To the Sinners of J^rusalem; or to the
biggest sinners.

Fifthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinners? Then this shows how unreasonable a thing it is, for men to
despair of Mercy. For those that presume, I shall say something to them
afterward.

I now speak to them that Despair.

There are four sorts of Despair. There is the despair of Devils; There is the
despair of Souls in Hell; There is the despair that is grounded upon Men's
Deficiency; And there is the despair that they are perplexed with that are
willing to be saved, but are too strongly born down with the burden of their
sins.

The despair of Devils, the Damneds despair, and that despair that a Man has of
attaining of Life, because of his own Deficience, are all unreasonable. Why
should not Devils and Damned Souls d^spair? Yea, why should not Man despair of
getting to Heaven by his own abilities? I therefore am concerned only with the
fou^th sort of Despair, to wit, with the despair of those that would be saved,
but are to strongly born, down ^ith the burden of their sins.

I say therefore to thee that art thus, And w^y Despair? Thy despair, if it was
reasonable, should flow from thee, because found in the Land that is beyond the
Grave; or because thou certainly know that Christ will not, or cannot save
thee.

But for the first, thou art yet in the Land of the Living; and for the second,
thou have ground to believe the quite contrary Christ is able to save to the
uttermost, them that come to God by him; and if he were not willing, he wou^d
not have commanded that Mercy i^ the first place should be offered to the
biggest sinners. Besides, he has said, And let him that is athirst come, and
whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life Fre^ly; that is, with all my
heart. What gro^nd now is here for Despair? If thou say^st, The number and
burden of my sins. I answer, Nay: That is rather a ground for Faith; because
such an one above all others, is invited by Christ to come unto him, yea,
promised Rest and Forgiveness if they come, Matt. 11.28. What ground then to
despair? Verily none at all. Thy despair then is a thing unreasonable, and
without footing in the Word.

But I have no ^xperience of God's love, G^d has given me no comfort, or ground
of hope, though I have waited upon him for it many a day.

Thou have experience of God's love, for that he has opened thine eyes to see
thy sins; and for that he has given thee desires to be saved by Jesus Christ.
For by thy sense of Sin thou act made to see thy poverty of Spirit, and that
has laid thee under a sure ground to hope that Heaven shall be thine hereafter.

Also thy desires to be saved by Christ, has put thee under another Promise, so
^here is two to hold thee up in hope, though thy present burden be never so
heavy, Matt. 5 3, 6. As for what thou say, as to God's silence to thee,
perhaps he has spoken to th^e once or twice already, but thou have not
perceived it, Job 33.14, 15.

However thou have Christ Crucified, set forth before thine eyes in the Bible,
and an invitation to come unto him, though thou be a Jerusalem-sinner, tho thou
be a biggest Sinner; and so no ground to despair. What if God will be silent to
thee, is that ground of despair? Not at all, so long as there is a Promise in
the Bible that God will in no wise cast away the coming sinner, and so long as
he invites the Jerusalem-sinner to come unto him, Job. 6.37.

Build not therefore Despair upon these things, they are no sufficient
foundation for it, such plenty of Promises being in the Bible; and such a
discovery of his Mercy to great sinners of old, especially since we have
withal a Clause in the Commission given to Ministers to Preach, that they
should begin with the Jerusalem-sinners in their offering of Mercy to the World.

Besides, God says, They that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings like Eagles; but perhaps it may be long first, I
waited long, says David, and did seek the Lord, and at length his cry was
heard: Wherefore he bids his Soul wait on God, and says, for it is good so to
do before thy Saints, Psalm. 40.1. Psalm. 62.5. Psalm. 52.9.

And what if thou waitest upon God all thy days? Is it below thee? And what if
God will cross his Book and blot out the handwriting that is against thee, and
not let thee know it as yet? Is it fit to say unto God, Thou art hard-hearted?
Despair not. Thou have no ground to d^spair, so long as thou live in this
World. It Is a sin to begin to despair before one sets his foot over the
threshold of Hell-gates. For them that are there, let them despair and spare
not; but as for thee, thou have no ground to do it. What! Despair of Bread, in
a Land that is full of Corn! Despair of Mercy when our God is full of Mercy!
Despair of Mercy, when God goes about by his Ministers, beseeching of Sinners
to be reconciled unto him! 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.

Thou scrupulous fool, where can thou find that God was ever false to his
Promise, or that he ever deceived the Soul that ventured it self upon him? He
often calls upon Sinners to trust him, though they walk in darkness and have no
light, Isa. 50.10.

They have his Promise and Oath for their Salvation, that flee for refuge to
the hope set before them, Heb 6.17, 18.

Despair! When we have a God of Mercy, and a Redeeming Christ Alive! For shame
forbear: Let them despair that dwell where there is no God, and that are
confined to those Chambers of Death, which can be reached by no Redemption.

A Living Man despair! When he is chid for murmuring and complaining! Lam.
3.39. Oh! so long as we are where Promises swarm, where Mercy is proclaimed,
where Grace reigns, and where Jerusalem-sinners are privileged with the first
ofter of Mercy, it is a base thing to despair!

Despair undervalues the Promise, undervalues the Invitation, undervalues the
proffer of Grace. Despair undervalues the ability of God the Father, and the
redeeming Blood of Christ his Son: Oh unreasonable Despair!

Despair makes Man God's Judge; it is a Controller of the Promise, a
Contradicter of Christ in his large offers of Mercy: And one that undertakes to
make Vnb^lief the great manager of our Reason and Judgment, in determining
about what God can and will do for Sinners.

Despair! It is the Devils fellow, the Devils master; yea, the Chains with
which he is captivated and held under darkness for ever: And to give way
thereto in a Land, in a State and Time that flows with Milk and Honey, is an
uncomely thing.

I would say to my Soul; O my Soul! this is not the place of Despair, this is
not the time to despair in: As long as mine eyes can find a Promise in the
Bible; as long as there is the least mention of Grace, as long as there is a
moment left me of breath or life in this World; so long will I wait or look for
Mercy; so long will I fight against Unbelief and Despair.

This is the way to honor God and Christ: this is the way to set the Crown on
the Promise; this is the way to welcome the Invitation and Inviter; and this is
the way to thrust thy self under the shelter and pro^ection of the word of
Grace. Never despair so long as our Text is alive, for that does sound it out,
That Mercy by Christ is offered in the first place to the biggest sinner.

Despair is an unprofitable thing, 'twill make a man weary of waiting upon God,
2 King. 6.33. 'Twill make a man forsake God, and seek his Heaven in the good
things of this world, Genesis 4.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 'Twill make a man his own
tormenter, and flounce and fling l^ke a wild Bull in a net, Isa. 51.20.

Despair! It drives a man to the study of his own ruin, and brings him at last
to be his own Executioner, 2 Samuel 17.23. Matt. 27 3, 4, 5.

Besides, I am persuaded also, that Despair is the cause that there are so many
that would fain be Atheists in the World: For because they have entertained a
Conceit that God will never be merciful to them; therefore they labor to
persuade themselves that there is no God at all, as if their misbelief would
kill God, or cause him to cease to be. A poor shift for an Immortal Soul, for a
Soul who likes not to retain God in its knowledge! If this be the best that
Despair can do, let it go, Man; and betake thy self to Faith, ^o Prayer, to
wait for God, and to hope, in despite of ten thousand doubts. And for thy
encouragement, take yet (as an addition to what has already been said) these
following Scriptures; The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in them
that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11.

Whence note, They fear not God, that hope not in his mercy. Also, God is angry
with them that hope not in his Mercy; for he only takes pleasure in them that
hope. He that believes, or has received his Testimony, has set to his Seal
that God is true, Joh. 3.33. But he that receives it not, has made him a
liar, and that is a very unworthy thing, 1 John 5.10, 11. Let the Wicked
forsake his ways, and the Unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return to
the Lord, and he will have mercy on him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
multiply pardons, Isa. 55.7. Perhaps thou art weary of thy ways, but art not
weary of thy thoughts; of thy unbelieving and despairing thoughts: Now God also
would have thee cast away these thoughts, as such which he deserves not at thy
hands, for he will have mercy upon thee, and he will abundantly pardon.

O fools! and flow heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken, Luke
24.25. Mark you here, showness to believe is a piece of folly. Ay! but say
thou, I do believe some, and I believe what can make against me. Ay, but
Sinner, Christ Jesus here calls thee fool for not believing All. Believe All,
and despair if thou can. He that believes All, believes that Text that says,
Christ would have Mercy Preached first to the Jerusalem-sinners. He that
believes All, believes all the Promises and Consolations of the Word; and the
Promises and Consolations of the Word, weigh heavier than do all the Curses and
Threatenings of the Law. And Mercy rejoices against Judgment. Wherefore believe
All, and Mercy will to thy Conscience, weigh Judgment down, and so minister
Comfort to thy Soul. The Lord take the Yoke from off thy Jaws, since he has set
Meat before thee, H^s. 11.4. And help thee to remember that he is pleased in
the first place to offer Mercy to the biggest sinners.

Sixthly, Since Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest sinners, Let Souls see that they lay right hold thereof; lest they
notwithstanding, indeed come short thereof. Faith only knows how to deal with
Mercy; wherefore put not in the place thereof Presumption. I have observed,
that as there are Herbs and Flowers in our Garden^, so there are their
Counterfeits in the Field; only they are distingui^hed from the other by the
Name of Wild Ones. Why, there is Faith, and Wild Faith; and Wild Faith is this
Presumption? I call it Wild Faith, because God never placed ^t in his Garden,
his Church; it is only to be found in the Field, the World. I also call it. Wild
Faith, because it only grows up, and is nourished where other wild notions
abounds. Wherefore take heed of this, and all may be well: For this
presumptuousness is a very heinous thing in the eyes of God: The Soul, says
he, that shall do ought presumptuously (^hether born in the Land or a stranger)
the same reproacheth the Lord; And that Soul shall be cut off from among his
people, Number 15.30.

The thoughts of this made David tremble, and pray, That God would hold him
back from presumptuous sins, and not suffer them to have dominion over him,
Psalm. 19.13.

Now this Presumption, Then put its self in the place of Faith, when it
tampereth with the promise for Life, while the Soul is a stranger to
Repentance. Wherefore you have in the Text, to prevent doing thus, both
Repentance and Remission of Sins to be offered to Jerusalem, not Remission
without Repentance: For all that repent not shall perish, let them presume on
Grace and the Promise while they will, Luke 13.1, 2, 3.

Presumption then is that which severeth Faith and Repentance, concluding that
the Soul shall be saved by Grace, though the man was never made sorry for his
sins, nor the love of the Heart turned therefrom. This is to be s^lf-willed, as
Peter has it. And this is a despising the Word of the Lord, for that has put
Repentance and Faith together, Mark 1.15. And because he has despis^d the Word
of the Lord, and has broken the Commandment, that Soul shall utterly be cut
off: his iniquities shall be upon him, Numb. 15.31.

Let such therefore look it, who yet are, and abide in their sins; for such, if
they hope, as they are, to be saved, presume upon the grace of God. Wherefore
Presumption and not harkening to God's Word, are put together, D^ut. 17.12.

Again, Then men presume when they are resolved to abide in their sins, and
sins, yet expect to be saved by God's grace through Christ. This is as much as
to say, God likes of Sin as well as I do, and cares not how men live, if so
be they lean upon his Son. Of this sort are they that build up Zion with Blood,
and Jerusalem with Iniquity; That Judge for reward, and teach for hire, and
Divine for money, and lean upon the Lord, Mic. 3.10, 11. This is doing things
with an high hand against the Lord our God, and a taking him, as it were, at
the Catch! This is, as we lay among men, to seek to put a trick upon God, as if
he had not sufficiently fortified his Proposals of Grace by his holy Word,
against all such kind of fools as these. But look to it,

Such will be found at the day of God, not among that great company of
Jerusalem-sinners, that shall be saved by Grace, but among those that have been
the great abusers of the grace of God in the World. These that say, Let us sin
that Grace may abound, and let us do Evil that Good may come, their Damnation
is just. And if so, they are a great way off of that Salvation that is by Jesus
Christ presented to the Jerusalem sinners.

I have therefore these things to propound to that Jerusalem-sinner that would
know, if he may be so bold to venture himself upon this Grace.

First, Do thou see thy sins?

Secondly, Art thou weary of them?

Thirdly, Would thou with all thy heart be saved by Jesus Christ? I dare say
no less, I dare say no more. But if it be truly thus with thee, how great
soever thy sins have been, how bad soever thou feel thy heart, how far
soever thou art from thinking that God has mercy for thee; thou art the Man,
the Jerusalem-sinner, that the Word of God has conquered, and to whom it
offers free Remission of sins, by the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

When the Jayler cried out, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? The answer was,
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. He that sees his
sins aright, is brought to his wits-end by them, and he that is so, is willing
to part from them, and to be saved by the grace of God.

If this be thy Case, fear not, give no way to Despair, thou presumest not, if
thou believe to life everlasting in Jesus Christ. Yea, Christ is prepared for
such as thou art.

Therefore take good courage and believe. The design of Satan is to tell the
Presumptuous, that their presuming on Mercy is good; but to persuade the
Believer, that his believing is impudent bold dealing with God. I never heard a
presumptuous man in my life, say that he was afraid that he presumed; but I
have heard many an honest humble Soul say, that they have been afraid that
their Faith has been Presumption. Why should Satan molest those whose ways he
knows will bring them to him? And who can think that he should be quiet when
men take the right course to escape his hellish snares. This therefore is the
reason why the truly humbled is opposed, while the Presumptuous goes on by Wind
and Tide. The truly humble, Satan hates, but he laughs to see the foolery of
the other.

Does thy hand and heart tremble? Upon thee the Promise smiles; To this man
will I look says God, even to him that is poor, and of a co^trite s^irit, and
trembles at my Word, Isa. 66.2.

What therefore I have said of Presumption, concerns not the humble in Spirit
at all. I therefore am for ga^hering up the S^ones, and for taking the
Stumbling Blocks out of the way of God's People; and fore-warning of them that
they lay the stumbling block of their Iniquity before their faces, and that are
for presuming upon God's mercy; and let them look to themselves, Ezekiel 14.6,
7, 8.

Also our Text stands firm as ever it did, and our Observation is still of
force, That Jesus Christ would have mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners. So then, let none Des^air, let none Presume; Let none despair
that are sorry for their sins, and would be saved by Jesus Christ: Let none
Presume, that abide in the liking of their sins, though they seem to know the
exceeding grace of Christ; for though the door stand wide open for the
reception of the Penitent, yet it is fast enough barred and bolted against the
presumptuous sinner. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, whatsoever a man sows,
that he shall reap. It cannot be that God should be wheadled out of his Mercy,
or prevailed upon by lips of dissimulation; He knows them that trust in him,
and that sincerely come to him by Christ for mercy, Nahum. 1.7.

It is then, not the abundance of sins committed, but the not coming heartily
to God by Christ for Mercy, that shuts men out of doors: And though their not
coming heartily may be said to be but a Sin; yet it is Such a Sin, as causes
that all thy other sins abide upon thee unforgiven.

God complains of this. They have not cried unto me with their heart; They
turned, but not to the most High. They turned feignedly, Jer, 3.10. Hos. 7.14,
16.

Thus doing, his Soul hates; but the Penitent, humble, brokenhearted Sinner,
be his Transgressions red as Scarlet, red like Crimsom, in number as the Sand;
though his transgressions cry to Heaven against him for Vengeance, and seem
there to cry louder than do his Prayers, or Tears, or Groans for Mercy; yet he
is safe. To this man God will look, Isa. 1.18. chap. 66, 2.

Seventhly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Then here is ground for those, that as to practice, have Not
been such, to come to him for mercy.

Although there is no Sin little of it self, because it is a contradiction of
the Nature and Majesty of God; yet we must admit of diverse numbers, and also of
aggravations: Two Sins are not so many as three; nor are three, that are done
in ignorance, so big as One that is done against light, against knowledge, and
Conscience. Also there is the Child in Sin, and a Man in Sin that has his Hairs
gray, and his Skin wrinkled for very Age. And we must put a differen^e betwixt
these Sinners also. For can it be, that a Child of Seven, or ten, or sixteen
years old, should be such a Sinner, a Sinner so vile in the Eye of the Law, as
he is who has walked according to the course of this World, forty, fifty,
sixty, or seventy Years? Now the Youth, this Stripling, though he is a Sinner,
is but a little sinner, when compared with such.

Now I say, If there be room for the first sort, for those of the biggest size;
certainly there is room for the lesser size? If there be a Door wide enough for
a Giant to go in at, there is certainly room for a Dwarff. If Christ Jesus has
Grace enough to save great sinners, he has surely Grace enough to save little
ones. If he can forgive five hundred pence, for certain he can forgive fifty,
Luk, 7.41, 42.

But you said before, that the little sinners must stand by, until the great
ones have received their grace, and that is discouraging!

I answer, There are two sorts of little Sinners such as are so, such as feign
themselves so. There are those that feign themselves so, that I intended there,
and not those that are indeed comparatively so. Such as feign themselves so,
may wait long enough before they obtain Forgivenness.

But again, A Sinner may be comparatively a little sinner, and sensibly a great
one. There is then two sorts of greatness in sin; greatness by reason of
number, greatness by reason of throughness of conviction of the horrible nature
of Sin. In this last sense, he that has but one sin, if such a one could be
found, may in his own eyes find himself the biggest sinner in the world. Let
this Man, or this Child, therefore put himself among the great sinners, and
plead with God as great sinners do, and expect to be saved with the great
sinners, and as soon, and as hearttily as they.

Yea, a little sinner, that comparatively is truly so, if he shall graciously
give way to Conviction, and shall in God's light, diligently weigh the horrible
nature of his own sins, may yet sooner obtain Forgiveness for them at the hands
of the heavenly Father, than he that has ten times his sins, and so cause to
cry ten times harder to God for Mercy.

For the grievousness of the Cry is a great thing with God; for if he will hear
the Widow, if she cries at all, how much more if she cries most grievously?
Exodus 22.22, 23.

It is not the number, but the true sense of the abominable nature of Sin, that
makes the Cry for Pardon lamentable. He, as I said, that has many sins, may not
cry so loud in the ears of God, as he that has far fewer; he in our present
sense that is in his own eyes the biggest sinner, is he that soonest finds
mercy.

The offer Then is to the Biggest sinner, to the biggest sinner First, and the
m^rcy is first obtained by him that first confesses himself to be such an one.

There are men that strive at the throne of Grace for Mercy, by pleading the
greatness of their Necessity. Now their Plea, as to the prevalency of it, lies
not in their counting up of the number, but in the sense of the greatness of
their sins, and in the vehemence of their cry for Pardon. And it is observable,
that though the Birth right was Rubins, and for his foolishness, given to the
Sons of Joseph; yet Judah prevailed above his Brethren, and of him came the
Messiah, 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 2.

There is a heavenly subtilty to be managed in this matter. Thy Broth^r came
with subtilty and has taked away thy blesing. The blessing belonged to Esau,
but Jacob by his diligence made it his own, Genesis 27.35. The offer is to the
biggest sinner, to the biggest sinner first, but if he forbears to cry, the
sinner that is a sinner less by far than he, both as to number and the nature
of transgression, may get the blessing first, if he shall have grace to bestir
himself well; for the loudest Cry is heard furthest, and the most lamentable,
pierces soonest.

I therefore urge this Head, not because I would have little sinners go and
tell God that they are little sinners, thereby to think to obtain his Mercy;
for veily, so they are never like to have it: For such words declare, that such
a one has no true sense at all of the nature of his sins.

Sin, as I said, in the nature of it, is horrible; though it be but one single
sin as to act; yea, though it be but a sinful thought; and so worthily calls
for the damnation of the Soul.

The Comparison then, of little and great Sinners, is to go for good sense
among men: But to plead the fewness of thy sins, or the comparative harmlesness
of their quantity before God, argues no sound knowledge of the nature of thy
Sin, and so no true sense of the nature or need of Mercy.

Little Sinner when therefore thou go to God, though thou know in thy
Conscience, that thou, as to acts, art no Thief, no Murderer, no Whore, no
Liar, no false Swearer, or the like, and in reason must needs understand, that
thus thou art not so profanely vile as others; yet when thou go to God for
Merey, know no man's sins but thine own, make mention of no man's sins but thine
own. Also labor not to lessen thy own, but magnify and greaten them by all
just Circumstances, and be as if there was never a Sinner in the World but thy
self. Also cry out as if thou wast the only undone Man; and that is the way to
obtain God's Mercy.

It is one of the comeliest Sights in the world, to see a little Sinner
commenting upon the greatness of his sins; multiplying and mul^iplying them to
himself; till he makes them in his own eyes bigger and higher than he sees any
other man's sins to be in the World; and as base a thing it is to see a man do
otherwise, and as basely will come on it, Luke 18.10, 11, 12, 13.

As therefore I said to the great Sinner before, let him take heed lest he
presumes: I say now to the little Sinner, let him take heed that he don't
dissemble: For there is as great an aptness in the little Sinner to dissemble,
as there is in the great one. He that hides his sins shall not prosper, be he
a sinner little or great, Prove. 28.13.

Eighthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Then this shows the true cause why Satan makes such head as he
does against him.

The Father and the holy Spirit are well sp^k^n of by all Deluders and deceived
Persons; Christ only is the Rock of Offense. Behold I lay in Zion a
stumbling-Stone and a Rock of Offense, Romans 9.33. Not that Satan cares for the
Father or the Spirit more than he cares for the Son, but he can let men alone
with their notions of the Father and the Spirit, for he knows they shall never
enjoy the Father or the Spirit, if indeed they receive not the Merits of the
Son. He that has the Son, has Life; he that has not the Son of God has not
Life, however they may boast themselves of the Father and the Spirit, 1 J^hn
5.12. Again, Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of
Christ* has not God: He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has both the
Father and the Son, 2 John 9.

Christ, and Christ only is he that can make us cap^ble to enjoy God with Life
and Joy to all eternity. Hence he calls himself The Way to the Father; The true
and l^ving Way, Joh. 14.6. Heb. 10.19.20. For we cannot come to the Father but
by him. Satan knows this, therefore he hates him Deluded Persons are ignorant
of this, and therefore they are so led up and down by Satan by the nose, as
they are.

T^ere are many things by which Satan has taken occasion to greaten his rage
against Jesus Christ.

As first, His love to Man, and then the many expressions of that love* He has
taken Man's nature upon him; he has in that nature fulfilled the L^w to bring
in Righteousness for Man; and has spilt his Blood for the Reconciling of Man
to God; he has broke the neck of Death, put away Sin, destroyed the works of
the Devil, and got into his own hands the Keys of Death: and all these are
heinous things to Satan. He cannot abide Christ for this. Besides, he has
eternal Life in himself, and that to bestow upon us; and we in all liklihood
are to possess the very places, from which the Satan's by transgression fell, if
not places more glorious. Wherefore he must ne^ds be angry. And is it not a
vexatious thing to him, that we should be admitted to the Throne of Grace by
Christ, while he stands bound over in Chains of Darkness, to answer for his
Rebellions against God and his Son, at the terrible day of Judgment. Yea, we
poor Dust and Ashes must become his Judges, and triumph over him for ever; and
all this, long of Jesus Christ; for he is the Meritorious Cause of all this.

Now though Satan seeks to be revenged for this, yet he knows it is in vain to
attack the Person of Christ, he has overcome him; therefore he tampers with a
company of silly Men, that he may Villifie him by them. And they, bold fools as
they are, will not spare to spit in his face. They will rail at his Person, and
deny the very Being of it; they will rail at his Blood; and deny the Merit and
Worth of it. They will deny the very end, why he accomplished the Law, and by
figgs, and tricks, and qui^ks, which he helps them to, they set up fond N^mes
and Images in his pl^ce, and give the glory of a Savior to them, Thus Satan
worke^h under the Name of Christ; and his Ministers under the name of the
Ministers of Righteousness,

And by his Wiles and Stratagems he undoes a world of men; But there is a Se^d,
and they shall serve him, and it shall be counted to the Lord for a Generation.
T^ese shall see their sins, and that Christ is the Way to Happiness. These
shall venture themselves both Body and Soul upon his Worthiness.

All this Satan Knows, and therefore his rage is kindle^ the more. Wherefore
ac^ording to his ability and allowance, he assaulteth, tempts, abuses, and
stirs up what he can to be hurtful to these poor People, that he may, while his
time shall last; make it as hard and difficult for them to go to eternal Glory
as he can. Oftentimes he abuses them with wrong apprehe^sions of God, and with
wrong apprehensions of Christ. He also casts them into the Mire, to the
reproach of Religion, the shame of their Brethren, the derision of the World,
and dishonor of God. He holds our hands while the World buffets us; he puts
Bear-skins upon us, and then sets the Dogs at us. He bedawbeth us with his own
Foam, and then tempts us to believe that that bedawding comes from ourselves.

Oh! the rage and the roaring of this Lion! and the hatred that he manifests
against the Lord Jesus, and against them that are purchased with his Blood! But
yet in the midst of all this, the Lord Jesus; sends forth his Herrald to
proclaim in the Nations, his love to the World; and to invite them to come in
to him for Life. Yea, his Invitation is so large, that it offers his Mercy in
the first place to the ^iggest Sinners of every Age, which augments the Devils
rage the more.

wherefore, as I said before, fret he, sum he, the Lord Jesus will divide the
Spoil with this great one; yea, he shall divide the Spoil with the strong,
because he h^th poured out his Soul unto death, and was numbered with the
Transgressiors, and bare the sin of many, and made Interc^ssion for the
transgressors, Isa. 53.12.

Ninthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Let the Tempted harp upon This string for their h^lp and
consolation. The Tempted wherever he dwells, always thinks himself the biggest
Sinner, one most unworthy of eternal Life.

This is Satan's master Argument; Thou art a horrible Sinner, a Hypocrite, one
that has a profane heart, and one that is an utter stranger to a work of Grace.
I say, this is his Maul, his Cl^h, his Masterpiece; He does with this, as some
do by their most enchanting Songs, sings them every where. I believe there are
but few Saints in the World that have not had this temptation sounding in their
Ears. But were they but aware, Satan by all this, does but drive them to the
Ga^ out at which they should go, and so escape his roaring.

Says he, Thou art a great Sinner, a horrible Sinner, a profane hearted Wretch
one that cannot be match^ for a Vile one in the Country.

And all this while Christ says to his Ministers, offer Mercy in the first
place to the biggest Sinners. So that this Temptation drives thee directly into
the Arms of Jesus Christ.

Was therefore the Tempted but aware, he might say, Ay Satan, so I am, I am a
Sinner of the biggest size, and therefore have most need of Jesus Christ: Yea,
because I am such a wretch, therefore Jesus Christ calls me; yea, he calls me
first: The first proffer of the Gospel is to be made to the Jerusalem sinner: I
am he, wherefore st^nd back Satan, make a lane, my right is first to come to
Jesus Christ.

This now would be like for like. This would foil the Devil: This would make
him say, I must not deal with this man thus; for then I put a Sword into his
hand to cut off my head.

And this is the meaning of Peter, when he says, Resist him steadfast in the
Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. And of Paul when he says, Take the Shi^ld of Faith,
wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked, Ephesians.
6.16.

Wherefore is it said, Begin at Jerusalem, if the Jerusalem sinner is not to
have the benefit of it? And if I am to have the benefit of it, let me call it
to mind when Satan haunts me with the continual remembrance of my sins, of my
Jerusalem-sins. Satan and my Conscience says, I am the biggest sinner, Christ
offers Mercy in the first place to the biggest sinners. Nor is the manner of
the Offer other but such as suiteth with my mind. I am sorry for my sin; yea,
sorry at my heart that ever sinful Thought did enter, or find the least
entertainment in my wicked mind: And might I obtain my Wish, I would never more
that my heart should be a place for ought but the Grace, and Spirit, and Faith
of the Lord Jesus.

I speak not this to lessen my Wickedness; I would not for all the World, but
be placed by mine own Conscience in the very front of the biggest Sinners, that
I might be one of the first that are beckoned by the gracious Hand of Jesus the
Savior, to come to him for Mercy.

Well Sinner, thou now speak like a Christian, but say thus in a stron^
Spirit in the hour of Temptation, and then thou will, to thy commendation and
comfort, quit thy self well.

This improving of Christ in dark hours, is the Life, though the hardest part
of our Christianity. We should neither stop at Darkness, nor at the raging of
our Lusts, but go on in a way of venturing and casting the whole of our Affair
for the next World, at the foot of Jesus Christ. This is the way to make the
Darkness Light, and also to alay the raging of our Corruption.

The first time the Passover ^as eaten, was in the night; and when Israel took
Courage to go forward, though the Sea stood in their way like a devouring Gulf,
and the Host of the Egyptians follow them at the heels; yet the Sea gives
place, and their Enemies were as still as a stone till they were gone over,
Exodus 12.8. chap. 14.13, 14, 21, 21, 22. chap. 15, 16.

There is nothing like Faith to help at a pinch; Faith dissolves Doubts, as the
Sun drives away the Mists. And that you may not be put out, know your time, as
I said, of believing is always. There are times when some Graces may be out of
use, but there is no time wherein Faith can be said to be so. Wherefore Faith
must be always in exercise.

Faith is the eye, is the mouth, is the hand, and one of these is of use all
day long, Faith is to see, to receive, to work, on to eat; and a Christian
should be seeing or receiving, or working, or feeding all day long. Let it
rain, let it blow, let it thunder, let it lighten, a Christian must still
believe: At what time, said the good man, I am afraid, I will trust in thee,
Psalm. 56.2, 3.

Nor can we have a better encouragement to do this, than is by the Text set
before us, even an open heart for a Jerusalem Sinner. And if for a
Jerusalem-Sinner to come, then for such an one, when come. If such a one To Be
saved, then for such a one that Is saved. If for such a one To be pardoned his
great transgressions, then for such a one who Is pardoned these, to come daily
to Jesus Christ too, to be cleansed and set free from his common Infirmities,
and from the Iniquities of his holy things.

Therefore let the poor Sinner that would be saved, labor for skill to make
the best Improvement of the grace of Christ to help him against the temptations
of the Devil and his Sins.

Tengthly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Let those men consider this, that (have, or) may in a day of
trial have spoken or done what their Profession or Conscience told them they
should not, and that have the guilt and burden thereof upon their Consciences.

Whether a thing be wrong or right, Guilt may pursue him that does contrary to
his Conscience. But suppose a man should deny his God, or his Christ, or
relinquish a good Profession, and be under the real guilt thereof? Shall he
therefore conclude he is gone for ever? Let him come again with Peter's tears,
and no doubt but he shall obtain Peter's Forgiveness. For the Text includes the
biggest sinners.

And it is observable, That before this Gl^use was put into this Commission,
Peter was pardoned his horrible Revolt from his Master. He that Revolteth in
the day of Trial, if he is not shot quite dead upon the place, but is sensible
of his Wound, and calls out for a Chyrurgion, shall find his Lord at hand to
pour Wine and Oil into his Wounds, that he may again be healed. And to
encourage him to think that there may be Mercy for him: Besides what we find
Recorder of Peter, you read in the Acts, some was through the violence of their
Trials, compelled to Blaspheme, and yet are called Saints, Acts 26.9, 10, 11.

Hence you have a Promise or two that speaks concerning such a kind of Men, to
encourage us to think that at least some of them shall come back to the Lord
their God. Shall they fall, says he, and not arise? Shall they turn away, and
not return? Jer. 8 4. And in that day I will assemble her that halteth, and I
will gather her that was driven out, and her that I have Afflicted. And I will
make her that halteth a Remnant, and her that was cast off, a strong Nation;
And the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion for ever. What we are to
understand by her that halteth, is best expressed by the Prophet Elijah, Mic.
4.6, 7. Zeph. 3.19. 1 Kings 18.21.

I will conclude then, that for them that have halted, or may halt, the Lord
has Mercy in the Bank, and is willing to accept them if they return to him
again.

Perhaps they may never be after that of any great esteem in the House of God,
but if the Lord will admit them to favor and forgiveness: O exceeding and
undeserved Mercy! See Ez^k 44.10.11, 12, 13, 14.

Thou then that may be the Man, Remember this, that there is Mercy also for
thee. Return therefore to God, and to his Son, who has yet in store for thee,
and who will do thee good.

But perhaps thou will say, He does not save all Revolters, and therefore
perhaps not me.

Answer, Art thou returning to God? If thou art returning, thou art the Man.
R^turn ye back sliding Children, and I will heal your back slidings, Jer. 3.22.

Some, as I said, that Revolt, are shot dead upon the place, and for them, who
can help them? But for them that cry out of their Wounds, it is a sign they are
yet alive, and if they use the means in time, doubtless they may be healed.

Christ Jesus has bags of Mercy that was never yet broken up or unsealed. Hence
it is said, he has goodness laid up; things reserved in Heaven for his. And if
he breaks up one of these bags, who can tell what he can do!

Hence his Love is said to be such as passes Knowledge, and that his Riches
are unsearchable. He has, no body knows what; for no body knows who! He has by
him in store for such as seem in the view of all men, to be gone beyond
recovery. For this the Text is plain. What Man or Angel could have thought that
the Jerusalem-sinners had been yet on this side of an impossibity of enjoying
Life and Mercy? Had thou seen their actions, and what horrible things they
did to the Son of God: Yea, how stoutly they backed what they did, with
resolves and endeavors to persevere, when they had killed his Person, against
his Name and Doctrine: And that there was not found among them all that while
as we read of, the least remorse or regret for these their doings: Could thou
have imagined that Mercy would ever have took hold of them, at least so soon!
Nay, that they should, of all the World be counted those Only meet to have it
offered to them in the very first place! For so my Text commands, saying,
Preach Repentance and Remission of Sin among all Nations, Beginning at
Jerusalem.

I tell you the thing is a Wonder, and must for ever stand for a Wonder among
the Sons of Men. It stands also for an everlasting Invitation and Allurement to
the biggest Sinners to come to Christ for Mercy.

Now, since, in the Opinion of all Men, the Revolter is such a one; if he has,
as I said before, any Life in him, let him take incouragment to come again,
that he may live by Christ.

Eleventhly, Would Jesus Christ have Mercy offered in the first place to the
biggest Sinners? Then let God's Ministers tell them so. There is an Incidence
in us, I know not how it does come about, when we are Converted, to contemn
them that are left behind. Poor fools as we are, we forget that we our selves
were so. Tit. 3.2, 3.

But would it not become us better, since we have tasted that the Lord is
gracious, to carry it toward them so, that we may give them Convincing ground
to believe, that we have found that Mercy which also sets open the Door for
them to come and partake with us.

Ministers, I say, should do thus, both by their Doctrine, and in all other
respects.

Austerity does not become us, neither in Doctrine nor in Conversation: We our
selves live by Grace; Let us give as we receive, and labor to persuade our
fellow-sinners which God has left behind us, to follow after that they may
partake with us of Grace. We are saved by Grace, let us live like them that are
gracious. Let all our things (to the World) be done in Charity toward them,
Pity them, Pray for them, be familiar with them for their good. Let us lay
aside our foolish, worldly, carnal grandeur; Let us not walk the Streets, and
have such behaviors as signify we are scarce for touching of the poor ones
that are left behind, no not with a pair of Tongs. It becomes not Ministers
thus to do.

Remember your Lord, he was familiar with Publicans and Sinners to a Proverb.
Behold a gluttonous man, and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners,
Matt. 11.19. The first part, concerning his gluttonous eating and drinking, to
be sure was an horrible slander; but for the other, nothing was over spoke
truer of him by the World. Now why should we lay hands cross on this Text, that
is, choose good Victuals, and love the sweet Wine better than the Salvation of
the poor Publican? Why not familiar with sinners provided we hate their spots
and blemishes, and seek that they may be healed of them?

Why not fellowly with our Carnal Neighbors? If we do take occasion to do so,
that we may drop, and be yet distilling some good Doctrine upon their Souls?
Why not go to the poor Man's House, and give him a Penny, and a Scripture to
think upon? Wh^ not send for the Poor to fetch away, at least, the Fragments of
thy Table, that the Bowels of thy fellow-sinner my be refresht as well as thine?

Ministers should be Exemplary: But I am an inferior Man, and must take heed
of too much meddling. But might I, I would meddle with them, with their Wives,
and with their Children too. I mean not this of all, but of them that deserve
it, though I may not name them.

But, I say, let Ministers follow the steps of their blessed Lord, who by Word
and Deeds showed his Love to the S^lvation of the World, in such a carriage as
declared him to prefer their Salvation before his own private Concern. For we
are commanded to follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile found in
his mouth.

And as I have said concerning Ministers, so I say to all the Brethren, carry
it so, that all the World may see, that indeed you are the Sons of Love.

Love your Savior; Yea, show one to another that you love him, not only by a
seeming love of Affection, but with the love of Duty. Practical Love is best.
Many love Christ with nothing but the lick of the Tongue. Alas! Christ Jesus
the Lord; must not be put off thus: He that has my Commandments, and keeps
them, says he, he it is that loves me, Joh. 14.21.

Practical Love, which stands in Self-denial, in Charity to my Neighbor, and a
Patient enduring of Affliction for his Name: This is counted Love.

Right Love to Christ, is that which carries in it a provoking Argument to
others of the Brethren, Heb. 10.24.

Should a Man ask me how he should know that he loves the Children of God? The
best answer I could give him, would be in the Words of the Apostle John; By
this, says he, we know we love the Children of God, when we love God, and keep
his Commandments, 1 John 5.2.

Love to God and Christ, is then (...), when we are tender of his Name; and
then we show our selves tender of his Name, when we are afraid to break any the
least of his Commandments. And when we are here, then do we show our love to
our Brother also.

Now we have Obligation sufficient thus to do, for that our Lord loved us, and
gave himself for us, to deliver us from Death, that we might live through him.

The World, when they hear the Doctrine that I have asserted and handled in
this little Book, to wit, That Jesus Christ would have Mercy offered in the
first place to the biggest Sinners; will be apt, because themselves are
Unbelievers, to think that this is a Doctrine that leads to Looseness, and that
gives liberty to the Flesh; but if you that Believe, love your Brethren; and
your Neighbors truly, and as you should, you will put to silence the ignorance
of such foolish Men, and stop their mouths from speaking Evil of you.

And, I say, let the love of Christ constrain us to this. Who deserves our
Heart, our Mouth, our Life, our Goods, so much as Jesus Christ, who has bought
us to himself by his Blood, to this very end, that we should be a peculiar
Pe^^le, zealous of good Works?

There is nothing more seemly in the World, than to see a Christian walk as
becomes the Gospel; nor any thing more unbecoming a Reasonable Creature, than
to hear a man say, I believe in Christ, and yet see in his Life, Debauchery and
Profaneness. Might I, such men should be counted the basest of men; such men
should be counted by all, unworthy of the Name of a Christian, and should be
shunned by every good man, as such who are the very Plague of Profession.

For so it is written, We should carry it toward them. Whosoever has a Form of
Godliness, and deny the power thereof, from such we must turn away.

It has oft-times come into my mind, to ask, by what means it is, That the
Gospel Profession should be so Taunted with Loose and Carnal Gospellers? And I
could never arrive to better Satisfaction in the matter, than this, Such men
are made Professors by the Devil, and so by him put among the rest of the
Godly. A certain Man had a fruitless Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard; but by
whom was it planted there? Even by him that sowed the Tares, his own Children,
among the Wheat, Luke 13.6. Matt. 13.37, 38* 39, 40. And that was the Devil.
But why does the Devil do thus? Not of love to them, but to make of them
Offenses and Stumbling blocks to others. For he knows that a loose Professor in
the Church, does more mischief to Religion, than ten can do to it that are in
the World.

Was it not, think you, the Devil that stirred up the Damosel that you read of
in Acts 16. to cry out, These are the Servants of the Most high God, that show
unto us the way of Salvation? Yes it was, as is evident, For Paul was grieved
to hear it. But why did the Devil stir up her to cry so? But because that was
the way to blemish the Gospel, and to make the World think that it came from
the same hand as did her Sooth-saying and Witchery, Ver. 16.17, 18. Holiness, O
Lord, becomes thy House for ever.

Let therefore, whoever they be that profess the Name of Christ, take heed that
they Scandal not that Profession which they make of him, since he has so
graciously offered us, as we are Sinners of the biggest size, in the first
place, his Grace to Save us.

HAving thus far spoken of the riches of the Grace of Christ, and of the
freeness of his Heart to embrace the Jerusalem-sinners; it may not be amiss to
give you, yet, as a caution, an intimatimation of one thing, namely, That this
grace and freeness of his Heart is limited to time and day; the which, whosoever
overstandeth, shall perish notwithstanding.

For, as a King, who of Grace, sends out to his Rebellious People an offer of
Pardon, if they accept thereof by such a day, yet beheadeth, or hangs those
that come not in for mercy until the day or time be past: So Christ Jesus has
set the Sinner a day, a day of Salvation, an acceptable time, but he who
stands out, or goes on in Rebellion beyond that time, is like to come off
with the loss of his Soul, 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 3.13, 16, 17, 18, 19. chap. 4.7.
Luke 19.41, 42.

Since therefore things are thus, it may be convenient here to touch a little
upon these particulars.

First, That this Day, or Time, thus limited, when it is considered with
reference to this or that man; is, oft-times undiscerned by the person
concerned therein, and always is kept secret as to the shutting up thereof.

And this in the wisdom of God is thus, to the end no man, when called upon,
should put off turning to God to another time: Now, and to Day, is that and
only that which is revealed in Holy Writ, Psalm. 50.22. Eccles. 12.1. H^b. 3.13,
16.

And this shows us the desperate hazzards which those men run, who when
invitation, or conviction attends them, put off turning to God to be saved till
another, and as they think, a more fit season and time. For many by so doing,
defer this to do, till the day of God's patience and long-suffering is ended:
and then, for their Prayers and Cries after mercy, they receive nothing but
mocks, and are laughed at by the God of Heaven, Prove. 1.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29. Isa. 65.12, 13, 14, 15. chap. 66.4 Zech. 7.11, 12, 13.

Secondly, Another thing to be considered is this, namely, that the day of
God's grace with some men, begins sooner, and also sooner ends than it does
with others. Those at the first hour of the day, had their Call sooner than
they who were called upon to turn to God at the sixth hour of the day; yea, and
they who were hired at third hour, had their Call sooner than they who were
called at the eleventh, Matt. 20.1, 2, 3, 4, 5 6.

1. The day of God's patience began with Ishmael and also ended, before he was
twenty years old. At thirteen years of age he was Circumcised; the next year
after, Isaac was born; and then Ismael was fourteen years old. Now that day
that Isaac was weaned, that day was Ishmael rejected: and suppose that Isaac
was three years old before he was weaned; that was but the seventeenth year of
Ishmael; wherefore the day of God's grace was ended with him betimes, Genesis
17.24, 25. chap. 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10. Gal. 4.30.

2. Cains day ended with him betimes, for after God had rejected him, he lived
to beget many Children, and build a City, and to do many other things. But
alas, all that while he was a Fugitive and a Vagabond. Nor carried he any thing
with him after the day of his rejection was come; but this doleful language in
his Conscience, From God's Face shall I be hid, Genesis 4.10, 11.12, 13, 14.

3 Esau, Through his extravagancies would needs go sell his Birthright, not
fearing (as other confident fools) but that yet the blessing would still be
his, after which he lived many years, but all of them under the wrath of God,
as was, when time came, made appear to his destruction; for when he would have
inherited the bl^ssing, he was rejected, for he found no place of r^pentance,
though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb. 12.14, 15, 16.

Many instances might be given, as to such tokens of the displeasure of God
against such as fool away, as the Wise Man has it, the prize which is put into
their hand, Prove. 17.16.

Let these things therefore be a further caution to those that sit under the
glorious sound of the Gospel, and hear of the Riches of the Grace of God in
Christ to poor sinners.

To slight Grace, to despise Mercy, and to stop the Ear when God speaks, when
he speaks such great things, so much to our profit, is a great provocation.

He offers, he calls, he woes, he invites, he prays, he beseeches us in this
day of his Grace to be reconciled to him: yea, and has provided for us the
means of reconciliation himself: Now this despised, must needs be provoking;
and it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.

But some man may say unto me, Fain I would be saved, fain I would be saved by
Christ: But I fear this day of Grace is past, and that I shall perish,
notwithstanding the exceeding riches of the Grace of God.

Answer, To this doubt I would answer several things.

First, With respect to this day.

Secondly, With respect to thy desires.

Thirdly, With respect to thy fears.

First, With respect to the day; That is, whether it be ended with a man, or no.

1. Art thou jogged, and shaken, and molested at the hearing of the Word? Is
thy Conscience awakened and convinced then, that thou art at present in a
perishing state, and that thou have need to cry to God for M^rcy? This is a
hop^ful sign that this day of Grace is not past with thee. For usually they
that are past Grace, are also in their Conscience past feeling, being feared
with a hot iron. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.

Consequently those past grace, must be such as are denied the awakening fruits
of the Word Preached. The dead that hear, says Christ, shall live; at least
wise Christ has not quite done with them; the day of God's patience is not at
an end with them, John 5.25.

2. Is there in thy more retired condition, Arguings, Struglings, and Strivings
with thy Spirit to persuade thee of the vanity of what vain things thou love,
and to win thee in thy Soul to a choice of Christ Jesus, and his heavenly
things? Take heed and rebel not, for the day of God's grace and patience will
not be past with thee, till he says, His Spirit shall strive no more with
thee; for then the woe comes, when he shall depart from them; and when he says
to the means of Grace, Let them alone, Hos. 4.17. chap. 9.12.

3. Art thou visited in the Night seasons with dreams about thy state, and that
thou art in danger of being lost? Have thou Heart-shaken apprehensions when
deep sleep's upon thee, of Hell, Death, and Judgment to come? These are signs
that God has not wholly left thee, or cast thee behind his back for ever. For
God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not; in a Dream, in a Vision
of the Night, when deep sleep falls upon man, in slumberings upon the Bed; then
he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, that he may withdraw
man from his purpose (his sinful purposes) and hide pride from man, Job 33.14,
15, 16, 17.

All this while God has not left the sinner, nor is come to the end of his
patience toward him, but stands, at least, with the door of Grace, a chair in
his hand, as being loath, as yet to bolt it against him.

4. Art thou followed with affliction, and do thou hear God's angry voice in
thy afflictions? Does he send with the affliction an Interpreter to show thee
thy vileness; and why, or wherefore the hand of God is upon thee, and upon what
thou have; to wit, that it is for thy sinning against him, and that thou
might be turned to him? If so, thy Summer is not quite ended; thy Harvest is
not yet quite over and gone. Take heed, stand-out no longer, lest he cause
darkness, and lest thy feet stumble upon the dark mountains; and lest while you
look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness, Jer. 8.20. chap. 13.15, 16, 17.

5. Art thou crossed, disappointed and waylaid, and overthrown in all thy
foolish ways and doings? This is a sign God has not quite left thee, but that
he still waits upon thee to turn thee. Consider, I say, has he made a hedge,
and a Wall to stop thee? Has he crossed th^e in all thou pu^test thy hand-unto?
Take it as a call to turn to him, for by his thus doing, he shows he has a mind
to give thee a better portion. For usually when God gives up men, and resolves
to let them alone in the Broad Way, he gives them ^ope, and lets them have
their desires in all hurtful things, H^s. 2.6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Psalm. 73.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Romans 1^.9.

Therefore take heed to this also, that thou strive not against this hand of
God: but betake thy self to a serious enquiry into the causes of this hand of
God upon thee, and incline to think, it is because the Lord would have thee look
to that, which is better than what thou would satisfy thy self wi^hall*
When God h^d a mind to make the Prodigal go home to his Father, he sent a
Famine upon him, and d^nied him a Belly-full of the Husks which the Swine did
eat. And observe it, now he was in his strait, he betook him to consideration
of the good that there was in his Fathers House; yea, he resolved to home to
his Father, and his Father dealt well with him; he received him with Music and
Dancing, because he had received him safe and sound, Luke 15.14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

6. Have thou any enticing touches of the word of God upon thy mind? Does, as
it were, some holy word of God, give a glance upon thee, cast a smile upon
thee, let fall, though it be but one drop of its savor upon thy Spirit; yea,
though it stays but one moment with thee? O! then the day of Grace is not
past! The Gate of Heaven is not shut! Nor God's Heart and Bowels withdrawn from
thee as yet. Take heed therefore, and beware that thou make much of the
Heavenly Gift, and of that good word of God of the which he has made thee taste.
Beware, I say, and take heed, there may be a falling away for all this; but, I
say, as yet, God has not left thee, as yet he has not cast thee off, H^b. 6.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

Sec^ndly, With respect to thy desires, what are they? Would thou be saved?
Would thou be saved with a through salvation? Would thou be saved from
guilt, and filth too? Would thou be the servant of thy Savior? Art thou
indeed weary of the service of the old Master the Devil, Sin and the World? And
has these desires put thy Soul to the flight? Have thou through desires betaken
thy self to thy heels? Do fly to him that is a Savior from the wrath to
come, for life? If these be thy desires, and if they be unfeigned, fear not:
Thou art one of those Runaways which God has commanded our Lord to receive, and
not to send thee back to the Devil thy Master again, but to give thee a place
in his House, even the place which likes thee best. Thou shall not deliver to
his Master, says he, the Servant which is escaped from his Master unto thee.
He shall dwell with thee, even among you in that place which he shall choose, in
one of thy Gates where it likes him best; thou shall not oppress him, Deuteronomy.
23.15, 16.

This is a command to the Church, consequently to the Head of the Church; for
all commands from God come to her through her Head. Whence I conclude, that,
that as Israel of old was to receive the Runaway-Servant who escaped from a
Heathen Master to them, and should not dare to send him back to his Master
again: So Christ's Church now, and consequently Christ himself may not, will
not refuse that soul that has made his escape from Sin, Satan, the World and
Hell, unto him; but will certainly let him dwell in his House, among his
Saints, in that place which he shall choose, even where it likes him best. For
he says in another place, And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out. In no wise, let his crimes be what they will, either for nature,
multitude, or the attendance of aggravating circumstances.

Wherefore if thy desires be firm, sound, unfeigned, to become the saved of
Christ, and his servant: Fear not, he will not, he will in no wise put thee
away, or turn thee over to thy old M^ster again.

Thirdly, As to thy fears, whatever they are, let that be supposed which is
supposed before, and they are groundless, and so of no weight.

Object. But I am afraid I am not el^ct, or chosen to salvation, though you
called me fool a little before for so fearing.

Answ. Though election is, in order, before calling, as to God, yet the
knowledge of Calling must go before the belief of my Election, as to my self.
Wherefore souls that doubt of the truth of their Effectual Calling, do but
plunge themselves into a deeper labyrinth of confusion that concern themselves
with their election; I mean, while they labor to know it before they prove
their Calling. Make your Calling, and so your Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10.

Wherefore, at present, lay the thoughts of thy Election by, and ask thy self
these questions; Do I see my lost condition? Do I see salvation is no where but
in Christ? Would I share in this salvation by Faith of him? And would I, as was
said before, be thoroughly saved, to wit, from the filth, as from the guilt? Do I
love Christ, his Father, his Saints, his Word and Ways? This is the way to
prove we are Elect. Wherefore, sinner, when Satan, or thine own heart seek to
puzzle thee wi^h Election; say thou, I cannot tend to talk of this point now,
but stay till I know that I am called of God to the fellowship of his Son, and
then I will show you that I am Elect, and that my name is written in the Book
of Life.

If poor distressed souls would observe this Order, they might save themselves
the trouble of an unprofitable l^bour under these unseason^ble and So^l-sinking
doubts.

Let us therefore, upon the sight of our wretchedness, fly and venturously leap
into the Arms of Christ, which are now as open to receive us into his Bosom, as
they were when nailed to the Cross. This is coming to Christ for Life aright;
this is right running away from thy Master to him, as was said before. And for
this we have multitudes of Scriptures to support, encourage, and comfort us in
our so doing.

But now let him that does thus, be sure to look for it, for Satan will be with
him to morrow, to see if he can get him again to his old service; and if he
cannot do that, then will he enter into dispute with him, to wit, about whether
he be elect to Life, and called indeed to partake of this Christ, to whom he is
fled for succor, or whether he comes to him of his own presumptuous Mind.
Therefore we are bid, as to come, so to Arm our selves with that Armor which
God has provided; that we may resist, quench, stand against, and withstand all
the Fiery Darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13, 14, l5, 16, 17, 18.

If therefore thou find Satan in this Order to march against thee, remember
that thou had this Item about it; and betake thy self to Faith and good
Courage; and be sober, and hope to the End.

Object. But how if I should have sinned the sin unpardonable, or That called
the sin against the Holy Ghost.

Answ. If thou have, thou art lost for ever: But yet before it is concluded by
thee that thou have so sinned, know that they that would be saved by Jesus
Christ, through faith in his blood, cannot be counted for such.

l. Because of the Promise, for that must not be frustrate: And that says, And
him that comes to Christ, he will in no wise cast. And again, Whosoever will, let
him take of the Water of Life freely, Joh. 6.37. Rev. 21 6. chap. 22.17.

But, I say, how can these Scriptures be fulfilled, if he that would indeed be
saved as before, has sinned the sin unpardonable? The Scriptures must not be
made void, nor their truth be cast to the ground. Here Is a Promise, and here is
a Sinner; a Promise, that says he shall not be cast out that comes; and the
sinner comes, wherefore he must be received: Consequently, he that comes to
Christ for life, has not, cannot have sinned that sin for which there is no
forgiveness.

And this might suffice for an answer to any coming soul, that fears, though he
comes, that he has sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost.

2. But again, He that has sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost cannot come,
has no heart to come; can by no means be made willing to come to Jesus Christ
for life; for that he has received such an opinion of him, and of his things,
as deters and holds him back.

1. He counts this blessed Person, this Son of God, a Magician, a Conjurer, a
Witch, or one that did, when he was in the World, what he did, by the power and
spirit of the Devil, Mat. 9.34. Mat. 12.24, 25, etc. Mar. 3.22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30. Now he that has this opinion of this Jesus, cannot be willing
to cast himself at his foot for life, or to come to him as the only way to God,
and to Salvation. And hence it is said again, that such an one puts him to open
shame, and treads him under foot, that is, by contemning, reproaching,
vilifying, and despising of him, as if he were the vilest one, or the greatest
Cheat in the World: and has therefore, as to his esteem of him, called him
accursed, crucified him to himself, or counted him one hanged, as one of the
worst of Malefactors, Heb. 6.6. and chap. 10.29. 1 Cor. 12.3.

2. His Blood, which is the meritorious cause of man's redemption, even the
blood of the everlasting Covenant, he counts an unholy thing, or that which
has no more virtue in it to save a Soul from sin, than has the blood of a Dog,
Heb. 10.29. For when the Apostle says, he counts it an unholy thing; he means,
he makes it of less value than that of a Sheep or Cow, which were clean
according to the Law. And therefore must mean, that his blood was of no more
worth to him in his account, than was the blood of Dog, an Ass, or a Swine,
which always was, as to sacrifices, rejected by the God of Heaven, as unholy,
or unclean.

Now he who has no better esteem of Jesus Christ, and of his Death and Blood,
will not be persuaded to come to him for Life, or to trust in him for Salvation.

3. But further, all this m^st be done against manifest Tokens to prove the
contrary, or after the shining of Gospel Light upon the soul, or some
considerable profession of him as the M^ssias, or that he was the S^viour of
the World.

1. It must be done against manifest tokens to prove the contrary; and thus the
reprobate Jews committed it, when they saw the works of God which put forth
themselves in him, and called them the works of the Devil and Beelzebub.

2. It must be done against some s^ining light of the Gospel upon them. And
thus it was with Judas, and with those, who after they were enlightened, and had
tasted, and had felt, something of the powers of the World to come, fell away
from the Faith of him, and put him to open shame and disgrace, Heb. 6.5, 6.

3. It must also be done after, and in opposition to ones own open profession
of him. For if after they have escaped the pollution of the World through the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning;
for it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
than after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment, (which is the
Word of Faith) delivered unto them.

4. All this must be done openly, before witn^sses, in the Face, Sight, and
View of the World, by Word, and Act. This is the sin that is unpardonable; and
he that has thus done, can never, it is impossible he ever should be renewed
again to repentance, and that for a double reason; first such an one does say,
he will not; and of him God says, he shall not have the benefit of Salvation
by him.

Object. But if this be the sin unpardonable, why is it called the sin against
the Holy Ghost, and not rather the sin against the Son of God?

Answ. It is called the sin against the Holy Ghost, because such count the
works he did, which were done by the Spirit of God, the works of the spirit of
the Devil: Also because all such as so reject Christ Jesus the Lord, they do it
in despite of that testimony which the Holy Ghost has given of him in the Holy
Scriptures; for the Scriptures are the breathings of the Holy Ghost, as in all
other things, so in that testimony they bear of the Person of the Works,
Sufferings, Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ.

Sinner, This is the sin against the Holy Ghost. What say thou? Have thou
committed it; nay, I know thou have not, if thou would be saved by Christ.
Yea, it is impossible thou should have done it; if indeed thou would be
saved by him. No man can desire to be saved by him, whom he yet judges to be
an Impostor, a Magician, a Witch. No man can hope for redemption by that Blood
which he yet counts an unholy thing. Nor will God ever suffer such an one to
repent, who has after light, and profession of him, thus horribly, and
Devil-like, contemned and trampled upon him.

True, Words, and Wars, and Blasphemies against this Son of Man are pardonable;
but then they must be done ignorantly and in unbelief. Also all blasphemous
thoughts are likewise such as may be passed by, if the Soul afflicted with
them, indeed is sorry for them, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15. Mar. 3.28.

All but this, Sinner, all but this! If God had said he will forgive one sin,
it had been undeserved Grace: But when he says, he will pardon all but one,
this is grace to the height. Nor is that one unpardonable otherwise, but
because the Savior that should save them is rejected and put away.

Jacob's Ladder, Christ is Jacob's Ladder that reaches up to Heaven, and he
that refuses to go by this Ladder thither, will scarce by other means get up
so high. There is none other name given under Heaven among men, whereby we must
be saved. There is none other Sacrifice for sin than his; he also, and he only,
is the Mediator that reconcileth men to God. And, Sinner, if thou would be
saved by him, his Benefits are thine; yea, though thou art a great and
Jerusalem. Transgressor.

FINIS.

