A SERMON Preached at the ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE NATIVES OF St. MARTINS in
the Fields At their Own Parochial Church, on May 29. 1684.

BY RICHARD BVRD, A. M. Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Lord President,
and Lecturer of St. Mary Aldermanbury.

Published at the request of the Stewards.

LONDON. Printed for Samuel Keble at the Turks-Head over against Fetter-Lane in
Fleet Street. 1684.



A SERMON Preached May 29th. 1684. ON St. Matt. 21.42: -- The Stone which the
Builders rejected, the same is become the Head of the corner.
BY the Stone, which was here discarded and thrown aside, is certainly typified
and prefigured the rejection of our blessed Savior, the casting off and
renouncing of the Messiah, who was sent into the world to be a light unto the
Gentiles, and to be the glory of the people Israel. And the Builders, that thus
despised his domination and rule over them, were the Scribes and Pharisees,
those hypocritical and Sanctimonious Zealots, who all along most despitefully
treated him, and at length glutted their malice and revenge by putting him to
death. And after all his deep humility, rejection, and sufferings, God raised
him from the dead, advanced him to his Kingdom at his own right hand, and so
made him, tho once a stone rejected by the builders, the chief and Head of the
Corner, uniting both Jews and Gentiles into one Spiritual-building. And St.
Peter proves as much in the audience of many thousands of the Jews, Nemine
contradicente. Acts 4.11. Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, this is
the stone that was set at naught of you builders, which is now exalted into
Heaven, and become Head of the Church as well Triumpant as Militant here upon
Earth.

So that the Text as it is legible in the Gospels, undoubtedly points at the
Crucifixion of the Messiah by the Scribes and Pharisees. But if we turn to the
118. Psalm, whence the words are quoted, than they may refer to the Psalmist
himself, and the Jewish Rabbis universally so applied them, and that with good
season, provided the Psalm be interpreted only as a song of thanksgiving and
not as a Prophecy; for it exactly, corresponds to the condition and
circumstances of David, who had been long exercised with many potent enemies
and afflictions on every side; and had been opposed and rejected by the House
of Saul, and the Chieftains of Israel in reference to his Kingdom; and had lain
for some time under proscription and banishment: Yet God at length stood up in
his defense, hearing him in all his troubles, redressing his grievances,
helping him to subdue and discomfit all the various hosts of his enemies; and
maugre all difficulties and oppositions bringing him back from exile, and
establishing him on the Throne of his Kingdom over Israel as well as Judah;
making him (tho at first a stone rejected by the builders, yet at last) Head of
the corner. Then did holy David pen this Psalm as it is conjectured, and
afterward Hymn it in the praise and glorification of God.

And, as I doubt not but all the Loyal Hearts of Judah and Jerusalem did
congratulate David, when he entered into the Royal City; and afterward went
into the Sanctuary to offer up unto God their sacrifice of praise and
thanksgivings for returning their King home again. So now, let every member of
this Loyal Assembly, according to the design and occasion of this solemn
Anniversary Festival, pour out in the presence of God, all imaginable praise
and glory for a deliverance, as stupendous and amazing for number, weight and
measure, as ever God in his wise Providence dispensed unto the men of Judah, or
any other people since the inchoation of the world.

I appeal to the Chronicles of the most early times, and challenge all
Registers of whatsoever Age to instance in any Kingdom or Republic, that has
been reduced to so low an ebb, to such sad extremities, and so perfectly unable
to emerge from the calamity: That were of such implacable enmities and discord
within themselves, and so mortally cursed and hated by all neighboring
Provinces: and at last to be so miraculously redeemed out of every straight and
difficulty; and that without the lest drop of blood, to the unspeakable joy of
all our hearts and the amazement of all about us; and at a time, when no Soul
alive could ever hope for or imagine such a sudden and prosperous turn of
affairs in these Kingdoms.

We were along time like the Captive Jews in Babylon, a grievous and afflicted
people; and had our Country depopulated by the inroads of mercyless and
imperious Tyrants; its strength and sinews enervated by civil and intestine
broils; our rights and liberties all infringed; our estates and fortunes
confiscated; our lives exposed to insuperable hazards; whole families extinct
and buried in ruins; the State and Government quite inverted and changed; all
order and peacedissolved and broken up; the Scepter and Royal Throne usurped;
the late King, of ever blessed memory executed at his own door; his Sons and
all the Royal Line proscribed out of the Kingdom; Several of the prime Nobility
hastily dispatched to attend the Funerals of their Royal Master; and thousands
of other inferior Subjects Ecclesiastical as well as Civil, had all their
necks crushed to pieces by the Chariot-wheels of insulting Pharaoh. Yea Gods
holy Vineyard too miserably laid wast and trodden under foot, and that very
Church, which was once so remarkable for its Orthodox faith, good discipline,
wholesome Canons, modest and decent way of worship, all brought to naught; and
nothing but loose Doctrines and most damnable heresies succeeding in the room
of them.

To such an amazing height of misery and confusion was this Nation reduced, and
such as this was our lamentable state and condition!

And after those many attempts that were made, and all honest and ingenious
minds had strove their utmost to stop this impetuous torrent and retreive their
Country from such a Sea of miseries: when there was no hopes left, and the
Nation just a sinking under its own burden: When the waters had almost drowned
us and the streams had gone e'ne over our Souls: Then did the Almighty lift up
his voice out of the deep, and the floods strait obeyed and drive back again;
then did God speak peace to this British Island, and wrought our delivery in a
trice, infatuating all the Counsels of the Mighty, undermining all their
projects and secret Machinations, strangely scattering all the bands and
Militia of the Nation; and by an extraordinary act of grace and mercy, above
our hopes, and beyond our merits, and with wonderful ease and safety, restoring
our most gracious Sovereign to all his Kingdoms, and his Loving Subjects to
their just rights and liberties; and withal bringing the Ark and our Religion
home again, and establishing it on the same basis, with all its Episcopal
constitutions; together with a profound peace and plenty, and an universal joy,
and gladsomeness on every brow accompanying the return of so indulgent and
merciful a Prince, even to the vilest and most profligate among his people;
who, though he had been long discarded and lain aside, yet, you see, God on
this day sat him on the Royal throne of his Fathers, and so the words of my
Text are again made out.

That very stone, which the builders rejected the same now, blessed be God, is
head over England.

The sin, which the Builders here in the Text were guilty of, was open
Rebellion and disloyalty to our blessed Savior, resolving that he should have
no rule or Kingship over them, and that made them discard and lay him aside.

Now this is still the same reigning iniquity, that was the occasion and
commencement of our late unhappy broils, and which broke up the sluices, and
caused all the forementioned, and much worse evils to gush in upon us.

And therefore, that I may keep close to my Text, and answer the end for which
I am appointed; and seeing the day also does so necessarily determine me to it,
give me leave to show you, first, the duty of Subjects to their Governors, to
tell you wherein it consists: Secondly, I will use two or three arguments to
press you to a conscientious discharge of it, that we may all practice it
better for the time to come, and study no more to reject and throw aside the
head stone of the corner: Than thirdly and lastly, I will give some modest and
short reflections upon the day, and so conclude.

Begin we now with the first, to show you wherein the duty of subjects to their
governors consists; And among several branches that might be named I shall at
present only speak to these four following.

The first branch of our duty to Governors is, to honor and reverence their
sacred Persons.

Says the Apostle, fear God, 1 Pet. 2.17.
honor the King. He gives us our duty to both in the same breath; and the
reason why such great obeisance and humility ought to be paid to the person of
the King is, because he is Gods representative upon Earth. So that Kings and
Princes must be looked upon, as upon them, on whom God has stamped much of his
own power and Authority, and therefore we ought to pay all honor and esteem,
never daring upon any pretense whatsoever to speak evil of the ruler of our
people. Acts 23.5.


Nay! they that despise and set light by Princes, refusing the homage that is
due unto them, expressly sin against the fifth Commandment, which obliges us to
honor our parents, And the Magistrate is the Civil parent of all those that
are under his dominion and Royalty; And the name is well deserved, because he
takes care of our lives, defends us from all dangers, watches and superintends
over us for our good, and so makes his Government a public and universal
blessing to the Nation; And those, which refuse to honor the Civil Parent, do
openly confront and violate one of the precepts of the second table.

Add to this, the base ingratitude that such men must needs be guilty of, that
can find in their hearts thus to slight and contemn them after all the care and
pains they have taken for their security and well-being. Lycurgus the great
Lawmakers, when he had allotted punishments to most vices, was asked why he had
made no Law against the sin of ingratitude, and his answer was, that is res
prodigiosa, a thing so monstrously wicked and absurd that no body in his wits
can be guilty of it: And surely it must be ingratitude with a witness to deny
honor and deference to those, by whose wise conduct and Government we owe e'ne
our lives, fortunes, liberties, Religion, and what not.

Let us all then like dutyful and Loyal subjects pay obeisance unto our
Governors, and have a profound and awful reverence for their Personages, and
esteem them sacred, in as much as they are Gods Deputies and Viceroys, whom
next under himself he has entrusted with the care and administration of his
people. Should an Ambassador, as soon as he is come ashore, be abused and set
at naught, the indignity does not terminate here, but lies upon the Prince
which sent him, and who no doubt will avenge the wrong that is done him in the
person of his Minister? or suppose a man should have his Picture stabbed
through with a Sword, or a limb of it cut off, has he not great reason to
resent the injury as done to his own person, and study a punishment
accordingly? Why thus will God do to all those that affront the Supreme Powers,
they being his Ambassadors and Delegates, and serve as so many pictures and
images to represent Gods great power and Sovereignty over his people.

Nay! God has given to Kings and Princes his own August and venerable name -- I
have said ye are Gods -- And in the 1 Chronicles. Psalm. 82.6.
the Throne, which they sat upon, is styled Gods throne -- wherefore seeing God
himself has so highly Dignified them, as to set them on his Throne, and to call
them after his own name, it is much more becoming all their subjects to keep
their distance and pay homage before them, and to have an inward worship and
esteem for them, which must be expressed by our outward mean and deportment, by
humble and lowly prostrations, by a cheerful and ready compliance with their
Commands, and that constantly and unfeignedly, without partiality or
hypochrisie, having no by or sinister ends of our own, but doing it in great
sincerity and truth. What a reverend Authorquotes and applies upon another
occasion, I may, with small alteration use to this. Says he, It Is a remarkable
passage that Aelian the Historian gives of a proud man, who being to go into
the presence of the Persian King, before whom he must make such adoration as he
had no mind to give, he therefore let fall his Ring at his entrance into the
Presence Chamber, and his stooping to take that up, passed for a worship of
that great Majesty. So many persons seem outwardly to worship their Prince, and
make very humble and lowly addresses unto him, when indeed they do but stoop to
their own interest, and are but taking up some Court preferment, which they
have more mind to than to be humble and Loyal.

Secondly another branch of our duty to Governors is custom and tribute. We
must pay them tribute.

And this we are obliged to perform by the example of our blessed Savior, who,
when the Pharisees and Herodians asked him whether it was lawful to pay Tribute
or not, he answered their Captious question, as his usual manner was, by
putting another; saying, whose Image and superscription is this? Why Caesar's.
Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's -- And at another time
when Christ was taxed and no Money to pay, rather then he would be thought
refractory, he wrought a Miracle to pay his assessment.

Nay! Mat. 17.28.
the Apostles afterward, whose Epistles are only a comment upon our Savious
sayings, acknowledges this. And St. Paul especially counsels the Romans to
render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom, Fear to whom fear, Honor to whom Honor; and a little higher he
assigns the reason why they must pay them Tribute, because they are Gods
Ministersattending continually upon this very thing i. e.; for the safeguard and
welfare of his people.

God has set them a part as his Vicegerents for the good of the people, and
it is highly reasonable they should be maintained and supported by them. And
indeed when it is considered what are the cares and troubles of that high
calling? How many thorns are platted in every Crown? We shall have but little
cause to envy them, or retrench their dues. Men generally admire the sovereign
power and authority of Princes, the high honors and dignities, the vast
revenues and exchequers, but never consider the insuperable hazards and perils,
and what abundance of plots and conspiracies, rolling hastily, like the Waves
of the Sea, one upon the neck of another, which are continually devised against
them. They look upon one side of the Medal and there see a fair Image and
inscription, but never turn the reverse and behold the crosses and bars that
are on the other. Tully somewhere in his Offices, tells us when Democles the
great Parasite was arrayed like a Prince, and sat at a Table where there was a
rich banquet provided for him; as soon as ever he saw the naked sword, with the
point downward, hanging just over his head, he could not for his life taste of
his entertainment, or take any comfort in the Royal attendance he had. By which
ingenious emblem Cicero shows, that the life of a King, in the midst of all his
pomp and grandeur, is in continual fear of Death. Wherefore let no man deny him
his just tribute or subsidy, since he earns it dear enough in all conscience,
when we reflect upon the many ears and disquietudes; the sudden frights and
dangers his Sacred person is daily exposed to.

Thirdly, another branch of our duty to Governors is this, we must daily put
up our prayers to God for them.

This also is laid down by the Apostle, Tim. 2.1. 2, 3.
I exhort therefore first of all, that supplications, and Prayers, and
intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings and all
that are in authority under them, that we may all lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty; and the prayers which are thus put up for
the preservation of the King, and all that are in commission under him, will
wheel about and soon recoil into our own bosoms, because the blessings, which
they receive from God, and which we ought constantly to pray for, tends to the
good of the people, that every man may happily enjoy himself, and eat the fruit
of his Labor under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree.

Wherefore if we had no Love for our Governors or our Country, yet for our own
sakes and the interest of our several friends and relations, it concerns us to
supplicate heaven in their behalf, that they may be our strength and fortress
our defense and Buckler in time of need; that God would so rule their hearts,
and strengthen their hands, that they may neither want will nor power to punish
wickedness and vice, and to maintain Gods true Religion and virtue; that they
may all give us wise and wholesome Laws for the retrenching our exorbitances and
the government of our lives, for the bridling our unruly wills and affections,
and to get the mastery over our passions, and to fright us by severe penalties
from the perpetration of every thing that is evil and sinful: And sure I am
that many of us are beholding more to the good government we live under, then
to our own principles for being such as we are; for if the Laws of the Land did
not tie men up, and make it death to commit Murder, rapin, or Robbery, I am
confident men would as frequently be found culpable herein, as in Swearing,
Drunkenness, Fornication, Profaning the Sabbath, and the like. And therefore
we have all great reason to uphold the Government and to pray for our Senators,
and to bless and praise God night and day for putting it into their hearts for
providing thus for our Souls as well as our bodies, for publishing such
gracious edicts, and constituting such easy and gentle Laws, Which ought to be
the pride and glory of the English subject.

It is storied of the people in China, that if any of them have a mind to
travel abroad and set but one foot out of their own Country, they must never
return home again; and was there not great policy in the Magistrates for
promulgating such a decree? for if once the Chinesses should venture to go out
and behold what great liberty other Countries enjoy above what they do in their
own, there would quickly be not a man left for the Governors to rule over. But
thanks be to God, our case is widely distant from other Countries, and no
people ever enjoyed a more relax and gentle Government, where the reins are in
a manner flung upon the necks of the Subjects; and all its laws are calculated
solely for the pleasure and ease, for the interest and profit, for the safeguard
of our souls as well as our bodies: and never earth bore a more gracious
Prince, a more indulgent and merciful Sovereign than weilds the Scepter in
these Kingdoms; and therefore we have all the reason in the world to supplicate
and interceed with God for the preservation of his Majesty's most Sacred
person, and the Government as it is by Law established.

But fourthly, the last branch of our duty to Governors is this, entirely to
resign our selves into their hands and submit to their good will and pleasure
in all things. Now because this part of our duty is most scrupled at, and a
great deal worse practiced by us, I shall therefore carefully consider it by it
self, and with that freedom and plainness as becomes the place where I now
stand, and use but these three arguments to engage your performance of it. And
afterward I will hasten to a conclusion of the whole.

My first Topic is this, obedience and subjection to Magistrates is one of the
essential marks of our Christian profession.

A Primitive Saint, in the infancy of the Church, was always better known by
his Catholic charity, and patient submission to persecuting Emperors than by
all the other graces in the whole Systom of Divinity: It was the undoubted
(...) and best distinguishing note, whereby you might judge infallibly of the
professors of christianity from any others whatever; because no other religion
enjoins such an exact observance of the commands of our governors. this is
strictly charged by saint Peter, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme or unto Governors as
those that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. And Saint Paul, in the 13th. to the Romans is most full
to this purpose. Verse 1. Verse 2.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers -- And whosoever resists the
power resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation: And than concludes, wherefore ye must needs be subject
not only for fear but also for conscience sake, out of a sense that it is a
duty which God exacts at our hands. And it is very observable, that these
precepts were all given at a time when those powers were Roman Emperors, and
cruel persecutors of Christianity, to show that no pretense of the wickedness
of our Rulers can exempt us from this duty.

Nay! in the case of our blessed Savior; and if ever resistance would be
tolerated and indulged, one might expect it in this; And yet Christ would not
allow of it, but sharply rebuked Peter for drawing out his sword and smiting
one of the inferior officers, saying, they that take the Sword shall perish by
the Sword: And some learned men are of the opinion, that the Soldiers which
came to seize him had no warrant but was rather a rabble that broke out with
swords and staves of their own accord and motion; and yet Christ was so jealous
of infringing the supreme authority, that he would not notwithstanding, suffer
any opposition to be made.

By the holy institutes and exemplar of our Savior and his Apostles, we must
all pay obedience unto our Governors, either active or passive; active in the
case of all lawful commands, and passive when the thing enjoined is repugnant
to the letter of Scripture: herein, I confess, we are not bound to act as they
would have us; but even this is a season for passive obedience, and we ought
quietly to undergo whatsoever is inflicted for such a refusal, and not to
secure our selves and rise up against them. Nay! it often happens out that
worse evils and more bloodshed will follow resistance than by patiently
suffering; as has been happily observed by some Historians that how bloody
soever Nero was, yet there was not so much blood spilt in his fourteen years
reign as there was within a few months after his death. Wherefore men had
better patiently submit their necks to the Yoke, than to rise up and rebel, and
so derive down greater judgments upon their own heads.

I am sufficiently sensible, this is a very irkson doctrine to carnal and
worldly minded people, to the suggestions of flesh and blood, and yet this is
no more than what Christianity obliges us to, if ever we hope for salvation;
and which the planters and propagaters of our Religion all stuck to and died by
it. But alas there is no such danger and trials now, as there was in those
days, before Christianity was adopted into the Laws of the Empire; we have no
persecution raised against the Church, but we all live in Luxury and ease, as
for what has been lately used against Dissenters, ought not in any wise to be
branded with so foul a character, these are not persecutions but light and
gentle admonitions only, full of affectionate care and kindness, sent to mind
them of their duty to their Mother, and to join in communion with that Church,
out of the Pale whereof Salvation can hardly be obtained. The Pythagoreans were
so passionately concerned when any one forsook their Schools, that they
presently carried out a Coffin after him, and so gave him over for a lost and
dead man. And how I pray shall those amongst us be reckoned in a better
condition, who nere come near our assemblies but refuse canonical obedience and
despise the Sacred standing Ordinances of the Church, which are the very life
and nourishment of all its members: The mere suspension and deprivation whereof
was that which made the Primitive Excommunicants, as they lay weeping and
condoling before the portal, so importunately to request the prayers and
intercessions of all good Christians, when they entered the congregation, for a
plenary indulgence (...) absolution of all their sins, that they might again be
admitted into a fellowship with the Church, out of which no spiritual gift or
blessing can proceed, and it is for this end only that our Rulers study now to
bring some amongst us within the Pale, they are wise Senators, and know what is
best, and are kinder to them than they are to themselves, and therefore they
shake the rod over them, being solicitous to scare and draw them to the
constant frequenting the public Oratories, which is of such infinite concern
to the everlasting welfare of their souls; and this is all the severity that is
exercised toward them, and how can any shorter course be taken, and what
gentler lenatives can be applied to make them come in than this.

But nevertheless, there is a loud outcry made and a great talk of persecution,
and much muttering and complaining in our Streets, and never more symptoms of
Rebellion and disloyalty than now; and which is most strange, from those that
call themselves Christians? but how does it appear that they are such, if they
don't discover better principles? We shall never find then out unless their
actions be suitable to their their profession, and therefore if they would be
known they must be served as an unskilful painter does all his pictures, when
no eye can discover by the features and Lineaments whom they represent, he is
forced to subscribe their names; so must these men have the name of Christ
Stamped upon their fore head or else by their practices we shall never know
them; for Rebellion and disobedience is diametrically opposite to the
institutes of Christianity, and I have read that it is a mark to discover
Mahometans by, but never Christians before.

Secondly, another argument I draw from the danger of its contrary, which is
this, that disobedience unto Governors is as mortal and damning a sin as any
of those that more immediately concerns the honor of God.

God holds the Balance even and bears an equal regard to all his sanctions, and
threatens no greater penalty for the breach of one than another, but Wills our
obedience to Governors as much as to himself. God makes no difference, but
looks upon every sin with the same abhorrency, and albeit he seems in Scripture
to be more severe with the Jews for the sin of Idolatry, yet this was only to
put them farther off from it, that being the first Religion of their Country,
and to which they was most prone; and not but God hated all kind of vices
alike, and tho some be of a deeper tincture than others, yet the Wages of every
sin is death; Romans 6.23.


God therefore lays no greater stress upon one precept than another, but
obliges us to all his commands impartially, and calls for our performance of
those duties to our Neighbor, and the several relations we standinone to
another, as much as those that more immediately concern his own worship. Nay!
he is sometimes pleased to dispense with the non performance of his own Laws,
but never those that relate to the good and benefit of mankind.

But notwithstanding the Scribes and Pharisees of old had a mind to be more
civil to God than he would have them, and were resolved to give his Laws the
preeminence, and never matter all the other commandments, so they did but
observe what belonged to the service of God; and therefore they stood up
mightily for his Worship and Glory, and were strict observers of the Sabbath,
and very zealous in defense of their Religion, and cried up every where the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and all the while neglected every
other duty of equal moment and concern, lived in open rebellion to their
Rulers, proved annoyance to the state, had no bowels of mercy and compassion,
but devoured Widows houses, and were greatly injurious to their Neighbors
interest.

And I am afraid we have many such now a days, who are great Champions for the
Church, and are very forward to maintain the cause of God, and think themselves
highly obliged to observe his Laws and Ordinances, but never matter how
negligent and remiss they are of others: Who take great care to discharge their
duty of the first table, and yet can freely indulge themselves in a manifest
violation of those of the second; as if Religion was designed to be a
supersedeas to common honesty, and if we did but often invoke God in our
prayers, we might afterward go lie, cheat, and abuse our neighbor. I have the
charity to believe that many of them are not given to profane the Sabbath, to
cursing or swearing, to drunkenness or fornication, nor to any such gross and
sensual immoralities, but none more guilty of Spiritual and Pharisaical vices
than they; there are none so proud and cenforious, so covetous and worldly
minded, so false and hypocritical, so factious and seditious, and so
disobedient unto Princes and Governors as they are. And if these be not mortal
and damning sins what are? and yet all this is pretended to be done out of pure
zeal to God and Religion: but if we trace out the first Authors and abettor of
this surious and misguided zeal, we shall quickly find them to be the Jesuits.
For there is no footsteps of this in the records of very early times, but just
upon the breaking out of the Reformation then this active fiery zeal began
first to blaze, and kindle, and embroil the whole nation out of zeal to their
Idolatrous rites and ceremonies: and before our Island could be thoroughly
purged from all the Jesuits and Seminary Priests that swarmed amongst us, they
they rubbed their leprofie upon some of our honest Country men, and e'ne left
the infection behind them. So that this ardent zeal for Religion was an old
Jesuitical Church engine, tho now moved about and played by other hands. And
this Andreas Ab Haberfeild in his Letter to Sir William Bosewell plainly
declares.

But thirdly and lastly, whether we will be obedient to our Governors or not,
yet God will have his ends served in the world.

Says Solomon, there are many devices in the heart of man, Prove. 19.21.
nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord that shall stand. How void of sense and
reason is it then, for such mortal creatures as we are to pretend to have our
wills fulfilled before Gods, and to order all things in the world as we would
have them? are we able to baffle the counsels and purposes of the Almighty, or
to invert and change the course of his Providence? can we cancel the sacred
ordinances of Heaven, and make the everlasting decrees of none effect? no! the
divine appointments must stand for ever, and are fixed and unalterable as the
center of the earth; and what from all eternity was preordained must so happen
out and come to pass, tho it be never so contrariant to the humors and fancies
of unquiet men. Why then will any interpose and grapple with the Almighty, turn
Rebels and affront his Viceroys and study to dismount those whom he has
appointed to rule over us? if God should suspend his providence and suffer
Rebellion to ride triumphant and grow prosperous, yet alas it is but for a
while, and then the Scene changes, and a new face of things strait appears: So
that although God may a little procrastinate and adjourn the execution of his
designs, yet they shall take place, when he sees it fitting and convenient, and
then must all Rebels be debased and punished, and them that should preside over
us again exalted.

Wherefore let this rally up the Spirits of every wise and Religious Prince;
seeing there is a God above, who beholds all the struglings of their enemies,
and and knows how hard they bare against the curb, and fain would trample them
underfoot. And although the affairs of their Kingdoms may be sometimes in a sad
plight, and look toward a change. Yet God can work miracles, and make the wind
tack about, and in an instant rescue them out of every straight and difficulty.
Who could have thought, when Joseph was betrayed by his Brethren and fold into
Egypt a slave, should at last be Lord over Pharaohs household? When Jonas was
cast into the Sea and swallowed up by a Whale, to have met him afterward
preaching at Nineveh? When Nebuchadnezar, was grazing in the forest among the
Beasts, to see him again governing in Babel? When the Jews were so totally
routed by the Chaldees, who sacked Jerusalem, burnt their Temple, and carried
them Captive into Babylon, should at last be restored and set at liberty by
that heathen Persian Monarch Cyrus? When that same Jesus, who was so
reproachfully handled, and so barbarously crucified by the Jews, should after
his death be adored by Kings, and Emperors, and his Cross an Ornament to
Crowns and Scepters? When our most gracious Sovereign, who was so long depulsed
from his Trone, discarded by his subjects, proscribed out of the Land, should
at last be installed Sovereign Lord over England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Thus you see, God is able to set all things to rights again? and tho he
sometimes stands by and suffers wicked Men to act their pleasure; yet after a
while the counsel of the Lord that shall stand, which ought to be a support and
encouragement to all Governors, and a terror to the obstinate and Rebellious,
for whether men will be obedient to them or not, or whether they discard and
lay them aside, or whatever they are pleased to do with them, yet Gods ends
must be served in the world, his Will shall be done be the Earth never so
impatient; and that very Stone which the builders rejected, shall in his good
time be made Head of the Corner.

Having thus dispatched the chief matters I designed at the beginning, I will
only now give some short and modest reflections upon the day, and so conclude.

If all the Topics that I have now urged for obedience unto the King and
Government we live under, be not sufficient, I hope the memory and experience
of our late unhappy troubles will abundantly prevail upon the most stif necked
amongst us. Let any of our sectaries look back and consider the sad posture of
affairs in the year 41. and recount, if they can, all the evils and mischiefs
that gushed in upon the Nation during the Civil Wars. I say let any of them
that survived the calamity, and had been for sometime under the hatches,
confess if they would pay so dear for Rebellion once more; whether they could
ever find in their hearts to set one foot toward the introducing again such
dolorous and bloody times in these Kingdoms; which I can parallel to nothing
but a kind of Interregnum where after the death of the Alcade or chief
Governor, the people are allowed to do all manner of villainies until another
is chosen. Or to that sad time among the Jews, when there was no King in
Israel, in the which every man did that which was lawful and right in his own
eyes.

The old civilized Romans had such an opinion of the augustness of their City,
that to be proscribed or banished was counted a capital punishment, and a civil
death thought equal to a natural. O that I could persuade all of you to be such
brave spirited Romans, and to have such a regard for this Royal City, the
Metropolis of our Nation, never to commit any base or disloyal action as to
merit proscription from it, but be as constant and true to the King, as we are
fully convinced the Natives of this place are, by this solemn anniversary
Festival; and if several Countries heretofore strove which should have the
honor of Homers birth, sure it is no small addition to our happiness, seeing
this very Parish is honored with so good a Kings Nativity as well as ours: And
if we enjoy not now all the rights and privileges, which has been long since
continued to this our Imperial City, we may e'ne thank some of its Pharisaical
members, who by their open Rebellions have forfeited the great Seal and Charter
of it.

I pray God then, we may all lay it to heart and let our Rebellion terminate
here, and every man sit down content, and eat the fruit of his labor under his
own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree. For what can any expect by disturbing and
thwartning the Government, but abundance of evils and calamities must ensue;
And then how deep will their guilt be, and what a great deal of blood must be
Spilt, and how many lives lost in such wild heats and combustions. Xerxes, when
he beheld his army pass before him, it drew tears from his eyes, that a hundred
years hence there would not be a man of them left. Here was something of good
nature, but we strive, as fast as we can, by our fierce debates and
quarrellings to destroy and be the death of as many, and to imbrue our hands
one in another blood.

These are strange and preposterous doings and very ill-timed, and most
unchristian breaches, and heartily to be lamented and sorrowed for, and do much
weaken our Nation, and fit us for a final overthrow. I remember Josephus says,
the unhappy divisions that were among the Jews in the time of their Siege did
more shake the foundations of their City than Titus his whole Army without the
Walls. And in another place, he has most impartially related, that there was no
care of Religion, no zeal for the Law amongst them, because there was nothing
but bandings and factions in their Synagogues. And I am afraid that our zeal
for small and indifferent matters, for circumstantials only, has quite eaten
up the very Spirit and life of our Religion; and well may we be bore down by
the common enemy, when we do all we can by our devilish and inhumane breaches
to prepare the way and accelerate his coming in.

And besides this, there is such a surplusage of Atheism and prophanness, of
irreligion and ungodliness abounding every where, that notwithstanding what
Juvenal remark long ago -- omne in praecipiti vitium Stetit -- all vice was at
the height. Yet if it be possible the times we now live in are worse; And
albeit some would insinuate, that it is the humor of every age to cry down
their own times; yet iniquity is now grown so bare faced and rife in our
streets that there is not the lest umbrage or color for such a pretext. And
was there nothing more, his is enough to throw us out of the protection of the
Almighty, and to make us the fag-end and refuse of Gods Creation. For what
says Solomon, righteousness exalts a Nation but sin is the reproach and
confusion of any people. And to use the words of a great man, the experience of
every age has made this good: All along the history of the old Testament, we
find the interchangeable providence of God toward the people of Israel always
suited to their manners; they were either prosperous or afflicted according as
virtue and piety flourished or declined amongst them. And God did not only
exercise this Providence toward his own people, but he dealt thus with other
Nations. The Roman Empire whilst the virtue of that people continued firm, was
strong as iron as it is represented in the prophecy of Daniel, but upon the
dissolution of their manners the iron began to be mixed with miry clay, and the
feet upon which the Empire stood to be broken in pieces.

No doubt than but it was our own exceeding guilt and sinfulness that destroyed
the nation, and plunged us into such an abyss of misery and confusion. But
seeing this happy day has given us a blessed resurrection to life again, and
turned all our heaviness into joy and rejoicing; O sing therefore unto the Lord
a new song, for he has done mavelous things; Psalm. 98.
with his own right hand and with his holy arm has he gotten himself the
victory. Praise the Lord upon the harp, sing to the harp with a Psalm of
thanksgiving; with trumpets and Shawms, O show your selves joyful before the
Lord the King. Let the sea make a noise and all that there in is, the round
world and they that dwell therein. Let the stoods clap their hands, and let the
hills be joyful together before the Lord. For this Nation was sunk deep into
the earth, but now it has lift up his head again. The people all lived under
bondage and thraldom, but now are at perfect liberty, and enjoy their own.
Oppression and Tyranny before infested the land, but now mercy and truth are
met together, and righteousness and peace have kissed each other. The hinges of
the Government that were all disjonted and broken, are now redintegrated, and
turn upon the same axle. Our most gracious Sovereign who had been so long
banished on a foreign shore is now landed again, and become the delight and
glory of three Kingdoms: That very Sun which before was shrouded and set, is
now stepped from behind the cloud, and shines upon us with all his heavenly and
benign influences.

In a word.

Seeing this day then has put a final period to all our grievences, Oh let us
study to be peaceable and quiet, and not Physic our distemper to a worse, but
learn the lesson of obedience better for the time to come, and mind the peace
and prosperity of our Nation, and the preservation of his Majesty's most sacred
Person, who after several years hazards and turmoils, by his own Countrymen
and by Foreigners; and after all those attempts and offers that were made by
the Priests while he was beyond sea, to pervert him from the true Religion,
blessed be God, yea! thrice blessed be God, who preserved him all along through
the Wilderness, and at length brought him back in the same faith and profession
as he went out. And let us all now implore the continuance of Gods mercy
toward him, that his Reign may be long and prosperous and his years many; that
he would bless him both in body and Soul, and give him the hearts and love of
all his Subjects; that he would make him wise as an Angel of light, and a
faithful Minister of justice among his people; that he would give him the
victory over all his enemies, at home and abroad; and let them be driven back
and put to confusion that wish him evil; that he would set a Crown of pure gold
upon his own head, and so make him for ever happy in this life, and when that
dismal night draws near in which we must part with him, Crown him
everlastingly in the world to come.

(...). FINIS.

