Man's whole Duty, AND Gods wonderful Entreaty Of him thereunto.

Set forth from 2 Cor. 5.20. and Published at the Request of some Hearers.

By DANIEL BVRGESS, Minister of the Word of Reconciliation.

Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside; and John Lawrance at the Angel in the Poultry. 1690.

To my Excellent Friends, Mrs. Joan Wood. Mrs. Anne Hook. Mrs. Abigail
Vanittern. Mrs. Martha Brown.
OF THE CITY OF BRISTOL.
Gentlewomen,
THese Lines do not vainly design to adorn your Names; but are very uprightly
meant to defend my own, from one of the blackest Reproaches. Even loathsome
Ingratitude. I have bid them tell all they meet, that You were, for some
(black) years together, my noblest Gaia's: And your Houses, my sweet Homes.
That I am not Unthankful, though I am Insolvent. That I am not Insolvent
neither, if Prayers do discharge Debts.

I do continue my pleasant Hope of your Persons Reconciliation unto God: And my
Prayers for your Dearest Relatives: Beseeching the Father of Glory, to make his
own Love, the Reward of Yours unto me. And if it he his blessed pleasure, to
make these very Leaves bear some Fruit unto your Souls

Be it freely said, as far as I know my self, I am neither Proud nor Ashamed of
them. Not Proud; for I am aware how my imperfections do Blemish them. Not
Ashamed; for I am told, God has Blessed them; and I am made to believe, that
he will Bless them. That as they are not Beautiful, so neither shall they be
Barren, as Rachel. But Fruitful, though Blear-Eyed as Leah.

I have told you some Years ago, that I Preached for the Salvation of Plow-Boys
and Milk-Maids, as well as Lords and Ladies. And if I did not, I should never
expect to do so much upon them by Rhetorical Politeness, as by Gospel
Plainness. Honey Dews be sweet to the Taste, but they miserably blast the Corn.
Delights of Fancy, hinder Wounds of Heart. This is still my Thought.

And if you are still the Christians that I once knew you, I am sure you will
welcome Plainest Gospel. It Is Gospel I do present you, and in Dress as homely
as I heretofore used among you. I am not now first to crave a Blessing upon it;
but shall ever continue craving it: And particularly a Blessing to your selves,
and to the Olive-Plants about your Tables.

Clare-House, in Drury Lane, London, Dec. 11. 1689. Your Affectionate Orator
unto your Heavenly Father. D. Burgess.

Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto.
II COR. V. 20. Be ye Reconciled to God.
OUR Being is our least and lowest Honor and Pleasure. The end of all Essence,
is Action. But neither is that its own End, or our Perfection. Action, is for
the advancement of our Being; as our Being is for our employment in Action.
Work designs Reward; and that together perfecteth our Action and Being. The
Reward that does this, is the Jewel inestimable; which should be bought at any
rate, but sold at none. And this, whether blind men see it or no, is Love.

I am sure, Devils and Damned ghosts do feel it. They are weary of their
Beings; and have no Action but in unallayed torments; because they neither Love
nor are Loved. They are still uneasy, and in degrees of pain proportioned to
their Enmity. Holy Angels and the Spirits of the Just above, do also feel it.
Their Essence and Action are as sweet as they wish; because their Love is as
great as they can desire. Their Love is an Ocean, and therefore is their Joy
not a drop less. This middle Worlds Inhabitants, as far as they have their
Senses, do feel it too. The dead in sin, do prefer their impurest Loves above
their Lives. And all that are alive unto God, do set their Seals unto that
Glorious Truth, and most memorable: He that dwells in Love dwells in God,
and God in him. 1 Jo. 4.16.

With profoundest Reverence be it writ and read! The Divine Blessedness it
self, which has no limits, does consist in Love. The Persons of the Glorious
Trinity are blessed infinitely. Their Being and Working are as much sweeter
unto them, as they are greater then any Creatures. And this, because they Love
and are Beloved mutually, no less then infinitely. Were their Love of each
other but finite, their Delight and Pleasure must be as imperfect. The reason
is most plain; Loving and being Loved, is all the Pleasure of an intelligent
Nature.

Wherefore to seek our Happyness any where but in Love, its very Element; is to
leave the Waters and go fish in the Woods. And to doubt whether we shall find
Felicity in Love, is to make a question, whether when we come to Sea, we shall
find any Water there?

I am by sad Experience cured of my hasty Confidence, as truly as ever great
Melanchton was. Nor do I presume I shall win all my Readers of this Essay. I
expect not to take and hold all the Fish that come to this Gospel-net it self:
But I must have leave to say, I do expect a very good Draught. For I shall
propose a word, that will cost Men hard service to resist. You that are
farthest from the Kingdom of God, will have much ado to get away Unconvert: And
you that stand nigher, must fight with all your might and main, if you be not
led captive to Christ this time. So extraordinary a portion of Holy Scripture,
is that which I here offer. A Text call it if you please. I do account it, and
call it, all the Bible in eight Syllables. The sum and substance of all God
thinks fit to Speak, and that we need to Hear.

Three things are obvious in it.

1. Man's miserable condition. He is an Enemy to God. He could not otherwise be
advised to Reconcilement.

2. Gods merciful Condeseention. To Prepare and Offer a Reconciliation: Yea,
and beseech our Acceptance of it.

3. Man's dutiful Religion. No hard task, nothing of brick and bondage: Only to
be friends and Reconciled to God.

Or, if you like, see you now, and never look off again while you live; see
here two particulars.

(1.) The Richest Feast that Grace it self can prepare. Very Reconciliation
unto God.

(2.) The Sweetest Invitation that it can make unto the same. Even Obsecration
and Entreaty, by Ministers, by Christ, and by the blessed God. By King, Prince
and Ambassadors.

Now close your Ears, if you can, against this Doctrine.

Reconciliation to God is the whole Duty of Man, and sinful Man is entreated
thereto by God. The Heads of Discourse that offer themselves are,

I. Man's Duty. Of which, in our Doctrinal part.

II. Gods Entreaty. Of which, in our Application.

The first shall have its Explication in five orderly Positions; And its Proof,
by as many demonstrative Arguments, as shall appear needful.

Position 1. God and Man were once entire Friends. Likeness to God, qualified
for such Friendship. And Gods blessed Love, both necessarily and freely
followed that likeness. Till Sin entered, Man was as like to God, as God willed:
And as dear to God, as he himself could will or wish. For, as to Relation, he
was made his Son; Luke 3.38. As to Portion, God gave him all things; Psalm. 8.6.
As for Tenure, he held all by Covenant; and was sure to lose nothing till he
should sin it away; Gen 2.17. As for Covenant, he had it signed and sealed. The
Trees of Life and of Knowledge were Sacramental; Genesis 2.9. And as to Communion,
doubtless that was great between God and Adam; till Adam made himself a
fugitive, and God made him an exile. For ought we know, it was not much less
between God and Adam in Paradise, then between God and Angels. Large Minds have
thought, the sin of the Angels, was their Envy at the Honor by God given unto
Man. While Man was himself, without all peradventure he would rather have been
annihilated, then consented to one vain thought. And as soon have chosen to
live in a boiling Cauldron of Oil, as any course of sin. But,

Pos. 2. Sin made God and Man extreme Enemies. At one blow it destroyed, the
Likeness, the Love, the Relation, the Portion, the Covenant, the Communion
aforesaid. Of Father and Son, it made them as Fire and Water. Contrary to each
other. Justice armed God against Man, and Malice enraged Man against God.
Righteously, God cursed Man; and no doubt but Man bitterly, cursed and
blasphemed God. Had not our Redeemer interposed, God would have as soon embraced
a Devil as a Man. And before Christ was preached unto Adam, I question not, but
he wished the destruction of his Creator. In a word; The Scriptures declare
God, and every unconvert Man, while such, at open war, and at utmost enmity.
Before that Abels be converted, God does hate them; and more then Cains do hate
them afterward. Neither does any Cain hate his Brother, as they hate their
Maker. No Souls do near so much hate their Neighbors, as all Unregenerate ones
do hate their God. Lamentable truth! Till Christ makes the blessed Peace, God
and Men wage the worst War. And there is no more concord between God and Men,
then between God and Devils.

Pos. 3. God and Man cease not to be Enemies, till they both return to be
entire Friends again. Friendship is mutual Love. It Is but Love, not Friendship,
where both parties do not Love. Enmity also, is mutual Hatred. Nor is it
Enmity, but Hatred only, when but one of the parties do hate. Accordingly,
Reconciliation is mutual; and cannot be said to be made, if both Enemies return
not from their Hatred to Love: Yea, and unto that height and very degree of
Love from whence they fell. A displaced Bone is not right set, if it be not
brought again into the very place whence it was thrust; nor will it ever be
easy or comely. Reconciliation to God is not right, nor will it be saving,
without his Condescension to us, and our Ascension unto him, made as in the
beginning. The things forenamed must be regained; to wit, our Likeness, Love,
Relation, Portion, signed, sealed Covenant, and Communion. Reconciliation, is
full Restoration.

Pos. 4. Reconciliation between God and Man has seven memorable things
relating to it. It concerns those that desire any part and portion in it, to
bear always in mind these things of it.

1. Gods Purpose and Promise of it, from all Eternity. Before the foundation of
the World, God purposed to reconcile some Enemies; Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Before the
World began, he made a promise of the same unto his Son; Tit. 1.2. To wit, in
those Eternal Transactions that were between the Father and the Son, by their
one Eternal Spirit. Whereof we read, Prove. 8.22. to 32. Isa. 53.10, 11, 12. etc.

2. Jesus Christ's Purchase of it, at his Death. The Holy Gospel certifies us,
that Christ by his Death purchased Reconciliation for some sinners: Paid the
whole price for it, and procured that it should in Gods time be given forth
unto them. Romans 5.10. Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.14.

It has been said, that sin made God and Man extreme Enemies. Let it be
considered, that God could never Purpose or Promise a Reconciliation, but in a
way consistent with the honor of his Government. And consequently, through a
full Satisfaction made unto him, for all the Glory that our sin took from him:
And a Price truly valuable paid unto him, for all the Favors bestown upon us.
Now to make such Satisfaction, and to pay such Price, was infinitely above the
power of any mere Creature. To invent it, was beyond the compass of finite
understanding. To ask it, had been too insolent a boldness. To effect it, was
most perfectly impossible. Dr. Owens Diatribe de Justitia Vindictiv. and Dr.
Bates his Harmony of the Attributes of God in our Redemption; abundantly clear
this. I say but this word or two.

A mere Creature could not possibly make and pay it, by Doing or Suffering. Not
by Doing: For it can do nothing for God, but what it owes unto God. And if it
could, yet it could not do so much, as would repay the Glory that sin robs God
of: For One, the least sin, takes more Glory from God in a minute, then all our
Obedience would restore in our everlastingness. Because our Obedience does in
no sort profit him; and gives but little honor to him; as preferring him but
above poor Creatures themselves: But our sin, in many respects, does reproach
and injure him horribly, as to his manifestative Glory, casting an unmeasurable
Contempt upon him; as setting him with all his infinite Excellencies under
every Creatures feet. Nextly; not by Suffering: For a Creature cannot suffer
infinitely, as sin deserves, but by suffering endlesly. Now if it so suffer, it
must be always making; it will not ever have made the satisfaction we speak
of. It will be ever paying the price; but it will never pay the full payment.
Alas, it is certain, that Hell would have some end, if the Creatures own
torment for a million of years could satisfy for one sin!

Wherefore, it pleasing God to purpose the reconcilement of sinful Men unto
himself; and there being a necessity it should be upon terms Honorable unto
him, as well as Beneficial unto us; it pleased him to purpose and promise that
it should be through his Incarnate Sons foresaid purchase, and meritorious
procurement. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; 2 Cor. 5. In
Christ, as his Oblation for us, and as his Gift unto us. The Oblation that
satisfied his Justice for us; the Gift that satisfied his Love unto us, (as a
great hand expresses it.) So 1 Timothy 2.6. He, Jesus Christ, gave himself a
Ransom for all; and Coll. 1.14. We have Redemption through his Blood. A Mystery
indeed; the Mystery of Mysteries; and which engages unspeakably our regards of
the next particular concerning this Reconciliation unto God: To wit,

3. The Holy Ghosts proof of it. For of Sinners reconciliation unto God; we are
ready to think the news too good to be true. To cry out, How can it be? I, and
when we are told, it is to be through a full satisfaction made by his Son; and
price invaluable paid by him. By him, who, though the infinite God, became a
finite Man: Though Gods equal, became his Servant: Though the Blessed God, yet
was made a Curse for us: We cannot but persist asking, How can these things be?
It nothing repents me, that I have often said; We do now as much need to have
the Spirit of God Live in us, as ever we did need the Son of God to Dye for us.
And as the Purchase of Reconciliation did require a Divine Person, the Proof of
it does require no less.

God deals with Man, as Man: In a way of Reason, suited unto his Reasonable
Nature. Which cannot Believe any thing, without a Reason for Belief of it. Of
all the great and mavelous things that God commands our Faith, he first
gives sufficient grounds for our Faith of them. Particularly, of his foresaid
Purpose to reconcile Sinners, and of his Sons Purchase foresaid; things of
greatest worth and weight; and of Concernment to as many as do need
Reconciliation. Of these extraordinary things, God has provided extraordinary
Proof. Even the Testimony of a Person, no less than the Father himself, or the
Son. Of the Glorious Spirit, coessential and coequal with both. This Divine,
Infallible Person, who cannot be deceived himself, or deceive us; is sent by
the Father and his Son, to certify us of the Purpose and the Purchase which we
speak of. To inform us of both; to conquer and drive away the Objections of our
Minds against both; to give us a certain kind of presence and sight of both. A
sight sufficient to move our Wills, and make our Hearts to rely and rest upon
both as really true. And to draw our Affections in necessary degrees; causing
us to Love and long for the possession of the Reconcilement so purposed, and so
purchased. And to overruled our Lives; and make them nothing so much, as a
course of Contemplation, Prayer and Action, for this said Reconciliation. For,
be it deeply considered;

The Holy Ghost is declared in the Word, to be sent for this end; To be a
Witness unto Jesus Christ, and an Agent for him. It would be very vain to
object that the Holy Spirit was given under the Old Testament long before Jesus
Christ came to Reconcile us by his Death. For he was so upon Christ's
interposing as our Reconciler straightway after sins entrance; and that with
respect to Christ's future Oblation and Intercession for our Reconcilement. And
then as for degrees, there is no comparison. The Spirit dropped but Dews in the
Old Testament: In the New, he rained down Showers. So that comparately he is
said not to be given till Christ was Glorified. He, our Redeemer, comes into
the World, and proclaims Gods Love unto it, and purpose to reconcile and save
sinners: As also his own undertaking, (according to a contract made between the
Father and himself,) to effect that Reconciliation by his Oblation and
Intercession. This, the guilty graceless World could not believe; nor have the
patience to hear, from the reputed Son of a Carpenter. Jews as well as
Gentiles, made light of it; yea, rose in arms against it; all, save a handful;
and those better taught by him, whom we are next to speak of. The Holy Spirit
(as was agreed on between the Divine Persons,) now comes; and what does he?
Why, he guides Souls into the Understanding and Faith of all the Truth by
Christ preached. He Glorifies Jesus Christ; convinces Unbelievers that Christ
is no Impostor, but a Glorious Person, come with a Glorious Commission, to
pursue Gods Glorious Purpose, and to make the Glorious Purchase foresaid. He
receives Christ's Spiritual things, and shows them unto Men that could not see
them before; even his Truth and his Grace. He receives them from Christ, as
the Lord Treasurer of them; and shows them abroad, that it may be seen, what
they are, and in whose hand they are: That Glory may be brought unto Christ:
That he may be owned and honored as the Purchaser of the purposed
Reconciliation; Jo. 16.13, 14, 15. etc. This did the blessed Spirit
effectually; causing the Church in all Ages to exalt the Father as the Original
Purposer; the Son, as the Meritorious Purchaser; the Holy Ghost, as the
convincing Proof-maker of our Reconciliation. Without which Proof, no Soul had
ever believed it, or found an Heart to look after a portion in it: Which is the
next great Consideration concerning it. For, if God has Purposed, and Christ
has Purchased Reconciliation; and the Holy Ghost has proved it so fully, that
there is no just place for the least doubt, but they have so done; the very
next thing to be looked after must be,

4. The Sinners possession of it. For whatever be the proportion of a good, it
avails not me without propriety. Let this Reconciliation be thought, as it is
in truth, a good no less than infinite. If it be not made mine own; if I am not
Reconciled; the sound of its Doctrine is to me, but as the speech of Bread, to
a Man starving for want of it: Or as words of a Pardon, to a Man going up the
Ladder, when he has it not.

O what Pillows do they sleep on, who lay their Eyes together without this
Reconciliation attained? One would think it should be more easy to rest on the
points of swords and spears, then upon one thought of God unreconciled. I will
say with my dear, and now blessed Friend, Mr. Richard Alleyn of Somersetshire:
If all the Kings of the Earth would give me all they are worth; I would not lie
down on my bed any night with one sin Unrepented, and without some hope of God
Reconciled to me! But I return.

The Holy Spirit in his Word testifyeth, a purpose of Reconciliation, that is
Eternal: As also a Reconciliation at the Death of Jesus Christ, that is
Fundamental. But he does as clearly deny any actual Reconciliation, before
Conversion: Before our Understanding and sincere Consent unto the Covenant of
Grace. How should Divine Wifdom throw the richest Pearl to the vilest Swine? Or
Holiness forgive and embrace Creatures contrary to it? There is no Law above
God, but God is a Law to himself: And though he can do what he will, he cannot
will what is Unwise or Unholy. Elect, or not Elect, he that believes not on
the Son, the wrath of God abides on him. Jo. 3.36. He that has not the Son of
God, (to wit, in Marriage-Covenant;) he has not Life; (to wit, the Life of
Peace with God, or of Hope from him, or of Holiness toward him.) 1 John 5.12.
In a word: Look at what time God teaches, and you learn; at what time God
draws, and you run after him; at what time you unfeignedly say, Lord, I do rely
on the promises, and I do consent to the demands of the Gospel Covenant; at
that time, in that very punct of time, your Pardon is sealed in Heaven. It Is
published in the Gospel, and declared so to be. For you are told; He that has
the Son of God has Life; 1 John 5.12. There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus; Romans 8.1. And being justified by Faith you have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ; Romans 5.1.

Come Reader, come take Eternal Life from these Lines! Hold thy self not a
minute longer in Hellfire; for Gods wrath is not a jod less. Down with my Book;
and down fall thou on thy Knees, and utter the few words, which will make God
and thy Soul everlasting Friends. No longer dare to live. Damned. Venture to
strike the Gospel Covenant, and be saved! Say to Jesus Christ; Lord, I will
stay no longer, I am thine upon thy Gospel-terms for ever. From this instant to
Eternity, I will be thine. Say to thy self; Heart, bid an eternal adieu unto
Unrighteousness, and unto trust in self-righteousness as satisfactory or
meritory. Say unto vain Company; Sirs, I take my leave of you; I must travel no
farther with you, that are not for the strait gate and narrow way. If you will
not be Reconciled to God with me, I will not any longer sight against God with
you. But whither do I break?

Be it known unto every Reader, this is Gospel: God is not Reconciled to us FOR
our Repentance and Faith. The most penitent Believers, are but unprofitable
servants unto him. But he is never to be Reconciled WITHOUT Repentance and
Faith. Both are as necessary, as though they were Meritory; though they are
infinitely far from it. Yea, and upon the first penitent and faithful
consenting to the Gospel Covenant, God and Sinners become as true Friends as
God and Holy Angels. And as Eternally inseparable ones; Romans 8.38, 39. It Is not
to be denied or concealed: The grant of Peace is one thing, and the sense of it
is another: And these two are separable. God may be Reconciled to a
Covenant-servant of his for months and years, and the servant be in fear and
doubt of it. Those sins that hinder not Gods grant of Peace to us, do often
hinder our sense and assurance of it. Wherefore, we are to consider another
particular concerning Reconciliation: To wit,

5. The Believers persuasion of it. For, though Reconciliation be the greatest
good; though it be Eternally purposed for me; and by Christ's Death purchased
for me; and be by the Holy Spirit proved to me, that it is for some Purposed
and Purchased. Yea, though through Grace I am possessed of it, what then? Until
I know that I am possessed of it, I am but like a Child in the Womb: Living
indeed in a bag of water, but not knowing my own Life. I have a Life that is
only in degree inferior to the Life of Angels: But yet I live in doubts and
fears, that I am like unto Devils; and that I shall lodge for ever in their
unquenchable fire. Now be it carefully heeded: The Holy Spirit who is given to
work Grace in us, he is also given to witness Grace unto us; and to make us
know the things that are freely given to us of God; 1 Cor. 2.12. He is a free
and sovereign Agent indeed; and he works and witnesses (in them, in whom he
works,) as he pleases. He gives assurance of Peace with God, as much as he
pleases; and as soon, and no more, and no sooner, than he pleases; 1 Cor.
12.11. At the first Plantation of the Gospel Church, he used together to
convert Souls, and to assure them of their Reconciliation unto God. But now we
see, he does not ordinarily so do. And as commanded, 2 Pet. 2.10. most Converts
do give great diligence, before their Election and Reconciliation are made
sure. I contemn the Roman Synagogue, that measures all Cloth by its own Ell;
and denies the attainableness of that assurance, which they neither duly seek,
or ever attain. Our Divines have confuted and shamed them so much, that there
needs not any thing to be said unto their blasphemous Dreams. Let the desirous
Reader see but that one most excellent Sermon of Mr. Samuel Fairclough on 2
Pet. 1.10. in the Morning Lectures against Popery. The Churches of Christ do
believe and teach, that the blessed Spirit does ordinarily, sooner or later,
witness unto true Converts their Reconciliation: And seal them to the day of
Redemption.

And this, either mediately or immediately. Immediately, by a sort of spiritual
words: Such as pass between God and the Blessed Spirits above. By these the
Holy Ghost testifies unto humble diligent Believers, that they are Gods
Reconciled and Adopted Children. And when he does so, he does it with a
clearness and sweetness that carry their own evidence with them. For there is
no Rule beyond it, by which it may be tried, as there is no other visible,
besides the Light it self, whereby you may try it; Romans 8.16. He is said
therefore to witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God. And
Ephesians. 1.13. with Ephesians. 4.30. He is said to seal us: But how so? Unless he does
set some print and stamp upon us, distinguishing our state and Relation. Again,
mediately the Spirit persuades us also of our Reconciliation. To wit, by
enabling us to see our Graces truth and sincerity; and from thence to infer our
certain Reconciliation. Both ways he is ordinarily the Comforter of sound
Believers.

I have read of a Woman that would say, she had born eight or nine Children;
and with as much pain as other Women used to undergo: But she would be content
to bear all that pain over again for this comfort of the Spirit. O that the
same mind were in all that profess a value of it! But well; what if you had
sought and found it too? There Is another very material particular concerning
Reconciliation to God, that would ask for your thoughts and cares: To wit,

6. The practical improvement of it. I mean of his Reconciliation, and of his
persuasion or assurance of it. Hear the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.2. Having these
promises, (to wit, of Reconciliation and all Grace, chap. 6. latter end;) what
use are we to make of them? Why, Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. q. d. Let us live,
as far as we can, without sin. Let us do Gods will on Earth as it is done in
Heaven, unto our utmost ability. Let us do all we are able to make our
Reconciliation more honorable to God then our Damnation would have been.

Assurance, is a special privilege. Scarce any Child's portion, at all times.
And it is possible that some of Gods Children may live and dye without it.
However, when it is bestowed, extraordinary Aids of Grace and Advantages for
Duty are bestowed with it. The helps which Schoolmen call necessary, are given
to all that are Converted: But those which they call liberal, are given but to
them that are Assured. In Conversion, all Gods Children do receive strength
sufficient to walk acceptably with him: But when they are sealed by the Holy
Spirit, they receive additional strength to walk more serviceably. Now as more
is given to them, proportionably more is required from them; more than from
other Converts, that are not yet assured of their Peace with God. Luke 12.48.
Every Israelite owed God much; but the Nazarite owed him much more.

If I were asked, Who of all the living were deepest Debtors unto God, and had
most work set them to do. I would say, assured Christians! Yea, and I verily
think, that next unto Saints Glorified, none are so painful and so humble as
the assured. True it is, in many things they themselves do offend: And it is not
in Perfection attained, but expected, that the best of them dare to glory.
Wherefore their Eye is, at least it ought to be ever kept, upon the last
particular concerning our Reconciliation unto God. And that is,

7. The Judgment days publication and perfection of it. Acts. 3.19. Sins shall
be, in open Court, blotted out, when that day of refreshment comes from the
presence of the Lord. Reconciliation shall be published to purpose, when in the
audience of Men and Angels, God the Judge of all shall pronounce it with his
Mouth. And so, that he will be admired in his Saints and all that believe. To
wit, for the heights whereto he exalts them, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. Hear but one
Apostle more; 1 John 3.2. When he shall appear we shall be like him: That is,
when God displays his own Glory in the Son of his Love; who comes at the last
day in the Glory of his Father; we shall be as like him as shall be fit for
Children to be like a Father. There shall be no sign of any variance ever being
betwixt us: But all the Blessedness possible shall speak his perfect
Reconciliation to us, and all the Holiness possible shall speak our like
Reconciliation unto him.

Whether the sins of Believers shall be all of them published in the general
Judgment, is a Question. Learned Alting brings five Reasons for the
Affirmative, and as many for the Negative. But it is most undoubted, that the
blessed Friendship betwixt God and them, shall be then shown abroad through the
whole Creation; and be exalted beyond the reach of our present words or
thoughts!

St. Austins Mother, hearing a Sermon of Heaven, is reported to have cried out;
O what do I here in this World? Methinks Reader, thou should imitate her. And
here exclaim; O what have I to do all my days, but provide for this
Judgment-day? Would thou know what course to take for this provision; I
beseech thee attend unto the fifth and last Position, that I offer for
explicating my Doctrine.

Pos. 5. Man's business touching his Reconciliation unto God, falls into three
particular exercises.

Attention, Reader, Attention; give here thy best Attention; and the greatest
thou ever gave, to the things that best deserve it. These Exercises must be
thine, if ever the war between God and thee do come to an end. The war lies in
this, which of you shall have their will. Fain thou would have thy own will,
as bad an one as it is. As mad a Mind as it is led by. I mean, as void as it is
of Truth, and as possessed as it is with Error. Self-will is the sin of sin. It
lives longest and dies last, in every sinner. Fain would thou live, as thou
listest; Think, speak, and act, as thou please; have thy Thoughts and Works
also free: Fain would thou be thy own Man, yea, and God too. Making to thy
self no God, but thy self; and observing no Law but thy Lust. I, and after this
done, thou would not be undone. Thou would gain this in the World, and not
lose thy Soul; take the Hell in sin, and miss the Hell prepared for it. Thou
would Temporally and Eternally disjoyn the evil of Suffering from the evil of
Doing. And escape that, though thy Life be spent, to the last breath of it, in
this. But God says thee nay; and sends forth Proclamations to the contrary.
From him I have Commission to tell thee; and I do by these Presents give thee
to know; God will tear Heaven and Earth in pieces, and (if it could be) he
would himself dye in the fight, rather than thou should have that will of
thine. Rather, then thou thy self should escape the misery of Devils, if thou will hold their enmity, and keep unreconciled as they. Yea, and rather than he
will ever afford thee Reconciliation, in any way but that of his
Gospel-Revelation.

If therefore thou learn'st not, and fallest not unto these Gospel-Exercises
that I am commending, thou plainly thus speak; To Hell, my Soul, get thee
going to Hell. O extremity of torment, I will venture thee! O eternity of
anguish, I fear thee not! O Worm, that ever live, and O Fire that never
dyest, I will bear you both! And O you exercises that are the Chariots of Grace
and Eternal Glory, I tell you all three, I scorn you! Frightful words; and not
to be heard without amazement, and a quaking Heart!

Reader, were I to beg but one Blessing for my own Soul, and for those that are
dearest unto me, it should be this: That we might happily begin and hold on
these three Exercises. Whereof I shall treat as plainly and fully, though as
briefly as I am able. Take them together first, thus. They are,

1. Of Believing and Considering Reconciliation, in respect to the three first
particulars. That is, as purposed, as purchased, and as proved to be so.

2. Of praying and laboring for Reconciliation, in respect to the three next
particulars: That is, as possessed, as persuaded or assured of, and as
practically improved.

3. Of hoping for Reconciliation, and rejoicing in it, in respect to the last
particular: That is, as published and perfected.

And here, observe thou well; how far it is from brick and bondage whereto thou
art called. Idleness, is of the worst wracks, that an Humane Soul can be set
on; and thou art called to employment right honorable. Thy Labor is not
desired, till admirable encouragements unto it are known, and well considered
first by thee. No, nor till superabundant aids from Heaven are invoked. Thou
art not set to Labor, but in Hope, and for or with Joy unspeakable and full of
glory. The World deals quite contrary with its Vassals. In the ways of sin, Men
know not whither they go, and are not suffered to consider, what they are like
to have for their Labor. And indeed their Labor is to sow in much pain what
they reap in Eternal Torment. In their Lives and Labors, as in their Deaths,
they have no Hope; or what is worse than none. They are far from Joy; the
Spirit of God assures us, there is no Peace to them. And their Mirth is nothing
in the world but light-headedness. Their going to Play Houses, is but sending
themselves to Bedlam.

Come on then, and learn the way, and enter into the joy of the Lord. The Lord
that sends me to invite thee, and thus direct thee.

First, Thou must believe and consider, that Sinners Reconciliation unto God is
a thing purposed by God, purchased by Christ, and proved to be so by the Holy
Ghost.

I have shown it to be so. But O Man! Understand thou what thou read? I
have proved it by Authority of Sacred Scriptures; but alas, Believe thou the
report of them? It is scarce every hundredth Man of those who own them, that
does in truth believe them. So judged the great Calvin himself. And the truth
is, if in any thing it be harder then other to credit Divine Scripture, it is
in its Testimony unto this great Truth. Nevertheless so it is, that its
Testimony herein must be credited sincerely, and considered of seriously,
before we can be qualified for Christianity: That is, for Jesus Christ's
reconciling and saving Religion. For the embracing it with seriousness and
sincerity, unto our Reconciliation and Salvation. Who can charge his Conscience
with all respects to a Religion, whose first Principles and very Foundations he
is ignorant or doubtful of? Who can pursue it whatever it costs him, and give
it the Government of his Life and Soul? They who do any less, do but dally with
Religion; they do not use it like it self. And they who do so much, need to be
very well certified of the goodness of the grounds they go upon. If not, they
must continually be like to Builders, who doubt their Foundation is ill laid;
and therefore either by and by desist from their work, or go on very heartlesly
with it.

Thus therefore must thou do, whoever thou art that desire Reconciliation
unto God. With a solemnity suitable to the moment of the affair, thou must go
and enquire into these things: Namely, Whether thou have Faith. And, if thou
have, What a Faith it is that thou have, concerning the things foresaid. Alas,
Sin is distractive: And Minds sinfully distracted, do conceit themselves to
believe, whatever they do not in words contradict. Nor do they at all discern
the difference between Moonlight and Sunshine. Though the former be cold, and
dispel no Vapors, and ripen no Fruits, as the latter does by its equally
useful and beautiful Beams. They distinguish not between the Historical and
worthless Faith of Devils, and the operative saving Faith of the operation of
God. Though the difference be as plain, as that of a painted Sun upon a rotten
Signpost, from the true Sun in the middle Heaven. In a word: Thou must
discourse thy self soundly concerning these things; and admit no rest, till
thou feel thy self more then almost persuaded: Till thou can say (as the
Doctor of the Gentiles,) I know and am persuaded; (and as the Doctor of the
Jews,) I believe, and I am sure; Lord, 1. There is a God. 2. This God is Three
distinct Persons, as to manner of Being and of Working. 3. Of these Divine
Persons, the First has eternally Purposed; the Second has in time dearly
Purchased the Reconciliation of lost Sinners; and this the Third has
convincingly Proved. 4. I perish for ever, if this Reconciliation be not
Purposed concerning me; if it be not Purchased for me; and if it be not Proved,
some way, unto me. 5. Until I have this Proof made unto me, I cannot possibly
have knowledge of the Purchase and Purpose touching me. 6. Wherefore I ought, I
may, and I will by Gods assistance, seek diligently this said Proof unto my
inmost Heart and Reins! Hasten, Man, hasten thou, go Read, go Pray, go Hear,
and go Consult the best Ministers, and Christians: Beseech them both, to tell
thee how they gat assurance and certainty hereof; charge them to pray the same
Spirit, in the use of like means, to give it unto thee. But this caution take
thou: Never judge thy Belief right and valid, until it discover it self to be
so by these properties. e. g. Till it do shame thee for former neglects of the
Father, Son, and Spirit; and their Purpose, Purchase, and Proof. Making thy
blushing Soul to exclaim; O never had I one thought worth the thinking till
now! Miserable Fool, I have lived like a bruit; as if I had been born in the
Field, and bred among the Cattle therein. I abhor my self, and every breath of
my past Life. Again, Till it do smart and pain thee, and give thee grievous
feelings, of thy want of more acquaintance with the Divine Persons, and these
their actions. Causing thee to esteem and desire acquaintance with the same,
above all the sensual delights under the Sun. Likewise, Till it become an
effectual Goad to quicken thee to the use of all means for it, and a Nail also
to fasten thy Soul unto it. Driving thee to this conclusion; q. d. Whatever I
shall henceforth propose to my self, or prosecute in the World. I will never so
absolutely propose any thing. Never so laboriously and incessantly pursue any
thing, as my acquaintance with the Divine Persons, and these their foresaid
Works. In other things I will be less resolute and more moderate; in this I
will be peremptory, and I will strain every Nerve of my Soul. Lastly, Till it
do sweeten, and make grateful and pleasant all thy Religious pains. At least,
as the most imperfect certainty that Husbandmen have of Harvest, does impart a
sweetness unto their perpetual motions. Till thou can truly say, thus: So
much I know of the Divine Persons. So far I do credit the Holy Spirits
Testimony of their Works. Such Faith I have of both, that what Ordinances and
Duties were heretofore burdensome or undelightful, are now become of my
chiefest joy: And such as I could not live without.

And now, Man, now first beats thy Pulse. This is the first breath of thy
laudable Life. The first step of thine toward God. The first stroke of
reconciling work. This is the first hairs breadth thou have stirred from thy
self-ruining Enmity toward the way of Peace. God speed thee onward! For

Secondly, Thou must Pray and Labor for the actual possession, the comfortable
persuasion, and the practical improvement of Reconciliation unto God.

Thou art now out of doubt, there is a way to get possessed of the
Reconciliation Purposed, Purchased, Proved. But can thy blindness,
unassistedly, find that way? Or, can thy halting Soul enter into, and walk in
it unassistedly? Or, if with much ado thou were able, would thou go without
infallible counsel and invincible aid? And that for want of asking. Or did
thou never hear of multitudes that perish in the very mouth of their way?
Stumbling unto perdition, at the very threshold of the door of Salvation.

I do now suppose thee to have an Eye in thy Head. And if so, I nothing
question but thou have a Tongue in thy Head too. The Eye of Faith, and Mouth of
Prayer, were never yet known far asunder. And indeed it would be a wonder, if
any seer of Reconciliation should not be straitway a wrestler for it. However,
wot it well: Divine Authority requires, and Bounty invites and entreats thee to
show that with thy sight of Reconciliation thou have received Praying Lips, and
Laboring Hands, and a large Heart, craving no less then the three things
foresaid. Of which in their order, hear what follows.

1. For the possession of Reconciliation unto God; let Heaven be made to ring
with thy Prayers, and let all that see thee on Earth be witnesses of thy pains.
Pray for it; but not out of Gods own way: That would be to Blaspheme, not to
Pray. Pray for it, by Prayer for the grace whereto God has made the promise of
it. Repentance by which thou art to be divorced from the Law of Sin, and
Covenant of Works. And Faith, by which thou art to be joined in the
Gospel Covenant unto Jesus Christ. Pray, I bid thee; for thou art no more able,
of thy self, to fulfill the demands of the Gospel Covenant then of the Legal.
And Christ has no Authority to possess thee of Peace, till thou do answer the
demand of the Gospel Covenant. The Elect themselves, (though they be loved with
a Love of good Will from Eternity,) they lie under the sentence of wrath, till
they consent unto the Covenant of Grace. And must so do. For Christ is not sent
to give Remission of sins before Repentance of them; Acts 5.31. Nor before
Faith on him, (which is joining in Marriage-Covenant unto him:) Acts 10.43.
Acts 20.21. But Precept, and Example of good success, provoke Men Unreconciled
to Pray for Repentance and Faith; Acts 8.22. Luke 18.13. etc. Well, But is
Prayer all? By no means. Thy labor is required, Man. God knows thy Poverty,
and requires no Price from thee. The whole thereof he took from Jesus Christ:
But thy Pains he will not excuse thee. He calls sinners to recover themselves
out of the snare of the Devil: 2 Timothy 2.26. That is, by the most diligent use
of the means of their recovery. By the utmost striving to keep from all things
that hinder Recovery and Reconciliation: Such as a Man would make to stay
himself, if he were hurrying down a Hill that had a Lake of Fire at the foot of
it. As also by extremest straining and putting forward to do all required for
Reconciliation. For instance; go retire thou; and after Divine Help implored,
sit down and reason the Case as strongly as thou can with thy self. Urge thy
own Soul to consent to the Gospel Covenant; as a good Parent would urge a wild
and wicked Child, with the mightiest Motives it could find. Pray and entreat
thy self as importunately as thou art able. Beseech and beg thy own Soul, as a
Parent his Child's, to yield unto God. Charge and command thy self too; adding
the most frightful threats of Vengeance, and sweetest promises of Grace to
drive and draw thy Heart. Diligently Answer every considerable Objection thou
have against Repentance and Faith. Tell thy self plainly, come what will as to
Estate, Name, and Friends, etc. the Covenant of Grace must be entered, and
shall. That thou art resolved to use any violence possible, in this case, to
get Gods Peace. I mean, the most constraining Arguments, the most intense
Desires, the most fixed Resolutions. As a Father will catch any way a Child
falling into the Fire; making nothing at all of breaking its Arm or Leg, so he
save its Life. Briefly, this know; in order to your Reconciliation unto God,
such pains of yours with your selves are as surely necessary as they are
possible. And who, I wonder, can tell me, when such self-labours were ever
unprofitable. When I shall hear that any Soul is become such a painful Preacher
to its self, persevering in it; I shall not stick to say, it is answering the
Call of God in my Text. And I shall sweetly think, what a Brand soever it has
been, it is one that must not lodge for ever in the Fire. I am not able much to
doubt a Man's well-doing, when I know him painful in Soliloquy, and much in
fervent Prayer.

Reader, shut the Book. Go and make thy God above, and thy Conscience within,
and thy Friends that be fit, to say of thee, Behold, he Prays! And behold, he
labors more abundantly then Hypocrites do, to lay hold of Life. Then return,
and read on; and know, that,

2. For the comfortable persuasion of thy being Reconciled unto God, thy Life
must be Prayer, and thy Pleasure be Labor. Thou must Pray without ceasing, and
Labor without complaining; thou must always do, and evermore delight, in both.
In the instant wherein, thou consentest unto the Gospel Covenant, God and thy
Soul are Eternal Friends. The Creation shall drop down, and fall into its first
nothingness, when that Covenant fails. But though thy state be so safe, it is a
question how long it will be before it will be sweet. Bitterly did Mary weep,
when Jesus stood by her, she not knowing it. Tears filled Hagars Eyes, and
Despairs drew the Blood of her Heart, when the Well was fast by her, and she
was not aware of it. It Is often so, through their own fault, and long so, with
Gods reconciled ones. They have their Pardon and their Pass for Heaven sealed
in Heaven; but not knowing so much, their Consciences write and sign their
Mittimus to Hell: And so make the greatest part of their Breath be spent in
Sighs. Horrid Robbery! To God of Praise, to Souls of Peace, and of Usefulness
in the World. O Christian, this remember: Want of assurance made by
negligence, is a sin whose name ought to be Legion: For it is a thousand strong.
Be it therefore considered.

How worthy is full persuasion of Gods Peace, to be prosecuted by the utmost
strength of thy Prayer? And conclude upon this; thou have no ground to expect
that it should be given without thy asking: Or be found without thy seeking.
Yea, or upon ordinary asking and seeking. Believe it, it is the sweetest of Gods
Mercies, and the highest of the Honors he bestows under the Sun. And the
generation of his Favorites do, all, bear witness; the does not use to give
it, or continue it, much less increase it, and make it full, without especial
ardency of Supplication, with accuracy of Conversation. See Mr. H. Hickmans
most excellent piece of the Believers Duty toward the Spirit.
Indeed these, when they meet, he uses to honor with it; Psalm. 6. David seems
to have begun his Prayer at Hells door, but to have ended it in the very porch
of Heaven. And I have heard of some, that under tormentive fears, have gone
into their Chambers, locked their Doors, and humbly told their God they could
not come away until he had given them some comforting assurance of his Love and
Peace: And did not come forth without it. Psalm. 50. ult. It is to the right
orderers of their Conversation, that the Lord promises to show his Salvation;
1 Timothy 6 18, 19. St. Paul reckons up a great deal, necessary for attaining
assurance of it. And so does St. John; if you consider together 1 Jo. 3.19.
with 18th ver. I appeal to the common sense of all sound Believers in the
World; whether when they are themselves, they can content themselves with a
bare possibility, or no more then a probability of being reconciled unto God?
Or with so much as we call a Conditional certainty: Which is, when a Man sets
himself to Believe and Obey the Gospel; confident he is Reconciled if he be
sincere, but doubting whether he be so or no: And whether they do not
ordinarily, when they are without it, Pray more than ordinarily for assurance;
double their Watch; and set themselves to a walk more than commonly strict,
both for exercise of Graces, and performance of Duties; in order to the first
gaining or regaining of lost assurance.

Reader, Lay to thy Heart my advice. Rest not in the twilight of Uncertainty.
Raise thy Holy Ambition much higher: And take the course just now foresaid, to
get possessed of positive Certainty; that thou may sail to Heaven with full
sails, and have an abundant entrance. Of this, I nothing doubt, but my Text
contains Commandment. Oh that I were as sure thou would forthwith say;
Farewell cursery Prayers, and drowsy Services, and Laodicean Religion! I might
have read my Name in the Book of Life long ago, had it not been for you. You,
whom now I banish with this solemn protest entered against you. I will
henceforth equally dread to do the works of the Devil furiously, and to do the
work of my God negligently. The Prayer, Labor, and Life of Faith, do not
Meritoriously purchase, but they do most Blessedly evidence Eternal
Reconciliation. And in these Chariots will I go mount and ascend unto the full
assurance of Hope. Which being done, I advise thee next in these words,

3. For the practick improvement both of thy Reconciliation, and of thy
assurance thereof, let thy Prayers and Pains be heaped up, pressed down, and
running over. O think not that when thou art certified of thy real Peace with
God, thy work is done; thy staff may be set behind the door; thou have no
further to go. No, Christian, no: But then when thou can so easily answer,
what thou have received more than others: Then, then is the time for thy
straining to get as ready thy Answer to a second Question; What thou do more
than others? What thou do more in all manner of Holy Conversation and
Godliness, more than those that are unassured do; and more than thou thy self
did do, before thou had assurance.

For why, are the Consolations of God Goats hair, and small things with thee?
Or dreamest thou, that they be Talents given thee for thy own Comfort, and not
for Gods use and special service? Or, tell me plainly; can thou thy self take
Comfort in them, unless thy God has Glory from them? Or is it possible that
such a Man as thou, should never have heard of many, that have by
non-improvement sinned themselves out of Comfort into Torment? Yea, by the
negligence of one Hour, lost the assurance they had gotten by the hard Prayers
and Labors of many a Year.

Reader, If thou art an assured Christian; if indeed the same Spirit that
united thee to Christ in thy Effectual Calling, and worked all Grace in thee,
has also witnessed that Grace and Salvation unto thee; then, as for thy Life,
consider; As sure as God calls Sinners to come in to the holy state; and calls
penitent Believers to go on farther and farther in it: So surely does he call
assured Believers to go fastest and farthest in it. And the more they do know
that their much is forgiven, the more to Love and Obey him that forgiveth. A
Truth denied by none, nor doubted by any, worthy to be remembered by all, and of
all, by such as I do suppose thee.

Certainly, the assured Christian owes God most Thanks. I, and God gives
assurance to qualify for Gratitude, and to provoke unto it. Certainly, The
unthankful are numbered with the unholy; 2 Timothy 3.2. And are unholy, and that
most unnaturally too: (For naturally we are Thankful even unto our fellow
Worms.) Yea, most universally also. For, Thankfulness, is, in a well explained
sense, all our Gospel-Obedience. It Is the general Duty of the Gospel,
containing and animating all Duties. All, without it, are impure Carcasses.
Repentance, if it be not Thankful, is rather a Legal rack and rage than a
Gospel Repentance. And Faith, if it be not a Thankful Consent unto the
Gospel Covenant, it is no saving Consent. Nor is the Love of God, or any Service
of him, proper or tolerable, unless they be grateful. Unless done upon this
motive, or account; because Christ has loved us, and given himself for us. As
Legal a Preacher in repute, as any among us, has these memorable words; If we
obscure the Doctrine of Gratitude, we do as bad or worse than the Antinomians.
But I return.

Reader, If thou be the Man I suppose; the reconciled and assured Man, I
mean; thou art not yet about thy business. Thou art not obeying my Text. Thou
art not heeding my Doctrine: Unless thou art engaged in raising thy Prayers to
a higher pitch; and in refining all thy Ways to a further degree, then ever
before. Unless thou art daily thus schooling thy self; Come up my Soul, come
up, and sit up higher. Keep not thou at the threshold, and just within the door
of Holiness, and in the lower places any of them. Ascend, ascend, ascend in thy
aims at Perfection. Ascend higher in every Prayer and Petition. Ascend to the
utmost heights of incarnate Sanctity. To these it is that Gods Trumpet alarums
thee. Nor is it for thee Excusable to do that which for others would be
Laudable. Thy assuredly Reconciled God, will as assuredly smite thee with his
sharp Chastisements, if thou do but as his unassured Children do. If thou
Mortifiest Corruptions but as they. Repellest Temptations but as they. Actest
Graces but as they. Performest Duties but as they. Improvest Comforts but as
they. Bear Troubles but as they do. O my Soul, thou must, and thou shall in
design, in desire and endeavor, do no less than PERFECT Holiness. Thou shall
love them that hate thee. Thou shall swim against the stream of sinning
multitudes. Thou shall have thy Hopes and Fears most, upon unseen Goods and
Evils. Thou shall be merciful to others, and severe to thy self. Thou shall
choose Moses his choice; and suffer rather than sin. Thou shall joy in
tribulation. Thou shall fall with Gods Friends, rather than rise with his
Enemies. Thou shall, of all thy sins, sacrifice thy Isaac, and thy darling own
iniquity. Thou shall live on Gospel-Promises. Thou shall still be upon the
Selfdenying side. Thou shall be forward for all Duty, but keep thy fire for the
weightiest Duties. Thou shall count least sins, no little Enemies. Thou shall
love thy Reprovers. Thou shall in every Commandment look to the First. Which
being done, it sweetly follows;

Thirdly, Thou must assiduously hope for the Glorious Perfection and
Publication of thy Reconcilement unto God in the day of Judgment, and rejoice
in that hope. And here, know thou first, thy business is not so easy as thy
warm Heart may presume it. Hope and Joy are sweetest feelings: And above all,
suitable unto our natural desires, and delightful. Besides, Hope can have no
surer ground then Gods Word, Oath, and Sign and Seal, or Sacrament; and that
thy Hope of perfected Reconciliation has received. Neither can Joy have a more
congruous and complete Object, then Gods perfect and published Friendship: And
this is it thou have to rejoice in the expectation of. But alas, both Hope and
Joy have enough to do to live in this World. They appear to many poor Souls,
very improper to the best state herein: Because the best estate on the Earthly
Globe, is not as that in Heaven, without Sin, Sorrow, Fear, Pains, Enemies,
Temptations. No, but it has the Soul burdened with guilt; debased and vexed
with adhering corruption and rebelling; clothed with infirmities; assaulted
with tempters; afflicted by the world; beset with dangers.

Nevertheless I must tell thee, such is thy Nature, that thou must and wilt
hope, and rejoice in hope of somewhat or other. Corruption and Temptation will
make thee do both on wrong Objects; if Grace and Heavenly Inspirations make
thee not exercise both, on these right ones that I name. And, whatever thou
imaginest, God is more dishonored when he is robbed of these affections of
Hope and Joy, then when he is denied any others. And much more reproached, when
you rob him of them, then when any other Children of his so do. Any unassured
of his Peace with them, I mean. So great are thy engagements to live hoping,
and joying in the hope of thy perfected published Reconciliation.

Do ask me what Hope is? I Answer, It is Desire; though all Desire be not
Hope. By Hope, I do understand a Desire of some good that we think future, and
to come; tho through many difficulties. A Desire that is continued and
persisted in; not such as a Child's is of its playthings, which is lost and gone
with the next fancy that starts in its mind. A Desire, that is also exercised
in thinking and expecting of its Objects; and can no more be satisfied without
it, than Hunger without Bread. A Desire, not easily to be diverted for so much
as short spaces of time from its object; but cleaving incessantly unto it in
Meditations, and Suppositions and Discourses endless. In the Learned Languages,
Hope is expressed by words that signify to look out at something distant, to
behold it often and wistly, and as it were to send our Souls out at our Eyes to
go meet it. I have somewhere read, that the Hungarian word for Hope is Remeni,
of Re, which signifies Above, and Meni as they call Heaven. Very proper, being
that the fully reconciled state there, is indeed the principal object of sacred
Hope: Romans 5.2. We rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. Col. 1.27. Christ in
you, the hope of Glory. To wit, the Glory put on Believers in the great day of
their completed and proclaimed Reconciliation.

Stay Reader; close now thy Eyes, and think what of this Hope is, and what of
it ought to be in thee! And, as it is no hard thing to do, tell thy self what a
Life a good measure of this Hope would make thee; how Serviceable, how
Comfortable!

The latter God requires from thee as surely as the former. Where be thy Eyes
if thou see not the express Texts, which the Holy Scripture presents? Where
thy Reason, if thou conceitest that unto so full an object of Joy given thee,
he does not require a proportionable act? Awake Man, and say thou; what is it
must go to complete an object for Joy? And of all of it, what one thing is
wanting in complete Friendship with thy God. We rejoice in things of great
value and price. And surely this is a Pearl of price. The Wisest Lord paid the
dearest price for it. We rejoice in things proportionable unto our wants. And
this will not leave one unsupplyed, or any desire uncrowned. We rejoice in
things pure. And surely, if the Sun in the Firmament has spots, this blessed
Light has not one. We rejoice in things wonderful. And surely this is the
greatest wonder that Infinite Power ever wrought. We rejoice in things that
present varieties. And surely this must have abundance in the Rivers of its
Pleasures. We rejoice in Victory. And this is nothing but Eternal Triumph it
self. We rejoice in Preferment. And this is the highest exaltation that we can
conceive; yea, and higher than we can conceive. We rejoice in excellent
Company. And here all that is Lovely is to meet, and never to part.

And now I ask, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, if not to rejoice
in the hope of this Glory? Greatly to rejoice in it, and always. This thou
may do, and sorrow never the less, but much the more for thy sins. The Feast
of the Passover admitted bitter Herbs, yea required them. And many a sweet
shower have I seen fall, while the Sun has beautifully shone. Indeed perfect
Joy is not to be had on this side of Heaven: But we might, and we ought to seek
and find sufficient Joy. Sufficient to make our Lives sweeter than any Sinners
be. To make the things that do embitter our Lives less grievous to us, and more
tolerable than they be. To make vain Recreations and Pleasures falsely called,
more despicable to us than they be. To make the Thoughts of God and the Life to
come, more familiar and pleasant than they be. To make Ordinances, and public
and private Duties more delightful; and the thoughts of Death far less
terrible. I heartily compassionate the poor melancholy Creatures, (as Men will
call them,) who by means of afflictive Bodily Maladies, are incapacitated (save
by Miracle, or Gods extraordinary working,) to rejoice as they ought. As to
their own Blessedness, I know the matter is not so great as we are prone in our
have to think. Through those said Maladies, Satan's advantaged Malice leads them
easily into mistakes of their state; and makes them breathe in trouble as in
their Element, and never know many hours but full of griefs and fears.
Nevertheless the day of their perfected and published Reconciliation will wipe
away all their Tears; and give them Joys enough to drown the memory of their
Sorrows in.

But O Christian, whoever thou art that have not that Millstone about thy Neck;
that horrid hinderance of high and holy rejoicing; grant me my request. As upon
my Knees I beg and pray thee, make Conscience of the command to rejoice and be
exceeding glad, in hope of the complete Reconciliation! For the Lords sake, for
thy Souls sake, for Saints sake whom thy Joy will strengthen, for pity to
Sinners, whom thy sour sad Countenance will harden; rejoice in the hope of thy
Glory! Rejoice presently, in prospect of that wherein thou must rejoice
Eternally! And without one Minutes stop or stay. Dread, and depart as from Hell
upon Earth, from all that tends to keep thee from this Heaven upon Earth!
Bucholtzer knew what he wrote, when his Pen dropped this word; Laetari in Deo --
A Holy Man is never so like a Holy Angel, as when he rejoices in God. Have thy
set times for solemn Consideration of these things: sc. How God is Pleased and
Honored by Joy so Hallowed. How he Praises it, and Rewards it. How much it
honors him more than pining querulous Sorrow does. How certain it is, that the
most pious and penitent Sorrow, is nothing but a Purge prescribed by him for
cleansing us; and making us to relish the fat things of the Feast that I speak
of. How excellently this Joy strengthens the Soul, sweetens Duty, lightens
Trouble, graceth Religion, suits the Gospel, and an adopted state: Yea, and
serves to subdue the sins that most easily beset us, and most extremely pester
us: Even incomparably more than all the selfdisquieting distraction, that goes
under the name of Humiliation. In a word: How desirable a temper the Apostles
was, As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; 2 Cor. 6.10. Sorrowing always, yet
never as men without hope; 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Reader, I must hope, if thou do
thus, thy following Life shall be a perpetual labor for abiding and abounding
Joy: And that, if Bodily Maladies and Satanical Illusions have made Grief and
Fear a second nature to thee, thou will be perswadable! Perswadable to make so
necessary a rupture; and try to tear thy self from thy self, for the possession
of this under Heaven. The God of Hope fill thee with all Joy and Peace in
believing and expecting thy perfected published Reconciliation! Amen.

My next undertaking, is to evince the truth of my Doctrine thus explained. To
demonstrate, that every Man has this to do, and no Man has any more to do in
the World; but to believe and consider Gods Purpose, Christ's Purchase, and the
Holy Ghosts Proof of their purposed and purchased Reconciliation. To Pray and
Labor for the possession, for the persuasion, and for the practical
improvement of it: And to Hope, and rejoice in the Hope of the perfection and
publication of it in the day of Jugment.

I dare not decline it, knowing that many do need it. Nor shall I be prolix in
it. They that cannot see by the Light of the one Sun in the Firmament, would
not see if there were a thousand shining thence. Their Conviction I despair of,
whomsoever these three Considerations shall not convince. But I propose them
with an humble confidence, that they shall be made Eye Salve unto some Souls:
And mighty through God, against Infidelity; as very Spittle and Clay, as they
shall appear in any wanton Eyes. They are but three.

C. 1. The sure word of Prophecy sets us this to do, and no more. Acknowledge
the Scripture to be Gods Word, and a perfect Revelation of his Will, and a
complete Rule of our Duty; and you acknowledge the truth of my Doctrine: I am
content that no man believe it ever the more for my Ministry of it, if I do not
show that the Scripture sets us to do all I say: Or if it can be shown that it
sets us any one thing more than I say. Reader, Rouse up thy Soul, and read not
with ordinary care what follows. I will not overwhelm thee with many Texts; but
be careful to set very plain and pertinent ones before thee.

The Belief and Consideration of Gods Love and Gracious Purpose to Reconcile
Sinners, is set us: Psalm 130.4. There are forgivenesses with thee, that thou
may be feared. That is; q. d. Lord, should thou deal with the best Man
alive according unto thy Laws strictness, and his own Souls frequent fears;
Hell must have him. But O, thou have Eternal and Unalterable Purposes of
forgiving Sins, and Reconciling Sinners unto thy self. And this is believed and
considered of, by thy Blessed Command. And if it were not, there were no manner
of foundation for Religion in the World. All our encouragement to all our
Worship of thee, is taken from this; Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish,
but have everlasting Life. Who sees not here the Fountain of all good; Gods
Love, that is, his Eternal Will and Purpose to Reconcile Sinners. This is set
to be seen and considered first: Then the Conduit, through which all the good
must flow from that Fountain; even, Christ the Purchaser of purposed
Reconciliation. Then the Vessels, which must receive all good from the Fountain
through the Conduit: Namely, Believers on Christ, entire Consenters to be his
in the Bond of the Gospel Covenant. Then the streams of good, by those Vessels
to be received through the Conduit from the Fountain: Even Deliverance from
ruining Enmity, and Possession of blessed Friendship with God for ever. To name
no more, 2 Pet. 1.10. we are commanded to make our Election sure. Our Election
passively, is Gods actively. Gods eternal purpose to Reconeile us. But how
should this be made sure unto our hearts, without their believing and
considering that God has Eternal Purposes about that matter?

The Belief and Consideration of Christ's Purchase of Reconcilement, is set us:
1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners. It Is the true and great
Fundamental Article of Christian Faith. Worthy of all reception into
Consideration and Improvement; that Christ came to save Sinners from Enmity,
and reconcile them unto God Everlastingly; Romans 5.10. When we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. When we did hate and were hated
of God, Jesus Christ paid a valuable, or rather invaluable, price, to buy our
Reconciliation; and bought it, leaving us as little need as we had ability to
bring any Meritory price for it: And how plainly do all the Texts that command
our Faith in Christ's Blood, whereby it is Purchased; suppose our Belief and
Consideration of it to precede?

The Belief and Consideration of the Holy Ghosts proof of this, is set us. That
it is, in especial manner, the work of the Glorious Spirit, to Reveal and to
Communicate all Purposed by the Father, and all Purchased by the Son, is
foreshewn in this our Discourse, well known to the Church of Christ; and
admirably well shown by him, whom I use to call John the Divine; I mean, our
Learned Dr. Owen, in his Pneumatologie, or Discourse of the Holy Spirit; worthy
to be wrote in Cedar and Marble. That we are required to believe and to
consider his testimony of this matter, this single Text would brightly evince,
if we had no other; Mat. 12.31. The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto mer. Observe here; our Savior had Preached Gods Purpose, and
his Errand into the World to make a Purchase of the Reconciliation of Sinners.
The Proof hereof was made by many Testimonies of the Holy Ghost: Principally by
Miracles wrought by his Power; which indeed are the utmost proofs possible.
These themselves, some would not believe and consider unto due purpose. No, but
as it is Mar. 3.30. They said it was an unclean or untrue Spirit that Christ
had to witness these things. And this their Blasphemous Unbelief and
Inconsideracy, is declared unpardonable; even so, as no other sin is.

Reader, Can thou think of this without horror? But see also, how are we
warned not to resist, not to quench, not to grieve the Holy Spirit. Acts 7.51.
1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30. Not to resist him in the Ordinances of his Word,
testifying unto us Gods foresaid Purpose, and Christ's Purchase, in order to
draw us to a due pursuit of our Reconcilement. Not to grieve him; that is, not
to provoke him to leave us, as our Friends use to do when we offend them; by
Unbelief and Inconsideracy of his foresaid Testimony. Not to quench him; that
is, not to oppose and put out the Light and Evidence he gives us of the things
foresaid; preferring our Darkness above his Light; choosing rather to be
ignorant than to know Gods Purpose, and Christ's Purchase of the said
Reconciliation. Not to Believe and to Consider the Holy Spirits foresaid Proof,
is to Resist, and Quench and Grieve him; if any thing be so to do.

Prayer and Labor for the possession of this reconciliation is set us. Acts
8.28. Repent (says Peter to Simon Magus) and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee. That is, Pray, if possibly thou may get
possessed of God's Peace and reconciliation. Luke 13, 24. Strive to enter in at
the strait gate, for many I say unto ye, will seek to enter in and will not be
able. That is, do your utmost to enter into the Christian state, to get joined
to the Lord in the Gospel Covenant of reconciling Grace, For many faint, chill,
lukewarm souls will seek, but ineffectually. But put ye your utmost power into
act.

Prayer, and Labor for the certain persuasion of this reconciliation is set
us. Prayer, Psalm. 4, 6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance on us.
David's example is obliging in this case. Labor; 2 Pet. 1.10. Brethren give
diligence to make your Calling (that is, into the state of reconciliation with
God;) and Election sure.

Prayer and Labor for the practical improvement of this reconciliation is set
us. Psalm. 119.65, 66. Thou have dealt well with thy Servant, O Lord: (and what
follows?) Teach me good Judgment and Knowledge. That is, holily to improve thy
love. Ephesians. 4.32. compare with Ephesians. 5.1. God for Christ's sake has forgiven
you; or been reconciled to you. And what then is inferred? Be ye therefore
followers, or (as in the Original) Imitators of God, as dear Children. That is,
as those that think they can never do enough to express their Love and
Thankfulness.

Hope, and Joy in the Hope, of the perfection and publication of reconciliation
to God, in the day of Judgment, is also set us. Hope, Tit. 2, 11, 12, 13. The
Grace of God that brings Salvation, teaches us to deny ungodliness, etc. and
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World. Looking for that
blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. Joy Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord, always. And again I say, Rejoice. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 16. Rejoice evermore.

To conclude, He that does these things, is certainly acceptable unto God, and
approved of Men. All, that do fear God. Nor can any answer be made to his
shame, if such a one ask, What lack I yet? If any do dream otherwise; and sear
that this is not the whole Duty of man; let them show but one thing more, and I
will bear the shame.

C. 2. The Nature of Religion requires this, and no more. I must be understood
of Postlapsarian Religion. Religion as since Man's Fall it has been modelled.
Be it considered that Religion, as so considered, is nothing else but a
restored Friendship, or a Reconciliation between God and Man, And this made in
a way prescribed by the Wisdom and Will of God whose revealed Will, is to
deal with man in a way agreeable to the Nature whereof he has made him; and
yet in every respect suited to the Sovereignty he has over him. Plainly thus;
in all his ways with us, God will himself so act, that the Power and Praise
shall be as visibly as truly his own. Yet so, that there shall be room and
place for our acting by and under him. And Duty shall still be truly and
visibly ours.

In this Reconciliation, each person of the blessed Trinity has his Gracious
Part. The Father Reconciles us, to wit as the Primary Cause, purposing of it, 2
Cor. 5.19. The Son Reconciles us; to wit as the Meritorious Purchaser; Ephesians.
2.16. The Blessed Spirit Reconciles us; as the Efficient Worker and VVitnesser
of the Grace, by which we are made Partakers of the Reconciliation, and are
assured thereof, Joh. 3, 5. Romans 5.5. So that the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, is
here illustriously and equally to be ascribed unto the Father, Son and Spirit.
In the mean time, we also have our part left us. We are bid, in my Text, our
selves to Reconcile our selves. That is, to do our part toward it. So Ezekiel.
33.11. Turn ye, turn ye; that is, Reconcile, Reconcile your selves; q.d. No
longer turn your backs on God, as Enemies; turn about your Faces toward him as
Friends.

Now, what I affirm is this. Namely, that this part to be done by us toward our
Reconciliation, consists in the things foresaid and no more. Of these we are
capable by the aids of Divine Grace. And so proper are all these to be done by
us, that the Neglect must needs incense Divine Justice. Of doing ought more, we
have no Capacity; (as blessed be God,) we have no Commandment in his Word,
which has been fore-asserted.

Of Believing and Considering the parts done by the Divine Persons, we have
Capacity. Natural, I mean. Though impotent and perverse our Faculties be, till
Grace give them strength and inclination unto good. They were created in us by
God for this Noble use. And should he admit our Reconciliation without their
being used thereto, an unsufferable spot would fall upon his infinite Wisdom.
It would be said; he had made noble Powers, for no use, or but vile. Yea, and
upon his Truth also. For it would be said, His wrath came not down upon the
very children of Unbelief. Contrary to Ephesians. 5.

Of Praying and Laboring for our Possession, Persuasion, and Practick
improvement of Reconciliation unto God, the same is to be said. We have
Natural, and surely English people may be supposed to have some Acquired
Abilities too. If not gracious and supernatural. And alas, what did God give us
these for? What a Blemish would it be unto his Wisdom and Government, if he
should require no use of them unto their chiefest ends. But grant us
Reconciliation, and Assurance, and Spiritual Prosperity without them. And let
it be told through the Earth, that he was no Condemner of slothful servants.
Nor Enemy to such as call not upon his name. He bids us pray and labor for
Spirituals; he forbids us to Crave and Cark for Temporals. O how should he then
make us plow and sow for Temporals, and not make us pluck our hands out of our
Bosoms for Spirituals.

Of Hoping, and Rejoicing in Hope of complete Reconciliation, the self-same, is
plainly seen. How full is our Nature of Love, Hope, and Joy? How Noble
Affections are they, and pleasant? And for what were they put into us? Very
Children need little Information. And very Blind they are, that see not how ill
it would reflect upon their Author, should he require no use of such Talents.
And should he endure his Friends by the disuse of these, to publish contempt of
his Friendship. For it is a public Declaration that we have made us another
God, when our Love does not exercise it self in Hope and Joy toward the true.

Whereof it is, more than this, that we poor Creatures are capable, I proclaim
my extreme ignorance. Graces all, and Worship Natural and Instituted, and
Duties (personal and relative) are plainly enough comprehended. Nor may I
bestow time to light Candles in that Sun. Lastly,

C. 3. The whole Generation of the Religious will vouch it, that their Duty
stands in this, and no more. No more, unto any of them known. Next to the
Infallible Scriptures, commend me to the common sense of Believers, for the
resolution of a Religious Case. Reader, go try a number of the best known unto
thee.

Ask them seriously two things.

(1.) Whether they do or dare in iheir daily walk, to let fall any one of the
particulars aforesaid? sc. Belief and Consideracy of the Purpose, Purchase, and
Proof of Reconciliation unto God. Prayer, and Labor for the Possession,
Persuasion, Practical Improvement. Hope and Joy in the hope of its final
Glorious Completement.

(2.) What other Religious Exercises they have, then of Faith with Meditation,
Prayer with painfulness of Means for things prayed fer, Hope with Joy? Upon me
be the shame, if any other be found. And if thou be not told by all; that if
these Exercises do please thee, there is nothing in Christian Religion to
offend thee. Blessed is the Man whosoever is not offended in one of these! And
who confines his Care only unto these. The Italians have a saying, Dangerous is
the man that has but one Business to do. But my God and the God of my Fathers
grant, that I and my dearest Friends may never have more to do than one. And
that one, be our Reconciliation unto him!

Of the Use of this Doctrine, the one half cannot be told you within the space
of a Sermon. And of that which might be, I shall wave much, to press that which
(I think) is needed most. Come Reader, and let me gain thy Attention to it, and
win thy Heart by it. Read, and every two or three Lines thou read, Lift up
thy Soul to Heaven. And put thy name into the number of the Reconciled, now at
this very Sermon.

Is Reconciliation unto God, the Duty, and whole Duty of every Man? Believe
thou this? Thou will then (among many others) make these Inferences.

Inf. 1. God and Men, are not as God and Devils, Unreconcilable. It is true,
they are much the same as to certain Enmity. An unconvert man is is truly at
Enmity with God, as any damned Angel is. They are also very like, as to the
exceeding Difficulty of Reconciliation. As much is to be done to reconcile God
and an Vnconvert Soul, as would be necessary to do to reconcile God and
Beelzebub. As great a price must be paid unto God for the one as the other. As
great a Change must be wrought in the one as in the other. And as great a Power
must go to the working of the Change in one, as in the other. Nevertheless,
though we are like Camels, with like Bunches on our Back; there is no
comparison between us and them, as to possibility of passing through the
Needles Eye. Infinite Power, to which all things are possible; and equal
Goodness, that shows it self in things wonderful, has made a wide difference.
The Condition of Devils is not more truly desperate, than the Condition of Men
is hopeful. And of any men, the Condition of those whom God is pressing and
ever praying to be reconciled unto him.

The Reconciliation of Devils is impossible; but the Reconciliation of such
Men, is more than possible; even probable. On Gods part, probable; for he is at
work for it. And upon Men's own part, probable; for they are, or appear to be,
at work for it also. Reader, I beseech thee by the tender Mercies of God,
through which this is true and plain, fix well this great Truth on thy Soul. I
am a Man that have somewhat to do with many poor dubious Souls. Of most that
come to me, I do plainly see this: It has been unbelief of this truth, that
has long kept them from seeking after God. It is unbelief of it, that now
fills them with fears inordinate in seeking after him; and makes them come
crying to me day after day, No hope, no hope. To the trouble of my soul, and no
small expense of my time. But I forbear. Let me add this only more; although
his Truth seem to be Believed by all bold Sinners among us, it does but seem
so. All indeed do grant it, but very few do believe it. And of them that do,
this must be said; their Belief is a corrupt one, and its Fruits are most
abominable. It Is so that they believe God to be Reconciled, as hence to be made
Fear him much the less, but Love him, and seek his Peace never the more. Could
such Fruit rise from the Root of an intelligent and sound Faith? It could not.
Briefly, let me tell thee, that this Truth is most fundamental: And Disbelief
of it is extreme Blasphemy, against the Truth, Holiness, and Faithfulness of
the most high God. It is true; such as have sinned the sin against the Holy
Ghost, have the door of Mercy shut upon them for ever. But to me it appears as
true; that, who such Persons be, is known unto God only: Not discovered unto
themselves or any other Men. I tell the worst Sinners that come to hear me,
They have as much ground to hope that God will accept them if they do Convert,
as ever Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob had, before they did Convert. Yea, and because
of our Gospel Sunshine, more then they had.

I. 2. Love indeed runs downward: And incomparably greater is the Love of God
to Man, then the Love of Man unto God, or unto himself. This I gather from Gods
beginning the Peace, though Man began the Quarrel. From his here so calling on
us to accept it; as speaks his forwardness to give, and our backwardness to
receive it. From his amazing condescension even to pray and beseech us to
receive it. This Love is as much above that of Earthly Parents, as the Heavens
are above the Center of the Earth. But what is our Love of God, what is our
Love of our selves? I know not a greater lover of his God, in all this World,
then the Man that printeth these words: My God knows that I even abhor and
loath my self, because I love and delight in him no more. And in another place:
I can more easily forgive my self all my other sins, then my loving God so
little. O what must others say? Other Saints, I mean, of inferior stature unto
him. And for Sinners, that make light of all Gods Calls to Reconciliation; and
are inflexible by his very entreaties, for whole Weeks, Months, and Years
together; who sees it not? Their Life is a practical protest, that they will
bear the prison of Hell, the torment of Fire, and that for the space of
Eternity, rather than be friends with God. So they love God; so they love
themselves. It Is true, we cannot here persuade them, but that they do truly
love themselves, and their God too. But in utter darkness it self men will see
better. There they will see and say, God was kind, and made them good offers;
but they were themselves their own destroyers; being by sin bewitched, in heart
to murder him, and in act to murder themselves. There they will understand the
sense, as well as feel the truth, of Prove. 8.36. and 35.

There they will know to their torment, what it is for God to beseech and pray
sinful Dust to come take Pardon and Peace; and for them to lend him a deaf ear,
or give him a more reproachful repulse against convictions of Conscience.
Reader, here stay a while: Think, and speak with thy self of the huge imports
of this word: [As though God did beseech you by us.] How, GOD beseech?
SOVEREIGNTY beg? And that of both Creatures and Rebels too? What means this,
and what is it we are to learn by it? God beseech! The word astonishes me; and
fills my mind with these thoughts above others. First, How pawerful is Love,
that makes Omnipotence stoop? Secondly, How Loveful is the Divine Majesty, that
thus condescendeth? Thirdly, How wonderful is this condescension, whereunto God
never stooped before, and beyond which it is not to be thought possible that he
should ever stoop? Fallen Angels, had nothing like it: Fallen Men, can have
nothing beyond it. God stoops; he stoops low; he stoops his lowest, unto us.
The lowest that the nature and honor of his Government will admit. God
beseech! I do believe; Lord, help my unbelief. I do believe, methinks I do see,
and hear the Heavenly King, even thus addressing to his rebellious Subjects:
Miserable Creatures, as I made you not miserable, I am not pleased to see you
so. I have made a costly provision for your restoration to the Happiness I made
you in: And left you nothing to do for the same, but to accept it in the way of
my Gospel Covenant. I have taught you so to accept it. I have commanded you,
and on no small penalty. And finally, I do beseech and pray you, Sirs, if ye
love me, accept of it. If ye do not love your own Souls, yet for my sake accept
it. I will take it as the greatest kindness unto my self, and will reward you
as though ye had profited me, if ye accept it. You give me my highest pleasure
if ye accept it. I will set Heaven ringing for joy thereof if ye accept it. As
long as I live, (and my Immortality will not dye in have) I will remember and
requite you, if ye will accept it. If ye would not do your utmost against me
and your selves, ye must accept it. If Grief could possibly sieze on Godhead,
ye would make me drown Heaven with my Tears if ye did not accept it: And to
repent that ever I made you. So good a will do I truly bear you, though Satan
and your silly Hearts, by him seduced, tell you contrary stories! Arguing
wildly, that because I drag you not to Grace and Glory against your wills,
therefore I have not any will that you should have either. Reader; again and
again read this, and cease not till thy astonished and trembling Soul take
fire, and flame forth in exclamations, What manner of Love is this? Stay me, I
am sick of Love! The Love of God and Christ do constrain me! O Lord, I am thy
servant, I am thy Gospel Covenant servant! I am thine, Lord, save me! In great
Letters I wish this Truth written upon thy Doors and Walls: God delights more
in Reconciling one penitent poor sinner, than in Damning all the obstinate
World. I, and the main revenue of his Crown lies in it: Else he would not love
Mercy above Sacrifice. Nor could we holily desire to be saved.

Reader, I cannot yet have done with thee. I must say to thee, as Ruth to her
Mother in Law, Entreat me not to leave thee, or return from following after
thee with this Inference. I must insist a little more upon Gods so astonishing
Entreaty. And I would to God I could find or make words, prevalent with thee to
insist much hereon. To be often musing what it is, that Gods entreaty of
sinners to be reconciled, does in good sober Truth import. I beseech thee go
and consult God himself in holy Prayer unto him. Go consult his Ministers, the
best of them; and such through whose Mouths he is most likely to speak his
Heart unto thee. Go consider, and take advice, whether it import not thus much:
To wit, a real will of God without any design or unsincerity, to have sinners
reconciled unto him; even as many of them as he sends his Gospel unto. A will
of complacence, as of a thing that would be highly grateful unto him; though
not a Will efficacious, and effective of it against all wilful and affected
unfitness in sinners; superadded unto their natural. A Will, that indeed does
not so overpower all things, as to bring all sinners unto Reconciliation; but
yet one that leaves nothing but their own obstinate Wills to keep them from it.
And makes, that all who live under the Gospel, and who do seek it as they are
directed by the Gospel, may reasonably judge their obtainment of it most highly
probable; and conclude that if their labor for it be lost, it will not be
through failure on Gods part, but their own.

It Is very certain, that such influences of the Holy Spirit were communicated
under the Old Testament, that of all that lived and dyed then unreconciled unto
God, the fault was laid at their own doors. Thou gave thy good Spirit to
instruct them. Neh. 9.20. Turn ye at my reproof, behold I will pour my spirit
to you, I will make known my words unto you. Prove. 1.23. etc. O how much more
must we now conclude in the Gospel day, that Men's destruction is of themselves?
That the Holy Spirit is always striving with sinners, and persuading them to be
reconciled, until they do by very great provocations cause him to withdraw for
ever from them.

By the Prophets of old, the Holy Ghost never spoke in the wondrously
condescensive Language, which he uses in the New Testament. Herein flows the
Language of incomparable tenderness; and such as put it beyond the most jealous
suspicion, that God is desirous of our Happiness in the said Reconciliation.
Herein the Majesty of Heaven even courts every vile Worm of us. And in most
compassionate manner, assays to melt and overcome the perversest sinner: Even
thy self, my Reader, thy self in particular.

Stay therefore thy self, and wonder, and bless. Throw aside my Book, and go
shut thee into thy Closet: And there with humble affectionate and thankful
sense of this Divine Love, fall on thy Knees and say to this purpose: Blessed
God, thy works are in themselves convincing Arguments of thy good Will unto
Men. Thy innumerable Benefits conferred upon us. Thy Temporal Judgments, which
in their own nature and in thy design are Medicinal and wholesome. The Time
thou allowest us in this World and in thy Church; which we cannot justly take
for a mere reprieve from torment, but for a space to Repent in, and to sue out
our Pardon. Above all, thy giving thy Son to dye for our Reconciliation; and
thy Spirit to instruct and persuade us to be Reconciled. After all, it has
seemed thee good, to treat us in words of as wonderful Love as that which
shines in thy works. Words of Obsecration and Entreaty. Such as the Potsheards
of the Earth cannot afford unto their Inferiors very often; no, nor unto their
Equals; nor always unto very Superiors. Thou, great Judge of the whole Earth,
beseechest Malafactors most worthy of Hell, to accept their Pardon! And
intreatest them to endure thee to save and glorify them! This thy Holy Angels
admire; at this the Devils envy: But I, Lord, I, a prodigy of stupidity, what
do I do? Of a truth I desire to Praise and to Wonder! From this Minute unto
Eternal Ages, uninterruptedly to Wonder and Praise. I am fully convinced how
justly I perish, if indeed I perish after all this so superabundant Grace. This
thy Love, and thy I know not what, that is more then Love it self, if more can
be, does sweeten my thoughts of thee. Never was my Natural Fear of thee so
conquered, never my Diabolical Enmity against thee so quenched, as now (I
trust) they are. I am less a Devil, since I considered this thy Love, O my God!
Experience has now assured me, Love begets Love, as Fire kindles Fire!

I. 3. Man's Enmity unto God, though it be strange, it is true. How else could
Reconciliation be his Duty, if his state were not of Enmity? It is confessed,
Enmity unto God is a strange thing. He is all Good, and nothing but Good. Our
Nature reasonable, can Love nothing but what appears Good; and must and cannot
but Love all that so appears. Unto all Men, if their Professions may be
believed, God does appear as he is now said to be: All, and only, Good. Whence
then should Hatred arise? To be sure, unto Angels and Men, in their first holy
state of Creation, God did so appear, and was verily and undoubtedly so
believed. O how could they ever break with God? The particular manner is more
curiously then profitably disputed by Men of argute wits. It is very plain unto
all thinking minds, that Creatures, as such, are mutable things and defectible.
That continuation in any good, is from the gift of the Creators Grace; not from
the strength of the Creatures Nature. That God gave Angels and Men at first, a
stock of Holy Qualities to trade with; and held both Probationers, on trial of
their Faithfulness. Some of the Angels, and our Father Adam, (the infallible
word assures us,) proved unfaithful. Acted not up to what they had received:
Thereby forfeited, and lost all; all their foresaid Qualities of Wisdom and
Goodness; and consequently, became full of Folly and Malice. For, as where
Light and Heat depart, Darkness and Cold must enter: Where Wisdom and Goodness
do cease, Folly and Malice must begin to have place. Now hence it is, that ever
since that fatal forfeiture, Devils, and all unrenewed Men, do do nothing but
monstrously. Nothing, but with monstrous Folly and Malice. Their Fall made them
Monsters; and all things must necessarily (when they are not overpowered;) act
according to their Natures; let them be what they will. Their depraved Natures,
both of them, do carry them to things most unnatural. To things that are, and
that they know to be, most infinitely Unreasonable in themselves, and Injurious
unto them. As for example, this of hating of God. Men do much know, and Devils
do more know, he is all Goodness; and worthy of all Love. That to hate him, is
to do the greatest hurt to themselves; and that for which they have not the
least cause from him; but through the Folly and Malice that Devils hold
remedilesly, and unrenewed Men hold wilfully, against all Divine Remedies; this
is most natural unto them. As natural, as for a poisonous Fountain to send
forth poisonous Streams.

And alas, how full is this World of this hatred of God, which few in the
World, if any, will own? How less full is the Sea of water, then unregenerate
Souls are full of it? Yea, and their mouths and hands full of it. Only Devils,
be fuller of it than Men: By which means it is, that only Hell is worse then
this World we live in. We see Men's Hands at work against God; we hear their
Tongues running against him in every place; we discern hereby what the
abundance of their Hearts is against him. How passionately they wish an end put
unto his Being. We Instruct, Persuade, Entreat with tears, and Beg them to let
us endeavor their recovery to a better mind: Nor is it above one of a hundred
will regard what we say. And yet must we be afraid, (if we will be pleasers of
Men,) to tell them they hate God?

But here I publish it: If I ever saw the Sun shine, or the Fire burn, or the
Water flow, I do see all unconvert Men, Women and Children, hate the Blessed
God. And whereas, none that I meet with or hear of, do deny but that they are
sinners, and do sin daily; I assure them this is the soul and life of their
sin. And were this hatred of God but once expelled, they would no longer be
sinners. Were that but mortifyed they would not be a minute longer impenitent,
or unpardoned sinners. It Is predominant hatred of God, that is the ruin of
every damned Man!

I. 4. The Gospel is a Jewel. This I do argue from our common principle; that
it is the only directory and mean of our Reconciliation unto God. If it be so;
and if Reconciliation be our only Duty, it is surely inestimable. It can be no
less I trow, whatever is the divinely appointed mean of our whole saving Duty.
Whatever is, as the Gospel is, and is named the Word of Reconciliation. That,
whereby the way of making Peace with God is revealed; that which is the very
Charter and Grant of Christ, the Peacemaker, and all his benefits, unto every
one that will receive it. If my Doctrine be true, the Blessed Gospel deserves a
higher rate, then the best of us all appear to put upon it.

Consider it as an History; it is one the Angels, unto whom it is but a History,
delight to pry into. As an offer of Salvation, it is tidings of great, even all,
Joy. As a Rule of Life, it is a Royal Law of Liberty. The truth of it, is sealed
by unparalleled Miracles. The Grace of it, is it self the Miracle of Miracles.
In the miserable parts of the World where this Gospel shines not, it is ever
Night. Darkness, and Death possess them. Forlorn Souls (as one speaks,) are
there under a continual Massacre; and be an easy conquest and prey to to the
Fiends of Hell. But the Places which the Gospel visits, (in our Saviors
Language,) are said to be Lift up unto Heaven.

They are found like the World at first, a Tohu and Bohu; but are made by the
Gospel, divine Temples. Of Stones, Children are raised up unto Abraham, by the
Gospel. What was our England but a howling Wilderness, till the Gospel made it
a Garden, and the Paradise of the Earth. Both for Heavenly and Earthly good
things. Indeed, all the World is Egypt; and there is no Goshen but of the
Gospels making! No other Star, ever led a Soul to it is Savior. The Law damns
all; and single Natural Religion saves none. The Gospel is like to the
Archangels Trumpet; by it Graves are made to open, and dead Souls to come
forth. And the Masters of most refined Morality will one day find, there is no
other Ministration of the Spirit.

Are therefore tears of very Blood, sufficient to Lament our Gospel-Contempt.
Contempt every where shown; in England, in London it self, every where. In
Houses, where Bibles lie about as neglected, as old Shoes. In Churches, where
usually is less crowding and earnest listening, than in Satan's Temples, our
Playhouses. I would I might not add, in very Pulpits too; from whence too often
sounds a but Natural, and Legal Religion, with few, if any Evangelical Note
in it. It is too truly said, I fear, that many Preach Adam, Moses, and at most
John Baptist. Having little to say of Jesus Christ; or of that Reconciliation
by him through the Gospel Covenant, which they seem to think that their People
have already, or may do very well without it. Save, Lord, save us from this
Gospel-Atheism, or we Perish! O let not the richest of blessings, thy
Gospel-pearl, be trampled under feet in England! Whatever sinks, Lord, raise
the price of the Gospel!

Inf. 5. Religion is no wrack. It has a very good action of slander, against
every Reproacher. Every Liar of the Legions, that report it a dark and
intricate, a Knotty and difficult business. For, as it has been shown, it is no
more, as no less,) then Reconciliation unto God. And an Exercise of our selves
in the plain orderly particulars foresaid; which are all our part and business.
O admirable Love and Grace of God, that shine in it is Brevity and Plainness!
Our Life, is short. And our Bodies eat up much of our time, in necessary cares
for them. But the Doctrine of Reconciliation, is no tedious one. What the old
Friendship was between God and Man. How the Quarrel rose, and how far it ran.
How the Reconciliation is to be made, on Gods part, and ours; by satisfying his
Justice, and subduing and removing our malice. These things require shorter
study, than a body of Philosophy. Nor are they by the Holy Spirit set forth
obscurely. And so, as to require a very quick and subtle Wit to Understand
them. No, a man may be wise unto Salvation, without wit and acuteness enough to
make a Disputer of this world. Nor does Divine Kindness less show it self, in
the Sweetness and Agreeableness of the Christian Religion. Such is it is
Constitution we see, that it employs us in nothing, but most pleasant
Exercises. In Believing and Considering most excellent and important Truths.
Laboring and Praying together for the best Blessings here. Hoping, and Joying
in the hope of most perfect Blessedness hereafter. Is this a Slavery,
Sensualists, is this an irksome Toil? Is this, what, any thing, besides
affected Malignity, can snarl at? The Hebrews have a saying, An hour in Heaven
is more worth then a Life on Earth. But I know those that tell me, they have
found more real solid Comfort in one hour of their Convert State on Earth, then
ever they had in all their former Life. And it is as certain that Religion is
the best Pleasure in this world, as that Heaven contains the best in the next
world.

Inf. 6. Minister's only business, is to make Peace. Peace and Reconciliation
between God and Men. Their business is but to promote Duty. If then
Reconciliation be all Duty, all their Business must lie herein. In this my
Text, they are called Ambassadors; not Heralds to proclaim War, but Ambassadors
to treat for Peace. True they must in order to Peace declare the War and
Hostility between God and Sinners. It was a foolish Law the Lacedaemonians made,
that no man should tell his Neighbor any ill and frightful News. And they are
belepered with ignorance and Error, who would sow up Minister's Mouths, and
have them wholly silent of the Miseries of the Unreconciled State. As though
God's Peace were ever to be sought, without Knowledge of his Wrath. Or as
though they more dreaded to hear the Discourse than to feel the doom thereof.
Nevertheless, so it is, that the Word of God unto Ministers committed, is the
Word of Reconciliation. And Reconciliation is the work they are sent for. They
are not to preach Wrath, but in order to provoke you to fly from it. I preach
Hell, (said a late most Apostolical Preacher,) that you may never come there.

Reader, I am full of wonder as I can hold. Come hear, and wonder with me.
Earthly Kings, put out Laws; and expect their Subjects, all, should, without
more ado of theirs, observe them. They do not send an Officer to every Town,
and House to inform and persuade the people to keep them. Especially when the
said Laws be for the Subjects own great good! But, O admirable Benignity! the
King of Heaven puts Parents in Families, and Ministers in Congregations? and
makes it their business from one end of the Year to the other, to Teach and
Persuade his poor ignorant and obstinate Subjects, to accept the Word of
Reconciliation. Though the gain be only and infinitely theirs, not his. But I
return; attend it oh Ministers, attend it oh Parents: It Is the Peace of God
that passes all Understanding, save Gods infinite one, that ye are Proposers,
Interpreters, and Orators, and Agents for.

Higher than at Reconciliation unto God, you cannot aim; Lower you should not
dare to aim, Holy Angels do not want it and Devils cannot have it. But what
think ye of your People and your Children? Gods Peace and Love are the highest
and all good; his Wrath and Curse are the deepest Misery; and there is no
middle Condition. Souls reconciled, are as it were in Heaven; Souls
unreconciled, are as it were in Hell. If you aim and labor at less then
Vnconvert men's Translation from the State of Wrath into the State of Peace, you
are at a game of sinful and pestilent Foolery. You are not in the discharge of
your Ministry. If you design not and drive not at Convert men's persuasion and
practical improvement of their present; and Hope of, and Joy in, their future
complete Reconciliation: the same must be said of all your pains with them. It
was an ancient Custom of some pious Fathers, to preach one part of the day for
Convincing and Converting the Unregenerate; and the other part, for Edifying
and Comforting the Regenerate of their Congregations. Unto me it appears so
wholesome a one, and useful, that I cannot but wish it in all English
Congregations used. I am aware of my unworthiness to teach my Brethren; but as
for you that are private Christians, I shall dare to give you this Advice. Keep
ye closest unto their Ministry, that keep closest to the business of
Reconciliation in their Ministry. As for Preachers, blessed be the Peacemakers,
the Lord shame those, that are not ashamed to design no more change of their
People, than Plato made of his Polemo: which was but from a Beast to a Man. He
that Preaches not at all, and he that Preaches not the Gospel of
Reconciliation, are under the self-same woe, 1 Cor. 9.16.

Inf. 7. God's Rewards must needs be like himself. Great and incomparable. If
my Doctrine be true, it must needs be so. Because, according to that, every man
must needs be a bloody Enemy of God, or an entire Friend. And if the former,
Justice cannot but revenge it self in matchless punishments: If the latter,
Grace cannot but display it self in supremest Advancements. Neither of them are
middle Relations, and neither of them can be held worthy of but middle Rewards.

Reader, if thou have never done it before, come spend an hour now, in close
thinking what a Friend of God is. If thou have, repeat again that profitable
Pleasure. Turn back if thou remembrest not, and see what Reconciliation to God
is said to be, in the entrance of this Discourse. A soul that should have the
same, and no more; I mean the same Friendship with God that Man had in his
first Estate, before sin entered; he would be a rich Creature. Bare Restoration
unto what we lost, would be no small Exaltion. But have thou not heard and
read, what all Pulpits and Books speak of our Redeemers setting Believers above
that it self? And bringing them into a greater nearness to God, then the first
Man had to fall from. I will not follow any to be wise above is written in the
Sacred Scripture. But from them I have long ago learned that Believers are now
endeared unto God, proportionably to the value of Jesus Christ's Obedience.
Whereas in dignifying Man before the Fall, we cannot but suppose God to have
held some proportion unto man's own. And consequently, as our Saviors did
unspeakably exceed Adams Obeence and the Angels too: so the Divinely vouchsafed
Love unto Believers, does beyond all expression surpass that which was
vouchsafed unto Innocent Man. I would be understood of mutual Love. A Learned
Man has construed, Joh. 10.10. to this purpose; of Christ's laying down his
(infinitely more valuable) life for his sheep, to the end that they might have
life, (that is, all good: all they forfeited and lost in the first Adam;) and
that they might have it more abundantly (more of it than Adam ever had.) Our
English Divines praise that Speech of a Foreigner; that God loves the poorest
Saint on Earth better than any Angel in Heaven loves God. But I excurr no
farther; I have already lost my self in astonishment. I am thinking, what a
Reward this it self is; and what Rewards and Honors must necessarily follow
this. O what must be done to the man, so dear to the heart of God? Kings
Favorites have none richer than themselves but Kings. Gods Favorites have God
infinitely, and God only more blessed than themselves. Never can I raise my
thoughts of Heaven so high, as when I consider (1.) What Gods Friends are; and
(2.) That Heaven's the Mansion House of his Friends. Nor can I think that
Heaven must have bin what it is, if Religion had been a mere Service, and not a
Friendship. If God had not been our Father, but only our Master!

Look we on the other sad hand, and think what a Creature an Enemy of God is.
One Unreconciled; yea and even Unreconcilable also. God is infinitely Holy; he
hates Sin more then any Man living can hate Hell. Enmity unto him, is the very
sin of sin: And Vnreconcileableness is the soul of Enmity. What a fire in the
Soul of God must, now, be thought to burn against this wight? And what a
Vengeance must it be, which that fire executes? If the sin for which Men are
damned, was the violation of a thousand other Laws, but not of the Law of Love;
and was a collection of all other faults possible, beside that of Enmity. And
if Hell were the punishment of such as had been in all other respects
Transgressors; but had not been haters of God. I should then think it a Furnace
seven times less hot, then now I am able to think it. O what blows can Gods
almighty hand give? And what should hold his hand from utmost severity, upon
them with whom he is at perfect Enmity? It Is Sins unreconcileable Enmity, that
makes Hells eternal extremity.

I. 8. There is no color to be laid on any Temptation, against true
Evangelical Religion. For why? It consists in Reconciliation unto God. Awake,
Reader, if thou art in a drowze. Do but awake and thou must needs see how
clearly this follows. Tell me if a quarrel had risen between a poor Subject and
a mighty King. A King, and such a King; and he also at the head of a formidable
Army. And if the said King should stoop and become a supplicant to his Subject
for a Peace between them. What could be said, with any show of Reason, to turn
the poor Subject from thankful acceptance of his Kings Grace? And that upon
the very first offer. Could the united wits of all the World make it look as if
it were his interest; or so much as safe for him, to slight his Kings Mercy,
and incense his Fury? No, but whatever could be said, would appear, as well as
be, most absurd. Alas, alas! What crawling Worms are the mightiest Earthly
Kings? Worms to day, and Worms meat to morrow! But what a King is the Eternal
One? What an Host is he Lord of? How many Millions of holy Angels, and envious
Devils has he, that are both of them ready at his beck to tear thee in pieces?
Yea, how would Frogs, Flies, or the most despicable Creatures dispatch thee in
an instant, if he should give them Commission?

Two things I often wish. O that my Friends would never quit the truth, or
abate their degree of Religion, but then when Satan can indeed present an
appearance of gain by it. I mean, a gain of somewhat better, or as good as Gods
Love, in their very own Thoughts. And Secondly, That when ever they have
thought themselves to have seen profit coming by it; and have by and by found
their mistake: That then they would acknowledge their horrid effascination; and
resolve never again to trust the spectacles through which they looked unto
their cost. I know that Lust does bewitch into Error; and Error, when it gets
into the throne of the Heart, fearfully plays the Tyrant. Let Men but listen
unto their Senses, Fancies, and Passions, they shall take the most loathsome
Lies for self-evident Truths: And when they have done, they shall be as much
governed by them. They shall adore Dogs and Crocodiles, scorning God and his
Christ. They shall dig for a Worms favor as for immortal Treasure; and dye
away for fear of its frown. And all with unshaken Confidence; as if God were
nothing, and Idols were all things. As if the smiles of a mortal Man, were
really a richer good then Gods Heaven; and a hard look from Caesar, were more
dreadful by far then Hellfire. But I do also know, and I keep some stir to
make others know it too: Such is the admirable constitution of our Religion,
such is its perspicuity with its purity; that Humane Minds are not presently so
stupefied, as to be unsensible of its Glory; or so distracted, as to dream
ought spoke against it, to be true, or so much as probable. It Is abundance of
Opium you give your Reason, before you make it dormant enough to let an ill
thought of Religion into your Heart: Before you are capable of your sweet
Follies and dear Deceits. Most commonly, you that neglect Religion, are fain to
serve Satan, without so much as any imagination of gain by it. I, and with many
a fearful expectation of loss too. And when your bewitched Eyes are drawn unto
some imaginary recompense in any way of sin; ye oftentimes soon afterward find
the Proverbs truth; Fraud and Frost end in dirt. Well were it, if then you
would set your selves to verify another as known a saying; Burnt Children
dread the fire!

In a word: The day is coming that will reveal it. The Religion instituted and
taught by Jesus Christ, is one that Men can bray and bark against; as they do,
and as he foretold us that they would; But they cannot argue against. Without
that quickness, and subtlety, and solidity, which are the privileges of very
few heads, its excellence and importance are the plainest of things unto all
honest hearts. And our Motives unto the severest Duty are ten thousand times
stronger then our Temptations unto the sweetest Sin. He has a very hard task
who goes about to prove, that I shall do better without Gods friendship then
with it! That I shall have more Light, if I go further from the Sun!

I. 9. The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink. Christianity, or Gospel saving
Religion does not consist in external Observances, and little Opinions. If it
be Reconciliation, or a new very Friendship with God, it cannot stand in the
poor despicable things wherein it is placed by too many Ceremonialists. I mean
Ceremonialists of every Sect and Party among us: Many of which seem to value
themselves more by some peculiar dividing Ceremony, then by common and
universally professed Christianity.

Natural corruption disposes Men to allow God nothing at all, of Subjection or
Obedience. By Gods inward and outward Calls of Conscience, Parents, Ministers,
they are brought quickly unto shame of that open malignity. But Carnality and
Sloth, admit not any great liberality to him: And Lust, and Fancy, and ill
Example, soon prescribe a narrow pittance. He shall have outward Homage and
Bodily service. Presence at the places of his Worship, and observation of all
laudable gestures therein. He shall have Lamps of Profession carried for him;
Oil they cannot tend for, Graces are mysterious things. He shall have loud
Cries, but as for intelligent and sincere Prayers, they promise him not. He
shall have their Eyes lift up to Heaven; but he must excuse them if their
Affections be set on Earth. He shall have their Company at every Sacramental
Feast; but they desire in this thing to be forgiven, if they come having not on
the Weddinggarment; and unengaged in the cares of imputed, inherent and
practical Righteousness. He shall have Zeal for the Religion they neither know
nor practice; I, and it may be against the sins that they do love and live in:
They hope he will accept it from them, without Integrity. In short; He shall
have his Church obeyed, and Gospel too, as far as they themselves please: But
that reaches not unto the concerns of Regeneration, Repentance, Faith, Love and
Obedience, principled from them. Entering Covenant, and keeping Covenant with
him, with all the Heart, and Soul, and Strength, is that which they see no
necessity of.

Miserable Creatures! Do ye believe the blessed God to be a spirit or a dead
stock? Did ye ever read one Chapter of the Holy Bible? Yea, or of the Heathen
Moralists? Can ye in sober sadness think, that our Blessed Redeemer was sent to
raise dead sinners, that he might make them unnatural and monstrous Flatterers?
Or that the Holy Spirit was sent by him, to make painted Sepulchers of you? Can
ye really persuade your selves, that God may be honored, and Satan's Kingdom be
demolished, and your Souls be changed and qualified for Heaven, by your
Trifling and your Lying? And without your Loving God as both your Benefactor
and Ruler? O shut not your eyes so very close till Vengeance open them for you!
Look out a little; see my Doctrine and its Proof. It shall possess you of other
thoughts, and rid you of these delusions. It shall stop your scoffing at
Spirituality, as a thing imaginary. At Union and Communion with God, as though
they were dreams, or but lying pretensions of Hypocritical Men. At Gods Living
in Men, and their Living in God, as though there were no such things. It shall
make you as confident as now you are ignorant, that they are mad Men whom you
hear Jearing at the Life of holy Love; and Promising Heaven to ever so little
washed swine. Magna ista credimus, quia nos parvi sumus. Senec.
It shall make you to own, that had not your Sense been little, you had never
took any thing but very Friendship with God, for honorable and great!

I. 10. True Religion is its own Reward. It is so framed by God, that in it
there is great Reward, besides what is prepared for it. It is evidently so, if,
as our Doctrine asserts, it stands in Reconciliation and Friendship with God.
If it be not a mere Service, but a very Friendship, If, as is most certain, God
admits all his convert Servants unto the relation of very Children, and the
dignity of Friends. All and every of his Commands do refer to our good; and are
framed as plainly to Delight as to Direct us. Reader, this is so plain in it
self, and from very much that has been foresaid; that I crave thy regards but
to these few words. Sinners generally, are full of the opinion, that Godliness
has all its worth but in reversion. That let Glory be what it will, Grace is a
very poor comfortless state: And Saints, do, very commonly and most faultily,
give them but too much occasion so to imagine. They walk not on in the way to
Zion with Joy and Singing. They demonstrate their very Hope but little, and
their Joy less: From whence it is inferred, their Possession of Joy is none, and
their hope of reversion it self is next to none. Thus prevails the evil report
upon our present, and our promised Canaan. And that so much, that the best
Believers are profited as well as pleased greatly, by the Hope and Joy of those
few in whom both are conspicuous. But how presently must that ill report dye,
were it duly considered, that follows.

Grace and Glory differ but in degree. They do not speak congruously, that make
Glory the End, and Grace but the Means. They are so much one thing, that the
Holy Spirit calls them by each others names. Glory is called Grace; 1 Pet.
1.13. Hope to the end for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the
revelation of Jesus Christ. Grace is called Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. We are changed
into the same image from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. And
what think we? Is it a Friendship with himself through our Redeemer, that we
have on earth, or no? None do or can doubt it. Is there a Reward sweeter then
of Friendship? I can hear of none. Is there a Friendship more honorable or
beneficial then Gods Friendship is? It were equal blasphemy and absurdity to
dream so. Finally, if God be the best Object and all goodness, as sure as any;
and if Friendship be the best Enjoyment of him that Creatures can have:
Wherein, save in degree, does Glory exceed Grace? And if indeed Grace and Glory
be for nature and kind the same thing; if one be Friendship with God begun, the
other be Friendship with God perfected: How is it possible the same Man should
like the one and not the other?

I am very certain, Men stand alike affected toward them, whatever they speak.
And were they, that here cannot be persuaded to seek Gods Friendship of Grace,
took up too unto Heaven; and had the door set wide open; and were ever so
importunately entreated to enter in; they would not enter, no but fly back; and
be, of the two, far more unwilling to take Glory above, then they are to accept
of Grace here. As believing that Gods perfected Friendship there, would be more
against them then his initial Friendship here. It Is equally plain, Fishes are
most against dryest places, and Sinners most against the holiest ones. As sure
as Heaven is more Holy, it is also more Hateful to a Sinner, then the Church
state below is. In a word: Heavenly Glory is not Reward, if Grace be not
Reward. (Gradus speciem non variat.) A handful of water is as truly water, as
all that which the Sea contains. Glorification above is no more truly a royalty
then Reconciliation here below is. Reconciliation unto God, I mean; which is of
all the works of God, if any be so, the most wonderful. For his taking Enemies
and Rebels into Heaven when they be reconciled, is nothing so mavelous as his
taking us into Reconciliation with him, when we are Enemies and Rebels!

Reader, what is thy Mind, what thy Will, after all this said? The Assent of
thy Mind and Consent of thy Will are thy greatest acts, and most consequential.
All thy others be but superstructures thereon. Speak, Man, have thou verily
Assented to the truth of the Gospel in my Doctrine; and have thou heartily
Consented to its becoming the governing Principle of thy Life? I hope thou art
not yet ignorant, and thy Head empty of the things proposed: Nor yet obstinate,
with thy Heart full of antipathies unto them. If I may so speak, some Devils
have been cast out by this very Word and Prayer! Are those that possess thee,
of a sort that goes not forth so? Know thou, then, I will not presently give
thee over, if it be so. I will carry thee in further Prayers unto him, that is
able to east out the most pertinacious of Devils: Nor will I leave thee without
these parting Exhortations.

Yea and I will, as for my own Life, beg and pray thee to have care of thine!
Importunately (or impudently be it styled,) I will beseech thee to hear, and to
come and let thee and me, be Friends with God, Blessed presently and blessed
eternally. Despise not my despicable appearance. My Office is honorable; I
sustain the very person of God, and supply the place of Jesus Christ. My Text
warrants me to say it. And I must give thee to know, it is God beseeches thee,
it is Christ prays thee by these my Lines, to Turn and Live! Divine Authority
here puts off its Terror, and for Loves sake, entreats thee. In the Law, it
thunders; commands on pain of Death and Hell: Here in the Gospel, it uses a
voice soft to a miracle. I never heard of a King knocking at the door of a
dungeon all night long, and calling, and crying to a Traitor to come accept a
Peace and Pardon; especially when he might cut off his Head, without the loss
of a Hair unto his own. But at thy door, God and Christ knock. To thee they
have called for many a long year, it may be. Earthly Kings put out Statutes,
and look that every Subject should look to himself. They do not send a stated
Officer to every Town and House, to put them in mind of it; to explain it; to
resolve cases about it, to excite, and pray them to keep it. But God puts forth
the Gospel; and sends out Ministers to do all this. Of his Love and Mercy, this
he does, as has been foresaid. And that charging them, with a woe denounced on
their failure, to do what they can with Sheep and Lambs. And in, and out of
season; attending continually on this very thing. Withal declaring, that he
will take contempt of us, as contempt of himself, and of his Christ. Luke
10.16. Thou art a stone, and not a man if thou need more Motives. For God to
come down from the Throne of his Sovereignty, and speak Supplications, is a
wonder not small. For Men to make light of him and his Grace, is one truly
great. Nahal slighted David's kind Message; thou shall not, I hope, slight this
that I deliver thee from thy King and Judge. No, methinks I hear thee taking up
Hazaels words; Is thy Reader a Dog, that I should do this thing? I proceed
therefore

E. 1. Reject not this doctrine of Reconciliation, though thou should not yet
Believe it. If thou have read what has been said, I cannot much doubt thy
Belief. But I find it still good, to suppose the worst. Some believed what the
Apostles preached, and some believed it not. O thou that believe not what I
have written, this I desire from thee: Or rather, this God requires from thee;
sc. That thou abstain from proud peremptory concluding, that it must needs be
false, because thou art not presently persuaded that it is true. And that thou
admit it to be so much as doubtful, if thou can not yet think it certain.
Worthy of thy Enquiry, if not of thy Faith.

I pray thee believe it possible, that thou may mistake: And that in this
very matter; wherein a mistake is as dangerous as any where it can be.
Consequently, that it imports thee highly, to go pray God to certify thee of
the Truth. And in order to thy being certified, to go to the best Friends thou
have, and best Ministers that thou know; and discourse them concerning it;
and hear what they have to offer to thee for or against it. I sadly know that
oftentimes it is but a Wind in the Bowels, that is mistaken for a Child in the
Womb: It stirring and moving so augely like a Child. I am as wary as I can:
But I do, and my Conscience tells me I ought, to speak comfortably to very
Enquirers. I have known some raw Enquirers become very credible Converts in a
few weeks time. And I wonder who ever knew our ignorant sort of people become
such by bare Hearing, without Enquiring and Consulting. I take it for granted
that they receive little or no good from me, if before much time passes they do
not come unto me. It Is Collocutory Preaching that God blesses to such: And
when I have brought any of them unto that, I cannot but hope God intends them a
Blessing. Reader, if thou art an Unbeliever, I despair not of thee if thou
be but an Enquirer. Doubting usually precedes Faith, though Faith does not
always follow Doubting.

E. 2. Delay not to set to the work, as soon as ever thou shall believe the word
of Reconciliation. Do thou already believe it? Thou have then begun thy
business about it, I hope. Thou never do rightly Believe, till thou do Act.
O let thy Work come full speed after thy Faith. Get ability to tell thy God
above, and (his Vicegerent,) thy Conscience within thee; that from thy first
Understanding and Persuasion of the truth of this Doctrine, thou did as
David. Make have, and not delay to keep his Commandments foredeclared. Do not
rest, or let thy Minister rest then, one day or hour, till thou know the
Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation. Enter thee into it solemnly. Consult for
thy preparation for the Lords Table; there to confirm it. For why, Delay is
worthy of the worst word I have given it in my Sermon on Eccl. 12.1. But now,
now an hours delay is (in some respects) worse then a years delay before.
Understanding and Faith unimproved unto holy Practice, are the most horrible
aggravations of sinful Practice. But a Man is in a fair way, as soon as he has
took but his first true step toward Reconciliation. When he has but sinceroly
uttered this word; Lord Jesus I will never be my own while I breathe more; I am
thine upon thy Gospel terms for ever! Be not afraid of the pain of this. It Is a
short one, and presently turns to Joy. As the pleasures of sin be short, and
quickly turn to Plagues. When that is but rightly said, the wheels will run in
all other work.

Have, have my Reader. If Physicians had given thee over for a dead Man,
would then Delay? The dying people I am called to, be all for present Peace
with God. The most healthful of the Living have full as much reason to be for
it. O that I could not say, I see them otherwise minded. I have read of Indian
Prisoners, chained in golden setters: And I see many English ones, whose
Estates on Earth allow them not leisure or liberty for Peacemaking with
Heaven. I tell them in my plainess, that the Dogs in Sicily cannot hunt,
because the sweet flowers in every field overcome the scent. And that the
sweets of this World in which they live, do spoil their scent and savor of
Spiritual things, and keep them from following after their Peace with God. And
for poor people, how little have, do all their hardships below, provoke them to
make for the Treasure above. Rich and Poor are, both, in expectation, as they
tell us, of Eternal Happiness. Both believe Reconciliation, hereto necessary.
But alas, both do not hasten to get it made; and therefore great is the misery
of both upon them.

E. 3. Let the business of thy Reconciliation have all thy strength spent on
it, when thou have set unto it. Reader, Heard I not thee saying erewhile; Here
begins my essay of Reconciliation unto my offended God? Thou art at it, art
thou not? If so, the Father of Glory be thy good speed? But as ever thou
expectest him to be so, spare for no pains therein. O what does require, or
what will requite thy pains, if Reconciliation unto God will not?

Tell me, Man, does the Gospel bid thee play, or work out thy Salvation! And
does it account that to be a Play, or a Work of thine, wherein thou put not
forth all thy strength. All thy contriving, and all thy executing strength.
Verily in Gods esteem, it is idly done, whatever thou have not forelaid with
best consideration, and brought forth with thy utmost might. Thou do but
trifle, till it comes to that pass, that thou may truly speak thus. Of all
things under the Sun my Understanding does consult most; my Will does command
most; my Practick, Powers do put forth themselves most of all, for my
Reconciliation with God. I Project nothing, I Crave nothing, I Labor for
nothing comparably unto it; or for any thing, but reductively and subordinately
unto it. A weak Mind, a weak Heart, and weak Practick power, I must own mine to
be. Weak in themselves, and weak in comparison of many other Christians. But,
my Heart in this thing reproaches me not; I am throughout Predominantly for
Reconciliation. Nor does my Mind plod and study, nor my Heart choose and crave,
nor my Hands more follow their work for any thing to be named, than for this
Reconciliation. I am sure I do jealously watch my Heart daily. And desire to
expend my whole strength in the matter of my Reconcillation, which is now my
whole Business. I do believe, God's peace is attainable by a restless Devil, as
soon as by an idle Man. And it is, and is like to be my care all days of my
Life, that God may never henceforth call me wicked or shalthful Servant. In
this I will follow Calvin, as Calvin followed Christ.

E. 4. Let a Strength greater than thy own be invoked, while thou art spending
thy own in the business of Reconciliation. Reader, know not thou how in all
things to prosper? Come, and Learn! Be much upon thy knees, then shall thou
succeed in every work of thy Hands. Of all the works thereof, Reconciliation is
the greatest. Wherefore, of all the same, beg the greatest help and aid of God
for this. And with the greatest Faith and Fervence beg it. Prayer, is an
Incense made of all Spices; all Graces are Ingredients in it. Some say, it has
more Promises in the word made unto it, than any other Duty has. I am sure it
has so many made to it, when it is made it self with Faith and Fervor, that
it must needs receive whatever it asks. True; Prayer does not excuse our
Labor. Praying, and doing no more, against Iniquity, is it self a black
mystery of Iniquity. God will not have our Sins mortified for us, as Goliath was
killed for the Israelites; we, like them, looking on, but striking not one
stroke. But yet good is the Hebrew Proverb; Without standing Prayer, the World
could not stand. A World of Pains is lost for want of Prayers. In its own
place; Our own Prayer is as necessary as God's Power, for our welfare, His
Power it is, that Works, Upholds, Increases all Good: But our Prayer it is,
that he will have to fetch it. If we will have that his Power, he will
ordinarily make us come and fetch it by Prayer. Indeed, he may Give, but we may
not Expect, before, and without our asking. And you shall ordinarily find it,
especially as to sensible returns; that God measures his Grant of Prayers, by
our care in Prayers. And when we exceed in our Cares, God exceeds in his
Grants.

Reader, do but thus Pray always, I will be content to bear thy Curse, if thou
do not prosper always. But, I will as soon be bound for thy Natural Life
without thy Breathing, as for thy reconciled one without thy Praying. Come on,
I pray thee, and let thou and I, enter the Holy Order of Mendieants; God's
Beggars be richer than Lords and Ladies. I use to beseech poor folk, to let me
make them rich; and rich people, to let me make them richer. Yea, both to let
me make them Kings and Queens. And how, think thou? Why by Marrying and
Begging. I have known those that have enriched themselves more by a happy
Match, than by all the Trade they ever drove in their Lives. Let Souls but
Marry Jesus Christ, they shall be sure to do it. Yea, and by Petitions granted
at White Hall, many have sweetly advanced themselves in this World. Let us both
keep Petitioning and Begging hard at the Throne of Grace, we shall not fail of
Favor and Advancement in a Higher Court than White Hall. Shrink not then, my
Reader, but come on, and resolve most resolutely, and say: O Prayer, I do now
see what thou art. And I resolve what in all my Life thou shall be. I will less
use Bread and Salt, than Prayer; and less delightfully, as far as I am able.
Prayer shall be the Girdle compassing all my Affairs; small and great. I will
never think any Mercy to hang so low, that I may reach it safely enough,
without setting up the Ladder of Prayer. And as for Mercies of the Higher
Hemisphere; as for my Reconciliation unto God, that is one and all Mercies; If
I forget Prayer, let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my Mouth. For this, with
the Trumpet of Prayer will I daily Alarm Heaven; call God my Savior to my
Succor; and Storm Hell to its Terror. Being the Enemies of my Reconciliation
cannot be scattered till God arise; and God will not arise, till Prayer awakes
him; Heaven shall as soon be without Angels Praises, as without my Prayers
ringing there. In the Mount and Valley, at my best and at my worst, I will
Pray. Ephraim and Manasses were Brothers. And I know when I am in Plenty, I am
in danger of Forgetfulness. But I will beseech God that I may never know any
Plenty but a Praying one; or Poverty, but what may increase my Beggary at his
Door. And that still, whatever it be he spreads my Table with, I may never come
more hungrily to my Supper than to my Prayer. O my Soul, the Door of Mercy
stands open continually, may the Mouth of thy Prayer neverkeep shut. And may
thou never cease to be Prayerful, till God does to be Bountiful. He is not like
the Tartarian Prince, that would not admit the Chinese into his presence,
without their submitting first to an hundred Bastinadoes on their Bodies. No;
at the Court of Heaven they are made most welcome, that come to Petition. And
the greater Blessings they do ask, the greater welcome they have. Ask a Kingdom,
thou shall be more pleasing to God than if thou beg but a piece of Bread.

E. 5. For your Life, despise not men's help, while you do drive on Prayer for
Gods Grace. Reader, hearken to a Man that every week sees sad instances. Some
poor Souls, awakened unto a like care of their Salvation, do go (as they do
tell me) unto their prayers. And, such as they be, do abound indeed in them. Of
God, they know little. Of the Covenant of Grace, and its terms on which God
will accept them. and on no other, they are ignorant sorely. Yea, and many of
them, are sensible that they are so; and go about wishing, O that I did know
God better, and what it is he would have me to do! But they have no Friend unto
whom they can get themselves to confess this ignorance, None at least, that is
able to instruct them. Pride indeed, though they name it shamefacedness, makes
them keep it to themselves. When any motion of God's Spirit, by legal Terror,
puts them upon going to some Minister, and opening their Case unto him, Satan
finds it no hard matter to make them stifle it soon; and this very often, and
very long. Under the Dominion of this dumb Devil, some tell me they have been
for many Months, and some for Years together. Though in the mean time they have
had shrewd Conflicts; and have gone near to gain Conquest sometimes. They have
gone, and knocked at Ministers doors with a purpose to confess ignorance and
beg instruction; and yet have had their hearts fail; have turned away and not
entered into the Houses, but gone back drooping unto their Homes. It is
suggested, and soon surmised by them, that Ministers and Friends will Chide
them, Shame them, and Grieve them, who think they have Grief enough on their
Hearts alreatly. Likewise, that God is the best Toucher and Helper; and can
Help and Teach without Friends and Ministers. I, and is merciful and ready to
do so for such as do pray so much to him as they do. Yea, and will not upbraid
neither, as Men will. Hereupon they keep still themselves unto themselves. Make
no use of them to whom God has committed the word of Reconciliation, for its
Despensation unto them. And given the Tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in
Season. They hear indeed their Sermons and continued Discourses: But how? Much,
they do not understand. Much, they misunderstand. Little, they Remember. Most,
or all, they misapply to themselves. Every Threat they hear, they say they must
Despair. Every promise they hear, their Case is as good as the best they
prosume. Thus are they up and down, like the troubled Sea. To the Priests Lips,
to the Ministers Face apart, they will not go. Collocutory preaching, they
think, will kill them; be it from Ministers or, any Religious Friends. I must
not say what I know, of the gain and the joy of many, when their proud Stomachs
have once come down; and they have consented to bear the smart of its being
known what they have been. But I very boldly tell thee, Reader, all that I have
met with, have in vain cried and prayed and expected God's immediate Teachings.
And have multiplied sins and sorrows by their disuse of his appointed Teachings
through the Mouths of his Ministers and People. Never lighting into the way of
God, or Knowing and Tasting his Goodness, till they had made use of the
Counselors instituted by God for them. And become Companions of such as fear
God, Walking with people wise to Salvation, and asking and borrowing Wisdom
from them. Leaving and Loathing the Society of vain and vile Creatures, that
formerly corrupted and hardened them. Now rejoicing singly in such as do
Instruct, Exhort, Reprove, and Give Examples of Good.

Others also, God's Holy Segullas, and Choice Children (I am persuaded) there
are, who sin in this respect. Sound Converts, yea considerable Proficients in
Grace and Peace. Who by one or other Temptation, are turned aside from all
Sociableness and Converse with their Brethren. And from a just Freedom of
Discourse with their Pastors. Of their Brethren, they seem to think some too
much above them in Gifts and Graces, for their Communion. Though one would think,
a poor body should not care how rich his Friends were. They will be the more
helpful unto him; will they not? But, alas, these seem to fear, they will be
the more Scornful, and less Helpful. And for others, they appear to judge too
much below them. Too dull in their Understandings for them to Instruct. Too
loose in their Lives, for them to Reclaim. They ought to consider, that the
more dark their Brethren be, they may the better expect welcome to that small
Light they can Minister. And the colder their Religious Love is, there is the
more need of their Bellows whatever they are, to blow it up. But this is not
considered, and Converse with these is not maintained. Yea, sadly be it said as
the very Truth is, Their Communion with their Brethren in Christ, as such, is
next to none. However, these so faulty Christians persevere in Prayer and
Supplications. Public, Family, Closet-prayers. And even Ejaculatory ones. But
these, seven these Souls; praying, and praying these, all sorts of prayer;
these, many, most, all of them (for ought I know) have their sore rebukes from
on High. Walk about with Hannah's sorrowful Spirit, for their ungranted Suits,
as they testify, many of them with their own Mouths. Long they have walked in
the dark, seen no light of God's reconciled Face, and it has been as much as
they could do to live, for his Terrors upon them. Nor has he ever shone upon
their Souls, or spoken peace; until they have took advice and a better course.
Until they have shook off their sullenness, and became Affable and Courteous.
Believing it God's way, very often to utter his voice through Good men's mouths.
Both his Teaching, Humbling, and Comforting voice. Yea, and to make none of his
Children, so Fat as those that are liberal to their Brothers and Sisters. To
water none, so much as those that water others. They themselves do tell me, God
has made their going unto their Godly Friends, a sensible going unto him.
Their hearing of them, a hearing of him. I, and their helping of them, a mighty
help (of God's making) unto themselves. In a word, Uniting to the Members, to
be Uniting unto Christ himself the Head. They tell me, they have at last found,
that God speaks by Men's Mouths, and works by Men's Hands. And to neglect
Ministers, or private Christians help, is to neglect God's own help and Grace.
Be it then, Reader, an Immortal Maxim with thee and me: that Religious
Friendship with good Men, and mutual Conference, is a means ordained by God,
for Assurance and perseverance. And, let us cherish humane Friendship, as most
necessary unto Divine.

E. 6. When thou art reconciled, reconcile thy Brethren. I will be short in
this my last Exhortation. In which my meaning is, that you should do your best,
to bring your Relations into the state you find good. I know it is next to
impossible, to Enjoy and not Commend Reconciliation unto ones Children and
Household. Directions and Motives I have elsewhere given, and am by promise
engaged to send abroad. In this place, I say but this. Good Reader, give it
good attention. Reconciled Souls be all Love. Souls made after his heart, who
has wrote himself by the name of Love. Love is all Action. As well thou may
hold all the four Winds in a bag, as Love in a sleep. For, like Fire, as long
as it Lives, it Acts. Reason, Love, and Religion, is all religious Loves
Communication. These, religious Love is ever dropping, nor has it more to
instill. He that Loves me, must show it by essays to make me Wiser in my self,
more Kind to him and to all Men, more Dutiful unto God. The two former are the
means, the last is the end. Unless these be the daily Exercises of thy Life,
there is small appearance of thy reconciled state. If thou art in it, thou
walk unworthy of it; making Men justly to doubt it, and provoking God most
dreadfully to cloud it. Remember that I told thee; if thou have but small care
of thy Families Reconciliation, God seems to have no saving care of thine.

Reader, The God of Heaven looks down, to see if any, in particular if thou
that art here reading, wilt indeed be Reconciled unto him, or no! He declares,
if thou will take hold of his strength, that thou may make peace with him,
thou shall make peace with him. If thou will not, his Vengeance is ready for
those, that for Reconciliation will not be ready. So he commands me once more
to tell thee: That if thou have stood out unto this last Call, thou may not
also stand out beyond it. If thou do not, but shall be by these last Lines
persuaded to take Gods offer, the richest Treasures of his Eternal Love shall
be thy Reward. If not, the Lord send thee quickly some Lines or Sounds, that he
will work by, more then by mine! I know not how to leave thee. And therefore I
will add this; if thou do but so much as fear now thy Unreconciledness; if
that Fear of mine become thine own Fear, that Fear of thine will become my
Hope. My Hope that Reconciliation work is beginning.

But as for many Readers, I will hope them Converts. That have cast themselves
down at Gods Mercy-seat, and humbled themselves at his Footstool. That have
turned unto him with full purpose of Heart, and made with him a solemn
Covenant. That have took him to be their God and Father, and devoted themselves
to be his Servants and Children. That have received Christ Jesus in all his
Offices, and stand bent to walk with him in all his ways. And all this upon a
holy change of Judgment and Inclination. Not upon a mere fright, and new sense,
of their (otherwise) dangerous Condition. I will hope that many are Reconciled
unto God truly. That they are got to the end of their Greation, the Enjoyment
of God. To the end and design of the Gospel, and its Ministry, Reconciliation
unto him. That they have attained unto that of God, which is, and will for ever
be, enough, and even all unto them. Enough, in the absence of Creature
comforts, as the Sun is light enough without Candles or Stars. Enough in the
confluence of Worldly Troubles; as the Preservation of Plate and Jewel is
enough, when all the Farthings in the House are stolen. I will hope that many
are saying most gladly to this effect. There Is no Neutrality. God is for or
against every Man: And every Man either hates God, as if he were evil; or loves
him more then he allows himself to love his own Soul! An hour or two ago, God
was my Enemy and I his. Now he Loves me, and I Love him. O what a Hell am I
raised from? What an Heaven am I raised to? True, I had a sort of Peace with
God before; but it was but a Presumption that I was dropping into Hell with. I
had the evidences of Hell in my Forehead, while I had the dreams of Heaven in
my Brain. I had a sort of Peace with my Conscience; but it was but a Truce.
One, wherein it was all the while preparing torments for me. Torments that
have, and would have more, filled my Heart with anguish, my Eyes with tears, my
Tongue with complaints. My ease was but that of a drunken Sleep, not the true
one of sound Health. The work of this day, the work of my Lifetime, yea the
work of my Eternity, will be to bless and magnify my Reconciled God, and my
Reconciling Advocate. Christ, my Advocate, pleading in his own person what he
has paid for me. And the Holy Ghost my Advocate, teaching me to plead it with
God, and with my self!

I have read that St. Jerome had always Christ's call unto Judgment ringing in
his head. Reader, Reader, may his call unto Reconciliation be ever ringing in
thine! One of our English Martyrs dyed with his Pardon by him; he would not
accept it on the ill terms whereon it was offered. But O burn thou not in Hell,
for not accepting the Pardon that God offers thee; they are good terms whereon
his Offers be made. It is wonderfully low that God does condescend in them.
Thou can not say wherein thou can desire lower Condescension. It Is
reported, that a Gentleman once prayed his King to give him leave; and offered
at a dear rate to buy his leave; to come sometimes into his presence, and cry,
God save the King! And being asked his reason, made answer, that (whether the
King loved him or no,) he should gain enough by it, if, by that means, he gat
the report of being beloved much by the King. Great reason there is for our
fear, that many Professors do aim at no more. That they enter Church
fellowship, follow Ordinances, open their Ears to Sermons, and their Purses
unto the Preachers; and all to gain but the repute of being reconciled unto
God. Not making very Reconciliation it self, their scope and drift; the End of
their Actions, and (as then it would be) the Rule of their Desires. Reader, say
that I warned thee against this most hyperbolical Folly. I beseech thee, Live
for somewhat more than a Lie. For somewhat more than a Name to live, and that a
false one also. Will thou not be persuaded? I pray thee, Man, think a thought
or two, of the short Continuance of this poor Name it self. Of its very slight
airy and smoky Pleasure. I, and of its certain attendant Torments. For though
thou tryest a thousand ways to disarm thy Conscience, thou shall not avoid it,
but shall ever and anon have wounds that will mar thy Mirth. And give thee
Torments, stronger then thy Delights.

If all will not move thee: But thou hardenest thy Heart against all, and art
resolute against Reconcilement unto God. What remains, but that I say, as a
Pious Matron, once did to a long Prodigal Son? To this effect. You have a long
time grieved and plagued my Soul with your sin. I have called, counseled, and
begged you to Convert. I have wept, and mourned, and cried to God night and
day. Impatient of the thoughts of your Damnation. But now, being nothing
prevails, and I see no hope. Now, I do (as I ought) even sit down content. I,
now, consent to thy being Damned. Let God destroy thee, if he please, in his
Righteous Fury; seeing thou will not accept of his Reconciling Mercy. With all
my Heart, God do his will with thee. It is said, that by these last forthcoming
Prints of the Mothers heart, the Sons wicked one was broken. That by these
words, set home by Gods Spirit, he was Converted and became an eminent Servant
of our Blessed Savior. God give alike efficacy unto these Lines of mine.

Heavenly Luther professed that the Article of Justification reigned in his
Heart. It is the more comprehensive Article of Reconciliation, that I wish
reigning in the Hearts of all the Ministers and Christians of England. Some
have called it the richest Vein in the whole Mine of Gospel treasure. But (as I
hope, I have proved it,) I boldly name it one and all. Even, the whole Mine of
Gods Mercy, and the whole Province of Man's Duty. There are those abroad, who
count us narrow souls, as many as confine our cares and pains unto this
Argument. But we think we have the Spirit of God, to whom they pretend not; and
do walk at large, while they understand it not. God knows, the Gospel
testifies, and the Day will reveal the truth. I conclude with this appeal, made
unto all that have but any tolerable Religious eyesight.

Whether a little Religion does not go a great way, among them who make not
Reconciliation their first, middle, and last work?
FINIS.
Books lately Published by Mr. Daniel Burgess, and are to be Sold by Thomas
Park hurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Call to Sinners, such as are under sentence of Death, and such as are under
any prospect of it from the long suffering, and gracious, but most righteous
God. Three Questions resolved briefly and plainly, viz. 1. What Conceptions
ought we to have of the blessed God? 2. What are those Truths, whereof the
Knowledge appears most indispensably necessary unto our Salvation; and
(therefore) to be first and most learnt by us? 3. What is the change wrought in
a Man by Gods H. Word and Spirit, before he can safely conclude himself passed
from Death to Life? Being the Sum of three Sermons. The Christian Temper: Or,
the Quiet state of Mind that Gods Servants labor for. Set forth in a Sermon at
the Funeral of Mrs. Vrsula Collins. A seasonable Question plainly resolved,
(viz.) What are we to judge of their spiritual estate who neglect the Lords
Supper. And what is that discerning of the Lords Body in it, without which men
do Eat and Drink their own Damnation. The Christians earnest Expectation and
Longing for the Glorious Appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. Set forth in a Discourse occasioned by the Decease of that Excellent
Christian and Minister of Christ, Mr. Noah Webb, late of Sandhurst in the
County of Berks.
Some Books sold by John Lawrance at the Angel in the Poultrey.
SEveral Discourses; viz. I. Of Purity and Charity. II. Of Repentance. III. Of
seeking first the Kingdom of God; By Hezekiah Burton. D.D. Published by Dean
Tillotson. Octavo. The Triumphs of Grace: Or, the last words and edifying death
of the Lady Margaret de la Musse, a Noble French Lady, who dyed May 1681. Aged
only 16 years. Twelves. Clavis Grammatica: Or the ready way to the Latin
Tongue, containing most plain demonstrations for the regular Translating of
English into Latin; by F. B. Schoolmaster in London. Octavo. Orbis Imperantis
Tabellae Geographico, Historico, Geneologico, Caronologicae, in quibus
Geographiae Epitome Mappis quo fieri potuit exactioribus, descriptio Historica
Imperiorum, Regnorum, and Rerum Publicarum, seculorum series a Christo Nato ad
hunc usque An. 1685. On Copper Plates. Octavo. A Relation of the Conquest of
Florida by the Spaniards. To which is added, Two Journeys of the present
Emperor of China into Tarcary in 1682, 1683. Octavo. A Help to true Spelling
and Reading, with a Scripture Catechism. By William Scoffia. Octavo.

