THE Christian Temper: OR, The Quiet State of Mind that God's Servants Labor
for. Set forth in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Ursula Collins. By D. B.

Ah, my dear angry Lord!
Since thou do Love, yet Strike;
Cast down, but Help afford;
Sure I will do the Like.
I will Complain, and Praise;
Bewail, but yet Approve;
And, all my sour-sweet days,
I will Lament and Love. Herbert.
-- Though I am quite forgot,
Let me not Love thee, if I Love thee not!
Idem. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the
lower end of Cheapside, and Robert Gibbs at the Golden Ball in Chancery Lane.
1688.

TO Mr. Joseph Collins.
SIR,
I Have complied with your Desire and your Neighbors, as far and as soon as I
have been able. You have the Sermon desired, for substance. Though not in every
particular as it was delivered. A difference, I think, ought to be between
Preaching and Writing. Or, if not, my Memory served me not to give it you
otherwise. You better know my Employments, than to accuse me of slowness. I
wish I were as free from the blame of too much Haste with it.

Such as it is, you will accept it, I know, at my hand. It Is followed with my
Prayer that it may not be Useless to Your self, and to others as Craving for
it. The Print of Sermons in the Heart and Life, is that which must make them
Useful; or Harmless it self. Its Argument is of the most seasonable for us all.
And more especially for You. So heavenly a Yoke Fellow cannot be quietly parted
with, without a need of Faith's being strengthened by some such word. Your own
feelings I presume do so certify you, better than any Lines of mine can do.

O Sir, industriously Imitate that Piety which you justly Praise. And take into
your Heart the Truths you Longed to have in your eye. So shall it not repent
you of asking, nor me of granting them unto you. I commend you to divine grace
and tuition, as

Yours in much Love unfeigned. D. Burgess.

To my Friends of troubled Spirits, in the Country.
YOU are Many: Although it be every one's word, I am Alone, and I am Like no
body. My Ministrations unto you by Speech, are at an end. That I served you no
better when I was with you, is a sorrow that I shall go in unto my Grave.
Notwithstanding all your good Opinions, Thanks, etc. But I am not able by so
frequent Letters as you desire, to Gratify you and Relieve my self. My Hands
are full, my Eyes are weak, and my actuative Graces be not proportionately
Strong. Proportionately to my Work in my present Place, I mean.

For this cause I would that this Sermon may pass for an Epistle unto each of
you. And that every one of you may read it, as supposing it written peculiarly
for himself. [As also the other small Scripts, wherewith I have cared to have
it joined.] Ministerial services are not effectual or the contrary, according
unto Ministers intentions. But if they were, you would fare as well as any, in
the use of mine. For though I Love my present Congregation as my own Soul, I do
unfeignedly Love your selves as them. More I cannot, and less I do not.

I do my self suspect it; and by others, I believe, it will be determined, that
that affection of mine has outrun my Judgment in treating you thus in this
corner. But I have bid my self follow his ironical counsel, who lately said to
me, "Go on with thy useful Indiscretions. Bishop Hall's words, are a wind that
I think to have blown me good. Divine goodness (says he) Loves the Strength
and passes over the Infirmities of good Affections. It pardons the Errors of
our Fervency rather than the Indifferencies of our Lukewarmness If by any
innocent means I may be Useful, unto others be the Praise of being Discreet.

Indeed I have commended in this Sermon three Books which may make needless
this Sermon it self. And any Additament. I mean Mr. Buroughs of Content, Mr.
Richard Alleine of Heart-work, and Dr. Bates of Resignation. Works, that praise
their great Authors, enrich their serious Readers, shame and condemn their
Neglecters.

But I so well know the Gust and Appetite, and Digestion of your Spirits, that
I shall set before you the following Memorandums. And not retract my request of
your conning my plain Sermon. Against the Invasions of your Unquietness;
against it is Abode in you, and it is Prevalence over you, remember ye,

M. 1. He must turn his Eye inward, that would judge right of any thing
outward. Self-ignorance, is the great hindrance of Self-denial. The want of
Self-denial is the great cause of all Contending with God and Distracting our
selves. Could I but deny my Self, my own Wisdom and my own Will, I should never
know a Restless hour more. To do this, my way is to be looking often into my
self. To sit and consider: What am I? I was first, Nothing. Then, Dust. Then, a
Body. Then, a Body and Soul, and that Holy and Happy. Then, a Body and Soul
Corrupted and Cursed. Then, Sanctified, through my Redeemer's Blood and by his
Spirit. Imperfectly Sanctified. Of my self I never was, am, or can be, but
Nothing or Worse. Evil, the worst I do deserve. Good, the least I cannot
deserve, etc. Now am I such a Thing? Can I deserve nothing? Why then I will
quietly bear any thing. For I see, I am a thing that wrong cannot be done to by
God. The truth is; till we conclude God cannot wrong us, we shall surmise in
every trouble of ours that He does wrong us. And till we well Understand our
selves, we shall never believe but that we are things to which God owes
somewhat. And must do us a great deal of wrong, if He make not good payment too.

M. 2. He that would be carried without falling, must bridle his Horse before
he Mounts. In all our ways, we are carried by our Thoughts. They are the Horses
whereon we travel. As they go Orderly or Disorderly, so we ride prosperously in
Grace and Peace, or fall shamefully from both. But so it is with them, that
restrained and bridled by the Word of God, they go orderly and well. If they
are let to have their heads, and have not the governing bridle put on them,
they are sure to go as ill. No Sin or Grace, no Sorrow or Comfort stirs but in
and by these Thoughts. Now, if before we ascended to make judgment of any Event
befalling us, we took the course aforesaid; we should lose a thousand Plagues
by the year in our Spirits, and find as many Comforts by it. Sinful and
sorrowful Ways can never be left, till like Thoughts be left. Isa. 55.7.
Ungoverned topping Thoughts undo Mankind. 1 King. 18.28. Why halt you 'twixt
two domineering Thoughts? so the Hebrew. Unless my ((...)) unruly, high, and
headstrong Thoughts be cast down by Gods Word; as 2 Cor. 10.5. I shall consume
my self with vexing at his work in the World. Thoughts do rend me, when I do
not rule them.

M. 3. He that would not be Shipwrackt, should not let his Vessel be Empty, or
Over-laden. They shall never want woe, who have too much or to little to do. Who
are either Drudges or Drones of their own making. Idleness is a deserving cause
of trouble, and a working one. It provokes God to send sorrow of Heart; and it
causes the Heart it self to create it unto it self. The same must be said
concerning Excess in labor. Your Diligence delights God. And in it you may
expect Comfort from him. Through his grace, it is a Working cause thereof, though it
be not a Deserving one. For wot it well, the Diligent Soul, (humane frailty
allowed for,) has no duty Undone or Illdone? While the Drone has many Undone,
and the Drudge has all Ill-done. In things both secular and sacred, He that
does too much or too little, he stabs or starves his own Quiet. He that does
all, and neither more or less, he gives it Nourishment and Growth.

M. 4. He that would Fall no lower, let him Lie upon the ground. It Is Pride,
makes capable of Soul falls and breaches. Men and Angels, both fell and brake
themselves by it. Humility, is the sure way to rise, and safe way to shun every
fall. Our meek and lowly Savior sends the Proud away, and empty. But the
Humble he neither sends away angrily from him, nor keeps sorrily with him. Hear
it, O Child of sorrow! Go to thy God, pray him to make thee as humble as He
would have thee. Tell Him, it is come already to this pass with thee; that in
thy Heart thou believe thy self as truly worthy of Hell as any that be in it,
and as truly unworthy of any comfort under the Sun as any that be under it. And
that thou will endeavor to justify Him; and take to thy self all the blame,
if he never give thee a Kid to rejoice here. Or, a room in Christ's Mansions, to
joy in hereafter. And that it is with profound self-abhorrence, that thou ask
either from Him. I dare engage, that as sure as Adam fell by ascending even to
be like God in Omnisciency, thou shall rise by descending thus, and being like
Christ in Humility. Who sees it not? The weak but humble stalk of Corn stands,
when the arms of Strong but Lofty Oaks be torn by Tempests!

M. 5. He must not believe what Rebels say, who would believe well of what the
King does. We cannot think God good, without thinking all that He does do to be
good. It Is the same judgment we make of his Nature and of his Actions. Now, He
is a great King; but in this old Adam's Rebel-world, He is every where spoken
against. If we take up, what the blind Passions and wild Fancies of men utter
against Him, we shall unavoidably take in black thoughts of Him. He, in his
Word, tells us that Sickness, Poverty, Perils, Reproaches, Soul-troubles, and
all, be but refining fires. Take away but our Dross. Do not Hurt, but Benefit
and work for our good. The World tells us another thing; that they are
consuming fires. They undo us utterly. Better die than bear them. If God had
any Love for us, he would suffer a great deal of Sin before He would use us so,
etc. Believe this, and farewell to all Rest in your Spirits. But, is it Peace
you would have? This do, you shall not miss of it. Viz. Believe what God says
concerning the World, and not what the World says concerning God.

M. 6. Lastly, Let him learn excellently well to Wrestle, that would not have
any thing to give him a Fall. Every one will trample on a Down-hedge. Let a man
be sunk, and down in his Spirit; unable to rise and oppose; every thing will
then smite him. His Life shall then be all, between the Hammer and the Anvil.
Every Event shall be a Tragedy on his Soul. But if he has but strength enough
to get upon his Knees. And on them, humbly to Wrestle with God in holy Prayer.
What then? Why that Communion with the Almighty, makes a Soul next to Almighty.
Yea, in a sense, Almighty. And more than Conqueror, even Triumpher over all his
Troubles. It is a certain rule; If our Troubles don't cast out or corrupt our
Prayers, our Prayers will surely cast out or conquer our Troubles. You can
never fall Lower, if you behave your selves well upon your Knees!

Now the Apostle's words deliver my Heart, Romans 13.15. The God of Hope fill you
with all Joy. The Joy of Contemplation and of Expectation while you are on the
earthly Globe, the Joy of full Possession when your eyes are closed. Let mutual
Love be everlasting. And mutual Prayer be continued, until we ascend where
Thanksgiving and Praise take up all. Let these Lines be witnesses of your being
continued in the affectionate memory, of

Your compassionate Servant in Christ Jesus, D. Burgess.

Psalm 116.7. Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul!


THis Psalm is an holy Vow. The Royal Writer, herein binds himself unto three
things. Namely, the Love of God, and his worship, v. 1, 2. Holy Life and
circumspect, v. 9. Payment of his Vow, most true and public, v. 13, 14. The
remainder of the Psalm, is for most part expressive of his Motives hereunto.

Our departed Friend, seemed to have made no small use of this Scripture. Many
were her Troubles, and many her Deliverances. And very much her heart ran in
the exemplary strain of David's, that is here recorded. It is now piously
desired that somewhat be done for helping you her surviving Brethren, to arise
unto an a-like Imitation.

Unto that end I shall first set before you, the principal Lessons that the six
first verses give forth. And then propose, and prosecute also the chiefest of
them that offer themselves from the seventh verse. For here are no dark or
difficult Phrases, that call for stay in their Explication.

L. 1. Returns of Prayer, make a Soul a Mount of holy Fire. It is certain, they
made David so. For thus are his words to be taken; q. d. The God whom I Loved,
whiles He was making me feel the blows of his hand, and denying me the Kindness
of his ear: I, and did resolve to Love, though He slew me: Him do I now Love, as
I can neither speak, nor be silent of. Now, now that His answer to my request
is come down from Heaven, my heart (I think) is gone up to Heaven. 'Twas
comparatively, Ice before: it is Flame now. If my Love before was a Spark, it is
now a Mount. The grant of my Prayer, has made a whole burnt-offering of my
Person. By giving me what I asked, God has took away all my will to ask for any
thing else but Himself. For,

L. 2. God Himself is the Object, His Mercies be but the Motives of our Love.
It was Father, Son, and Spirit that David Loved. Mercies drew his heart unto
the Divine Fountain of them. They took his heart; but they kept it not so low
as themselves. They carried it to the right Owner. I Love the Lord, not I Love
his Deliverances, says the good man; q. d. It Is unto the Giver, my affections
are drawn by best gifts. Nor would I count any of them good, if they tended not
to make my Esteem and Love of Him better. Return of Prayer is another kind of
thing than the Gold of Ophir! But all my Love is too little for Him that makes
it. And rather than any of it should be stole from Him, I would choose to have
any Desire of mine denied by Him. It Is Him that I studiously Love in all
things, for all things, and above all things.

L. 3. The Mercy of one Day, engages us to Duty all our Days. It engaged the
Psalmist, as the second verse most expressly says. Because He has inclined [at
this time] his Ear unto me, therefore will I Call upon Him [or Pay all Duty to
Him] as long as I live; q. d. The Deliverance that God has now wrought for me,
has sensibly brought Fire, Fuel, and Bellows to the Love of God in me. And for
present, the coals thereof are coals of Fire, which has a most vehement flame.
But this gives me not content, I look forward, and I take care for to morrow.
My heart is green Wood; and Fire in green Wood does as easily Die, as it does
difficulty come to Live. Above measure I think my self engaged, to consult for
the continuance of that Zeal which is easier Lost than first Got. And easier
Kept, than Regained. Lost, I know, it will be, if the divinely appointed means
be not used to preserve it. The which means are all Duties. And unto the Use of
them all my days, I am as much obliged as the very first day of my Salvation. I
dream not that God's end in it, is to make me Bless, Reverence, Trust, and
Serve Him the more, for less than all my time. The benefit of the Salvation it
self, extends plainly through it all. And through it all, as in duty bound, I
engage my self to that universal Obedience, whereof Prayer is the so eminent
Pillar. The World shall see, there is a Thankfulness that abides unto the
Giver, even to the last breath of the Receiver.

L. 4. Death and Hell do often Fright, but they never Hurt a good Soul. The
Psalmist says, ( verse the third,) that the fears of death, (to wit, Bodily and
Spiritual,) found him: and he found trouble and sorrow, (great store) in them.
He says not, that they mischieved him. It were easy to show that they (both)
did him good. He has elsewhere told us, 'Twas good, (beneficial,) for him that
he was Afflicted; ( viz. in Body and Spirit.) And here it self, he does, with
sufficient plainness, speak the same. For in the next verse these are his
words, Then called I on the Name of the Lord: as if he had said, In that my
Affliction, I sought God early. That Hell upon Earth, drove me to Heaven. Mine
Eyes had been less toward God, if he had not set the Image of death upon my
Eyelids. So many and so fervent Prayers had not been put up from my Soul, and
for my Soul, if the dread of Death and Hell had not come into my Soul.
Memorable is that passage of worthy Mr. Shepherd, I have often wondered, If
Christ has born all our miseries, and suffered death for us, why then should
we feel any miseries, or see death any more? And I could never satisfy my own
heart by many answers given, better than by this; viz. That if the Lord should
abolish the very being of our miseries, they should indeed then do us no hurt:
but neither could they then do us any good. Now the Lord Jesus has made such
Peace for us, that our Enemies shall not only not hurt us, but they shall be
forced to do us much good. Wants, make us pray the more; Sorrows, do humble us
more; Temptations, make us exercise graces more; Desertions make us long for
Heaven more It Is now part of our portion, to have not only Paul, and Apollos,
and World, but to have Death it self to do us good.

L. 5. The troubles of our Souls, are the Souls of our Troubles. David's, do so
appear. By the heaps of words that he pileth up to express them, they appear
so. Death-sorrows, Hell-pains, Troubles and Sorrows that found him, and got
hold of him. Oh what a deal of Water can the Sea contain more than a Thimble,
or a Cockle-shell? And what an a like deal of good and evil is the Soul capable
of more than the Body? And how much more to be pitied is the Soul that is
betwixt Hope and Fear of God's Love, than the Body that is between the Axe and
the Block? [Let the Reader that would see more of this, see the unparallellable
Mr. To. Bolton upon Prove. 18.14.

L. 6. In the Fire and Water, there is nothing like holy Prayer. David was in
them both, with the witness: and in them, as the best course he could take, he
prays. Then called I on the Name of the Lord! O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver
my Soul! q.d. When I was beat off my Legs, I fell upon my Knees. I knew, the
heavenly Father used to strike his Children no lower. Yea, and to strike them
for no purpose so much, as to bring them on their Praying Knees. Unmixed Praise
is his delight in Heaven: but, upon Earth, it is Praise with Prayer he delights
in. And which he makes the inlet of all his Mercies, and our true
Consolations. They quite mistake their way to welfare, who when they are
distressed, sit still in lazy Complaints. Or go busy themselves in
Complotments; hoping by their own and by borrowed Wisdom and Power to remove
the Mountains that lay on their hearts. Idleness, and carnal Activity, sink us
deeper into sorrows; they never take us out. But Prayer honors God, and God
honors Prayer. No want is so great, but He can supply it: and there is no Soul
that Prays in Faith, but may be sure He will supply it. Is his Power only
Infinite? no, his Goodness that makes Promises, and his Truth that keeps them,
be fully as Infinite as that Power it self is. What, therefore, is comparable
to Prayer? It Is with it, and not without it, that Faith subdues worlds of
evils, obtains Promises, muzzles Lions, quenches Fire, scapes the edge of
Swords, of weak makes strong. Nothing can kill a Believer, but that which can
stop the breath of his Prayer.

L. 7. God's gracious, righteous and merciful Acts, do teach us his gracious,
righteous, and merciful Nature. They taught our Psalmist. He comes from
declaring the former, to conclude the latter. He had said what God had Done;
and ( verse the fifth) he says what God is. Namely, Gracious; that is, Kind,
without any Force or Necessity, and without any Merit or Motive from without
his own heart. Righteous, that is, Just or Faithful. Merciful, that is, forward
to help creatures Lying in misery. Be it observed; it is the Nature of God, from
whence alone, in many cases, we can draw any Hope or Peace. It Is from thence
alone, as the first Fountain, that, in all cases, we do or can draw it. It Is
for the Exaltation and Praise of his Nature, that he works all his works; and
that he calls us to consider all his works. It Is the reproach of his Nature,
that Satan, above all things, aims and acts for: as that which upholds the
Kingdom of Sin in the World. Wherefore, miserable are they, who cannot set seal
unto this Doctrine. And who do not Learn what God Is, from what He Does. Their
Religion is vain Pageantry, who, while they cry up his Works, do not
enamouredly see in them, the glory of Him the worker.

L. 8. God is a Believer's own God. So the Psalmist calls him, OUR GOD. To be
sure, God is at his own Disposal. He can give Himself to whom He pleases, to
be Theirs in Marriage Covenant for ever. And it is as certain, He has so given
Himself, and all that He Has, unto sincere Believers. Who accordingly give
themselves, and all that they Have unto Him. (Of both, I speak largely
elsewhere.)

L. 9. The most Shiftless Saints, have God their Savior. The Lord preserves
the Simple, says verse the sixth. Men of least Policy, are saved by Him who is
Only Wise. They are Preserved one, or other, or all ways; viz. From evils, and
In them, and out of them.

L. 10. Sanctified hearts, remember their Wants, and their Helps. David's did
so: I was brought Low, and He helped me. Indeed sin takes away the heart.
Corrupts the mind, Memory, and Will. And lets not him be a Man, that will not
be a Saint. Grace, on the contrary, raises the Mind, perfects the Memory,
rectifies the Will. And make that he who will be a Saint, must be very like an
Angel. That is, Humble and Grateful. Humble in ones self Grateful unto God.
As Soon shall Cherubims cease to remember that once they were Nothings, and God
raised them out of Nothing; as an Holy Soul shall forget his great Depressions,
and his Gods Exaltations of him out of them.

The Text we are now arrived to. And in it you see, (do ye not?) these
Particulars; to wit, (1.) The Preucher, David's Conscience. (2.) The Auditory,
David's whole man. (3.) The Sermon, an Exhortation to holy Quietness pressed by
Gods motive Kindness. Many Doctrines, here meet us; and chiefly these.

D. 1. Good men give themselves good Lectures. David's have their Chaplains in
their breasts. And Preach unto themselves. Their own Reins do instruct them.
And indeed all men's words, and God's too, be unprofitable unto us, till they
become the words of our Consciences unto us. He is an ill man, whose Conscience
is a dumb Dog.

D. 2. The best of men, do not keep perfectly still, in severe storms. David
himself did not. This charge, [Return to thy Rest,] plainly speaks his Removal
from it. And a sinful Unquietness, it self. We have heard indeed of Job's
Patience in his Affliction: and so have we heard of his Impatience too. In that
very grace wherein a good man is most Perfect, in that it self he is far from
being Legally Perfect. Our gracious God does not; and Men should not, let one
act, or a few un-allowed acts denominate us; In no man, save Him who was God
and Man, had ever Diligence or Patience its Perfect work. In the foresaid
sense, Perfect. We may not call our selves Hypocrites, for that which God does
not so call us. Perfection is coveted by every one that is sincere; but it is
not by any one in this Life attained. Sin came into us, when our Souls came
into our Bodies: and 'twill never go quite out of us till our Souls go quite
out of them. Happy is he that has no sin Reigning or Raging! Till you are in
Abraham's bosom you shall have sin Assaulting and Afflicting you. And that in
Adversity, and Prosperity too. -- But the Truth I choose to insist on is that
which follows.

D. 3. Rest in God is the state of Mind, that is Labored for by the Children of
God. It Is that, you see, whereto David laboriously called and instructed his
Soul. And the record of it can be thought designed for nothing so much, as to
provoke us to go and do likewise. That thus we may the better do, the
Proposition shall be briefly Explained and Proved in these four Considerations.

C. 1. Rest is the Health. Or the pleasant Feeling of a Soul United unto, and
Enjoying of its supreme good. Two things it imports; Life, and Peace Rest, is
not Death; nor is it Rage. Where there is no Life, there is none of the
Spiritual Rest we speak of. Nor any other, but what a Stock or Stone possesses.
Where there is no Peace, it need not be said what a distance there is from
Rest. Raging Life, stands farther from Rest, than Dead Peace it self. A Flint
stone is nearer to it, than a Furious malecontented man. Soul-rest, is a lively
Peace, and Peaceful Life. And here think distinctly; (1.) No Creature is or can
be its own happy-making good. (2.) All Living ones do crave such good, from
without themselves. (3.) God is all good. Creatures have nothing, but what He
puts and holds in 'em; no virtue to benefit one another. (4.) Before the best
Union unto God, we cannot have the best good from Him, By the best Union,
understand nearest Relation. That of Adopted Sons and Covenanted Servants. By
the best good, understand that which is Spiritual and Eternal. (5.) When we
have the best good bestown upon us by God, we are not at Rest in our selves
presently. We are not well, till what is Bestown on us be also Enjoyed by us.
(6.) Enjoyment, is made up of five Ingredients; to wit, Use, Knowledge,
Pleasure, Content, Security. We then Enjoy what God Is unto us, and what He
also Does for us, when we Use it for the just ends of it. When we duly reflect,
and Discern our selves to be in the Possession and best use of those best
things. When we take Pleasure, and make glad our hearts in the Discovery
thereof. When we Content and satisfy our selves with that Pleasure; saying,
It Is Enough, yea it is All; we would not, nay, we cannot have it better with us,
than Grace has made it. When, likewise, we have, and consider us to have
strong Security, for Holding what we Have. (7.) Rest, is the State and Temper
of a Soul thus enjoying God, through Jesus Christ. It Is such a Soul's
satisfiedness; and that in a double reference; to all that God has yet done,
and all that God shall ever do. A Soul in the Rest which our Text intends, thus
speaks: Lord, I must speak as I find. Thou have hitherto done all things
well. I must needs approve, yea and applaud all. I am sure Thou thy self can
not mend it; for there has been in it no fault. I shall never forgive my self
my trespasses, in the hard thoughts I have had of any thing by Thee done. If I
remember them in Heaven, I shall there Blush to all Eternity for them. Lord,
for the future I project to be wiser. I do now let fall all Contest with Thee,
about future Events in this World. I put a Blank in thy hand; write, Lord, thy
Pleasure. Write the Kind and Quality of the things that shall befall me. Write
the Measure and Quantity of them. Write the Term and Continuance of them too!
Order my Lot while I sojourn on Earth, even how Thou please. Thy Will shall
be my Will. If ever I contradict the former, I shall the latter too. Thou can
not do what ought to Offend me; or what ought not to Please me. Nor can I any
way do my self hurt, but by unjust surmising that what Thou do is not good. I
command my self, having Peace with Thee above, to maintain Quietness for ever
within. And not admit any thing from without to make a tumult in the Region of
my Heart. No, but to behave my self as may show that I do account Thee a
sufficient Shield from evil, and Store of good. And this, by walking on the
waves, if Thou call, without sinking. By entering the Fiery Furnace, if Thou will have me, without Desponding. By trusting in Thee, even when Thou appearest
to slay me.

C. 2. There Is no Perfect Rest behither Abraham 's bosom. It is a Truth, denied
by none, though considered duly by few; a state of Adoption is a state of Rest.
Upon thy first Repentance, and Faith, thou art made a Child of God, John 1.12.
Being his Child, thou have a Child's portion. And to be sure, the Children of
his house are free. Free from the condemning Wrath of God the Lawgiver and
Judge; free from the Power of Satan the Jayler and Executioner; free from all
the Dominion of Sin (that is a worse Enemy than Satan himself;) free from all
things that totally exclude Rest. I, and have all things that do constitute and
make the foresaid Rest. Who doubts it? they have some Knowledge of God; some
Use of his holy Name, and his Peerless Excellencies. Some Pleasure therein, and
some Content therewith. And some Confidence too of the unmoveableness of their
good estate. These latter they have sometimes, and in some measures: and much
more the former. But yet, though now we are the Children of God, it does not in
this World perfectly appear. No, our very Life is Hid; and so is our Rest, in
great part. Infinite Wisdom sees good to make a difference of degrees between
Grace and Glory. And to make the state of Glory, one of all Rest: and the state
of Grace, one of but some Rest. The state of Glory, one of Rest, absolutely:
and the state of Grace, one of Rest, but comparatively. I say, but
comparatively. In comparison of the Wilderness, Canaan was a Rest: but compared
unto Heaven, what was it? True, it flowed with Milk and Honey; but it had also
Thorns and Briars. Compared to the state of Sin, the state of Grace is Heaven
upon Earth; but compare it to Heaven above, and then it is (dicere ausim) but a
Hell upon Earth. Such an Hell, that St. Austin's words are known to be true;
Some good men have need of Patience to Live, as much as others have need of
Patience to Die. There want not Reasons, for God's so ordering things. And our
Divines have not been sparing in their accounts of them. I forbear it here:
praying only that it be observed, Disturbing Trouble shall as soon get up to
Heaven, as Undisturbed Rest come down to us in this World. Christ our Head, had
never any sinful Sorrow indeed: but neither had He, before his Exaltation, any
sorrowless Comfort here below. We, imperfectly sanctified creatures, have
neither any Sorrow that is altogether sinless; or any Comfort that is
altogether sorrowless. One of the Thieves on the Cross did Blaspheme, Mark
15.31. Our murmuring Flesh and Corruption, though crucified, does break out. And
raises, in every state, unquiet and unruly Thoughts. The World's Objects also,
deceive us with their Emptiness, and vex us with their Falseness. Satan,
likewise, by Injections of his, has more than a few ways to Disturb us. In a
word, there are four things whereto we are here liable, which make perfect
Peace here impossible. I mean, Bodily Diseases, Mental Errors, Divine
Desertions, and Satanical Temptations. By means hereof, the troublesome Thoughts
in our minds, are made as numberless as the wandering Atoms in the Air. And it is
an imperfect Patience, wherein our souls are in our best days possessed. A
quiet and calm Spirit is in God's sight a Jewel, for Excellency; in our sight
it is a Jewel for Rarity. Nor is it any where found, but abundance of flaws are
found in it. Where is Wealth without Care? Where is Pleasure, without
Weariness? Where is Honor or Praise, without Hazard? Who has Friends, without
any Guile in them? Who has Relations and no Crosses in them? Who has found out
that Age, that is without it is Infirmities? I will ask but once more, and pass
on. Who has grace without adherent Corruption, Hope without Fear, and Comforts
without Eclipses?

C. 3. There is more perfect Rest attainable, than what is yet by any of us
attained. The best souls do often lose of that which they had. But never do
they gain all that they may have If any have so done, they are black Swans,
rare Instances. Generally, all sober Christians will grant, they Need more than
they have. Nor will they dare to say, that their Diligence in time past could
not have gained more. Or that their holy Industry from this time will not gain
more. All sincere Converts, do enter into Rest. They pass Jordan, they set
their feet on Canaan. Nor is it God's will that they should keep by the Rivers
side. He gives them Eyes and Feet. Understanding, and strength And commands
them to use both for getting further up into the Pleasant Land. Every Believer,
upon his first Union unto Christ, makes God name his strong tower. He runs into
it, and he Rests in it. But how? Into the outer parts he runs, and in but small
part, comparatively, he Rests. Now God says not, Hitherto shall thou come, and
no step further But contrarily; He calls to come farther in, into the Chambers
of purer Peace and Rest, Isa. 26.20. I, and to advance toward the fullness of
Joy, 1 John 1.4.

Let it be observed; The Rest in God we speak of, is a Grace. Grace, is a
Growing thing. It Is but a Seed of it that the Holy Ghost infuseth, in our first
Conversion. But, like the grain of Mustard Seed, it grows. He that Infuseth it,
does Increase it. He brings it unto it is just measure and Size, in every
Convert. He Keeps it Growing until the very Harvest. Nor is ever Grace at a
full stand, till it be ripened into Glory. It Is often told you, and I hope you
know: the Holy Spirits work is to set us working. All that He works for us and
in us, (...) works by us. Consequently, we ^ay by no means imagine, but that we
have room to Mend till we come to Heaven. And have an increase to make in this
and every grace. The greatest Charity must take it for Phrenzie, if any man
should say to this purpose. Long has been my Conflict? and I have obtained
some Conquest over the enemies of my Souls Rest. I cannot expect, nor will I
therefore endeavor after more. My work shall be to keep, not enlarge my
victory. My will is melted into the will of God as much as I ever look to have
it. Inwardly I Fret as little; outwardly I Murmur as little as I am ever like
to do. It were vain to pray the Holy Spirit, to make my own Spirit less
Tumultuous and confused than it is. To hold it any higher than He does already,
from sinking Discouragements, or distracting Cares. In all that comes on me, my
Mind is as satisfied as ever it will be, that it is God's doing, and that it is
Just and Good. My Will also is as obsequious, yielding and submissive, as it
can be made. The tenor and temper of my Soul is as like Heaven as it will ever
be upon earth, etc. No gracious Heart can have such a Mouth. As long as it is it
self and free from Lunacy, it cannot. Nay, but it will speak clean contrarily.

C. 4. The Children of God, do upon many and mighty Motives, seek to attain all
Rest in God that is attainable. They think not less than All, to be enough for
their present state. And they have Reasons enough for that their Thought. Some
of them, and not the Least, shall be proposed. God's Servants consider the
following particulars.

(1.) There is a Necessity of Precept. God commands, that Degrees of Rest
unattained be laboriously sought. As well as that the Degrees attained be
watchfully kept. He requires not the Principle of any grace, without the
Practice; nor Perseverance in any, without Proficience. As expressly we are bid
to Grow, as to stand in grace. Now where the word of God's Command is, there is
Power. In a gracious Soul there is such a powerful impression made, as there is
in a Subject's heart by his Kings commandment; or in a Child's by his Father's.

(2.) There is a Necessity of means. Of means unto our chief end, yea our whole
one. Our Ultimate one, which is God's Honor; our Near one, which is Our own
Good; our Intermediate one, which is our Neighbor's Good. Rest in God is an
undispensably requisite Means unto all three. And our Degrees in them, can be
but according as our Degrees of Rest are. For the Being and Life, the Beauty
and the Strength, of all Duty unto God, consists much in this Rest. Is God my
God? do I Hallow his Name? or do I Look like Christ's disciple? Till I Lie down
at his foot, submit to his Will, content me with his Pleasure? Excepting
against nothing that He does? No; but when a Soul does this, it acts not a
Single grace, but all graces together. It acts them not meanly neither, but
illustriously and amiably. With huge strength and demonstrations strongest of
Truth and Goodness. As for our own Good, it stands in Receiving from God what
through Christ he Gives. Waiting for what he Promises. Giving back what he
requires from our hands. And how requisite is a Quiet spirit to all these? The
Vessel into which a Liquor is poured, must not stir and jog up and down, but be
held still. Are we Vessels of mercy? Are we to receive the waters of Life, the
streams of grace? If so, the spirit of grace must hold still our Spirits. Keep
them Quiet and unhurryed and submissive. So, if we are to Live by Hope, and
wait for the glory to be revealed, how needful is Rest? As Soon may you see with
shut eyes, as Hope with vexing and restless hearts. Rest and Submission be the
inlets of Hope, as Hope is the inlet of Consolation and Joy. The Worship we are
to give unto God, has this to be said of it. It has a Soul and Body, a Kernel
and Shell, a Substance and Shadow. An heart that is like either to the Dead Sea
or to the Adriatic raging Sea, may give God the carcass, the Shell, and the
Shadow of worship. The Soul, the Kernel, the Substance, none can give but the
resigning, resting heart. That which Resigns it self unto God's good will, and
Rests confident there will be nothing but what ought to be in his works. As for
our Usefulness to the Conversion of sinners, or Edification of Converts, let
Reason and Experience speak! Will the mire cast out of a troubled muddied Soul
conduce unto these ends, or to the quite contrary? Words signify little,
without an efficacy-giving Example. But a Restless man's whole Conversation, is
one continued slander of Religion. And a Disswasive from it. In short, the
Philosopher says right. Whatever moves, must move upon somewhat Unmovable.
Ships move on the Sea it is true; but the Sea moves on that which moves not.
Coach-wheels move up and down; but so does not the Axle-tree to which they are
fastened. Man's heart can in no good course move, till it be joined unto God,
and rest in Him who is unmovable. It Is by Rest in Him, we are fitted for every
Motion for Him Then it is we can do what pleases Him, when what He does do
does please us.
.

(3.) There is a Necessity of Covenant. There is no true Servant of God, but
what is a Covenant one. Nor any Covenant one, but what has Promised and Vowed
sincere and entire Acquiescence in God's Will. Praying, without limitation,
that his Will be done. Yea, and upon Earth as in Heaven. Now, do Covenants
signify any thing or nothing? signed, sealed Covenants. Such is our Covenant
with God, in Baptism, and at his Holy Table signed and sealed. Or dreams any
man, that he has risen to a full performance of his Sacramental Engagement? If
not, he must feel it is force on his Soul, constraining to pursue more Rest in
God. Or else be inclined to renounce his Baptism; as indeed the most among us,
but too practically do.

(4.) There is a Necessity of Interest. God allows, yea commands us to Love our
selves wisely, without any stint. The sum of all his Commands is this; "Be
happy! Whatever is truly for my eternal Interest, the same is my Duty. Now, if
any thing be so, Rest in God is so. For why? Satan can have no good angling in
the waters of my Soul, if they be not Troubled. Temptations spoil men; but
Content with God's Will, spoils and shames Temptations. Yea, and it does by our
Comforts, as our Savior by the Loaves and Fishes, Matthew. 14. It multiplies
them miraculously; and makes a very few of them, enough for us, and to spare. A
little with Content, is not a little. It Is a great deal. And a great deal, and
Content with it, is very Heaven it self. A great man has said, A Contented
spirit on Earth, is in some respects better than Heaven. Boldly I will say;
It Is the best of Heaven that we can have on Earth, to Rest always and Depend on
the Lord of Earth and Heaven. Living off from Creatures; and from under their
Power to Glad or Sadden us. And knowing this unquestionable truth, That sound
Christians Possess all things. Or, if they don't, they have given them the good
of all they want, as truly as the good of what they have. The Honor, that Rest
in God does crown a Soul with, is the greatest that God can be imagined to
give, or a Creature receive. It makes as like God as a Creature can be. When
you have all you would have in Him, you are next Happy and Honorable to Him,
that has all in Himself that He would have.

(5.) There is a Necessity of Nature. The very Nature of a Regenerate man, is
against Vexation at what God does. And is for the most entire resignation unto
his Pleasure. Unregenerate men's carnal mind, is all Enmity; and such as cannot
be Subject to, and Quiet in, God's Will. But the Newborn man's renewed mind,
is all Friendship; and such as cannot but be Flexible to, and be at Rest in it.
At least, it cannot but wish, and will, and pray, and strive to be so. God
calls Unquiet hearts, Rebels. And so do his Children call their own hearts when
they be Unquiet. Saints in Heaven can have no actual Discontent; Saints on
Earth can have no allowed Discontent. The Nature of these is as truly against
it, as the Nature of those is. Albeit their Power against its invasion be not
so great. Their good Apprehension of God, and their good Affections toward Him,
be the same for Kind, though not for Degree.

It remains that we Apply all. May He who only teaches to Profit, teach you
this; without which it is impossible to Profit. Rest is so suitable to natural
Desires, that I must suppose you always to desire it. Our Days are so
troublesome and stormy, that, methinks your present care for it should be above
ordinary. And that very Providence which occasioned this Sermon, one would
think, should contribute much to your Persuadableness by it. In hope that some
will make a good use of it, and with desire that all of you may, I shall set
before you two things; viz. The principal Truths this Doctrine calls to us to
Consider; and the special Duties it obliges us to Practice.

Of these Truths, I commend five.
T. 1. Good men are careful about the Temper of their Minds. All men are so
about the Temper of their Bodies. As for their Minds, most are very heedless.
And tamely bear any Temper that comes upon them. Not having ill Tempers
Lamented, or gracious ones Labored for, by them. But men of good hearts, are
not a little careful about their good plight and tempers. Prove. 4.23. Keep thy
heart with all diligence, is a Text engraven deeply on their hearts. [And I
would that Mr. Richard Alleines golden Sermons upon it, were more in peoples
hands.]

T. 2. This World, as bad as it is, is not so bad as some hasty folk make of it.
Such, I mean, as exclaim against it as a Place incapable of any Rest. And
altogether unfit for Comfort or Joy. True, we are here, all of us, defiled with
rebelling Corruptions, clothed with numberless Infirmities, loaded with past
Guilts, assaulted with present Temptations. We are by Satan buffeted, by Men
oppressed, by God afflicted. Be it confessed therefore; without some solid
support, (Vivere non est Vita,) our Life is scarcely worth the name of Life.
But yet, all Rest is not reserved for next World. There is a Lord that in this
World, rebukes Temptations, pardons Guilts, heals Infirmities, subdues
Corruptions, heightens Consolations above Sufferings. And who in this World it
self, bids and makes his Children to Rest and Rejoice in Him. Such a thing
there is as an Heaven upon Earth. And it is long of our selves if we find it not.

T. 3. Serious Christianity, does little deserve the imputations of Sourness
and Melancholy. What is it but a Life studiously Quiet and Comfortable? It Is
Possessors chide themselves for nothing more, than their foolish departures
from their true Rest. They proclaim it Comely to rejoice, Psalm 33.1. And
profess that they do so with Joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.
Have they at times their Shipwracks of Rest, in which neither Sun nor Star
appears? The World will not believe it, but the Church knows it. And will be
content to bear the hard names sent from the scorners chair.
Yes, they have. But then it self, Light, and Rest, and Joy are sown for them,
as they be not for sinners. And their Sorrows be, but like a travailing
Woman's, the forerunners of Joy. Their bitterest Aloes be better therefore
than sinners most sweetened Arsenick. Sinners be still in little Quiet, and be
going to less. Good men have always some, and are going where they shall have
all. Sincere Religion, is the only Element in which Rest or Peace can live.

T. 4. We never do well to be angry at what God does. Grace carries us to expel
and prevent anger and unquietness. It Is Corruption inclines us at any time to
Plead for it. Indeed we may reasonably and sinlesly, Resent Afflictions. Yea,
it is our Duty to abhor stupidity, and not (through unsensibleness) despise God's
Chastening. We may likewise, humbly make our Moans to God; and pour out our
complaints unto our Brethren. We also may and ought to use all innocent means,
to get from under afflictive evils. Scripture and Nature vouch this. But to
Rage and Repine at God's work, is to Blaspheme his Majesty. And it is certainly
the Logic of the Devil, that frames Arguments against God. Arguments I call
them; but they are but in color and false appearance so. Sin and Satan have a
great hold of a man, when ever he offers to bring such to justify his blaming
of God; e. gr.

Obj. Can I be Troubled too much? my Trouble is for sin.

Ans. You must not for Sin it self be Troubled more than God requires. And that
is unto Humiliation, not Desperation. Distraction fits for Bedlam, not for
Heaven. If your Trouble be for Sin, your care should be to keep Sin out of your
Trouble.

Obj. God has Departed from me; Can I take on too much?

Ans. Yes, you may. If He be gone from you, go you and cry after Him. Not Run
away from Him, and Rage against Him.

Obj. My Affliction is a none such; and may not I then be allowed to Crudge a
little?

Ans. It may be it is a nonesuch but in thy own Conceit. But if otherwise, God
has not wronged thee. Hell it self is not more than thy desert. Fretting will
make it worse. Submission is thy only way unto Restoration.

Obj. But this Affliction makes me Unserviceable; and therefore I cannot bear
it.

Answ. Unserviceable! Vain Man, I tell thee, Serving God is doing his Will, not
your own. His Will is now, that you serve his glory by patient endurance of his
Chastisement. Whatever other service He has to do, He can do it without you. He
can Find Servants, or Make them, or Work without them.

T. 5. That Rest and Peace which cost but little, are worth as little. David's
get theirs, by Prayers and Pains with their Souls. True Saints sow in Tears
before they reap in great Joy. I would not be thought to intimate, that all
God's Children do mourn as long, as loud, and as much, one as another. I know
they do not. There is a vast difference that Sovereign Grace makes. But I
affirm this, to be clear from the Holy Scripture. A frame of holy Rest in the
Soul is not to be expected without the constant and diligent care of the Soul.
To wit, for Attaining, Keeping, Increasing it. And whatever the temper of the
Soul appears, it is more than probable that it is not worth keeping, if it cost
not true pains in the getting. God does not sell us Peace for our Pains. But He
hates Pride and Idleness, and gives not Peace without our Humility and Industry.

The Duties whereto I exhort, are five most conducive to Rest.

D. 1. Give all Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. There is no
Rest in Creatures. They are False, and Delude us. Weak, and Disappoint us. But
neither is there any Rest in God for you, until you be truly Converted unto
God. How often have I told you, Without holiness no man shall comfortingly see
God here or hereafter? Without the holiness of Spirit, Covenant, Qualities,
Conversation, and Company, that I have treated of elsewhere. If you would have
Rest, go no shorter a way than this to find it.

D. 2. They say, that neither Trees, nor Grass, will grow upon the ground under
which Gold Mines be. It Is sure that Holy Rest is often killed by the Love of
yellow Dust.
Love not the World, nor the things of the World. Watch and Pray against the
inordinate Love of this low World, and its low things. It often gets into the
best hearts, before they are aware. And sooner than other Enemies to
Soul-peace. When it has invaded, the strongest Grace will have enough to do to
drive it out. And must look for small measures of quiet while it is in. Of all
the famed Saints recorded in Scripture, and renowned for assurance of God's
Love; what one do you read of tainted with Love of this World?

D. 3. Walk circumspectly and precisely. In Duties Personal and Relative.
Omission, or slight Performance of one, deserves deprivation of the Holy
Spirit. And, if the Comforter go away, what becomes of your Rest? The weakest
Christian, that lives up unto the grace he has received, is safer than the
strongest that does not so. And will have more Rest at Noon than he.

D. 4. Let your Love of God Believe all things, and Hope all things. I mean, in
all severest dispensations Believe all that He does to be very Equitable. And
hope to see the day that will show how little cause has been given of your
Dislike. The Law says, the King can do no hurt, though his Ministers may. The
Gospel is plain, Heaven's King cannot do hurt to his Children. Although the World
may. All Unsatisfiedness with Events, is caused by our having no thoughts of
God, or low, and slight, and hard ones. Do but Know and Remember He is God. And
one that then cannot act but like Himself. It will be almost as Impossible as
Unjust to be Discontented.

D. 5. Muse not ever upon your Afflictions disjunctly from your Mercies. If you
must multiply thoughts of them, then join you as many thoughts of your Mercies
with them. Else, while the best men muse, a wildfire will burn. But be it
reflected on by us! Had we ever in our Lives one Affliction, under which we had
not a million of Mercies? Or, what man is he that has not received a Sea of
Mercies for every drop of Trouble from God's hand? That has not had many a good
Day or Week, for every sorrowful Hour? A very ill Spirit it therefore appears,
that is took up wholly in poring on the so few sorrows, though Deserved, and
Needed, and Blessed too, it may be. Passing unregarded the so many Comforts, on
an Undeserving and Ill-deserving worm bestown.

I wave other Particulars. Let such as need, gather from Mr. Buroughs of
Contentment, and Dr. Bates of Resignation unto the Will of God.

My Testimony of the gracious, humble, quiet Christian forementioned, is
unnecessary. Except it be for provoking your Imitation. Upon very satisfactory
grounds, I have thought her One, of Gifts and Graces, above the ordinary pitch.
And, the same for the Consolations of God. Her Night-song was, Now am I one day
nearer my Father's house, my heavenly home. And her Morning one was harmonious;
to the same tune. Her Memory is sweet unto many; her helpful Converses are
dearly missed by her Relations and Neighbors. My Advice is, that you all take
the only way to do her Memory true Honor; and your selves the greatest
Kindness. Which is, to hear her, though now Dead, yet Speaking. And by her
Example shown you, now pressing you to conclude the Duties that I have
Preached, to be both Possible, and Desirable. She foresaw her Death, and
passed through the darkest shadow of its Vale, as undauntedly, as you know. O
that before God take any others of you hence, you may seek and find that Soul
Rest which may a-like glorify God, comfort your selves, and rejoice the
Congregation you leave behind! Amen.

Restless Importunity makes thus public, the Verses of Psalm 116th. sung
before the Sermon. And the Hymn sung after it.
Psalm 116.
1. THE God of Love has all my Love,
All, all, I give Him all:
And well I may; cause when I Pray,
All Help comes at my Call.
2. Because that his free Grace so pleased,
To grant this humble Prayer:
When I shall cease to Him to Pray,
I Will cease to breath in's Air.
3. The sinking sorrows of pale Death,
My trembling Soul assailed,
Fear of the Jaws of ravenous Hell,
Upon my heart prevailed.
4. Then, which was all that I could do,
I did invoke God's Name:
" My God, said I, "Save my Lost Soul!
And swift Salvation came.
5. Transcendent is the Grace of God;
That does with Truth abound:
The Praises of his Mercies great,
Through Earth and Heaven sound.
6. This Lord to simple helpless Souls,
Sufficient Help will give:
I seemed as dead as Death it self,
And yet, behold, I Live.
7. Turn, turn thee then, my rescued Souls
Unto thy calm and rest:
For why; the God of Love, to thee
Has his Choice Love expressed.
HYMN.
ARE Heaven and Hell eternal things?
What! never to have end?
Must Heavens full Pleasures never abate?
Hell's stock of Plagues never spend?
O strengthen, Lord, our weakest Faith
Of so great Hopes and Fears!
Make the Archangel's Trumpet be
Still sounding in our Ears.
Vain World, farewell! our dead friends show
Our days to Live be few:
By Word and Works, this day God puts
Next World within our view.
Scorn, O our Souls, Time and this World,
Hold the next World in Eye:
The Sweets and Bitters of this World,
Must, both, to Morrow die.
Haste, haste, and make your Peace with God,
In Him take up your Rest:
Your Present state shall then be Good,
And Future state be Best.
FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Hundred select Sermons on several Texts, by Tho. Horton, D D.

Sermons on 4 select Psalms, viz. 4th. 42, 51, 63. by Tho. Horton, D. D.

Mr. Baxters Christian Directory.

Sermons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. J.
Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwins, and Dr. John
Owens Epistles Recommendatory.

An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermon to
Cornelius; and circumspect walking, By Dr. Tho. Tailor.

A Practical Exposition on the 3d. Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by
Anthony Burgess.

Dr. Donns 40 Sermons, being his 3 Volumes.

Pareus Exposition on the Revelations.

General Martyrologia, with the Lives of 32 English Divines, by Sam. Clark.

A Conference between a Bensalian Bishop, and an English Doctor concerning
Church Government.

An Exposition of the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon, by William Greenhil.

The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkeley. Gods holy Mind, touching matters
Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments: Also an Exposition on the Lords
Prayer, by Edward Elton, B. D.

Horologiographia optica; Dyalling, universal and particular, speculative and
practical; together with a Description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method,
by Sylvanus Morgan.

A seasonable Apology for Religion, by Matthew Pool.

Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, by
J. S.

The Practical Divinity of the Papist, discovered, to be destructive to true
Religion, and men's Souls, by J. Clarkson.

A Case of Conscience, viz. whether it be lawful for any person to act contrary
to the opinion of his own Conscience, formed from arguments that to him appear
very probable, though not necessary or demonstrative, by Dr. Collings.

The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods hand, and the good man's mercy
to the bruit-Creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho. Hodges. B. D.

Certain Considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity among Protestants.

Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion: of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection.

Funeral Sermons.
Mr. James Janeway, by Nath. Vincent. The Lady Susanna Keate's, by Richard
Kidder, M A.

Mr. Cautons, by Mr. Henry Hurst, and Mr. Nath. Vincent.

Mr. Sorrels, by Mr. Benj. Smith.

Mr. Wadsworth, by Mr. R. Bragg.

Mr. Newcomens, by Mr. Fairson.

Mr. Thomas Vincents, by Mr. Slater.

Mr. Corbets, by Mr. Richard Baxter.

Mr. Bakers, by Mr. Nath. Vincent.

Mr. Marshals, by Mr. Tomlins.

Mr. Johnsons, by Mr. Loid.

Mrs. Fishers, by Mr. Scot.

Dr. Whittakers, by Dr. Annesly.

Mr. Wells, by Mr. Thomas Watson.

Mr. Stubs, by Mr. Watson.

Mr. Stubs, by Mr. Richard Baxter.

Hodges Vanity of man as mortal.

Mr. Lies, by Mr. Lamb.

Virtuous Daughter by Brion.

Sir Thomas Viners by Dr. Spurslow.

Mr. Perns, by Ainsworth.

Work and Reward of a Christian, by R. Raworth.

Mr. Wests Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Cole.

Mr. Webbs, by Mr. David Burges.

Baxters which is the true Church;

Hodges Creatures goodness.

Naked Truth.

Doolittles Protestant Answer to a Popish Question.

Mr. Kidders Charity directed.

Scholars Address against Pluralities.

Dr. Crossmans Sermon.

Humphrys peaceable disquisitions.

Hodges considerations to promote peace.

An Endeavor for Peace among Protest.

A conference between a Papist and a Jew; and a Protestant and a Jew.

An Essay for the Education of Gentlewomen.

A warning for Servants; or the Case of Margaret Clarke.

An Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon by the peaceable design.

A Discourse of Pluralities.

A Discourse of Excommunication.

The middle way of Predetermination

Popery an Enemy to Truth, by Mr. Sheldreck.

Dr. Dumoulins conformity of Independent Government to the Ancient Primitive
Christians.

Excommunication Excommunicated in a Dialogue between a Doctor of both Laws.

Wases Grammar.

Vincent of Conscience.

A rebuke to Informers.

A modest inquiry into Dr. Stillingfleet's Historical mistakes.

The State of Blessedness.

Liberty of Conscience in order to universal peace.

The Lords voice crying to England.

Life of Herod the Great.

Phelps Innocencies reward.

Rosses Mystogogus Poeticus.

Phelps on the Revelations.

Gillespys Ark of the Covenant.

Present State of new England.

Dr. Collings of Providence.

Froysells Sermons of Grace and Temptations.

Yarringtons Englands Improvement, First part. -- Idem Second part.

Meaning of the Revelation, by John Hayter.

The Morning-Lecture against Popery, or the principal Errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture, preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London.

Four useful discourses: (1) The art of improving a full and prosperous
condition for the glory of God; being an appendix to the art of Contentment in
three Sermons, on Philip. 4.12. (2) Christian submission, on 1 Samuel 3.18.
Philip. 1.21. (4) The Gospel of peace sent to the sons of peace, in six Sermons
on Luke 10, 5, 6. by Jeremiah Buroughs.

Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems.

A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands.

The unity and essence of the Catholic Church visible, by Mr. Hudson.

The intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the
particular Believing soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chap. of
Cant. by John Collings, D.D.

Large 8 vo.
The sure mercies of David by Nath. Heywood.

Heaven or Hell here in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent.

Closet-Prayer a Christians duty; all three by O. Heywood.

A practical discourse of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and duty of
Prayer by Tho. Cobbet.

Of quenching the Spirit; the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered; by Theophilus Polwheile.

The sure way to Salvation; or a Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with
Christ; by Richard Stedman. M. A.

Sober Singularity, by the same Author.

Heaven taken by Storm, by Tho. Watson.

The Child's Delight; together with an English Grammar.

Reading and Spelling made easy; both by Tho. Lie.

Aesops Fables, with morals thereupon in English Verse.

The Young-mans Instructor, and the Old-mans remembrancer; being an Explanation
of the Assemblies Catechism.

Captives bound in Chains, made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho.
Doolittle.

Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by William
Whitaaker.

The Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry Sermons, preached at
St. James Dukes-place, by Zech. Crofton.

The lise and death of Edmund Stanton D. D. To which is added a Treatise of
Christian Conference; and a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger.

Sin the Plague of plagues, or sinful sin the worst of Evils; by Ralph Venning.
M. A.

Cases of Conscience practically resolved; by J. Norman.

The Faithfulness of God considered and cleared in the great Events of his
Word; or a second part of the fulfilling of the Scripture.

The Immortality of the Soul explained and proved by Scripture and Reason; to
which is added Faiths-triumph over the fears of Death; by Tho. Wadsworth.

A Treastise of the incomparableness of God, in his Being, Attributes, Works,
and Word; by George Swinnock, M. A.

A Discourse of the Original, etc. of the Cossacks.

The Generation of Seekers; or the right manner of the Saints Addresses to the
Throne of Grace, with an Exposition on the Lord's-Prayer.

The Administration of Cardin. Ximenes.

An Essay to facilitate the Education of Youth, by bringing down the Rudiments
of Grammar to the sense of seeing, which ought to be improved by Syncrisis; by
Mr. Lewis of Totenham.

An Artificial Vestibulum; wherein the sense of Janua Linguarum is contained,
compiled into plain and short Sentences, in English, for the great ease of
Masters, and Expeditious progress of Scholars; by Mr. Lewis.

Speculum Sherlockianum, or a Looking-glass, in which the Admirers of Mr.
Sherlock, may behold the man, as to his Acuracy, Judgment, Orthodoxy.

A Discourse of Sins of Omission; wherein is discovered their Nature, Causes,
and Cure; by George Swinnock.

His Majesty's Propriety in the British Seas vindicated.

Differences about Water Baptism no bar to Communion; by John Bunyan.

The Dutch-Dispensatory; showing the virtues, qualities and properties of
Simples; the virtue and use of Compounds; whereto is added the Complete
Herbalist.

Hurst Revival Grace.

FINIS.

