A CALL TO SINNERS, SUCH As are under Sentence OF DEATH, AND SUCH As are under
any Prospect of it: FROM The Long-suffering and Gracious, but most Righteous
GOD.

By his Servant Daniel Burgess, at the Pious Request of an Excellent Person.

^f God peradventure will give them Repentance, 2 Timothy 2.25. LONDON, Printed
for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower end of
Cheapside, and R^bert Gibbs at the Golden Ball in Chancery Lane. 1689.

To my dear Children.
My Hopes and my Fears,
THE first Adam's sin came into You through my Loins. O may the second Adam's
grace come into you, through my means. My God and the God of my Father's grant
it! To Him have I Dedicated you: And for Him would I Educate you.

I am Called unto much work for Others: It Is little that I can do distinctly
for You. Be it your Care to make Yours, what is done for many Others. Thus
publicly I command you to read this Call, as wrote singly for your selves.
It Is possible some other Parents may from so mean an example, Charge their
Children. And this my Paper may speak unto you, when I am gone from you.

You know they are many, who think my Days on Earth will be few. And that You
must Die Young, or Live Orphans. However that be ordered by God, hasten ye to
make sure your Peace with Him. Up and be doing, O precious Souls, and dear as
mine own!

The God of my own Mercies, Comforts and Hopes be with you! Amen.

A Call to SINNERS, UNDER Sentence of DEATH, and under any Prospect of
approaching Death.
O Blessed God, that have called me to lay my Paper to the Grave, and to
entreat the Dead to Rise; to Argue with Rocks, and Persuade very Millstones to
be Saints! O take the Work into thine own hand; half a word of thine will make
every Reader a Sincere Convert and Sound Believer! Lord, if thou will, thou
can make this Call (like the Trump of the Archangel,) to raise Millions of
Dead Souls out of their Graves! Amen, Amen, for Jesus sake, Amen. Miserable, O
miserable, but not yet Helpless Sinner,

THE Lusts thou have served all thy former days, cannot now give thee one
pleasant Thought in these thy last days. The World thou have Idolized, cannot
save thee from, or in, thy approaching Death. The Devil whom thou have Imitated
and Obeyed, longs to be sent to fetch thee to Hell. The God whom thou have not
sought unto for thy Peace with Him, is resolved to wait but a very little
longer for thy seeking unto Him. Yet so Kind is his holy Nature, so
Compassionate is his holy Jesus, so long-suffering is his holy Spirit, that (by
my hand). He gives thee once more the Offer of his Pardon, Grace and Glory.

He commands me to try, if any or all of these ten Cousiderations; will awaken
thy Soul.

C. 1. The very last Week and Day of thy Life is given thee to prepare for
Eternity, as well as all thy former ones. I, and the mispending of these, will
be a greater sin than the mispending of all thy former Weeks and Days has
been. It will be a kind of sinning over all former sins again, and adding unto
the same. Who can say thy Day of Grace is over? And who can doubt but our last
sins be still incomparably our worst sins?

C. 2. The very minute it self, wherein Thou beginnest thy true Conversion, God
does begin thy true Salvation. Thou art under the Sentence of Condemnation not
only by the Law, but by the Gospel. When thou do begin to Convert, read Luke
15.20. And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him.

C. 3. The very Call that in this Paper God sends unto thee, is a probable
argument that God has saving Grace in store for thee. Methinks, God has said
to me: Go preach to the poor condemned Malefactors, for I have some people
among them; and Hell shall not have all that die on the Gallows.

C. 4. The very Book of God which directs me to all I put thee upon, is full of
Proofs that thou may be saved, however wicked thou have been, if even now
thou do not Deny or Delay Gods merciful Call sent thee. The Heaven is not so
full of Stars, as Old and New Testament of Proofs hereof. In the Old Testament,
Manasseh is a famous Instance of saving Grace to Sinners most notorious: The
Thief dying on the Cross, is another, recorded in the New Testament. [One of 97
years old, was converted by John Rogers. And Richard Rogers used to say of
John, I will never despair of any man for John Rogers's sake: so wicked a
wretch John had bin.]

C. 5. The very Nature, Decrees, and Words of God make it certain, that
Unbelief dishonours God more than all other Sins, and Faith more honors him
than all other Duties. St. Austin says, Judas sinned worse by his unbelieving
sorrow for his Sin, than by all his sins that he sorrowed for. And such another
Phoenix says, That right Faith honors God more, than an uniform entire
Obedience to the whole Law in Innocence could do.

C. 6. The very Pardon and Salvation of thy perishing Soul, is a Work God has
more Delight in, than he has in all the Works of the whole Creation. Seek,
Sinner, seek: seek, and fear not that God will deny unto thee, the thing he
delights to give unto all that do duly seek.

C. 7. The very Hope that in his Gospel-way God will save thee, and Confidence
that through Christ he can do it without any loss of his own glory, is no small
Honor unto God; I, and it is that without which, thou can never rightly
Believe on Jesus Christ, and therefore never Do any thing pleasing unto God.

C. 8. The very Soul of thine, which is certainly and extremely corrupted and
cursed, is not worse than many of the Souls which are now in Heaven, once were.
Gods Son has Redeemed, and his Spirit has sanctified as bad as Thou art. Why
not Thee too?

C. 9. The very Change of thine that I write for; change of Covenant, of
Spirit, of Nature, of Conversation, of Company; it can no sooner be made, but
Heaven will ring with Joy for it. I. and Hell gnash for envy at it. Father,
Son, and Spirit, Angels, Saints above, and all Saints below that hear of it,
will be right glad.

C. 10. The very State that thou art now in, is not so bad as that thou shall
presently pass into, is good; if now thou acceptest Christ offered to Thee. No,
nor shall the very Eternity of the Damned be so bitter, as he Eternity of thy
blessed Soul and Body be sweet. Sinner, sinner, lay this to thy heart: thy
State is Hellish; bad as a Creatures sin can-make it. But, Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and in the same moment it shall be Heavenly; even good as a
God-Man's Obedience can deserve to have it made. And know thou, though all we can
say of Hell, is but a flea-bite in comparison of what thou will feel it to be
if thou come therein; yet for all that, There Is more Joy in Heaven than Torment
in Hell.

Go thou then, and do all that is enjoined for Conviction, for Compunction, for
Union unto Jesus Christ, and to God by Him. Pray, and beg Prayers. Hear, and
Read Directions, and follow them. Lose no time, not a moment. Convinced
sufficiently thou art not, till thou art able sincerely to say these twelve
particulars.

P. 1. There is a Law and Covenant of perfect Obedience, which I was under,
ever since I was a Child of Adam. As soon as I was a Man, I was bound
personally, perfectly, and perpetually to Obey and Love the Father, Son and
Spirit. (I, and as soon as my Soul and Body came together, I was a Man in the
Language of the Scripture.)

P. 2. That Law of Perfect Obedience, that Covenant of works is broke by my
first Parent; and that Breach is imputed unto me, and the cursed Quality of it
is inherent in me even from the womb. It has also bin breaking continually by
my vile Person, in all my Thoughts, Words and Deeds, throughout all my days.

P. 3. For that double Breach, I am under God's wrath, the Laws Curse, liable
to all miseries, to Death, to Hell. I am bound over, as the Devils to the
Judgment of the great day: And as with them so with me, God is angry all the
day long.

P. 4. Yet can I not in the least find fault with the Law, or blame the Lord
and Lawgiver. Though I am undone, he has done me no wrong. He does but right; and
natural necessary right, for naturally he hates Sin, as I hate Hell. Nay, and
the equity and the honor of his Government require that such Sinners as I am,
receive such sentence as I am under.

P. 5. My offended God is also my absolute Sovereign; and not at all a Debtor
unto me, that I can commence no action against him, nor charge him with any
Injustice, if he let me perish under his damnatory sentence, and deny me
Salvation.

P. 6. No, nor can I excuse my self from being my own self-destroyer, by laying
the blame of my sin upon any Creature. They but Tempt, they Force not. All my
formerly used shifts, Cavils and Contradictions, I have done with for very
shame. My Mouth is stopped, and I am Dumb before God.

P. 7. Yet I hear and I believe a doctrine of Grace and Salvation, even for
such sinners as I am. A Salvation purposed by God. A Salvation purchased by
Jesus Christ. A salvation attested and published by the Holy Ghost. A
salvation, for sinners of all ranks and degrees. A salvation through a New
Covenant and New Birth.

P. 8. This Salvation, I perceive, God never meant, nor made any man's, but in
the way of Repentance, Faith, New obedience. The way of Children's salvation is
extraordinary, I speak of grown Persons.

P. 9. My self I find utterly unable, to Repent, to Believe, and to obey the
Gospel. I, to will or desire aright any good. Tho I must perish if I do not:
Yet without the Holy Spirit of Liberty, Life and Power put into me, I cannot
Repent, Believe and Obey.

P. 10. God, who was not at first bound to Create me, is now as little bound to
New-Create me; by putting his Holy Spirit into me, and by working in me, the
Habits of Repentance, Faith and Obedience; and by Exciting the same habits unto
Act and Exercise. If he does freely New-Create me, he is Gracious: if not, he
is Righteous.

P. 11. Nevertheless, God in the Gospel Licenseth, yea Invites, and Commands
(in general) all sinners to Repent, Believe, and Obey, i. e. to use all the
means of these, by God appointed, and of which we are capacitated. And I
conclude it my duty and interest to use the said means.

P. 12. Lastly, I take for granted, that it is my Duty and interest, to wait
unto my very last gasp what the Lord will say unto me, and do with me. And this
will I do if God enable.

Stop, Sinner, stop here; and over again with these twelve Particulars very
seriously! And now let me tell thee, vain is thy Conviction of all, without
that Compunction, or being pricked through the Heart, which we place in three
things; Fear, Grief, Separation from Sin: Go labor therefore to get able to
say as follows:

P. 1. I fear the Spiritual and Eternal Judgments of God, that heretofore I
feared but little, if at all. Hitherto I feared but only Poverty, Reproach,
Sickness, etc. now I fear a dark Mind, an hard Heart, and a Wrath to come.

P. 2. I grieve for all I have been and done against God, and Christ, and the
Holy Spirit: I grieve more for this, than I do for ought beside; more than
ought beside is worthy to be grieved for.

P. 3. I separate and turn me from every sin, to the best of my Skill and
Power. Tho I cannot say, all Sin in my will is dead; I dare say, all my Will to
sin is dead; I and of all the good gifts of God, I should now choose his CHRIST
and his H. SPIRIT.

This indeed is somewhat, sinner. Yet is one thing, (and the greatest,)
lacking. For ought that yet appears, it is lacking Do thou turn from every sin
to the best of thy skill and power? Thou do well to do thy all, though it be
next to nothing, that as yet thou can do. Is all thy will to sin dead? This
is a good hearing: though it be to be feared, it is a very improper death that it
has died. Trees are said to be dead, when Life is gone out of the root of
them: and they are said to be dead, when Winter-weather has but driven their
life unto their root. And has hindered nothing but their Growing and
Fruit-bearing: nor them neither, but until the Spring-season. Now is thy will
to sin any otherwise dead, than the Trees in thy Garden be dead in Winter? Or
is this Death, think thou, a true or a sufficient? Thou now chusest of all
God's gifts both CHRIST and his H. SPIRIT. Welcome news this is. But all is not
Gold that glisters: and it should be enquired whether it be a good choice thou
make of these so good gifts. A choice of mere Compulsion, thou do not thy
self believe a good one. Such a choice rebelliously-disposed subjects may make
of a King, whom they loath and wish under ground: such a choice ill Women may
make of men for their Husbands, while they hate their tempers and their
Persons. A choice of inward free Disposition is the only one that truly
praises an Object chosen; and that can commend the soul that makes the choice.
Speak man, of which sort is thy choice? What is thy considerate Judgment, and
thy Free Disposition, how stand thou affected toward these divine Persons,
and their holy Nature? Their saving Benefits, I question not thy desire of. And
say, if thou can, is it any thing but Compulsion by fear of being damned
without them that causes thy choice. Sinner, I would have thee know: It Is from
Christ working in thee by his Spirit, that thou turnest from sin so as thou
do: That thy Will to sin is dead, even so much as a Tree in Winter: That thou
chusest Christ and his spirit though but for their Benefits and but on
Compulsion. Without divine Drawing thou had never come so far it self. But woe
be to thee that ever thou wast born, if thou art not drawn and do not come
farther. If thou do not come into real and gracious Marriage-union unto the
Lord Jesus Christ. O go Labor, Pray, and Wait to be enabled to say the four
particulars that follow: as ever thou would get able to say, I am passed from
death to Life.

P. 1. I now see the Necessity of Union to Christ, and unto God by Christ. God
and Man were at first United closely, though not inseparably. Sin undid us by
Disuniting us. By destroying the Relation and Kin we had unto God: and of
Children making us Aliens and Strangers. Religion is nothing at all less than
Reunion unto God. A return unto our first Kin and Relation unto Him. Such Kin
as that of Father and Child: such Relation as that of Friend and Friend. Now
hereunto no return can be made, but by Union first made unto Jesus Christ, Joh.
1.12. Such an Union to him, as that which is betwixt Husband and Wife: betwixt
Head and Members: bewixt Root and Branches: betwixt Foundation and Stones built
on it! These similitudes the Holy Scripture uses: and he that takes them for
insignificant ciphers, blasphemeth.

P. 2. I now see the Nature of this so necessary Union unto Jesus Christ. It Is
the foresaid Relation and Kin, by mutual Consent and Covenant made. By
threefold Consent. God is willing that his Son Christ as Mediator should become
so nearly related unto us. Christ's will is always one and the same with his
Fathers; and He is declared most willing. We, sinful Fugitives and Aliens, are
never willing, till infinite Grace by almighty Power makes us willing. Nor ever
are we took into the Relation we speak of, till we are made so. And are brought
to an hearty Consent unto the Marriage-Covenant. Which consent, is indeed
saving Faith. Consenting thereunto, is believing: and believing on, is marrying
unto Christ Jesus, as appears Joh. 1.12, etc. And this great work being done,
we are instantly Akin unto our blessed Lord. Related as near, as a Wife is
unto an Husband. I, and Related unto God as a Wife is unto her Husband's
Father. Christ MEDIATOR is our Husband, and God is Our Father by the Law of
grace. My Father and your Father, says that gracious Husband, Joh. 20.17.

P. 3. I now see what that Covenant of Grace is, whereto our consent given does
make the foresaid Union. It consists, I see, in Promises and Demands. Promises
of good things unto us, and Demands of duty from us. The Promised Mercies I
comprise in four: (1.) GRACE. Both Grace Justifying, and Absolving from the
guilt of sin: and Grace Sanctifying, or Abolishing by degrees the Power of sin,
Heb. 8.10, 12. (2.) BREAD. I mean all the necessary good things, of this Life.
Enough of them to bear our charges to Heaven, 1 Timothy 4.8. (3.) GLORY. That is,
both Excellency and Eternity of all desirable good in the next World. 2 Timothy
4.8. 1 Pet. 1.4. (4.) CHILDREN'S BLESSING. An entail of good things for our
sakes, [tho' not our merits,] upon our Children, Romans 11.28. Exodus 20.6. Acts
2.39. The Duty demanded is also considerable in four particulars. (1)
REPENTANCE. An Heart-renting for sin, and from it. A First one; necessary unto
our acceptance into a Justified state; an After-one continued; necessary unto
our sense of Justification, and unto our daily Pardons, Act. 2.38. Luke 13.3.
(2) FAITH. Assent unto the Gospel Revelations, Consent unto the Precepts,
Reliance upon the promises, Act. 16.31. Mar. 16.16. (3.) NEW OBEDIENCE.
Conformity of the whole man unto the whole Rule of the Gospel in Natural, Civil
and Religious actions, 2 These. 1.8. 1 Pet. 4.17. (4) PERSEVERANCE. Or strict
and precise adherence unto that conformity, in all times, places, companies and
conditions unto Life's end, Rev. 2.10. Our Holy Baptism, and the Lord's supper,
do both Encourage our belief of God's fulfilling the promises of this Covenant,
and Engage us on our parts to fulfill the Demands of it, in the strength of
Christ. [And they would, of all Ordinances, be the most helpful, if the Nature,
Ends and Uses of them were duly Taught by Ministers and Learned by People.]

P. 4. I now feel my hearts free and full consent to this said Covenant of
grace. Unto the Acceptance of it is promised Benefits, for my only Portion and
Enjoyment: and unto the Acceptance of its demanded Duties, for my only
Business and Employment in this world. Blessed be free grace, I do accept both.
And my Soul that was so far from God, is made nigh. The Objections of my mind
and oppositions of my will are routed. Grace in Christ has conquered my Enmity
against God, as Holy: and my, fear of Him, as my Enemy. His offered Son I have
Accepted; his Person, with his Benefits. I have taken Him for my Husband,
Teacher, Savior, Ruler: As the only Mediator to Reconcile God unto me, and to
Communicate grace to me from God. Now is Father Son and Spirit my enjoyed
Portion, and my served Lord again. I have entered into an Oath and a Curse, and
bound my self at my everlasting peril, Him only to serve, Him only to enjoy.
With engaged heart, with opened mouth, with a fixed hand and seal I have
obliged my self to have no other God but Him; no Mediator, but his Son; no
Ruler, but his Spirit; no Rule, but his Word. The Word of his ever Blessed
Covenant, well ordered in all things and sure: which is all my salvation and
all my desire. Oh Reader, I have heard of a sinner, who twice heard a Voice
from Heaven as he thought it, saying, Make haste, make haste; and yet he (a
prodigious Adder) died a Sinner. Be it far from thee to be so obstinate.

Will thou tell me?

Obj. 1. That I mistake thee, and that thou art no such great Sinner, though it
be thy lot to have been drawn away by ill Company, and to have miscarryed of
late.

Answ. Alas, alas! if so blind and senseless, what hope of thee? However, the
Lord who is only able, shall be entreated to make thee Understand, 1. Every
sinner is a great one, for no sin is small; the least of sins against God,
deserves Death eternal. 2. By Nature thou art a Child of Wrath, and Enemy of
God. 3. All thy Life of Unregeneracy has been very sinful, a dead and damning
Life. 4. Thou art an English despiser of Christ, and that is the worst sort in
the World: For according to the degrees of spiritual Light such are the degrees
of obstinate Rebellion against it.

Obj. 2. But thou have been Punished, and art like to die too: Yea and have
been troubled for thy Sins very much: and thou hopest God has more Mercy, than
after all this to damn thee to Hell.

Answ. Sinner, I pray God give thee thy sight! These things are true. 1. An
everlasting Hell it self is not more than our Sins do deserve; God is far from
Unmerciful in damning Sinners so incorrigible. 2. The Tears and the Blood of a
Creature, are no satisfaction for Sin: thy burning in Hell for the space of a
million of years, will not expiate the guilt of one vain Thought.

Obj. 3. I put my trust in my God and Savior: and I hope to be saved without
the ado you make about Conviction, and Compunction and Union, some may say.

Answ. Deluded Soul! O that thou would consider! 1. In all the book of God we
are taught there is no Salvation, but in these ways of his Sovereign Wisdom and
Mercy. 2. By this it is plain, you know not God, nor what it is to Trust in Him:
but do only Presume blasphemously that He is such an one as your self, and is
neither Holy nor Just. 3. You will believe in his Promises directly contrary to
the condition required in 'em: and you will not believe his Threatenings against
impenitent unreformed Sinners though ratified with his Oath.

Obj. 4. Why, says another, what profit can you assure me of, if I should, to
my utmost, endeavor all that you advise?

Answ. 1. And what if I could not Assure thee of any Profit? Would thou do
nothing upon very Probability? If 'twere but Probable that the King would grant
a Petition for thy Life, would refuse any possible labor to get one
presented. The whole World acts upon Probabilities. 2. But well; I can Assure
thee of benefit no less than Eternal. For suppose the worst, that thy
endeavors prevail not unto Saving Conversion; yet will they prevail to a
lessening of thy Torments in Hell for ever. Every degree of contempt greatens
them; every degree of endeavor lessens them. On the other hand; if unto thy
utmost thou endeavor, there is no just reason for the frightful conclusion that
'twill be Uneffectual unto Salvation. And if it be not, thy certain Profit is
too great for Angel's Tongues to express. A comprehensive foresight of it,
would work wonders in thee. Enquire, if thou know not, what things are these
ten? 1. Justification. 2. Adoption. 3. Sanctification of the Holy Spirit. 4.
Acceptance of all Duties with God. 5. Title unto all the Promises of the
glorious Gospel. 6. Inseparable and honorable Union to God. 7. Peace and Joy
in Conscience. 8. Victory over sinful Love of Life and Fear of Death. 9.
Glorious Resurrection of thy Body. 10. Boldness in the day of Judgment, and
Admission into heavenly Glory. If I were sure I should never get, I would Live
and Die in the pursuit of these. Up, Sinner, up, and be Doing, and know this:
-- If but one man now in the World were to be Saved, I would Try to be the Man:
and if but one were to be Damned, I would Tremble and carefully endeavor to
make sure that I should not be He. O that these six Memorandums were nailed on
thy Memory: (they have done others good, why not thee?) M. 1. It Is God in
Christ, only, that can save thee. 2. He invites thee to Salvation, even yet. 3.
Upon gracious terms, He Promises, He will Save thee. 4. He commands thee by all
his Authority to accept it on his Terms. 5. He will Rejoice over thee with
Singing, if thou do accept it. 6. And Oh the Love! He will Weep over thee if
(after all) thou will Destroy thy self unperswadably. Sinner, Sinner, I can
tell thee of one that heard a Voice, No Mercy, no Mercy, and yet was persuaded
to Endeavor, and did Convert, and did obtain Mercy. Remember it: Despair is
full as bad as Presumption; and divine Mercy is not a jot less than Justice.

Obj. 5. I cannot say I do not Repent and Believe, and that sincerely: but if I
do, it is with a sadly weak Repentance and Faith: and such as I am ashamed of,
and cannot believe the holy Judge of all the Earth will accept.

Answ. Say it be so: and say that it is but the lowest place in Heaven that thou
shall be set in: Is any Seat there Uneasy? O man, know and Joy in it. It Is
Truth of Grace that is thy Life. The look of the weakest eye unto the brazen
Serpent, did heal as truly as the look of the strongest. Upon the very first
sincere Acceptance of Father, Son and Spirit to be thine through the blessed
Mediator, and Resignation of thy self to be theirs through the same only
Propitiation, it is sure thy Mittimus to Hell is stopped and superseded, thy Pass
to Heaven is granted. He will deliver thy Soul from going down into the Pit,
and thy Life shall see the Light, Job 33.28. Benhadad escaped by casting
himself on the Mercy of the King of Israel: It shall never repent thee, if in
his holy appointed way thou ca^t thy self on the King of Heaven's Mercy. Heaven
cannot shut, nor Hellopen, unto a Soul sincerely weary of all the Sin it has,
and sick of desire for all the grace it wants. I should think thee in Hells
mouth, If I heard thee uttering boasts of having all. Grace; or content, as
having enough. They that have most, do all cry, that it is next to none that
they have. And the higher they get in holy Qualifications, the lower they fall
in their Apprehensions of themselves. He that gives Grace to the Humble,
makes them yet more Humble by all the Grace He gives them I would rather be
the worst Humble man than the best Proud one in the World; and specially, the
spiritually Proud. Well, in a word: Beg the Holy Spirit to keep thee from both
extremes; from Dreaming of safety while building on the Sand, and from
Despairing of Mercy when thou buildest on the Rock Christ.

Now, O every one of you needy Souls that I address unto, may you know the
things of your Peace in the short span of your time that remains. If this
little Gospel-Net catch but one Fish among you, I win more than a World. But I
have sent up Prayers to Him that can make it take take thousands of you, that
He would so do. And take all the Glory of it unto Himself, when He has done it.
Sirs, I shall be certified that He has granted my Cries, if ever I shall hear
that you grant me but these Requests, which conclude my Call unto you. They are
for your observance of these rules in your endeavoring, if indeed you will
endeavor, to Reconcile you to God e're ye Dye.

R. 1. That you enter on it with such Solemnity as such a Work well deserves.
Get as many Godly Ministers and Friends as you can, to come join with you in
Fasting and Prayer for divine Blessing on your great enterprise: Testify to
your God, to your Conscience, and to all godly conscientious Folk about you,
that you have higher Thoughts of God, than to dare go about making your Peace
with his Majesty, as though 'twere a business, that either did not Require or
would not Requite, the greatest and humblest Care and Pains.

R. 2. That you stick to it closely and constantly, as that Work will require
you to do. I, and would have required, had you begun ever so soon, and were you
to live ever so long. Sirs, is not your Worldly business yet over? is not your
Peace with God now, your one and only busisiness? All of the four and twenty
hours that ye do not sleep out, methinks you might now spend very freely in the
work I have proposed. Formerly, 'twas all of it spent in running away farther
from Gods peace: why, now should but a part of it be laid out in making after
it? The time was when you begrudged God an half hour's diversion from the World
or sinful Pleasure. You now reproach God fearfully, if ye begrudge not the
World the least Unnecessary diversion from Gods proper service.

R. 3. That you Observe and Lament in all you do, that Leprosy of Selfishness,
which of all things is hardest to be cured. To love your self is no Sin, but
Duty; but Love of Self above God, what is that, think you? God is so just, that
were there any thing else so good as He, he would love it as well as himself;
were there ought better, he would love it better, than himself. Now alas, alas!
God is truly all-good and all-lovely: Nothing is lovely but as of and for him;
yet how do you find it? what care you for God but for your own ends? could you
not sin on as jocundly as ever, and omit all Duty as profanely, but for fear of
your own Sufferings in Hell, and for desire of your own Pleasures in Heaven? Is
it not for Self Ends that you list to know God, or be at Peace with him? Yes,
it is, and to turn the Scales, and get to love your selves but for God's
honors sake, to desire Pardon of Sin, Peace of Conscience, Deliverance from
Hell, principally that ye may thereby Love and Honor God; is this Easy? Or is
it, think you, Unnecessary? Sirs, mark it well; I count not that you have
received your sight, or any sense of your Duty and Business, 'till you are
crying to this purpose, viz. O blessed God, thanks to thine own Grace for it, I
have begun to seek my Reconciliation unto thee; and I do not, nor dare I but
hold on seeking: But, woe is me, a cursed Selfishness (I see) has, and still
does act me. Oh! I have not, nor do I yet carry it toward Thee, as a God, and
above all, yea Universal good. I would I could Love thee so as to be ashamed of
my sin in time past, and to be afraid of it for the future, principally because
of Love to thy All-loveliness. Oh that I could say, If there were no Heaven to
reward, nor Hell to Punish me, yet so do I love God and hate sin, that of all
things I would desire to be Reconciled to Him and Live his Praises. But Oh,
though I discern it is as necessary to my Happiness that I Love thee, as that I am
Loved of thee, and that if I love not thee, I love not any good at all, for
thou art one and All; I, and that I do not love thee rightly, 'till I do love
thee above all, and Love nothing but thee and for thy sake: Yet is there a
Millstone about my neck that presses me down into deep Selfishness, and hinders
my seeking thee without giving thee greatest Provocations for ever to abhor me.
Sirs, your real weariness of this said Millstone would be a token for good.

R. 4. That you by no means argue from the Multitude or Greatness, or Long
Continuance of your Sins, that there is no Help for you in God. True, Sin is an
evil, in one sense Infinite: It Is against an Infinite God. One sin did deserve
and procure the whole World's Condemnation. One sin takes more honor from God,
than all the Obedience of mere Creatures can repair. And what then; sin, for
all this, is not Infinite, so as Gods Mercy, and Christ's Merits, and the Holy
Ghosts mighty Power are infinite. No, such are these, that if I my self had
sinned all the sins of the fallen Angels, and of fallen Mankind both, Christ's
Blood could satisfy for all: the Holy Ghost could sanctify and cleanse me
from all: The Mercy of God could forgive me all. I and observe it: Heaven has
more than a few, of them who were on earth more sinful than ordinary, for a
sadly long time. Again I tell you: Unless your present and future Unbelief hold
you down under them, no sins can be your ruin. It Is not falling into the water
that is deepest, drowns a man; but it is keeping down under the water. Sirs,
Vomit up now all your heretofore sweet poisons, make all your sins to become
your shames and sorrow, let no one of them live in your favor, and (fear it
not) you shall not die in their guilt. If we our selves stood bound to pay unto
God the satisfaction of any one Sin, there were no hope of our Salvation: but
that is undertook by Christ who suffered death and the pains of Hell in our
stead, whom if the chief of sinners commit and submit themselves unto, there is
as little fear of their Damnation.

R. 5. That you be sure to be Orderly and Universal in this your great work. My
meaning is: that you seek good things in their good Order; the first firstly,
and so onward: and that you seek all Gods proposed good things, all and every
of the Number. Do not as many do wildly; do not crave to have the Sacraments,
before you competently understand the Commandments: nor pretend to be keepers
of the Holy Commandments, till you competently understand the Blessed Pattern
of Prayer: nor dream ye a possibility of profitably Receiving the Sacrament, or
Obeying any Commandment, or making any Prayer, till you are competently
acquainted with the Gospel Creed. Do not conceit your selves capable of Comfort
before Holiness, or of Holiness before Union to Christ, or of saving Union to
Christ before Faith, or of Faith before Humiliation, or of Humiliation before
Conviction. Seek all, and seek in Order! O seek 'em but as you believe that
damned Souls in Hell would seek 'em, if they had but your Capacity and your
Call. The Lord grant when your Bodies drop into the Pit, your Souls may not
fall into Eternal Flames. And that your Real Conversion may be so sensible, as
to be Comfortable to your selves; and so Visible, as that it may be said by all
who see your end, Behold God has granted unto these Prisoners [and these Dying
Creatures,] Repentance unto Life. Amen.

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside.
THree Questions resolved briefly and plainly; Viz.

1. What Conceptions ought we to have of the blessed God?

2. What are those Truths, whereof the Knowledge appears most indispensibly
necessary unto our Salvation; and (therefore) to be first and most Learnt by us?

3. What is the Change wrought in a Man by God's H. Word and Spirit, before he
can safely conclude himself passed from Death to Life? Being the Sum of three
Sermons.

The Christians earnest Expectation and Longing for the glorious Appearing of
the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Set forth in a Discourse occasioned
by the Decease of that Excellent Christian and Minister of Christ, Mr. Noah
Webb, late of Sandhurst in the County of Berks.

The Christian Temper: Or, the Quiet State of Mind that God's Servants labor
for. Set forth in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Vrsula Collins. All three by
Daniel Burgess, Minister of the Gospel.


