A true and Impartial NARRATIVE OF Some Illegal and Arbitrary proceedings by
certain Justices of the Peace and others, against several innocent and
peaceable Nonconformists in and near the Town of Bedford, upon pretense of
putting in execution the late Act against Conventicles. TOGETHER With a brief
Account of the late sudden and strange Death of the Grand Informer, and one of
the most violent malicious Prosecutors against these poor people. Published for
general Information.

-- They which hate us, spoil for themselves. Ps. 44. 10. -- As deceivers, and
yet true, etc. As poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10. -- And took joyfully the spoiling of
your Goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in Heaven a better and an
enduring substance. Heb. 10. 34. Printed in the year, 1670.

SIR,
Some proceedings at Bedford, pursuant to the late Act of Parliament, (a true
Narrative whereof is herein enclosed) afford matter both of wonder and dislike
to such that have observed them. When you have perused the Paper, you will
conclude with me and others, that this Text needs no Comment; it is plain, that
in despite of Magna Charta, and in defiance to all Laws and Rules of
Righteousness, Neighborhood and Humanity they resolve to ruin the
Nonconformists, though the Instruments are no ways able to recompense the King
and Kingdoms damage thereby. The Sufferers are cheerful and peaceable; their
immediate Persecutors are the scum of the people, and chiefly the appurtenants
of the Commissaries Court. The most forward Instrument of that sort is one that
has openly avowed and declared his esteem for Popery above other Religions. If
some check be not given to these Extravagancies, many Families will suddenly be
ruined, and the public Trade and Welfare endangered, which the Interest of
some, the Rage, Revenge and Enmity of others will not admit regard to. Pardon
this trouble, when I have told you the particulars of the Narrative are all
true, and will be proved in every part. So I have remaining at present only to
tell you, I am, Sir,

Your assured Friend.

The NARRATIVE.
ON Lord's Day ( May 15.) at the dwelling house of one John Fen, a Haberdasher
of Hatts, many persons being assembled for Religious Exercise; One West and
Feckman (two Apparitors) by a Warrant from one Mr. Foster, who is a Justice of
Peace, and the Commissaries Deputy, did enter the House, and force the Meeters
to Mr. Fosters House, who fined every one of them severally, according to their
reputed abilities; and committed the Preacher to Prison, for words he spoke
against the Church of England, then occasioned by the discourse of Mr. Foster.
The Apparitors charged (by virtue of their Warrant) a Constable, and a
Churchwarden, to assist them; but they neglecting, (being not willing to the
work, as they themselves declared) were fined each of them five pounds; though
by intercession of friends, the Fines are not yet levied.

On Friday following, one Thomas Battison another Churchwarden, and the most
active and busy in the work, having with much labor and difficulty called
together the Overseers of the Poor, and the Constables of the several Wards, to
levy the several Fines upon the Goods of the Meeters, did fitst attempt to levy
the Fine of Ten pounds upon the Goods of one John Bardolf a Maltster, who
having sold all his Malt before the Act commenced, and delivered his Malt and
Malt-house into his possession to whom he had sold them, none of the Officers
would join with Battison to break open the Door of the Malt-house, or to
distrain the Malt, though he most importunately charged and besought them to do
it, promising to bear them harmless.

Whilst Battison and the other Officers were debating in the open Yard before
the Malthouse Door, a great number of all sorts of persons were gathered about
them, expressing (by turns) their indignation against him, for attempting this
against Bardolf; whom the whole Town knew to be a just and harmless man; and
the common sort of people covertly fixing a Calves tail to Battisons back, and
deriding him with shouts and hollows, he departed without taking any distress
there; and advanced with other Officers to Edward Covingtons Shop, a Grocer, to
levy five shillings, for his Wife being at the Meeting, where none of the
Officers would distreyn but Battison, who took a Brass Kettle, but when he had
brought it to the street-door, none of the Officers would carry it away;
neither could he hire any to do it in two hours time, though he offered money
to such needy persons among the company as wanted bread; At last he got a youth
for sixpence to carry the Kettle less way than a stones-throw, to an Inn-yard
where before he had hired a Room to lodge such Goods, under pretense to lodge
Grain: but when the Youth had carried the Kettle to the Inn-gate, (being hooted
at all the way by the common Spectators) the Innkeeper would not suffer the
Kettle to be brought into his Yard; and so his man set it out in the middle of
the street, None regarding it, till toward night a poor woman that receives
alms was caused by an Overseer to carry it away.

From hence, Battison, with the rest of the Officers at his heels, proceeds to
distrein one John Spencer a Grocer, for a Fine of Forty shillings; but his
Shop-door being locked, Battison could not prevail with the Officers to join
with him in breaking it open: and so this day ended, without any other distress
than that of the Kettle.

The next day, which was the Market Day, the Justices understanding how
Battison was discouraged in his work by the backwardness of the other Officers,
and the open discountenance of the other people, commanded the Officers to
break open the Doors, and levy the Distresses, and promised them to bear them
harmless: Immediately old Battison, with a file of Soldiers and the Constables,
in the middle of Market-time advanced again to the Malt-house of John Bardolfe,
(situate in an Inn-yard in the middle of the Marketplace) and breaks open the
Doors, but not without long time and trouble, all people refusing to lend
either Bars or Hammers, which they sent from place to place to borrow for that
purpose: When the Doors were broken open, Battison distreyned fourteen Quarters
of Malt, but it was night before he could carry them away; for though the
Marketplace was then full of Porters (it being a great Corn-Market) yet none
of them would assist, though charged strictly by Battison and the Constables,
but ran all away, and left their Fares; some of them saying, they would be
hanged drawn and quarterd before they would assist in that work; for which
cause the Justices committed two of them (which they could take) to the Gaol.

The next day, being Lord's Day, Fines were doubled upon the Meeters, before the
first could be levied; for they assembling again at the same House, according
to their custom; Battison with the two Apparitors, by another Warrant from Mr.
Foster, entered the Meeting Place about nine of the clock in the morning: but
the Meeters refusing to depart before their Exercise was ended (unless forced)
Battison sends word of it to Mr. Foster, who returns a verbal Order, that
Battison should charge certain Gentlemen of the Town (whose names he had sent
by the messenger) to assist him; which Battison accordingly did, going to their
Houses to call them, though there were near a hundred common people spectators
in the streets, and none of them then charged to assist, and also Trained-Band
Soldiers ready in Town for this service, partly at the charge of these
Gentlemen whom Battison had so warned to assist, and who were so warned (as is
supposed) upon design, to have them incur the penalties of five pounds for
their refusing. About ten of the clock in the morning the Meeters went with
Battison and the Apparitors (being constrained so to do) to the Swan in
Bedford, where being kept till four of the clock in the afternoon, and their
names taken by the Justices, they were set at liberty.

Next morning Mr. Foster the Justice appears early in the streets, with old
Battison and the two Apparitors, a file of Soldiers and some Constables, to
see the Fines levied upon the Meeters Goods; charging to his assistance such
persons he sees, and sending for others to their houses, but got few or none
besides his first company; most of the Tradesmen, Journeymen, Laborers and
Servants having either left the Town, or hid themselves, to avoid his call. The
Town was so thin of people, that it looked more like a Country Village than a
Corporation; and the Shops being generally shut down, it seemed like a place
visited with the Pest, where usually is written upon the Door, Lord have mercy
upon us!

The first Distress was attempted upon the Goods of one Nicholas Hawkins a
Cutler, who was fined forty shillings; but his Goods being removed beforehand,
and his House visited with the Smallpox, the Officers declined entering. Mr.
Foster meeting here on John Croker (that was also fined three pounds) commanded
his assistance; who refusing, was therefore by Mr. Foster commanded into the
custody of one of the Town-Sergeants, then present.

From hence Mr. Foster went into the House of one Michael Shepherd a
Shoemaker, who was fined five shillings; where a Distress was made, not only
for five shillings, but also for 12d. more; because the said Shepherd being
asked the same time by Mr. Foster, if he was at Church the day before? and not
answering, only desired to know who accused him, or would swear it.

The next House in their way was one Thomas Honyloves, a Journyman -Shoemaker,
fined twenty shillings or more; whose Children lying sick of the Smallpox, in
the House where his Goods lay, the Officers were unwilling to enter, and so Mr.
Foster drew them off to one Thomas Cowpers a Heelmaker, fined forty shillings;
distreyning three Cart-load of Wood, cut especially for his working; which was
of more value than any of his household Goods, he being a poor man, and living
only upon making Heels and Lasts.

The next remove was to one John Crokers House before mentioned, a Dealer in
Linen Drapery, and fined three pounds; who having removed his Shop-Goods to
another place, to secure them from the Distress, old Battison would not trouble
himself to distrein then, but said he would take a better opportunity to get
his Goods.

Near this place lived one Daniel Rich, a Tanner, and Constable of that Ward;
who being fined five shillings for his Wife, had his best Wearing-Coat
distreyned the same time, by immediate Order of Mr, Foster.

From hence Mr. Foster marches to John Spencer, a Grocer; whose Goods he
distreyned for a Fine of about forty shillings. The next Neighbor was William
Jay, a Baker, who was also distreyned for five shillings. And next to him lived
one Edward Isaae, a Blacksmith, fined forty shillings for himself and his Wife;
from whom they took away Locks, Shovels, and the very Anvil upon which he
forgeth his Work; and Battison would have pulled down the Forge-Bellows also,
but that it required more time and labor, than his itch to greater prizes in
other places would allow him: Hastening therefore to their Market, they leave
(for a time) the Parish of Paul's, invading the Parish of Cuthberts; where they
find the door of one Thomas Arthur a Pipe-maker, locked, who was fined five
pounds; before they had broken the door open by attempts they made at it, the
same was unlocked on the inside; Mr. Foster enters, and distreyning all the
Goods within doors and without, the said Arthur desired to know, how much Money
he had distreyned for? to whom the said Mr. Foster replied, that they
distreyned for eleven pounds: thereupon Thomas Arthur desired to see the
Warrant; which being produced, he seeing himself therein but six pound, told
Mr. Foster so: to which M. Foster answered, that there was five pound more for
keeping his Door locked. When Thomas Arthur perceived that Mr. Foster would
distreyn all his Goods; he said, Sir, What shall my Children do, shall they
starve? Mr. Foster replied, that so long as he was a Rebel, his Children should
starve. And so on Wednesday following, old Battison, the two Apparitors, with a
File of Musketeers, and a Cart, carried away what Household Goods they thought
fit, and all the Wood both within doors and without, necessary to his Trade, by
three Cart-load, not leaving so much as to suffice for the burning of a Kiln of
Pipes, ready set, though earnestly desired by the poor Pipemaker himself, and
also by others of Battisons Company. Mr. Foster having done his Work at the
Pipemakers, proceeds in the Parish to one Robert Browns a Gardener, distreyning
all his Household Goods, for a Fine supposed to be three pounds: making haste to
the chiefest place they aimed at, for their turn, they passed into Peter's
Parish, to the House of Mris. Mary Tilney, Widow, a Gentlewoman well descended,
and of a good Estate, who was fined Twenty pounds; and to make her exemplary in
suffering for that offense, Mr. Foster himself, being attended by his Public
Notary, will see the Fine effectually levied upon her Goods; and indeed the
same was effectually done; for (a Cart being provided for that purpose) they
distreyned and carried away all the Goods in her House they thought worth their
labor, as Tables, Cupboards, Chairs, Irons, Feather-beds, Blankets, the very
Hangings of the Room, and the Sheets off her Bed, insomuch that the Widow was
forced that night to borrow Sheets of her Neighbors to lie in, being not
willing to lodge out of her own House, though invited by her friendly
Neighbors; nor did they leave her one Featherbed of her own (having taken
three away) whereon to spread those Sheets she borrowed, but she was forced to
make use of a Bed and Bolster of another, left in her House: It is true the
Gentlewoman had more good Housholdstuff of her own, than was at this time found
in her House; but foreseeing the Waste intended upon her, prudently secured the
best of them abroad; and therefore cannot with safety possess them for her
necessary use: And as for the value of those Goods taken away, it is supposed
to be betwixt forty and fifty pounds. Yet the said Mris Tilney was more
troubled at the crying and sighing of her poor Neighbors about her, (who were
much affected with her sufferings, she being very charitable) than for the loss
of her Goods, which she took very cheerfully. And so the Officers left her,
having finished this days work.

The next day, being Tuesday, more Fines were to be levied on the Goods of the
rest of the Meeters; but Battison finding it would lie hard upon him and the
two Apparitors, for want of more help than they had the day before; and
fore-knowing that if he deferred charging Assistance till he began his work,
all people would get out of the way, as they did; Therefore early in the
morning he walked alone in the Streets, looking into the Shops, to charge men
beforehand to be ready: Which being soon perceived by the people, most of the
Tradesmen and other Inhabitants, instantly either deserted the Town, or hid
themselves as before. About ten of the Clock, old Battison, with the Soldiers,
and some Constables, whom he had warned overnight to be in readiness, marches
up the High Street; where he levieth the Fine of five pounds upon John Fen, the
Haberdasher of Hatts beforementioned, at whose House the Meeting was; taking
away all the Hats in his Shop, and the next day carted away his Houshold-Goods,
because there was but twenty nine Hats in the Shop, beside Hatbands, that they
took away. Having thus dealt with this Hatter, he proceeds to deal the same
measure to another Hatter, one Samuel Fen, who was also fined five pounds, and
dealt with as his Brother before him, finding no more favor from them than the
former.

The next Fine they proceed to levy, was forty shillings upon the Goods of one
Thomas Woodward, a Malster: but one Richard Layfield being in possession of the
Malthouse, to whom the Maltster had (some time before) sold all his Malt, and
quitted the possession; Old Battison met with a stop, and was persuaded to
defer distreyning, till Richard Layfield, who had bought the Malt, had spoken
with the Justices, then met at the Swan: forthwith the said Layfield applied to
the Justices, ^cquaints them that Thomas Woodward ( bona fide) did owe him
sixty pounds, that he had formerly lent him in money, and that the said Thomas
Woodward was bound to deliver two hundred ninety odd quarters of Malt to
others, for Money and Barley received of them; and therefore upon condition
that the said Layfield should acquit him of the said sixty pound debt, and
oblige himself to deliver the two hundred ninety odd quarters of Malt to the
several persons interessed in them, he did sell and deliver to him the said
Richard Layfield, all the Malt lying in his Malthouse, and Barley left, and
that there was no fraud herein; All the persons to whom the two hundred ninety
and odd quarters of Malt were due, were ready to make oath of the truth of
their Debts; the said Richard Layfield did also produce the Deed to the
Justices, and averred that the reason of making this Bargain, was to secure his
sixty pound, which he thought might otherwise be hazarded. But notwithstanding
all this, Sir George Blundell, one of the Justices, said; That Richard Layfield
went about herein to defraud the King, and therefore bound him over to the next
Assizes; and further said, that so long as Thomas Woodward aforesaid offended,
the Malt should be distreyned, and that he would leave them (meaning the
Meeters) worth nothing; And when he had done that, he would fill the P^isons
with them: adding moreover, If they do not like it, Let them stand up and
defend themselves, as we did.

There were no further Distresses made the last week; it is conjectured that
some falling out betwixt the Mayor and Mr. Foster on Wednesday, was the
occasion to delay their proceedings; It seems the Mayor was not willing that
Battison (who is Churchwarden for Paul's) should distreyn in the two Parishes on
the other side of the River where the Mayor lived: But on Monday the 30th
instant, Feckman the chief Apparitor, with the Churchwarden, Constable, and
Overseer of Mary's Parish in Bedford, began to distrein. The persons name is
Joseph Ruffhead at whose House they first began; the Fine they levied upon him
was three pound; the said Ruffhead upon their approach to him desired to see
their Warrant, wherein not finding Feckmans name, he discharged him from coming
upon his Ground, and therefore was had to one of the Justices; before whom
making good his practice in keeping Feckman from his Ground, because not in the
Warrant, was told by the Justice, that Feckman came only as an Assistant to the
Officers. Whereupon the said Ruffhead returning back permitted them to take
their Distress; who took two Timber Trees of about seven pound value, for the
three pound. The same day the same Officers went to distreyn one John Clerk, a
Grocer, for forty shillings; and breaking open his Doors, they took his
Housholdgoods, not meddling with those in his Shop, being but of little value.
And from thence the same Officers went to the House of John Rush Waggoner, to
levy a Distress of three pounds set upon him, where they seized a new Cart and
Wheels for the same.

The same day at part of a Village called Cotten-End, near Bedford, the
Officers of the same, by Warrant from the Justices, distreyned several persons,
who had been convicted by the Justices, for having a Meeting at the House of
one Thomas Thorowgood; which persons were fined to a greater value than the
whole of their Estates did amount to; and this day they are stripped of their
whole substance; and the said Thorowgood has not left him so much as his Loom
to work with, being a Weaver; and by his labor therein supporting himself and
his Family.

But because there are several remarkable Circumstances relating to this
matter, which do clearly evince the undue and most inhumane dealings of some of
the Justices, especially of Sir George Blundell, with the poor people last
mentioned; here is therefore inserted a particular and exact Account of the
whole Proceeding, as follows.

From the discourse of a little Child, who said there had been a Meeting at the
House of Thomas Thorowgood in Cotten-End; the Wife of John Pryor Victualler,
resorts to Sir G. B. and makes Oath of the Child's Report to her, who issues a
Warrant for the appearance of several persons of that En^ship, suspected to
have been there, who appeared before several Justices at the Swan in Bedford,
before whom none that were examined confessed a Meeting to have been, or that
they were there: the Justices dealt with them severally, assuring them that
such of them as would confess who was the Preacher, should be acquitted: but no
confession was made; and generally they did refer to any proof that could be
brought against them, not being willing to accuse themselves or others. The
Justices upon consideration did conclude, that there was ground sufficient to
convict them; and did assess Fines upon them severally. Thomas Thorowgood's
Fine (at whose House the Meeting was said to be) was Nineteen pounds; who was
by the Officers distreyned, and all that he had, with the Implements of his
Trade (he being a Weaver) taken from him, and the said Thorowgood with his Wife
is since departed away from their dwelling and gone.

The Wife of one George Winright, and a Son-in-law of Winrights, were fined ten
pounds five shillings, as having been at the Meeting. The said George Winright
is Tenant to the Earl of Exeter, and being in Arrears of Rent to his said
Landlord, about Michelmas last, for his said Landlords security of receiving
Rent then due, and such further as for the year ensuing would be accrewing, the
said Winright prevailed with two Sons-in-law of his, to become bound for him to
the Earl's Steward, then upon the place, for his quarterly payment of money
due; and for the indemnity of his two Sons, in respect of the said Bond, the
said Winright by Bill of Sale passes over all his Goods and Chattels to the
two Sons, one whereof lived with him, in the possession of what was so sold,
from the time of the said Sale; but it happened that the Son who lived with
him, staying out from home at a Fair the third of May, kept at a Village about
two miles from Cotten-end, the Father-in-law took such displeasure that he
broke open the Son's Coffer standing in the House, took out the Writing and
destroyed it: the Son remains still with his Father, and was fined ten pounds
for being at a Meeting. The Father pleads there were no Goods of the Son's
there, though they were once his with his Brothers, yet the Writing was since
destroyed, and sets forth the matter of Fact. The cancelling of the Writing was
deemed Collusion, and the Officers were ordered to proceed in the Distress.
Winright thereupon drives away his Cattle, sells several of them at Potten
Market, and some not sold there, he sells to one Miller, an Inhabitant of the
same Parish, for a valuable rate; who paid good part of the money, and gave
Bond for the remainer to Winright (the said Cattle being in Miller's Grounds
and Possession several days) which being heard of, Sir G. B. sends a Warrant
for both the Buyer and Seller to appear before him, to whom they gave
information of the sale and the payment. But all their Pleas being unregarded,
the said Knight demanded Sureties of them for their appearance at the Assizes,
declaring with his wonted vehemence he would bind them both over, and distreyn
the Cattle likewise: whereat the said Winright being affrighted, promised to
pay the ten pounds, and accordingly did so; but some few days after, being
told by a Lawyer that he had wrong in so doing, he repairs to Sir G. B.
acquainting him with what the Lawyer had said, entreating his favor: which
without delay he imparted, beating him well for his pains.

Thomas Langley, an Inhabitant of Cotton-End, likewise being fined five pound
ten shillings, for his being at the aforesaid suspected Meeting, presuming upon
the favor of Sir G. B. (to whom he stood in late relation as a Servant) told
the Officers he would pay the money, if he could not get abatement of Sir G. B.
to whom repairing, and not prevailing for any suchlike kindness, he was
unwilling to pay the said Fine, having very little Stock, and owing for the
greatest part of that, and much likewise in arrears to his Landlord: but the
Officers having strict charge to go take all he had, and sell it for five
pounds ten shillings, they distreyned his three Cows, really worth ten pound,
and going to sell them, a Neighbor in compassion to the Distreyned, paid the
Officer five pound ten shillings, and sent the Cows home to the right owner.

Some other persons of the said Endship were distreyned by the Officers, and
had that little substance they had taken from them, and deposited by the
Officers in the house of the aforesaid Pryor, whose Wife did at first inform of
the said Meeting, where they yet remain to be sold to any willing to buy the
same, that with the proportion allotted to the Informer, the said Pryor may
again have some money to put into his purse, having prodigally and brutishly
wasted all, that he lately sold a considerable Estate for, that lay in the
aforesaid Endship.

A true Relation of the sudden and strange Death of one Feckman, a malicious
Persecutor of the good People at Bedford.
Of a like complexion with that beastly creature John Pryor, last mentioned,
was one Feckman a most violent and thirsty Persecutor at Bedford; whose father
living at Turvy in the County of Bedford, left him a very considerable Estate,
who at his marriage did receive a good addition thereto, by a Portion with his
Wife; but giving no limits to his lusts and extravagancies, in some few years
he had spent all, and for his last refuge became an Apparitor, to which the
calling of an Alehouse-keeper being by special favor added, he by the gains
from both was enabled to live as a Hous-keeper in Bedford; but at the coming
forth of this late Act, he blessed himself with the hopes of recovering an
Estate, and raising himself a Fabric out of the Ruins of those whose
kindnesses had refreshed him; and pursuant to this purpose, he engages with all
his might both in taking the Meeters, and levying the Distress upon their
Goods; in the former, manifesting more than usual diligence; and in the latter,
expressing extraordinary rage and violence, so that by his fierceness and
cruelty (wherein he seemed delighted) he appeared rather a Purveyor for, and a
resemblant of Satan, than an Officer of a Court Christian (as some men style
the Commissaries.) But some few days after, viz June 3. 1670. at a Visitation
(where he, as a necessary and endeared Appurtenant* was attending) at Ampthill,
he was taken there ill, and coming thence to his home, fell very far amiss,
issuing blood in great abundance both by vomit and seige, continuing so to do
till his death (which was the 5th day after his first sickness) during all
which time he was in very great pain and anguish of body, and for the most part
unwilling to speak, and not very sensible, sometimes speaking words of
threatening against Phanaticks; and sometimes blaming Mr. Foster for setting him
in the Office. After whose Death his Wife, in compliance with her Husbands
desire of being buried at Turvey, endeavored to borrow a Coach of the
Neighbor Gentlemen, to carry his Corpse; but all that were asked, refused to
lend; and the two Carriers who live in the Town (each of which keeps two
Coaches, that they let for Hire to persons desiring them) did both of them
refuse for hire to let theirs for his conveyance; so that his wife was
constrained to send his Corpse in a Cart to the place designed for his burial.

A POSTSCRIPT.
THis Instance of the Execution of the late Act against Meetings for Religious
Worship, is not thus made public, as though there were no other of the same
kind in other places; For it is well known that in many of the principal Cities
and Towns in the Nation, there have been proceedings on the same account, with
no less Outrage, Illegality and Violence; which may in due time be published
also: only this is one of the first, whose Tragical Acts have been collected,
every particular whereof will readily be attested on Oath, by those that
suffered, and others who were spectators of the whole proceeding. Nor is the
design of publishing hereof, to cast any reflection on the Act it self, let it
stand or fall in the Providence of God, as it shall be found complyant with, or
opposite to, the Honor and Interest of his Majesty, with the Peace, Welfare
and Prosperity of the Kingdoms. Councels for public good, are the Province of
our Superiors; ready Obedience, or peaceable Sufferings, are the lot of
private men: But least of all is there any design in this Narrative, to
insinuate further discomposures into the minds of men than what are already
evident, or to attempt a disposal of them, into irregular, and disorderly
actings, to the disturbance of the Public Peace: This indeed (as it appears in
the Narrative) some of their Adversaries do openly declare, that they would
willingly, by their unjust and oppressive usage of them, hurry them into. But
all endeavors of that kind will be in vain, and the hopes of some about it,
wholly frustrate. For as this People, by their peaceable deportment for many
years together, have given all the satisfaction, that any men in the like
circumstances are able to give, of their harmless and quiet inclinations; So
they intend not (by the Grace of God) to gratify their Adversaries, by
transgressing the obligation of their own Consciences unto peace, and all due
subjection unto Magistrates. It is nothing else but the Authority of God in
their Consciences, which imposes a necessity upon them to practice those things
in their Christian Profession for which they are made obnoxious to so great
sufferings, and gives them a supportment under them. The violation thereof, by
any disorderly and seditious behavior, to the disturbance of the Public
Peace, would be at once, to renounce the Principle of their Actings, and to
deprive themselves of the Comfort of their Sufferings. Nor do they in the least
suspect, that the Declaration of their Resolutions in this kind, will prompt
many to renew and multiply their violent proceedings against them, upon
security of freedom from opposition; None but vile and ignoble spirits will
entertain a thought of so doing, upon such grounds; Wise and generous Persons
will rather take hold of it, as a fit and honorable occasion, to exercise
their clemency and forbearance. And indeed all unquiet storms, thundrings and
lightnings, are in and from the lower Regions; but amongst the higher Spheres
and more Celestial Bodies, all things are always peaceable and serene, and by
their influences are the other raging and noxious disturbances quelled and
scattered: and such an end do we hope and pray for, of our present
disquietments.

The ends therefore of publishing this Account are plainly and only these:
First, to prepare others, of the same way and practice in the things of
Religion, with the persons so roughly treated at Bedford, not to think strange
of the like trials when they befall them, and to bear them patiently, quietly,
and peaceably, notwithstanding all provocations to the contrary, as they have
done. 2dly, Humbly to demand of our Legislators, whether this be the Garment of
their Offspring? It does not appear that there is any thing in the Act it
self, that does direct to, or will bear any man out in, such an execution of
it, as that which is here most truly and impartially represented. And we
suppose that the secret intentions of some, ought not to influence Public
Administrations, wherein all are concerned. And it may not unbecome the wisdom
of those who have Power, speedily to revise those Laws, which may easily be
perverted, so as to give too much countenance unto, and be made instrumental
in, gratifying the lusts and revenge of private men. 3dly, To give a clear
prospect into the sad Effects of the Prosecution of this Act, in the way and
manner as has herein been made known; in which it appears, that there has
been very little regard to Law, Equity, Peace, Love, Humanity, or indeed any
thing that is desirable or useful among Mankind. It is evident already, how
that by these means, no small Disturbances, Distractions and Confusions, have
filled the minds, and exercised the thoughts of all sorts of men; some forsake
their Callings, and all industry in them; in which number are not only the
Prosecutors of this Act, and those prosecuted by them, but others also, who
withdraw themselves, or forsake their Habitations, that they may have no
concernment in these proceedings, or at least not to contribute their
Assistance in them. Poor industrious Families are utterly ruined, and some made
wholly incapable to provide for their future subsistence, (the Utensils and
Implements of their respective Callings (contrary to Law) being most
barbarously taken from them:) And besides all this, opportunities are hereby
given to Thieves and Robbers to countenance their Villainies, with pretenses of
executing this Act, which have actually by some already been made use of in
Hartfordshire, not far from the Town of Hartford; the truth whereof will
evidently appear upon enquiry. Moreover, also, the minds of the residue of men
are filled with mutual Animosities, Heats, Jealousies and Suspicions, things no
way conducing to public tranquillity and advantage, And all this is brought
about by this only means; And that too in a time otherwise of the highest
peace, calmness, and sedateness of mind amongst all sorts of people throughout
the Nation. Whether these, and innumerable other evils of the like kind, will
be recompensed unto the Kingdom, by the satisfaction given to the envy and
jealousies of some men, (whose usefulness unto themselves is very well known,
but not so as to the Public advantage of the Nation) Men wise, peaceable and
sober, will in their own minds judge and determine.

FINIS.

