A TREATISE OF THE Fear of God: SHOWING What it is, and how distinguished from
that which is not so. ALSO Whence it comes. Who has it. What are the Effects.
And What the Privileges of those that have it in their hearts.


By John Bunyan.

Psalm. 128. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord.

LONDON, Printed for N. Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultry, over against the
Stocks-Market. 1679.

Rev. 14.7. Fear God.
THIS Exhortation is not only found here in the Text, but is in several other
places of the Scripture pressed, and that with much vehemence, upon the
children of men (as in Eccles. 12.13. 1 Pet. 1.17, etc.) I shall not trouble
you with long preambles, or fore-speech to the matter, nor shall I here so much
as meddle with the context, but shall immediately fall upon the words
themselves, and briefly treat of the Fear of God.

The Text; you see, presents us with matter of greatest moment, to wit, with
GOD, and with the FEAR of him.

First, They present us with God, the true and living God, Maker of the worlds,
and upholder of all things by the word of his power; that incomprehensible
Majesty, in comparison of whom, all Nations are less than the drop of a bucket,
and than the small dust of the balance. This is he that fills Heaven and
Earth, and is every where present with the children of men, beholding the evil
and the good; for he has set his eyes upon all their ways.

So that considering, that by the Text we have presented to our souls the Lord
God and Maker of us all, who also will be either our Savior or Judge, we are
in reason and duty bound to give the more earnest heed to the things that shall
be spoken, and be the more careful to receive them, and put them in practice;
for, as I said, as they present us with, the mighty God; so they exhort us to
the highest duty toward him; to wit, to fear him; I call it the highest duty,
because it is as I may call it, not only a duty in it self, but, as it were,
the SALT that seasoneth every duty. For there is no duty performed by us, that
can by any means be accepted of God, if it be not seasoned with godly fear.
Wherefore the Apostle says, Let us have grace whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear. Of this fear, I say, I would
discourse at this time; but because this word fear is variously taken in the
Scripture, and because it may be profitable to us to see it in its variety; I
shall therefore choose this method for the managing of my discourse, even to
show you the nature of the word in its several, especially of the chiefest
acceptations.

1. Then, by this word FEAR, we are to understand, even God himself, who is the
object of our FEAR.

2. By this word FEAR, we are to understand the WORD of God, the Rule and
Director of our FEAR.

Now to speak to this word [ fear] as it is thus taken.

1. Of this word [FEAR] as it respects God himself, who is the object of our
fear.
By this word [Fear] as I said, we are to understand God himself, who is the
object of our fear: For the Divine Majesty goes often under this very name
himself. This name Jacob called him by, when he and Laban chod together on
Mount Gilead, after that Jacob had made his escape to his Fathers house;
Except, said he, the God of Abraham, and the FEAR of Isaac had been with me,
surely now thou had sent me away empty. So again, a little after, when Jacob
and Laban agree to make a Covenant of Peace each with other; though Laban after
the jumbling way of the Heathen by his oath, puts the true God and the false
together, yet Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isaac, Genesis 31.42, 53.

By the FEAR, that is, by the GOD of his Father Isaac. And indeed, God may well
be called the FEAR of his people, not only because they have by his grace made
him the object of their FEAR, but because of the dread and terrible Majesty
that is in him. He is a mighty God, and terrible, and with God is terrible
Majesty. See Dan. 7.21. chap. 10.17. Neh. 1.5. chap. 4.14. chapter 9.32. Job 37.22.

Who knows the power of his anger? The mountains quake at him, the Hills melt,
and the Earth is burnt at his presence. Yea the world, and all that dwell
therein. Who can stand before his indignation? who can abide the fierceness of
his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by
him, Neh. 1.5, 6.

His people know him, and have his dread upon them, by virtue whereof there is
begot and maintained in them that godly awe and reverence of his Majesty which
is agreeable to their profession of him. Let him be your FEAR, and let him be
your Dread. Set his Majesty before the eyes of your souls, and let his
excellency make you afraid with godly fear, Isa. 8.12, 13.

There are these things that make God to be the Fear of his People.

First, His presence is dreadful, and that not only his presence in common, but
his special, yea his most comfortable and joyous presence. When God comes to
bring a soul news of mercy and salvation, even that visit, that presence of God
is fearful. When Jacob went from Beer-sheba toward Haron, he met with God in
the way by a dream, in the which he apprehended a Ladder set upon the Earth,
whose top reached to Heaven; now in this dream, from the top of this Ladder, he
saw the Lord, and heard him speak unto him, not threatningly, not as having his
fury come up into his face; but in the most sweet and gracious manner, saluting
him with promise of goodness, after promise of goodness, to the number of eight
or nine; as will appear if you read the place ( Genesis 28.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17.) Yet I say, when he awoke, all the grace that discovered it self in
this heavenly vision to him, could not keep him from dread and fear of God's
Majesty.

And Jacob awoke out of his sleep, and said, Surely the Lord was in this place
and I knew it not; and he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place?
this is none other but the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven.

At another time to wit, when Jacob had that memorable visit from God, in which
he gave him power as a Prince to prevail with him; yea and gave him a name,
that by his remembering it he might call God's favor the better to his mind;
yet even then; and there such dread of the Majesty of God was upon him, that he
went away wondering that his life was preserved, Genesis 32.30. Man crumbles to
dust at the presence of God; yea though he shows himself to us in his robes of
salvation.

We have read how dreadful and how terrible even the presence of Angels have
been unto men, and that when they have brought them good tidings from Heaven,
Judge. 13. v. 22. Mat. 28.5. Mark 16.5, 6.

Now if Angels which are but creatures, are, through the glory that God has put
upon them, so fearful and terrible in their appearance to men; how much more
dreadful and terrible must God himself be to us, who are but dust and ashes?
When Daniel had the vision of his salvation sent him from Heaven (for so it
was) O Daniel, said the messenger, a man greatly beloved; yet behold the dread
and terror of the person speaking fell with that weight upon this good man's
soul, that he could not stand, nor bear up under it. He stood trembling, and
cries out, O my Lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon me, and I have
retained no strength. And how can the servant of this my Lord talk with this my
Lord? for as for me straightway there remains no strength in me, Dan. 10.10,
11, 12, 17.

See you here if the presence of God is, not a dreadful and a fearful thing;
yea his most gracious and merciful appearances; how much more then when he
shows, himself to us as one that disliketh our ways, as one that is offended
with us for our sins?

And there are three things that in an eminent manner make his presence
dreadful to us.

1. The first is God's own greatness and Majesty, the discovery of this, or of
himself thus, even as no poor mortals are able to conceive of him, is
altogether unsupportable. The man dies to whom he thus discovers himself. And
when I saw him, says John, I fell at his feet as dead, Rev. 1. v. 17. 'Twas
this therefore that Job would have avoided in the day that he would have
approached unto him. Let not thy dread, says he, make me afraid. Then call
thou and I will answer; or let me speak, and answer thou me, Job 13.21, 22. But
why does Job after this manner, thus speak to God? why? it was from a sense
that he had of the dreadful Majesty of God, even the great and dreadful God
that keeps covenant with his people.

The presence of a King is dreadful to the Subject, yea though he carries it
never so condescendingly; if then their be so much glory and dread in the
presence of the King, what fear and dread must there be, think you, in the
presence of the Eternal God?

2. When God gives his presence to his people, that his presence causes them
to appear to themselves more, what they are, than at other times, by all other
light, they can see. O my Lord, said he, by the vision my sorrows are turned
upon me; and why was that, but because by the glory of that vision, he saw his
own vileness more than at other times. So again. I alone, says he, saw this
great vision; and what follows? why? and my comeliness was turned in me into
corruption, and I retained no strength, Dan. 10.8. By the presence of God, when
we have it indeed, even our best things are our comeliness, our Sanctity and
righteousness, and all do immediately turn to corruption, and polluted rags.
The brightness of his glory dimns them as the clear light of the shining Sun,
puts out the glory of the fire or candle, and covers them with the shadow of
death.

See also the truth of this in that vision of the Prophet Isaiah. Woe is me,
said he, for I am undone, for I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell among a
people of unclean lips. Why? what is the matter? how came the Prophet by this
sight? why? says he, mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. Isa. 6.
But do you think that this outcry was caused by unbelief? no, nor yet begotten
by slavish fear, this was to him the vision of his Savior with whom also he
had communion before, Chap. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. It was the glory of that God with
whom he had now to do, that turned, as was noted before of Daniel, his
comeliness in him into Corruption, and that gave him, yet greater sense of the
disproportion that was betwixt his God and him, and so a greater sight of his
defiled and polluted nature.

3. Add to this the revelation of Gods goodness, and it must needs make his
presence dreadful to us; for when a poor defiled creature shall see, that this
great God, has, notwithstanding his greatness, goodness in his heart, and
mercy to bestow upon him; this makes his presence yet the more dreadful. They
shall fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos. 3.5. The goodness as well as the
greatness of God, does beget in the heart of his elect, an awful reverence of
his Majesty. Fear ye not me, says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my
presence? and then to engage us in our soul to the duty, he adds one of his
wonderful mercies to the world, for a motive, Fear ye not me? why? who art
thou? He answers (even I) which have set, or placed the Sand for the bound of
Sea by a perpetual decree that it cannot pass; and though the waves thereof
toss themselves yet can they not prevail, though they roar, yet can they not
pass over it, Isa. 5.22.

Also when Job had God present with him, making manifest the goodness of his
great heart to him, what does he say? how does he behave himself in his
presence? I have heard of thee, says he, by the hearing of the ear, but now
mine eyes see thee; wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes,
Job 42.5, 6.

And what means the tremblings, the tears, those breakings and shakings of
heart that attend the people of God, when in an eminent manner they receive the
pronunciation of the forgiveness of sins at his mouth, but that the dread of
the Majesty of God is in their sight mixed therewith. God must appear like
himself, speak to the soul like himself, nor can the sinner when under these
glorious discoveries of its Lord and Savior, keep out the beams of his Majesty
from the eyes of its understanding. I will cleanse them, says he, from all
their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me, I will pardon all their
iniquities whereby they have sinned against me, and whereby they have
transgressed against me. And what then? And they shall fear and tremble for all
the goodness, and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it, Jer. 33.8, 9.

Alas! there is a company of poor, light, frothy professors in the world, that
carry it under that which they call the presence of God, more like to Anticks,
than sober sensible Christians; yea more like to a fool of a Play, than those
that have the presence of God. They would not carry it so in the presence of a
King, nor yet of the Lord of their Land, were they but receivers of mercy at
his hand: They carry it even in their most eminent seasons, as if the sense and
sight of God, and his blessed grace to their souls in Christ, had a tendancy in
it to make men wanton: But indeed it is the most humbling and heartbreaking
sight in the world; it is fearful.

Object. But would you not have us rejoice at the sight and sense of the
forgiveness of our sins?

Answer. Yes, But yet I would have you, and indeed you shall, when God shall
tell you that your sins are pardoned indeed, Rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2.8.
For then you have sollid and Godly joy, a joyful heart, and wet eyes, in this
will stand very well together, and it will be so more or less. For if God shall
come to you indeed, and visit you with the forgiveness of sins, that visit
removes the guilt, but increases the sense of thy filth, and the sense of
this that God has forgiven a filthy sinner, will make thee both rejoice and
tremble. O! the blessed confusion that will then cover thy face whiles thou,
even thou so vile a wretch shall stand before God to receive at his hand thy
pardon, and so the first fruits of thy eternal salvation. That thou may
remember, and be comforted, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy
shame (thy filth) when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done,
says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 16.63.

2. But Secondly, As the presence, so the name of God, is dreadful and fearful:
wherefore his name does rightly go under the same tittle, That thou may fear
that glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28.58.

The name of God, what is that, but that by which he is distinguished and known
from all others? Names are to distinguish by; so man is distinguished from
beasts, and Angels from men; so Heaven from Earth, and Darkness from Light;
especially when by the name, the nature of the thing is signified and
expressed; and so it was in their original, for then names expressed the nature
of the thing so named. And therefore it is that the name of God is the object
of our fear, because by his name, his nature is expressed. Holy and reverend is
his name, Psalm. 111.9. And again, he proclaimed the name of the Lord, the Lord,
the Lord, God gracious and merciful, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth; keeping mercy for thousands, pardoning iniquity, transgression and
sins, and that will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 3.6, 7.

Also his name, I AM JAH JEHOVAH, with several others, what is by them
intended, but his nature, as his Power, Wisdom, Eternity, Goodness and
Omnipotency, etc. might be expressed and declared. The name of God is therefore
the object of a Christians fear. David prayed to God that he would unite his
heart to fear his name, Psalm. 86.11. Indeed the name of God is a fearful name,
and should always be reverenced by his people: Yea his name is to be feared
for ever and ever, and that not only in his Church, and among his Saints, but
even in the world, and among the Heathen. So the Heathen shall fear the name of
the Lord, and all Kings thy glory, Psalm. 102.15.

God tells us that his name is dreadful, and that he is pleased to see men be
afraid before his name. Yea one reason why he executes so many judgments upon
men as he does, is that others might see, and fear his name. So shall they fear
the name of the Lord from the West, and his glory from the rising of the Sun.
See Mal. 4.2. Rev. 11.18. Mal. 1.4. chap. 2.5. Isa. 59.18, 19.

The name of a King, is a name of fear: And I am a great King, says the Lord
of Hosts. The name of Master is a name of fear: And if I be a Master, where is
my fear, says the Lord? Yea rightly to fear the Lord, is a sign of a gracious
heart. And again, To them that fear my name, says he, shall the Son of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings; yea when Christ comes to Judge
the world. He will give reward to his Servants the Prophets, and to his Saints,
and to them that fear his name, small and great.

Now I say, Since the name of God, is that by which his nature is expressed,
and since he naturally is so glorious and incomprehensible, his name must needs
be the object of our fear, and we ought always to have a reverent awe of God
upon our hearts at what time soever we think of, or hear his name; but most of
all, when we our selves do take his holy and fearful name into our mouths,
especially in a religious manner, that is, in preaching, praying, or holy
conference. I do not by thus saying intend, as if it was lawful to make mention
of his name in light and vain discourses; for we ought always to speak of it
with reverence and godly fear, but I speak it to put Christians in mind that
they should not in religious duties, show lightness of mind, or be vain in
their words when yet they are making mention of the name of the Lord, And let
every one that names the name of our Lord Jesus Christ depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Make mention then of the name of the Lord at all times with great dread of his
Majesty upon your hearts, and in great soberness and truth. To do otherwise is
to profane the name of the Lord, and to take his name in vain; And the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. Yea, God says, that
he will cut off the man that does it; so jealous is he of the honor due unto
his name, Exodus 20.7. Levit. 20.3.

This therefore shows you the dreadful state of those that lightly, vainly,
lyingly, and profanely make use of the name, this fearful name of God; either
by their blasphemous cursing and oaths, or by their fraudulent dealing with
their neighbor; (for some men have no way to prevail with their nighbour to
bow under a cheat, but by calling falsely upon the name of the Lord to be
witness that the wickedness is good and honest:) but how these men will escape
(when they shall be judged) devouring fire, and everlasting burnings, for their
profaning and blaspheming of the name of the Lord, becomes them betimes to
consider of, Jer. 14.14, 15. Ezekiel. 20.39. Exodus 20.7.

3. But Thirdly, As the Presence and Name of God are dreadful and fearful in
the Church; so is his Worship and Service. I say, his Worship, or the works of
service, to which we are by him enjoined while we are in this world, are
dreadful and fearful things. This David conceives, when he says, But as for
me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy FEAR
will I worship toward thy holy Temple, Psalm. 5.7.

And again, says he, Serve the Lord with fear.

To praise God is a part of his worship. But says Moses, Who is a God like
unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, Exodus 15.11

To rejoice before him is a part of his worship: But David bids us Rejoice with
trembling, Psalm. 2.8.

Yea the whole of our service to God, and every part thereof, ought to be done
by us with reverence and godly fear. And therefore let us, as Paul says again,
Cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God, Hebr. 12. 2 Cor. 7.1.

That which makes the worship of God so fearful a thing, is,

1. For that it is the worship of GOD: all manner of service carries more or
less dread and fear along with it, according as the quality or condition of the
person is, to whom the worship and service is done. This is seen in the service
of subjects to their Princes, the service of servants to their Lords, and the
service of chlldren to their Parents. Divine Worship then being due to God (for
it is now of Divine Worship we speak) and this God so great and dreadful in
himself and Name, his Worship must therefore be a fearful thing.

2. Besides, this glorious Majesty is himself present to behold his Worshippers
in their woshiping him. When two or three of you are gathered together in my
Name, I am there. (That is, gathered together to worship him) I am there, says
he. And so again, he is said to walk in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, Rev. 1. that is, in the Churches, and that with a countenance
like the Sun, with a head and hair as white as Snow; and with eyes like a flame
of fire. This puts dread and fear into his service; and therefore his servants
should serve him with fear.

3. Above all things, God is jealous of his worship and service. In all the ten
words, he tells us not any thing of his being a jealous God, but in the
second which respects his worship, Exodus 20. Look to your selves therefore,
both as to the matter and manner of your worship; For I the Lord your God,
says he, am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the Fathers upon the Children.
This therefore does also put dread and fear into the woship and service of God.

4. The Judgments that sometimes God has executed upon men for their want of
godly fear, while they have been in his worship and service, put fear and dread
upon his holy appointments.

1. Nadab and Abihu was burned to death with fire from Heaven, because they
attempted to offer false fire upon God's Altar ( Levit. 10.1, 2, 3.) And the
reason rendered why they were so served, was, because God will be sanctified in
them that come nigh him. To sanctify his Name, is to let him be thy dread and
thy fear, and to do nothing in his worship but what is well-pleasing to him.
But because these men had not grace to do this, therefore they died before the
Lord.

2. Ely's Sons, for want of this fear, when they ministered in the holy worship
of God, were both slain in one day by the sword of the uncircumcised
Philistines: See 1 Samuel 2.

3. Vzza was smitten, and died before the Lord, for but an unadvised touching
the Ark, when the men forsook it, 1 Chronicles. 13.9, 10.

4. Ananias and Saphira his Wife, for telling of a lie in the Church, when they
were before God, were both stricken dead upon the place before them all,
because they wanted the fear and dread of God's Majesty, Name and Service, when
they came before him, Acts 5.

This therefore should teach us to conclude, that next to God's Nature, and
Name, his Service, his instituted Worship, is the most dreadful thing under
Heaven. His Name is upon his Ordinances, his eye is upon the Worshippers, and
his wrath and judgment upon those that worship not in his fear. For this cause
some of those at Corinth were by God himself cut off (1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32.) and to others he has given the back, and will again be with them no
more.

This also rebukes three sorts of people.

1. Such as regard not to worship God at all; be sure they have no reverence of
his Service, nor fear of his Majesty before their eyes. Sinner, thou do not
come before the Lord to worship him; thou do not bow before the High God;
thou neither worshipest him in thy closet, nor in the Congregation of Saints.
The fury of the Lord and his indignation must in short time be poured out upon
thee, and upon the families that call not upon his Name, Psalm. 79.6. Jer. 10.25.

2. This rebukes such as count it enough to present their body in the place
where God is woshiped, not minding with what heart, or with what spirit they
come thither. Some come into the worship of God to sleep there; some come
thither to meet with their chapmen, and to get into the wicked fellowship of
their vain companions. Some come thither to feed their lustful and adulterous
eyes with the flattering beauty of their fellow-sinners. O what a sad account
will these worshipers give, when they shall count for all this, and be damned
for it, because they come not to worship the Lord with that fear of his Name
that became them to come in, when they presented themselves before him!

3. This also rebukes those that care not so they worship, how they worship,
how, where, or after what manner they worship God. Those I mean, whose fear
toward God is taught by the precepts of men.

They are hypocrites; their worship also is vain, and a stink in the nostrils
of God. Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this people draw near me with
their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart far
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men. Therefore
behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a
mavelous work, and a wonder: For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and
the understanding of their prudent shall be hid, Isa. 29.13, 14. Mat. 15.7, 8,
9. Mark 7.6, 7.

Thus I conclude this first thing, namely, that God is called our dread and
fear. I shall now come to the second thing, to wit, to the Rule and Director of
our Fear.

2. Of this word [FEAR] as it is taken for the Word of God.
But again this word [ Fear] is sometimes to be taken for the Word, the written
Word of God; for that also is, and ought to be the Rule and Director of our
Fear. So David calls it in the 19th. Psalm. The fear of the Lord, says he, is
clean, enduring for ever. The FEAR of the Lord, that is, the Word of the Lord,
the written Word; for that which he calls in this place the Fear of the Lord,
even in the same place he calls, the Law, Statutes, Commandments and
Judgments of God. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: The
Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: The Statutes of the Lord
are right, rejoicing the heart: The Commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes: The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever: The
Judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. All these words have
respect to the same thing, to wit, to the Word of God, jointly designing the
glory of it. Among which phrases, as you see this is one, The FEAR of the Lord
is clean, enduring for ever. This written Word is therefore the object of a
Christians Fear. This is that also which David intended when he said, Come ye
children hearken to me, I will teach you the Fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34.11. I
will teach you the Fear, That is, I will teach you the Commandments, Statutes
and Judgments of the Lord, even as Moses commanded the children of Israel; Thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5, 6, 7.

That also in the 11th. of Isaiah intends the same; where the Father says of
the Son, That he shall be of a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord;
that he may judge and smite the earth with the ROD of his mouth. This Rod in
the Text, is none other but the FEAR, the Word of the Lord; for he was to be of
a quick understanding it IT, that he might smite, that is, execute it according
to the Will of his Father, upon, and among the children of men.

Now this, as I said, is called the Fear of the Lord, because it is called the
Rule and Director of our Fear. For we know not how to fear the Lord in a saving
way without its guidance and direction. As it is said of the Priest that was
sent back from the captivity to Samaria to teach the people to fear the Lord.
So it is said concerning the written word, it is given to us, and left among us
that we may read therein all the days of our life, and LEARN to fear the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 6.1, 2, 3, 24. chap. 10.12. chap. 17.19.

And hear it is that trembling at the Word of God, is even by God himself, not
only taken notice off, but counted as laudable, and praiseworthy, as is
evident in the case of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.26, 27.

Such also are the approved of God, let them be condemned by whomsoever. Hear
the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his Word, your brethren that hated
you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, let the Lord be glorified, but
he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed, Isa. 66.5.

Further, Such shall be looked too, by God himself cared for, and watched over,
that no distress, temptation, or affliction may overcome them and destroy them.
To this man will I look, says God even to him that is poor and of a contrite
Spirit, and that trembles at my word. It is the same in substance with that in
the same Prophet in chap. 57. For thus says the High and Holy One that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the High and Holy Place,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the spirit of
the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Yea, the way t^
escape dangers foretold is to hearken to understand, and fear the Word of God.
H^ that feared the Word of the Lord amongst the Servants of Pharaoh, made his
Servants and his Cattle flee into houses, and they were secured. But he that
regarded not the word of the Lord left his Servants and Cattle in the Field,
and they were destroyed of the hail, Exodus 9.20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

If at any time the sins of a Nation, or Church, are discovered and bewailed,
it is by them that know and tremble at the Word of God, when Ezra heard of the
wickedness of his brethren, and had a desire to humble himself before God for
the same, who were they that would assist him in that matter, but they that
trembled at the word of God. Then, says he, were assembled to me every one
that trembled at the Word of the God of Israel, because of the transgression of
these that had been carried away, Ezra. 9.4.

They are such also that tremble at the Word that are best able to give counsel
in the matters of God, for their Judgment best suiteth with his mind and will.
Now therefore said he, let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the
(Strange) wives, according to the counsel of my Lord, and of those that tremble
at the Commandment of our God, and let it be done according to the Law, Ezra.
^^.3.

Now something of the dread and terror of the Word lies in these things.

1. As I have already hinted from the Author of them. They are the Words of
God. Therefore you have Moses and the Prophets, when they came to deliver their
errand, their message to the people, still saying; Hear the Word of the Lord,
Thus says the Lord, and the like. So when Ezekiel was sent to the house of
Israel, in their state of Religion, thus was he bid to say unto them. Thus
says the Lord God. Thus says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 2.4. Chap. 3. v. 11.

This is the honor and majesty then, that God has put upon his written Word,
and thus he has done even of purpose, that we might make them the rule and
directory of our FEAR, and that we might stand in aw of, and tremble at them.
When Habakkuk heard the Word of the Lord, his belly trembled, and rotteness
entered into his bones. I trembled in my self, said he, that I might have rest
in the day of trouble, Hab. 3.16. The word of a King is as the roaring of a
Lion; where the word of a King is, there is power; what is it then when God,
the great God shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, whose
voice shakes not only Earth, but also Heaven. How does holy David set it forth,
The voice of the Lord is powerful, the voice of the LORD is full of majesty,
etc. Psalm. 29.

2. It is a word that is fearful, and may well be called the fear of the Lord,
because of the subject matter of it, to wit, the state of sinners in another
world, for that is it unto which the whole Bible bends it self, either more
immediately, or more mediately; all its doctrines, counsels, encouragements,
threatenings and judgments, have a look (one way or other) upon us with respect
to the next world, which will be our last state, because 'twill be to us a
state eternal. This word, this law, these Judgments, are they that we shall be
disposed of by. The word that I have spoken, says Christ, it shall judge you
(and so consequently dispose of you) at the last day, Joh. 12. Now if we
consider, that our next state must be Eternal, either Eternal glory, or Eternal
fire, and that this Eternal glory, or this Eternal fire must be our portion
according as the words of God, revealed in the holy Scriptures shall determine:
who will not but conclude that therefore the words of God are they at which we
should tremble, and they by which we should have our fear of God guided, and
directed, for by them we are taught how to please him in every thing.

3. It is to be called a fearful word, because of the truth and faithfulness of
it. The Scriptures cannot be broken. Hear they are called the Scripturs of
truth, the true sayings of God, and also the fear of the Lord, for that every
jot and tittle thereof is for ever settled in Heaven, and stands more steadfast
than does the world. Heaven and Earth said Christ shall pass away, but my word
shall not pass away, Matthew. 24. Those therefore that are favored by the Word
of God, those are favored indeed, and that with the favor that no man can
turn away, but those that by the word of the Scriptures are condemned, those
can no man justify and set quit in the sight of God. Therefore what is bound
by the text, is bound, and what is released by the text, is released; also the
bond and release is unalterable, Dan. 10.21. Revel. 19.9. Matthew. 24.35. Psalm.
119.89. Joh. 10.35.

This therefore calls upon Gods people to stand more in fear of the Word of
God, than of all the terrors of the World.

There wants even in the hearts of Gods people a greater reverence of the
Word of God, than to this day appears amongst us, and this let me say, that
want of reverence of the word, is the ground of all disorders that are in the
heart, life, conversation, and in Christian Communion.

Besides, The want of reverence of the word lays men open to the fearful
displeasure of God. Who so despises the Word, shall be destroyed, but he that
fears the word shall be rewarded, Prove. 13.13.

All transgression begins at wandering from the word of God, but on the other
side, David says, Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have
kept me from the paths of the destroyer, Psalm. 17.4. Therefore Solomon says,
My Son, attend to my words; eneline thine ear unto my sayings; let them not
depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of thy heart, for they are life
to them that find them, and health to all their flesh, Prove. 4.20, 21.

Now, if indeed thou would reverence the Word of the Lord, and make it thy
Rule and Director in all things; Believe that the Word is the Fear of the Lord;
the Word that stands fast for ever, without and against which God will do
nothing either in saving or damning of the souls of sinners.

But to conclude this:

1. Know, that those that have not due regard to the Word of the Lord, and that
make it not their dread and their fear, but the Rule of their life is the lusts
of their flesh, the desire of their eyes, and the pride of life; are sorely
rebuked by this Doctrine, and are counted the fools of the world: For Lo they
have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9. That
there are such a people is evident not only by their irregular lives, but by
the manifest testimony of the Word. As for the Word of the Lord, said they to
Jeremiah, which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not
hearken unto thee, but will certainly do whatsoever thing goes out of our own
mouth, Jer. 44.16.

Was this only the temper of wicked men then? is not the same spirit of
rebellion amongst us in our days? doubtless there is, for there is no new
thing: The thing that has been, is that that shall be, and that which is done,
is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the Sun, Eccles.
1.9.

Therefore as it was then, so it is with many in this day.

As for the Word of the Lord, it is nothing at all to them; their lusts, and
whatsoever proceeds out of their own mouths, that they will do, that they
will follow. Now such will certainly perish in their own rebellion; for this is
as the sin of witchcraft; it was the sin of Corah and his company, and that
which brought upon them such heavy judgments; yea and they are made a sign that
thou should not do as they, for they perished, (because they rejected the
Word, the Fear of the Lord) from among the Congregation of the Lord, and they
became a sign. The Word which thou despisest still abides to denounce its woe
and judgment upon thee; and unless God will save such with the breath of his
Word (and it is hard trusting to that) they must never see his face with
comfort, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Numb. 26.9, 10.

2. Are the words of God called by the name of the Fear of the Lord? Are they
so dreadful in their receipt and sentence? then this rebukes them that esteem
the words and things of men more than the words of God, as those do who are
drawn from their respect of, and obedience to the Word of God by the pleasures
or threats of men.

Some there be who verily will acknowledge the authority of the Word, yet will
not stoop their souls thereto: such, whatever they think of themselves, are
judged by Christ to be ashamed of the Word; wherefore their state is damnable
as the other. Whosoever, says he, shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in
this sinful and adulterous Nation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed,
when he comes in the glory of the Father, with the holy Angels, Mark 8.38.

3. And if these things be so, what will become of those that mock at, and
professedly contemn the words of God, making them as a thing ridiculous, and
not to be regarded? shall they prosper that do such things? from the promises
it is concluded, that their judgment now of a long time slumbreth not, and when
it comes it will devour them without remedy, 2 Cor. 36.15.

If God, I say, has put that reverence upon his Word, as to call it, The Fear
of the Lord, what will become of them that do what they can to overthrow its
authority, by denying it to be his Word, and by raising cavils against its
authority? such stumble indeed at the Word, being appointed thereunto, but it
shall judge them in the last day, 1 Pet. 2.8. John 12.48. But thus much for
this.

Having thus spoken of the Object and Rule of our Fear;

I should come now to speak of [ FEAR] as it is a grace of the Spirit of God in
the hearts of his people; but before I do that, I shall show you that there are
diverse sorts of fear besides. For man being a reasonable creature, and having
even by nature a certain knowledge of God, has also naturally something of
some kind of fear of God at times, which although it be not that which is
intended in the text, yet ought to be spoken to, that that which is not right,
may be distinguished from that that is.

Of several sorts of fear of God in the heart of the Children of men.
There is, I say, several sorts, or kinds of fear in the hearts of the Sons
men, I mean besides that fear of God that is intended in the text, and that
accompanies Eternal Life.

I shall hear make mention of three of them.

1. There is a fear of God that flows, even from the light of nature.

2. There is a fear of God that flows from some of his dispensations to men
which yet are neither universal, nor saving.

3. There is a fear of God in the heart of some men that is good and godly, but
does not forever abide so.

To speak a little to all these, before I come to speak of FEAR, as it is a
grace of God in the hearts of his Children.

And first to the first, to wit, that there is a fear of God, that flows even
from the light of nature.

A people may be said to do things in a fear of God, when they act one toward
another in things reasonable, and honest 'twxt man and man, not doing that to
others they would not have done to themselves. This is that fear of God which
Abraham thought the Philistians had destroyed in themselves, when he said of
his wise to Abimelech, she is my Sister. For when Abimelech asked Abraham why
he said of his wife, she is my Sister; He replied, saying, I thought verily
that the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay me for my wives
sake, Genesis 20.11. I thought verily that in this place men had stifled and
choked that light of nature that is in them, at least so far forth as not to
suffer it to put them in fear, when their lusts were powerful in them to
accomplish their ends on the object that was present before them. But this I
will pass by, and come to the second thing.

Namely, to show that there is a fear of God, that flows from some of his
dispensations to men, which yet are neither universal, nor saving.

This fear when opposed to that which is saving, may be called an ungodly fear
of God; I shall describe it by these several particulars that follow.

First, There is a fear of God that causes a continual grudging, discontent,
and heart-risings against God under the hand of God; And that is, when the
dread of God in his coming upon men, to deal with them for their sins, is
apprehended by them, and yet by this dispensation they have no change of heart,
to submit to God thereunder.

The sinners under this dispensation cannot shake God out of their mind, nor
yet graciously tremble before him, but through the unsanctified frame that they
now are in, they are afraid with ungodly fear, and so in their minds let fly
against him.

This fear oftentimes took hold of the Children of Israel when they were in the
Wilderness in their journey to the promised Land; still they feared that God in
this place would destroy them, but not with that fear that made them willing to
submit, for their sins, to the judgment which they fear, but with that fear
that made them let fly against God.

This fear showed it self in them, even at the beginning of their voyage, and
was rebuked by Moses at the Red Sea, but it was not there, nor yet at any other
place, so subdued, but that it would rise again in them at times to the
dishonor of God, and the anew making of them guilty of sin before him, Exodus
14.11, 12, 13. Numb. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

This fear is that which God said, he would send before them, in the day of
Joshua, even a fear that should possess the inhabitants, of the land, to wit, a
fear that should arise for that faintness of heart that they should be
swallowed up of, at their apprehending of Joshua in his approaches toward them
to destroy them. I will send my fear before thee, and will destroy all the
people to whom thou shall come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their
backs unto thee. This day, says God, will I begin to put the dread of thee,
and the fear of thee upon the Nations that are under the whole Heavens who
shall hear report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of
thee, Dut. 2.25. Chap. 11.25.

Now this fear is also, as you here see, called anguish, and in another place,
an Hornet, for it, and the soul that it falls upon, do greet each other as Boys
and Bees do. The Hornet puts men in fear, not so as to bring the heart into a
sweet compliance with his terror, but so as to stir up the spirit into acts of
opposition and resistance, yet withal they flee before it. I will send Hornets
before thee, which shall drive out thee H^vite, etc. Exodus 23.27.

Now this fear, whether it be wrought by a misapprehending of the judgments of
God (as in the Israelites,) or otherwise as in the Canaanites, yet ungodliness
is the effect thereof, and therefore I call it an ungodly fear of God, for it
stirs up murmurings, discontents, and heart-risings against God, while he
with his dispensations is dealing with them.

Secondly, there is a fear of God that drives a man away from God, (I speak
not now of the Athest, nor of the pleasurable sinner, nor yet of these; and
that fear that I speak of just now) I speak now of such who through a sense of
sin and of Gods justice fly from him of a slavish ungodly fear. This ungodly
fear was that which possessed Adams heart in the day that he did eat of the
tree concerning which the Lord had said unto him, In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die. For then was he possessed with such a fear of
God as made him seek to hide himself from his presence. I heard, said he, thy
voice in the garden, and I was afraid because I was naked, and I hid my self,
Genesis 3.10. mind it, he had a fear of God, but it was not godly: it was not that
that made him afterward submit himself unto him; for that would have kept him
from not departing from him, or else have brought him to him again, with bowed,
broken and contrite spirit. But this fear, as the rest of his sin, managed his
departing from his God, and pursued him to provoke him still so to do, by IT he
kept himself from God, by IT his whole man was carried away from him. I call IT
ungodly fear, because it begat in him ungodly apprehensions of his Maker.
Because it confined Adams conscience to the sense of justice only, and
consequently to disspair.

The same fear also possessed the children of Israel when they heard the law
delivered to them on Mount Sinai: as is evident, for it made them that they
could neither abide his presence, nor hear his word. It drove them back from
the Mountain. It made them, says the Apostle to Hebrews, That they could not
endure that which was commanded, Heb. 12. Wherefore this FEAR Moses rebukes,
and forbids their giving way thereto. Fear not, said he, but had THAT fear been
godly, he would have encouraged it, and not forbid, and rebuke it as he did.
Fear not, said he, for God is come to prove you, they thought otherwise. God
says he, is come to prove you, and that HIS fear may be before your faces.
Therefore that fear that already had taken possession of them, was not the fear
of God, but a fear that was of Satan, of their own misjudging hearts, and so a
fear that was ungodly, Exodus 20.18.19. Mark you, here is a fear and a fear, a
fear forbidden, and a fear commended, a fear forbidden because it engendered
their hearts to bondage, and to ungodly thoughts of God, and of his word; It
made them that they could not desire to hear God speak to them any more, ver.
19.20, 21.

Many also at this day are possessed with this ungodly fear: And you may know
them by this. They cannot abide conviction for sin, and if at any time the word
of the law, by the preaching of the word comes near them they will not abide
that preacher, nor such kind of sermons any more. They are, as they deem, best
at ease, when furthest off of God, and of the power of his word. The word
preached brings God nearer to them than they desire he should come, because
whenever God comes near their sins, by him, are manifest, and so is the
judgment too that to them is due. Now these not having faith in the mercy of
God through Christ, nor that grace that tends to bring them to him, they
cannot but think of God amiss, and their so thinking of him makes them say unto
him, depart from us, For we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Wherefore
their wrong thoughts of God, beget in them this ungodly fear; and again, this
ungodly fear does maintain in them the continuance of these wrong and unworthy
thoughts of God, and therefore, through that devilish service wherewith they
strengthen one another, the sinner without a miracle of grace prevents him, is
drowned in destrustion and perdition.

'Twas this ungodly fear of God that carried Cain from the presence of God into
the Land of Nod, and that put him there upon any carnal wordly business, if
perhaps he might by so doing, stifle convictions, of the majesty and justice of
God against his sin, and so live the rest of his vain life in the more sinful
security and fleshly ease.

This ungodly fear, is that also which Samuel perceived at the peoples
apprehension of their sin, to begin to get hold of their hearts; wherefore he,
as Moses before him, quickly forbids their entertaining of it. Fear not, said
he, ye have done all this wickedness, yet turned aside from following the Lord.
For to turn them aside from following of him, was the natural tendency of this
fear. But fear not, said he, that is, with that fear that tends to turn you
aside. Now I say, the matter that this fear works upon (as in Adam, and the
Israelites mentioned before) was their sin. You have sinned, says he, that is
true, yet turn not aside, yet fear not with that fear that would make you so
do, 1 Samuel 12.20. Note by the way sinner, that when the greatness of thy sins,
being apprehended by thee, shall work in thee that fear of God, as shall
incline thy heart to fly from him, thou art possessed with a fear of God that
is ungodly, yea so ungodly, that not any of thy sins for hainousness way be
compared therewith (as might be made manifest in many particulars) but Samuel
having rebuked this fear, presently sets before the people another, to wit the
true fear of God; fear the Lord, says he, serve him with all your hearts (
ver. 24.) And he gives them this encouragement so to do, for the Lord will not
forsake his people.

This ungodly fear, is that which you read of in Isa. 2. and in many other
places, and Gods people should shun it, as they would shun the devil, because
its natural tendency is to forward the destruction of the soul in which it has
took possession.

Thirdly, There is a fear of God, which, although it has not in it that power
as to make men flee from Gods presence, yet it is ungodly, because, even while
they are in the outward way of Gods ordinances, their hearts are by it, quite
discouraged from attempting to exercise themselves in the power of religion.

Of this sort are they which dare not cast off the hearing, reading, and
discourse of the word as others: no, nor the assembly of Gods children for the
exercise of other religious duties, for their conscience is convinced this is
the way and worship of God. But yet their heart (as I said) by this ungodly
fear, is kept from a powerful gracious falling in with God. This fear takes
away their heart from all holy and godly prayer in private, and from all holy
and godly Zeal for his name in public, and there be many professors whose
hearts are possessed with this ungodly fear of God; and they are intended by
the slothful one. He was a servant, a servant among the servants of God, and
had gifts and abilities given him, therewith to serve Christ, as well as his
fellows, yea, and was commanded too, as well as the rest, to occupy till his
Master came. But what does he? why he takes his talent, the gift that he was to
lay out for his Masters profit, and puts it in a napkin, digs a hole in the
earth, and hides his Lords money, and lies at a lazy manner at to-elbo all his
days, not out of, but in his Lords Vineyard: for he came among the servants
also at last. By which it is manifest that he had not cast off his profession,
but was slothful and negligent while he was in it. But what was it that made
him thus slothful? what was it that took away his heart, while he was in the
way, and that discouraged him from falling in with the power, and holy practice
of religion according to the talent he received? why it was this, he gave way
to an ungodly fear of God, and that took away his heart from the power of
religious duties. Lord, said he, behold here is thy pound, which I have kept,
laid up in a napkin, for I feared thee. Why man? does the fear of God make a
man idle, and slothful no, no? that is, if it be right and godly. This fear was
therefore evil fear; it was that ungodly fear of God, of which I have here been
speaking of. For I feared thee, or as Matthew has it, for I was afraid. Afraid
of what? of Christ, That he was an hard man, reaping where he sowed not, and
gathering where he had not strewed. This his fear, being ungodly; made him
apprehend of Christ contrary to the goodness of his nature, and so took away
his heart from all endeavors to be doing of that which was pleasing in his
sight, Luke 19.20. Matthew 25.24, 25.

And thus do all those that retain the name, and show of religion, but are
neglecters, as to the power, and godly practice of it. These will live like
Dogs and Swine in the house, they pray not, they watch not their hearts, they
pull not their hands out of their bosoms to work, they do not strive against
their lusts, nor will they ever resist unto blood striving against sin; they
cannot take up their Cross, or improve what they have to Gods glory.

Let all men therefore take heed of this ungodly fear, and shun it as they shun
the Devil, for it will make them afraid where no fear is. It will tell them
that there is a Lion in the street, the unlikeliest place in the world for such
a beast to be in; it will put a vizzard upon the face of God, most dreadful
and fearful to behold, and then quite discourage the soul as to his service; so
it served the slothful servant, and so it will serve thee poor sinner, if thou
entertainest it, and give way thereto. But,

Fourthly, This ungodly fear of God, it shows it self also in this. It will not
suffer the soul that is governed thereby, to trust only to Christ for
justification of life, but will bend the powers of the soul to trust partly to
the works of the Law. Many of the Jews was in the time of Christ, and his
Apostles possessed with this ungodly fear of God, for they was not as the
former to wit, as the slothful servant, to receive a talent and hide it in the
earth in a napkin, but they were an industrous people, they followed after the
Law of righteousness, they had a Zeal of God and of the religion of their
fathers, but how then did they come to miscarry? why, their fear of God was
ungodly, it would not suffer them wholly to trust to the righteousness of faith
which is the imputed righteousness of Christ. They followed after the Law of
righteousness, but attained not to the Law of righteousness. Wherefore, because
they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law. But what
was it that made them join their works of the Law with Christ, but their
unbelief whose foundation was ignorance and fear, they were afraid to venture
all in one bottom, they thought two strings to one bow would be best, and thus
betwixt two stools they came to the ground. And hence, to fear and to doubt,
are put together as being the cause one of another, yea they are put often times,
the one for the other; thus ungodly fear for unbelief: ( Be not afraid, only
believe) and therefore he that is overruled and carried away with this fear,
is coupled with the unbeliever that is thrust out from the holy City among the
dogs.

But the fearful and unbelievers, and murderers are without, Revel. 21.8. The
fearful and unbelieving, you see, are put together, for indeed, fear, that is,
this ungodly fear, is the ground of unbelief, or, if you will, unbelief is the
ground of fear, this fear: but I stand not upon nice distinctions. This ungodly
fear has a great hand in keeping of the soul from trusting only to Christ's
righteousness for justification of life.

Fifthly, This ungodly fear of God, is that which will put men upon adding to
the revealed Will of God, their own inventions, and their own performances of
them as a means to pacify the anger of God. For the truth is, where this
ungodly fear reigns, there is no end of Law and Duty. When those that you
read of in the book of Kings, (2 King. 17.) Were destroyed by the Lions
(because they had set up Idolatry in the Land of Israel) they sent for a Priest
from Babylon that might teach them the manner of the God of the Land; but
behold when they knew it, being taught it by the Priest, yet their fear would
not suffer them to be content with that worship only. They feared the Lord,
says the text, and served their own Gods. And again. So these Nations feared
the Lord, and served their graven Images. It was this fear also that put the
Pharisees upon inventing so many traditions, as the washing of cups, and beds,
and tables, and basins, with a bundance of such other like gear, ( Mark 7.)
none knows the many dangers that an ungodly fear of God will driv a man into.
How has it wrakt and tortered the Papists for hundreds of years together, for
what else is the cause but this ungodly fear, at least in the most simple and
harmless of them, of their penances, as creeping to the Cross, going barefoot
on pilgrimage, whiping themselves, wearing of sackcloth, saying so many
paternosters, so many avemaries, making so many confessions to the Priest,
giving so much money for pardons, and abundance of other the like, but this
ungodly fear of God? For could they be brought to believe this Doctrine, that
Christ was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification,
and to apply it by faith with Godly boldness to their own souls, this fear
would vanish, and so consequently all those things with which they so
needlessly and unprofitably afflicted themselves, offend God, and grieve his
people.

Therefore, gentle reader although my text does bid that indeed thou should
fear God; yet it includes not, nor accepts of any fear: no, not of any fear
of God. For there is, as you see, a fear of God that is ungodly, and that is to
be shunned as there sins. Wherefore thy wisdom and thy care should be, to see
and prove thy fear to be godly, which shall be the next thing that I shall take
inhand.

The third thing that I am to speak to is, that there is a fear of God in the
heart of some men that is good and godly, but yet does not for ever abide so.

Or you may take it thus. There is a fear of God, that is godly but for a time.

In my speaking TO, and opening of THIS to you, I shall observe this method.

1. I shall show you WHAT this fear is.

2. I shall show you by WHO, or what this fear is wrought in the heart.

3. I shall show you what this fear DOES in the soul. And,

4. I shall show you WHEN this fear is to have an end.

For the first, This fear is an effect of sound awakenings by the word of wrath
which begets in the soul a sense of its right to eternal damnation; for this
fear is not in every sinner; he that is blinded by the Devil, and that is not
able to see that his state is damnable, he has not this fear in his heart, but
he that is under the powerful workings of the word of wrath (as God elect are
at first conversion,) he has this godly fear in his heart; That is, he fears
that that damnation will come upon him, which by the justice of God is due unto
him, because he has broken his holy law. This is the fear that made the three
thousand cry out, men, and brethren, what shall we do? and that made the Jailer
cry out, and that with great trembling of soul, sirs what must I do to be
saved? Acts 2. Chap. 16.

The method of God is to kill and make alive, to smite, and then heal, when the
Commandment came to Paul, sin revived, and he died, and that Law which was
ordained to life, he found to be unto death. That is, it passed a sentence of
death upon him for his sins, and slew his conscience with that sentence.
Therefore from that time that he heard that word, why do thou persecute me?
which is all one, as if he had said, why do thou commit murder? he lay under
the sentence of condemnation by the law, and under this fear of that sentence
in his conscience. He lay, I say, under it until that Ananias came to him to
comfort him, and to preach unto him the forgiveness of sins, Acts 9.

The fear therefore that now I call godly, it is that fear which is properly
called the fear of eternal damnation for sin, and this fear at first awakening,
is good, and godly, because it arises in the soul from a true sense of its
very state. Its state by nature is damnable, because it is sinful, and because
he is not one that as yet, believes in Christ for remission of sins. He that
believes not shall be damned. He that believes not, is condemned already, and
the wrath of God abides on him, Mark 16, 16. Joh. 3.18, 36.

The which, when the sinner at first begins to see, he justly fears it, I say,
he fears it justly, and therefore godly, because by this fear he subscribes to
the sentence that is gone out against him for sin.

Secondly, By who, or by what is this fear wrought in the heart?

To this I shall answer in brief. It is wrought in the heart by the Spirit of
God, working there at first as a Spirit of bondage on purpose to put us in
fear. This Paul insinuates in Romans 8.15. Saying, Ye have not received the
Spirit of Bondage again to fear. He does not say, ye have not received the
Spirit of Bondage, for that they had received, and that to put them in fear,
which was at first conversion, as by the instances made mention of before, is
manifest; all that he says, is, that they had not received it again, that is,
after the spirit, as a spirit of adoption is come; for then, as a spirit of
bondage it comes no more.

It is then the Spirit of God, even the Holy Ghost that convinces us of sin,
and so of our damnable state, because of sin, Joh. 16.8, 9. For it cannot be
that the Spirit of God should convince us of sin, but it must also show us our
state to be damnable because of it, especially if it so convinces us, before
we believe, and that is the intent of our Lord in that place, of sin, (and so
of their damnable state by sin) because they believe not on me. Therefore the
Spirit of God when he works in the heart, as a spirit of bondage, he does it
by working in us by the Law, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20.

And he, in this his working is properly called a spirit of bondage.

1. Because, by the Law he shows us, that indeed we are in bondage to the Law,
the Devil and Death, and damnation; for this is our proper state by nature,
though we see it not until the Spirit of God shall come to reveal, this our
state of bondage unto our own senses by revealing to us our sins by the Law.

2. He is called, in this his working, the spirit of bondage, because he here
also holds us, to wit, in this sight and sense of our bondage-state, so long as
is meet we should be so held, which to some of the Saints is a longer, and to
some a shorter time. Paul was held in it three days, and three nights, but the
Jailer and the three thousand, so far as can be gathered, not above an hour,
but some in these later times, are so held for days, and months if not years.

But I say, let the time be longer or shorter, it is the Spirit of God that
holds him under this yoke, and it is good that a man should be HIS time
helden under it. As is that saying of the lamentation. It is good that a man
bear the yoke in his youth. That is, at his first awakning ( Lamen. 3.27.) So
long as seems good to this holy Spirit to work in this manner by the Law.

Now, as I said, the sinner at first is by the Spirit of God held in this
bondage, that is, has such a discovery of his sin, and of his damnation for
sin made to him, and also is held so fast under the sense thereof, that it is
not in the power of any man, nor yet of the very Angels in Heaven to release
him, or set him free until the Holy Spirit changes his ministration, and comes
in the sweet and peaceable tidings of salvation by Christ in the Gospel, to his
poor, dejected, and afflicted conscience.

Thirdly, I now come to show you what this fear does in the soul.

Now although this godly fear is not to last always with us, (as I shall
further show you anon) yet it greatly differs from that which is wholly ungodly
of it self, both because of the Author, and also of the effects of it. Of the
Author I have told you before, I now shall tell you what it does.

1. This fear makes a man judge himself for sin, and to fall down before God
with a broken mind under this Judgment: The which is pleasing to God, because
the sinner by so doing justifies God in his saying, and clears him in his
Judgment, Psalm. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

2. As this fear makes a man judge himself, and cast himself down at Gods foot,
so it makes him condole and bewail his misery before him, which is also well
pleasing in his sight. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, saying,
thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke, etc. Jer. 31, 18, 19.

3. This fear makes a man lie at Gods foot, and puts his mouth in the dust if
so be there may be hope. This also is well-pleasing to God, because now is the
sinner as nothing, and in his own eyes less than nothing, as to any good or
desert. He sits alone and keeps silence because he has now this yoke upon
him. He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope, Lamen. 3.28,
29.

4. This fear puts a man upon crying to God for mercy, and that in most humble
manner, now he sensibly cries, now he dejectedly cries, now he feels and cries,
now he smarts and cries out, God be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18.13.

5. This fear makes a man that he cannot accept of that for support, and
succor which others that are destitute thereof will take up and be contented
with. This man must be washed by God himself, and cleansed from his sin by God
himself, Psalm. 51.

6. Therefore this fear goes not away until the Spirit of God does change his
ministration as to this particular in leaving off to work now by the Law, as
before, and coming to the soul with the sweet word of promise of life and
salvation by Jesus Christ.

Thus far this fear is godly, that is until Christ by the spirit in the Gospel
is revealed and made over unto us, and no longer.

Thus far this fear is godly, and the reason why it is godly, is because the
groundwork of it is good. I told you before what this fear is, namely, It is
the fear of damnation. Now the ground for this fear is good, as is manifest by
these particulars.

1. The soul fears damnation, and that rightly, because it is in its sins. 2.
The soul fears damnation rightly, because it has not faith in Christ, but is
at present under the Law. 3. The soul fears damnation rightly now, because by
sin, the Law, and for want of faith, the wrath of God abides on it.
But now, although thus far, this fear of God, is good and godly, yet after
Christ by the Spirit in the word of the Gospel is revealed to us, and we made
to accept of him as so revealed and offered to us by a true and living faith;
this fear, to wit, of damnation, is no longer good, but ungodly. Nor does the
Spirit of God ever work it in us again. Now we do not receive the spirit of
bondage again to fear, that is to say, to fear damnation, but we have received
the spirit of adoption whereby we cry father, father.

But I would not be mistaken, when I say, that this fear is no longer godly. I
do not mean with reference to the essence and habit of it, for I believe it is
the same in the feed which shall afterward grow up to an higher degree, and
into a more sweet and gospel current, and manner of working, but I mean
refference to this act of searing damnation, I say it shall never by the spirit
be managed to that work, it shall never bring forth that fruit more.

And my reasons are;

1. Because that the soul by closing through the promise, by the spirit, with
Jesus Christ, is removed off of that foundation upon which it stood when it
justly feared damnation: It has received NOW forgiveness of sin, it is now no
more under the law, but in Jesus Christ by faith; therefore there is now NO
condemnation toit, Act. 26.18. Romans 6.14. chap. 8.1.

The groundwork therefore being now taken away, the spirit works that fear
no more.

2. He cannot, after he has come to the soul as a spirit of adoption, come
again as a spirit of bondage to put the soul int his first fear, to wit, a fear
of eternal damnation, because he cannot say, and unsay; do and undo. As a
spirit of adoption he told me that my sins were forgiven me, that I was
included in the covenant of grace, that God was my Father through Christ that I
was under the promise of salvation, and that this calling and gift of God to me
is permanent, and without repentance. And do you think, that after he has told
me this, and sealed up the truth of it to my precious soul, that he will come
to me, and tell me that I am yet in my sins, under the curse of the Law and the
eternal wrath of God? No, no, the word of the Gospel is not yea, yea; nay, nay:
It is only yea, and amen; it is so, as God is true, 2 Cor. 1.17, 18, 19, 20.

3. The state therefore of the sinner being changed, and that too, by the
spirits changing his dispensation, leaving off to be now as a spirit of bondage
to put us in fear, and coming to our heart, as the spirit of adoption to make
us cry father, father, he cannot go back to his first workagain; for if so,
then he must gratify, yea and also ratifiy, that profane and Popish doctrine,
forgiven to day, unforgiven to morrow, a child of God to day, a child of Hell
to morrow; but what says the Scriptures. Now therefore such are no more
strangers, and foreiners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, and are built upon the foundations of the Apostles and
Prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief Cornerstone. In whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows into an holy Temple in the Lord, in
whom you also are builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit,
Ephesians. 2.

Object. But this is contrary to my experience.

Why Christian, what is thy experience?

Why? I was at first, as you have said, possessed with the fear of damnation,
and so under the power of the spirit of bondage.

Well said, and how was it then?

Why, after some time of continuance in these fears I had the spirit of
adoption sent to me to seal up to my soul the forgiveness of sins, and so he
did; and was also helped by the same spirit, as you have said, to call God
Father Father.

Well said, and what after that?

Why, after that I fell into as great fears as ever I was in before.

Ans. All this may be granted, and yet nevertheless, what I have said will
abide a truth; for I have not said that after the spirit of adoption is come, a
Christian shall not again be in as great fears, for he may have worse than he
had at first, but I say, that after the spirit of adoption is come, the spirit
of bondage, as such, is sent of God no more to put us into those fears. For,
mark, for we have not received the spirit of bondage AGAIN to fear. Let the
Word be true, whatever thy experience is. Do thou not understand me?

After the Spirit of God has told me, and also helped me to believe it, that
the Lord for Christ's sake has forgiven mine iniquities; he tells me no more,
that they are not forgiven. After the Spirit of God has helped me, by Christ,
to call God my Father, he tells me no more that the Devil is my Father. After
he has told me, that I am not under the Law, but under grace, he tells me no
more that I am not under grace, but under the Law, and bound over by it, for my
sins, to the wrath and judgment of God: But this is the fear, that the Spirit
as a spirit of bondage works in the soul at first.

Quest. Can you give me further reason yet to convict me of the truth of what
you say?

Answ. Yes. 1. Because as the Spirit cannot give himself the lie; so he cannot
overthrow his own order of working, nor yet contradict that testimony that his
servants by his inspiration has given of his order of working with them.

But he must do the first: If he says to us (and that after we have received
his own testimony, that we are under grace) that yet we are under sin, the Law
and wrath.

And he must do the second; if after he has gone through the first work on us,
as a spirit of bondage, to the second as a spirit of adoption; he should
overthrow as a spirit of bondage AGAIN, what before he had built as a spirit of
adoption.

And the third must therefore needs follow, that is, he overthrows the
testimony of his servants; for they have said, That now we receive the spirit
of bondage AGAIN to fear no more; that is, after that we by the Holy Ghost are
enabled to call God Father, Father.

2. This is evident also, because the covenant in which now the soul is
interested, abides, and is everlasting, not upon the supposition of my
obedience, but upon the unchangable purpose of God, and the efficacy of the
obedience of Christ, whose blood also has confirmed it. It is ordered in all
things, and sure, said David; and this, said he, is all my salvation, (2 Samuel
23.5.)

The covenant then is everlasting in it self, being established upon so good a
foundation, and therefore stands in it self everlastingly bent for the good
of them that are involved in it. Hear the tenor of the covenant, and God's
attesting of the truth thereof. This is the covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into
their mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people; And they shall not teach every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me;
from the least to the greatest; for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more, Heb.
8.10, 11, 12. Now if God will do thus unto those that he has comprised in his
everlasting covenant of grace, then he will remember their sins no more, that
is, unto condemnation; (for so it is that he does forget them) then cannot the
Holy Ghost, who also is one with the Father and the Son, come to us again (even
after we are possessed with these glorious fruits of this covenant) as a spirit
of bondage, to put us in fear of damnation.

3. The Spirit of God, after it is come to me as a spirit of adoption, can come
to me no more as a spirit of bondage, to put me in fear, that is, with my first
fears, because, by that faith that he, even he himself, has wrought in me, to
believe and call God Father, Father, I am united to Christ, and stand no more
upon mine own legs, in mine own sins, or performances; but in his glorious
righteousness before him, and before his Father; but he will not cast away a
member of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; nor will he that the Spirit
of God should come as a spirit of bondage to put him into a grounded fear of
damnation, that stands complete before God in the righteousness of Christ;
for that is an apparent contradiction.

And the third must therefore needs follow, that is, he overthrows the
testimony of his servants; for they have said, That now we receive the spirit
of bondage AGAIN to fear no more; that is, after that we by the Holy Ghost are
enabled to call God Father, Father.

2. This is evident also, because the covenant in which now the soul is
interested, abides, and is everlasting, not upon the supposition of my
obedience, but upon the unchangable purpose of God, and the efficacy of the
obedience of Christ, whose blood also has confirmed it. It is ordered in all
things, and sure, said David; and this, said he, is all my salvation, (2 Samuel
23.5.)

The covenant then is everlasting in it self, being established upon so good a
foundation, and therefore stands in it self everlastingly bent for the good
of them that are involved in it. Hear the tenor of the covenant, and God's
attesting of the truth thereof. This is the covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into
their mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people; And they shall not teach every man his neighbor,
and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all know me;
from the least to the greatest; for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more, Heb.
8.10, 11, 12. Now if God will do thus unto those that he has comprised in his
everlasting covenant of grace, then he will remember their sins no more, that
is, unto condemnation; (for so it is that he does forget them) then cannot the
Holy Ghost, who also is one with the Father and the Son, come to us again (even
after we are possessed with these glorious fruits of this covenant) as a spirit
of bondage, to put us in fear of damnation.

3. The Spirit of God, after it is come to me as a spirit of adoption, can come
to me no more as a spirit of bondage, to put me in fear, that is, with my first
fears, because, by that faith that he, even he himself, has wrought in me, to
believe and call God Father, Father, I am united to Christ, and stand no more
upon mine own legs, in mine own sins, or performances; but in his glorious
righteousness before him, and before his Father; but he will not cast away a
member of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; nor will he that the Spirit
of God should come as a spirit of bondage to put him into a grounded fear of
damnation, that stands complete before God in the righteousness of Christ;
for that is an apparent contradiction.

Quest. But may it not come again as a spirit of bondage, to put me into my
first fears for my good?

Ans. The Text says the contrary; For we have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear. Nor is God put to it for want of wisdom, to say, and
unsay, do, and undo, or else he cannot do good. When we are sons, and have
received the adoption of children, he does not use to send the spirit after
that to tell us we are slaves and heirs of damnation, also that we are without
Christ, without the promise, without grace, and without God in the World, and
yet this he must do if it comes to us after we have received him as a spirit of
adoption, and put us, as a spirit of bondage in fear as before.

Quest. But by what spirit is it then that I am brought again into fears, even
into the fears of damnation, and so into bondage by?

Ans. By the spirit of the Devil who always labors to frustrate the faith and
hope, and comfort of the godly.

Quest. How does that appear?

Answ. 1. By the groundlesness of such fears.

2. By the unseasonableness of them.

3. By the effects of them.

1. By the groundlesness of such fears.

The ground is removed, for a grounded fear of damnation, is this, I am yet in
my sins, in a state of nature, under the law, without faith, and so under the
wrath of God; this, I say, is the ground of the fear of damnation, the true
ground to fear it; but now the man that we are talking of, is one that has the
ground of this fear taken away by the testimony and seal of the spirit of
adoption: he is called, justified, and has, for the truth of this his
condition, received the evidence of the spirit of adoption, and has been
thereby enabled to call God Father, Father; now he that has received this, has
the ground of the fear of damnation taken from him, therefore his fear, I say,
being without ground, is false, and so no work of the Spirit of God.

2. By the unseasonableness of them. This spirit always comes too late. It
comes after the spirit of adoption is come. Satan is always for being too
soon, or too late. If he would have men believe they are children, he would
have them believe it, while they are slaves, slaves to him and their lusts. If
he would have them believe they are slaves, it is when they are sons, and have
received the spirit of adoption, and the testimony, by that, of their sonship
before. And this evil is rooted even in his nature; He is a liar, and the
Father of it, ( John 8.) and his ^ies are not known to Saints, more than in
this, that he labors always to contradict the work and order of the spirit of
truth.

3. It also appears by the effects of such fears. For there is a great deal of
difference betwixt the natural effects of these fears which are wrought indeed
by the spirit of bondage and those which are wrought by this spirit of the
Devil afterward.

The one, to wit, the fears that are wrought by the spirit of bondage causes
us to confess the truth, to wit, that we are Christless, graceless, faithless,
and so at present, that is, while he is so working in a sinful and damnable
case; but the other, to wit, the spirit of the Devil when he comes, which is
after the spirit of adoption is come, he causes us to make a lie, that is to
say, we are christless, graceless, and faithless. Now this I say is wholly, and
in all the parts of it a lie, and HE is the Father of it.

Besides, the direct tendency of the fear that the Spirit of God, as a spirit
of bondage works in the soul, is to cause us to come repenting home to God by
Jesus Christ, but these latter fears tend directly to make a man, (he having
first denied the work of God, as he will, if he falls in with them) to run
quite away from God, and from h^s grave to him in Christ as will evidently
appear if thou give but a plain and honest answer to these questions
following.

1. Quest. Does not these fears make thee question, whether there was ever a
work of grace wrought in thy soul?

Answ. Yes, verily that they do.

2. Quest. Does not these fears make the question whether ever thy first fears
was wrought by the Holy Spirit of God?

Answ. Yes, verily that they do.

3. Quest. Does not these fears make thee question whether ever thou have had
(indeed) any true comfort from the Word and Spirit of God.

Answ. Yes, verily that they do.

4. Quest. Do thou not find intermixed with THESE fears plain assertions that
thy first comforts, were either from thy fancy, or from the Devil, and a fruit
of his delusions?

Answ. Yes, verily that I do.

5. Quest. Does not THESE fears weaken thy heart in prayer?

Answ. Yes, that they do.

6. Quest. Does not these fears keep thee back from laying hold of the promise
of salvation by Jesus Christ?

Answ. Yes, for I think if I were deceived before, if I were comforted by a
spirit of delusion before: why may it not be so again, so I am afraid to take
hold of the promise.

7. Quest. Does not these fears tend to the hardening of thy heart, and to the
making of thee desperate?

Answ. Yes, verily that they do.

8 Quest. Does not THESE fears hinder thee from profiting in hearing, or
reading of the Word?

Answ. Yes verily, for still whatever I hear or read, I think nothing that is
good belongs to me.

9 Quest. Does not THESE FEARS tend to the stirring up of blasphemies in thy
heart against God?

Answ. Yes, to the almost distracting of me.

10 Quest. Does not these fears make thee sometimes think, that it is in vain
for thee to wait upon the Lord any longer?

Answ. Yes verily, and I have many times almost come to this conclusion, that I
will read, pray, hear, company with Gods people, or the like, no longer.

Well poor Christian, I am glad that thou have so plainly answered me, but
prithee look back upon thy answer, how much of God, do thou think, is in
these things, how much of his Spirit, and the grace of his Word: just none at
all, for it cannot be that these things can be the true and natural effects of
the workings of the Spirit of God; NO not as a spirit of bondage. These are not
his doings; do thou not see the very paw of the Devil in them, yea in every
one of thy ten confessions; is there not palpably high wickedness in every one
of the effects of this fear?

I conclude then, as I began, that the fear that the Spirit of God, as a spirit
of bondage works, is good, and godly, not only because of the Author, but
also because of the ground and effects; but yet it can last no longer as such
(as producing the aforesaid conclusion,) then till the spirit, as the spirit of
adoption comes, because that then the soul is manifestly taken out of the state
and condition, into which it had brought it self by nature and sin, and is put
into Christ, and so by him into a state of life, and blessedness by grace.
Therefore if first fears come again into thy soul after that the spirit of
adoption has been with thee, know they come not from the Spirit of God, but
apparently from the spirit of the Devil, for they are a lie in themselves, and
their effects are sinful and devilish.

Object. But I had also such wickedness as those in my heart at my first
awaking, and therefore by your argument neither should that be but from the
Devil.

Answ. So far forth as such wickedness was in thy heart, so far did the Devil
and thine own heart seek to drive thee to despair, and dround thee there, but
thou have forgot the question, the question is not whether then thou wast
troubled with such iniquities, but whether thy fears of damnation at that time
were not just and good, because grounded upon thy present condition, which was,
for that thou wast out of Christ in thy sins, and under the curse of the Law,
and whether now, since the spirit of adoption is come unto thee, and has thee,
and has done that for thee as has been mentioned, I say, whether thou
ought for any thing whatsoever to give way to the same fear, from the same
ground of damnation; it is evident thou ought, not because the ground, the
cause is removed.

Object. But since I was sealed to the day of redemption, I have grievously
sinned against God, have not I therefore cause to fear, as before? may not
therefore the spirit of bondage be sent again to put me in fear as at first?
sin was the first cause, and I have sinned now.

Answ. No, by no means, for we have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear. That is, God has not given it us, for God has not given us the spirit
of fear, but of power, of love and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7.

If therefore our first fears come upon us again, after that we have received
at Gods hands the spirit of love, of power, and of a sound mind, it is to be
refused though we have grievously sinned against our God. This is manifest
from, 1 Samuel 12. Fear not, ye have done all this wickedness. That is, not with
that fear which would have made them fly from God as concluding that they were
not now his people.

And the reason is, because sin cannot dissolve the covenant into which the
Sons of God by his grace is taken.

If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments; if they break my
statutes, and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions
with a rod, and their iniquities with stripes; nevertheless my loving kindness
I will not utterly take away from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail,
Psalm. 89.30, 33.

Now if sin does not dissolve the covenant, if sin does not cast me out of this
covenant, which is made personally with the Son of God, and into the hands of
which by the grace of God I am put, then, ought I not, though I have sinned, to
fear with my first fears.

2. Sin, after that the spirit of adoption is come, cannot dissolve the
relation of Father, and Son, of Father and child. And this the Church did
rightly assert, and that when her heart was under great hardness, and when she
had the guilt of erring from his ways, says she, Doubtless thou art our
Father, Doubtless thou art, though this be our case, and though Israel should
not acknowledge us for such, Isa. 63.16, 17.

That sin dissolveth not the relation of Father and Son, is further evident;
see Gal. 4.4. When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the adoption of Sons. And because ye are Sons, God has
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Father, Father. Now
mark, wherefore thou art no more a Servant, that is, no more under the Law of
death, and damnation, but a Son, and if a Son, then an heir of God through
Christ.

Suppose a child does grevously transgress against, and offend his Father, is
the relation between them therefore dissolved? Again, suppose the Father should
scourge and chasten the Son for such offense, is the relation between them
therefore dissolved? Yea suppose the child should now through ignonorance cry,
and say, this man is now no more my father, is he therefore now no more his
Father? does not every body see the folly of arguings? why of the same nature
is that doctrine, that says, that after we have received the spirit of
adoption, that the spirit of bondage is sent to us again to put us in fear of
eternal damnation.

Know then that thy sin, after thou have received the spirit of adoption to cry
unto God Father, Father, is counted the transgression of a child (not of a
slave) and that all that happens to thee for that transgression is but the
chastizement of a Father. And what Son as he whom the father chasteneth not? It
is worth your observation.

That the Holy Ghost checks those, who under their chastizements for sin,
forgot to call God their Father. You have, says Paul; forgotten the
Exhortation that speaks unto you as unto Children, my Son, despise not thou
the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him. Yea,
observe yet further, that Gods chastizing of his children for their sin, is a
sign of grace and love, and not of his wrath, and thy damnation; therefore NOW
there is no ground for the aforesaid fear.

For whom the Lord loves he chastizeth, and scourges every Son whom he
receives, Heb. 12.

Now if God would not have those that have received the spirit of the Son,
however he chastises them, to forget the relation, that by the adoption of
Sons, they stand in to God, if he cheks them that do forget it, when his rod is
upon their backs for sin; then it is evident that those fears that thou have
under a color of the coming again of the spirit, as a spirit of bondage, to
put thee in fear of eternal damnation, is nothing else but Satan disguised, the
better to play his pranks upon thee.

I will yet give you two or three instances more wherein it will be manifest
that what ever happens to thee, I mean as a chastizement for sin, after the
spirit of adoption is come, thou ought to hold fast by faith the relation of
Father and Son.

1. The people spoken of by Moses, are said to have lightly esteemed the rock
of their salvation, which rock is Jesus Christ (and that is a grievous sin
indeed) yet, says he, Is not God thy Father that has bought thee? and then
puts them upon considering the days of old Deuteronomy. 32.6.

2. They in the Prophet Jeremiah had played the harlot with many lovers, and
done evil things as they could; and as another Scripture has it, gone a
whoring from under their God, yet God calls to them by the Prophet saying, Will thou not from this time cry unto me my Father thou art the God of my youth?
Jer. 3.1 -- 7.

3. Remember also that eminent text made mention of in 1 Samuel 12. Fear not, ye
have done all this wickedness; and labor to maintain faith in thy soul, of thy
being a child, (it being true that thou have received the spirit of adoption
before) and so that thou ought not to fall under thy first fears, (because
the ground is taken away) of thy eternal damnation.

Now, let not any, from what has been said, take courage to live loose lives,
under a supposition, that once in Christ, and ever in Christ, and the covenant
cannot be broken, nor the relation of Father and Child dissolved, for they that
do so, it is evident have not known what it is to receive the spirit of adoption;
It is the Spirit of the Devil in his own hue that suggesteth this unto them,
and that prevails with them to do so; shall we do evil that good may come?
shall we sin that grace may abound? or shall we be base in life because God by
grace, has secured us from wrath to come? God forbid, these conclusions
betoken one void of the fear of God indeed, and of the spirit of adoption too.
For what Son is he, that because the Father cannot break the relation, (nor
suffer sin to do it,) that is betwixt the Father and him, that will therefore
say, I will live altogether after my own lusts, I will labor to be a continual
grief to my Father.

Yet lest the Devil (for some are not ignorant of his devices) should get an
advantage against some of the Sons, to draw them away from the filial fear of
their Father, let me here, to prevent such temptations, present such with these
following considerations.

1. Though God cannot, will not dissolve the relation which the spirit of
adoption has made 'twixt the Father and the sons, for any sin that such do
commit: yet he can, and often does take away from them the comfort of their
adoption, not suffering Children, while sinning, to have the sweet and
comfortable sense thereof on their hearts. He can tell how to let sinners be
round about them, and sudden fear trouble them. He can tell how to send
darkness that they may not see, and to let abundance of waters cover them, Job
22.10, 11.

2. God can tell how to hide his face from them, and so to afflict them with
that dispensation, that it shall not be in the power of all the World to
comfort them. When he hides his face, who can behold him? Job. 23.8, 9. chap.
34.29.

3. God can tell how to make thee again to possess the sins that he long since
has pardoned, and that in such wise that things shall be bitter to thy soul.
Thou writest bitter things against me, says Job, and make me to possess the
iniquities of my youth. By this also he made once David groan, and pray against
it as an unsupportable affliction, Job 13.26. Psalm. 25.7.

4. God can lay thee in the dungion in chains, and roll a stone upon thee, he
can make thy feet fast in the stocks, and make the a gazing stock to men and
Angels, Lam. 3.55. ver. 7, 53. Job. 13.27.

5. God can tell how to cause to cease the sweet operations, and blessed
influences of his grace in thy soul, and to make those Gospel showers that
formerly thou have enjoyed, to become now to thee nothing but powder and dust.
Psalm. 51. Dut. 28.24.

6. God can tell how to fight against thee with the sword of his mouth, and to
make thee a Butt for his Arrows; and this is a dispensation most dreadful, Rev.
2.16. Job 6.4. Psalm. 38.2, 3, 4, 5.

7. God can tell how so to bow thee down with guilt and distress, that thou
shall in no wise be able to lift up thy head, Psalm. 40.12.

8. God can tell how to break thy bones, and to make thee by reason of that to
live in continual anguish ofspirit: yea he can send a fire into thy bones that
shall burn, and none shall quench it, Psalm. 51.8. Lam. 3.4. chap. 1.13. Psa.
102.3. Job 30.30.

9. God can tell how to lay thee aside, and make no use of thee as to any work
for him in thy generation. He can throw thee aside as a broken vessel, Psalm.
31.12 Ezekiel. 44.10, 11, 12, 13.

10. God can tell how to kill thee, and to take thee away from the earth for
thy sins, 1 Cor. 11.29, 30, 31, 32.

11. God can tell how to plague thee in thy death, with great plagues, and of
long continuance, Psalm. 73.45. Deuteronomy. 28.

12. What shall I say? God can tell how to let Satan loose upon thee; when thou
lie a dying, he can license him then to assault thee with great temptations,
he can tell how to make thee possess the guilt of all thy unkindness toward
him, and that when thou, as I said, art going out of the World; he can cause
that thy life shall be in continual doubt before thee, and not suffer thee to
take any comfort day nor night; yea he can drive thee even to a madness with
his chastizements for thy folly, and yet all shall be done by him to thee as a
Father chastizeth his Son, Deuteronomy. 28.65, 66 67.

13. Further, God can tell how to tumble thee from off thy deathbed in a
cloud, he can let thee die in the dark; when thou art dying, thou shall not
know whither thou art going, to wit, whether to Heaven or to Hell. Yea he can
tell how to let thee seem to come short of life, both in thine own eyes, and
also in the eyes of them that behold thee. Let us therefore fear, says the
Apostle (though not with slavish, yet with filial fear,) lest a promise being
lest us of entering into rest, any of us should seem to come short of it, Heb.
4.1.

Now all this, and much more can God do to HIS as a Father by his rod, and
Father by rebukes; ah who know but those that are under them, what terrors,
fears, distresses and amazements, God can bring his people into; he can put
them into a furnace, a fire, and no tongue can tell what, so unsearchable and
fearful are his Fatherly chastizements, and yet never give them the spirit of
bondage again to fear. Therefore if thou art a Son, take heed of sin, lest all
these things overtake thee, and come upon thee.

Object. But I have sinned, and am under this high and mighty hand of God.

Ans. Then thou know what I say is true, but yet take heed of harkening unto
such temptations as would make thee believe thou art out of Christ, under the
Law, and a statte of damnation: and take heed also that thou do not conclude
that the author of these fears, is the Spirit of God come to thee again as a
spirit of bondage to put thee into such FEARS, lest unawares to thy self thou
do deify the Devil, dishonor thy Father, overthrow good doctrine, and bring
thy self into a double temptation.

Object. But if God deals thus with a man, how can he otherwise think, but that
he is a reprobate, a Graceless, Christless and Faithless one.

Answ. Nay, but why do thou tempt the Lord thy God? why do thou sin and
provoke the eyes of his glory? why does the living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? ( Lam. 3.39.) He does not willingly afflict, nor grieve
the Children of men, but if thou sinnest, though God should save thy soul, as
he will if thou art an adopted Son of God, yet he will make thee know that sin
is sin, and his rod that he will chastize thee with (if need be) shall be made
of scorpions: read the whole book of the Lamentations, read Job's and David's
complaints: yea, read what happenned to his Son, his welbeloved, and that when
he did but stand in the room of sinners, being in himself altogether innocent,
and then consider O thou sinning Child of God, if it is any injustice in God,
yea if it be not necessary that thou should be chastized for thy sin.

But then, I say, when the hand of God is upon thee, how grievous soever it be,
take heed, and beware that thou give not way to thy first fears, lest as I said
before, thou addest to thine affliction; and to help thee here; Let me give
thee a few instances of the carriages of some of the Saints under some of the
most heavy afflictions that they have met with for sin,

1. Job was in great affliction, and that, as he confessed for sin, ( Joh.
7.20.) Insomuch that he said, God had set him for his mark to shoot at, and
that he ran upon him like a Giant; that he took him by the neck, and shook him
to pieces, and counted him for his enemy, that he hid his face from him, and
that he could not tell where to find him, yet he counted not all this as a sign
of a damnable state, but as a trial, and chastizement, and said when he was in
the hottest of this battle, when I am tried, I shall come forth like gold. And
again, when he was pressed upon by the tempter to think that God would kill
him, he answers with greatest confidence, Though he slay me, yet will I trust
in him, Job 16.14. ver. 12. Chap. 19.11. Chap. 23.8, 9, 10. Chap. 13.15.

2. David complained that God had broken his bones, that he had set his face
against his sins, and had taken from him the joy of his salvation: yet even at
this time he says, O God, thou God of my Salvation, Psalm. 51.8, 9, 12, 14.

3. Haman complained that his soul was full of troubles, that God had laid him
in the lowest pit, that he had put his acquaintance far from him, and was
casting off his soul, and had hid his face from him. That he was afflicted from
his youth up, and ready to die with trouble: he says moreover, that the fierce
wrath of God went over him, that his terrors had cut him him off; yea, that by
reason of them he was distracted, and yet, even before he makes any of these
complaints, he takes fast hold of God, as his saying, O Lord God of my
Salvation, Psalm. 88.

4. The Church in the Lamentations complains that the Lord had afflicted her
for her transgressions, and that in the day of his fierce anger; also that he
had trodden under foot her mighty men, and that he had called the heathen
against her; she says, that he had covered her with a cloud in his anger, that
he was an enemy, and that he had hung a chain upon her, she adds moreover that
he had shut out her prayer, broken her teeth with gravel stones, and covered
her with ashes, and in conclusion, that he had utterly rejected her. But what
does she do under all this trial? does she give up her faith and hope, and
return to that fear that begot the first bondage? No, The Lord is my portion,
says my soul, therefore will I hope in him; yea she adds, O Lord, thou have
pleaded the cause of my soul, thou have redeemed my life, Lamen. 1.5. Chap.
2.1, 2, 5. Chap. 3.7, 8, 16. Chap. 5.22. Chap. 3 24, 31, 58.

These things show, that Gods people, even after they have received the spirit
of adoption, have fell foully into sin, and have been bitterly chastized for
it; and also that when the rod was most smart upon them, they made great
conscience of giving way to their first fears wherewith they were made afraid
by the Spirit, as it wrought, as a spirit of bondage; for indeed there is no
such thing as the coming of the Spirit of bondage to put us in fear the second
time, as such, that is, after he is come as the spirit of adoption to the soul.

I conclude then, that THAT fear that is is wrought by the spirit of bondage is
good, and godly, because the ground for it, is sound; and I also conclude, that
he comes to the soul as a spirit of bondage, but once, and that once, is before
he comes as a spirit of adoption: and if therefore the same fear does again
take hold of thy heart, that is, if after thou have received the spirit of
adoption, thou fear again the damnation of thy soul, that thou art out of
Christ, and under the Law, that fear is bad, and of the Devil, and ought by no
means to be admitted by thee.

Quest. But since it is as you say, how does the Devil after the spirit of
adoption is come, work the child of God into those fears of being out of
Christ, not forgiven, and so an he^r of damnation again?

Answ. 1. By giving the lie (and by prevailing with us to give it too) to the
work of grace wrought in our hearts, and to the testimony of the holy spirit of
adoption. Or,

2. By abusing of our ignorance of the everlasting love of God to his in
Christ, and the duration of the covenant of grace. Or,

3. By abusing some scripture that seems to look that way but does not. Or,

4. By abusing our senses and reason. Or,

5. By strengthening of our unbelief. Or,

6. By overshaddowing of our judgment with horrid darkness. Or,

7. By giving of us counterfeit representations of God. Or,

8. By stirring up, and setting in a rage our inward corruptions. Or,

9. By pouring into our hearts abundance of horrid blasphemies. Or,

10. By putting of wrong constructions on the rod, and chastizing hand of God.
Or,

11. By charging upon us, that our ill behavours under the rod, and chastizing
hand of God, is a sign that we indeed have no grace, but are downright damned
graceless reprobates.

By these things and others like these, Satan, I say, Satan brings the Child
of God, not only to the borders, but even into the bowels of the fears of
damnation, after it has received a blessed testimony of eternal life, and that
by the holy spirit of adoption.

Quest. But would you not have the people of God, stand in FEAR of his rod, and
be afraid of his judgments?

Answ. Yes, and the more they are rightly afraid of them, the less, and the
seldomer they will come under them, for it is want of fear that brings us into
sin, and it is sin that brings us into these afflictions. But I would not have
them fear with the fear of slaves, for that will add no strength against sin,
but I would have them fear with the reverential fear of Sons, and that is the
way to depart from evil.

Quest. How is that?

Answ. Why, having before received the spirit of adoption; still to believe
that he is our father, and so to fear with the fear of children, not as slaves
fear a tyrant. I would therefore have them to look upon his rod, rebukes,
chidings, and chastizements, and also upon the wrath wherewith he does inflict;
to be but the dispensations of their Father.

This believed, maintains, or at least helps to maintain in the heart a
Son-like bowing under the rod.

It also maintains in the soul a Son-like confession of sin, and a justifying
of God under all the rebukes that he grieveth us with. It also engages us to
come to him, to claim and lay hold of former mercies, to expect more, and to
hope a good end shall be made of all Gods present dispensations toward us,
Mich. 7.9. Lam. 1.18. Psalm. 77.10, 11, 12. Lam. 3.31, 32, 33, 34.

Now God would have us thus fear his rod, because he is resolved to chastize us
therewith if so be we sin against him, as I have already showed; for although
Gods bowels turn within him, even while he is threatening his people, yet if we
sin, he will lay on the rod so hard, as to make us cry, Woe unto us that we have
sinned ( Lam. 5.16.) and therefore, as I said, we should be afraid of his
judgments, yet only as before is provided as of the rod, wrath and judgment of a
Father.

Quest. But have you yet any other considerations to move us to FEAR God with
child-like FEAR?

Answ. I will in this place give you five.

1. Consider that God thinks meet to have it so, and he is wiser in heart than
thou; he knows best how to secure his people from sin, and to that end has
given them Law and Commandments to read, that they may learn to fear him as a
Father; Job 37.24. Eccles. 3.14. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.

2. Consider, he is mighty in power; if he touch it but with a fatherly touch,
man nor Angel cannot bear it; yea Christ makes use of that argument, he has
power to cast into hell, fear him, Luke 12.4, 5.

3. Consider that he is every where, thou can not be out of his sight, or
presence; nor out of the reach of his hand. Fear ye not me says the Lord? can
any hide himself in secret places that I should not see him, says the Lord? do
not I fill Heaven and Earth says the Lord? Jer. 5.22. chap. 23.24

4. Consider that he is holy, and cannot look with liking upon the sins of his
own people. Therefore says Peter, Be as obedient children, not fashioning your
selves according to your former lusts in your ignorance, but as he that has
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is
written, be ye holy, for I am holy. And if ye call on the Father who without
respect of persons, judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your
sojourning here in fear.

5. Consider that he is good, and has been good to thee, good in that he has
singled thee out from others, and saved thee from their death and hell, though
thou perhaps was worse in thy life than those that he left when he laid hold on
thee. O this should engage thy heart to fear the Lord all the days of thy
life: They shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the latter days, Hos. 3.5.

And now for the present, I have done with that fear, I mean as to its first
workings, to wit, to put me in fear of damnation, and shall come in the next
place to treat of the grace of fear, more immediately intended in the text.

Of the grace of fear, more immediately intended in the text.
I shall now speak to this fear, which I call a lasting godly fear.

First, By way of Explication, by which I shall show, 1. How, by the Scripture
it is described. 2. I shall show you what this fear flows from. 3. And then I
shall also show you what does flow from it.


For the first of these, to wit, how by the Scripture this fear is described,
and that, 1. More generally. 2. More particularly.


First, More generally.

1. It is called a grace, that is a sweet and blessed work of the Spirit of
grace, as he is given to the elect by. Hence the Apostle says, let us have
grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and Godly fear, ( Heb.
12.) for as that fear that brings bondage, is wrought in the soul, by the
spirit, as a spirit of bondage: so this fear, which is a fear that we have
while we are in the liberty of sons, is wrought by him as he manifests to us
our liberty; where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, that is, where
he is as a Spirit of adoption, setting the soul free from that bondage under
which it was held by the same spirit while he wrought as a spirit of bondage.
Hence as he is called a spirit working bondage to fear, so he, as the Spirit of
the Son, and of adoption, is called, The Spirit of the fear of the Lord, Isa.
11.2. Because it is that Spirit of grace that is the author, animater and
maintainer of our filial fear or of that fear that is son-like, and that
subjecteth the elect, unto God, his Word, and Ways; unto him, his Word and
Ways as a Father.

2. This fear is called also the fear of God, not as that which is ungodly is,
nor yet as that may be, which is wrought by the spirit, as a spirit of bondage;
but by way of eminency, to wir, as a dispensation of the grace of the Gospel,
and as a fruit of eternal love. I will put MY FEAR in their hearts, and they
shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40, 41.

3. This fear of God, is called Gods Treasure, for it is one of his choice
Jewels, it is one of the rarities of Heaven, The fear of the Lord is his
treasure, Isa. 33.16.

And it may well go under such a title, for as treasure, so the fear of the
Lord is not found in every corner. It is said, all men have not faith, because
that also is more precious than gold, the same is said about this fear. There
was no fear of God before their eyes, that is, the greatest part of men are
utterly destitute of this goodly Jewels this treasure, the fear of the Lord.
Poor vagrants, when hey come straglling to a Lords house, may perhaps obtain
some scraps and fragments, they may also obtain old shoes, and some sorry
cast-off rags, but they get not any of his Jewels, they may not touch his
choycest treasure, that is kept for the children, and those that shall be his
heirs. We may say the same also of this blessed grace of fear, which is called
here Gods treasure. It is only bestowed upon the elect, the heirs, and children
of the promise, all others are destitute of it, and so continue to death and
Judgment.

4. This Grace of fear, Is that which makes men excel and go beyond all men,
in the account of God; It is that which beautifies a man, and prefers him above
all other; Have thou, says God to Satan, considered my servant Job, that there
is none like him in all the earth, a perfect, and an upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil? Job. 1.8. chap. 2. ver. 4.

Mind it, There is none like him, none like him in all the earth. I suppose he
means either in those parts, or else he was the man that abounded in the fear
of the Lord; none like him to fear the Lord, he only excelled others with
respect to his reverencing of God, bowing before him, and sincerely complying
with his will, and therefore is counted the excellent man. It Is not the
knowledge of the Will of God, but our sincere complying therewith, that proves
we fear the Lord; and it is our so doing that puts upon us the note of
excelling; hereby appears our perfection, herein is manifest our uprightness. A
perfect, and an upright man is one that fears God, and that because he
escheweth evil.

Therefore this grace of fear is that without which no part or piece of service
which we do to God, can be accepted of him. It is, as I may call it, The salt
of the Covenant, which seasoneth the heart, and therefore must not be lacking
there; it is also that which salteth, or seasoneth all our doings, and
therefore must not be lacking in any of them, Levit. 2.13. For,

5. I take this grace of fear, to be that which softeneth and mollifieth the
heart, and that makes it stand in AWE both of the mercies and Judgments of God.
This is that that retains in the heart that due dread, and reverence of the
heavenly majesty that is meet, should be, both in, and kept in the heart of
poor sinners. Wherefore when David described THIS fear, in the exercise of it,
he calls it an AWE of God. Stand in AWE, says he, and Sin not; and again, mine
heart stands in AWE of thy Word; and again, Let all the Earth FEAR the Lord;
what is that? or how is that? why? Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in
AWE of him, Psalm. 4.4. Psalm. 119.161. Psalm. 33.8.

This is that therefore, that is, as I said before, so excellent a thing in the
eyes of God, to wit, a grace of the spirit, the fear of God, his treasure, the
salt of the covenant, that which makes men excel all others: for it is that
which makes the sinner to stand in AWE of God, which posture is the most
comely thing in us, throughout all ages. But,

Secondly, and more particularly.

1. This grace is called, The beginning of knowledge, Prove. 1.7. because by the
first gracious discovery of God to the soul, this grace is begot; and, again
because the first time that the soul does apprehend God in Christ to be good
unto it, this grace is animated, by which the soul is put into an holy AWE of
God, which causes it with reverence and due attention to hearken to him, and
tremble before him. It is also by virtue of this fear that the soul does
enquire yet more after the blessed knowledge of God. This is the more evident,
because, where this fear of God is wanting, or where the discovery of God, is
not attended with it, the heart still abides rebellious, obstinate, and
unwilling to know more, that it might comply therewith: nay, for want of it,
such sinners say rather; As for God, let him depart from us, and for the
Almighty, we desire not the knowledge of HIS ways.

2. This fear is called, The beginning of Wisdom, ( Job. 28.28. Psalm. 111.10)
because then and not tell then, a man begins to be truly spiritually wise* what
wisdom is there where the fear of God is not? Therefore the fools are described
thus, For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord,
Prove. 1.29. The word of God is the fountain of knowledge, into which a man will
not with godly reverence look, until he is endued with the fear of the Lord:
Therefore it is rightly called the beginning of Wisdom. But fools despise
wisdom, and instruction, Prove. 1.7. It is therefore this fear of the Lord that
makes a man wise for his soul, for life, and for another world. It Is this that
teaches him how he should do to escape those spiritual and eternal ruins that
the fool is overtaken with, and swallowed up of forever. A man void of this
fear of God, wherever he is wise, or in what ever he excels, yet about the
matters of his soul, there is none more foolish than himself; for through the
want of the fear of the Lord, he leaves the best things at sixes, and sevens,
and only pursues with all his heart those that will leave him in the snare
when he dies.

3. This fear of the Lord, Is to hate evil. To hate sin, and vanity; sin and
vanity they are The sweet morsels of the FOOL, ( Job 20.12.) and such which the
carnal appetite of the flesh runs after: and it is only the virtue that is in
the fear of the Lord, that makes the sinner have an antipathy against it. By
the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, Proverbs 16.6. That is, men shun,
separate themselves from, and eschew it in its appearances. Wherefore it is
plain that those that love evil, are not possessed with the fear of God.

There is a generation that will pursue evil, that will take it in, nourish it,
lay it up in their hearts, hide it, and plead for it, and rejoice to do it:
These cannot have in them the fear of the Lord, for that is to hate it, and to
make men depart from it; where the fear of God, and sin is, it will be with the
soul, as it was with Israel, when Amri and Tibni, strove to reign among them
both at once, one of them must be put to death, they cannot live together: sin
must down, for the fear of the Lord begets in the soul a hatred against it,
an abhorrence of it, therefore sin must die, that is, as to the affections and
lusts of it; for as Solomon says in another case, where no wood is, the fire
goes out. So we may say, where there is a hatred of sin, and where men depart
from it, there it loses much of its power, waxes feeble, and decays.
Therefore Solomon says again, Fear the Lord, and depart from evil, Prove. 3.7.
as who should say, fear the Lord, and it will follow, that you shall depart
from evil: departing from evil, is a natural consequence, a proper effect of
the fear of the Lord where it is.

By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, that is, in their Judgment,
will, mind, and affections: not, that by the fear of the Lord, sin is
annihilated, or has lost its being in the soul, there still will those
Canaanites be, but they are hated, lothed, abominated, fought against, prayed
against, watched against, strove against, and mortified, by the soul, Romans 7.

4. This fear is called a fountain of life. The fear of the Lord is a fountain
of life, to depart from the snares of death, Prove. 14.27.

It is a fountain, or spring, which so continually supplieth the soul with
variety of considerations of sin, of God, of death, and life eternal, as to
keep the soul in continual exercise of virtue, and in holy contemplation. It is
a fountain of life, every opperation thereof, every act and exercise thereof
has a true, and natural tendency to spiritual and eternal felicity. Wherefore
the wise man says in another place, the fear of the Lord tends to life, and
be that has it shall abide satisfied, he shall not be visited with evil, Prove.
19.23. It tends to life even as of nature; every thing has a tendency to
that which is most natural to it self, the fire to burn, the water to wet, the
stone to fall, the sun to shine, sin to defile etc. Thus I say, the fear of the
Lord tends to life; the nature of it is to put the soul upon fearing of God,
of closing with Christ, and of walking humbly before him.

It is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. What are the
snares of death, but sin, the wiles of the Devil etc. From which the fear of
God has a natural tendence to deliver thee, and to keep thee in the way that
tends to life.

5. This fear of the Lord, it is called, The instruction of Wisdom, Prove.
15.33. You heard before that it is the beginning of wisdom: but here you find
it called the instuction of wisdom: for indeed it is, not only that which makes
a man begin to be wise, but to improve, and make advantage of all those helps
and means to life, which God has afforded to that end. That is, both to his
own, and his neighbors salvation also. It is the instruction of wisdom, it
will make a man capable to use all his natural parts, all his natural wisdom to
Gods glory, and his own good. There lies, even in many natural things, THAT,
into which if we were instructed, would yield us a great deal of help to the
understanding of spiritual matters; For in wisdom has God made all the World;
nor is there any thing that God has made, whether in Heaven above, or on Earth
beneath, but there is couched some spiritual mystery in it. The which men
matter more, than they do the ground they tread on, or than the stones that are
under their feet, and all because they have not this fear of the Lord, for had
they that, that would teach them to think, even from that knowledge of God, that
has by the fear of him put into their hearts, that he being so great, and so
good, there must needs be abundance of wisdom in the things he has made: that
fear would also endeavor to find out what that wisdom is, yea and give to the
soul the instruction of it.

In that it is called the instruction of wisdom, it intimates to us that its
tendency is to keep all even, and in good order in the soul. When Job perceived
that his friends did not deal with him in an even spirit and orderly manner, he
said, that they forsook the fear of the Almighty, Job 6.14. For, this fear
keeps a man, even, in his words and judgment of things. It may be compared to
the ballace of the Ship, and to the poys of the balance of the Scales, it
keeps all even, and also makes us steer our course right with respect to the
things that pertain to God and man.

What this fear of God flows from.
I come now to the second thing, to wit, to show you what this fear of God
flows from.

First, This fear, this grace of fear, this son-like fear of God, It flows from
the distinguishing love of God to his elect. I will be their God, says he, and
I will put my fear in their hearts. None other obtain it but those that are
enclosed and bound up in that bundle. Therefore they, in the same place are
said to be those that are wrapped up in the eternal or everlasting covenant of
God, and so designed to be the people that should be blessed with this fear. I
will make an everlasting covenant with them, says God, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, and
they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.40.

This covenant declares unto men, that God has, in his heart, distinguishing
love for some of the children of men, for he says, he will be their God, that
he will not leave them, nor yet suffer them to depart, to wit, finally from
him. Into these men's hearts he does put his fear, this blessed grace, and this
rare, and effectual sign of his love, and of their eternal salvation.

2. This fear, flows from a new heart. This fear is not in men by nature; the
fear of Devils they may have, as also an ungodly fear of God; but this fear is
not in any, but where there dwells a new heart, another fruit and effect of
this everlasting covenant, and of this distinguishing love of God.

An new heart also will I give them, a new heart, what a one is that? why? the
same Prophet says in another place, A heart to fear me, a circumcised one, a
sanctified one, Jer. 32.39. Ezekiel. 11.19. Chap. 36.26.

So then, until a man receive an heart from God, an heart from Heaven, a new
heart; he has not this fear of God in him. New wine must not be put into old
bottles, lest the one, to wit, the bottles mar the wine, or the wine the
bottles, but new wine must have new bottles, and then both shall be preserved,
Matthew. 9.17.

This fear of God must not be, cannot be found in old hearts, old hearts are
not bottles out of which this fear of God proceeds, but it is from an honest and
good heart, from a new one, from such an one that is also an effect of the
everlasting covenant, and love of God to men.

I will give them an heart to fear me, there must in all actions be heart, and
without heart no action is good, nor can there be faith, love or fear, from
every kind of heart; these must flow from such an one, whose nature is to
produce, and bring forth such fruit; Do men gather Grapes of thorns, or Figs of
thistles? so from a corrupt heart there cannot proceed such fruit as the fear
of God as to believe in God, and love God, Luke 6.43, 44, 45.

The heart naturally is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, how
then should there flow from such an one, the fear of God? it cannot be. He
therefore that has not received at the hands of God, a new heart, cannot fear
the Lord.

3. This fear of God, it flows from an impression, a sound impression that the
word of God makes on our souls; for without an impress of the word, there is
no fear of God. Hence it is said that God gave to Israel good laws, statutes
and judgments, that they might learn them, and in learning them, learn to fear
the Lord their God. Therefore says God in another place, Gather the people
together, men, women and children, and the stranger that is within thy gates,
that they may hear, and that they may learn to fear the Lord your God, Deuteronomy.
6.1, 2. Chap. 31.12.

For as a man drinks good doctrine into his soul, so he fears God. If he
drinks it in much, he fears him greatly; if he drinks it in but little, he
fears him but little; if he drinks it not in at all, he fears him not at
all.

This therefore teaches us how to judge who fears the Lord; they are those
that learn, and that stand in awe of the word: those that have by the holy word
of God the very form of it self engraven upon the face of their souls, they
fear God, Romans 6.17. But on the contrary, those that do not love good doctrine,
that give not place to the wholesome truths of the God of Heaven revealed in his
testament, to take place in their souls, but rather despise it, and the true
professors of it, they fear not God. For as I said before, this fear of God, it
flows from a sound impression that the word of God makes upon the soul; and
therefore

4. This godly fear, it flows from faith, for where the word makes sound
impression on the soul, by that impression, is faith begotten, whence also this
fear does flow. Therefore right hearing of the word, is called the hearing of
faith, Galla. 3. verse 2. Hence it is said again; By faith Noah being warned of
God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving
of his house, by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith, ( Heb. 11.7.) The word, the warning that he
had from God of things not seen as yet, wrought, through faith therein, that
fear of God in his heart that made him prepare against unseen dangers, and that
he might be an inheritour of unseen happiness.

Where, therefore, there is not faith in the word of God, there can be none of
this fear; and where the word does not make sound impression on the soul, there
can be none of this faith. So that as vices hang together, and have the links
of a chain, dependence one upon another, even so the graces of the spirit also,
are the fruits of one another, and have such dependence on each other, that the
one cannot be without the other.

No faith, no fear of God: Devils faith, Devils fear, Saints faith, Saints fear.

5. This godly fear, it also flows from sound repentance for and from sin,
godly sorrow works repentance, and godly repentance produces this fear. For
behold, says Paul, This self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a godly sort,
what carefulness it wrought in you, what clearing of your selves, yea what
indignations, yea what fear, 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. Repentance is the effect of
sorrow, and sorrow is the effect of smart, and smart the effect of faith: now
therefore fear must needs be an effect of, and flow from repentance.

Sinner, do not deceive thy self, if thou art a stranger to sound repentance,
which stands in sorrow and shame, before God, for sin, as also in turning
from it, thou have no fear of God, I mean none of this godly fear, for that is
the fruits of, and flows from sound repentance,

6. This godly fear, it also flows from a sense of the love and kindness of
God to the soul. Where there is no sense or hope of the kindness, and mercy of
God by Jesus Christ, there can be none of this fear, but rather wrath and
despair, which produces that fear that is either devilish, or else that which
is only wrought in us by the spirit, as a spirit of bondage, (but these we do
not discourse of now) wherefore the godly fear that now I treat of, it flows
from some sense or hope of mercy from God by Jesus Christ. If thou Lord, says
David, should mark iniquity, O Lord, who should stand, but there is
forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.3, 4.

There is mercy with thee. This the soul has sense of an hope in, and therefore
fears God. Indeed, nothing can lay a stronger obligation upon the heart to
fear God, than sense of, or hope in mercy. See Jer. 33.8, 9.

This begets true tenderness of heart, true godly softness of spirit; this
truly endeareth the affections to God: and in this true tenderness, softness,
and indearedness of affection to God, lies the very essence of this fear of
the Lord, as is manifest by the fruit of this fear when we shall come to speak
of it.

7. This fear of God, flows from a due consideration of the judgments of God,
that are to be executed in the world, yea upon professors too: yea further,
Gods people themselves, I mean, as to themselves, have such a consideration of
his judgments toward them, as to produce this godly fear.

When Gods judgments are in the earth, they effect the fear of his name, in the
hearts of his own people, My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am, said
David, afraid of thy judgments, Psalm. 119.120. When God smote Vzza, David was
afraid of God that day, Chron. 13.12. Indeed many regard not the works of the
Lord, nor take notice of the opperation of his hands, and such cannot fear the
Lord. But others observe and regard, and wisely consider of his doings, and of
the judgments that he executes, and that makes them fear the Lord.

This God himself suggesteth as a means to make us fear him. Hence he commands
the false Prophet to be stoned: That all Israel might hear, and fear. Hence
also he commanded that the rebellious Son should be stoned: That all Israel
might hear and fear. False Witness was also to have the same judgment of God
executed upon him: That all Israel might hear and fear. The man also that did
ought presumptuously was to die: That all Israel might hear and fear, Deuteronomy.
13.11. Chap. 21.21. Chap. 17.13. Chap. 19.20.

There is a natural tendency in judgments, as judgments to beget a fear of God
in the heart of man as man: but when the observation of the judgments of God,
is made by him that has a principle of true grace in his soul, that
observation being made, I say, by a gracious heart, produces a fear of God in
the soul, of its own nature, to wit, a gracious or godly fear of God.

8. This godly fear it also flows from a godly remembrance of our former
distresses, when we were distressed with our first fears; for though our first
fears were begotten in us by the spirits working as a spirit of bondage, and so
are not always to be entertained as such, yet even that fear leaves in us,
and upon our spirits, that sense and relish of our first awakenings and dread,
as also occasioneth, and produces this godly fear. Take heed, says God, and
keep thy soul deligently, lest thou forget the things that thine eyes have
seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life, but teach
them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons. But what was the things that their eyes had
seen, that would so damnify them, should they be forgotten? The answer is, The
things which they saw at Horeb; to wit, the Fire, the Smoke, the Darkness, the
Earthquake, their first awakenings by the Law, by which they were brought into
a bondage fear; yea they was to remember this especially. Especially, says he,
the day that thou stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord thy
God said unto thee, gather me the people together, and I will make them hear my
Words, that they may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon
the Earth, Dut. 4.9, 10, 11. The remembrance of what we saw, felt, feared and
trembled under the sense of, when our first fears were upon us, is that which
will produce in our hearts this godly filial fear.

9. This godly fear, it flows from our receiving of an answer of prayer, when
we supplicated for mercy at the hand of God. See the proof for this. If there
be in the Land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust, or if
there be Catterpillars; if their Enemies besiege them in the Land of their
Cities, whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness there be: What prayer and
supplication soever be made, by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which
shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands
toward this house: Then hear thou in Heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive,
and do, and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou know
(for thou even thou only know the hearts of all the Children of men,) that
they may fear thee all the days (of their life,) that they live in the Land
which thou gave unto our Fathers, 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39, 40.

10. This grace of fear also flows from a blessed conviction of the alseeing
eye of God. That is, from a belief that he certainly knows the heart, and
sees every one of the turnings and returnings thereof; this is intimated in
the text last mentioned. Whose heart thou know; That they may fear thee, To
wit, so many of them as be, or shall be convinced of this. Indeed without this
conviction this godly fear cannot be in us; the want of this conviction made
the Pharisees such hypocrites. You are they, said Christ, that justify your
selves before men, but God knows your hearts, ( Luke 16.15.) The Pharisees, I
say, were not aware of this, therefore they so much preferred themselves before
those, that by far, were better than themselves, and it is for want of this
conviction that men go on in such secret sins as they do, so much without fear
either of God or his judgments.

11. This grace of fear also flows from a sense of the impartial judgment of
God upon men according to their works. This also is manifest from the Text
mentioned above. And give unto every man according to his works or ways, that
they may fear thee, etc. This is also manifest by that of Peter, 1 Pet. 1.17.
And if ye call upon the Father, who without respect of persons, judges
according to every man's works pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. He
that has godly conviction of this, will fear of God, will fear before him: by
which fear their hearts are poised; and works directed with trembling,
according to the will of God.

Thus you see what a weighty, and great grace this grace of the holy fear of
God is, and how all the graces of the Holy Ghost yield mutually their help and
strength to the nourishment and life of it; and also how it flows from them
all, and has a dependence upon every of them for its due working in the heart
of him that has it. And thus much to show you from whence it flows. And now I
shall come to the third thing, to wit, to show you what flows from this godly
fear.

What flows from this godly fear.
Having showed you what godly fear flows from.

I come now I say to show you, what proceeds or flows from this godly fear of
God, where it is seated in the heart of man. And,

First, There flows from this godly fear, a godly reverence of God. He is
great, said David, and greatly to be feared, in the assembly of his Saints.
God, as I have already showed you, is the proper object of godly fear, it is
his Person and Majestly that this fear always causes the eye of the soul to
be upon. Behold, said David, as the eyes of Servants look unto the hand of
their Masters, and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress: so
our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us, Psalm. 122.
verse 2.

Nothing aweth the soul that fears God, so much as does the glorious Majesty
of God.

1. His person is above all things feared by them, I fear God, said Joseph,
Genesis 42.18. That is, more than any other; I stand in awe of him, he is my
dread, he is my fear, I do all mine actions as in his presence, as in his
sight, I reverence his holy and glorious Majesty, doing all things as with fear
and trembling before him.

2. This fear makes them have also a very great reverence of his word; for that
also, I told you, was the rule of their fear, Princes, said David, persecute me
without a cause, but my heart stands in AWE (in fear) of thy word.

This grace of fear therefore, from it flows reverence of the words of God; of
all laws, that man fears the Word; and no law that is not agreeing therewith,
Psalm. 119.116.

3. There flows from this godly fear, tenderness of Gods glory. This fear I say
will cause a man to afflict his soul, when he sees, that by professors,
dishonor is brought to the name of God, and to his word. Who would not fear
thee, said Servius, O King of Nations, for to thee does it appertain. He speaks
it as being affected with that dishonor, that by the body of the Jews was
continually brought to his name, his word, and ways, he also speaks it of a
hearty wish that they once would be otherwise minded. The same saving in
effect, has also John in the Revelations, O who would not fear thee Lord, said
he, and glorify thy name? Revel. 15.4. clearly concluding that godly fear
produces a godly tenderness of Gods glory in the world, for that appertains
unto him: that is, it is due unto him, it is a debt which we owe unto him. Give
unto the Lord, said David, the glory due unto his Name. Now if there be
begotten in the heart of the godly, by this grace of fear, a godly tenderness
of the glory of God, then it follows of consequence, that where they that have
this fear of God, do see his glory diminished by the wickedness of the children
of men, there they are grieved, and deeply distressed. Rivers of waters, said
David, run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119.136. Let me
give you for this these following instances.

1. How was David provoked when Goliath defied the God of Israel, 1 Samuel 17.23,
29, 45, 46.

2. Also when others reproached God, he tells us that that reproach was even as
a Sword in his bones, Psalm. 42.10.

3. How was Hezekiah afflicted when Rabshakah railed upon his God, Isa. 37.

4. David also for the love that he had to the glory of Gods word, ran the
hazard and reproach of all the mighty people, Psalm. 119.151. Psalm. 89.50.

5. How tender of the glory of God was Ely, Daniel, and the three Children in
their day.

1. Ely died with fear and trembling of heart when he heard that the Ark of God
was taken, 1 Samuel 4.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

2. Daniel ran the danger of the Lions mouths for the tender love that he had
to the word and worship of God, Dan. 6.10.16.

3. The three children ran the hazard of a burning fiery Furnace rather than
they would dare to dishonor the way of their God, Dan. 3.13, 16, 20.

This therefore is one of the fruits of this godly fear, to wit, a reverence of
his name, and tenderness of his glory.

Secondly, There flows from this godly fear, watchfulness: As it is said of
Solomon's Servants, they watched about his bed because of fear in the night: So
it may be said of them that have this godly fear: It makes them a watchful
people.

1. It makes them watch their hearts, and take heed to keep them with all
diligence lest they should, by one, or another of its sleights, lead them to do
that which in it self is wicked, Prove. 4.23. Heb. 12.15.

2. It makes them watch, lest some temptation from Hell should enter into their
heart to the destroying of them, 1 Pet. 5.8.

3. It makes them watch their mouths, and keep them also, at sometimes, as with
a bitt and bridle, that they offend not with their tongue, knowing that the
tongue is apt, being an evil member, soon to catch the fire of hell, to the
defiling of the whole body, Jam. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

4. It makes them watch over their ways, look well to their goings, and to make
strait steps for their feet, Psalm. 39.1. Heb. 12.13.

Thus this godly fear puts the soul upon its watch, lest from the heart within,
or from the Devil without, or from the world, or some other temptation,
something should surprise, and overtake the child of God to defile him, or to
cause him to defile the ways of God, and so offend the Saints, open the mouths
of men, and cause the enemy to speak reproachfully of religion.

Thirdly, There flows from this FEAR, a holy provocation to a reverential
converse with Saints in their religious and godly assemblies, for their further
progress in the faith and way of holiness. Then they that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another. Spoke, that is of God, and his holy and glorious name,
kingdom, and works, for their mutual edification. a book of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name, Mal. 3.16.

The fear of the Lord in the heart, provokes to this in all its acts, not only
of necessity, but of nature; It is the natural effect of this godly fear, to
exercise the Church in the contemplation of God, together, and apart. All fear,
good and bad, has a natural propenseness in it to incline the heart to
contemplate upon the object of fear, and though a man should labor to take off
his thoughts from the object of his fear; whether that object was Men, Hell,
Devils, etc. yet do what he could, the next time his fear had any act in it, it
would return again to its object.

And so it is with godly fear, that will make a make a man speak of, and think
upon the name of God reverentially, Psalm 89 7. Yea and exercise himself in the
holy thoughts of him in such sort that his soul shall be sanctified, and
seasoned with such Meditations.

Indeed holy thoughts of God, such, as you see this fear does exercise the
heart withal, prepare the heart to, and for God. This fear therefore it is that
David prayed for, for the people, when he said, O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac
and Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts
of the heart of thy people and prepare their heart unto thee, 1 Chronicles. 29.18.

Fourthly, There flows from this Fear of God, great reverence of his Majesty,
in and under the use and enjoyment of God's holy Ordinances. His Ordinances are
his Courts, and Palaces, his Walks and Places where he gives his presence to
those that wait upon him in them, in the fear of his name. And this is the
meaning of that of the Apostle. Then had the Churches rest, throughout all
Judah, and Galilee, and Samaria and were edified, and walking in the fear of
the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied, Act. 9.31.

And walking] that word, intends their use of the ordinances of God. They
walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless.] This in
Old Testament Language is called, treading Gods Courts, and walking in his
Paths. This says the Text, they did here, in the fear of God. That is in a
great reverence of that God whose Ordinances they were. You shall keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary I am the Lord, Levit. 19.30. Chap. 26.2.

It is one thing to be conversant in Gods ordinances, and another to be
conversant in them, with a due reverence of the Majesty, and name of that God
whose Ordinances they are: it is common for men to do the first, but none can
do the last without this fear. In thy fear, said David, will I worship, Psalm.
5.7. It is this fear of God, therefore from whence does flow that great
reverence that his Saints have in them, of his Majesty, in, and under the use
and enjoyment of Gods holy ordinances: and consequently, that makes our service
in the performance of them acceptable to God through Christ. Heb. 12. last.

For God expects that we serve him with fear and trembling, and it is odious
among men, for a man in the presence, or about the service of his Prince, to
behave himself lightly, and without due reverence of that Majesty, in whose
presence, and about whose business he is: And if so, how can their service to
God have any thing like acceptance from the hand of God, that is done, not in,
but without the fear of God? this service must needs be an abomination to him,
and these servers must come off with rebuke.

Fifthly. There flows from this godly fear of God, Selfdenial. That is an holy
abstaining from those things that are either unlawful, or inexpedient;
According to that of Nehemiah. The former governors that had been before me,
were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them Bread and Wine, besides
forty Shekels of Silver, yea even their Servants bear rule over the people: but
so did not I, because of the fear of God, Nehe. 5.15. Here now was Selfdenial,
he would not do as they did that went before him neither himself, nor should
his Servants; but what what was it that put him upon these acts of Self-denial?
The answer is, The fear of God: But so did not I, because of the fear of God.

Now whether by the fear of God, in this place, be meant his word, or the grace
of fear in his heart, may perhaps be a Scruple to some, but in my judgment the
next must have respect to the latter, to wit, to the grace of fear, for without
that be indeed in the heart, the word will not produce that good selfdenial in
us, that here you find this good man to live in the daily exercise of.

The fear of God therefore, that was the cause of his Self-denial, was this
grace of fear in his heart. This made him to be, as was said before, tender of
the honor of God, and of the Salvation of his brother: yea so tender that
rather then he would give an occasion to the weak to stumble, or be offended,
he would even deny himself of that, which others never sticked to do. Paul also
through the sanctifying operations of this fear of God in his heart, did deny
himself even of Lawful things, for the profit and Commodity of his Brother. I
will not eat flesh while the World stands, least I make my Brother to offend.
That is, if his eating of it would make his Brother to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13.

Men that have not this fear of God in them, will not, cannot deny themselves,
(of love to God, and the good of the weak, who are subject to stumble at
indifferent things) but where this grace of fear is, there follows Selfdenial;
there men are tender of offending; and count, that it far better becoms their
profession to be of a Self denying, condesending conversation, and temper, them
to stand sturdily to their own liberty in things inexpedient who even is
offended thereat.

This grace of fear therefore is a very excellent thing, because it yields
such excellent fruit as this. For this Self-denial, of how little esteem soever
it be with some, yet the want of it, (if the words of Christ be true, as they
are) takes quite away from even a professor, the very name of a disciple. Mat.
10.37, 38. Luke 14 ver. 26, 27.33.

They, says Nehemiah, Lorded it over the Brethren. but so did not I. They took
Bread and Wine, and forty Shekles of Silver of them, but so did not I yea even
their Servants bare rule over the people, but so did not I because of the fear
of God.

Sixthly, There flows from this godly fear of God, singleness of heart, Col. 3,
2. Singleness of heart both to God and man; singlenes of heart; that is it
which in an other place is called, sincerity, and godly simplicity, and it is
this, when a man does a thing simply for the sake of him or of the Law, that
commands it, without respect to this by end, or that desire of praise or of
vainglory from others. I say when our obedience to God is done by us simply,
or alone for Gods sake, for his words sake without any regard to this or that
by-end or reserve, not with eye service, as men pleasers, but with singleness
of heart, fearing God.

A man is more subject to nothing, then to swerve from singleness of heart in
his service to God, and obedience to his Will.

How does the Lord charge the Children of Israel, and all their obedience, and
that for seventy years together, with the want of singleness of heart toward
him, when ye fasted, and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those
seventy years, did ye at all fast to me, even to me. And when ye did eat, and
when ye did drink, did you not eat for your selves, and drink for your selves,
Zech 7.5, 6.

They wanted this singleness of heart, in their fasting, and in their eating,
in their mourning, and in their drinking, they had double hearts in what they
did. They did not as the Apostle bids, whether they eat or drink or what ever
they did, do all to the glory of God. And the reason of their want of this
thing, was, they wanted this fear of God; for that, as the Apostle here says,
effects singleness of heart to God, and makes a man, as John said of Gains,
do faithfully what ever he does, 3 John 5. And the reason is, as has bin
already urged, for that Grace of fear of God retains, and keeps upon the
heart a reverent, and awful sense of the Dread Majesty, and All-seeing eye of
God, also a due consideration of the day of account before him; it likewise
makes his service sweet and pleasing, and fortifies the soul against all
discouragements; by this means, I say, the soul in its service to God or man,
is not so soon captivated, as where there is not this fear, but through and by
it, its service is accepted, being single, sincere, simple and faithful; when
others, with what they do are cast into Hell for their hypocrisy, for they mix
not what they do with Godly fear.

Singleness of heart in the service of God, is of such absolute necessity, that
without it, as I have hinted, nothing can be accepted, because where that is
wanting, there wants love to God, and to that which is true holiness in deed.
It Was this singleness of heart that made Nathaniel so honorable in the eyes of
Jesus Christ. Behold, said he, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no Guile,
John 1. And it was the want of it that made him so much abhor the Pharisees. They
wanted sincerity, simplicity and godly sincerity in their souls, and so became
an abhorrence in his esteem. Now I say this golden Grace [singleness of heart]
it flows from this godly fear of God.

Seventhly, There flows from this godly fear of God, compassion and bowels, to
those of the Saints that are in necessity and distress. This is manifest in
good Obadiah. It is said of him. That he took an hundred of the Lords Prophets
and hid them by fifty in a Cave, and fed them with Bread and Water in the days
when Jezebel that Tyrant sought their lives to distroy them, 1 King. 18.3, 4.
But what was it that moved so upon his heart as to cause him to do this thing?
why, it was this blessed grace of the fear of God.

Now Obadiah, says the text, Feared the Lord greatly, for so it was, when
Jezebel cut off the Prophets of the Lord that Obadiah took an hundred Prophets
and hid them by fifty in a Cave and fed them with Bread and Water. This was
charity to the distressed, even to the distressed for the Lords sake.

Had not Obadiah served the Lord, yea, had he not greatly feared him, he would
not have been able to do this thing especially as the case then stood with him,
and also with the Church at that time; for then Jezebel sought to stay all that
indeed feared the Lord; yea, and the persecution prevailed so much at that
time, that even Elijah himself thought that she had killed all but him. But
now, even now, the fear of God in this good man's heart, put forth it self into
acts of mercy though attended with so eminent danger.

Se here therefore that the fear of God will put forth it self (in the heart
where God has put it) even to show kindness, and to have co have compassion
upon the distressed Servants of God, even under Jezebels Nose; for Obadiah
dwelt in Ahabs hose, and Jezebel was Ahabs Wife, and an horrible persecutor, as
was said before: yet Obadiah will show mercy to the poor, because he feared
God, yea he will venture, her displeasure, his place, and neck, and all, but he
will be merciful to his Brethren in distress. Cornelius also being a man
possessed with this fear of God, became a very free-hearted, and open-handed
man to the poor. He feared God, and gave much Alms to the people. Indeed this
fear, this godly fear of God, it is an universal grace; it will stir up the
soul unto all good duties. It is a fruitful grace, from it, where it is,
flows abundance of excellent virtues, nor without it can there be any thing
good, or done well that is done, But,

Eighthly. There flows from this fear of God, hearty, fervent and constant
prayer. This also is seen in Cornelius, that devout man. He feared God; and
what then? why, he gave much Alms to the people, and prayed to God always,
Act. 10.1, 2.

Did I say that hearty, fervent, and constant prayer flowed from this fear of
God? I will add, that if the whole duty and the continuation of it, be not
managed with this fear of God, it profits nothing at all. It is said of our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, He was heard in that he feared. He prayed then
because he feared, because he feared God, and therefore was his prayer accepted
of him even because he feared. He was heard in that he feared, Heb. 5.7.

This Godly fear is so essential to right prayer, and right prayer is such an
inseparable effect and fruit of this fear, that thou must have both or none, he
that prays not, fears not God, yet he that prays not fervently, and
frequently fears him not; and so he that fears him not cannot pray; for if
prayer be the effect of this fear of God, then without this fear, prayer,
fervent prayer cease. How can they pray or make conscience of the duty that
fear not God? O prayerless man, thou fear not God! Thou would not live so
like a Swine or a Dog in the world as thou do if thou fearedst the Lord.

Ninthly. There flows from this fear of God, a readiness, or willingness, at
Gods Call, to give up our best enjoyments to his dispose. This is evident in
Abraham, who at Gods call, without delay, rose early in the morning to offer up
his only and well-beloved Isaac a burnt offering in the place where God should
appoint him.

It was a rare thing that Abraham did, and had he not had this rare grace, this
fear of God, he would not, he could not have done, to Gods liking, SO wonderful
a thing. It Is true, the Holy Ghost also makes this service of Abraham to be the
fruit of his faith, By faith Abraham offered up Isaac, and he that had the
promises offered up his only Son, ( Heb. 11. Jam. 2.) Ay, and without doubt,
love unto God, in Abraham, was not wanting in this his service, nor was this
grace of fear; nay, in the story where it is recorded. There it is chiefly
accounted for the fruit of his godly fear, and that by an Angel from Heaven.
And the Angel called out of Heaven, and said Abraham, Abraham. And he said,
here am I. And he said, lay not thine hand upon the Lad, neither do thou any
thing unto him, for now I know that thou fear God seeing thou have not
withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me, Genesis 22.11, 12.

Now I know it, NOW, now thou have offered up thine only Isaac, thine All, at
the bidding of thy God. Now I know it. The fear of God is not presently
discerned in the heart and life of a man. Abraham had long before this, done
many a holy duty, and showed much willingness of heart to observe and do the
Will of God; yet you find not, as I remember, that he had this testimony from
Heaven that he feared God till now: but now he has it, now he has it from
Heaven. Now I know that thou fear God. Many duties may be done (though I do
not say that Abraham did them) without the fear of God; but when a man shall
not stick at, or withhold his darling from God, when called upon by God to
offer in up unto him, that declares, yea, and gives conviction to Angels, that
NOW he fears God.

Tenthly. There flows from this godly fear, humility of mind. This is
evident, because, when the Apostle cautions the Romans against the venom of
Spiritual Pride, he directs them to the exercise of this blessed grace of fear
as its antidote. Be not high minded, says he, but fear, Romans 11.20. Pride,
Spiritual Pride, which is here set forth by the word, high minded, is a sin of
a very high and damnable nature, it was the sin of the fallen Angels, and is
that which causes men to fall into the same condemnation, Left being puffed up
with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. Pride, I say, it damns
a Professor with the damnation of Devils, with the damnation of Hell, and
therefore it is a deadly, deadly sin. Now against this deadly sin, is set the
Grace of humility, that comely garment, for so the Apostle calls it saying, be
clothed with humility. But the question is now, how we should attain to, and
live in the exercise of this Blessed and comely grace? to which the Apostle
answers, FEAR: be afraid with godly fear; and thence will flow humility. Be not
high minded but fear. That is fear, or be continually afraid and jealous of
your selves, and of your own naughty hearts, also fear least at some time or
other the Devil your adversary should have advantage of you. FEAR, lest by
forgeting what you are by nature; you also forget the need that you have of
continual pardon, support, and supplies from the Spirit of Grace, and so grow
proud of your own abilities or of what you have received of God, and fall into
the condemnation of the Devil. FEAR, and that will make you little in your own
eyes, keep you humble, put you upon crying to God for protection, and upon
lying at his foot for mercy; that will also make you have low thoughts of your
own parts, your own doings, and cause you to prefer your Brother before your
self, and so you will walk in humiliation, and be continually under the
teachings of God, and under his conduct in your way. The humble God will teach.
The meek will he guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his way.

From this grace of fear then, flows this excellent and comely thing humility
yea, it also is maintained by this fear. FEAR takes off a man from trusting to
himself, it puts a man upon trying of all things, it puts a man upon desiring
counsel and help from Heaven, it makes a man ready, and willing to hear
instruction and makes a man walk lowly, softly, and so securely in the way.

Eleventhly, There flows from this grace of fear, Hope in the mercy of God. The
Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in them than hope in his mercy, (
Psalm. 147.11.) The latter part of the Text is an explanation of the former: as
if the Psalmist had said, They be the men that fear the Lord, even they that
hope in his mercy; for true fear produces hope in Gods mercy. And it is
further manifest thus. Fear, true fear of God inclines the heart to a serious
enquiry after that way of salvation with God himself has prescribed; now the
way that God has appointed, by the which the sinner is to obtain the salvation
of his soul, is his mercy, as so and so set forth in the word (and godly fear
has special regard to the word.)

To this way therefore the sinner With this godly fear submits his soul, rouls
himself upon it, and so is delivered from that death into which others for want
of this fear of God, do headlong fall.

It is, as I also hinted before, the nature of godly fear to be very much
putting the soul upon the enquiry which is, and which is not the thing approved
of God, and accordingly to embrace it, or shun it. Now I say, this fear having
put the soul upon a strict and serious enquiry after the way of Salvation, at
lest it finds it to be by the mercy of God in Christ, therefore this fear
puts the soul upon hoping also in him for eternal life, and blessedness; by
which hope he does, not only secure soul, but become a porson of Gods delight.
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in them that hope in his mercy.

Besides, This godly fear, carries in it Self-evidence that the state of the
sinner is happy because possessed with this happy grace. Therefore, as John
says We know we are passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren 1
John 3.14. So here The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in them that
hope in his mercy. If I fear God, and if my fearing of him is a thing in which
he takes such pleasure, then may I boldly venture to roll my self eternal life
into the Bosom of his mercy, which is Christ.

Thus fear also produces hope; if therefore, poor sinner, thou know thy
self to be one that is possessed with this fear of God, suffer thy self to be
persuaded therefore to hope in the mercy of God for salvation, for the Lord
takes pleasure in thee. And it delights him to see thee hope in his mercy.

Twelfthly, There flows from this godly fear of God, An honest and
conscientious use of all those means which God has ordained, that we should be
conversant in for our attaining salvation. Faith and hope in Gods mercy is that
which secureth our justification and hope, and as you have heard they do flow
from this fear. But now, besides faith and hope, there is a course of life in
those things in which God has ordained us to have our conversation, without
which there is no eternal life. You have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life, and again without holiness no man shall see the Lord Not that
faith and hope are deficient, if they be right, but they are both of them
counterfeit when not attended with a reverent use of all the means: upon the
reverent use of which the soul is put, by this grace of fear. Wherefore
beloved, said Paul, as you have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but
now much more in mine absence, work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling, Romans 6.22. Heb. 12.14. Philip. 2.12.

There is a Faith and Hope of mercy, that may deceive a man (Though the faith
of Gods elect, and the hope that purifies the heart never will) because they
are alone, and not attended with those companions that accompany salvation, (
Heb. 6.3, 4, 5, 7, 8.) but now this godly fear carries in its bowels, not only
a moving of the soul to faith and hope in Gods mercy, but an earnest
provocation to the holy and reverent use of all the means that God has ordained
for a man to have his conversation in, in order to his eternal salvation.

Work out your salvation with fear. Not that work is meritorious, or such that
can purchase eternal life, for eternal life is obtained by hope in Gods mercy,
but this hope if it be right, is attended with this godly fear, which fear
puts the soul upon a diligent use of all those means that may tend to the
strengthening of hope, and so to the making of us holy in all manner of
conversation, that we may be meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light. For hope purifieth the heart, if fear of God shall be its
companion, and so makes a man a vessel of mercy prepared unto glory. Paul bids
Timothy to fly pride, covetousness, doteing about questions, and the like, and
to follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, Love, patience, to fight the
good fight of faith, and to lay hold of eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.

So Peter bids that we Add to our faith, virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and
to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience, to patience, godliness; to
Godliness, brotherly-kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity: Adding, For
if these things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be
barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ -- Wherefore
the rather Brethren give deligence to make your calling and election sure, for
if you do these things ye shall never fall. For so an entrance s^all be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9 10, 11.

The sum of all which, is, that which was mentioned before, to wit, to work out
our own salvation with fear and trembling. For none of these things can be
conscientiously done but by and with the help of this blessed grace of fear.

Thirteenthly, There flows from this fear this godly fear, A great delight in
the holy commands of God, that is, a delight to be conformable unto them.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that greatly delights in his
commandments, Psalm. 112.1. This confirms that which was said before, to wit,
that this fear provokes to a holy and reverent use of the means; for that
cannot be, when there is not an holy, yea a great delight in the commandments
Wherefore this fear makes the sinner to abhor that which is sin, because that
is contrary to the object of his delight. A man cannot delight himself at the
same time in things directly opposite one to another, as sin, and the holy
commandment is; therefore Christ says of the servant he cannot love God and
Mammon, he cannot serve God and Mammon. If he cleaves to the one, he must hate
and despise the other, there cannot at the same time be service to both,
because that themselves are at enmity one with the other. So is sin, and the
commandment. Therefore if a man delights himself in the commandment, he
hates that which is opposite which is sin: how much more when he greatly
delights in the commandment?

Now this holy fear of God, it takes the heart and affections from sin and
sets them upon the holy Commandment. Therefore such a man is rightly
esteemed blessed. For no profession makes a man blessed, but that which is
accompanied with an alienation of the heart from sin, nor does any thing do
that, when this holy fear is wanting. It is from this fear then, that love to,
and delight in the holy commandment flows, and so by that the sinner is kept
from those falls and dangers of miscarying that other professors are so subject
to: He greatly delights in the Commandment.

Lastly, There flows from this fear of God, enlargement of heart. Then thou
shall see, and flow together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged. Isa
60.5. Thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged, enlarged to Godward, enlarged
to his ways, enlarged to his holy People, enlarge in love after the salvation
of others. Indeed when this fear of God is wanting, though the profession be
never so famous, the heart is shut up, and straightened, and nothing is done in
that princely free spirit, which is called the spirit of the fear of the Lord (
Psalm. 51.12. Isa. 11.2.) But with grudging, legally, or with desire of vain
glory; This enlargedness of heart is wanting, for that flows from this fear of
the Lord.

Thus have I showed you both what this fear of God is, what it flows from, and
also what does flow from it. I come now to show you some of the privileges of
those that thus do fear the Lord.

Of the privileges of them that thus do fear the Lord.
Having thus briefly handled in particular, thus far this fear of God, I shall
now show you certain of the excellent privileges of them that fear the Lord:
not that they are not privileges that have been already mentioned; for what
greater privileges then to have this fear producing in the soul, such
excellent things, so necessary for us for good both with reference to this
world and that which is to come, but because those fourteen above named, do
rather flow from this grace of fear where it is, then from a promise to the
person that has it: therefore I have chosen rather to discourse of them, as
the fruits and effects of fear, then otherwise. Now besides all these there is
intailed by promise to the man that has this fear, many other blessed
privileges the which I shall now in a brief way lay open unto you.

First, Then, That man that fears the Lord, has a grant and a license to
trust in the Lord: with an affirmation that he is their help, and their shield.
Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord, he is their Helper and Shield, Psalm.
115.11. Now what a privilege is this! An exhortation in general to sinners as
sinners to trust in him, is a privilege great and glorious, but for a man to
be singled out from his Neighbors, for a man to be spoken to from Heaven, as
it were by name, and to be told that God has given him a license a special and
peculiar grant to trust in him, this is abundantly more, and yet this is the
grant that God has given that man. He has I say a license, to do it, a
license indicted by the Holy Ghost, and left upon record for those to be born
that shall fear the Lord to trust in him. And not only so, but as the text
affirms, he is their Help and their Shield. Their help under all their
weaknesses and infirmities, and a Shield to defend them against all the
assaults of the Devil, and this World. So then, the man that fears the Lord
is licenced to make the Lord his stay and God of his Salvation, the succor and
deliverer of his soul. He will defend him because his fear is in his heart. O
ye Servants of the Lord, ye that fear him, live in the comfort of this, boldly
make use of it when you are in straits, and put your trust under the shadow of
his wings, for indeed he would have you do so, because you do fear the Lord.

Secondly, God has also proclaimed concerning the man that fears the Lord,
That he will also be his teacher, and guide in the way that he shall choose, and
has moreover promised concerning such, that their soul shall dwell at ease.

What man is he that fears the Lord, says David, him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose, Psalm. 25.21.

Now to be taught of God what like it? yea what like to be taught in the way
that thou shall choose? Thou have chosen the way to life, Gods way, but perhaps
they ignorance about it is so great, and those that tempt thee to turn asid, so
many, and so subtle, that they seem to out wit thee, and confound thee with
their guile. Well, but the Lord whom thou fear will not leave thee to thy
ignorance, nor yet to thine enemies power or subtilty, but will take it upon
him himself to be thy teacher and thy guide, and that in the way that thou have
chosen. Hear then and behold thy privilege, O thou that fear the Lord, and
who ever wanders turns aside, and swerveth from the way of Salvation: who ever
is benighted, and lost in the midst of darkness, thou shall find the way to the
Heaven and the glory that thou have chosen.

Further, He does not only say, that he will teach them the way, for that must
of necessity be supplied, but he says also that he will teach such IN it; Him
shall he teach IN the way that he shall choose. This argues that, as thou shall
know, so the way shall be made by the communion that thou shall have with God
therein, sweet and pleasant to thee. For this text promises unto the man that
fears the Lord, the presence, company (and discovery of the mind) of God,
while he is going in the way that he has chosen. It is said of the good
Scribe, That he is instructed unto, as well as into the way of the Kingdom of
God. Instructed UNTO that is, he has the heart and mind of God still
discovered to him in the way that he has chosen even all the way from this
world, to that which is to come, even until he shall come to the very gate and
door of Heaven, Matthew. 13.52. what the Disciples said, was the effect of the
presence of Christ, to wit, that their hearts did burn within them while he
talked to them by the way, Luke 24. shall be also fulfilled in thee, he will
meet with thee in the way, talk with thee in the way; he will teach thee IN the
way that thou shall choose.

Thirdly, Do thou fear the Lord? he will open his secret unto thee, even that
which he has hid, and keeps close from all the world, to wit the secret of his
covenant and of thy concern therein. The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25.14. This then further
confirms what was said but just above, his secret shall be with them, and his
Covenant shall be showed unto them.

His secret, to wit, that which has been kept hid from ages and generations,
that which he manifests only to the Saints, or holy Ones; that is, his
Christ, for he it is, that is hid in God, and that no man can know but he to
whom the Father shall reveal him, Matthew. 11.27.

But oh! what is there wraped up in this Christ, this secret of God! why all
treasures of Life, of Heaven and Happiness. In him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. And in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col.
2.

This also is that hidden one, that is so full of grace to save sinners, and so
full of truth and faithfulness to keep promise and covenant with them, that
their eyes must needs convey, even by every glance they make upon his Person,
Offices and Relation, such affecting ravishments to the heart, that it would
please them that see him, even to be killed with that fight.

This secret of the Lord shall be; nay IS with them that fear him, for he
dwells in their heart by faith. And he will show them his Covenant. That is,
the Covenant that is confirmed of God in Christ, that everlasting and eternal
covenant, and show him too, that he himself is wrapped up therein as in a
bundle of life with the Lord his God. These are the thoughts, purposes and
promises of God to them that fear him.

Fourthly, Do thou fear the Lord? His eye is always over thee for good, to
keep thee from all evil. Behold the eyes of the Lord is upon them that fear
him, on them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to
keep them alive in famine, Psalm. 33.18, 19.

His eye is upon them, that is, to watch over them for good. He that keeps
Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. His eyes are upon them, and he will keep
them as a Shepherd does his Sheep: that is, from those wolves that seek to
devour them, and to swallow them up in death. His eyes are upon them, for they
are the Object of his delight, The rarities of the world, in whom, says he, is
all my delight. His eye is upon them, as I said before, To teach and instruct
them. I will teach thee and instruct thee in the way that thou shall go, I will
guide thee with mine eye. Psalm. 32.8. 2 Chronicles. 7.15.16. The eye of the Lord,
therefore is upon them, not to take advantage of them to destroy them for their
sins, but to guide, to help and deliver them from death, from that death that
would feed upon their souls. To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them
alive in famine. Take Death here, for Death spiritual, and Death eternal, and
the Famine here, not for that that is for want of bread and water, but for that
which comes on many for want of the word of the Lord ( Revel. 20.14. Amos 8.11,
12.) and then the sense is this The man that fears the Lord, shall neither
die spiritually nor eternally, for God will keep him with his eye from all
those things that would in such a manner kill him. Again, should there be a
famine of the word, should there want both the word and them that preach it in
the place that thou do dwell, yet Bread shall be given thee, and thy water
shall be sure; thou shall not die of the famine because thou fear God. I say
that man shall not, Behold he shall not, because he fears God. and this the
next head does yet more fully manifest.

Fifthly, Do thou fear God? fear him for this advantage more and more. O fear
the Lord, ye his Saints for there is no want to them that fear him. The young
Lions do want and and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord (that fear
him) shall want no good thing, Psalm. 34.9, 10. Not any thing that God sees good
for them, shall those men want that fear the Lord. If health will do them good.
If sickness will do them good. If riches will do them good. If poverty will do
them good. If life will do them good. If death will do them good, then they
shall not want them, neither shall any of these come nigh them, if they will
not do them good.

The Lions, the wicked people of the world that fear not God, are not made
sharers in this great privilege, all things fall out to them contrary, because
they fear not God. In the midst of their sufficiency they are in want of that
good, that God puts into the worst things that the man that fears God, does
meet with in the world.

Sixthly, Do thou fear God? He has given charge to the armies of Heaven to
look after, take charge of, to camp about, and to deliver thee. The Angel of
the Lord encampeth about them that fear him, and delivers them. Psalm. 34.7.
This also is a privilege intailed to them, that, in all generations fear the
Lord. The Angel, the heavenly creatures have it in commission to take the
charge of them that fear the Lord, one of them is able to slay of men in one
night 185000. These are they that camped about Elisha like horses of fire, and
chariots of fire when the enemy came to destroy him. They also helped Hezekiah
against the band of the enemy, because he feared God. 2 King. 6.17. Isa. 37.36.
Jer. 26.19.

The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them, that is, left the enemy,
should set upon them on any side, but let him come where he will, behind or
before, on this side or that, the Angel of the Lord is there to defend them.

The Angel. It may be spoken in the singular number (perhaps) to show that
every one that fears God has his Angel to attend on him, and serve him. When
the Church, in the Acts, was told that Peter stood at the door and knocked; at
first they counted the messenger mad, but when she did constantly affirm it,
they said, It is his Angel. Act. 12.13, 14, 15. So Christ says of the Children
that came unto him. Their Angels behold the face of my Father which is in
Heaven. Their Angels; that is, those of them that feared God, had each of them
his Angel, who had a charge from God to keep them in their way. We little think
of this, yet this is the privilege of them that fear the Lord, yea if need be
they shall all come down to help them, and to deliver them, rather then
contrary to the mind of their God they should by any be abused. Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1. last.

But how do they deliver them? for so says the text. The Angel of the Lord
encampeth about them that fear him, and delivers them. Answer, The way that
they take to deliver them that fear the Lord, is sometimes by smiting of their
enemies with blindness that they may not find them. And so they served the
enemies of Lot, Genesis 19.10.11. Sometimes by smiting of them with deadly fear
and so they served those that laid feige against Samaria, 2 King. 7.6, And
sometimes by smiting of them even with Death it self, and thus they served
Herod, after he had attempted to kill the Apostle James, and also sought to vex
certain others of the Church, Act. 12. These Angels that are servants to them
that fear the Lord, are them that will, if God does bid them, revenge the
qarrell of his servants upon the stoutest monarch on earth. This therefore is a
glorious privilege of the men that fear the Lord. Alas they are some of them,
so mean that they are counted not worth taking notice of by the high ones of
the World, but their betters do respect them, the Angels of God count not
themselves to good to attend on them and camp about them to deliver them. This
then is the man that has his Angel to wait upon him even he that fears God.

Seventhly, Do thou fear the Lord? Salvation is nigh unto thee. Surely his
Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in their Land, Psalm
85.9.

This is another privilege for them that fear the Lord. I told you before,
that the Angel of the Lord did incamp about them, but now he says, his
Salvation is also nigh them; the which, although it does not altogether exclude
the conduct of Angels, but include them; yet it looks further. Surely his
Salvation, his saving pardoning grace is nigh them that fear him: That is to
save them out of the hand of their spiritual enemies. The Devil, and Sin and
Death, do always wait even to devour them that fear the Lord, but to deliver
them from these, his salvation does attend them. So then, if Satan tempts, here
is their salvation nigh; if sin, by breaking forth, beguiles them, here is Gods
salvation nigh them; yea, if death it self, shall suddenly seize upon them, why
here is their Gods salvation nigh them.

I have seen, that great men's little children must go no whither without their
nurses be at hand,. If they go abroad, their nurses must go with them; if they
go to meals, their nurses must go with them, If they go to bed, their nurses
must go with them, yea and if they fall a sleep their nurses must stand by them.

O my brethren those little ones that fear the Lord, they are the children of
the highest, therefore they shall not walk alone, be at their spiritual meats
alone, go to their sick beds, or to their graves alone, the salvation of their
God is nigh them, to deliver them from the evil: This is then the glory that
dwells in the Land of them that fear the Lord.

Eighthly, Do thou fear the Lord? Heathen yet again. The mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting on them that fear him, and his righteousness
unto childrens children, Ps. 103.17. This still confirms what was last
asserted, that is, that his salvation is nigh unto them. His salvation, that
is, pardoning mercy, that is nigh them. But mind it, there he says, tis-nigh
them: but here it is upon them. His mercy is upon them, it covers them all
over, it compasses them about as with a Shield. Therefore they are said in an
over place to be clothed with salvation and covered with the robe of
righteousness. The mercy of the Lord is UPON them, that is, as I said, to
shelter and defend them.

The mercy, the pardoning, preserving mercy, the mercy of the Lord is upon
them, who is he then that can condemn them? Romans 8.

But there ye is more behind, The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting, to
everlasting on them. It Was designed for them before the world was, and shall be
upon them when the world it self is ended: From everlasting, to everlasting it
is on them that fear him. This from everlasting to everlasting, is that by
which, in another place, the eternity of God himself is declared. From
everlasting to everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90.2. The meaning then may be
this. That so long as God has his being, so long shall the man that fears
him find mercy at his hand. According to that of Moses. The eternal God is thy
refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms, and he shall thrust out the
Enemy before thee, and say destroy them, Deuteronomy. 33.27

Child of God, thou that fear God, here is mercy nigh thee, mercy enough,
everlasting mercy upon thee. This is long-lived mercy. It will live longer then
thy sin, it will live longer then temptation, it will live longer then thy
sorrows, it will live longer then thy persecutors. It is mercy from everlasting
to contrive thy salvation, and mercy TO everlasting, to weather it out with all
thy adversaries. Now what can hell and death do to him that has this mercy of
God upon him? And this has the man that fears the Lord.

Take that other blessed word, and O thou man that fear the Lord, hang it
like a Chain of Gold about thy neck. As the Heaven is high above the Earth, so
great is his mercy toward them that fear him, Psalm. 103.13.18. If mercy as
big, as high, and as good as Heaven it self will be a privilege, the man that
fears God shall have a privilege.

Ninthly, Do thou fear God? Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the
Lord pittieth them that fear him. Psalm. 103.13.

The Lord pittieth them that fear him: That is, condoleth, and is affected;
feels, and sympathizeth with them in all their afflictions. It is a great
matter for a poor man to be in this manner in the affections of the great and
mighty, but for a poor sinner to be thus in the heart and affections of God
(and they that fear him are so,) this is astonishing to consider.

In his love and in his pity be redeemed them, In his love and in his pity. In
all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them; in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and bare them, and carried
them all the day of old, Isa. 63.9.

I say, in that he is said to pity them, it is as much as to say, he condoleth,
feels, and sympathizeth with them in all their afflictions and temptations.
So that this is the happiness of him that fears God, he has a God to pity
him, and to be touched with all his miseries. It Is said in Judges, His soul was
grieved for the miseries of Israel, ( Judge. 10.16.) and in the Hebrews, He is
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and can succor them that are
tempted ( Chap. 4.15. Chap. 2.17.18.

But further let us take notice of the comparison. As a Father pitieth his
Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Here is not only pity, but
the pity of a relation, a Father. It Is said in another place. Can a woman (a
mother) forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the
Son of her womb? yea she may, yet will not I forget thee. The pity of neighbors
and acquaintance helps in times of distress, but the pity of a Father and a
mother, is pity with an over and above. The Lord, says James, is very pitiful,
and of tender mercy, Pharaoh called Joseph his tender Father, because he
provided for him against the famine, but how tender a Father is God? how full
of bowels, how full of pity? Jam. 5.11. Genesis 41.43 marg. It Is said that when
Ephraim was afflicted, Gods bowels were troubled for him, and turned within him
toward him, O that the man that fears the Lord did but believe the pity and
bowels that are in the heart of God and his Father toward him Jer. 31.18, 19,
20.

Tenthly, Do thou fear God? He will fill the desire of them that fear him, he
will hear their cry and will save them, Psalm. 145.9.

Almost all those places, that make mention of the men that fear God, do
insinuate as if they still were under affliction, or in danger by reason of an
enemy. But, I say, here is still their privilege, their God is their Father
and pities them.

He will f^lfil the desire of them that fear him. Where now is the man that
fears the Lord? let him harken to this. What say thou poor soul? will this
content thee, the Lord will fulfill thy desires? It is intimated of Adonijah,
that David his Father did let him have his head and his will in all things. His
Father, says the text, had not displeased him at any time in (so much as)
saying why have thou done so, 1 King. 1.6.

But here is more, here is a promise to grant thee the whole desire of thy
heart, according to the prayer of holy David, The Lord grant thee according to
thine own heart, and fulfill all thy counsel. And again, The Lord fulfill all
thy petitions, Psalm. 20.

O thou that fear the Lord, what is thy desire? All my desires, says David,
is all my salvation, 2 Samuel 23.5. so say thou All my salvation, is all my
desire. Well, the desire of thy soul is granted thee, yea God himself has
engaged himself even to fulfill this thy desire. He will fulfill the desires of
them that fear him, he will hear their cry, and will save them. O this desire
when it comes, what a Tree of life will it be to thee? Thou desire to be rid
of thy present trouble, the Lord shall rid thee out of trouble. Thou desire
to be delivered from temptation, the Lord shall deliver thee out of temptation.
Thou desire to be delivered from thy Body of death, and the Lord shall change
this thy vile Body that it may be like to his glorious Body. Thou desire to
be in the presence of God, and among the Angels in Heaven. This thy desire also
shall be fulfiled and thou shall be made equal to the Angels, ( Exodus 6.6. 2
Pet. 2.9. Phil. 3.20.21. Luke 16.22. chap. 26.35, 36.) Oh! but it is long
first. Well, learn first to live upon thy portion in the promise of it, and
that will make thy expectation of it sweet, God WILL fulfill thy desires, God
WILL do it* though it tarry long: wait for it because it will SVRELY come, it
will not tarry.

Eleventhly, Do thou fear God? The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him,
Psalm. 147.11.12. They that fear God, are among his chief delights. He delights
in his Son, he delights in his works, and takes pleasure in them that fear him.
As a man takes pleasure in his Wife, in his Children, in his Gold, in his
Jewels; So the man that fears the Lord, is the object of his delight. He takes
pleasure in their prosperity, ( Psalm. 35.27.) and therefore sends them health
from the Sanctuary, and makes them drink of the River of his pleasures. They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thy House, and thou shall
make them drink of the River of thy pleasures, Psalm. 36.8.

2. That, or those that we take pleasure in; that or those we love to
beautify, and adorn with many ornaments. We count no cost too much to be
bestowed on those in whom we place our delight, and whom we make the object of
our pleasure. And even thus it is with God. For the Lord takes pleasure in his
people, and what follows? he will beautify the meek with Salvation, Psalm. 149.4.

3. Those in whom we delight, we take pleasure in their actions: yea, we teach
them, and give them such rules, and laws to walk by, as may yet make them that
we love more pleasurable in our eyes. Therefore they that fear God, since they
are the object of his pleasure, are taught to know how to please him in every
thing, 1 These. 4.1.

And hence it is said, that he is ravished with their looks, that he delights
in their cry, and that he is pleased with their walking, Solomon's Song, Chapter 4
9. Prove. 15.8. Chapter 11. v. 20.

4. Those in whom we delight, and take pleasure, many things we will bear and
put up, that they do, though they be not according to our minds. A man will
suffer that in, and put up that at the hand of the Child or Wife of his
pleasure, that he will not pass by, nor put up in another.

They are my Jewels, says God, even them that fear me; and I will spare them
(in all their comings short of my will) even as a man spares his own Son that
serves him, Matt. 3.16, 17.

On how happy is the man that fears God! His good thoughts, his good attempts
to serve him, and his good life pleases him, because the fears God.

You know how pleasing in our eyes the actions of our Children are when we know
that they do what they do, even of a reverent fear and aw of us; yea though
that which they do amounts but to little, we take it well at their hands, and
are pleased therewith. The woman that cast in her two mites into the Treasury,
cast in not much, for they both did but make one farthing, Mark. 12.40, 41, 42,
43. Yet how does the Lord Jesus trumpet her up, he had pleasure in her, and in
her action. This therefore, that the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear
him, is another of their great privileges.

Twelfthly, Do thou fear God? The least dram of that fear gives the
privilege to be blessed with the biggest Saint. He will bless them that fear
the Lord SMALL and GREAT, Psalm. 115.13.

This word SMALL may be taken three ways.

1. For those that are small in esteem, for those that are but little accounted
of ( Judge. 6.15. 1 Samuel 18.23.) Art thou small or little in this sense, yet if
thou fear God, thou art sure to be blessed. He shall bless them that fear
him, small and great, be thou never so small in the worlds eyes, in thine own
eyes, in the Saints eyes (as sometimes one Saint is little in another Saints
eye;) yet thou, because thou fear God, art put among the blessed.

2. By small, sometimes is meant those that are but small of stature, or young
in years, little Children, that are easily passed by and looked over: as those
that sang Hosanna in the Temple were when the Pharisees deridingly said of them
to Christ, do thou hear what THESE say? Matthew. 20.16. Well, but Christ would
not despise them of them that feared God, but preferred them by the
Scripture-Testimony far before those that did contemn them. Little Children how
small so ever, and although of never so small esteem with men, shall also, if
they fear the Lord be blessed with the greatest Saints. He shall bless them
that fear him small and great.

3. By small, may sometimes be meant those that are small in grace or gifts;
these are said to be the least in the Church, that is under this Consideration
and so are by it, least esteemed. Thus also is that of Christ to be understood.
In as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me,
1 Cor. 6.4. Matthew. 25.45.

Art thou in thine own thoughts, or in the thoughts of others, of these last
small ones? small in grace, small in gifts, small in esteem upon this account,
yet if thou fear God, if thou fear God indeed, thou art certainly blessed
with the best of Saints. The least Star stands as fixed, as the bigest of them
all, in Heaven. He shall bless them that fear him, small and great. He shall
bless them, that is, with the same blessing of eternal life. For the different
degrees of grace in Saints, does not make the blessing, as to its nature,
differ. It Is the same Heaven, the same Life, the same Glory, and the same
Eternity of Felicity that they are, in the text, promised to be blessed with.
That is observable which I mentioned before, where Christ at the day of
Judgment particularly mentions, and owneth, the least: In as much as ye did
it not to one of the least. The least then, was there, in his Kingdom and in
his Glory as well as the biggest of all.

He shall bless them that fear him SMALL and great, The small are mamed first
in the text, and are so the first in rank, it may be to show, that though they
may be slighted, and little set by in the world, yet they are much set by in
the eyes of the Lord.

Are great Saints, only, to have the Kingdom, and the glory everlasting? Are
great works, only, to be rewarded? works that are done by virtue of great
grace, and the abundance of the gifts of the holy Ghost? No: Whosoever shall
give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold water, only in the
name of a Disciple, Verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose a Disciples
reward. Mark, here is but a little gift, a Cup of cold water, and that given to
a little Saint: but both taken special notice of by our Lord Jesus Christ,
Matthew. 10.42.

He will give reward to his Servants the Prophets, and to his Saints, and to
them that fear his name small and great, Revel. 11.18.

The Small therefore among them that fear God, are blessed with the great, as
the great, with the same salvation, the same glory, and the same eternal life:
and they shall have, even as the great ones also shall, as much as they can
carry, as much as their hearts, souls, bodies, and capacities can hold.

Thirteenthly, Do thou fear God? why the Holy Ghost has on purpose indicted
for thee an whole Psalm to sing concerning thy self. So that thou may even
as thou art in thy calling, bed, Journey or when ever, sing out thine own
blessed and happy condition to thine own comfort and the comfort of thy
fellows. The Psalm, is called the 128. Psalm, I will set it before thee both as
it is in the reading and in the singing Psalms.

Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways, for
thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, happy shall thou be, and it shall be
well with thee. Thy wife shall be a fruitful Vine by the sides of thine house,
thy children like Olive Plants round about thy Table. Behold that thus shall
the man be blessed that fears the Lord. The Lord shall bless thee out of
Zion, and thou shall see the good of Jerusalem, all the days of thy life; yea
thou shall see thy childrens Children and peace upon Israel.

As it is sung.

Blessed art thou that fear God,
And walk in his way.
For of thy Labor thou shall eat,
Happy art thou, I say.
Like fruitful Vines on thy House side,
So does thy wife spring out,
Thy Children stand like Olive Plants,
Thy Table round about.
Thus art thou blessed that fear God,
And he shall let thee see.
The promised Jerusalem,
And her felicity.
Thou shall thy Childrens Children see,
To thy great Joys increase.
And likewise grace on Israel,
Prosperity and Peace.
And now I have done with the privileges when I have removed one Objection.

Object. But the Scripture says, Perfect love casts out fear, and therefore
it seems that Saints after that a Spirit of Adoption is come, should not fear,
but do their duty, as another Scripture says, without it, 1 John 4.18. Luke
1.74, 75.

Answ. Fear, as I have showed you, may be taken several ways.

1. It may be taken for the fear of Devils. 2. It may be taken for the fear of
reprobates. 3. It may be taken for the fear that is wrought in the godly, by
the Spirit as a Spirit of bondage, or, 4. It may be taken for the fear that I
have been but now discoursing of.
Now the fear that perfect love casts out, cannot be that sonlike gracious fear
of God, that I have in this last place been treating of: because that fear,
that love, casts out, has torment: but so has not the Son-like fear. Therefore
the fear that love casts out, is either that fear, that is like the fear of
Devils and Reprobates, or that fear that is begot in the heart by the Spirit of
God as a Spirit of bondage, or both: for indeed all these kinds of fear, have
torment: and therefore may be cast out: and are so by the Spirit of Adoption,
which is called the Spirit of Faith and love, when he comes with power into the
soul: so that without this fear we should serve him.

But to argue from these texts that we ought not to fear God, or to mix fear
with our worship of him; is as much as to say that by the Spirit of Adoption we
are made very Rogues, for not to fear God, is by the Scripture applied to such,
Luke 23.40. But for what I have affirmed the Scripture does plentifully
confirm, saying, Happy is the man that fears always. And again, It shall be
well with them that fear God, that fear before him.

Fear, therefore, the Spirit of the fear of the Lord is a grace that greatly
beautifies a Christian, his words, and all his ways. Wherefore now let the
FEAR of the Lord be upon you; take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts.

I come now to make some use and application of this doctrine.

The use of this Doctrine.
Having proceeded thus far about this Doctrine of the fear of God: I now come
to make some Use and Application of the whole: and my first use shall be a use
of Examination.

Is this fear of God such an excellent thing? Is it attended with so many
blessed privileges then this should put us, ever soul of us, upon a diligent
examination of our selves, to wit whether this grace be in us or no, for if it
be, then thou art one of these blessed ones to whom belong these glorious
privileges, for thou have an intrest in every of them; but if it shall appear
that this grace is not in thee, then thy state is fearfully miserable as has
partly been manifest already, and will further be seen in what comes after.

Now the better to help thee to consider, and not to miss in finding out what
thou art, in thy self examination, I will speak to this.

1. In general. 2. In particular.
1. In general.

1. No man brings this grace into the world with him. Every one by nature is
destitute of it, for naturally none fear God, there is NO fear of God, none of
this grace of fear before their eyes, they do not so much as know what it is,
for this fear flows, as was showed before, from a new heart, faith, repentance,
and the like, of which new heart faith and Repentance, if thou be void, thou
art also void of this godly fear. Men must have a mighty change of heart and
life, or else they are strangers to this fear of God, alas how ignorant are the
most of this? yea, and some are not afraid to say they are not changed nor
desire so to be: can these fear God? can these be possessed with this grace of
fear? No, Because they have no changes therefore they fear not God, Psalm. 36.1.
Romans 3.18. Psalm. 55.19.

Wherefore sinner consider, whoever thou art, that art destitute of this fear
of God, thou art void of all other graces, for this fear* as also I have
showed, flows from the whole stock of grace where it is. There is not one of
the graces of the Spirit, but this fear is in the bowels of it; yea as I may
say, this fear is the flower and beauty of every grace, neither is there any
thing, let it look as much like grace as it will, that will be counted so
indeed, if the fruit thereof be not this. fear of God; wherefore I say again,
consider well of of this matter, for as thou shall be found with reference to
this grace, so shall thy judgment be. I have but briefly treated of this grace,
yet have endeavored, with words as fit as I could, to display it in its
colors before thy face, first by showing you what this fear of God is, then
what it flows from, as also what does flow from it: To which, as was said
before, I have added several privileges that are annexed to this fear, that by
all, if it may be, thou may see it, if thou have it, and thy self without
it, if thou have it not. Wherefore I refer thee thither again for information
in this thing; Or if thou art loath to give the Book a second reading but wilt
go on to the end now thou art gotten hither: Then secondly and particularly I
conclude with these several propositions concerning those that fear not God.

1. That man that is proud, and of an high and lofty mind, fears not God. This
is plain from the Exhortation. Be not high minded but fear, Romans 11.20. Here
you see that an high mind and the fear of God, are set in direct opposition,
the one to the other: and there is in them, closely concluded by the Apostle,
that where indeed the one is, there cannot be the other; where there is an high
mind, there is not the fear of God: and where there is the fear of God, the
mind is not high but lowly. Can a man at the same time be approved man, and
fear God too? why then is it said God beholds every one that is proud and
abases him, and again he beholds the proud afar off?

He therefore that is proud of his person, of his Riches, of his Office, of his
Parts, and the like, fears not God. It is also manifest further, for God
resists the proud, which he would not do, if he feared him, but in that he
sets him at such a distance from him, in that he testifies that he will abase
him and resist him, it is evident that he is not the man that has this grace
of fear; for that man, as I have showed you, is the man of Gods delight, the
object of his pleasure, Psalm. 138.6. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. Mal. 4.1.

2. The covetous man fears not God. This also is plain from the word, because
it sets covetousness, and the fear of God in direct opposition. Men that
fear God, are said to hate covetousness Exodus 18.21. Besides, the covetous man
is called an Idolater, and is said to have no part in the Kingdom of Christ and
of God. And again, The wicked boasts himself of his hearts desire, and
blesses the covetous, whom the Lord abhoreth, Ezekiel. 33.31. Ephesians. 5.4, 5.
Psalm. 10.3.

Hearken to this you that hunt the world to take it, you that care not how you
get, so you get the world. Also you that make even religion your stalking-horse
to get the world. You fear not God. And what will you do, whose hearts go after
your covetousness? you who are led by covetousness up and down, as it were by
the Nose; sometimes to swear, to lie, to cousen, and cheat and defraud, when
you can get the advantage to do it. You are far, very far from the fear of God.
Ye adulterers, and adulteresses, for so the covetous are called, Know ye not
that the friendship of this world is the enmity with God: whosoever therefore
will be a friend of this world is the enemy of God. James 4. ver. 4.

3. The riotous eaters of flesh have not the fear of God. For this is done
without fear, Jud. 12. Gluttony is a sin little taken notice of, and as little
repented of by those that use it, but yet it is odious in the sight of God, and
the practice of it a demonstration of the want of his fear in the heart: yea,
so odious is it that God forbids that his people should so much as company with
such. Be not says he, among wine bibers, among rioters eaters of flesh, Prove.
23.20. And he further tells us, that they that are such, are spots, and
blemishes to those that keep them company, for indeed they fear not God. 2 Pet.
2.13. Romans 13.13. 1 Pet. 4.4.

Alas! some men, are as if they were for naught else born, but to eat, and to
drink and pamper their carcasses with the dainties of this world, quite
forgeting why God sent them hither: but such, as is said, fear not God, and so
consequently, are of the number of them upon whom the day of Judgment will come
at unawars, Luke 21.34.

4. The liar is one that fears not God. This also is evident from the plain
Text, Thou have lied (says the Lord) and have not remembered me, nor laid it to
thy heart, have not I held my peace even of old, says the Lord, and thou
fear me not? Isa. 57.11. What lie this was, is not material, 'twas a lie, or
a course of lying, that is here rebuked, and the person, or persons, in this
practice, as is said, were such as feared not God: a course of lying, and the
fear of God cannot stand together.

This sin of lying is a common sin, and it walks in the world in several
guises. There is the profane scoffing lier, there is the cunning artificial
lier, there is the hypocritical religious lier, with liars of other ranks, and
degrees. But none of them all have the fear of God, nor shall any of them, they
not repenting, escape the damnation of Hell. All liars shall have their part in
the lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Revel. 21.8. Heaven and the new
Jerusalem are not a place for such. And there shall in no wise enter into it,
any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a
lie, ver. 27. Therefore another Scripture says, That all liers are without.
For without are dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolators and whosoever loves and makes a lie. Chap. 22.15. But this should
not be their sentence, judgment, and condemnation, if they that are liars were
such as had in them this blessed fear of God.

5. They fear not God who cry unto him for help in the time of their calamity,
and when they are delivered, they return to there former rebellion. This Moses
in a spirit of Prophecy asserteth at the time of the mighty judgment of the
Hail. Pharaoh then desired him to pray to God that he would take away that
judgment from him. Well, so I will, says Moses. But as for thee, and thy
servants, I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God, Exodus 9.30. As who
should say, I know that so soon as this judgment is removed, you will to your
old rebellion again. And what greater demonstration can be given that such a
man fears not God, then to cry to God to be delivered from affliction to
prosperity, and to spend that prosperity in rebellion against him? This is
crying for mercies that they may be spent, or that we may have something to
spend upon our lusts, and in the service of Satan. Jam. 4.1, 2, 3.

Of these God compalins in the 16 of Ezekiel and in the second of Hosea. Thou
have, says God, taken of thy fair Jewels of my Gold, and of my Silver which I
had given thee, and made to thy self images, etc. ( Ezekiel. 16.17.)

This was for want of the fear of God. Many of this kind there be now in the
World both of men, and women, and Children; Art not thou that read this
Book, of this number? Have thou not cried for health when sick, for wealth when
poor, when lame for strength, when in prison for liberty, and then spent all
that thou gottest by thy prayer, in the service of Satan, and to gratify thy
lusts? look to it sinner, these things are signs that with thy heart thou
fear not God.

6. They fear not God, that way-lay his people and seek to overthrow them, or
to turn them besides the right path, as they are journying from hence to their
eternal rest. This is evident from the plain Text. I Remember says God what
Amalek did unto thee by the way when ye were come forth out of Egypt, how he
met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble
behind thee, when thou wast faint, and weary, and he feared not God, Deuteronomy.
25.17, 18.

Many such Amalekites there be now in the world that have set themselves
against the feeble of the flock, against the feeble of the flock especially,
still smiting them, some by power, some with the tongue, some in their lives
and estates, some in their names and reputations, by scandal, slanders and
reproach but the reason of this their ungodly practice is this, They fear not
God. For did they fear HIM, they would be afraid to so much as think, much more
of attempting to afflict and destroy, and calumniate the Children of God: but
such there have been, such there are, and such there will be in the world, for
all men fear not God.

7. They fear not God, who see his hand upon backsliders for their sins, and
yet themselves will be backsliders also. I saw says God, when for all the
causes whereby backsliding Israel committed adultery, I had put her away, and
given her a bill of divorce, yet her treacherous Sister Judah FEARED NOT, but
went and played the harlot also, Jer. 3.8. Chap. 2. verse 19.

Judah saw that her Sister was put away, and delivered by God into the hand of
Salmanezer who carried her away beyond Babylon, and yet, though she saw it, she
went and played the harlot also. A sign of great hardness of heart, and of the
want of the fear of God, indeed. For his fear, had it been in her heart, it
would have taught her to have trembled at the judgment that was executed upon
her Sister, and not to have gone and played the harlot also: And not to have
done it while her Sisters judgment was in sight and memory. But what is it,
that an heart that is destitute of the fear of God will not do? No sin comes
amiss to such: yea they will sin, they will do that themselves, for the doing
of which they believe some are in Hell Fire, and all because they fear not God.

But pray observe, if those that take not warning when they see the hand of God
upon backsliders, are said to have none of the fear of God, have they it, think
you, that lay stumbling blocks in the way of Gods people, and use devices to
cause them to backslide, yea rejoice when they can do this mischief to any? And
yet many of this sort there are in the world, that even rejoice when they see a
professor fall into sin and go back from his profession, as if they had found
some excellent thing.

8. They fear not God who can look upon a Land as wallowing in sin, and yet are
not humbled at the sight thereof. Have ye, said God by the Prophet to the Jews,
forgot the wickedness of your Fathers, and the wickedness of the Kings of
Judah, and the wickedness of their Wives, which they have committed in the Land
of Judah, and streets of Jerusalem? They are not humbled to this day, neither
have they FEARED, nor walked in my Law, Jer. 44.8, 9, 10.

Here is a Land full of wickedness, and none to bewail it, for they wanted the
fear of God, and love to walk in his Law. But how say you, if they that are not
humbled at their own and others wickedness are said not to fear, or have the
fear of God what shall we think, or say of such, that receive, that nourish and
rejoice in such wickedness? do they fear God? yea, what shall we say of such,
that are the inventors and promoters of wickedness as of oaths beastly talk,
or the like? Do they, do you think, fear God?

Once again, what shall we say of such, that cannot be content to be wicked
themselves, and to invent, and rejoice in other men's wickedness, but must hate,
reproach, vilify and abuse those that they cannot persuade to be wicked? Do
they fear God?

9. They that take more heed to their own dreams, than to the word of God, fear
not God. This also is plain from the word; for in the multitude of dreams,
there is also diverse vanities, but fear thou God, that is take heed unto his
word, Eccle. 5.7. Isa. 8.20.

Here the fearing of God is opposed to our overmuch heeding dreams: and there
is implied, that it is for want of the fear of God that men so much heed those
things.

What will they say to this that give more heed to a suggestion that arises
from their foolish hearts or that is cast in thither by the Devil, then they do
to the holy word of God? These are filthy dreamers.

Also what shall we say to those that are more confident of the mercy of God to
their soul, because he has blessed them with outward things, than they are
afraid of his wrath and condemnation, thought the whole of the word of God does
fully verify the same? These are filthy dreamers indeed.

A dream is either real, or so by way of semblance, and so some men dream
sleeping, and some waking ( Isa. 29.7.) And as those that a man dreams sleeping
are caused, either by God, Satan, Business, Flesh, or the like, so are they
that a man dreams waking, to pass by those that we have in our sleep.

Men when bodily awake, may have dreams, that is, visions from Heaven; such are
all they that have a tendency to discover to the sinner his state, or the state
of the Church according to the word.

But those that are from Satan, business, and the flesh are such, (especially
the first and last to wit, from Satan and the flesh) as tend to imbolden men to
hope for good in a way disagreeing with the word of God. These Jude calls
filthy dreams such whose principles were their dreams, and they led them to
defile the flesh, that is, by fornication and uncleanness, To despise dominion,
that the reins might be laid upon the neck of their lusts, To speak evil of
dignities, of those that God had set over them, for their governing in all the
Law and Testament of Christ, these dreamt that to live like brutes, to be
greedy of gain, and to take away for it, as Cain and Balaam, did by their
wiles, the lives of the owners thereof, would go for good Coin in the best of
trials. These also Peter speaks of in 2 Epist. 2 Chap And he makes their dreams
that Jude calls so their principle and errors in life and doctrine; you may
read of them in that whole Chapter where they are called cursed Children, and
so by consequence such as fear not God.

10. They fear not God, who are Sorcerers, Adulterers, false swearers, AND that
oppress the hireling of his wages.

It is a custom with some men to keep back by fraud from the hireling, that
which by covenant they agreed to pay for their labor, pinching, I say and
pareing from them their due that of right belongs to them, to the making of
them cry in the ears of the Lord of Sabbath ( Jam. 5.4.) These fear not God;
they are reckoned among the worst of men, and in their day of account God
himself will bear witness against them.

And I, says God, will come near to you to Judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against false swearers, and against the adulterers, and against those
that oppress the hireling of his wages, the Widow, and the Fatherless, and
that turn aside the stranger from his right, and FEAR not me says the Lord.

11. They fear not God, who instead of pitying of, rail at Gods people in
their affliction, temptations and persecutions, and rather rejoice and skip for
joy, then sympathize with them in their sorrow. Thus did David's enemies, thus
did Isreal's enemies, and thus did the Thief, he railed at Christ when he hanged
upon the Cross, and was for that, even by his fellow, accounted for one that
feared not God, Luke 23.40. Psalm. 35.1, 22, 23, 24, 25 26. Read Obadiah 10.11,
12 13, 14, 15. Jer. 48.2, 7.

This is a common thing among the Children of men, even to rejoice at the hurt
of them that fear God, and it arises even of an inward hatred to Godliness.
They hate you, says Christ, because they hated me. Therefore Christ takes what
is done to his, in this, as done unto himself, and so to holiness of life.

But this falls hard upon such as despise at, and rejoice to see Gods people in
their griefs, and that take the advantage, as dogged Shimei did, to augment the
griefs and afflictions of Gods people, 2 Samuel 16.5, 6, 7, 8.

These fear not God, they do this of enmity, and their sin is such as will
hardly be blotted out, 1 King. 2.8, 9.

12. They fear not God, who are strangers to the effects of fear. If I be a
Master where is my fear? That is, show that I am so by your fear of me in the
effects of your fear of me. You offer polluted Bread upon mine Altar. This is
not a sign that you fear me, ye offer the blind for Sacrifices, where is my
fear? ye offer the lame and the sick these are not effects of the fear of God,
Mal. 1.6, 7, 8.

Sinner, it is on thing to say, I fear God, and another to fear him indeed.
Therefore as James says, show me thy faith by thy works, so here God calls for
a testimony of thy fear by the effects of fear. I have already showed you
several effects of fear, if thou art a stranger to them, thou art a stranger to
this grace of fear. Therefore, to conclude this, It is not a feigned profession
that will do; nothing is good here, but what is salted with this fear of God,
and they that fear him are men of truth, men of fingleness of heart, perfect,
upright, humble, holy men; wherefore reader examine, and again I say examine,
and lay the word and thy heart together before that thou concludest that thou
fear God.

What! fear God, and in a state of nature? fear God without a change of heart
and life? what! fear God and be proud, and covetous, a wine bibber, and a
riotous eater of flesh! how? fear God and a liar, and one that cries for
mercies to spend them upon thy lusts; this would be strange.

True, thou may fear as devils do, but what will that profit? Thou may by
thy fear, be driven away from God, from his worship, people, and ways, but
what will that avail? It may be thou may so fear at present, as to be a
little stopped in thy sinful course: perhaps thou have got a knock from the
word of God, and art at present a little dazzled and hindered from being in thy
former and full carrier after sin; but what of that? If by the fear that thou
have, thy heart is not united to God and to the love of his Son, Word, and
People, thy fear is nothing worth.

Many men also are forced to fear God, as underlings are forced to fear those
that are by force above them.

If thou only thus fear God, it is but a false fear; it flows not from love
to God: this fear brings not willing subjection, which indeed brings the effect
of right fear: but being over mastred, like an hypocrite, thou subjectest thy
self, ( Psalm. 18.44.) by feigned obedience being forced, I say, by mere dread
to do it, Psalm. 66.3.

It is said of David. That the same of him went out into all Lands, and the
Lord brought the fear of him upon all Nations, 1 Chronicles. 14.17. But what did
they now love David? did they now choose him to be their King? no verily; they,
many of them rather hated him, and when they could, made resistance against
him. They did, even as thou do: feared, but did not love: feared, but did not
choose his government that ruled over them.

It is also said of Jehosaphat, when God had subdued before him Amon, Moab and
Mount Seir. That the fear of God was upon all the kingdoms of the Countries,
when they heard that the Lord fought against the enemies of Israel, (2 Chapter
20.29.) But, I say, was this fear, that is called now the fear of God, any
thing else, but a dread of the greatness and power of the King? no verily, nor
did that dread bring them into a willing subjection to, and likeing of his laws
and government, it only made them like slaves and underlings, stand in fear of
his executing the vengeance of God upon them.

Therefore still, notwithstanding this fear, they were rebels to him in their
hearts, and when occasion and advantage offered themselves, they showed it by
rising in rebellion against Israel.

This fear therefore provoked but feigned, and forced obedience, a right emblem
of the obedience of such, who being still enemies in their minds to God, are
forced by virtue of present conviction to yield a little, even of fear to God,
to his word, and to his ordinances. Reader, whoever thou art, think of this, it
is thy concern, therefore do it and examine, and examine again, and look
diligently to thy heart in thine examination, that it beguile thee not about
this thy so great concern, as indeed the fear of God is.

One thing more, before I leave thee, let me warn thee of. Take heed of
deferring to fear the Lord. Some men, when they have had conviction upon their
heart that the fear of God is not in them, have through the overpowring of
their corruptions, yet deferred and put off the fear of God from them, as it is
said of them in Jeremiah. This people have a revolting and a rebellious heart,
they are revolted and gone; neither said they in their heart let us now fear
the Lord, Jer. 5.22, 23, 24.

They saw that the Judgments of God attended them because they did not yet fear
God, but that conviction would not prevail with them to say, let us now fear
the Lord. They were for deferring to fear him still; they were for putting off
his fear from them longer. Sinner, have thou deferred to fear the Lord? is thy
heart still so stubborn as not to say yet, let us fear the Lord? Oh the Lord
has taken notice of this thy rebellion, and is preparing some dreadful
Judgment for thee. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, shall
not my soul be avenged of such a Nation as this? ver. 29.

Sinner why should thou pull vengeance down upon thee? why should thou
pull vengeance down from Heaven upon thee? Look up, perhaps thou have already
been pulling this great while, to pull it down upon thee. Oh, pull no longer;
why should thou be thine own Executioner? Fall down upon thy knees man, and
up with thy heart and thy hands to the God that dwells in the Heavens; cry, yea
cry aloud, Lord unite mine heart to fear thy name, and do not harden mine heart
from thy fear. Thus holy men have cried before thee, and by crying have
prevented Judgment.

Before I leave this use let me give thee a few things, that if God will, may
provoke thee to fear the Lod.

1. The man that fears not God, carries it worse toward him, then the beast,
the bruit beast, does carry it toward that man.

The fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every Beast of the earth,
yea and upon every Fowl of the air, and upon all that moves upon the earth,
and upon all the Fishes in the Sea, Genesis 9.2.

Mark, All my creatures shall fear you, and dread you, says God. None of them
shall be so hardy as to cast off all reverence of you.

But what a shame is this to man, That God should subject all his creatures to
him, and he should refuse to stoop his heart to God? The Beast, the Bird, the
Fish, and all, have a fear and dread of man, yea God has put it in their hearts
to fear a man, and yet man is void of fear and dread, I mean of godly fear of
him, that thus lovingly has put all things under him.

Sinner art thou not ashamed that a silly Cow, a Sheep, yea a Swine, should
better observe the Law of his creation, then thou do the Law of thy God?

2. Consider, He that will not fear God, God will make him fear him whether he
will or no. That is, He that does not, will not now so fear him, as willingly
to bow before him, and put his neck into his yoke, God will make him fear him
when he comes to take vengeance on him. Then he will surround him with terror,
and with fear on every side, fear within, and fear without, fear shall be in
the way, even in the way that thou go when thou art going out of this World:
and that will be dreadful fear, Eccles. 12.5. I will bring their fears upon
them says the Lord. Isa. 66.4.

3. He that fears not God now, the Lord shall laugh at his fears then. Sinner,
God will be even with all them that choose not to have his fear in their hearts:
For as he calls and they hear not now, so they shall cry, yea howl then, and he
will laugh at their fears. I will laugh, says he, at their destruction I will
mock when their fear comes, when your fear comes as disolation, and your
destruction like a whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon you, then
shall you call upon me, but I will not answer: you shall seek me early, but you
shall not find me, for that you hated knowledge, and did not choose the FEAR of
the Lord, Prove. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.

Sinner! thou think to escape the fear: but what will thou do with the pit?
Thou think to escape the pit; but what will thou do with the Snare. The
Snare, say you, what is that I answer it is even the work of thine own hands.
The wicked is snared in the works of his own hands, he is snared by the words
of his lips Psalm. 9.16. Chap. 12.13.

Sinner, what will thou do when thou come into this snare; that is into the
guilt and terror that thy sins will snaffle thee with, when they like a cord
are fastened about thy soul? This snare will bring thee back again to the pit
which is Hell, and then how will thou do to be rid of thy fear. The fear, pit
and the snare shall come upon thee, because thou fear not God.

Sinner, art thou one of them that have cast off fear? poor man, what will thou
do when these three things beset thee? whither will thou fly for help? And
where will thou leave thy glory? If thou fliest from the fear, there is the pit,
if thou fliest from the pit there is the snare.

The second use is an Exhortation to fear God.
My next word shall be, an Exhortation to fear God. I mean an Exhortation to
Saints, O fear the Lord ye his Saints for there is no want to them that fear
him.

Not but that every Saint does fear God, but as the Apostle says in an other
case, I beseech you do it more and more. The fear of the Lord, as I have showed
you, is a grace of the new covenant, as other saving graces are, and so is
capeable of being stronger or weaker as other graces are. Wherefore I beseech
you fear him more and more.

It is said of Obadiah, That he feared the Lord greatly: every Saint fears the
Lord, but every Saint does not greatly fear him. O there are but few Obadiah's
in the world. I mean among the Saints on earth: See the whole relation of him,
1 King. 18. As Paul said of Timothy, I have none likeminded, so it may be said
of some concerning the fear of the Lord; They have scarce a fellow. So it was
with Job, There is none like him in all the earth, one that fears God, etc.
Job 1. Chap. 2. There was even none in Jobs day that feared God like him, no,
there was not one like him in all the earth, but doubtless there were more in
the World that feared God; but this fearing of him greatly, that is the thing
that Saints should do, and that was the thing that Job did do, and in that he
did outstrip his fellows.

It is also said of Hananiah, That he was a faithful man, and feared God above
many, Nehe. 7.2. He also had got, as to the exercise of, and growth in this
grace, the start of many of his Brethren. He feared God above many. Now then,
seeing this grace admits of degrees, and is in some stronger, and in some
weaker: let us be all awakned, as to other graces, so to this grace also. That
like as you abound in every thing, in faith, in utterance, in knowledge, and in
all diligence, and in your love to us: See that ye abound in this grace also.

I will labor to enforce this exhortation upon you by several motives.

1. Let Gods distinguishing love to you, be a motive to you to fear him
greatly. He has put his fear in thy heart, and has not given that blessing to
thy neighbor; perhaps not to thy Husband, thy Wife, thy Child, or thy Parent:
Oh what an obligation should this consideration lay upon thy heart, greatly to
fear the Lord? Remember also, (as I have showed in the first part of this book)
that this fear of the Lord is his Treasure, a choice Jewel, given only to
favorites, and to those that are greatly beloved.

Great gifts naturally tend to oblige, and will do so, I trust, with thee, when
thou shall ingeniously consider it. It is a sign of a very bad nature when the
contrary shows it self; Could God have done more for thee then to have put his
fear in his heart? This is better, then to have given thee a place, even in
Heaven without it. Yea had he given thee all faith, all knowledge, and the
tongue of Men and Angels, and a place in Heaven to boot, They had all been
short of this gift, of the fear of God in thy heart. Therefore love it, nourish
it, exercise it, use all means to cause it to increase and grow in thy heart,
that it may appear it is set by, at thy hand poor sinner.

2: Another motive to stir thee up to grow in this grace of the fear of God,
May be the privileges that it lays thee under. What, or where will thou find
in the Bible, so many privileges, so affectionately intailed to any grace, as
to this of the fear of God? God speaks of this grace, and of the privileges
that belong unto it, as if (to speak with reverance) he knew not how to have
done blessing of the man that has it.

It seems to me, as if this grace of fear, is the darling grace, the grace that
God sets his heart upon at the highest rate. As it were he embraces and hugs,
and lays the man in his bosom, that has, and grows strong in this grace of
the fear of God.

See again the many privileges in which the man is intrested, that has this
grace in his heart: and see also that there are but few of them, wherever
mentioned, but have intailed to them the pronunciation of a blessing, or else
that man is spoken of by way of Admiration.

3. Another motive may be this. The man that grows in this grace of the fear
of the Lord will escape those evils that others will fall into. Where this
grace is, it keeps the soul from final apostasy. [ I will put my fear in
their heart, and they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.40.] But yet, if there
be not an increase in this grace, much evil may attend, and be committed
notwithstanding.

There is a child that is healthy, and has its limbs and can go, but it is
careless; now the evil of carelessness does disadvantage it very much,
carelessness is the cause of stumblings, of falls, of knocks, and that it falls
into the dirt, yea that sometimes it is burned, or almost drowned. And thus it is
even with Gods people that fear him, because they ad not to their fear, a care
of growing more in the fear of God, therefore they reap damage; whereas, were
they more in his fear, it would keep them better, deliver them more, and
preserve them from these snares of death.

4. Another motive may be this, To grow in this grace of the fear of God, is
the way to be kept always in a conscientious performance of Christian duties.

An increase in this grace I say, keeps every grace in exercise, and the
keeping of our graces in their due exercise, produces a conscientious
performance of duties. Thou have a Watch perhaps in thy pocket, but the hand
will not as yet be kept in any good order, but does always give thee the lie,
as to the hour of the day; well, but what is the way to remedy this but to look
well to the spring, and the wheels within? for if they indeed go right, so will
the hand do also. This is thy case in spiritual things? Thou art a gracious
man, and the fear of God is in thee, but yet for all that, one cannot well
tell, by thy life, what time a day it is. Thou give no true, and constant
sign that thou art indeed a Christian; why the reason is, thou do not look
well to this grace of the fear of God. Thou do not grow and increase in that,
but suffer thy heart to grow careless, and hard, and so thy life remiss, and
worldly: Job's growing great in the fear of God, made him eschew evil, Job. 1.
chap. 2.

5. Another motive is, This is the way to be wise indeed. A wise man fears
and departs from evil. It does not say a wise man has the grace of fear, but
a wise man fears, that is pureth this grace into exercise. There is no
greater sign of wisdom then to grow in this blessed grace. Is it not a sign
of wisdom to depart from sins, which are the snares of Death and Hell? Is it
not a sign of wisdom for a man, yet more and more to endeavor to intrest
himself in the love and protection of God? Is it not a high point of wisdom for
a man to be always doing of that which lays him under the conduct of Angels?
surely this is wisdom. And if it be a blessing to have this fear, is it not
wisdom to increase in it? doubtless it is the highest point of wisdom, as I
have showed before, therefore grow therein.

6. Another motive may be this. It is seemly for Saints to fear, and increase
in this fear of God.

1. He is thy Creator, is it not seemly for creatures to fear and reverence
their Creator?

2. He is thy King, is it not seemly for Subjects to fear and reverence their
King?

3. He is thy Father, is it not seemly for Children to reverence and fear their
Father? yea and to do it more and more?

7. Another motive may be, It is honorable to grow in this grace of fear: when
Ephraim spoke trembling he exalted himself in Israel, Hos. 13.1.

Truly to fear, and to abound in this fear, is a sign of a very princely
spirit: and the reason is, when I greatly fear my God, I am above the fear of
all others, nor can any thing in this world, be it never so terrible and
dreadful, move me at all to fear them. And hence it is that Christ counsels us
to fear. And I say unto you my friends, said he, fear not them that kill the
body, and after that have no more that they can do. (I but this is an high
pitch, how should we come by such princely spirits) well, I will forewarn you
whom you shall fear and by fearing of him, arrive to this pitch, Fear him who
after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you fear
him, Luke 12.4, 5.

Indeed this true fear of God, sets a man above all the world. And therofore,
It says again, fear not their fear, but sanctify the Lord God in your heart,
and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, Isa. 8.

Your great, ranting, swaggering Roysters that are ignorant of the nature of
this fear of God, count it a poor sneaking, pitiful, cowardly spirit in Men to
fear and tremble before the Lord, but whosoever looks back to gaols, and gibbits,
to the sword and burning stake, shall see, that there in them has been the most
mighty and invincible spirit that has been in the world.

Yea see if God does not count that the growth of his people in this grace of
fear, is that which makes them honorable, when he positively excludes those
from a dwelling place in his house, That do not honor them that fear him,
Psalm. 15.4. And he says moreover, A woman that fears the Lord, she shall be
praised. If the world and godless men will not honor these, they shall be
honored some way else. Such, says he, that honor me I will honor, and they
shall be honored in Heaven, in the Churches, and among the Angels.

8. Another motive to grow in this fear of God, may be, This fear, and the
increase of it, qualifies a man to be put in trust with heavenly and spiritual
things, yea and with earthly things too.

1. For heavenly and spiritual things. My covenant, says God, was with Levi of
life and peace, and I gave THEM to him, for the fear wherewith he feared me,
and was afraid before my name, Mala. 2.5.

Behold what a gift, what a mercy, what a blessing this Levi is entrusted with;
to wit with Gods everlasting covenant, and with the life, and peace, that is
wrapped up in this Covenant. But why is it given to him? the answer is, for the
fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name. And the reason is
good, for this fear of God, teaches a man to put a due estimation upon every
gift of God bestowed upon us; also it Teaches us to make use of the same with
reverence of his name, and respect to his glory in most Godly-wise, all which,
becomes him that is entrusted with any spiritual gift. The gift here was given
to Levi to minister to his brethren doctrinally thereof, for he (says God)
shall teach Jacob my Statutes and Israel my Law.

See also, Exodus 18.21. and Neh. 7.2. With many other places that might be
named, and you will find that men fearing God and hateing covetousness; that
men that fear God above others, are entrusted by God, yea, and by his Church
too, with the trust and ministration of spiritual things before any other in
the world.

2. For earthly things. This fear of God qualifies a man to be put in trust
with them rather then with another. Therefore God made Joseph Lord of all
Egypt; Obadiah, Steward of Ahabs house, Daniel, Mordecai and the three
Children were set over the province of Babylon. And this by the wonderful
working hand of God because he had to dispose of earthly things now, not only
in a common way, but for the good of his people in special. True, when there is
no special matter, or thing to be done by God in a Nation for his people, then
who will, that is, whether they have grace or no, may have the dispose of those
things: but if God has any thing in special to bestow upon his people of this
worlds good, then he will entrust it in the hands of men fearing God. Joseph
must now be made Lord of Aegypc because Israel must be kept from starving:
Obadiah must now be made Steward of Ahabs house, because the Lords Prophets
must be hid from, and fed in despite of the rage and bloody mind of Jezebel:
Daniel with his companions, and Mordecai also, they were all exalted to earthly
and temporal dignity, that they might in that state, they being men that
abounded in the fear of God, be serviceable to their Brethren in their straits
and difficulties, Genesis 42.18. Chap. 41.39. 1 King. 18.3. Hester the two last
Chapters, Dan. 2.48. Chap. 3.30. Chap. 5.29. Chap. 6.1, 2, 3.

9. Another motive to grow in this grace of fear is, Where the fear of God in
the heart of any is not growing, there no grace thrives, nor duty done as it
should.

1. There no grace thrives, neither Faith, Hope, Love, nor any grace. This is
evident from that general Exhortation, perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1. Perfect holiness, what is that? but as James says of patience, let
every grace have its perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire lacking
nothing. Jam. 1.

But this cannot be done but in the fear of God, yea in the exercise of that
grace, and so consequently in the growth of it, for there is no grace, but
grows being exercised. If then you would be perfect in holiness, if you would
have every grace that God has put into your souls, grow and flourish unto
perfection, lay them, as I may say a soak in this grace of fear, and do all in
the exercise of it: for a little done in the fear of the Lord is better then
the revenues of the wicked. And again, the Lord will not suffer the soul of the
righteous, the soul that lives in the fear of the Lord, to famish, but he
casts away the abundance of the wicked. Bring abundance to God, and if it be
not seasoned with godly fear, it shall not be acceptable to him, but loathsome
and abominable in his sight; for it does not flow from the spirit of the fear
of the Lord.

2. Therefore where there is not a growth in this fear, there is no duty done
so acceptably. This flows from that which goes before, for if grace rather
decays than grows, where this grace of fear is not in the growth and increase
thereof, then duties in their glory and acceptableness decay likewise.

10. Another motive to stir thee up to grow in the increase of this grace of
fear is, It is a grace, do but abound therein, that will give thee great
boldness both with God and men. Job was a man, a nonesuch in his day, for one
that feared God, and who so bold with God as Job? who so bold with God, and who
so bold with men as he?

1. How bold was he with God, when he wishes for nothing more then that he
might come even to his seat, and concludes that if he could come at him, he
would approach even as a prince unto him, and as such would order his cause
before him, Job 23.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Chap. 31.35, 36, 37.

Also before his friends, how bold was he? For ever as they laid to his charge
that he was an hypocrite, he refels them with the testimony of a good
conscience, which good conscience he got and kept, and maintained by increasing
in the fear of God, yea his conscience was kept so good by this grace of fear,
(for 'twas by that that he eschewed evil) that 'twas common with him to appeall
to God when accused, and also to put himself for his clearing under most bitter
curses and imprecations, Job 13.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24. Job
31.

This fear of God is it that keeps the conscience clean and tender, and so free
from much of that defilement that even a good man may be afflicted with, for
want of his growth in this fear of God.

Yea let me add, if a man can with a good conscience say that he desires to
fear the name of God, it will ad boldness to his soul in his approaches into
the presence of God. O Lord, said, Nehemiah, I beseech thee let thine ear be
attentive to the prayer of thy Servant, and Servants, who desire to fear thy
name, Nehe. 1.11.

He pleaded his desire of fearing the name of God, as an argument with God to
grant him his request; and the reason was, because God had promised before to
bless them that fear him, both small and great, Ps. 115.13.

11. Another motive to stir you up to fear the Lord, and to grow in this fear,
is, by it thou may have thy labors blessed to the saving of the souls of
others. It Is said of Levi (of whom mention was made before, that he feared God
and was afraid before his Name) that he saved others from their sins. The law
of truth was in his lips, and he walked with me in Peace and Equity, and did
turn away many from iniquity, Mal. 25.6. The fear of God that dwelt in his
heart, showed its growth in the Sanctifying of the Lord by his life and words,
and the Lord also blessed this his growth herein, by blessing his labors to
the saving of his Neighbors.

Would thou save thy Husband, thy Wife, thy Children, etc. then be greatly
in the fear of God. This Peter teaches, Wives, says he, be subject to your own
husbands, that if any obey not the word, they may without the word, be won by
the conversation of the wives, while they behold your chaste conversation,
coupled with fear, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.

So then, if Wives and Children: yea if Husbands, Wives, Children, Servants,
etc. did but better observe this general rule of Peter, to wit, of letting
their whole conversation be coupled with fear, they might be made instruments
in Gods hand of much more good then they are. But the misery is, the fear of
God is wanting in actions, and that is the cause that so little good is done by
those that profess. It Is not a conversation, that is coupled with a profession
(for a great profession may be attended with a life that is not good, but
scandalous) but it is a conversation coupled with fear of God (that is, with
the impressions of the fear of God upon it) that is convincing, and that
ministers the awakenings of God to the conscience, in order to saving the
unbeliever. O they are a sweet couple, to wit, a Christian conversation,
coupled with fear.

The want of this fear of God, is that that has been a stumbling block to the
blind oftentimes. Alas, the World will not be convinced by your talk, by your
notions and by the great profession that you make, if they see not, therewith
mixed, the lively impressions of the fear of God: but will, as I said, rather
stumble and fall, even at your conversation and at your profession itself.
Wherefore, to prevent this mischief, that is of stumbling of souls while you
make your profession of God, by a conversation not becoming your profession:
God bids you fear him. Implying that a good conversation coupled with fear
delivers the blind world from those falls that otherwise they cannot be
delivered from. Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before
the blind, but shall fear thy God, I am the Lord, Levit. 19.14.

But shall fear thy God, that is the remedy that will prevent their stumbling
at you, at what else soever they stumble. Wherefore Paul says to Timothy. Take
heed to thy self, and to thy doctrine, continue in them, for in so doing thou
shall both save thy self and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4.16.

12. Another Motive to fear, and grow in this fear of God is, This is the way
to engage God to deliver thee from many outward dangers, whoever falls therein,
Psalm. 34.7.

This is proved from that of the story of the Hebrew Midwives. The Midwives
says Moses, feared God, and did not drown the Men-Children as the King had
commanded, but saved them alive. And what follows, Therefore God dealt well
with the Midwives; and it came to pass that because the Midwives feared God,
that he made them houses, Exodus 1. That is he sheltered them and caused them to
be hid from the rage and fury of the King, and that perhaps in some of the
Houses of the Egyptians themselves, for why might not the Midwives be there hid
as well as was Moses even in the Kings Court?

And how many times are they that fear God, said to be delivered, both by God
and his Holy Angels: as also I have already showed.

13. Another Motive to fear and to grow in this fear of God is, This is the way
to be delivered from Errors, and damnable opinions. There are some that perish
in their righteousness, that's an Error; there be some that perish in their
wickedness, and that's an Error also. Some again prolong their lives by their
wickedness, and others are righteous over much, and also some are over wise,
and all these are snares, and pits, and holes. But then say thou, how shall
I escape? Indeed that's the question, and the Holy Ghost resolves it thus, He
that fears God shall come out of them all, Eccles. 7.15, 16, 17, 18.

14. Another Motive to fear, and to grow in this fear of God, is, Such have
leave, be they never so dark in their souls, to come boldly to Jesus Christ,
and to trust in him for life. I told you before, that they that fear God, have
in the general, a license to trust in him: but now I tell you, and that in
particular that they, and they specially may do it, and that though in the
dark: you that sit in darkness and have no light, if this grace of fear be
alive in your hearts, you have this boldness; Who is among you that fears the
Lord (mark that fears the Lord) and obeys the voice of his Servant, that
walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord,
and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10.

It is no small advantage, you know, when men have to deal in difficult
matters, to have a patent, or license to deal; now to trust in the Lord is a
dificult thing, yet the best and most gainful of all. But then, some will say,
since it is so difficult, how may we do without danger? why the Text gives a
license, a patent to them to trust in his name that have his fear in their
hearts. Let HIM trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.

15. Another Motive to fear and grow in the grace of fear, is, God will own and
acknowledge such to be his, who ever he rejects. Yea he will distinguish and
separate them from all others, in the day of his terrible Judgments.

He will do with them, as he did by those that sighed for the abominations that
were done in the Land, ( Ezekiel. 9.) command the man that has his Inkhorn by his
side, To set a mark upon their foreheads, that they might not fall in that
Judgment with others.

So in Mal. 3. God says plainly of them that feared the Lord, and that thought
upon his name: That they should be writ in his Book. A Book of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name, and they shall he mine says the Lord of Hosts in the day that I make up
my Jewels and I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him,
Mala. 3.16, 17.

Mark, he both acknowledges them for his, and also promises to spare them, as a
man would spare his own Son. Yea and moreover will wrap them up as his chief
Jewels with himself in the bundle of life. Thus much for the Motives.

How to grow in this Fear of God.
Having given you these Motives to the duty of growing in THIS fear of God,
Before I leave this use, I will in few words show you HOW you may grow in THIS
fear of God.

1. Then, If thou would grow in this fear of God, Learn aright to
distinguish of fear in general. I mean, learn to distinguish between THAT fear
that is godly, and that which in it self is indeed ungodly fear of God; and
know them well the one from the other, lest the one, the fear that in it self
indeed is ungodly, get the place, even the upper hand of that which truly is
godly fear. And remember the ungodly fear of God, is by God himself counted an
enemy to him, and hurtful to his people, and is therefore most plentifully
forbidden in the word, Genesis 1.15. Chap. 26.24. Chap. 46.3. Exo. 14.13. Chap.
20.20. Number. 14.9. Chap. 21.34. Isa. 41.10, 13, 14. Chap. 43.1. Chap. 44.2, 8.
Chap. 54.4. Jer. 30.10. Dan. 10.12.19, Joel. 2.21. Hag. 2.5. Zech. 8.13.

Secondly If thou would grow in this Godly fear, learn rightly to
distinguish it from that fear, in particular, that is Godly but for a time:
Even from that fear that is wrought from the spirit, as a spirit of bondage. I
say learn to distinguish this from that, and also perfectly to know the bounds
that God has set to that fear that is wrought by the spirit, as a spirit of
bondage; Lest instead of growing in the fear that is to abide with thy soul for
ever, thou be overrun again with that first fear, which is to abide with thee,
but till the spirit of adoption come. And that thou may not only distinguish
them one from the other, but also keep each in its due place and bounds,
consider in general of what has already been said upon this head, and in
particular that the first fear is no more wrought by the holy spirit, but by
the Devil to distress thee and make thee to live, not like a Son, but a slave.
And for thy better help in this matter, know that God himself has set bounds
to this fear, and has concluded that after the spirit of Adoption is come, that
other fear is wrought in thy heart by him no more. ( Romans 8.15. 2 Timothy 1.7.)

Again, before I leave this, let me tell thee that if thou do not well bestir
thee in this matter, this bondage fear, to wit that which is like it, though
not wrought in thee by the Holy Ghost, will by the management and subtilty of
the Devil, the author of it, haunt, disturb and make thee live uncomfortably,
and that while thou art an heir of God and his Kingdom. This is that fear that
the Apostle speaks of, That makes men all their life time subject to bondage,
Heb. 2.14.15.

For though Christ will deliver thee indeed at last, thou having embraced him
by faith, yet thy life will be full of trouble; and death, though Jesus has
abolished it, will be always a living bugbear to thee in all thy ways and
thoughts to break thy peace, and to make thee to draw thy loins heavily after
him.

Thirdly would thou grow in this Godly fear? then as thou should learn to
distinguish of fears, so thou should make conscience of which to entertain
and cherish. If God would have his fear (and it is called his fear by way of
eminency) that his fear may be before you that you sin not, Exo. 20.20. Jer.
32.4. I say, if God would have this his fear be with thee, then thou should
make conscience of this, and not so lightly give way to slavish fear, as is
Common for Christians to do.

There is utterly a fault among Christians about this thing: That is, they make
not that conscience of resisting of slavish fear, as they ought; they rather
cherish and entertain it, and so weaken themselves, and that fear that they
ought to strengthen.

And this is the reason that we so often lie grabling under the black, and
amazing thoughts that are engendered in our hearts by unbelief: For this fear
nourishes unbelief; that is now it does, (to wit, if we give way to it after
the spirit of Adoption is come) and readily closes with all the fiery darts of
the wicked.

But Christians are ready to do with this fear as the Horse does when the tines
of the fork are set against his side, even lean to it until it enters into
his belly. We lean naturally to this fear, I mean, after God has done good to
our souls; it is hard striving against it, because it has even our sense and
feeling of its side.

But I say, If thou would be a growing Christian, growing, I say, in the
fear that is Godly, in the fear that is is always so; then make conscience of
striving against the other, and against all these things that would bring thee
back to it. Wherefore should I fear, said David, in the day of evil, when the
iniquities of my heels compasses me about? Psalm. 49.5.

What! not fear in the day of evil? what! not when the iniquities of thy heels
compasses thee about? no, not then, says he; that is, not with that fear,
that would bring him again into bondage to the law; for he had received the
spirit of Adoption before. Indeed, if ever a Christian has ground to give way
to slavish fear, it is at these two times, to wit in the day of evil and when
the iniquity of his heels compasses him about: But you see, David would not
then, no not then give way thereto, nor did he see reason why he should.
Wherefore should I, said he? I, wherefore indeed, since now thou art become a
Son of God through Christ, and have received the spirit of his son into thy
heart crying father father.

Fourthly, would thou grow in this grace of Godly fear? then grow in the
knowledge of the new covenant, for that is indeed the girdle of our reins and
the strength of our souls. Hear what Zacharias says, God, says he, has
raised up to us an horn of salvation in the house of his servant David, as he
spoke by the mouth of all the Holy Prophets which have been since the world
began. But what was it? what was it that he spoke? Why, That he would grant us
that we being delivered from the hand of our enemies, might serve him without
fear, (without this slavish bondage fear) in holiness and righteousness before
him all the days of our life. But upon what is this princely fearless service
of God grounded? Why upon the holy covenant of God, upon the oath that he swore
unto Abraham, Luke 1.69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75.

Now in this covenant is wrapped up all thy salvation: in it is contained all
thy desire, and I am sure that then it contains the complete salvation of thy
Soul: and, I say, since this covenant is confirmed by promise, by oath, and by
the blood of the son of God, and that on purpose that thou might serve thy
God without slavish fear, Then the knowledge and faith of this covenant, is of
absolute necessity to bring us into this liberty, and out of our slavish
terrors, and so, consequently, to cause us to grow in that son-like, Godly
fear, which became even the Son of God himself, and becomes all his Disciples
to live in the growth and exercise of.

Fifthly, would thou grow in this Godly fear? then labor even always to
keep thine evidences for Heaven and of thy salvation alive upon thy heart; for
he that loses his evidences for heaven, will hardly keep slavish fear out of
his heart; but he that has the wisdom and grace to keep them alive, and
apparent to himself, he will grow in this godly fear. See how David words it;
from the ends of the earth, says he, will I cry unto thee, when my heart is
overwhelmed, lead me to the rock that is higher then I. For thou have been a
shelter to me, and a strong tower from the enemy: I will abide in thy
tabernacle for ever. For thou God have heard my prayer thou have given me the
heritage of those that fear thy name, Psalm. 61.5.

Mark a little, David does by these words in the first place suggest, that some
times, to his thinking, he was as far off of his God, as the ends of the earth
are asunder and that at such times he was subject to be overwhelmed, afraid.

Secondly, The way that he took, at such times, to help himself, was, 1. To cry
to God to lead him again to Jesus Christ, lead me to the rock that is higher
than I. for indeed without faith in him, and the renewing of that faith, there
can be no evidence for Heaven made to appear unto the soul. This therefore he
prays for first. 2. Then he puts that faith into exercise, and that with
respect to the time that was past, and also of the time that was to come. For
the time past, says he, thou have been a shelter to me, and a strong tower
from the enemy; And for the time to come he said, I will abide in thy
tabernacle, that is, in thy Christ by faith, and in thy way of worship by love,
for ever. And observe it, he makes the believing remembrance of his first
evidences for Heaven, the ground of this his cry, and faith, for thou says he,
O God, have given me the heritage of those that fear thy name. Thou have made
me meet to be partaker of the mercy of thy chosen, and have put me under the
blessing of goodness wherewith thou have blessed those that fear thee.

Thus you see how David in his distresses musters up his prayers, faith and
evidences for eternal life, that he might deliver himself from being
overwhelmed, that is, with slavish fear, and that he might also abound in that
Son-like fear of his fellow brethren that is not only comely with respect to
our profession but profitable to our souls.

Sixthly, Would thou grow in this fear of God? then set before thine eyes
the being, and majesty of God: For that both begets, maintains and
increases this fear. And hence it is called the fear of God; that is, an holy
and awful dread and reverence of his majesty. For the fear of God, is to stand
in aw of him, but how can that be done if we do not set him before us? And
again if we would fear him more, we must abide more in the sense and faith of
his glorious majesty. Hence this fear, and Gods name, is so often put
together: as fear God, fear the Lord, fear thy God, do this in the fear of the
Lord, and thou shall fear thy God, I am the Lord.

For these words, I am the Lord, thy God and the like, are on purpose put in,
not only to show us who we should fear, but also to beget, maintain, and
increase in us that fear that is due from us to that glorious, and fearful
name, the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 28.58.

Seventhly, Would thou grow in this grace of fear? then keep always, close
to thy conscience, the authority of the word; Fear the commmandment, as the
commandment of a God both mighty and glorious, and as the commandment of a
father, both loving and pitiful: let this commandment, I say, be always with
thine eye, with thine ear, and with thine heart: For then thou will be taught,
not only to fear, but to abound in the fear of the Lord. Every grace is
nourished by the word, and without it there is no thrist in the soul, Pro.
13.13. Chap. 4.20, 21, 22. Deuteronomy. 6.1.2.

Eighthly, Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then be much in the faith
of the promise, of the promise that makes over to thy soul an interest in God,
by Christ, and of all good things. The promise naturally tends to increase in
us the fear of the Lord, because this fear, it grows by goodness and mercy;
They shall fear the Lord and his goodness; now this goodness and mercy of God,
it is wrapped up in, and made over to us by promise; for God gave it to Abraham
by promise. Therefore the faith and hope of the promise, causes this fear to
grow in the soul. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit perfecting holiness
in the fear of God, 2. Cor. 7.1. perfect holiness in the fear of God; therefore
that fear by the promise must needs grow mighty, for by, with, and in it, you
see holiness is perfected.

Ninthly, Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then remember the Judgments
of God that have or shall certainty over take those professors, that have
either been downright hypocrites, or else unwatchful Christians. For both
these sorts partake of the Judgments of God; the one, (to wit, the true
Christian) for his unwatchfulness, for his correction; the other (to wit, the
hypocrite) for his hypocrisy, to his destruction. This is a way to make thee
stand in aw, and to make thee tremble, and grow in the grace of fear before thy
God.

Judgments? you may say, what Judgments?

Answ. Time will fail me here to tell thee of the Judgments that sometimes
overtake Gods people, and that always certainly overtake the hypocrite for his
transgressions.

For those that attend Gods people I would have thee look back to the place in
this Book where they are particularly touched upon.

And for those that attend the hypocrite, in general they are these.

1. Blindness of heart in this world.

2. The death of their hope, at the day of their death.

3. And the damnation of their souls at the day of Judgment. Matthew. 23.15, 16,
17, 18, 19. Job. 8.13. Chap. 11.20. Chap. 18.14. Chap. 20.4, 5, 6, 7. Matthew.
23.33. Chap. 24.51. Luk 20.47.

The godly consideration of these things tend to make men grow in the fear of
God.

Tenthly, Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then study the EXCELLENCIES
of the grace of fear, and what profit it yields to to them that have it, and
labor to get thy heart into the love, both of the exercise of the grace it
self, and also of the fruit it yields: For a man hardly grows in the increase
of any grace, until his heart is united to it, and until it is made lovely in
his eyes, Psalm. 119.119, 120.

Now the excellencies of this grace of fear, have also been discoursed of, in
this Book before, where, by reading thou shall find the fruit it bears, and the
promises that are anexed to it, which, because they are many, I refer thee also
thither for thy instruction.

Eleventhly Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then remember what a
world of privileges do belong to them that fear the Lord: As also I have
hinted, namely that such shall not be hurt, shall want no good thing, shall be
guarded by Angels and have a special license, though in never so dreadful
plight, to trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon their God.

12. Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then be much in prayer to God
for abundance of the increase thereof. To fear God, is that which is according
to his will, and if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. Pray
therefore that God will unite thy heart to fear his name; this is the way to
grow in the grace of fear.

Lastly, Would thou grow in this grace of fear; Then devote thy self to it,
Psalm. 119.38. Devote my self to it, you will say, how is that? I answer, why
give thy self to it, addict thy self to it. Solace thy self in the
contemplation of God, and of a reverence of his name and word and worship. Then
will thou fear, and grow in this grace of fear.

What things they are that have a tendency in them to hinder the growth of the
fear of God in our hearts.
And that I may yet be helpful to thee, (Reader) I shall now give thee caution
of those things, that will, if way be given to them, hinder thy growth in this
fear of God, the which, because they are very hurtful to the people of God, I
would have thee be warned by them.

And they are these which follow.

1. If thou would grow in this grace of fear, Take heed of an hard heart, for
that will hinder thy growth in this grace. Why have thou hardened our hearts
from thy fear? ( Isa. 63.17.) was a bitter complaint of the Church heretofore;
for it is not only the judgment, that in it self is dreadful, and sore to Gods
people, but that which greatly hinders the growth of this grace in the soul.
An hard heart is but barren ground for any grace to grow in, specially for the
grace of fear: there is but little of this fear, where the heart indeed is
hard; neither will there ever be much therein.

Now if thou would be kept from an hard heart.

1. Take heed of the beginings of sin. Take heed I say, of that, though it
should be never so small, A little leaven, leavens the whole lump: there is
more in a little sin to harden, than in a great deal of grace to soften. David's
look upon Bathsheba, was, one would think, but a small matter: yet that
beginning of sin, contracted such hardness of heart in him, that it carried him
almost beyond all fear of God. It did carry him to commit lewdness with her,
murder upon the body of Vriah, and to abundance of wicked dissimulation; which
are things I say that have direct tendency to quench, and destroy all fear of
God in the soul.

2. If thou have sinned, lie not down without repentance; for the want of
repentance, after one has sinned, makes the heart yet harder and harder.

Indeed an hard heart is impenitent, and impenitence also makes the heart
harder and harder. So that if impenitence be added to hardness of heart, or to
the beginings of sin which makes it so, It will quickly be with that soul, as
is said of the house of Israel, it will have A Whores forehead, it will hardly
be brought to shame Jer. 3.3.

3. If thou would be rid of an hard heart, that great enemy to the growth of
the grace of fear, Be much with Christ upon the Cross in thy Meditations; For
that is an excellent remedy against hardness of heart: a right sight of him, as
he hanged there for thy sins, will dissolve thy heart into tears, and make it
soft and tender. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced and mourn (
Zech. 12.10, 11.) Now a soft, a tender, and broken heart, is a fit place for
the grace of fear to thrive in. But,

2. If thou would have the grace of fear to grow in thy soul, Take heed also
of a prayerless heart, for that is not a place for this grace of fear to grow
in. Hence he that refraineth prayer, is said, To cast off fear. Thou casts
off fear, said one of his friends to Job. But how must he do that? why the next
words show, Thou restrainest prayer before God. ( Job 15.4.) See thou a
Professor that prays not? that man thrusts the fear of God away from him.
See thou a man that prays but little? that man fears God but little, for it
is the praying soul, the man that is mighty in praying, that has an heart for
the fear of God to grow in. Take heed therefore of a prayerless heart, if you
would grow in this grace of the fear of God.

Prayer is as the pitcher that fetches water from the Brook, therewith to
water the herbs; break the pitcher and it will fetch no water, and for want of
water the Garden withers.

3. Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then take heed of a light and
wanton heart. For neither is such an heart good ground for the fear of God to
grow in: wherefore it is said of Israel, She feared not, but went and played the
Harlot also. She was given to wantonness and to be light, and vain, and so her
fear of God decayed, Jer. 3.8. Had Joseph been as wanton as his Mistress, he
had been as void of the fear of God as she: but he was of a sober, tender,
godly, considerate spirit, therefore he grew in the fear of God.

4. Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then take heed of a covetous
heart, for neither is that which is such an one good ground for this grace of
fear to grow in. Therefore this covetousness, and the fear of God, are, as
enemies, set the one in opposition to the other: one that fears God, and
hates COVETOVSNESS, Exodus 18.21.

And the reason why covetousness is such an obstruction to the growth of this
grace of fear, is because covetousness casts those things out of the heart
which alone can nourish this fear. It casts out the word, and love of God,
without which no grace can grow in the soul, how then should the fear of God
grow in a covetous heart? Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. 1 John 2.15.

5. Would thou grow in this grace of fear? then Take heed of an unbelieving
heart; For an unbelieving heart is not good ground for this grace of fear to
grow in. An unbelieving heart is called an evil heart, ( Heb. 3.13.) because,
from it flows all the wickedness that is committed in the World. Now it is
faith, or a believing heart that nourishes this fear of God ( Heb. 11.7.) and
not the other; and the reason is, for that faith brings God, Heaven, and Hell,
to the soul, and makes it duly consider of them all: this is therefore the
means of fear, and that which will make it grow in the soul: but unbelief is a
BANE thereto.

6. Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then take heed of a forgetful
heart. Such an heart is not an heart where the grace of fear will flourish,
when I remember I am afraid, etc. Therefore take heed of forgetfulness: do not
forget but remember God, and his kindness, patience, and mercy, to those that
yet neither have grace nor special favor from him, and that will beget and
nourish his fear in thy heart, but forgetfulness of this or of any other of his
judgments, is a great wound and weakening to this fear, Job 21.6. When a man
well remembers that Gods judgments are so great a deep and mystery, as indeed
they are, that remembrance puts a man upon such considerations of God, and of
his judgments as to make him fear. Therefore says Job I am afraid of him. See
the place, Job 23.15. Therefore am I troubled at his presence, when I consider
I am afraid of him. When I remember and consider of the wonderful depths of his
judgments toward man.

7. Would thou grow in this grace of fear? then, Take heed of a murmuring,
and repining heart, for that is not an heart for this grace of fear to grow in.

As for instance, when men murmur and repine at Gods hand, at his
dispensations, and at the Judgments that overtake them, in their persons,
estates, families, or relations THAT their murmuring, tends to destroy fear;
for a murmuring spirit is such an one as seems to correct God, and to find
fault with his dispensations: and where there is that, the heart is far from
fear.

A murmuring spirit either comes from that wisdom that pretends to understand
that there is a failure in the nature and execution of things, or from an envy
and spite at the execution of them. Now if murmurings arise from this pretended
wisdom of the flesh, then instead of fearing of God, his actions are judged to
be either riged or ridiculous, which yet are done in judgment, truth and
righteousness. So that a murmuring heart cannot be a good one for the fear of
God to grow in: alas the heart where that grows, must be a soft one, as you
have it in, Job 23.15, 16. And an heart that will stoop and be silent at the
most abstruse of all his Judgments. I was silent because thou did it.

The heart in which this fear of God does flourish, is such, that it bows and
is mute, if it can but epsy the hand, wisdom, justice or holiness of God in
this or the other of his dispensations, and so stirs up the soul to fear before
him.

But if this murmuring arises from envy and spite, that looks so like to the
spirit of the Devil, that nothing need be said to give conviction of the
horrible wickedness of it.

8. Would thou grow in this grace of fear? then, Take heed of an high and
captious spirit, for that is not good ground for the fear of God to grow in: a
meek and quiet spirit is the best, and there the fear of God will flourish
most, therefore Peter puts meekness and fear together, as being most suited in
their nature and natural tendency one to another, 1 Pet. 3.14.

Meekness of spirit is like that heart that has depth of earth in it, in which
things may take root and grow; but an high and captious spirit, is like to the
stony ground, where there is not depth of earth, and consequently, where this
grace of fear cannot grow: therefore take heed of this kind of spirit, if thou
would that the fear of God should grow in thy soul.

9. Would thou grow in the grace of fear? then, Take heed of an envious
heart, for that is not a good heart for the fear of God to grow in. Let not thy
heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long, Prove.
23.17. To envy any, is a sign of a bad spirit, and that man takes upon him, as
I have already hinted, to be a controller and a judge, yea and a malicious
executioner too, and that of that fury that arises from his own lusts and
revengeful spirit, upon (perhaps) the man that is more righteous then himself.
But suppose he is a sinner that is the object of thine envy, why, the Text sets
that envy, in direct opposition to the fear of God: Envy not sinners, but be
thou in the fear of God. These two therefore, to wit, envy to sinners and
fearing of God, are opposites. Thou can not fear God, and envy sinners too.
And the reason is, because he that envieth a sinner, has forgotten himself,
that he is as bad, and how can he then fear God? He that envies sinners,
rejects his duty of blessing of them that curse, and praying for them that
despitefully use us; and how can he that has rejected this, fear God? He that
envieth sinners, therefore, cannot be of a good spirit, nor can the fear of God
grow in his heart.

Lastly, Would thou grow in this grace of fear? Then Take heed of hardening
thy heart at anytime against convictions to particular duties, as to, Prayer,
Alms, Self-denial, or the like. Take heed also of hardening thy heart, when thou
art under any judgment of God, as sickness, losses, crosses, or the like.

I bid you before, to beware of an hard heart, but now I bid you beware of
hardening your soft ones: For to harden the heart, is to make it worse then it
is; harder, more desperate, and bold against God, then at the present it is.
Now, I say, if thou would grow in this grace of fear: take heed of hardening
thy heart, and especially of hardening of it against convictions to good; for
those convictions are sent of God like seasonable showrs of rain, to keep the
tillage of thy heart in good order, that the grace of fear may grow therein;
but this stiffling of convictions, makes the heart as hard as a piece of the
nether Millstone.

Therefore happy is he that receives conviction for so he does keep in the
fear of God, and that fear thereby nourished in his soul: but cursed is he that
does otherwise. Happy is the man that fears always, but he that hardneth his
heart shall fall into mischief, ( Prove. 28.14.)

A use of Encouragement.
I come now to a use of encouragement to those that are blessed with this grace
of fear. The last text that was mentioned, says, Happy is the man that fears
always, (and so does many more.) Happy already, because blessed with this grace,
and happy for time to come, because this grace shall abide, and continue till
the soul that has it is brought unto the mansion house of glory. I will put my
fear in their heart, and they shall not depart from me. Therefore, as here is
says, Happy IS he, so it says also, It SHALL go well with him, that is, in
time to come. It SHALL go well with them that fear the Lord, Eccles. 8.12. Had
God given thee all the world, yet cursed had thou been, if he had not given
thee the fear of the Lord: for the fashion of this world is a fading thing, but
he that fears the Lord shall abide for ever and ever.

This therefore is the first thing that I would propound for thy encouragement
(thou man that fear the Lord.)

This grace will dwell in thy heart, for it is a new covenant grace and will
abide with thee forever. It is sent to thee from God, not only to join thy
heart unto him; but to keep thee from final apostasy; I will put my fear in
their heart, and they shall not depart from me, ( Jer. 32.) That thou may
never forsake God, is his design, and therefore to keep thee from that wicked
thing, he has put his fear in thy heart.

Many are the temptations, difficulties, snares, traps, trials and troubles
that the people of God pass through in the world, but how shall they be kept,
how shall they be delivered, and escape? Why, the answer is the fear of God
will keep them, He that fears God shall come out of them all.

It is not therefore a wonderful mercy to be blessed with this grace of fear,
that thou by it may be kept from final, which is damnable apostasy? Bless
God therefore, thou blessed man, that have this grace of fear in thy soul.

There are five things in this grace of fear that have a direct tendency in
them to keep thee from final apostasy.

1. It is seated in the heart, and the heart is, as I may call it, the main
FORT in the mystical world, man. It is not placed in the head, as knowledge is;
nor in the mouth, as utterance is; but in the heart, the seat of all, I will
put my fear in their heart. If a King will keep a Town secure to himself, let
him be sure to man sufficiently the main FORT thereof. If he have twenty
thousand men well armed, if they lie scattered here and there, the Town may be
taken for all that, but if the main fort be well manned, then the Town is more
secure. What if a man had all the parts, yea all the arts of Men and Angels,
that will not keep the heart to God.

But when the heart, this principal fort, is possessed with the fear of God,
then he is safe, but not else.

2. As the heart in general, so the will in special, That chief and great
faculty of the soul, is the principal that is acted by this fear.

The will, which way that goes, all goes: If it be to Heaven or Hell. Now the
will, I say, is that main faculty that is governed by this fear that does
possess the soul, therefore all is like to go well with it.

This Samuel insinuates, where he says, If ye WILL fear the Lord. Fearing of
God is a voluntary act of the will, and that being so, the soul is kept from
rebellion against the Commandment, because by the will, where this fear of God
is placed, and which IT governs, is led all the rest of the powers of the
soul, 1 Samuel 12.14. In this will then is this fear of God placed, that this
grace may the better be able to govern the soul, and so by consequence the
whole man; for as I said before, look what way the will goes, look what the
will does, thither goes, and that does the whole man. See Psalm. 110.3.

Man, when his will is alienate from God, is reckoned rebellious throughout, (
Joh. 5.40.) and that not without ground, for the will is the principal faculty
of the soul as to obedience, and therefore things done without the will, are as
if they were not done at all. The spirit is willing; If ye be willing; she has
done what she could, and the like; by these and such like sayings the goodness
of the heart and action, is judged, as to the subjective part thereof.

Now this fear that we have been speaking of, is placed in the soul, and so
consequently in the will, that the man may thereby the better be kept from
final, and damnable apostasy.

3. This fear, as I may say, even above every other grace, is Gods well-wisher;
and hence it is called, as I also have showed you, HIS fear. As he also says
in the Text mentioned above, I will put MY fear in their heart. These words HIS
and MY, they are intimate, and familiar expressions, bespeaking, not only great
favor to man, but a very great trust put in him: As who should say, this fear
is my special friend, it will subject, and bow the soul and the several
faculties thereof to my pleasure, it is my great favorite and subdueth sinners
to my pleasure: you shall rarely find faith, or repentance, or parts, go under
such familiar characters as this blessed fear of the Lord does. Of all the
counselors, and mighties, that David had, Hushi only was called the Kings
Friend, (2 Samuel 15.37. Chapter 16.16.) So of all the graces of the spirit, this of
the fear of God, goes mostly, if not always by the title of my fear, Gods
fear, his fear, etc.

I told you before, if the King will keep a Town, the main fort therein must be
sufficiently manned: and now I will add, that if he have not to govern those
men, some trusty and special friend, such as Hushi was to David, he may find it
lost when it should stand him in greatest stead. If a soul should be possessed
with all things possible, yet if this fear of God be wanting, all other things
will give place in time of rebellion, and the soul shall be found in, and under
the conduct of Hell when it should stand up for God and his truth in the World.
This fear of God, it is Gods special friend, and therefore it has given unto it
the chief seat of the heart, the will, that the whole man may now be, and also
be kept hereafter, in the subjection and obedience of the Gospel. For,

4. This grace of fear is the softest, and most tender of Gods honor of any
other grace. It is that tender, sensible and trembling grace that keeps the
soul upon its continual watch. To keep a good watch is, you know, a wonderful
safety to a place that is in continual danger because of the enemy. Why this is
the grace that sets the watch, and that keeps the watchman awake, ( Song.
3.7, 8.)

A man cannot watch as he should if he be destitute of fear: let him be
confident, and he sleeps, he unadvisedly lets into the garrison, those that
should not come there. Isreal's fault when they came to Canaan, was, that they
made a Covenant with the inhabitants of the Land (to wit, the Gibeonites)
without asking counsel of God. But would they have done so, think you, if at
the same time the fear of God, had had its full play in the soul, in the Army?
no they at that time forgot to fear. The grace of fear had not at that time its
full stroke and sway among them.

5. This grace of fear is that, which, as I may so say, first affects the
hearts of Saints with Judgments, after we have sinned: and so is as a beginning
grace to bring again that to rights, that by sin is put out of frame. O it is a
precious grace of God: I know what I say in this matter, and also where I had
been long ago, through the power of my lusts and the wiles of the Devil had it
not been for the fear of God.

But Secondly, Another encouragement for those that are blessed with this
blessed grace of fear, is this, This fear fails not to do this work for the
soul, (if there in truth) be it never so small in measure. A little of this
leven, levens the whole lump. 'True, a little will not do, or help the soul to
do those worthy exploits in the heart or life, as well as a bigger measure
thereof; nor indeed can a little of any grace, do that which a bigger measure
will: but a little will preserve the soul from final apostasy, and deliver it
into the arms of the Son of God at the final Judgment. Wherefore when he
says, I will put my fear in their heart, he says not, I will put so much of
it there, such a quantity, or such a degree; but, I will put my ear there.

I speak not this in the least to tempt the godly man to be content with the
least degree of the fear of God in his heart. 'True, men should be glad that
God has put even the least degree of this grace into their souls, but they
should not be content therewith, they should earnestly covet more, pray for
more, and use all lawful, that is, all the means of Gods appointing, that they
may get more.

There are, as I have said already, several degrees of this grace of fear, and
our wisdom is, to grow in IT, as in all other the graces of the Spirit. The
reasons why, I have showed you, and also the way to grow therein, but the least
measure thereof will do as I said, that is, keep the soul from final apostasy.
There are, as I have showed you, those that greatly fear the Lord, that fear
exceedingly, and that fear him above many of their brethren: but the small, in
this grace, are saved, as well as these that are great therein, He will save
them that fear him small and great.

This fear of the Lord is the pulse of the soul, and as some pulses beat
stronger, some weaker, so is this grace of fear in the soul. They that beat
best are a sign of best life, but they that beat worst show that life is
present: As long as the pulse beats, we count not that the man is dead, though
weak; and this fear, where it is, preserves to everlasting life. Pulses there
are also that are intermitting, to wit, such as have their times for a little,
a little time to stop, and beat again: 'True these are dangerous pulses, but
yet too, a sign of life. This fear of God also is sometimes like this
intermitting pulse: there are times when it forbears to work, and then it works
again; David had an intermitting pulse, Peter had an intermitting pulse, as
also many other of the Saints of God. I call that an intermitting pulse with
reference to the fear we speak of, when there is some obstruction by the
workings of corruptions in the soul, I say some obstruction from, and hindrance
of the continual motion of this fear of God, yet none of these (though they are
various, and some of them sings of weakness,) are signs of death but life. I
will put my fear in their heart, and they shall not depart from me.

But you may say, How shall I know that I fear God.

Ans. If I should say, that desires, true sincere desires to fear him, is fear
it self; I should not say amiss, Nehe. 1.11. For although a desire to be or do
so and so, makes not a man to be in temporal or natural things, what he desires
to be (for a sick or poor, or imprisoned man, may desire to be well, to be
rich, or to be at liberty, and yet be as they are, sick, poor, or in prison;)
Yet in spirituals, a man's desire to be good, to believe, to love, to hope, and
fear God, does flow from the nature of grace it self.

I said before, that in temporals, a man could not be properly be said to be
what he was not; yet a man even in naturals or temporals, shows his love to
that thing that he desires, whether it be health, riches or liberty; and in
spirituals desires of, from love to this, or that grace of God sincere desires
of it flow from the root of the grace it self. Thy Servants that desire to fear
thy name. Nehemiah bore himself before God upon this, That he desired to fear
his name.

And hence again it is said concerning desires, true desires, The desire of a
man is his kindness, Prove. 19.22. For a man shows his heart, his love, his
affections, and his delights, in his desires: and since the grace of fear of
God, is a grace so pleasant in the sight of God; and of so sanctifying a nature
in the soul where it is: a true sincere desire to be blessed with that grace,
must needs flow from some being of this grace in the soul already.

'True, desires, are lower, than higher acts of grace, but God will not look
over desires: But now they DESIRE a better Country, that is an heavenly;
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for
them a City. Mark, they desire a Country, and they shall have a City. At this
LOW place, to wit, sincere desires, God will meet the soul and will tell him,
that he has accepted of his desires, that his desires are his kindness, and
flow from grace it self, He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him.
Therefore desires are not rejected of God, but they would, if they did not flow
from a principle of grace already in the soul; therefore desires, sincere
desires to fear God, flow from grace already in the soul.

Therefore since thou fear God, and it is evident, by thy desires, 'that
thou do so do: thou ART happy, NOW, in this thy fear, and SHALL be happy for
ever hereafter in the enjoyment of that which God in another world has laid up
for them that fear him.

3. Another encouragement for those that have this grace of fear is this. This
grace can make that man, that in many other things is not capable of serving of
God, serve him better then those that have all, without it. Poor Christian man,
thou have scarce been able to do any thing for God all thy days, but only to
fear the Lord. Thou art no Preacher, and so can not do him service that way:
Thou art no rich man and so can not do him service with outward substance:
Thou art no wise man, and so can not do any thing that way: But here is thy
mercy, thou fear God. Though thou can not preach, thou can fear God.
Though thou have no bread to feed the belly nor fleece to cloth the back, of
the poor, thou can fear God. O how blessed is the man that fears the Lord,
because this duty of fearing of God is an act of the mind, and may be done by
the man that is destitute of all things, but that holy and blessed mind.

Blessed therefore is that man, for God has not laid the comfort of his people
in the doing of external duties, nor the salvation of their souls, but in
believing, loving, and fearing God. Neither has he laid these things in
actions done in their health, nor in the due mannagement of their most
excellent parts, but in the receiving of Christ, and fear of God. The which,
good Christian, thou may do, and do acceptably, even though thou should
lie bedridden all thy days, thou may also be sick, and believe; be sick and
love, be sick and fear God, and so be a blessed man.

And here the POOR Christian has some thing to answer them that reproach him
for his ignoble pedigree, and shortness of the glory of the wisdom of the
World. 'True, may that man say; I was taken out of the Dunghill, I was born in a
base and low estate: But I fear God. I have no worldly greatness, nor
excellency of natural parts, but I fear God.

When Obadiah met with Elijah, he gave him no worldly, and fantastical
complement, nor did he glory in his promotion by Ahab the King of Israel, but
gravely and after a gracious manner said, I thy servant fear the Lord from my
youth. Also when the Mariners enquired of Jonah saying, What is thine
occupation, and whence come thou? what is thy Country, and of what people art
thou? This was the answer he gave them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord,
the God of Heaven, which has made the Sea and the dry Land, Jon. 1.8, 9.

Indeed this answer is the highest, and most noble in the world, nor are there
any save a few, that in truth can thus express themselves, though other answers
they have enough; most can say, I have wisdom, or might, or riches, or friends,
or health, or the like; these are common, and are greatly boasted in by the
most: but he is the man that fears God, and he that can say, when they say,
to him what art thou? [ I thy servant do fear the Lord] he is the man of many,
he is to be honored of men: Though this, to wit, that he fears the Lord, is
all that he has in this World. He has the thing, the honor, the life, and
glory that is lasting: his blessedness will abide when all men's but his is
buried in the dust, in shame, and contempt.

A Word to Hypocrites.
Hypocrites, My last word is to you (The hypocrite is one that would appear to
be that in men's eyes, that he is nothing of in Gods) Thou hypocrite that
would be esteemed to be one that loves, and that fears God, but does not; I
have this to say to thee, thy condition is damnable, because thou art an
hypocrite, and seek to deceive both God and Man with Guises, Vizards, Masks,
shows, pretenses, and thy formal, carnal, feigned subjection to the outside of
Statutes, Laws and Commandments: but within thou art full of rotteness and all
excess.

Hypocrite, Thou may by thy cunning shifts be veild, and hid from men: but
thou art naked before the eyes of God, and he knows that his fear is not in
thy heart, Luke 16.15.

Hypocrite, Be admonished that there is not obedience accepted of God, where
the heart is destitute of this grace of fear. Keeping of the Commandments, is
but one part of the duty of man, and Paul did that, even while he was an
Hypocrite, Philippians. 3. To FEAR GOD and keep his Commandments, that is the
whole duty of man, Ecclesiastes 12.13. This [ fear God] the hypocrite, cannot
as an hypocrite do, and therefore as such, cannot escape the damnation of Hell.

Hypocrite, Thou must fear God first, even before thou do offer to meddle
with the Commandment, that is as to the keeping of them. Indeed thou should
read therein that thou may learn to fear the Lord, but yet, fear God, goes
before the Command to keep his Commandments. And if thou do not fear God
first, thou trangressest, instead of keeping of the Commandments.

Hypocrite, This word, fear God is that which the hypocrite quite forgets,
although it is that which sanctifies the whole duty of man. For this is that,
and no thing without it, that can make a man sincere in his obedience, the
hypocrite looks for applause abroad, and forgets that he is condemned at home,
and both these he does because he wants the fear of God.

Hypocrite, Be admonished that none of the privileges that are spoken of in
the former part of the Book belongs to thee, because thou art an hypocrite; and
if thou hope, thy hope shall be cut off, and if thou lean upon thy house, both
thou and it shall fall into Hellfire. Triumph then, thy Triumph is but for a
while. Joy then, but the Joy of the Hypocrite is but for a moment, Job 8.13,
14, 15. Chap. 20.4, 5, 6.

Perhaps thou will not let go now, what, as an Hypocrite, thou have got: But
what is the hope of the Hypocrite, when God shall take away his soul, Job 21.8.

Hypocrite, Thou should have chosen the fear of God, as hou have chosen a
profession without it, but thou have cast off fear, because thou art an
Hypocrite; and because thou art such, thou shall have the same measure that
thou meetest: God will cast thee off because thou art an Hypocrite. God has
prepared a fear for thee because thou did not choose the fear of God, and that
fear shall come upon thee like desolation, and like an armed man, and shall
swallow the up, thou and all that thou art, Prove. 1.29.

Hypocrite, Read this Text and tremble. The Sinners in Zion are afraid,
fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrite, (...) shall dwell with devouring fire
(...) as shall dwell with everlasting burning^* Isa. 33.13, 14.

Hypocrite, Thou art not under the fatherly protection of God, because thou art
an Hypocrite, and want his fear in thine heart. The eyes of the Lord are
upon them that fear him to deliver them. But the fearless man, or Hypocrite is
left to the snare and wiles of the Devil to be catched therein and overcome,
because he is destitute of the fear of God.

Hypocrite, Thou art like to have no other reward of God for thy labor than
that which the goats shall have: the Hypocrite because he is an Hypocrite,
shall not stand in Gods sight. The gain of thy religion thou spendest as thou
gettest it. Thou will not have one farthing overplus at Death and Judgment.

Hypocrite, God has not entrusted thee with the least dram of his saving
grace, nor will he, because thou art an Hypocrite: And as for what thou have,
thou have stolen it, even every man of you from his Neighbor; still pilfering
out of their profession, even as Juda^ did out of the bag. Thou come (...) a
thief into thy profession, and like a thief thou shall go out of the same.
Jesus Christ has not counted thee faithful to commit to thee any of his Jewels
to keep, because thou fear him not, He has given his banner to them that
fear him, that it may be displayed because of the truth, Psalm. 60.4.

Hypocrite, Thou art not true to God, nor man, nor thine own soul, because thou
art an Hypocrite: how should the Lord put any trust in thee? Why should the
saints look for any good from thee? Should God give thee his word, thou will
sell it; should men commit their souls to thee, thou will destroy them by
making Merchandise of them for thy own Hypocritical designs.

Yea if the Sun waxes hot thou will throw all away, and not endure the heat
because thou art an Hypocrite.

ERRATAS.
REader, thou art desired to correct these Errata's, (with some others) which
were occasioned by the Printer, by reason of the absence of the Author.

Page 96. line 11. after matter, read no, p. 109. l. 23. for serrini, r.
Jeremy, p. 116. l. 14. for next, r. text, p. 117. l. 18. for even, r. ever, p.
128. l. 3. for lest, r. last, and l. 23. after self, r. for, and l. 25. for
thus, r. this.

FINIS.

