To ISRAEL MAYO, Esquire, and ELIZABETH his Wife, of the County of Hartford.
My Excellent Friends,
IN the days of old time, Religious Men did set up Stone Monuments, in the
places where they received extraordinary Mercies. That custom obtains not in
Christian practice. Otherwise I had hastened to Build one in your delicious
Bayford place. In your Bethel there, and my Children's Bethlehem. The House of
their Bread for a long time. Bread, blessed to be the Staff of a very sinking
and almost hopeless life in one of them.

A Paper Memorial I have thought better than none. And do hereon inscribe my
acknowledgments unto the Father of Mercies, and to your selves his Instruments.
Blessed be God, and blessed be you from God! Amen and Amen! Unto the divine
Grace, be Sacrifices of praise for ever. Unto your selves, be the Joy of a good
Foundation against the time to come! The Holy Ghost so names your works of
Beneficence; or as some Critics construe it, a Bill of Contract; by virtue
whereof you have your final Judge made your Debtor, and the Day of Judgment
ensured to be the Day of Payment. The Hebrews do call Alms by the name of Salt,
for its preserving and sweetning power. And the great Alphonsus used to say,
that he kept the very things he bestowed. Implying, that, by honoring God with
his substance, he did not Alienate it, but Confirm his Propriety, in it. By
your liberal things toward me devised, I am made a witness of your sacred
Unanimity. May your reward be great, pressed down, shaken together, and running
over.

Of this Discourse whereto I have prefixed your Names, I have many ways
expressed my humble thoughts. That great Man, whose weighty ones follow in his
Letter unto me here annexed, is the only one from whom I have received much
light in the Argument. I never heard one Sermon hereof; nor read many Lines,
except in a Chapter of his Life of Faith. A Chapter worthy to be written in
Cedar, and to be read as long as Letters last. And if I could have given to my
Friends, half the number of those Chapters, that I can of these Sermons, I
should not have now sent them abroad, after so many Months confinement in my
Closet. I think I should have let them pass through no more Honor and
Dishonor, good Report and evil Report, than had fallen upon them in the
Preaching. Of your candid acceptance, I have no doubt in my Breast; and
therefore make no needless entreaties for its welcome in your House.

My great Benefactors, My daily Prayers ascend for your Persons, and your
numerous and lovely Branches. Prayers, that all the Treasures of Divine Love
may be the reward of your Families Love unto mine. That you may, all, be
reaping to Eternity, the Kindnesses you have vouchsafed to the Apples of my
Eye. And that all the days of your Lives, your Treasures, Hearts, Companions
and Conversations, may verily be where this Discourse directs them! That, as
your selves, your Children may become, all of them, eminent instances of the
possibility of Camels running through the Needles Eye; of Rich Folks entering
the Kingdom of Heaven. That if your long Prosperity abide, it may not slay, or
so much as wound you. And if Adversity do overtake, it may never overcome you.
Finally, That the least of Christ's Ministers that have obtained Mercy to be
Faithful, may be made no unprofitable Servant to your holy Joy of Faith. Even

Your true Honourer, and very thankful Servant in Christ Jesus, Daniel Burgess.
From my Study in Bridges street in Covent Garden, Aug. 28. 1690.
Mr. Baxter's Letter to the Author concerning this Discourse.
SIR,
THough you sent me your M. S. as if it were to know my thoughts of it, I am
ready to conjecture that you did it in Charity, to be a help to a ^anguishing
dying Man: And I must ^ay that I have long found a great deal ^f benefit, by
the Exercise of the Duty which you press: But you have ^one it so very well for
matter and ^anner, as I hope will much add to ^he pleasing ascent of my
Affections. (...) have long supposed that God (though ^very where equally in his
Essence, ^et not equally working every where, and on all things) does first
operate usually on the highest Creatures, that are likest him in excellency,
and by them on the lower, and so to the lowest: And that, accordingly, to the
ascent of the lowest there must be some advantage given by those next them.
Though we are unacquainted with the causality of most of the superior mediate
Causes, except those whose knowledge is necessary to our Duty. As we know that
there is one Mediator between God and Man, whose Office and Honor no Creature
must invade; so we know that he uses variety of inferior means, Angels and
Men, Apostles, Ambassadors, Rulers, Ordinances, and many below these.

And they that will have nothing but God immediately, will have none of God: To
set God against second Causes natural or gracious, is to set him against his
own Work, his Wisdom and his Will, and that is to set him against his own Glory
and Himself; I never believed that he that praises an excellent Fabric, does
thereby dishonor the Builder: And he that said, As my Father sent me, so send
I you, and he that hears you hears me, did not thereby set up so many
Antichrists, nor dishonor himself.

Far be it from us to ascribe any of Gods Prerogative to any Creature. Justin
Martyr says, He would not have believed Christ himself, if he had Preached any
but the true and only perfect God. But infiniteness even of Perfection
overwhelmeth us if our Thoughts approach him not by a Mediator, of whom as in
our nature we have more familiar thoughts: And certainly Christ would not have
us pretend to glorify him as separated from his Church: The Glory of the New
Jerusalem was showed John in its particulars, for the exercise of his Faith,
and the raising of his Desire, Hope and Joy. Christ is not there solitary, nor
would so be thought of. To sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is part of
the promised Felicity.

Some men think they dishonor Heaven, and Saints, if they describe not their
Perfection, too like to that of God himself; and set not Man above Man, yea
above Angels; yea some Deifie Souls on Earth it self, feigning their Spirits as
distinct from Soul and Body, to be Specifically Essentiated, by the Essence of
God himself, or as others of the second and third Persons in the Trinity, which
they say are the Prime Emanant Life and Matter, and this not only as the
Efficient, but Constitutive Cause. A Heaven of men's own feigning, will be no
Heaven.

Though you know who (Mr. F.) corrects me for thinking that there is
Repentance in Heaven, I am so far from thinking otherwise, that I dare not pray
for to be freed from repenting there. A Heaven consistent with an Everlasting
penitent sense, that I sinned, and thereby needed a Savior, Mercy and
Forgiveness, exciting me to the joyful praises of him that Redeemed us, and
washed us from ^ur sins in his Blood, such a Heaven ^ill satisfy my hopes. I
believe that ^ll Sin and Curse shall be done away; ^ut I think such a
Repentance is neither Sin nor Curse.

As I live in almost continual thoughts (...) Heaven, so the remembrance of
^ultitudes of my old holy Acquaintance, (...) seldom left out of these
thoughts. and there are few sleeping nights in which I dream not of some or
other of them.

And, if it be a weakness, I will ^nfess it to you, that I have much ado (...)
think but some shame with confes^on will accompany me, when I first ^eet any
there that I have been unkind (...), or wronged; and that will know ^y faults
better than here they did; and that I shall ask them forgiveness: (...) which I
know being forgiven by Christ they will soon grant.) I sup^ose you have read or
heard of my Dear and Holy Friend Dr. Drake's Letter to Mr. Love before his
Execution. I go not so far; but with my^ thanks for your excellent Books, I
tel^ you, that waking and sleeping, living, and I hope dying, I cannot spare in
my Meditations of Heaven, the pleasant familiar thoughts of my Acquaintance
gone before, with all the blessed Body of Christ.

With such thoughts is passing, your unworthy Brother* Rich. Baxter.
Aug. 21. 1690.
Men and Brethren,
THE Supreme Lord has wonderfully distinguished men, in the condition of
Living. But all are equal in ^^e necessity of Dying.

David, a King, proclaimed him^^f a Worm. And alas! we see and ^el it, The
Prophets do not live for ^er. Though, blessed be God, our great ^rophet dies no
more; but is with ^s Church to the end of the ^orld. The best of the Church
^ust be taken out of the World. ^racious Persons must Die to be ^ved; as
Graceless ones must Die (...) be Damned.

The Churches Angels be not im^ortal. Mr. HENRY HURST was ^t; for God has taken
him. You ^ow this good Man is fallen. You know it; you have, and you do stil^
bewail it. So Samuel died, and a^ the Israelites were gathered together^ and
lamented him.

Many of you have heard a ver^ seasonable and useful Sermon preached at his
Funeral in this pla^^ And many more would have hea^ it, if the Place had been
lar^ enough to receive them. All of yo^ if I mistake not, are melted into (...)
good disposition for another Se^mon on the same Subject. And (...) Esteem for
him, and Affection (...) your selves, have inclined me to gi^ you this.

An Impulse is fallen on me, ((...) weak as I am) to undertake a thi^ very great
herein. Even, to raise t^ Dead. To raise again this h^ Man, and very many more.
(...) raise them in a very good sen^ and unto very good service. Bett^ than it
would be, if I could fet^ back their Souls from Abraham bosom, and their Bodies
from t^ Earth's bowels. Plainly Sirs, I assay in this Sermon, to raise of our
blessed Brother, and of other glorified Brethren, though not the Lovely PERSONS,
yet the holy FAITH, the heavenly CONVERSATION, and the victorious END, Egress,
or Going forth thereof into Glory. And all these, for your Instruction and
Encouragement unto Faith and Holi^ness.

I have found a Text, apt, (like the Archangel's Trumpet,) thus to raise the
Dead, and change the Quick. To raise Dead Saints, and make more Lively the
Living ones. A Text, which if I handle not and you hear not amiss, will do it.
For it is the King of Heaven's Mandate given for the raising of them. And I
will be bold to ^ay, If the mighty work be not done, ^tis because of our
unbelief.

Heb. 13.7. (...).

Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word
of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation: Or
rather thus,

Remember your Guides who have spoken unto you the Word of God whose Faith
follow, considering the End (Escape, or Issue) of their Conversation.


I am of his mind, who has said; This Epistle to the Hebrews is as serviceable
to the Church as the Sun is unto the World. But I will confine my present
discourse to this stricture of it, which is my Text* The sacred Writer is here
pressing unto Perseverance in the Faith, Worship, and Obedience of the Gospel.
For promoting the same, he prescribes a duty, of which our Pulpits have been
too silent, and your Pews too ignorant, if I rightly judge. The duty of
recalling to mind Departed Ministers; adding spiritual, mental Converse with
Dead ones, unto At^endance upon Living ones. Making use of Comprehensors, as
well as of ^iators; of Teachers glorified, as well ^s of Teachers but
imperfectly san^tified.

And of these, four things are re^uired,

1. Remembrance of their Persons.

2. Imitation of their Faith.

3. Consideration of their Conver^ation.

4. Consideration of the End and ^ictorious Issue of that their Conver^ation.

These are required, for the ex^ellent and important End aforesaid. ^f these,
the Connection is too plain (...) be insisted on. For, the Imitation of the
Faith of any, does evidently enough require the honorable Memory of their
Persons. We have no Power to follow forgotten steps. Nor Will, to tread in any,
but those of reverenced Feet. And this latter, as evidently requires the
former. For Reason admits us not to Honor, or give our selves trouble to
Remember such, after whom we think not fit to walk. That were to be absurdly
prodigal of our Mind^ and Memories. Nor needs it be said, either how necessary
it is that we consider first what men's Conversation is, before we consider what
it^ blessed End is. Or how requisite i^ is unto our Imitation of the Faith o^
Believers, that we have the motiv^ considerations, of the gracious Conversation
in which it did begin, an^ of the glorious Victory, in which i^ did end. For
how useless to you^self were your most perfect Knowledge of Heaven's Glory, if
you could have it without a competent unde^standing of the Work, whose Reward
^t is? And, who would take care to ^ook much upon the Penny, before ^^e had
took good cognizance of the ^abour in the Vineyard, whereof it is ^he wages? We
must know the Race, before we can or shall list much to heed the Garland. And
^ruly, till we see the difficulties of ^he Race, to be run thorough by ^others;
and the glories of the Gar^and put upon their heads; we have ^ut little heart
to Engage in the ^ne, or Expect the other for our selves. Well it were, if by
sight of ^oth we were duly animated.

The substance of the Text I shall ^abour to present in three orderly
Positions; scil.

P. 1. Godly Ministers, when Dead, ^ught not to be Buried in Oblivion.

P. 2. Their holy Faith and Conversation, ought to be considered and fol^owed.

P. 3. Consideration of their Conquest and Escape out of all their Difficulties
here below, is a very necessary motive to our imitation of their holy Faith and
Life.

I begin with the first.

P. 1. Godly Ministers, when Dead, must not be Buried in Oblivion.
My Text expressly commands the contrary. Remembrance of them, Natural and
Moral, is here required. Naturally, we remember those whom we often call to
mind, think of, and speak with our selves concerning them. For, thinking is
nothing but speaking with our selves. Thoughts be the words of our hearts.
Morally, we remember such as we do congruously speak of with our selves. I mean
agreeably to their worth; and suitably to the proper End of our commemorating
them. This Moral remembrance, without the Natural, is impossible; and the
Natural without this Moral, is at least vain and idle. Remember your Guides, is
in effect thus much; Multiply honorable and affectionate thoughts concerning
them. Thoughts proper and apt to praise the Gifts and Graces of God in them,
and to promote the same in your selves.

Our English Translation renders (...) as a Participle of the present tense:
The Syriac, Arabic, Vulg. Lat. and Rhemists; Calvin and Grotius, and (of our
own Writers) Doctor Owen and Bishop Lloyd so take it.
But I rather conceive it a Noun Substantive in this place; because the Apostle
speaks of such as had been Rulers; not such as continued to be so. He seems to
intend the Apostles, Evangelists, and all ordinary Pastors who had led and
ruled them by God's holy word; and were now ^t rest from their Labors, and
en^oying their Reward. These, he commands to be remembered; but not with any
Heathenish or Popish Celebrations. These, without the ^east particular
deference unto St. Peter; or any ambitious pretending Successors of his. These,
with a ve^^y apparent exclusion of all the Tribes, that take on them to Rule
without speaking the Word of the Lord. All, that Preach not, o^ Preach another
Gospel.

But, be it here observed; it is not only or principally, as Ministers but as
Members of Jesus Christ, tha^ we are charged to remember these departed ones
aforesaid. Their Ministry of the Word, is indeed considered as an Engagement
unto the required Remembrance. But it i^ their Faith, their holy Conversation
and the glorious End of both, tha^ are proposed as specially obligativ^
thereunto. Insomuch as my Tex^ may well admit a comprehension of all
Christians, that have fought the good fight, kept the Faith finished their
Course, and received their Crow^ I mean, of such, as, though they were never
called to the distinct Office o^ the Ministry, yet in all manner of ho^^
Conversation, have ministered unt^ our Faith and Joy; as all seriou^ practical
Christians do. And, (...) whom after their Dissolution, we may assert the
things foresaid, in Hope and Charity; (It being not for mortal Worms, to
conclude peremptorily, who do enter the heavenly Mansions.) I shall therefore
confirm the Doctrine proposed, as so far extended. And advance Considerations
which do very convincingly prove thus much; scil. That godly Ministers and
Christians, when they are Dead, ought so to be remembered as we have foresaid.

C. 1. Your reasonable Nature binds you to remember your godly Ministers and
Friends deceased. It binds you to converse most in your thoughts with the most
noble Objects. But of ^ll Creatures, excepting the blessed Angels, these are
the most excellent. They are so in themselves, and so in our Opinion, or rather
your Faith. When they were in the Body, you ^^ought them pieces of Heaven, of
whom the World was not worthy. You ^alled them the excellent of the Earth; and
all your delight was in them How readily did you break from other Company, put
off any dispensable Business, and undertake Journeys, otherwise tedious, to
solace your hearts with their Converse (...) And are they now grown worse for
their very Perfection? Are they les^ Lovely for their being in Glory? B^ they
therefore fallen in your esteem because they are advanced unto Heaven? The nearer
they be unto their Lord and yours, the farther must they be from all kind
thoughts of yours? What hinders, that you cannot more delightfully visit them
now when all that is delightful fill them? That you cannot follow them to no
worse a Country, than you profess your selves seeking; and n^ more remote,
than that you have your Conversation in, if you an^ true Israelites.

It is full as easy to think of (...) friend at the Indies, as at next doo^
And of your friends that be in the house made without hands, as those that be
in any house of your own here ^elow. Wherefore, your own Minds, if you
inhumanely resist not their Light and Law, will be a^cending unto these Stars
in Glory. And that as naturally as the sparks ^y upward. Or as Men, (impatient
^f herding with Creatures that live ^ut an Animal Sensitive life,) do ^esort
for their pleasure unto the ^ossessors of their own more noble Nature. And most
Industriously unto such of them, as are of most ^nspicuous Goodness.

C. 2. Your gracious Love of God ^nds you to Remember your godly Mi^sters and
Friends deceased. Love, which is all Religion, is of all things ^e most
Imperious. And, of all ^ings to be named, does most com^and those Legions of
ours which are ^^dest to be Governed, our thoughts. ^endures not wilful
Ignorance, or ^^^getfulness of it is Object. It has ^en named very justly, the
matchless Art of Memory. Ubi Amor, ibi^ Oculus. If the Love of God prevail in
your Hearts, it will carry your Minds, and keep them where he is* It will turn
the stream of your cogitations, and hold them toward Heaven. The Heaven, in
which He is not without his Children with Him. Without the Souls of the ju^^
made perfect; who behold his face i^ Righteousness, and are satisfied with his
Likeness. Every one exulting in that triumph about Him, My God i^ mine and I am
His. And is it possible, think you, to Love this Father and not Love these
Children of His to Converse with Him, and to forget them! with a neglectful
Obliv^on of them, to hold an acceptabl^ Communion with him!

The beloved Disciple tells us un^^mitedly, concerning all his Family on Earth
as well as Heaven; Eve^ one that loves him that begat, love^ him also that is
begotten of Hi^ 1 John 5.1. But what Children of h^ can we Love, if we Slight
the very best He has! And do then regard them ^east, when we conclude them to
have most of his Image, Likeness, and Complacence.

C. 3. Your continued Relation unto godly Ministers and Friends deceased, ^inds
you to the Remembrance of them.

Sirs, you have been often charged ^ot to look upon your selves too
^bstractedly; but to consider your ^elves as Members of a Community. All the
World, is, naturally, but ^ne Man and Woman's Children. The Church above and
below, is but one Family. Besides, as you cannot be ^gnorant; the great Lord of
this ^amily has pleased, yet nearer to ^yn you, and those ^ speak of. To ^ut
you in particular endearing Re^^tions unto them. Your Ministers, ^ow in glory,
were, some of them, our Fathers, and begat you in Christ. Others were your
Nurses, and fed and nourished you in his ^aith, after your New Birth. Your
godly Friends, were (full often) the Ministers of God for good unto you, in
things Temporal and Spiritual. Brethren, you were all; Companions, and mutual
Benefactors: serving one another in love. Now fain I would know, what you
think! Does such Relation signify little or nothing? Or, if it does, was the
Relation, and it is Obligations too, dissolved at their Death? In the language
of Practice, too many do so speak; but you cannot so think. What! Does Death
separate from God and Christ? Away with that frightful thought! Dead Saints be
God's Friends. He calls Abraham his Friend, many hundred years after his
decease. Dead Saints be Christ's Friends also. He says concerning dead
Lazarus, Our Friend sleeps. Now, are they still related to God and Christ,
and yet cut off from you? Dreadful imagination! But if, as it is most certain,
the Relation is immortal; and stands in full force, what then? It follows
evidently, that, as sins against Relations be the most aggravated;
forgetfulness of glorified Friends is a sin against everlasting Relations. And
the guilty do in a very ill sense, Forget their own people, and their Father's
house.

C. 4. Your Gratitude binds you to remember godly Ministers and Friends
deceased. The Apostle, and all the Churches of the Gentiles, owed thanks unto
Aquila and Priscilla. And owe you not any unto these, that have been your
Helpers in Christ Jesus? If you do, Contemptuous forgetfulness is a sorry
payment.

Let it not offend, but excite to farther enquiry, such as may doubt the truth
of that which follows.

I cannot but think, that our godly Friends in Heaven do much more Love and
Remember us now, than when they dwelt in this cold and dark World. Their Love
of God is now incomparably greater than before. And why not the Love of all his
Children, proportionably greater? Their Memories now are perfected. And how
then should they forget the Brethren they but lately knew, and delighted in?
Their Souls, by entering Heaven, receive an amplitude that we can little
express. And they can there remember us, without diverting their minds from
God. Yea, and be it heeded well; their Enjoyment of God above, as ours here
below, does not only Admit, but Require, affectionate thoughts of his Children.
Our Prayers here are amiss, if in them we forget our Brethren above, (as shall
be afterward shown!) And their praises above would be amiss if in them they
forgot us, their Brethren below. The reason is obvious; the King of Glory will
be honored and loved, by the honor and love of his Servants, for his sake.
And gives law unto those in Heaven and Earth too, that they love each other as
themselves. Those in Heaven, do fully observe it. The greater is our sin and
shame, that we are so little won by their admirable kindness: For,

Upon the supposition of this their kindness and mindfulness of us, this will
be granted by all; To be unthankful, is to be ungodly. And they are the most
ungrateful Creatures on the Earth, who live forgetful of their Friends in
Heaven. Being that ingratitude unto the greatest Lovers of us, is the worst
that is possible to be in us.

C. 5. Your Character binds you to remember your Godly Ministers and Friends
deceased. You are Believers, are ye not? If so, the Spirit, that can neither be
deceived nor deceive, describes you as persons Come up unto the Spirits of just
men made perfect. Heb. 12.22, 23. Believers, while they are in the State
Militant, are took into the Society of their Brethren in the State Triumphant.
They are come unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem. They are
made free Denizons and spiritual possessors of it; their Conversation is in it.
They are come to the innumerable Company of Angels, in that City. Not to this
or that particular Tutelar Angel, but to the whole Company. Not come to them,
with their Prayers, as is the way of Romish Idolaters, who wildly worship the
Servants, to the reproach of the Lord. And against the Servants own holy Will.
Worship me not, says the Angel to St. John; I am thy fellow Servant and of thy
Brethren. They are come to the Angels Society; who are gathered into that one
Body, whereof Christ is the head. They are become Fellow Members with them, and
have a Communion in service with them. Angels rejoice in their good, and
minister to it; and they rejoice in Angels Blessedness and Glory. Nor is this
at all Incredible, or Wonderful, if it be considered that they are come unto
the very Lord of the foresaid City. Unto God the judge of all. Come into a
state of Filial favor with Him. Have Access unto him, and the Throne of his
Grace, with sweetest liberty and boldness. By means whereof, they come also to
the Spirits of their Brethren made perfect. Being admitted thus to their
Father, they are admitted unto all their so dignified Brethren about his
Throne. They are come to the Spirits of the just made perfect. The Dream of
Spirits of just men departed, and not made perfect; but sent to Purgatory to be
refined; was never in the Apostle's Head. He knew none but perfect. And unto
the Society of all such, he declares Believers access. Unto them, Believers,
all, come. Not, ^s to Objects of their Worship and Invocation, or Mediators of
Intercession. That were wretched Blasphemy toward God, and Injury unto them.
They come to them in way of Friendship and Communion with them. With them, who
in their separate state from their own Bodies, do hold Communion with God, and
Christ, and all his Mystical Body. With Christ's Members on Earth, as truly as
those above in Heaven with them. Loving, and loved of all. A learned Man's
words upon this Text, are memorable. We are said here to come unto the Spirits
of ju^^ men made perfect, in those actings (...) our minds wherein Evangelical
Communion does consist. And this require^ that there be like actings in them
without which there can be no suc^ Communion!

This being supposed; what mus^ we conclude of Souls estranged from their godly
Friends departed? Wh^^ very rarely afford unto perfected Spirits, one serious
and steady look o^ their thoughts. Who are far from taking it for their Duty,
and making it their practice, to have the^ in their minds. And in the
affectionate Memory, due unto such a Society. The least we can say is this:
^uch Christians do foully blot their ^ames, and fall short of their Cha^acter,
and live not up to their Estate and Dignity.

C. 6. Your Faith binds you to remember your godly Ministers and friends
deceased. I had almost said, (...) necessitates you. But of that, ^dge ye your
selves, when you have ^onsidered what follows. Faith, ^ou must needs know, is
the evidence of Persons, as well as of Things, ^ot seen; not seen by Eyes of
Clay. ^t were a sorry business, if it were not (...). For it is only for the
sake of Persons, that we do or ought to va^e any sort of Things. But it is out
^f question; the Eye of Faith sees Him that is Invisible, Heb. 11.27. ^he Life
of Faith, is fellowship and Communion with the Divine Persons, 1 John 1.3. Say
then, I ^eseech you; Can Faith see the Father of Spirits, and hold Communi^n
with the Father and Son; and not with them that stand continually before his
Face, and neares^ his Throne? The same Eyes of Flesh that see the King, see his
Attendant^ that surround him. Why should not the same Eyes of Faith see th^^
Spiritual King, and his Attendants King's Children at greatest distance use to
have considerable Acquaintance and Friendship with the nea^ est in their
Father's Court. Wha^ should hinder yours with your glorified Brethren, if
indeed you have it with their Father in Heaven.

Let me tell you, Sirs; the Go^ of Heaven, is a Lord of most numerous Hosts.
The Father of Spirits is not to be conceived of, as Childless. Nor the King of
Glory, as sitting on a Throne solitary. Or dwelling in a thin Court. There is
n^ such God in Heaven, as is without his thousands, and ten thousand time ten
thousand Spirits ministering unt^ Him. And, all, as spectable, as visible unto
Faith, as He himself. Al^ so near unto him, that one would ^hink it impossible
to see Him, and ^ot see Them. All so like to Him, and so beloved by Him, that
con^empt of them is no small contempt ^f Himself.

The plain Inference then, is this. The Faith of living Saints fails, before
their Memory of the dead ones ^oth so. And the reason why we ^o not more by
Faith live with them, (...) because we do not by Faith live ^ore upon God. For
a right Remembrance of Him, is inconsistent with the Forgetfulness of them, so
^ear unto Him!

C. 7. Your Interest binds you to Remember your godly Ministers and Friends
deceased. The interest of ^our Grace, and the interest of your Peace and
Comfort does bind you.

The Interest of your Grace. Need ^ou be told the Efficacy of Company? You have
your glorified friends in ^our company, as often as you have them in thoughtful
memory. And of such their company, great is the double force: To wit, the
Natural and the Institutive. For, naturally we follow admired Examples. There Is
not one mind of a thousand, but receives impressions from them; just as Wax
receives the figure of an applied Seal. Besides God has ordained a
Communication of Qualities, from chosen Associates. He that walks with the
wise, shall be wise. God has promised illapses of their Wisdom, into them that
choose and hold their Communion. It cannot be therefore, but we must derive into
us their heavenly Dispositions, if in our thoughts we converse much with our
heavenly Friends. We must derive of their Love of God, Contempt of this World,
etc.

The Interest of your Peace and Comfort, does no less oblige you. That which
serves your Grace, does in so doing serve your Peace. But not alike, all. Nor
scarcely any thing so immediately and sensibly, as ^leep and pious thoughts of
glorified Friends. Which will soon be but of question, if you use but a ^ittle
consideration. If you think a ^ittle, what a refreshment it must ^e to be took
now and then out of ^n Hospital of sick and crying Souls ^r a Bedlam of mad and
ranting ^nes, into an house wherein all are ^erry and wise. Alas! what is this
World, but a mad Bedlam? What is ^he Church on Earth, but a very Hospital,
wherein no one is perfectly tured? What is Heaven, but the College of all
Souls without sin or sorrow? To retire in our minds from ^he Bedlam and
Hospital, into this College. To leave a while the objects of our Grief, and go
and entertain our thoughts with them who have none but of Joy. No words ^an
picture forth the sweetness of ^his: Which is then always, and ^hen only known,
when tried. I mean, solemnly; not in slight and ^nelaborate thoughts.

They are therefore their own Enemies, who bury in forgetfulness their deceased
godly Friends. They rob themselves of not the least means of Grace and Peace:
Wrong their own Souls, and that in their greatest Concerns. Averting from so
sovereign a course, both to Refine and Revive them.

C. 8. Your God's Commands bind you to remember your godly Ministers and
Friends deceased. In my Text he commands, as you have heard, Heb. 6.12. He
commands you to be followers, imitaters, of them; and consequently (I hope) to
remember them. For Copies forgotten can by no means be imitated; or used for
Examples, as is required, Jam. 5.10. All the Texts that set forth the state of
departed Saints, have so many commands going with them of your Remembrance
contended for. You cannot think, that God leaves you at liberty, whether you
will take and improve his Revelations, or no. Or, that any holy improvement can
be made of the same, while left in Oblivion. Waving all others, I will singly
propose that one Text more, which I conceive ^xtraordinary.

Heb. 12.1. Seeing we also are ^ompassed about with so great a cloud ^f
Witnesses; let us lay aside every ^eight, and the sin which does easily ^eset
us, and let us run with patience ^he Race that is set before us. Belie^ers, are
here compared to men ^nning a Race. They are exhorted ^o the means of running
it, so that ^hey may obtain the prize: To wit, ^y laying aside weights, and
sins, and ^xercising Patience with Diligence. ^hey are encouraged so to run
also. ^ncouraged by Witnesses given them; a cloud, or great number of them; and
this number placed ^und them, encompassing of them. ^hese Witnesses, are the
Saints gone before us to Heaven. Their Testi^ony is either of that which we do,
or of that which we ought to do. As in the Races to which the Apostle alludeth;
those that did run used to have many Friends looking on them; and encouraging
them; by testifying, either that thus they had done, or thus and thus they
might and ought to do. In like manner, all the Saints above, do as it were
stand looking on us. Not in proper Speech, or intuitively; we have no such
Dream. But upon Scripture-record, they do still stand round about us. And are
by their Examples, for that purpose recorded; encouraging us in our Christian
race. Ready to testify, how we acquit our selves. Though dead, yet they in a
sort see, speak, and testify. By their richly rewarded Duties, they testify
to the wisdom of our most costly ones. Those for which we are thought to be
beside our selves; and are most inhumanly dealt with by our Adversaries. They
are ready also to testify what may be done in every case, by us. Principally
this; that Faith will carry sound Believers through all their Duties and
Dangers. Upon many occasions we fall into ^ontest with our selves, and dispute,
what is best. To go back, or to go ^n. And in a Wood, and lost, we ^re. Now
these holy blessed Friends of ours encompass us. And their ^erdict they do from
the Holy Scripture History give us. Testifying still against the frauds of all
Temptations; against the folly of all our distract^ng fears; and unto the Duty,
Safe^y, and sure Victory of persevering Faith. By consequence it must be the
Will of God, that, in all our Trials, we ever and anon consider the Eyes of
these excellent Persons thus upon us. And their Testimony, as has been said;
that is ever upon the side of our Duty. That we do so consider and lay this to
Heart, as to turn it unto our motive encouragement. And a provocation to put
forth the utmost of our Spiritual strength. Whereby alone we can answer the
gracious End of God, in vouchsafing unto us this encompassing Cloud, and
encouraging one.

In short; God's Preceptive Will makes a perfect Necessity. And this his Will
is revealed, for the remembrance of Saints deceased! So that his Fear cannot be
duly before your Eyes, when these Persons are not duly kept in your minds.

C. 9. Your God's promises do bind you to remember your Godly Ministers and
Friends deceased. Know ye not, that he has promised an honorable and lasting
Memory unto his righteous Servants! And that Memory to be among your selves;
the only persons Qualified to bear it. Now his promises speak that Will of his,
that is the Rule of yours. If you Consent not to it, you Oppose your God. If
you but Consent to it, with an Unoperative and Ineffectual Will; (Sola voluntas
est cadaver, Scalig.) that is, as if you Consented not. If you Consent
entirely, you remember those we speak of with sweet memory. And by that
Practice ye fulfill the divine Promise. Add hereto; God has honored this
gracious Practice, with considerable Promises unto such as hold it. The very
promise of dwelling in his holy Hill, is made unto such as honor them that
fear Him. And it is a wonderful mistake, if any think it made to such as honor
them, but for term of life. Such as honor them here, as the Excellent of the
Earth; but cease to honor them at all, when God honors them most; taking them
to Heaven as ^udged to be too good for this World. ^f this Promise then be a
cord of Love, wherewith God draws us to ^he Honor and Love of the Saints in
Light; as well as of the Household of Faith; what must be inferred! They break
it daringly, (do they not!) as many as Love and Honor Saints, but unto their
Deaths. Accounting themselves to have don their last Office indeed, when the
have followed their Corpse unto the grave's side. Giving the grave the Victory
over all their regards unto them.

C. 10. Lastly, Your own Prayer and Promises bind you to remembe^ your Godly
Ministers and Friends deceased. A word shall serve in the plain Argument.

You pray that Gods will may (...) done by you and by others on Earth, (...)
it is done in Heaven. As there it (...) done, by all the Spirits about the
Celestial Throne. But how pr^phanely must you thus pray, without some very
lively thoughts c^ those Spirits, and of their Obedience? Without which it is
as if yo^ prayed plainly, that his will may b^ done by you like you know not
whom and as to manner, you mind n^^ how.

Your Prayers all, are full of vi^tual promises. Praying that yo^ may, you do
constructively promise that you will labor, to obey God as the Heavenly Host
do. Consequently, that you will well consider them, and their performances.
Even with the accuracy and frequence of those, who set themselves to imitate
greatest Exemplars. And is it a trivial thing in your sight, to lie unto God!
And that in your very prayers! Or do you not so, if you exercise not your minds
in the foresaid consideracy of your glorified Friends.

Other considerations might be added; but I will hope, what is said has
enforced your Belief; and raised in you full purposes, of Obedience, unto this
Truth.

Granting that it has so done, some may ask, what will the Belief and
Obedience of it make for Edification. Urging, that this remembrance of Godly
Ministers and Friends deceased, is a subject they have rarely heard preached.
And, notwithstanding all the caution wherein it is expressed, it is one very
liable to be abused unto Superston, etc.

I answer. If indeed it be a Trut^ the less it has been insisted on, the more
it ought now to be insisted or And must not be kept from all People, for fear
it should be abused b^ some. I have convincingly prove it to be a Truth. And
one, who^^ faith and regular Obedience contr^butes more than a little unto the
love of God; unto the life of Faith unto all Grace and Consolation. which I
must believe, is to Edify. Never theless, I acknowledge it is use unt^
Edification, to be more manifeste^ in the sequel of this Discours^ Wherein are
set forth those hol^ things, whereunto the foresaid R^ membrance is an
Antecedent, bot^ most Conducive and Necessary.

Wherefore I will but briefly suggest a few Inferences from this fir^^
Doctrine, and proceed unto a second.

I. 1. The best of this World, must ^ave it. In Death's War there is no
Discharge. The Prophets and Apostles ^re dead. John the beloved Disci^le, is
not left behind.

It was the advice of a Heathen; Reckon your best friends as least dura^e
things. And it is the Sentence ^f holy Scripture, the Body is dead because of
Sin, Romans 8.10.

I. 2. God honors them in their Deaths, that honor him in their lives. and
that here, where they have ho^oured Him. For, as He commands ^^e Church above,
honorably to receive them; So Chrysostom Clem. Vatablus. Menoch. and Lud. de
Dieu (in loc.) construe the Text.
He commands ^e Church below, hono^^bly to remember 'em. ^e will have their
^ames shine here, as ^ell as their Souls ^ere. Abel, so long ago murdered,
(...) to this day most honorably men^^oned, Heb. 11.4. (...). Being dead, he
is yet spo^en of, with renown immortal.

I. 3. Every Believer has a Jacob 's Ladder. I mean, he has that, whereby he
can in his Thoughts ascend the Heavens; and Spiritually view his glorified
Ministers an^ Friends there. In his mind he ca^ see where they are, what they
are, and what they are doing, (as we shall hereafter show.)

I. 4. Sorrow for godly men deceased ought to be moderate. For we are t^
remember them honorably, and for imitation; not scandalously, to o^^
distraction. True, we may, a^^ ought to mourn. When Lazaru^ died; Jesus wept.
But we may n^^ sorrow unmixedly, and as without Hope. The Israelites mourned
n^^ so much for Jacob, as the Egyptia^^ did. The grief of Saints, mu^^ know its
bounds.

I. 5. Although God be to be remembered by us principally, he is not to (...)
remembered only. For he command^ us to remember his and our ho^^ Friends, that
are in glory attendin^ him. Remember your Father; but ^orget not his Children,
who carry ^ost of his Image and Likeness on them. Remember your Redeemer; ^ut
forget not those his Redeemed, ^n whom his Love and Power shine with greatest
Luster. Remember ^our Sanctifier; but forget not his most Sanctified ones.

I conclude with a saying of one ^cquainted with God above thou^ands: He never
knew a heavenly ^onversation, that pretending to know God alone, has no
converse with his ^oly ones that attend Him; and does ^ot live as a Member of
their Society ^n the City of God; that does not with ^ome delight behold their
Holiness, ^nity and Order. But, as it is time, (...) proceed to my next
Observa^^ion.

D. 2. The holy Faith and Conversation of godly Ministers and Friends deceased,
must be considered and followed.
So the Text, in terms most plai^ Follow their Faith; to wit considere^ by you.
And that Comma, cons^dering the end of their Conversation imports evidently a
command to follow it. For the sake of these, wa^ the remembrance of their
Persons fore required. Which, without th^^ use of their Faith and Conversatio^
would be to little purpose. B^ it considered therefore strictly;

1. What this Faith is.

2. What this Conversation. And

3. What the Reasons for our considering and following both.

1. Faith is considered as Objectively taken, or Subjectively. A the first, it
is the truth of the Go^pel by them held. Viz. 1. The Gospel-History, of the
Primiti^^ Friendship between God and Man of the Enmity raised by the first si^
between them; and of the Reconc^liation made by the Son of God 2. The Gospel
Offer and Invitation of Sinners unto Grace and Salvation ^y a New Covenant; one
of admira^le Promises and most equitable and ^racious Demands. 3. The
Gospel-Rule and Directory for the Worship, and the whole Walk of all embracing
and entering that Covenant. This History they Credited; this Offer ^hey
Accepted; this Covenant they Entered; this Rule they Followed, ^ubjectively
taken, their Faith is that ^race of God in them, whereby ^hey so received the
Gospel. Now ^his grace of Faith, is either general; and so it is their Assent
and Consent unto all God's Revelation as perfect^y true: Or special; as it
relates un^o Christ Jesus, the sum of all God's Revelation; and so it is their
accep^ance of Him in all his Offices, as Teacher, Savior, Ruler. The de^arted
Saints we speak of, had a Faith, which was unto them instead of Possession and
Sight. One that made things said by God, as credible as if they had seen them
with their Eyes. And things promised by God, as comfortable as if they had had
them in their hands. I would be understood of the Truth, only, not of the
degree of Credibility and Comfort. They had also a Faith i^ their Hearts, which
was unto them a Marriage Knot; whereby they joined themselves unto Christ Jesus
in everlasting Covenant. Resigning themselves to him, to be Taught, Saved and
Ruled. Committing themselves to God's saving Mercy lodged in Christ's Hand: And
submitting themselves to God's governing Authority lodged in the same. This
Faith of theirs, in both acceptations, is that which we are to consider and
follow.

Conversation, is the way and course of humane life. Respectively of all
Duties; toward our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier; toward the Church, the
World, and our Selves. And this, as under all Circumstances of our various
Conditions, in our Pilgrimage. The way and course of the Saints we speak of,
was Holy and Exemplary. Through their Faith in Christ working by Love,
purifying their Hearts, conquering the World, and chasing the Devil, they
sincerely and perseveringly glorified God. They held Communion with the Father,
Son, and Spirit, in Faith, Hope and Love; in Worship and Obedience. They loved
the Church as Christ's Body; served it and sympathized with it, as members of
it. The Unregenerate World they pitied, and spent their days in pains and
prayers for it is conversion. Their Hearts, that is, Themselves, they kept with
all diligence; preferring always the man above the Brute, the Soul above the
Body. In a word, their life was an Exercise of Grace; a Warfare against
Corruptions and Temptations; a putting of their Talents to Usury, and
merchandising to and for Heaven. All their days, were Humiliation-days for
their Sins, their Own and their Relations; and Thanksgiving days for their
Mercies and Hopes: They walked after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh. And
this their walk, is that their Conversation, that we are called to eye and to
imitate.

We shall briefly enquire the Reasons for this practice. To wit of our
considering the Faith and Conversation of our glorified Brethren. And of our
setting our selves to transcribe both. Our own vanity, is apt to charge the
Divine Wisdom foolishly, for commanding it. And to ask, Unto what purpose is
this our cost and pains? Being we have the perfect rule of the Gospel, and of
our Savior's own transcendent Example.

St. Austin's word is of great weight. WHY God commands any thing, I need not
trouble my self, He will look to that. Let me ever look well to WHAT he
commands. Whether we see them or no, there are infinite reasons, for every
thing God requires. But yet when those reasons are obvious, their use is rich
and various. Of the Practice foresaid, I shall therefore point out a few such
as are most clear and apparent.

R. 1. This practice unites the upper and lower House of God. The Church above,
and that below. It holds together the Members of the Family in Heaven and upon
Earth. It engages us, to keep eyeing of them. As Scholars of the lower Form,
eye those of the higher whom they must imitate. It even necessitateth the
Household of Faith, to hold great conversation with them that live by Sight.
This is no light reason, with such as consider how God stands for his
Children's Union and Association. Such as has been forespoken of, and
therefore shall have no more here said of it.

R. 2. This Practice doubles our help to the Life of Faith and Holiness. The
Instructions and Precepts of the Gospel are a blessed Help. But not all, that
we need. Who feels it not? After that we have heard our Master's best and
brightest Doctrines, we need our Fellow Servants instructive and motive
Examples. Which are indeed the most instructive Comments to the understanding
of them; and most motive Encouragements unto the obeying of them; as Experience
certifieth. By what is here said, no disgrace is cast upon the Gospel. It Is
merely from our own dullness, that we need superadded Examples. And the shame of
that want, rests singly upon our own Head. While in the mean time, unto God
belongs the glory of the additional Mercy.

Admirable Mercy! For the Gospel shows us but the Duty. But the Example of
deceased Saints shows also the possibility, of living by Faith and in Holiness.
Because, what has been done, may certainly be done again. We are emboldned to
believe we may so live, when we consider others to have lived so. And let it
not startle you, if I say this: Jesus Christ's own Example is (in this one
respect) a much less encouragement, than one of his least and poorest Servants.
For it does not nearly and immediately so teach the possibility of the foresaid
Life, as his Servant's example does. A Soul under Temptation exclaims, that, be
it ever so necessary, it is altogether as impossible, to live by Faith in this
World; and hold a rightly ordered Conversation in such a Catholic Sodom. Go
you and tell him, that the Son of God did live by Faith, and fulfill all
righteousness even in this World. He shall reply upon you, that it is a wild
inference, that he may, because the Son of God did so do. He shall tell you,
Christ had none of his sins in him; and he has little or none of Christ's
strength in his dejected Soul. Christ had all created and uncreated holiness,
and might well overcome World and Devil; but it were a wonder if they should be
overcome by him, a weak and sinful Dust. He shall ask you, what Logic of yours
it is, that thus argues? An Angel slew an hundred thousand Enemies; therefore a
Worm may slay as many. But, on the other hand; tell you this bruised Reed, that
yonder in Heaven be multitudes, and many of his own Acquaintance, that were
Worms as weak as himself; as tempted as himself; and many a time as dejected as
himself; who did, nevertheless, keep the holy Faith, and finish their holy
Course, and win the Crown of Righteousness. What then? Why then you do bind his
contradiction hand and foot; and it is odds but you cast out his despairing
Spirit. To be sure you silence him; and very probably, you make him by and by
to speak Evangelically. And to fall to chiding of his legal self; and
counselling it in David's Rhetoric. Why cast down O my Soul, why disquieted in
me? Trust in God. For I, even I, may yet Praise him who is the health of my
countenance and my God.

And now I ask. Should such a Tower of David, such an Armory as this; whereon
there hang a thousand bucklers and shields, for tempted despondent Souls;
should such a practice suffer disuse? It would be unspeakable loss to the whole
generation of the righteous. But, blessed be his excellent name; He that
delights of bruised Reeds, to make polished Pillars, in his Temple; and of
smoking flax to make burning and shining lights; He is more wise and kind than
to admit it. Glory be to him in the highest.

R. 3. This practice doubles the glory of God, from the Faith and Conversation
of Saints deceased. If I may so speak, God had from themselves one crop, Or
tribute of glory. And would have had it, though no eye but his own, had seen
their Faith and Conversation. Though no mortal man had observed and followed
them. But now, now that Faith and Conversation are not buried in Oblivion; but
are lifted up, and draw men after them; behold a second crop, another tribute
springs up! So fruitful do living Christian's Meditation and Imitation make
them, that it may be said of deceased ones, much like as of Sampson. The
Praises they bring unto their God in their death, be more than they which they
brought in their life.

Can therefore any Lover of God, be without a deep sense, of the reason of this
practice? Or need to be farther told; that he who has made all things for his
glory, has required this practice for the same? Here I must believe that none
are Blind, but those that will not see.

R. 4. This Practice does likewise add unto the joy of Saints deceased. Heaven,
is the element of Joy. There Is less water in the Sea, and light in the Sun,
than Joy in Heaven. But we are generally taught, that the Inhabitants have
various degrees; even after the Resurrection. However it be, it is this only
that I would here propose: viz. Of their Joys in Heaven this must needs be one,
that they did in their measure, glorify God in their day upon Earth. And, if
they have knowledge of it; it must be another Joy, to have their Faith and
Obedience live, and bear fruit, after that they are transplanted. To have their
old Graces and Duties, for many years after, to edify their Brethren and
glorify their Father.

And why we may not conceive them soon to know it, when it is so; let them say
that can! I cannot. With humble submission, I conclude that they are informed
of it, when the matter of their Joy is obtained. Whether the holy Angels give
them notices; or what way they receive the same, I take not on me to determine.
Some have thought, that this is true concerning men Damned. Such whose Errors
are remembered to the diffusing of their enmity and malignity, after their
death; they have proportionable increases of their torment in Hell made,
presently made; and with full significations given of the meritoriously
procuring cause of it. And on the other side, concerning Saints in Heaven, some
have presumed this, viz. That such whose Faith and Holy Life, are commemorated,
etc. made use of to the edification of the Church; they receive like increases
of Joy. As soon made, as the foresaid sinners increases of Torment. Learned men
have thought, Jer. 17.10. to make this way. I the Lord search the heart, I try
the reins, even to give to every man according to his ways, and according to
the FRUIT of his doings; and with full certification of the service that is so,
of grace, rewarded,

I contend not, but, to as many as, with me, do suppose this; (which I think no
one will pretend an ability to disprove;) To such at least I shall think this
reason of good force. Upon the very single account hereof, I dare ask them, Is
there not a cause for the commended Practice? If we on Earth have Power, should
we not have Will, to add to the Joy of our Brethren in Heaven.

R. 5. This Practice of good men, exalts the saving grace of God. Grace unto a
Sinner, is, and will be an eternal Wonder. Saving grace, even most restrainedly
considered, is above all the blessing and praise that can be given it, in the
very state of Glory. Abraham himself, even after the Resurrection, will be
unableadequately to praise the grace of his own Salvation. The grace that took
him out of his misery, and qualified him and brought him unto Glory. That said
to him in his blood, Live. That when he was alive, gave him Life more
abundantly. And when he wa^ Meet, placed him in the inheritan^^ of the Saints
in Light. This grace unto his single Person, will transcen^ all his possible
conception. But le^^ this Grace to him, be considered i^ its just extent. As
saving him, an^ making him an Instrument of savin^ many others. In a sense, the
Fath^^ of thousands of heirs of Salvation An Exemplar unto them. Making his
Faith and Obedience, bless^ means of grace, unto multitude^ Causing generations
to call him blesse^ Using him, when Alive, and al^^ when Dead, as a Co-worker
with Go^ What an addition is this? Thi^ that makes Salvation it self somewh^^
more than it self. Yea much more. As to save a man from death at the Gallows,
and to make a King (...) him, is much. But to proceed an^ to make him the
means, of rais^^ many others unto Thrones is ve^^ much more.

In a word then. Who can wonder that the Grace of God has chose this method!
And engaged us to consider and imitate, the grace of our Friends departed. His
goodness is above the Heavens. And the effects of it, must be like unto it.
Therefore he bestows not Salvation passive, without Active: that is, whom he
saves, he also makes (instrumentally) Saviors. And why! but because he will
praise his grace, and make it like itself. And so be Glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that do Believe. He will leave nothing to be said that
it might have been done for them, that was not done.

R. 6. This Practice is unto all the living, a charm of great sweetness to most
exemplary Faith and Holiness: For what heart will not strain for the purest
faith and most unspotted Life, upon the consideration that God intends it for a
Pattern. And commands all its good, to be eyed and imitated. who will or can
argue otherwise! I am to be a Copy. I will therefore write fair, as for my
Life; and beware of blots and blurs. I am to be a Guide, and be followed. I
will therefore make straight paths to my feet; and dread a false step in
Doctrine or Manners. I am to speak even when I am dead. I will therefore season
with salt every word. And see with great carefulness, that none be found
hurtful, or useless. If Posterity follow me, they shall follow Christ. If they
walk as I, I will see they shall walk as He walked.

A sweet and salutary Reasoning; is it not! And who would have been, without
such a Charm! If any pretend to be so spiritual, that they can perfect holiness
without it; and therefore give God no thanks for it; to speak the mildest thing
that can be said, I think that a great Jealousy of their state, is Godly and
Necessary.

Brevity commands me to offer no more than these few Inferences for application
of this Truth. Disposed minds may easily farther apply it in their own
thoughts, unto its obvious purposes.

I. 1. What garments of praise are Faith and Holiness! Surely incomparable.
Otherwise our Predecessors attire with them, needed not to be so observed, so
followed. The Church i. e. holy believers, are called a Bride beautifully
decked. Their Faith and Holy Life bear the names of Embroidery, Silk, Fine
linen, Silver, Gold, and Jewels. Yea, and are declared to be the End of our
Saviors all-transcending Righteousness imputed unto us. They are therefore
miserably Blind, who are contentedly Naked. And as shamefully Naked, who are
not thus clothed.

I. 2. How many are our Ministers more than the Earth bears! For all our
forerunners unto Heaven abide Ministers still unto us. Their faith and
Holiness, if we are not wanting to our selves, will be our daily Lectures. We
have every day the refusal of them. The King of the Church, for many reasons
aforesaid, requires our use thereof. Who then dares say, that Ministers be
scarce! O that deaf Adders, and dull and slow Hearers of them, were so.

I. 3. What need of Gods mercy have all his family on earth! All are bound to
Remember and Imitate their Brethren in Heaven. Now it is Mercy very great, to
be bound to a practice so beneficial, delightful, and honorable, as this has
been shown to be. And of this mercy, who says that he has no need! again,
it is mercy unspeakable, to be forgiven the neglect of so gracious a Precept. Of
so kind a Prescription against sin and sorrow. And of this mercy, what an
abundance do we all want? I say this upon good warrant; I am jealous that the
generality of true Israelites do need a special abundance. Being as to this
precept, guilty of above ordinary negligence. The Lord grant unto us that we
may find mercy of the Lord in that day; (so the Apostle names the Judgment-day,
though some critical Heads have construed it of another.)

I. 4. How unexpectable is sinless perfection in this World? Hence (...)
looking off, from the forementioned witnesses and patterns to a more perfect
exemplar, Heb. 12.2. Christ the (...), as enduring -- despising -- and (...) as
now set down, and so having perfected his (...), and hence proposed to the
exercised as their example and encouragement, hence (...), proportionate or
analogize your selves to him, as in ver. 3. Christ was indeed the Author -- in
an higher sense, but here I think he is proposed as the most perfect and
encouraging exemplar of, thorough costly and successful faithfulness.
The very Apostles had it not. And this restriction of our imitation unto their
Faith, argues that they had not. And implicitly tells us, that they had Errors
of Judgment, and Practice that we are to Decline, not to follow. In Writing the
Holy Scriptures, they had and professed to have the Holy Ghost's infallible
guidance. But at other times, and to other purposes, they never had it, nor
pretended to it. No, their own Writings record their Mistakes and Miscarriages.
Of the Saints of the Old Testament, there can be little matter of doubt
concerning them, the same thing may be said; and this only shall be added. The
Holy Ghost commends them unto us indeed, for very useful witnesses and
patterns, as has been before shown, Heb. 12.1. But then, as in way of caution
against our Dreams of their Perfection, in the very next verse what does he? He
bids us look off from them all, unto an incomparably more noble and truly
perfect one, (...). Looking off [from them] unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
(or Leader and Perfector) of our Faith. Jesus that had despised the shame,
endured the Cross, and received his blessed (...) or escape out of all his
sufferings; having sit down at Gods right hand. Unto this blessed Jesus, in the
next verse we are instructed to proportionate our selves, as some think the
Greek (...) to signify. Our Nature was sinless under the Sun, in Jesus Christ,
but as to us mere men, it is truly said, Adam lost more Innocence and Purity in
an hour, than his Posterity will recover to the Worlds end.

I. 5. What a reproachful thing, is Universal imitation of the best men! Their
holy Faith and Life is all you are bid to follow. To Swallow their Errors, and
practice their Sins, is what God and they themselves forbid you. And is
imitating or them in the things wherein they were not themselves. But were more
Satan's, than their own men. Wherefore so to do is to comply with Satan, not to
conform unto them. Let it also be considered; that to affect and strain to take
up their (unaffected) Tones, Gestures, Garbs, etc. is to but ape their Humanity
it self. And nothing of an imitation of their Piety. In Children it is
playfulness; in Men it is Childishness, if no worse.

D. 3. Consideration of deceased Ministers and Friends escape, out of all their
sublunary Difficulties, is a necessary motive to the imitation of their Faith
and Life.
The Original word (...) which we render End, is rendered an Escape, 1 Cor.
10.13. Nor does it express a mere End or common Issue of things. But an End
attended with Victory, and deliverance out of things grievous. That the
consideration of Saints that are blessed with such an end, is as it is here
asserted; is by the Apostle plainly declared. Who makes it the motive unto the
imitation that we have ^^ready pressed. His words do evidently import as much
as if he had ^id these following ones. Sirs, it is a hot service I put you
upon. Imitation of departed Saints Faith and Holiness, is no easy business.
African Lions appear in every step of it is way. All the World is in arms
against it. Throwing Firebrands, Arrows, and Death. The Devil and his Angels
raise their Posse, and do their worst. I know your want, and God directs me to
furnish you with a most powerful Encouragement. One, which if you rightly use,
you shall walk undauntedly in your most difficult Duty. You shall Run, and not
faint. The Swords of them that lay at you, shall not hold; neither their
Spears, nor their Darts. Their Arrows shall not make you flee. You shall laugh
at the shaking of their Spears. And this so mighty motive, is Consideration.
Careful and Curious Inspection, reiterated and repeated contemplation. To wit
of your Pred^cessors glorious Conquests, over a^^ that stands against you. And
(...) their triumphant Ingress into the caelestial and eternal Blessedness One
too rich, to be comprehende^ by the present poverty of your Understandings. But
yet one whereof your little Understanding is enough, both to sweeten a^^ the
bitterness, and spoil the tempting power of all the sweetness of this world.
Keep this consideration, and live; Keep it as the Apple of your Eye.

For the display of this general position to the weakest minds, I will cast
it is contents into these four particulars.

P. 1. Our deceased good Ministers and Friends, were in this world threshed and
winnowed as much as our selve^ are. Their Escape out of sufferings speaks their
fore-endurance of them. Of which their Endurance, it will not be useless to
take some good notice. And ever and anon compare their Hardships and our own.
It ^s a small Map, in which I must present the World of them.

Their Souls lodged in as Frail and as Burthensom Bodies, as, ordinarily, ours
do. And, as hard to keep in Subjection, and be possessed in Honor. Bodies that
were as very Prisons and Fetters unto their Spirits. Whose Weaknesses, Pains,
and Deformities were neither few, nor light.

Their treatment by the World, was with the same malignity as ours is, or
worse. It Hated them as much; Censured, Reproached, and every way Injured them,
by secret and open practices. One while it bespake them, as it does us, in
words smooth as butter, sweet as hony-combs. By the sweet Poison of Flattery,
designing upon them the worst of cruelty. Assaying by the Lordly dish and sweet
milk, to court them unto the fatal Nail and Hammer. Another time it spoke of
them as it does of you, all manner of ev^^ Poured out Cursings and Bitterness
breathed out threatenings and slaughter. Trying if it were possible to frighten
whom they could not flatter out of God's way.

Their Temptations by Satan, were no less than our own. Are we pestred with his
Suggestions, Persuasions, Instigations? So were they, as they have often
complained unto some of us: and unto God, in the hearing of all that worshipped
with them. Do we find that he subtly suits his temptations unto our Ages, our
Tempers, and our Conditions in the World? We are vain if we think he did
otherwise with them. Does he assault us oft-times in temptations unto sins,
from which we think our selves most safe? No question but he so assaulted them.
In a word; All his Logical fallacies, all his Politic wiles, all his Military
stratagems, were used against them as surely as they are against us. How many
have told us their Temptations unto Atheism, Blasphemy, Despair, Murder,
Self-murder, and what not?

Their Afflictions from God, were such as ours do not appear to exceed.
Understand me of Afflictions upon Soul, Body, Name, Estate, Family, Friends.
From his hand are all; are they not? By whomsoever they are Executed it is by
him they are Ordered. And that as to the Sort, Degree, and Duration of them.
Now, can you answer me? Which of your Souls does God exercise with more Griefs,
Fears, and Anguish than he did theirs? Who of you have Bodies more acquainted
with the Stone, Colic, and Strangury, Fever, Consumption, and Palsy, than
theirs were? Who can say his Name is more Laden with reproach, than their Names
used to be? Or that his Estate has been so torn from him, as none of theirs
ever was. Or, that Providence never made any of their Families such Hospitals,
as it has made his. Or so parted any of them from their Lovers and Friends, as
it has parted him. Many indeed are the afflictions of the righteous in this
World. But not more than those of the righteous before you, were, who are
ascended into the World where none are.

Their Indwelling Sin, was their perpetual troubler, as ours is. And found them
as much to do, as ours finds us. Held them in continual warfare, as ours
holds us. They all had Sin, and felt Sin, and lamented Sin, in all and every
part of them. As wormwood has bitterness in its Root, in its Stalk, and in its
Leaves. Their Minds had abiding Unteachableness; Wills, Untractableness;
Consciences, Unsensibleness; Memories, Unfaithfulness; Affections,
Unorderliness; Imaginations, Unruliness. That which came into them, when their
Souls came into their Bodies, never perfectly left them till their souls left
their Bodies. All days of their lives therefore, their Faith was weak, Hope
infirm, Love chill. Many a trembling hour they spent, in fear that they were
but shadows and empty shows of Faith, and Hope, and Love, that they had. In
fear of their being Graceless; yea (and what is worse) past the day of Grace.
Being Unreconciled to God, yea, and (through deadly delay,) Unreconcilable. Many
have so feared; and all have lived exclaiming, O wretched Man that I am who
shall deliver me! Such fears, simple souls do think to have been no ones bitter
Draughts but their own. But I tell them, they cannot answer me this question:
To which of your friends in Heaven can you turn, that has not drank them!
Again,

Their Loads of Actual Sin pressed them down, as sorely as ours do press us. My
sin is ever before me, was the perpetual cry of one of them. Are we Burdened
with our sins, their Aggravations, and th ir Demerits! they were so, with
theirs. Their sins against Law, against Gospel, against Conscience. With their
Aggravations by their Multitudes, their Kinds, and their Circumstances. With
their Demerits of outward; of inward, and of eternal and extremest punishments.
For these, God knows what were their sighs, and their groanings were not hid
from Him.

Their mixtures of sin in all Natural, Civil, and Religious things, did foul
their faces with weeping. Think you that it is a peculiar sin, or grief of
yours; in a great degree to Eat, and Drink, to Buy and Sell, yea to use the
holy Word and Prayer, from selfish Principles and to selfish Ends; not Purely
from Principles, and unto Ends Heavenly! your mistake is gross. It was the
common sin of all your friends in Heaven; and the common grief of all while
they lived upon Earth. Ardently all desired; but no one ever attained unto
sinless purity; no, not in any one of their paths, Phil. 3.12, 13. 1 John 1.8.
Jam. 3.1. In every motion of Nature there was much of Corruption. In every
Secular thing most lawful, there was what was Unlawful, In all holy things,
there were Iniquities. And for these, went they mourning all their days.

Their long unaccomplished desires, and unanswered Prayers, made their hearts
sick an hundred times. Ours, be a sword in our Bones, that we are prone to
think did never cut any other Souls. But it is without any color of Reason,
that we think so in our haste. It is very well known, God used to make our
Predecessors wait, as long as He makes any of us. And as frequently they cried,
as we do now cry, How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? Mine eyes
fail while I wait for my God. I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried. For
day and night thy hand is heavy upon me. O God, I cry in the day time, and thou
hear not.

To conclude this particular; The sorrows of death compassed them, as they
compass us. Great was their consternation, in the prospect of their
Dissolution! Unto which, all their great Grace could not reconcile their
reluctant Nature. With fearfulness and trembling they felt the King of Terrors
entering, and pulling down their Tabernacle of Clay. Laying their Earthly House
in the Dust. Turning their Flesh into rottenness, and sending it out of the
sight of man into darkness. Have we our terrors? they were not without theirs!
Of some, and those extraordinarily sanctified, it is credibly reported; that
very Fear was their Executioner. And they died for fear of Death. Of others, I
pray bethink your selves; how was it that you saw them lie gasping on their
Beds? and heard them rattling in their Throats? and observed them to take the
breach of the strings of their Eyes and Heart? It Is impossible here to say all;
and hard to me, not to say too much. But I proceed.

P. 2. These very Souls thus winnowed, are gloriously escaped out of all these
evils. So the Text says, expressly. And so the whole Scripture, so brightly,
that all are Believers except such as are not Christians. To quote the obvious
Texts, would be to recite a great part of the Bible. Let that one which I
produce recall others unto your remembrance. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord. An illustrious Maxim! in few words declaring, man's great
End or Aim; which is blessedness. And man's only way unto the same; which is by
dying in the Lord, or in the Faith of Christ Jesus, after living in him by
Faith. This Maxim, St. John had from Heaven. And this he was bid to write, for
the use of the Saints on Earth. And this he tells us, is confirmed by the
Holy Ghost. Yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them. In which confirmatory reasons, we have these things
asserted. scil. 1. That before their death in the Lord, these Saints had
labors, and works for him which were hard. Such, as to be exempted from, was a
part of blessedness. 2. That at their Death they were exempted from them. And
now lived no more in Sweat, much less in Tears. 3. That with freedom from
sufferings they now received Gods Rewards of their Obedience. His rewards of
Grace, which are like the Donor; beyond comprehension, and objects of eternal
wonder. Their works do follow them. That is, the immense reward of their
slender work. The eternal reward of their short work. The far more exceeding
and eternal weight of Glory!

This argument flows with Milk and Honey; stay we and feed a while hereon.
Think pleasantly of what is proved so evidently. Saints, raised out of the
Valley of Tears, are lifted up into the Mount of Joy. Wherein no Eye ever wept,
or Breast sighed, or Tongue complained. Or ever had cause or occasion so to do.
Wherein, neither the World, nor the God of this World could ever give trouble.
For Satan's Vassals cannot reach it. And he and his Angels were long ago cast
far enough from it. Wherein, the Immortal Father never gave a blow to any
Child; or took from any the Kisses of his Mouth, sweeter than Wine. Wherein
sin, the most hateful evil, has no more place than the Devil, whose work it
is. But the perfect purity long desired, is fully enjoyed. Wherein, no one
sinful, or mixed and imperfect act, ever blemished the holy state. Wherein no
Hope is ever delayed one minute; nor ought is desired, before God's will is
that it should be possessed. Wherein there is no Doubt, or Grievance of Life;
nor any Fear, or Possibility of Death. Wherein, we do all know, all things are
better than any of us upon Earth can know.

For we know, that when Saints enter the House made without hands, they
presently take possession of all the Goods. And who can know, till he goes up
and sees, how many and how rich they be? Indeed the holy Oracles, do warrant
thus much to be said of our good Friends that are entered there.

They possess blessed Light, One, in comparison whereof, their former knowledge
was but a less thick darkness. The open light of the Sun, vastly exceeds a few
Beams strained through the crevice of a Wall. And no less does Gods
manifestation of himself above, exceed that which he affords his Church below.
Neither is there any compare between the strength of a glorified Eye, and of an
imperfectly sanctified one. Unto glorified ones, the deep Fountains of Wisdom
and Grace are laid open. The riches of Goodness, the beauties of Holiness, the
glories of Power are manifested. The Embroideries of Providence are unfolded.
It Is not easy to name, what God does hide from 'em. For why? He himself is All
in all. And, this we know, They do see him as he is! Wherefore necessarily,

They possess blessed Love. So argues the infallible Teacher. We shall be like
him; For we shall see him. God is love. And sight of God, turns us into flames
of Love. Such are our glorified Friends, like unto the blessed Angels. Ever
receiving the highest love, that God confers on finite Creatures; and giving
back the greatest love, that God can have from their glorified Powers. Upon
earth, the Fire of their Love was a little Spark; it is now a Mount. That
spark, (as Kitchen-fire,) often languished; almost expired, for want of feeding
by proper Considetations But in their present Mount of Celestial fire, there is
no variableness or shadow of change. The Divine glory so holds their Eyes, and
heats their Hearts. So, that their enamoring Thoughts are never interrupted;
and their enflamed Affections never abated. Certainly therefore,

They possess blessed Life. Valere, vita est. To be Alive, is to be in fullness
of Joy. And where is that fullness but in Love? Where is Water if not in the
Sea? Where is Light if not in the Sun? Where is Joy if not in Love. Light does
not more naturally kindle sacred Love, than Love creates supreme Joy. For what
can there be less than all Delight, where there is nothing but Love; and that,
as this is, without Diminution or End. It is sure, that our Friends Live in the
Triumphs of Joy, if they live in the Sunshines of Knowledge, and Flames of Love.

True it is, great is the number of them that dwell in this Light, Love, and
Life. Tho comparatively few are saved; the City that is above, is Populous, but
the multitude of its Citizens, does not Impoverish, but Honor and Adorn it.
For why? GOD is its Treasure. And good INFINITE is not by any numbers exhausted
or lessened. The Sun's light is but finite. Yet all men enjoy the light of it;
and every one, as sufficiently, as if no ones Eyes but his own received it. God
is Infinite. And much more may all his Favorites above enjoy Him: every one as
fully, as if he enjoyed him only.

Be it added; Earthly excellencies are all of them, like to rich Perfumes. By
Custom they wax less sensible, at least less grateful, to such as carry them.
And cease to be sweet, when they cease to be New. But it is not so with
Excellencies heavenly. God's own happiness is now as pleasant unto Him, as it
was millions of ages agone. It was never at all New, but ever most sweet. And
he has provided his Children also a Felicity, that shall not need to be
commended by Novelty. One that shall relish as well with them to eternal ages
as at the first moment. Which we cannot doubt, if we do not forget this: viz.
That Heavenly Joy is Perfect. And what is Perfect, is indeficient; never
abates; never can Die, or be Sick, or be weaker at one time than at another.
Things of limited goodness, admit change and weariness of them. It being
necessary to leave one for another. Yea, and having in them somewhat that is
hurtful too, and not delicious, no wonder if they sometimes become nauseous.
But good that is unbounded, and reaches to the satisfaction of all our Desires;
and is unmixed, and ministers nothing beside delights; such as the Heavenly
good is; this must always taste alike. Unto the sweetness of this nothing can be
added: nor can any thing be taken away from it.

Well; this, and more than this, is the blessed state of our godly Friends
deceased. A state, whereof every Possessor lives in most delitious and eternal
Rapture, Heaven is it self; and they we speak of are in Heaven. But concerning
both, it must be said, it is but a little portion of them that is heard! The one
half is not told us. Nor does it yet appear, save very imperfectly, what they
are. As to that which through Gods grace does appear, it follows in our next
particular.

P. 3. Their glorious Escape unto Heaven ought to be well Considered by as on
Earth. The word of command is in the text. And is a very remarkable one, used
but once more in all the New Testament, viz. Act. 17.23. where it is put to
express the careful and severe consideration, that the Apostle took of the
Athenians Devotion. In minds not atheistical, ^here must needs be ever and anon
^ome occasional Thoughts bubling ^p. But they are bubbles indeed, that signify
little and effect nothing. They make not that Consideration which is here
demanded. Which consists in much and serious speech with our selves concerning
the Victory of our godly Friends. Streams, fed by a living Spring, flow
constantly; and do enrich and give delight where they come. And such are the
Thoughts and Soliloquies, which do ever much better our Hearts and our Ways.
Such as flow from a vital Principle and Disposition; and are maintained daily
by the same. Even without those outward occasions of them, with which slight
and transient thoughts do flow and ebb; or rather dry away.

Fix it in your minds, that it is the Will of God, that is here declared so to
be. That he requires you to have this said glorious Victory much in your
minds. That your Thoughtfulness of it will truly please Him. And your
Forgetfulness and Neglect, incense him. Let your Wills submit to this
acknowledged Will of God; and command all that is within you so to do. Become
you Convinced of your duty herein; and Disposed to do it. You shall then find
within you a Fountain, whence numerous, delicious, and efficacious Thoughts,
shall spring. Your own reins shall instruct you daily. Without other Monitors,
(the Holy Spirit excepted,) it shall become of your daily Business and
Recreation also, to consider the Conquest forepraised. Without other calls,
your minds will run to it, and on it. They will be often speaking, to this
purpose, each of them.

Here am I, in my passage through the red sea; Hope and Fear divide my Life.
Hope of Escaping, Fear of Drowning. Escaping as an Israelite; Drowning, as an
Egyptian. O ye my godly Ministers and Friends that are sweetly got ashore, I
cannot but think of you. Of your safe Landing; and joyful Reception above.
Methinks I hear you recounting your old Weaknesses, Fears, and Dangers. And
wondering at the arm of Grace that carried you through them. Rejoicing in the
change you feel. Triumphing over Sin, Satan, and the World, that withstood you.
And saying, how little danger the Sea has, if the true Pilot be but duly
trusted. How safely all must go, and how sweetly all must end. How reasonable
is it for all he carries, to trust him in the worst^ storms. To bear most
patiently every Difficulty; being they are but for a moment, and their reward
is Glory of exceeding weight. How you would have even gloried in all your
Tribulations, had you but known the ten thousandth part of what you now see.
How you would advise us that be still on the Sea, were you to speak with us.
What you would tell your Followers of Sins folly, the Creatures vanity, Gods
bounty, Christ's excellency, Holiness its beauty: (Holiness of State, of Heart,
of Life.) O what a deal would you tell, that do know now what a Rewarder God
is? Of all, that in patient continuance in well-doing, do seek and serve him.
You would make us all ashamed of our selves. Ministers of their Preaching;
People of their Hearing; Both, of their worse living.

O ye blessed Spirits, and not only Healed, but Beautified. Often have I heard
you complain of Wounds, Bruises, and Putrefying sores like my own. And now
methinks I see you without Spot or Wrinkle or any such thing. While the cure of
my own Diseases, is little more than begun: In you, in you it is, that I read
the high Praises of Christ your Physician and mine. Should I let go the memory
of you, I should lessen the Honor of Him. In you it is that I read the praises
of the Holy Ghost. Then it is he appears to me a most wonderful Builder, when I
look on you his most glorious Temples. Then I conclude, sure he is able to
raise me also out of my ruins.

O ye Conquerors and more than Conquerors; whom I knew when you were Warriors.
And under my own hardships of warfare. My own, who was your unworthy
Fellow-Souldier under Christ's Banner. How congratulate I your Conquests and
Triumphs? How admire I the Truth, Power and Love of your and my Captain? How
uneasy does the sight of your Crowns make me, till I am with you, and like
you? If I forget you, O ye Angels-fellows, let my Tongue cleave to the roof of
my Mouth! If mine Eye keep poring always upon my SEA, my SICKNESS and my
WARFARE; if it be not also turned on your PASSAGE, your CURE, and your
CONQUEST, let my Arm fall from my Shoulder Blade!

The ((...),) Contemplators of the blessed End of godly Friends, are Christians
that thus converse with themselves. I say thus, unto the true end and use
thereof. And unto this end do converse or consider, not transiently think.
There is a great difference between a step and a walk. And there is no less,
between a thought and a consideration. I come therefore to the last particular.

P. 4. This consideration of godly Friends escape unto Heaven, is a motive most
necessary, unto imitation of their Faith and Holiness. The Apostles use of it
as such, proves it such. But, to give measure pressed down and running over, it
shall be added. (1.) The best of Christians, do need motive Considerations.
Which is acknowledged by all that are so much as titularly Christians. (2.) Of
motive Considerations, this is of the best. Which will appear from the natural
effects of it, in which its motive virtue is most resplendent. Of these, the
seven following ones, are not the least principal.

E. 1. This Consideration confirms our Faith. Our Faith of the holy God's
bountifulness, and of holy men's blessedness. It is true, that the H. Spirit's
Light dispels our darkness, and enlightens our minds. And, he gives us the
Gospel for a Lamp; and Faith for an Eye. But can any man doubt it? The Gospel
is cleared and Faith strengthened more than a little, by Examples. Examples of
the promised goodness of God to Men, and the blessedness of men in that
goodness of God. Especially by the examples of Persons known, and dear unto our
selves. Put the case you know and believe ever so well of a Physician. Yet let
him once make perfect Cures on many of your most dangerously diseased
Relations: Your confidence of his ability, and his Patients safety will be
increased. You will be somewhat more fearless to trust him with your own Life,
than you were before. The Application is easy.

E. 2. This Consideration raises our Apprehensions. Our Apprehensions and
Estimations of God, of Christ, of the H. Spirit, and of the Gospel Covenant.
You cannot see your dear Friends saved by them, but you must the more esteem
and value them! Their so great Salvation, that certifies the goodness of the
Efficients and Instruments unto you, must needs enhance the value of them in
you. Great and grateful Effects, never fail to raise the price of Causes and
Means. I mean with any but Idiots or Lunaticks; Creatures of undisposed minds
or distracted ones.

E. 3. This Consideration strengthens our Choice. Our choice of our Redeemer,
for Prince and Savior. The sight of our Tempted, Persecuted, Afflicted
Brethren here on Earth, is but too often a scandal unto us Makes our Hearts to
stagger. Tempts us to go back, and follow Christ no more. But the Spiritual
sight of our Crowned and Triumphant Brethren in Heaven, has on us a contrary
operation. It strengthens our Resolution; and steels our Courage to trust and
obey him, who gave such a Life and Glory unto them. It makes us, anew to resign
our selves unto him. Yea and bitterly lament, that we chose him not more early
and more fervently.

E. 4. This Consideration quickens our Desires. Our Desires, and our Hopes. Our
desires to be, with Christ and his triumphant Friends above. And our hopes,
that as laden with sins as now we are, divine Grace may unburthen us at last,
and lodge us with them. The thoughts of their wonderful Advancement will work,
upon any Heart not stone dead. When carnal men think of any of their Equals,
that are risen above them unto high Places, what is the effect? Why they are
straitway inspired, with an unwonted Ambition for themselves. Yea and affected
with a new Persuasion also, that it is as possible for themselves to break
through the difficulties which are in the way to Preferment. Why should not the
Ambition and Expectation of Spiritual men, be excited by the same Medium?
Surely, as Desire and Hope are the springs of Action; glorious Successes of
mean Agents be Springs of Desire and Hope in their Spectators.

E. 5. This Consideration provokes our Diligence. The Victory of Miltiades,
took sleep from the eyes of Themistocles. The thoughts of another honor,
spurred him on unto his more successful Labor. And will not the matchless
conquests of our glorified Friends, take our hands out of our bosoms? They will
unquestionably, if they be considered solemnly. They will urge unto that holy
Violence, without which the heavenly Kingdom cannot be taken.

E. 6. This Consideration sweetens our Life of Religion. Joy, is our strength.
Heaviness in the heart, weakens, if not binds our hands and feet. Indeed many
Objects of God's Love, and true Saints, are of sorrowful spirits. But the
chiefest Instruments of his glory, are, for the most part, Souls of much
alacrity. To be sure, whatever does sweeten, does also heighten our Duty. For,
Delight exonerates Body and Mind, takes off dulling Indispositions from them.
Gives wings to both, and intends their actions. It does marvelously, but as
certainly increase our Force to act, and our Accuracy in acting. Cogendi vis
inest, says Pliny; it makes the very Lame to walk, yea leap. For this reason
it seems, that Music has ever been used in Wars; because it does delight;
and, by delighting, strengthen the Nerves of flesh and spirit. But what can
delight a Soul that is any thing heavenly, like contemplation of the celestial
Society? For Contemplation does, in a sort, unite the Soul unto its Object.
And, eminently, this Contemplation ministers Hope; which is the greatest Parent
of Joy, next to Fruition. When you are musing of Heaven's Inhabitants, your
Soul has a place with them; and makes one among them. And you are in an
exercise that makes you an Evidence of an everlasting Mansion with them. Nero,
Xerxes, and others, have propounded rewards to the inventors of new Pleasures.
But he that shall diligently make use of this, shall never propound any. He
shall say, I have Enough; yea, I have All.

E. 7. This Consideration abates the Fear of Death. Morally it does so; as it
is of those works, unto which safety from fear of evil is promised. The Promise
hereof is as plainly made to good works, as the Threat of shame and fear is
uttered against sinful ones. And, through the grace of our Redeemer, hereof we
are certain: though holy thoughts and works deserve not Consolation, as sinful
ones deserve fearfulness and horror; yet Grace gives as just an expectation of
Comfort from the one, as Justice gives of Trouble from the other. Besides, even
naturally this Consideration abates the fear aforesaid. For they be the errors
of Fancy, by which Death is made excessively formidable. Without a false
representation, it could not scare a true Christian. But contemplation of our
glorified Friends, does confute the false suggestions of our Fancies. It
represents Death in its true notion; and so, by rectifying our Minds,
fortifieth our Hearts, e. gr. Death, we cannot endure in our thoughts, because
we imagine it to be this threefold penance; to wit, the putting off a Body,
without which we cannot live; the leaving of a World, that is the best we ever
saw; and a going into a strange Country and State of which our knowledge is
very imperfect. Now due Consideration of the heavenly Society and of our
Friends in that glory, what does it? If any thing, this it does. It represents
Death as quite another thing, unto every good man. It demonstrates it to be
only the putting off of a House of Clay, to enter and live in one made without
hands; and therein joyfully to wait till the same is new built and added unto
it. To be the leaving of a World, that next to Hell it self, is the very worst
part of the Creation. And to be but a going home, not abroad; unto their Father
and Brethren, not to strangers, and they know not whom. To a Country strange
but unto Sense, not unto Faith. One, of which our knowledge must needs be
imperfect, because the glory thereof is so very great, and our minds so weak.
Because its eternal Possessions, exceed the capacity of our present
Understandings. So that all who enter it, must do as great men's Heirs; who when
they come to Age, go take into their hands, more than in their minority they
could conceive in their minds.

Thus is Death represented as a change, but for the better. One that does not
Hazard, but Accomplish our greatest Hopes. And so it becomes more the object of
our Hope, and less the object of our Fear.

The uses I make, I must crowd into a narrow room. And present in a few
Inferences and Exhortations. Learn ye hence.

I. 1. The Necessity of Faith and Holiness. I name both, though the Apostle's
word is, [whose FAITH follow.] For he plainly means Faith in its Principle, and
in its Effects and Exercises. Be these, either of them things indifferent? Or
but small, as Cummin and Anise? Indeed so they seem to be conceited, even in
England, and very London. But where be your eyes? See you not God's Precepts,
and his multiplied motives unto both? Is it consistent with his Wisdom and
Goodness, thus, above all things, to call for things Needless? Do not dream So.
If Satan could keep all men from these Jewels, he would shut up Heavens Gates;
this is true if the Gospel be so. The day is hastening which will convince you
all; Fruit, without a Root, cannot be had. A Root, if without Fruit, cannot be
valued. Without the Root and Fruit of Faith, no soul can be saved. Hell will
shortly awaken you that sleep and rest long in Forms of Godliness. In empty
names, in scenical shows, in dead opinions, in alamode customary Religion. O
that Gospel light, may prevent your Conviction by Hell Fire! Christ is able to
save to the uttermost. But Faith and Holiness are his uttermost. And without
them, He has not will or power to save one Creature.

The Leper under the Law, typified a Sinner. And he was to go with his Head
uncovered, that he might be known of all men, and avoided. These hints uncover
the head of our Epidemical Sin. Fly you far from it.

I. 2. The Possibility of Faith and Holiness. They are as Possible, as
Necessary. Hereof, every Soul got to Heaven, is a clear Demonstration. As we,
so they all of them, had their conflicts of carnal Passions. From Nature,
Temper, Education, secular Interest, they had them. But through the aids of the
Holy Ghost, they took and held Holy Faith and Life. Some had a clearer and
cleaner Victory than others, but all were Victors. And their Victories, do
prove ours to be possible. They prove that the Enemies of Faith and Holiness
are not Unconquerable; as Diogenes his walking, proved that motion was not a
thing impracticable. Take heed, Brethren, take heed; and abuse not the true
doctrine of your want of Power. Nor ever believe your danger of hell, to be so
much from ought, as from your Will. Let D. Owen's words be written on the Walls
of your Houses. They are upon Heb. 12.15. There is no man who under the
profession of the Gospel comes short of obtaining God's grace and favor, but
it is by reason of himself and his own sin. His negligence, sloth, missing of
opportunites, love of sin. We have, as Merciful a God to deal with, as they
that are got to Heaven had. We have the same Savior and Sanctifier offerr'd,
that they had. We have the same Word and Sacraments ministered, as they had. Why
should we conceit our Salvation impossible? Have a care Sirs, that you do not
make it so! That, indeed, you may do. And are very like to do, if you heighten
your corruptions by Custom, inflame them by as wilful Temptation. And make
them, more irresistible than you find them.

I. 3. The Felicity of Faith and Holiness. How well do these end? We are called
in the text to contemplate their End. And that, for the Glory thereof and for
its Attractiveness of us. God cannot be God, if he cease to be the rich
rewarder of Faith and Holiness. For he has sworn by his Godhead; and pawned his
Name of God upon it, that he will be the God of Believers and Obeyers of the
Gospel. The eternal Crown must fall off from his own Head, if an immortal one
be not set on theirs. As sin and Misery, so Holiness and Blessedness are
inseparable.

I. 4. The untowardliness of men called to Faith and Holiness. Wonderful! who
has bewitched them? For, as our text speaks not obscurely, they are hard to be
enamored with the greatest Beauty. Motives, and strong ones they need, unto
their most certain and greatest good. The life of Faith and Holiness, is the
highest that can be in this low world. The best Heaven to be had on earth. And
yet do we want a much better to allure us unto it. So dark is the Light that is
in us. So, so have we lost the first Light, Purity, and Vigilance of our Minds,
and the Rectitude of our Wills. Things despicable, insinuate themselves into us
very easily. Their faint color of profit or pleasure, invades us with
mavelous power. Power that ravishes presently the esteem of our Minds, and
Choice of our Wills. The lying vanities that do still deceive us, can even
compel us; and carry us whither (we think at least) we would not go. But,
objects most amiable; in themselves most excellent, and unto us most important;
such as deserve the throne of our hearts; alas, how darkly do our Minds,
represent these? how coldly do our Wills receive them? Till Omnipotence draws
us, we never run, or go, or so much as look after them. A most humbling
consideration! We do need bit and bridle to keep us out of Satan's crooked way,
and spurs and goads to make us go in God's strait paths.

I. 5. The kindness of God to untoward men. This, if any thing shines in my
text and doctrine. For in what appears God's kindness, if not in his methods
of calling us to Faith and Holiness? Which are so admirably suited unto our
weakness. So apt to reduce and engage the most extravagant Souls. So fitly
qualified, as has been before showed, to make pliant the most obstinate in
evil, and to nail fast the most irresolute in good. Motives, even such, the
divine grace presents. So it self does the dread Sovereign of the whole
Creation, court every worm. Vouchsafing, not only to Will and Command, but to
encourage and entice us unto Faith and Obedience. So making, that, if we will
swim on in sin unto Damnation; it shall be against the stream of grace in its
utmost Condescension.

I. 6. The Benefit of godly Ministers and Friends. This, does hence appear
great. Because, not only Living but Dead, they are unto us, great means of
grace. As we may profit much by hearing* Est aliquid quod a magno viro vel
tacente proficias. Sen. Ep. 94.
and seeing them, while they be here; we may do the same by Remembering them
when they be gone. It is our own fault, if it does not do us good to think of
them. It is true, we may reap advantage from the thoughts of them, who to us
were unknown. And of whom, and of whose Faith and Holiness we have only read or
heard.

They have well deserved from the Church, whose Pens have preserved the History
of pious Persons for us. Abroad, Melchior Adam, Theod. Beza, and others. At
home, our immortal Martyrologist, Jo. Fox, Mr. S. Clark, Dr. Bates, Dr. Fuller,
Dr. Lloyd,, etc. That dunghill Spirits should contemn their sacred Pearl, is of
no wonder at all. But that reputed Merchants for Heaven, should grudg them
their Money and their Time, is sadly strange. A Collection of the Characters of
many most exemplarily religious, is now preparing in this City. Surely men of
real Religion will pray for its good speed; as conceiving it a very apt medium
for commending unto us the City that has better foundations, and for animating
us to Live, to Suffer, and to Die for it.

But it may not be denied, and it ought to be considered; Great is the power of
Acquaintance and Converse! Our thoughts have by far the easiest and sweetest
access unto them in Heaven, that we had most friendship with upon Earth.

In a word, Pearls, are but the shining Froth of the Sea; as Silver and Gold be
but the White and Yellow Dust of the Earth. An Holy Friend, is an incomparably
richer thing, and more serviceable.

I. 7. The Praise of Consideration. Which thus here meets us. It is by the
sacred Writer made the capital means of our excitation, unto the things which
are our Life. Yea, of our excitation unto them by the most powerful motive. It
is by him made as necessary, to our being benefited by God's Word, as Eating is
necessary, to our being nourished by Bread. For his phrase is to be understood,
as if the Text had plainly said; The blessed End of your holy Predecessors,
take you into just and deep consideration; without which, it can no more affect
you, than a Beauty and Treasure can affect one that neither sees nor hears of
them. Nor any more draw forth your hearts to imitate their Faith, than Chains
or Cords can draw forth of their places, things that they take no hold of. --
Indeed the usefulness of Consideration, is self-evident; nor need words, for
information's sake, be multiplied. All men grant, that every good Act is a
product of stated Judgment, not of a sudden rash Thought: and stated Judgment
it self is the issue of serious Perpension, the ultimate and most perfect Act
of our Reason, or Thinking faculty. But, interpretative Contradiction is the
rife Plague among us. Most men, sleep in their gross Inconsideracy, and are
strangers unto true Contemplation. And it is to be feared, some are vain and
wild enough, to expect benign infusions of the Holy Spirit, without the
required considerations of their own. Miserable delusion! For, He is a spirit
of Wisdom; that is, of wise Thoughts. Not a spirit sent to make Fools; that is,
creatures spending no Thoughts, or but few and slight ones, on the things of
their Peace. His work is, to make wise, and to set at rights our Thoughts. To
wit, as to the Objects, Qualities, Numbers, Orders, and Ends of them. In a
word; He that eats not necessary Bread, is dead naturally, and he that
considers not necessary Truth, is dead spiritually. Spare Meals make slender
Bodies; and slight Meditations make lean Graces. Would thou be much edified
by thy glorified Friends Examples? then contemplate them much. Expecting not
holy Impulses, from a few roving Thoughts! Without much musing, no holy fire
burns. Precious Metals and Jewels are produced, where the Beams of the Sun are
most strongly reflected; and there it is that heavenly Affections are kindled,
where apt Thoughts are most vigorously exercised.

Now, in his Name whose we Are; whom we Serve; and to whose Tribunal we Hasten;
I exhort as follows.

Let not worthy Mr. HURST, or any other Servant of Jesus Christ, be without a
Religious Monument in your Hearts. Former Ages have exceeded bounds in
commemoration of deceased Friends. Papists abide still in their Excesses. But,
abhorring them, run you not into a contrary peccant Extreme! Idolize your
Friends in glory, you may not; honorably and affectionately remember them, you
must.

Your duty is, to follow their Faith, not their Fancies. And their holy Walks;
not their wry Steps. They were but Men; our fellow servants, and not our
Masters. Nor are they to be followed by us, farther than they followed their
and our one Master. It shall be Praise now, and Glory in the day of your
accounts, if you consider their Chief End, and aim at the same. The God, the
Mediator, and the Comforter that they chose; and do choose the same. The
Gospel Covenant that they studied, lived upon, and by; and do study, and live
upon the Promises, and according to the Demands of the same. If you exercise
daily the Faith you have seen in them, the Hope and the Love; the Repentance,
the Diligence, and the Patience; the Humility, the Justice, and the Charity.

The holy things which ye have both Learned and Received, and heard and seen in
them, do ye; and the God of Peace shall be with ^ou. After severe study of the
way (...) Heaven, they neither wilfully ^andred out of it, nor slothfully
^alked in it. Take you their Way, and their Pace; and hold both. ^mitate you
their Watchfulness over your Hearts and your Sen^es, and their Resistance of
both ^ssaulting Temptations, and conspi^ing Corruptions. They did, as the Army
of Israel, which, passing thorough a Wood abounding with Honey, would not taste
it, because ^he King had forbad them. The people feared the King's Oath, 1 Samuel
14.26. They chose rather Afflictions, than sinful Pleasures; and Re^roaches for
Christ, rather than the Treasures of Egypt. Love you the World, and the things
of it, as little is they loved them. They understood the disproportion between
a spiritual Nature, and carnal Sensualities: and looked not on Temporal things,
as the goods of immortal Souls. Pray, as hard (...) they prayed for the Peace
of Jerusalem! Loving the Church; as knowing they were to be judged by their
Affections unto the suffering Churches. Not confining God's Church unto their
own Party; nor making their unnecessary Opinions Articles of Faith, and their
unnecessary Modes of Worship Terms of Communion. Let it not be said, that
Joshua's Resolution, was theirs, more than yours. As they, so do you resolve,
to serve God with your Households commanded so to do. Educating your Children
piously and prudently. Loving your Servants Souls, with care to save them; and
using them in all references, as you would be used your selves, if you were in
their conditions.

Contemplate seriously and frequently, (as before directed,) the blessed state
of which they are now possessed. Spend not all the thoughts ^ou have to spare,
upon their Life. Of the two, bestow them most li^erally upon the Estate they
entered unto at their Death. And do not ^ndure your Living Friends, to take from
you the time in which you should remember your Dead ones. Take it for no less a
duty to Commemorate the Dead, than to visit the Living. To Commemorate the
Place where they be, the Company wherewith they dwell, the work wherein they
are employed. And stay ye sometimes in these thoughts, when you form them; as
you use to stay in visits of your Neighbors, when you make them. Start not out
of these useful thoughts, as soon as you are got into them. As though you dreamed,
that little benefit and comfort could be expected from them. Rest not till you
have overcome the first shyness of your minds. Their strangeness unto these
thoughts. Yea, till sensible benefit has made them impatient, of keeping long
from them, A little serious exercise will make them so.

For, to say the truth, which some tell me they feel; and which I have felt as
my great motive, both to Preach and Publish this hasty discourse. These
thoughts are most exceeding helps, to facilitate and to sweeten our thoughts of
God, with whom is dazzling and overwhelming Majesty. Mr. Baxter calls them our
stepping-stones; and stairs of ascent to look at God. And a greater than he,
does (methinks) direct us to eye the glorified Saints, as a sweet mean to
promote looking unto Jesus Christ, Heb. 12.1, 2. Unto Jesus Christ, who is our
only and perfectly sufficient Mediator. His glory, dare you not for your lives
to give unto his most glorified Members. But, neither dare you to neglect such
remembrance of those his Members, as so makes for the honor of Him the Head.
As is both an Evidence of your Principle of Holiness toward Him; and a Means of
its Practice and Progress.

The promotion of which Principle, Practice, and Progress, is the dutiful
Design of every Sermon. And may it be the plentiful Blessing of this Occasional
one unto you! Amen and Amen!

Postscript.
THE foregoing Discourse has pressed the Remembrance of departed Saints Glory,
without any thing said of departed Sinners Misery. Because I had purposed to
treat thereof distinctly and as fully, from another Text. But, opportunity
being here given me, I take it to say thus much.

Of the Means of Grace, all are Excellent, but none Superfluous. They do, all,
^ualifie and Engage us unto the use of each other. No one excuses from the use
of another. It has been shown to be highly beneficial, to stir up our selves,
by the consideration of deceased Saints Blessedness, unto an imitation of their
Faith and Holiness. And it is as certainly profitable to urge our selves, by
the consideration of deceased Sinners Ruin, unto an abhorrence of their
Unbelief and Disobe^ience.

The Reasons are both obvious and numerous. So are convincing Observations and
Experiences. He was an eminently pious Ancient that thus bespake his Auditory;
Sirs, Let us be often going down to Hell in our contemplations while we live that
our Souls may not go down into it when we die. And I have heard our greatest
Divines praise another; who having found that exercise very helpful against his
Temptations, did not stick to exclaim, O Lord, my Soul does bless thee for Hell!

It is true, the Hope of Heaven is the sweetest Persuasive; but, it is as true,
that the Fear of Hell is commonly the strongest Motive, to our Duty.
Unregenerate hearts, do feel little but this latter. And the most sanctified
men alive will tell you; that they are fain, under most of their Conflicts, to
call in their Fear to the help of their Hope. And that their Life is a Flying
from the Wrath to come, as well as a Laying up Treasure in Heaven.

To clear this, let it be observed. The Objects of Hope are less conceivable by
our minds, than those of Fear be. Although Storms and Darkness be without any
difficulty pictured; Calms and Sun-shines cannot be drawn without exquisite
Art, and extreme Industry. Hell's Torments be a thousand times more easily
understood, than Heaven's Joys and Glorys be. The Imagination of a natural Man,
will frightfully represent the burning Fire, and the gnawing Worm. But the
fullness of Joy in God's presence, and the everlasting Pleasures at his right
hand, these are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them. No Eye but a
Spiritual one; and that strained hard in deep Contemplation, can discern much
of them. Alas! who is it that can say, he needs not all the helps prescribed in
Mr. Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest? (part 4th. page 219. unto page 242.) I
mean his Helps to conceive affectionately of the Heavenly Glories.

These things premised, I exhort unto the Duty easily inferred. Unto frequent
and most serious Consideration of impenitent Sinners end, as well as of
penitent Believers. Naturalists say, that the attractive virtue of the
Loadstone is less when it is single; and draws much more strongly, when it is
encompassed and armed with Iron. You shall find, I am very sure, that the Hope
of Heaven will much better draw you, when the Fear of Hell does conjunctly
drive you.

Briefly, Having here no more room, I advise to a just meditation of these
three particulars.

There is an Hell, as sure as there is an Earth. There be damned men Burning,
as sure as there be sinning men Breathing. Yea, and as many of them, as have
ever died in Impenitence, and Unbelief, and Disobedience. Christians and Jews
also believe this. So do Turks and Pagans, for the substance of it. The Al^oran
mentions a house of Perdition. Plato speaks almost the words of Holy Scripture;
(...).

This Hell is the Center of Misery. A Collection of all evils in their ^ighest
degrees. Passing all our pre^ent understanding; forasmuch as not comprehending
what an incensed God can do, it is impossible to comprehend what a Damned man
does suffer. A man that eternally Dies and Lives together; having a Death
without End, and a Life without Ease. And Tortures too, without, and beyond,
all comparison.

This Hell or Center of Misery has six Memorables; e. gr. 1. Its Scripture
Names. A Prison, bottomless Pit, second Death, never dying Worm, unquenchable
Fire. 2. Its Essentials. Deprivation of all good; of Drops of Water, as well as
Cups of Wine: and Accumulation of all evils; for the Vessels of Wrath are
filled with it. 3. Its Efficients. The Place, Company, and enraged Conscience
are grievous ones; but God's own immediate hand is inconceivably the sorest,
and strikes the hardest blows. (^ee Dr. Tho Good win hereof.) 4. Its
Concomitants. These are an Enlargement of mind and a Fixedness of it upon
tormenting Objects. God lets in upon the Damned a great Light, to exaspe^^te
their Fire. There, Ignorance ^ould do them a kindness; so ^ould one minutes
Forgetfulness. But it cannot be. Here they would (...) know God, there they
must. ^ere they would not Think of him, ^ere they cannot cease one moment ^om
thoughts of him. And there^^re feel nothing but confounding Shame, piercing
Sorrow, racking ^ury, and Despair that is beyond (...) Epithets. 5. Its
Duration. And this is FOR EVER. An Eternity ^^expressable as its Extremity. 6.
Its ^nds and Reasons. Which are, the ^estraining of Sin in the World; and the
showing forth God's Holi^^ss, Righteousness, and Power, upon Sinners finally
incorrigible.

Indeed, if we saw all the Blessed ^^ining in Heaven, and all the ^amned
burning in Hell, as daily and plainly as we see any thing with our Eyes; it
could not make us Holy without the gracious influence of the Holy Spirit. But,
be it considered; that blessed influence of his is not to be expected, without
the use of his prescribed Contemplations and Practices. It is by Heaven and
Hell, both of them, in our Thoughts, that he pleases to rectify our
Affections and Works. Let us therefore, neither Pray for his Grace without
Meditations, of both, nor Meditate of both without Prayers for his Grace.

FINIS.
NB. The Marginal Note page 59^ was by the Printers mistake inserted. The
substance of it being found page 60 and 61 in its proper place.


