RULES FOR HEARING THE Word of God With certain and saving Benefit.

The Second Edition.

By DANIEL BVRGESS, Minister of the Gospel.

Published by an Hearer of them, at the Request of many others.

London, Printed for Andrew Bell and Jonas Luntley, at the Pestle and Mortar,
over against the Horseshoe-Tavern in Chancery Lane. MDCXCIII.

Price Three Pence.

Rules for hearing the Word of God, with certain saving Benefit.
BEFORE you Hear.
DIrection I. Pray for a Blessing. Ask and you shall receive it. Sincere hearty
Prayer is still a Prevailer; and then most, when it is for Gifts that be best.
But by not asking a Blessing, you deserve a Curse: because you do virtually
tell God, either that you need not his Spirit, or that you desire not the
saving Efficacy of his Word. Neglect of Prayer will ruin the best Hearer; holy
Use of it will save the worst Hearer.

Direct. II. Use Forecast against Distractions in Hearing. Wrath, and Lust, and
sinful Passions will take away your Heart at Sermons; but a constant cordial
Watch and Fight against them, will destroy those Destroyers. God will let no
Soul be devoured by them, that is diligent to keep from them: Though on the
other hand, Souls that do little to prevent them, shall be plagued with them.
Divine Grace will not encourage your sinful Negligence: No, but the Temptations
which overtake you wilfully, shall overcome you woefully. Believe sad
Experience, others and your own.

Direct. III. Value the Word, and the Preaching of it, and thank God for them
both. Honor them for God's sake, and God will honor and bless you for his
Son's sake, and for his Promise sake: God is so free of his Blessing on both,
that he lets no Man who highly prizeth it, go without it. You may highly prize
Gold and Silver, and go without them: but the richer Treasure of the Gospel is
certainly your own, if you can but supremely value it. If you do despise it,
blame your selves that you are not enriched by it. God will not throw his
inestimable Pearl unto ungrateful Swine: Swine that will not give so much as
Thanks for the Pearl of greatest Price.

Direct. IV. Acquaint your selves well with the Ends and Uses of the Word. Read
Books, and ask Ministers, and know as well as they, to what Purposes God
sends his Oracles: The four comprehensive Ends are, to convince of Sin, to
convert unto Jesus Christ, to confirm in Grace, to direct and comfort in
Obedience: Understand these, and muse much on them. Come to Sermons for these,
and you shall not go from Sermons without them: But God has not Pleasure in
Fools: and if you come to hear for you know not what, it is no marvel if you
come away Fools as you went.

Direct. V. Never forget God's Promise of Blessing on dutiful Hearing. He
cannot lie; and he has told you, Hear and your Souls shall live. Keep you that
Promise of his as the Apple of your Eye. It will do your Heart good to think,
God has not left himself at Liberty to bless or not bless your Hearing: No,
but that his FREE Grace is also BOUND Grace; bound by Word and Oath. This will
give you holy Boldness, to which God always gives happy VVelcome. But the want
of this in your Mind, will keep it full of cursed and malignant Doubts and
Fears. Without a Miracle of Grace it will hold you fearful, and hold you
unbelieving; that is, perishing.

Direct. VI. Honorably use your Advocates. All the Week long honor the Son of
God, as he in whom alone you can ever have Acceptance with God: and honor the
holy Spirit of God, by whom alone you can ever have effectual Assistance to any
Good. No Man ever thus honored the Son and Spirit, and went without the full
Blessing of the Word. Without our Intercessor in Heaven, and our Intercessor
in our Hearts, we can profitably do nothing; but with them we may do every
thing prosperously: Therefore be Sermons everywhere so lost, because this
Dependence on Christ and on his Spirit are scarce any where found. O that this
Word might be well weighed!

Direct. VII. Conclude upon it, the Word will be the Savor of Life or Death
unto you. It will cure you, or further kill you; and give Life to Life, or
Death to Death. Give your selves this preparatory Sermon before you come to
hear mine. Ministers Sermons soften or harden Hearers Souls; they never leave
you (in degrees of Good or Evil) as they find you. Such Fore-thoughts are
ordinary Antecedents, and direct Causes of no small Good.

IN Hearing the Word.
DIrection I. Approve Plainness and Power. Not only excuse and endure, but
approve and prefer them. You like best the Physician that heals best; and the
Counselor at Law that best brings you to Peace, and quiet Possession of your
Inheritance; tho neither of them do complement you at all, but reprove you
much, and chastise your mischievous Folly with needful Severity. Be as wise for
your Souls as for your Bodies and Estates. God heals the sick Souls that prefer
and use his own prescribed plain Medicines: But nice and peevish Ones, that
loath his Manna, and must have Quails; that disgust his sharp Word, and must be
treated with Men's smooth Words; such must die in their Pride and Folly. Where
Preachers be but Musicians, Churches be but Golgotha's.

Direct. II. Receive the faithful Minister's Words as God's own: for so they
are; they are God's Words originally; his Sermon as well as his Text, is all of
it so. They are God's Words materially, as to the Matter and Sense of them.
They are God's Words to you institutively; by God's Command they be spoken unto
you. They are God's Words given advantagiously; Words of God, by the Kindness
of God, delivered with more Advantage for your Minds and Hearts than in the
Holy Scripture barely read: Words of God, with a Comment of his Appointment:
Words of God, to which he has made a special Promise of highest Blessing: for
Faith (eminently) comes by hearing these Words: He that hears you, hears
me, said Christ to the Preachers that he sent. Receive every Gospel-Sermon as
by Christ preached, and doubt not but it shall be by Christ blessed: But if you
take the Words as well as the Breath of a Sermon, for ours, the Mistake will be
a deadly Loss of yours.

Direct. III. Mix abundance of Prayer with your Hearing. Souls are Spirits,
their Motions are swifter than the Sun's; they can, and they ought to do two
things at once: Ejaculation helps Attention, and not hinders it: Bread and Salt
must be in every Meal, and short warm Prayer in every Duty. Let your Hearts cry
out at every Truth delivered, O Lord, fix this Truth on my Soul! At every
Precept and Promise, Good God, help me to obey this Command, and to rely on
this Promise! At every Reproof, Glorious Spirit, convince and humble me for
this Sin, and lead me to Christ for Pardon, etc. Such praying Hearers never
lose their Labors. But woe to them, who tho at Sermon-time they be not deaf
Adders, yet they be dumb Dogs, whose Hearts do not to this Purpose speak, while
their Ears hear. I do not well hearken to the Ambassador, when I pray not much
to the King.

Direct. IV. Apply to your own Souls what the Preacher says to all. To know
for one's good, the Hebrews call to know for one's self: And do not all the
World so do? Ministers be Nurses, Sermons be Breasts, God's Word is Milk,
Hearers be the Children, and right Hearing is their sucking the Milk into each
one's own Soul. What another sucks and applies, will not nourish thee. Say thou
then of every Doctrine, This is my Lesson, I will learn it: Of every Command,
This is my Duty, I will do it: Of every Promise, This is my Encouragement, and
I will make Meat and Drink of it; my Soul shall rely and feed hereon. Who ever
missed of Life by the Word of Life, that so took it to themselves? Who did ever
thus suck, and not grow by the Gospel's Milk? Blessed are they that thus
monopolize a Sermon: While, to be sure, all are starved that do not thus feed,
whatever Dainties are set before them. And they are the most miserable of all
the Damned, who starve themselves where they might have feasted.

Direct. V. Express your Reverence of God in a Sermon, unto all the
Congregation. God is specially present in Heaven, and at a Sermon: Do you
believe it? Then show that Faith of yours: Show it to your God, and to your
Conscience, by holy Thoughts and holy Affections: Yea, and show it to all the
Church by your well-composed Countenances, and becoming Gestures. Your Bodies
are God's as well as your Souls: If you do not glorify him with both, you
glorify him with neither. God lays no hard Impositions on Aged, Sickly, Weak
Bodies: But he requites others to give him reverent Postures. Heads
unnecessarily covered in Hearing, are sinfully covered, and scandalously.
Gadding Eyes are impudent Publishers of profane rambling Hearts; and of those
Fools, whereof one makes many. Put off your Shoes, and keep them off while you
are on holy Ground: That is, be Reverent in Soul and Body. So honor God before
all the People, and then he shall make it seen before all the People, how he
honors and blesses you. Irreverence at a Sermon, is a public Call to God
for Damnation: A constructive bidding God to damn you, where Hundreds may be
VVitnesses to it; and, without God's great Grace, be poisoned by it. [There are
who say, that all Dissenters are irreverent in Worship: See you that they
slander us not with a matter of Truth.]

Direct. VI. Honor the Preacher as a Man of God, and no more. God styles a
Minister by that Name; and God's Names be the most proper and instructive. A
Minister is but a Man; do not therefore adore him as a God. Let him be so thy
Minister, that Christ may still be thy only supreme Shepherd and Bishop. He is
but a Man; expect therefore and bear with his Infirmities, and pray God for his
Assistances to him. He is but a Man; therefore pin not thy Faith on his Sleeve,
but exercise thy own Sense, and beg the Guidance of God's holy Spirit. Yet
nevertheless, he is a Man of God, remember: If not, do not hear him: If so,
consider while thou art hearing, he is one that has received the Holy Ghost;
he is one that Christ has qualified and commissioned, under himself, to be a
Savior of thee, and of all that hear him. Wherefore do not despise him, as not
adore him. Thou shall profit by him, if thou hear him as he is, an
Ambassador of God, a Messenger of Christ, an Overseer made by the Holy Ghost.
But woe is thine, if thou followest him either as a God, or as a common Man. The
Gospel pronounces no Blessing upon the Superstitious, or upon the Profane.

Direct. VII. Project to retain as much as may be of what you hear. All along
your hearing, design and do what you can for remembering. Say over to your
selves the Doctrine many times: and, if you can, repeat to your selves all the
Heads of the Discourse: But lay fast hold of the main Drift of every Sermon.
However Nature, Sickness or Age may have incurably wounded your Memories, God
is gracious, remember. He will accept an unfeigned Good Will for the very Deed.
His Spirit shall be a never-failing Remembrancer, to such as against their
Wills, and against their Endeavors, be forgetful. He will not call them
forgetful Hearers, that strain and strive, and do their best to be tenacious
ones. But he will so call, and will curse those, who like not and list not to
retain his Word, as well as to receive it. Hearers so wilfully dull, must look
to remain among the Dead. As they are slothful, they are wicked Servants. And
let them expect Christ's foretold Word, Depart ye Cursed. Heaven is no Hive for
Drones. Ignorance is a Curse; and if it be your Choice, it will as surely be
your Destruction as your Option.

AFTER Hearing God's Word.
DIrection I. Take the most earnest heed that you do not let slip what you have
received. Your Memories be the great Servants of your Faith, Hope and
Obedience; and they are but imperfectly sanctified: they be too much like the
Grates that let go clean Water, and hold filthy Mud. If you take little Pains
about them, you will have but sorry Service from them. The best Ground will
never hold the good Seed, if no care be had to drive off the Fowls that will be
coming and catching it away, and if Labor be not bestown to harrow it in. This
Labor for the Word is Labor in the Lord; and it shall not be in vain. Thus
do, you shall surely prosper, and do well. But if this be too much in your
Conceits; if you are lame, and will not use Crutches; if you cannot otherwise
remember, and you will not talk with your selves and Families of a Sermon; nor
go forth unto a Repetition; nor ask the holy Spirit to be your Remembrancer;
you must take to your Sorrow, what you get by your Sloth. The Devil cannot rob
you of a Sermon against your Will: and God will not keep a Sermon in your Mind
without your Will.

Direct. II. Let your Thanks be returned after every Sermon heard. Thanks and
Praise are God's dearly beloved; the End of all his Works; of your Beings,
your Redemption, your Gospel-Calls, all Ordinances and Providence. It is Hell
where no Praise and Thanks are; and it is Heaven where there is nothing
besides. Nothing delights God so much as these; and for nothing on this Earth
does God expect these, more than for his Gospel preached. When it is said, He
gives his Word, it is presently added, Praise ye the Lord. And this Praise we
are told, shall please the Lord better than an Ox or Bullock, than any external
Sacrifice. If Vnprofitableness by the Word do not drive away Thankfulness,
Thankfulness for the Word shall be sure to drive away Vnprofitableness. Let
your Thanks be more than verbal, your Profit shall be real: It shall appear to
all Men. But as long as you hear unthankfully, you must be and appear unholy.
Ingratitude does, of any Sin to be named, turn Honey into Gall, and Physic to
Poison. It is the same thing, to call a Man unthankful, and to say he is a
Samaritan, and has a Devil.

Direct. III. Lament your Sins in hearing, and go act Faith on Christ for your
Pardon. Abundance of Dross is in all our Gold. Iniquity abounds in our holy
Things. The holiest of them all need a thousand Pardons, and deserve our
deepest Blushes. And let us not flatter our selves, Repenting and Believing be
not Things indifferent, or Acts of mere Christian Liberty, but indispensable
Duty. They must go before the Seal of our Pardon, in our Conscience or in
Heaven. And believe it, God is incensed with Sin, whoever it be that sins,
and in whatever. He delights to be kind, but he hates to be fond. As ever
you would profit by a Sermon, follow it with the Tears of Repentance, and with
the Prayers of Faith. Then will God give you Profit, with Measure pressed down
and running over. If you are too proud for this; in God's Name I tell you, that
Pride of yours shall have a shameful Fall. The best thing proud, is worse than
the worst that is truly humble.

Direct. IV. Examine with humble Diligence, what in hearing appeared to you as
doubtful. Suspect your own Understandings more than your Minister's: But lean
not rashly on your own, or idolatrously on his. If Error be in his Doctrine, it
turns to Poison in thy Soul. Wherefore do not swallow what thou do suspect.
The most noble Hearers try all Doctrine by the holy Scriptures. Good Children
ask their Parents Advice; wise Women ask their Husbands; the Wise of all Sorts
go ask their Ministers, and entreat them to clear up by God's written Word the
Truth of their preached Word. Thus do; and whoever be barren Hearers, you shall
be fruitful ones. God never fails to teach Souls so careful to imbibe nothing
but Truth. O happy Church where Mal. 2.7. is wisely and duly observed! where
Ministers Lips preserve Knowledge, and People seek it at their Mouths. But it is
no more than is to be expected, if stupid Drones and contentious Cavillers,
live Idiots, and die without saving Wisdom. God's Curse rests on the Idle, and
he resists the Proud.

Direct. V. Prove your State and Condition by every Gospel-Sermon. You cannot
try too often, things whereof you can never be sufficiently certain: I mean so
much certain, but that you will still need to be more certain. You are true
Believers and alive to God, or Unbelievers and dead in Sin and Misery. You are
strong in the Grace that is in Christ, or Babes weak in the same. It is a sorry
Sermon by which no Help is given you, to form a Judgment of your selves
touching these things. God's Blessing upon your conscientious Care to make use
of the Help, you need not to distrust. His Command on you to prove your selves,
is not without a Promise of Blessing made to it. He ever enricheth those
Hearers, who use Sermons as Scales to weigh, and Touchstones to try their
Souls. But as for the Presumptuous, who dream themselves to be as good as they
need to be; and the Despairing, who conclude that they shall remedilesly abide
as bad as they are, and therefore never put the Word of God so close unto them;
What Hope of these! God will condemn those by his Word, who will not judge
themselves by it. If you will not make it a Light unto you, he will make it
Fire to you.

Direct. VI. Carry on your Knowledge, Memory, and every good Purpose, unto
Practice. Christian Divinity is an Art of doing more than knowing God's Will,
remembering it, and temporarily purposing to do it: It teaches living unto God.
Word and Sacraments, yea Faith and Repentance, all are for Obedience. God gave
his Son, and sent down his Spirit, to get him a People zealous of good Works as
well as Words. Much Fruit it is (and not your fair Leaves) that glorifieth God.
And it is the Hearer, rich in good Works, that God will glorify: The Hearer,
to whose Feet the Word is a Light, to walk by it; as well as a Light to his
Head, to talk by it. I have Warrant from our Savior to tell you; If you hear
his Word and so keep it, you shall have greater Honor than the Virgin Mary had
in being his Mother. And do you but still do the Word of his that you know, you
shall never fail to be made know the Word that he would have you to do. Use
well your Hands and Feet, and he will make every Sermon a Royal Salve to your
Eyes. But from him that practices not what he knows, from him shall be taken
the Light that he has: To him is promised no more Light; unto him is threatened
the darkest Fire, Luke 28.29. Heathen Moralists hold no Man to be so very bad,
as he who acts Evil, and no more than talks of Good. Christian ones must needs
pronounce them the worst Monsters, that speak as with cloven Tongues, and yet,
as Negroes, are no where white but in the Mouth.

Direct. VII. Teach your Relations what God teaches you at Sermons. God will
never forfeit his Name of Love; nor fail to reward Charity, and specially
Soul-Charity. It is the Devil's Proverb, The Free shall not be fat. God's
Proverb is, The liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that waters others shall
be watered. God will hide nothing from an Abraham, for this very reason,
because he will instruct all his Family with it. Go you now and instruct yours;
so shall you be taught of God as you have never been in past Days: Drop Divine
Truths on them, and God shall make Sermons rain down rich Showers on you. But
vain are your idle Moans, while you are uncharitable to your Relations. If I
know the Mind of God, He will starve you if you will not feed them. God is a
great lover of Children; and our Children are his more than ours. Nor can you
easily incense God more, than by neglect of these his Children. I wonder not
that many hear and understand not; because what they understand, they teach
not. You may be ever learning, but you shall never come to the saving Knowledge
of the Truth, until you make conscience of communicating the Truth you know.
Thus, spend, and God will send. Teach others, and God shall teach you; comfort
them, and God shall increase and multiply Comfort to you.

When these Rules shall be observed, Ministers shall be joyful (both) Fathers
and Nurses: The Bed of Christ shall be green in our Assemblies. It shall be no
more querulously said, that our Sermons have miscarrying Wombs and dry Breasts.
Joy shall be made in Heaven, and in the midst of us. Fear shall come on every
Soul of our Scorners. We shall praise God as the Primitive Christians, and have
Favor with all the People. The Word of God shall so run and be glorified; and
God, even our own God shall so bless us. Amen.

FINIS.

