Eighteen Directions FOR Saving Conversion UNTO GOD. WITH Directions for Daily
Holy Living. And Motives, with Directions, unto Religious Discourse; such as
tends to promote Conversion and holy Conversation. By Daniel Burgess, Minister
of the Gospel. Thus Published for the Poor.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

EIGHTEEN DIRECTIONS FOR Saving Conversion UNTO GOD. By Daniel Burgess,
Minister of the Gospel. Thus Published for the Poor.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

To my Friends in the Counties of Wilts, Berks, Somerset, Gloucester, Oxford,
Southampton, Middlesex, Grace and Peace.
Sirs,
I thankfully remember all your old true Love. And, by your frequent
Salutations, I am comfortably assured of it is continuance. Having not any thing
better, I Re-salute you all together, with this Fragment.

I entreat that your Children may be exercised in Learning to Understand them
and Recite them. Especially those Children whom I Baptized; and do with an
especial Affection remember.

This Inscription obtains its end; if it certify you, that You and Yours live
in the affectionate memory, of one that sticks not, to go out of the common
Road to fetch in one Soul unto Jesus Christ.

Your Fervent Lover and Orator. D. Burgess.

Eighteen Directions for Saving Conversion unto God, etc.
D. 1. BE Men. Be not content to be Flies and Worms, or Dogs and Swine in Men's
Shape. You have REASON; a faculty of Understanding and Judging what is True and
what is False. You have a WILL; a freedom of Choosing what you understand to be
Good, and of Refusing what you think to be Evil. You have a CONSCIENCE also,
obliging you always to ACT upon Choice, and to CHOOSE upon Judgment. Be not
then, as if you had neither of the three. Be not swayed by brutish Sense; and
acted by Colors, Smells, Sounds, and Tastes, as if you had been Born in the
Field among Cattle, and had in you no nobler Principle than they. Rise
presently and say, each of you; From this moment I will use my Powers. My
Nature is better than Brutes, and my Life shall be better. I will follow my
exercised Reason; and seek GRACE which is it is Perfection.

Till this be resolutely said, you have no proper Manhood. No, but are Bruits
and worse, Morally; though you are Men, Naturally, Psalm. 49.20.

D. 2. Know your Maker. Endure not to be Silly Children that know not their own
Father. You know, you made not your selves. Your Parents know little of your
inner parts; and confess that they did not form the same. You believe your
Maker to be one, that was Himself never made: But an Eternal Being, and the
common Father and Fountain of all Beings. And by consequence, of more Wisdom,
Power and Goodness than all. And more worth Knowing, than all. Rise then, and
say every one of you; What good shall my Life do me, if I may not know the
Father of it? Give me the Knowledge of my Father, or else I die. I will never
know rest, till I understand WHO and WHAT He is.

Go, learn the Sixteen things concerning GOD in the first of my Three Questions
resolved. Till He be known, nothing can be rightly known. 2 These. 1.7, 8.

D. 3. Love your Selves. Being descended from so excellent a Father, LOVELINESS
and LOVE it self; and being so excellent a race of his, as Men bearing his
Image; do not make light of your selves. The visible Creation is not, by
millions of times, worth one of your Souls. Say then straightway in your Souls,
every of you: I see nothing, but my God, better than my Soul. Next to his
Glory, I will therefore make this Souls good, my chief End and Care. If this
Soul be lost, it shall not be for want of any thing I can do to Save it. I will
do and suffer, work and beg, Live and Die for this Soul of mine. For it is
Felicity in my Maker's Love and Favor, and Likeness.

Until this be said, you do but Flatter, you do not Love your Selves. No, but,
interpretatively, you Hate your selves. And you Mischief your Selves, more than
Devils can do, Prove. 8.36.

D. 4. Visit Heaven and Hell. You know there is another World; (none of you all
pretend to be sure, that there is not another.) If there be another, confine
not your Acquaintance unto this. Heathens, Turks, and Jews themselves believe
another World: And say it is a Bigger than this, and an Everlasting one. And
one, whose Pleasures exceed those of this lower Worlds, as much as the Light of
the Sun exceeds the Gloworm's. Whose Pains and Torments also be such, that
the worst Torments here would be very Refreshments unto the tormented there.
Let every one then say, I will as daily think of the next World, as I breath in
this. And Fear the torments of that World, more than the pains of this. And
Desire and seek the Pleasures of that World, more than all of this.

Before this Practice, you do not see afar off, but are blind. You live in this
World, as Spiders in their Webs; careless and thoughtless of the Beesom of
destruction. And as Serpents in the Dust, regardless of the glory of higher
Regions, 2 Cor. 4.18.

D. 5. Call Earth your Purgatory. Your Time here, is, all of it, given you on
Trial; and for Preparation for your Eternal State. Your Maker is Holy; his
Heaven is Pure; All that enter it must be Purified; their Time is allowed them
for Purification. As they are Purified or not Purified here on Earth, they are
taken into Heaven or excluded. No other Place of Purifying, or Time, is set by
God. Say then, Reader, say often unto thy self; My time is my trial for
Eternity; I am here, on my good behavior; as I Live here, I Speed for ever.
After my death God will neither hold me on trial in that World, nor send me
back again, and try me in this. If I am Glorified I must be Purified; and if
Purified, it must be now. My Motto shall be NOW or NEVER, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. 2 Cor.
5.9, 10.

D. 6. Believe and search God's Word. Believe the H. Scripture so to be. It is,
in a manner, as plain that the Scripture is his Word, as that the World is his
Work. Men could no more invent such a Bible, than they could make such a World.
(Read Dr. Manton, Dr Bates, Mr. Baxter hereof, you shall say so.) As sure as
there is a God, his Will must be Revealed; but if it be not Revealed in the H.
Scripture, where is it Revealed? And what is there in the Scripture but is like
Him, and speaks it self His? And if His it be, how Continually, Awfully, and
Affectionately should it be studied? Rather than neglect it, I would burn all
my other Books, and read the Scripture by the light of them. Say thou that
read this; upon due consideration say thou; If I had a thousand Souls, I
would venture them all upon the truth of these H. Scriptures. I resolve to Live
and Die by them. And I engage my self here, in presence of their blessed
Author, that I will as daily read this his Word, as I eat his Bread, Joh. 5.39.
Col. 3.16. Psalm. 119.97.

D. 7. Esteem Godliness God-likeness. You know little of God's Word till you do
so. It Is true, Flesh and Blood, and the World, and the Liar from the beginning,
do give Godliness another report. Even a very black Character. They represent
it as a very Hell upon Earth. But God's Word says the clean contrary; as his
Children also feel the clean contrary. Godliness, all agree, is nothing but
Imitating, and Obeying of God. Now, to Imitate him (in Wisdom, Truth, and
Goodness,) can be nothing but Beauty and Pleasure, and Benefit and Honor. And
to Obey him, is no other. Being He is too Great, to have his service any
disparagement unto Angels; and too Good, to let it go unrewarded unto Men. Nor
puts He his Children on Earth upon any thing, but what He put his Son in Heaven
upon, whiles he was here. Will He have us Suffer, as well as Labor for him?
Beside that, we may thank our Sin for it; let us consider, The Natural Son of
God suffered the Curse of the Law; the Adopted Children of God suffer nothing
but the Chastisements of Grace. He was made perfect by vastly greater
Sufferings. Add hereto; what are light Sufferings and but for a moment, for an
exceeding great Crown and Eternal? And think too; Can the Devil name any thing
in Holiness, so hard as we can prove all things in Sin to be? And, all places
in Hell to be? Love is all Religion, and all Pleasure is Love. God only, is
more blessed than a Man Godly. Conclude thou thus, Reader, and say; Henceforth
will I seek Fish in the Air and Fowls in the Sea, as soon as seek Pleasure or
Honor any where but in Godliness. Psalm. 119.92. Prove. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

D. 8. Beware of the Mill and the Circle. Of the Mill of worldly Business, and
of the Circle of Sensual Pleasure. They be the Traps that take most Souls; and
are the Death of all that they take. The Mill does store Hell with you poor
Tenants, and the Circle stores it with your Rich Landlords. You have but one
Soul, and can Love best but one thing; if the Worlds Profits or Pleasures get
the Throne of your one Soul, you have no other for God; and He will sit no
where but on the Throne, and in your BEST Love. Nor have you but one Lifetime
for working out your Salvation. If this one be eat up by the foresaid Vulturs,
your Salvation is lost. Say then Reader, if thou carest to be saved; Heart and
Life-Religion, shall be my prime Mill and Circle; my chief Business and
Pleasure. Worldly ones will follow me; but I will follow these. And of all
things in the World I will keep the Throne of my Heart from Worldly Business
and Pleasures. The Bloodiest Tyrants and Butchers of Humane Souls, 1 John 2.15,
16, 17. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.

D. 9. Keep out of Pest-houses. Out of the Company of 1 Men falsely so called;
2 Men, that know not their God; 3 Men that love death, and wrong their own
Souls; 4 Men, that look not into any World but this; 5 Men, that mind not Times
End and Use; 6 Men, that value Bibles no more than Plutarch 's Morals; 7 Men,
that fancy God's Service wretched Bondany; 8 Men, like Bees, either busy in
gathering Honey or Drowned in it. Wisdom has said it, Justice has ordered it,
and Goodness has warned you of it. A Companion of Fools shall be destroyed.
Come not of choice therefore, near unto their Doors. The choice of Company, is
in a great degree the choice of your State; of Sin and Misery, or of Grace and
Salvation, I mean. Say, if thou art Wise, or if thou ever would be Wise; say
and hold; I will henceforth choose to associate with Frogs and Toads, rather
than with Gods Enemies. I will have no Bosom Friend that has not some Holiness
to the Lord wrote on his Forehead, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. 2 These. 3.6. Psalm. 139.21.

D. 10. Have a care of your Eyes. In Nature you may be Blind, and Live; in
Grace you cannot. Ignorance and Error Damn Souls, as surely as Sins against
Light and Knowledge. Especially where there is plenty of means of Knowledge.
Heaven's a far Country; Holiness is a narrow way to it; And is a Blind Man
like to hit it, do you think? Besides, Darkness is that whereof Satan is the
Prince a^^ ^^orance is called the Power of the Devil; and Christ is said to be
coming to take vengeance of all that KNOW NOT God, and that (do not more than
Know,) that OBEY not the (whole) GOSPEL. Reader, go beg Gods Eye Salve, say
presently; Grace is called Light, and Glory is called Light; I will no more
endure this dark Heart of mine. I will never be quiet until I get to understand
all the Fundamental TRUTHS, GRACES, and DUTIES of Christianity.

For thy Life get understanding of the Assemblies Catechism. Of the Summaries
of Truths in my Three Questions resolved, etc. Prove. 4.5, 7, 8, 9. Prove. 7.4.
The Grand Charter Issued out and Granted by Jesus Christ for the Plantation of
the Christian Faith in all Nations. By George Lawson, Rector of More in the
County of Salop.

D. 11. Highly prize Sunshine and Thunder. Plain and clear, Rouzing and
piercing Sermons. How dull are your Heads? What can Benefit you, that does not
Inform you? And what can Inform you that is not as plain as the Sun? Your
Hearts be likewise cold and frozen desperately. What besides Thunderbolts can
break 'em? What besides Flashes of Fire can thaw them? Believe it, dark and
dull Preachers be fearful Judgments and Curses to such as I suppose you.
Ignorance, makes some Preachers dark; Pride, makes others; but Sin makes both;
and both do promote Sin. Say thus, thou that valuest thy Soul; I will pray God
to direct me to a Ministry both Shining and Burning: Plain for my dull Mind,
Powerful for my rocky Heart. Clear to inform my Understanding, and as Cutting
and Searching to excite me Affection, Isa. 58.1. Hos. 6.5.

D. 12. Beg of God Golden Snuffers. We do all need Reprovers. And so peevish
we, all, are, that unless they be excellent ones; very Compassionate and very
Discreet, and very Innocent themselves; we cannot bear them when they reprove
us. We receive no good from the Snuffers, except they be of pure Gold; it is
seldom that we ever do. Great need therefore there is, that thou Prayest the
Over-ruler of all things, to bestow upon thee some Righteous ones to smite
thee. Some Skilful Friends, and Faithful, and of excellent Holiness to tell
thee ever and anon of thy Miscarriages. Such as thy Minister never hears of;
and can but generally reprove. Psalm. 141.5. 1 These. 5.14. Exodus 37.23.

D. 13. Suppose the worst of your Selves. Your own Hearts will be forward to
Presume all is well quickly; and that God and you are Reconciled. Satan also
still pushes on toward presumption. Toward Hope without any ground for it: Or,
at least, without just ground for it. But fair and soft, goes best and
farthest. Think thus; if you are indeed Reconciled, your Examination of your
self will not break; no, but Clear and Strengthen the Reconciliation; and bring
you in abundance of comfort. But if you are not Reconciled to God, you never
can be reconciled until you know your want of it. And Examination, is Gods
appointed way for your Knowledge. Do not say, But this Knowledge will scare us.
For, I pray, what will Hell do? What! Will you not bear the Judgment Seat of
your own Consciences? Whether you will or no, you shall bear God's greater
Judgment Seat. Go resolve then, and say thou; Never will I be high-minded; but
Fear. I will maintain a godly Jealousy of my Self and my State. Daily will I
Examine, and pray God to Examine, my Heart; and try my Ways. I will Consult my
God, my Heart, my Minister and my Friends, about the grounds of my Hopes, and
Comforts, 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 Cor. 9.27. Rev. 3.17.

D. 14. Sleep not on the top of a Mast. Do not Delay to mend your Condition,
while it is apparently dangerous. He that is on the Ladder, is near to
Execution; and Unregenerate men be all on the Ladder. Delay is not for them;
every breath, for ought they know, is their Last. (See my Sermon against Delay
in the Morning Lectures.) Say to thy Soul, as the Angel to Lot; Arise, lest
thou be consumed; Escape for thy Life, NEITHER STAY THOU. Escape, lest thou be
consumed. If thou do not flee, wrath will come; and thou will not be able to
flee from it, Eccles. 12.1. Now, in days of Youth. No Delay, in Youth it self,
2 Cor. 6.2.

D. 15. Let thy Sins be but Falls, and not Leaps. Though, after all, thou do
the Evil that thou would not do; see that thou do not one more, than what
is against thy will. Thou fallest into Sin, when for want of strength thou
committest it: Thou leapest into it when thou committest it with consent, of
choice, and for very pleasure. True, the wages of all sin, is DEATH; yet the
former is a Gnat, and the latter a Camel. So wide is the difference. And the
Gospel is plain; Lambs fall into the mire, but they are Swine that leap into,
and wallow in it, Psalm. 19.13. Romans 7.15, 16, 17. Heb. 10.26.

D. 16. Row against the stream. The World wonderfully mistakes CANNOT for
WILL-NOT. Beware you of it; for it may soon become fatal. Use your selves unto
this Language: Here is a Duty, against which my mind is full of carnal
Objections; and my Will full of like Oppositions. But against both, I will
Fight; God help me by his Grace to Conquer. The Duty goes against me, I
confess; but I, for God, will go against my Self. I am ashamed that I cannot do
it more Freely, but I will go force my self to perform it. Though I cannot
Cheerfully, I will Mournfully perform it. Men are sometimes bid to Eat for a
Stomach; I will go Obey to get a better Heart to Obey with. Isa. 64 7. God
rewards Duty with Duty, Psalm. 119.55, 56.

D. 17. Flee from Popery. When you have gone thus far, admit no conceit of
Merit in it. Dream not that your own strength brought you so far, neither.
Without the Grace of Christ, nothing can be done. And it must be for his alone
Merit, that all is accepted, when it is done. Every one of your good Thoughts,
are the works of his Spirit. And every kind look of God upon you, is the
purchase of his Blood. You must never expect to Repent, Believe, or Obey, but
by his Strength. And when you do, you must never look for acceptance with God
but upon the Merit of his Obedience. Romans 5.18, 19. Romans 10.4. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Colos. 3.17. NB. 1. Christ satisfied God offended with us; He paid what we
Owed, and could not pay. 2. God Accepted what Christ performed, as performed on
our behalf. 3. Believers enjoy the Fruits of Christ's Performance being so
Accepted. 4. And, therefore must not Believe or Obey for those Ends for which
Christ did Obey; I mean, to Satisfy Gods Justice, and to Merit his Mercy.

D. 18. Finally and Principally; Take no rest, and give God none; till, through
his Grace, you discern your selves to have risen up, orderly, these seven
Steps. By these he leads every one of his Chosen, unto the Glory prepared for
them. Nor are you to preach peace unto your Souls till they have ascended them
all.

1. CONVICTION. Or a thorough Persuasion of the Sinfulness, Miserableness, but
Changeableness of your Condition. (See Twelve necessary Convictions in my Call
unto Sinners.) John 16.8.

2. CONSIDERATION. Or Serious, Much, and Frequent Meditation of the things
whereof you are Convinced in your Hearts, Psalm. 119.59.

3. CONTRITION. Or Fear, and Grief, and Shame and Hatred of Sin, wrought by the
Consideration aforesaid, as the means thereof. Psalm. 51.17.

4. CONSULTATION. Or Enquiry and Taking Counsel of God, and of his Servants,
what to do for Covenant Union unto Christ and Saving Interest in him. Acts 2.37.

5. ACCEPTANCE. To wit of the Lord Jesus Christ to be your Prophet, Priest,
King, and Pattern or Exemplar. Intelligent and Sincere CONSENT to his being all
four, unto and for you. John 1.12.

6. DEDICATION. Or, Solemn Completing of that said Acceptance, by Purpose,
Promise, and Vows to Learn 2of Christ, to Trust in him, to Obey him, to Imitate
him. And this, both by Inward and Spiritual, and Outward and Sacramental
Covenanting, Isa. 44.5. 2 Cor. 8.5. Ezekiel. 16.8. Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.

7. CONVERSATION. Or, a Life expressive of all aforesaid. A Life aptly
signifying that the Soul has been Convinced, Considerate, Contrite,
Consultative, Acceptive of Christ, Dedicative of it self unto Christ. A Life of
endeavored, though not attained, Perfection. Col. 2.6. Psalm. 50 21. Romans 6.18,
19. Mark here, the AS YE HAVE, and the SO NOW YIELD; and observe well the
Doctrine of it. We should SO serve God and Holiness in our Regenerate State, AS
we did serve Sin and Satan in our Unregenerate State. Even SO, 1. So Readily
and Freely. 2. So Resolutely and Invincibly. 3. So Carefully and Studiously. 4.
So Painfully and Industriously. 5. So Pleasantly and Delightfully. 6. So
Perpetually and Incessantly. 7. So Progressively and Proficiently. 8. So
Perswasively of others, and with Zeal provoking many.


NATURE will not let a Man live, without some Service of God. And GRACE will
not let a Christian live, without such Service as this, Performed, or at least
Endeavored.

Go, Reader, and say to this effect; Morning, Noon, and Night, I will be
Catechizing my Soul about these seven things. Yea, and I will desire my Pastor
to Catechize me concerning them. And till I have ALL, I will account my self
NOTHING; yea WORSE than Nothing.

May every Peruser, be a Practiser of these Directions! May all my
Imperfections in them, be forgiven, in the Blood of my Redeemer, by my gracious
God! May my more Judicious Brethren (more able in Speaking, and more able in
Writing,) be drawn to publish their more Elaborate Directions, by the good
Success of these so hastily thrown together! May these Lines Live, when I am
Dead; and Speak, when my Breath is Stopped; and (in the mean time) may they
Preach unto Thousands, of whom I can never see the Faces, till the
Resurrection! Amen and Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside near Mercers Chapel.
A Call to Sinners, such as are under Sentence of Death, and such as are under
any Prospect of it: from the Long-suffering and Gracious, but most Righteous
God.

Three Questions resolved briefly and plainly, viz. (1.) What Conceptions ought
we to have of the blessed God? (2.) What are those Truths, whereof the
Knowledge appears most indispensibly necessary unto our Salvation; and
(therefore) to be first and most learnt by us? (3.) What is the change wrought
in a Man by God's H. Spirit, before he can safely conclude himself passed from
Death to Life? Being the Sum of three Sermons.

A seasonable Question plainly resolved: viz. What are we to judge of their
Spiritual Estate, who neglect the Lord's Supper? And, What is that discerning
of the Lord's Body in it, without which Men do eat and drink their own
Damnation?

Man's whole Duty, and Gods wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto. Set forth from
2 Cor. 5.20. and published at the Request of some Hearers.

Advice to Parents and Children. The Sum of a few Sermons, Contracted, and
Published at the Request of many Pious Hearers.

Christian Commemoration, and Imitation of Saints Departed; Explicated, and
Pressed from Heb. 13.7. occasioned by the Decease of the Reverend Mr. Henry
Hurst, Lately Minister of the Gospel in London. All Six by Daniel Burgess
Minister of the Gospel.

FINIS.
Directions for Daily Holy Living, by D. Burgess Minister of the Gospel.
D. 1. LImit your sleeping hours. Let them not be as many as brutish Sense
demands. Let Reason fit their number to your Health and Labor. Your Motion
is not by the Rule of Religion, if your Rest be not so, Psalm. 139.18. I awake,
that I may be still with thee. So, some Learned read it.

D. 2. Consecrate your waking thoughts. Let your God have those first Fruits.
He always Loved the first of all things. The first Fruits, and first Born,
under the Law, were his. Present Him with these, every morning. Thoughts are
inward Speeches. Let God hear Himself first spoken of by you, still. It will
argue that He is your Beloved, and it will make Him more so Love makes
Thoughtful; and Thoughtfulness makes Love. A Potter is known by his Vessels,
and a Heart by its Thoughts; and of all Thoughts, by its first in the morning,
and last at night. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord! Psalm. 5.3.

D. 3. Regulate your Bodily Dresses. Long Dresses bewray large Consciences, if
no worse. He that duly prefers his Soul above his Body, would rather go like
the wild Indians, than dress like some Londoners. The Hebrew word Beged,
signifies Clothing and Covenant Breaking. God seems to have taught thereby,
that the Clothes on our backs should humble us for the sin of our first Parents
and Persons. But if they do not so; and if outward Adorning be that which
employs our early hours, and severe thoughts, it will be dearly paid for in our
dying hours, with tormenting thoughts, 1 Pet. 3.3. Whose adorning let it not be
that outward adorning.

D. 4. Time well your Closet and Family Worship. They be not the same things in
season, and out of season. Let the Word be read; one verse rather than none;
and Prayer be made; the shortest, rather than none; both by your selves alone,
and with your Families. If it may be, worship first by your selves. But,
needlessly tie not your selves, being God has not bound you unto such and such
hours. Still do, as you verily think is most for Edification, Mat. 6.6. Enter
into thy closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy Father. Josh.
24.15. As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.

D. 5. Sanctify your worldly Business. Nothing is your business but that which
God your Master sets you about. Dare not then do any thing, but that whereto
you can entitle Him. Nor dare you to do it for any other chief end, but to
please Him. When you do WHAT He sets you, and supremely BECAUSE He sets it, and
wills that you do it; knowing and hoping for his Direction in it, and Blessing
of it; you then sanctify it: Then HOLINESS TO THE LORD is written upon it,
whatever it be, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye Eat or Drink, or WHATSOEVER ye do, do
all to the glory of God.

D. 6. Moderate your Pains in your Callings. Pains must be; Sweat, is required.
But by Reason and Religion they must be measured. God's Laws be all Just and
Good. Drones that will not work must not eat. He that is a sluggard in his
work, is branded as Brother of the Prodigal waster, Prove. 18.9. Drudges, of
whose Labor there is no end, and who bereave their Souls of good; who use
themselves worse than God allows Oxen to be used; Treading out the Corn, and
muzzling themselves; these are branded by the Spirit of God, as inconsiderate,
absurd, and self-destroying fools, Eccles. 4.8. Diligent hands have the promise
of being made rich: That is, Hands that be neither Drones nor Drudges, Prove.
10.4. The hand of the diligent makes rich.

D. 7. Strengthen your guards against your strongest Enemies. Sin, is our
Enemy; even One and All. God hates nothing but sin; and man can be hurt by
nothing but sin. Sin's name is Legion; for it is many. And of the many, there
is some one or other in every man, that has more power than all the rest. That
gives strength unto all the rest. And, being mortified, all the rest are
mortified. There be also beside that KING-sin in the Souls, some kind of
PEER-sins, which, of all, next unto the KING-sin, are by far the most
dangerous. The KING-sin is (always or mostly) your Temperamental sin; the sin of
your Constitution. The PEER-sins, be the Radical ones, of Sensuality, Unbelief,
Hypocrisy; and the way-laying ones, whereunto Temptations will every day meet
us in our Company and Business. You can never have any but a false Peace, till
you can say, as Psalm. 18.23. I am upright before the Lord; I keep my self from
my own iniquity. Doctor Bates, his little Book upon that Text is a Light and a
Lamp, a Rod and a Staff.

D. 8. Govern your Thoughts and your Words. Let not your Minds or Tongues be
unbridled, and run whither they will. You are in your Shops and your Business
very often, alone; Reverence your Conscience, and dare not in the presence of
God's Vicegerent to suffer a sinful or useless self-discourse. But talk with
your selves of great and good Subjects, and with designs of great and good
Effects upon your hearts by them. When you are in company, consider your
Tongue's need of Government: All its words be Meat or Poison to your Hearers,
and your selves: They do still holily make for Edification, or subserviently
for Recreation, or contrarily for Corruption, Prove. 24.9. The THOUGHT of
foolishness is sin, Mat. 12.36. Of every idle WORD that men shall speak, they
shall give account in the day of Judgment.

D. 9. Preserve the Prerogative of your King. I mean, of your Love. Your Love
of God, of Angels, of Men: That is your Principal Grace; your Prince. Keep that
Prince on horseback; let that ride, and reign, and rule you in all you do. Let
not any thing lower, move and sway you more, in any of your ways. Remember
still, it is Love that is the highest improvement of our Faculties, the End of
all other Graces, the Excellency in all other Graces. For this is the Word of
God given, for this is the Spirit given, for this was his Son given, that we
might Love! Never please your selves therefore with any Quality, or any
external Duty, without Love, internal Love, animating, enlivening, exalting it,
Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

D. 10. Value highly your Time. Do so really, in more than empty pretense. And
do so apparently also. Apparently unto your own Conscience, Family, Friends,
Neighbors. Tell all in the Language of Practice, you account them as the worst
of Thieves, who rob you of your Time. Say as Mr. Fowler, My Time and Strength
is God's, and he shall have it. And as Mr. Calvin, Christ shall not find me
idle. Esteem every small moity of Time, as you do of Gold. Expend none at all,
of it, but in mowing and whetting your Sithe; in very Duty, and necessary
Recreation. Buy a great deal of it; I mean, part with much vain pleasure,
secular profit, fools favor and kindness, and good men's too sometimes, to
save your Time. To save it from doing of evil, and from doing of lesser good,
when you may do greater. That is indeed, as we are bid, Ephesians. 5.16. To Redeem
the Time.

D. 11. Exercise Christian Temperance in all your Meals. Brutes, are more
temperate in use of food, than many men. And, may I not say, that some
unregenerate men are more temperate, than here and there a well reputed
Christian appears? This is a shame. Excess in Meat and Drink, is not the least
fruitful sin against Body or Soul. To be abstemious and sparing for Health's
sake, is to be as wise as Brute creatures, and some men graceless. Abstinence,
for Conscience sake; of love to God and Christ, to our own Souls and others; of
faithfulness unto our Baptismal Engagement; this is Christian Temperance, Ezekiel.
16.49. Behold this was the sin of Sodom, Pride, FULLNESS of BREAD, and abundance
of IDLENESS was in her. Sin came in by eating; remember then Prove. 23.2. Put a
knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to Appetite. And, Be not desirous
of Dainties; for they are deceitful meat, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die.

D. 12. Hasten your Recoveries out of your wilful sins. For, sins of
unavoidable Infirmity, God threatens not Eternal Plagues, or Temporal Judgments
on you. Sincere and constant Humiliation for them, is indeed necessary and
natural, to Lovers of God and Christ. But sins that are not of common and
insuperable Infirmity, they make fearful breaches of your Peace with God, and
sore wounds in your Souls. They sadly lessen God's Love of Complacence in you,
and your Love and all graces toward God. When you fall into these, dare not to
lie one minute in them; Lament them presently; Confess them presently to God,
and (if need be) unto man also. Repent, rent your hearts for them, and rent
them also from them, without delay. Cry for the Balm of Christ's Blood to be
presently dropped into your wounds; and for the clean Water of his Spirit to be
presently poured on you. Cry mightily for Pardon of them, and Assistance
against them. Every minutes delay may cost you so many days, weeks and months
dolor and anguish. Chosen delays may make so many Spira's of you, for ought I
know, Psalm. 32.3. While I kept silence, i. e. would not confess my sin, my
bones waxed old, i. e. I suffered dearly.

D. 13. Examine strictly your Relative Duty. Often say, What Subject am I? What
Fellow-Subject? What Observer of Magistrates and Ministers? What Friend am I?
How do I carry it toward my Enemies? For a Christian can be no one's Enemy! as
far as he is a Christian, he cannot. What Husband or Wife am I? What Parent or
Child am I? What Master or Servant am I? What Superior, what Inferior, what
Equal am I? Sincerity or Hypocrisy, is, for the most part specially seen in
these things, 2 Pet. 3.11. What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
Conversations and Godlinesses? Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I
have respect unto all thy Commandments.

D. 14. Repeat every Evening your double use of the WORD and PRAYER. I mean, in
your Closet and Family. Dare not for the gain of a Kingdom to omit it, of
choice. Nor to perform it without greatest Seriousness, Willingness and
Thankfulness, Psa. 55.17. Evening and Morning, and at Noon, will I pray and cry
aloud, and he shall hear my voice.

D. 15. Repair every days Losses, and be chary of every days Gains. I mean your
extraordinary ones. The Womb of some days does bring you forth huge Hindrances
of Duty to God, to your selves, and to your Families. III Persons or Things
obstruct your Solemnities. When they do so, consider and consult, and strain
hard to make it up the next day. Read, Pray, Meditate, etc. so much the more.
Another day brings forth huge Helps. A Lecture, a Fast, or Public
Thanksgiving, a Funeral Sermon, a meeting with some Servants of God of
extraordinary Talents; apt to Teach, and forward so to do. When such a day
comes, lay up, and lock up your Spiritual Gains. Roast what you take, as Solomon
speaks; keep, feed on it, enjoy it. Ephesians. 5. v. 16. Redeeming the time, because
the days are evil. John second Epistle, verse 8. Look to your selves that we
lose not those things that we have wrought, but may receive a full reward.

D. 16. Improve both of the holy Sacraments. Most lamentably these are
neglected among us! The God of all Grace, that has condescended to extremity
in the ordaining of them, awaken Ministers and People to better use of them! On
God's part they are Signs and Seals, on our part they are Bonds and Badges.
Baptism and the Lords Supper, are the utmost confirmations God gives us of his
Promise to be our God; and the utmost we give of our Engagement to be his.
Forget not this, nor vainly remember it. Plead with God for your Souls, his
Signed, Sealed Promises unto you; to the expulsion of Distrust. And plead with
your Souls for God, your Sacramental Bonds given unto him, and Badges of being
his put upon you; to the Conquest of Disobedience. Sacramental Obligation is
the chief Storehouse and Magazine to draw Armor from, in an Hour of
Temptation. There is none like it. Romans 6.1, 2, 3. What shall we say then?
shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that
are dead to sin live any longer therein? Know ye not, that so many of us as
were Baptized into Jesus Christ, were Baptized into his death? 1 Pet. 3.21. The
like figure whereunto, even Baptism, does also now save us, (not the putting
away of the filth of the flesh; but the answer of a good Conscience toward God)
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16, and 21. The Cup of Blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which
we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Ye cannot drink the
Cup of the Lord, and the Cup of Devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lords
Table, and of the Table of Devils.

D. 17. Hear your selves daily your Catechism. I mean, the Summary of Religion,
unto which you have attained. There be several set down in my Three Questions
Resolved long ago Printed, I advise all, once a day, to go over that which they
have Learned, and can Remember. Let grown Christians ask and answer themselves,
how they do in their Hearts BELIEVE each Article of the Apostles Creed; how
they PRAY each Petition of the Lords Prayer; how they PRACTICE each Commandment
of both Tables; how they are ENCOURAGED and ENGAGED unto all three; unto the
Life of Holy Faith, Prayer and Practice; I mean, by their Holy Baptism and the
Lords Table. Romans 2.21. Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy
self? Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your own Heart. Psalm. 16.7. My Reins instruct me.

D. 18. Command your last Thoughts to be fit to be your last. When you compose
you to sleep, suppose that you may die in that sleep. And if so, the God unto
whom you must go in that death, is fit to be thought of in the entrance to it.
If not, it will be sweet in the Morning to review last thoughts of him at
Night. Yea, and those thoughts of Faith and Love, and Trust, at Night, will be
generative of more of the same Spirit and Goodness in the Morning. Psalm. 63.6.
I remember thee on my Bed, and meditate of thee in the Night Watches.

He that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
Men, Romans 14.18.

Motives, with Directions, unto Religious Discourse; such as tends to promote
Conversion and holy Conversation. By the same Author. Thus Published for the
Poor.
THE H. Spirit setting forth the sin of all the Members of the Body, insisteth
longest upon the Instruments of Speech. Romans 3.13, 14. Their Throat is an open
sepulcher, with their Tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is
under their lips: Whose Mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. He declares
also, that our Safety depends upon the right or ill using hereof, Prove. 18.21.
Death and Life are in the power of the Tongue, and they that love it shall eat
the fruit thereof. And that one of the prime things that shall be brought to
Judgment are our Words, Mat. 12.37. For by thy words thou shall be justified,
and by thy words thou shall be condemned. He makes our Speech the great
discovery of our Heart, Mat. 12.34. O generation of Vipers, how can ye, being
evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. Psalm 37.30. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his
tongue talks of judgment.

And accordingly holy men, watch against the sins of the Tongue, Psalm. 39.1. I
said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue: I will keep
my Mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. Yea and Pray unto God to
assist their watch, Psalm. 141.3. Set a Watch, O Lord, before my mouth: Keep the
door of my Lips. They make conscience of expressing the Image of their hearts
in holy discourses, Psalm. 37.30. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom,
and his tongue talks of judgment. And count it absurd to pretend to be
religious, if their Discourse be not governed by Religion, Jam. 1.26. If any
man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives
his own heart, this man's Religion is vain.

God, for Christ's sake forgive me my trespasses! And prosper unto many others,
with me, these twelve Motives to Religious and Useful Discourse.

M. 1. Our Speech is given us by God for Religious Discourse. Jam. 3.9.
Therewith we bless God. We do so, it we use it to the end for which He gave it.
It is a Faculty most Excellent; and therefore ought to be consecrated unto the
holy uses, for which it was by Him intended. Otherwise, we oppose his just
Design, and abuse his rich and extraordinary Gift. That which He has bestown
upon no Creatures, but those that are capable of Religion; and bestown it on
them for no use so much as of Religion.

M. 2. Religious Discourse is the most Honorable. Does God excel Creatures?
Does Eternal Blessedness transcend momentany things? As truly and plainly does
Religious discourse outshine all other. Men, despise Childrens talk of their
Play-things; Princes, contemn Subjects talk of their Shops and Farms; and, no
less, do Newborn Souls slight Princes talk of Crowns and Kingdoms, in
comparison of talk concerning Heaven. It is only holy Breath, that is Nobly
spent.

M. 3. Religious Discourse is the most Delightful. It is most apt to Delight;
and does actually Delight Men most, when Sin corrupts not their Sense. As Honey
is incomparably sweeter than Whites of Eggs, when no Disease has vitiated our
Palates. For, what is Delightful, but Goodness? And what is Goodness, but
Pleasingness unto God? And, what Discourse so pleases God, as Religious? And
who have so much Pleasure as they in Heaven, who have no discourse but
Religious? Prove. 15.26. The words of the pure are pleasant words.

M. 4. Religious Discourse is the most Profitable. It trafficks in the richest
Commodities. God has no richer, than what it trades for. Yea, and its words be
a wind that do always blow good unto both the Speaker and Hearer. They prevent
evil Words and Thoughts abundance of them; if not much other Sin. They awaken
the Speakers Mind, and affect his Heart; and give him a rich promise of Gods
Blessing. Prove. 11.25. The liberal Soul shall be made fat: and he that waters
shall be watered also himself. Mal. 3.16, 17. Then they that feared the Lord,
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it; and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his Name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that
day when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own
Son that serves him. They also Save and Convert some Souls; and Quiet and
Comfort others of the Hearers. Talk of Health and of Riches will not cure the
Sick, nor enrich the Poor. But full often has talk of Holiness made holy and
blessed the Hearers of it. Who knows not many Instances?

M. 5. Religious Discourse is a Duty most Undoubted, most Cheap, and most
Advantageous to do good. Undoubted; for no Law forbids any man to praise his
God- Cheap, for what does cost less than words? or what will you spend for God,
if you will not speak for Him unto your Friends? Advantageous; for in
Discourse, you may better know any man's Capacity; and so, suit it better, in
the matter and language, than in Preaching. Besides, you speak singly and more
particularly, and insinuatingly. Deuteronomy. 6.7. And thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them, when thou fittest in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up.

M. 6. Religious Discourse is a Duty of greatest opportunity. Not a day, but
Providence gives you an opportunity, for more or less of it. Not any Company
you ever come into, but every Soul needs it. Converts, men Unconverted, and men
Doubtful whether they are Reconciled unto God, or no; all do need the Lips that
disperse Knowledge, Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good
unto all men, especially unto them who are of the household of faith.

M. 7. Religious Discourse is a Duty helpful unto the best Ministry. The
Ministry has done little good upon you, until it has brought you unto the use
of it. But when you do use it, you will exceedingly further the good of the
Ministry. Some will not hear the fittest Ministers for them, till Discourse
bring them. Others cannot Understand, or Remember much, till Discourse help
them.

M. 8. Religious Discourse is a Duty forced upon us by Satan's party. They are
all of them, every day, speaking against Godliness. How can any of the Lovers
of God hold their peace, therefore? It is said, that a dumb Child did once
break silence, when his Father was spoke against. Our heavenly Father is spoken
against every day; shall he not every day be spoken for? He is every where
Reviled; shall he not be every where Praised? All sorts, young Men and Maidens,
old Men and Children, let their Tongues run out against Him; shall not all
sorts of his true Servants Plead for Him? O Lord, open the mouths of all, and
let them show forth thy Praise! Amen and Amen.

M. 9. Religious Discourse is a Duty that every good man has had the blessing
of. I do not think any one can say, that all the good he ever reaped, was from
set continued Sermons. Doubtless, all have tasted the good of familiar
Discourses. All must say; that gracious words, dropped from one and another
good man occasionally, at Tables ends, and by Fire sides, have been worth more
than a little unto their Souls. And if so, how Unnatural is the cruelty, to see
Souls about them perishing, and not minister unto them as they themselves were
ministered unto? Not so much as dropping the words, which, by experience, they
know to be helpful. Luke 24.32. And they said one to another, Did not our heart
burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us
the Scriptures?

M. 10. Religious Discourse is a Duty that is inseparable from Charity. From
the Love of God and of Men. If I Love God, I shall Desire his Glory. If I
rightly Desire it, I shall Endeavor it. If I Endeavor it, surely as I have
opportunity, I must Speak for it. If I Love Men's Souls, I cannot grudge a few
words for their Conversion or Edification. Love is chill where holy Discourse
is scarce; and dead, where it is absent. In all appearance dead. Ephesians. 4.16.
From whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love.

M. 11. Religious Discourse is a Duty that is a mighty Promoter of Charity.
Love, I think, is all Religion. The Soul of all. And who knows not this? Love
of God is the grace we can least spare; but the grace that of all is the most
subject to abate in us. It is in us as Fire in green Wood, that needs continual
blowing. And Religious Discourse is an experienced Bellows to blow it. Love of
one another also, easily waxes cold. But what exciteth that, will excite this.
And let Experience speak; who do so Love each other, as those who most edify
and are edified by each others Religious discourse? I can Love no Man so
intensely as him, who either helps me toward Heaven, or receives help from me.
Philem. v. 12, and 16. Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him, that
is mine own bowels. Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother
beleved, specially to me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh and in
the Lord?

M. 12. Religious Discourse is a universal Ministry. All and every one, of
Christ's adult Disciples, are more or less Qualified for it, and Commissioned
unto it. If thou have not in some measure Tasted and Seen that the Lord is
good, thou art not a Christian. If thou have, thou art able to say somewhat of
that which thou have Seen and Tasted. And if thou have such a Talent as that
Ability, the exercise of it is thy unquestionable Duty. Who doubts but that our
Savior calls all his Servants the SALT of the Earth, and the LIGHTS of the
World? though one Order of them be so most eminently. But what Salt are they,
that rarely drop a savoury word? Or what Lights be they, who carry it so that
no body Knows or Remembers God ever the more for them? Of all vile creatures,
the Ministers that neglect Preaching, are contemned in the eyes of God and of
good Men. But thus far as I say, you that are Christians are Ministers. And if
you neglect this Ministry of yours that I speak of, you are more sinful and
vile than you are aware. Tell me not that there be some, who say, that it is not
for Children, Women, or Unlearned men to talk of Religion. I know many do say
so; and I know if many such Sinners entice you, it will be your death to
hearken, consent, and follow them against God's express and plain Word. Young
Men and Maidens, old Men and Children are bid to praise God. Even CHILDREN
themselves. It is made the praise of the Excellent Woman, Prove. 31. that in her
mouth was the Law of Kindness. By which, Commentators of the best rank do
understand no less than the Law of Grace, the Word of Reconciliation, the
Doctrine of the Kindness and Love of God toward us. Whereof this rare Matron
was perpetually discoursing with her Children and Handmaids. To conclude; Our
Words have a middle place between our Thoughts and our Deeds; and of a mighty
influence they are upon both; and certainly the ordering of them, as I have
said, is a great Ordinance of God for Making and Keeping good our Thoughts and
Works, and our Neighbors also. Wherefore a needful prayer it is for us, O
Lord, open our mouths! that is, give us DISCRETION wherewith to open them, and
HOLY AFFECTION wherewith to open them, and desirable OPPORTUNITIES wherein to
open them for thy Glory, and our own and our Brethren's Edification. Amen.

Twelve Directions for Religious Discourse. Prove. 1.5. A wise man will hear,
and increase Learning. Good Proficients will give heed to first plain Elements.

D. 1. Understand well the TRUTHS and DUTIES of Religion. Read, Hear, Enquire,
spare no Pains to get a good understanding of the Creed, Lords Prayer, Ten
Commandments, and Doctrine of the Sacraments. A well informed mind it is, that
must teach the Mouth, and add Learning to the Lips. Prove. 16.23. The heart of
the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. An inquisitive
humble man will not long be Ignorant. And when he ceases to be Ignorant, he
will presently be usefully Eloquent. [And it is no matter if he be not gawdily
so]

D. 2. Believe the things of Religion to be real. Even as the things that you
see with your Eyes. Believe thus the Being and Glory of God, the Sinfulness of
Sin, the Beauty and Importance of Holiness, the Joys of Heaven, the Torments of
Hell, the Eternity of Both. Whatever your Head be, if your Heart be faithless,
your Discourse will be heartless. And must be extorted from you too; it will
not come freely, as little as its worth will be. But strong Faith, makes
forward to speak, bold in speaking, and unrestrainable from it. 2 Cor. 4.13. It
is written, I Believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also Believe, and
therefore speak.

D. 3. Love the real things of Religion with all your Heart. Knowledge, and
Faith too, is an idle mute, without Love. They work, yea and speak also, by
Love. It is out of nothing of the heart, so much as Love, that the Mouth
speaks. Love makes the Lips of those that are asleep to speak, Cant. 7.9. And
the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, for my beloved, that goes down
sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak. Nothing sooner
casts out dumb Devils. Who ever knew a great Lover of his God, a silenced Man?
Undoubtedly our Affections are chilled, before our Tongues are tied.

D. 4. Perfect the Subjection of your Selves unto Religion. Be constantly and
universally under its government, in all your ways. Eat and Drink, by religious
rule. Buy and Sell by the same. Pray and Worship by the same. For if you allow
your selves in any one Sin, you cannot reprove others for any. You cannot
Decently, nor can you Sincerely. Under the Law the Snuffers were to be made of
pure Gold. Teaching, that Reformers of other Men, were to be Unspotted and
Inoffensive themselves, and Praiseworthy. Exodus 37.23. And he made his seven
lamps, and his snuffers, and his snuff-dishes of pure gold.

D. 5. Compassionate the Souls that be void of all sound Religion. Consider
their Misery; and their Helplesness unless help be brought quickly. Remember
that Sinners be Stray creatures, from God their Owner. And be sinking under the
burden of their sins, into Hells bottomless Pit. Remember also, that God who
has called thee into his way of Salvation, and has forgiven thy Sins, will be
exceeding angry, if thou hidest thy self from thy perishing Neighbors. If thou
Pretendest that thou know not the case of their Souls; or Passest them by
unreproved and uninstructed, as though thou did not know it. God will be
angry if thou show not more Pity upon an Ox, or a Sheep, or an Ass; yea
though it be thy very Enemies. Exodus 23.4, 5. If thou meet thine enemies Ox or
his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again. If thou see
the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden, and would forbear
to help him, thou shall surely help with him. Deuteronomy. 22.1, 4. Thou shall not see
thy Brothers Ox or his Sheep go astray, and hide thy self from them: thou shall
in any case bring them again unto thy Brother. Thou shall not see thy Brothers
Ass or his Ox fall down by the way, and hide thy self from them: thou shall
surely help him to lift them up again. They be Cruel as Ostriches, that are
Dumb as Dogs. Yearning Bowels will bring forth Edifying Discourses.

D. 6. Covet earnestly your own Proficience in Religion. In the Gifts, Graces,
Services, and Comforts of it. Prove. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat:
and he that waters shall be watered also himself. To water others, is one
way, a sure one, and an excellent to have God water us. God never muzzles the
Mouths of such as do kindly and painfully tread out Corn to others. He does
then most sensibly Teach us, while we are Teaching others. Ordinarily he does
so, as Experience tells us. I believe we may all say, as one great man says
expressly. -- I am never backward to help or cold in helping the Souls of
others, until a base cold is gotten into my own Soul; and it is waxed careless
of it self. Desire of our own Spiritual good, will certainly put upon
Endeavors for other Men's good. Although Covetousness of earthly things puts
upon a contrary practice.

D. 7. Keep a Law of Moral Kindness in your Lips toward Religious men, and
Irreligious. Remember still that Gospel Precept, 1 Pet. 3.8. Be ye courteous.
Forgetfulness of it, is an extreme damage to the Interest of the Gospel. It is
an unknown mischief that one rough rugged word will many times do. How many
thousands of good ones it will prevent, or frustrate. Whereas, Affable ones do
wonderfully open our Ears, Mouths, and Hearts unto each other. Do not think to
impart Wisdom, where you do not pleasantly express Love. It must be your
Lovers, to whom you will have much pleasure to Discourse. And who will with
much pleasure Hear you. Neither may you expect to make or keep many such
Lovers, without Morosity and Sourness of behavior abandoned. If Love cast not
them out, they will soon cast Love out; and then farewell to good Discourse. You
may see how the very Apostles were fain to carry it, to maintain their
Ministry, and its Usefulness, 1 These. 2.7. We were GENTLE among you, even as a
NURSE cherishes her Children. A winning Affability is as necessary as Breath
it self to profitable Discourse; especially with weak Christians.

D. 8. Perfume your own Houses with Religious Discourses. Make it said in your
Neighbourhoods, that happy are your Children, and happy your Servants which
live continually near you, and hear your Wisdom. Be sure that your Lips
disperse Knowledge at home; and that your Families have Precept upon Precept.
Fail not to be Guides of your own Blind. Of your own Relations, of Souls under
your own Roofs. Unless you exercise this Charity at home, it will justly enough
be concluded Vainglory, that sets your Tongue going religiously abroad. And by
and by you shall be told what is true, Prove. 26.7. The legs of the lame are not
equal: so is a Parable in the mouth of fools. Pious speeches out of a fools
mouth, make the fool ridiculous, and become themselves contemptible.

D. 9. By Counsel and with good Advice order your religious Discourse. It is
War against Sin and Satan, Offensive. For Gods Glory, and Men's Salvation,
Defensive. It well deserves good thinking; and will requite it well. Wherefore
rush not into it, rashly. And do not fancy that extemporary suggestions are all
you need bestow upon it. I would that upon the walls of your houses you had
written, Heb. 10.24. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and
to good works. The Duty required, is provocation of one another by religious
Discourses unto Love and good Works. The Means prescribed, as necessary for its
right performance; is Consideration of one another; to wit, of one another
Circumstances, Conditions, Estates, Lives, Virtues, Faults, Wants, etc. Even
that we may suit our Ministrations unto them with a due heedfulness. And take
the most proper Matter, Language, Method, Time, and every thing else to do them
good. Thus do, and many shall say unto you, as David to Abigail, 2 Samuel 25.32,
33. David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee
this day to meet me. And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have
kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging my self with mine
own hand.

D. 10. Let the one thing Needful, be the main one in all your religious
Discourse. Even RIGHTEOUSNESS; Imputed, Inherent, and Practical. HOLINESS to
the Lord; the Principle of it, the Practice of it, the Progress, and the
Perseverance. As high as they sour in notions, and in profession, and in vogue,
they be not the true Eagles of Heaven, that spend their time in catching at
Flies. The Kingdom of God is not in Meat and Drink; i. e. Christianity consists
not in the Circumstantials of Religion. Woe to them whose Discourses consist of
little beside. You shall not repent it, if you determine as St. Paul, 1 Cor.
2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and
him crucified. The Converting, Edifying, Comforting Knowledge of Jesus Christ,
Crucified and Glorified. Doubtless so meant the Apostle.

D. 11. Believe Reproaches for truly religious Discourses to be honors and
treasures. Otherwise, you will soon faint. But you know who thought it their
Honor, to suffer more than Reproach. Acts 5.41, 42. And they departed from the
presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for his Name. And daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceased
not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. And who thought it Treasure, even richer
than Egypts. Heb. 11.26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than
the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.
Neither may you expect to reach their Heaven, if you possess not their Temper,
and walk not in their way. And this remember; it is dangerous to be without
sinners Reproaches; and more dangerous to have their Applause. It Is its own
that the World loves. The Witnesses of Christ's Truth, are said to have
tormented them that dwelt upon the Earth; or earthly sensual lives Solomon's
Throne was supported by Lions; and truly so must Christ's Kingdom and Interest
be. Dastardly Spirits will never be Trumpets of his praise; for the fear of man
brings such a snare on the heart, as tyeth the tongue it self.

D. 12. Be Companions of them that best maintain Religious Discourse. With best
Understanding, Zeal, Humility, and Success. Have no other Company of choice,
but that which will either Teach you, or Learn from you What will be your
Physicians, or your Patients. Let all your Delight be in these as the excellent
ones of the Earth. And be always willing to Borrow and to Lend. To Lend to
those that know less than you do; and to Borrow from such as know more than
you. Otherwise, whatever company you keep, it is little, by them, that you are
like to gain. For there is no Edification, where men too Ignorant to Teach, are
too Proud to Learn: and they who have very much knowledge, have too little
humility and grace to draw it forth; except it be in public places, where they
expect applause and acceptance with multitudes. Pious Humility makes us both
Communicative of the knowledge we have, and Inquisitive after more. And it is
certain, that by communicating, the wisess do grow wiser; and by enquiring, the
weakest do get to be wise. Eccles. 10.15 The labor of the foolish wearieth
every one of them, because he knows not how to go to the City. The sense is
this, I judge: Because a Fool is to proud, or too bashful and fearful to go and
enquire in the City, of one able to Direct him to dispose of his Labor
therefore does he unprofitably throw it away, that it does but Weary him and
not Benefit or Enrich him (Let the Learned see in l. Ludov. de Dieu. in Po.
Synop^

POSTSCRIPT.
Reader; The Serpents Seed will Hiss, and especially against such Arguments as
those, and such Management of them. I pray God they may but Hiss, and no Sting
thy Soul; for their Venom cast on my Name, is worthy of no complaint or fear.
Very probably thou will be told, this Discourse is rankly Fanatical. Let such
as do suggest so, be told; that, godly Learned Episcopal Men have praised this
Fanaticism. Have Encouraged the printing it; do buy it and communicate it. And
Bishop Wilkins (the late honor of his Order,) in a Sermon published by Dr.
Tillotson, (a Dean of a thousand) has these words, which are full out as
Fanatical as any of mine, Practical Religion would be much advantaged, if men
were but more free toward one another in communicating their Doubts,
Temptations, Comforts; warming their Affections, and building up one another by
MVTVAL CONFERENCE. O that we Dissenters may make good use, and not evil, of the
honor put upon us in this Nation; by Men's calling all serious practical
CHRISTIANITY, Fanaticall Presbyterian, etc.

FINIS.

