Seasonable Counsel: OR, ADVICE TO Sufferers. BY JOHN BUNYAN.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible in the Poultry.
MDCLXXXIV.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
BEloved, I thought it convenient, since many at this day are exposed to
sufferings, to give my advice touching that to thee. Namely, that (thou
would take heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, and not suffer
thy self to be entangled in those snares that God has suffered to be laid in
the World for some. Beware of men, is the counsel of Christ, for they will
deliver you up. (Mat. 10 17.) Keep thou therefore within the bounds of
uprightness and integrity toward both God and man: for that will fortify,
that will preserve thee, if not from, yet under the rage of men, in a
comfortable and quiet frame of heart. Wherefore do that, and that only, that
will justify they innocence, and that will help thee, not with forced Speech,
but with good Conscience (when oppressed) to make thy appeals to God, and to
the Consciences of all men.

This is the advice that (I thank God.) I have taken my self: for I find that
there is nothing, next to God and his Grace by Christ, that can stand one in
such stead, as will a good and harmless Conscience.

I hope I can say God has made me a Christian: and a Christian must be a
harmless Man, and, to that end, must embrace nothing but harmless Principles. A
Christian business, as a Christian, is to believe in Jesus Christ and in God
the Father by him, and to seek the good of all about him, according as his
place, state and capacity in this World will admit, not meddling with other men's
matters, but ever following that which is good.

A Christian is a Child of the Kingdom of God, and that Kingdom (take it as it
begins in Grace, or as it is perfected in Glory,) is not of this World but of
that which is to come: and though (men of old as) some may now be afraid of
that Kingdom: yet that Kingdom will hurt no man, neither with its Principles,
nor by it self. To instance somewhat. Faith in Christ: what harm can that do? A
life regulated by a moral Law, what hurt is in that? Rejoicing in Spirit for
the hope of the life to come, by Christ, who will that harm? Nor is the
instituted worship of our Lord of any evil tendency, Christianity teaches us
also to do our enemies good, to love them that hate us, and to pray for them
that despitefully use us and persecute us, and what evil can be in that. This
is the sum of the Christian Religion, (as by the word may be plainly made
appear:) wherefore I counsel thee to keep close to these things, and touch with
nothing that jostleth therewith.

Nor do thou marvel (thou living thus) if some should be so foolish as to seek
thy hurt, and to afflict thee, because thy works are good. ( 1 John 3.12.) For
there is need that thou should at sometimes be in manifold temptations, thy
good and innocent life notwithstanding. (1 Pet. 1.6.) For, to omit other
things, there are some of the graces of God that are in thee, that as to some
of their Acts, cannot show themselves, nor their excellency, nor their power,
nor what they can do: but as thou art in a suffering state. Faith and Patience,
in persecution, has that to do, that to show, and that to perform, that cannot
be done, showed, nor performed any where else but there. There is also a
patience of hope; a rejoicing in hope, when we are in tribulation, that is,
over and above that which we have when we are at ease and quiet. That also that
all graces can endure, and triumph over, shall not be known, but when, and as
we are in a state of affliction. Now these Acts of our Graces are of that worth
and esteem with God, also he so much delights in them: that occasion thorough
his righteous Judgment, must be ministered for them to show their beauty, and
what bravery there is in them.

It is also to be considered that those Acts of our Graces, that cannot be put
forth, or show themselves in their splendour, but when we Christianly suffer;
will yield such fruit to those whose Trials call them to exercise, that will in
the day of God, abound to their comfort and tend to their perfection an glory.
(1 Pet. 1.7. 2 Cor. 4.17.)

Why then should we think that our innocent lives will exempt us from
sufferings, or that troubles shall do us such harm? For verily it is for our
present and future good that our God does send them upon us. I count therefore,
that such things are necessary for the health of our Souls, as bodily pains and
labor are for the Body. People that live high, and in idleness, bring diseases
upon the Body: and they that live in all fullness of Gospel Ordinances, and are
not exercised with Trials, grow gross, are diseased and full of bad humors in
their Souls. And though this may to some seem strange: yet our day has given us
such an experimental proof of the truth thereof, as has not been known for some
ages past.

Alas we have need of those bitter, pills, at which we so whinch and shuck: and
it will be well if at last we be purged as we should thereby. I am sure we are
but little the better as yet, though the Physician has had us so long in hand.
Some bad humo^rs may, possibly ere long be driven out: but at present the
disease is so high, that it makes some professors fear more a Consumption will
be made in their purses by these Doses, than they desire to be made better in
their Souls thereby. I see that I still have need of these Trials, and if God
will by these, judge me as he judges his Saints, that I may not be condemned
with the World, I will cry, Grace, Grace for ever.

The consideration also that we have deserved these things, much silence me as
to what may yet happen unto me. I say, to think that we have deserved them of
God (though against men we have done nothing) makes me lay my hand upon my
mouth, and causes me to hold my tongue. Shall we deserve correction? And be
angry because we have it! Or shall it come to save us? and shall we be offended
with the hand that brings it. Our sickness is so great that our enemies take
notice of it; let them know too that we also take our Purges patiently. We are
willing to pay for those Potions that are given us for the health of our Body,
how sick soever they make us: and if God will have us pay too for that which is
to better our Souls, why should we grudge thereat? Those that bring us these
Medicines have little enough for their pains: for my part, I profess, I would
not for a great deal, be bound, for their wages, to do their work. True,
Physicians are for the most part chargeable, and the niggards are too loath to
part with their Money to them: but when necessity says they must either take
Physic, or die: of two evils they desire to choose the least. Why, affliction
is better than sin, and if God sends the one to cleanse us from the other, let
us thank him, and be also content to pay the messenger.

And thou that art so loath to pay for thy sinning, and for the means that puts
thee upon that exercise of thy graces, as will be for thy good hereafter: take
heed of tempting of God lest he doubleth this Potion unto thee. The Child by
eating of raw Fruit stands in need of Physic, but the Child of a childish
humor refuses to take the Potion, what follows but a doubling of the
affliction, to wit frowns, chides, and further threatenings and a forcing of the
bitter Pills upon him. But let me, to persuade thee to lie down and take thy
Potion, tell thee, it is of absolute necessity, to wit for thy spiritual and
internal health. For,

First, Is it better that thou receive judgment in this World, or that thou
stay for it to be condemned with the ungodly in the next?

Secondly, Is it better that thou should, as to some acts of thy Graces, be
foreign, and a stranger, and consequently that thou should lose that far
more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory that is prepared as the reward
thereof? or that thou should receive it at the hand of God, when the day
shall come that every man, shall have praise of him for their doings?

Thirdly, And I say again, since chastisements are a sign of senship, a token
of love: and the contrary a sign of Bastardy, and a token of hatred. (Heb.
12.6, 7, 8. Hos. 4.14.) Is it not better that we bear those tokens and marks in
our flesh that bespeak us to belong to Christ, than those that declare us to be
none of his. For my part, God help me to choose rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: and God of
his mercy prepare me for his will. I am not for running my self into
sufferings: but if Godliness will expose me to them, the Lord God make me more
godly still: for I believe there is a World to come.

But Christian Reader, I would not detain thee from a sight of those sheets in
thy hand: only let me beg of thee, that thou will not be offended either with
God, or men, if the cross is laid heavy upon thee. Not with God, for he does
nothing without a cause: nor with men, for they are the hand of God: and will
they, will they; they are the servants of God to thee for good. (Psalm. 17.14.
Jer. 24.5.) Take therefore what comes to thee from God by them, thankfully. If
the messenger that brings it is glad that it is in his power to do thee hurt,
and to afflict thee; if he skips for joy at thy calamity: be sorry for him;
pity him, and pray to thy Father for him: he is ignorant and understands not
the judgment of thy God, yea he shows by this his behavior, that though he
as Gods ordnance serves thee by afflicting of thee: yet means he nothing less
than to destroy thee: by the which also he prognosticates before thee that he
is working out his own damnation by dong of thee-good. Lay therefore the woeful
state of such to heart, and render him that which is good for his evil; and
love for his hatred to thee: then shall thou show that thou art acted by a
Spirit of holiness, and art like thy heavenly Father. And be it so, that thy
pity and Prayers can do such an one no good, yet they must light some where: or
return again, as Ships come laden from the Indies, full of blessings into
thine own bosom.

And besides all this, is there nothing in dark Providence for the sake of the
sight, and observation of which, such a day may be rendered lovely, when it is
upon us. Is there nothing of God, of his Wisdom and Power and goodness to be
seen in Thunder, and Lightning, in Hailstones? in Storms, and darkness and
tempests? Why, then is it said, he has his way in the whirlwind and storm.
(Nahum 1.3.)? And why have Gods servants of old made such notes, and observed
from them, such excellent and wonderful things. There is that of God to be seen
in such a day as cannot be seen in another. His power in holding up some, his
wrath in leaving of others; his making of Shrubs to stand, and his suffering of
Cedars to fall; his infatuating of the Counsels of men, and his making of the
Devil to out wit himself; his giving of his presence to his people, and his
leaving of his foes in the dark; his discovering the uprightness of the hearts
of his sanctified ones, and laying open the Hypocrisy of others, is a working
of spiritual Wonders in the day of his wrath, and of the whirlwind and storm.
These days! these days are the days that do most aptly give an occasion to
Christians, of any, to take the exactest measures and scantlings of our selves.
We are apt to overshoot, in days that are calm, and to think our selves far
higher, and more strong than we find we be, when the trying day is upon us. The
mouth of Gaal and the boasts of Peter were great and high before the Trial
came, but when that came, they found themselves to fall far short of the
courage they thought they had. (Judges 9.38.)

We also, before the temptation comes, think we can walk upon the Sea, but when
the winds blow, we feel our selves begin to sink. Hence such a time is rightly
said to be a time to try us, or to find out what we are, and is there no good
in this? Is it not this that rightly rectifies our judgment about our selves,
that makes us to know our selves, that tends to cut off those superfluous
spriggs of pride and self-conceitedness, wherewith we are subject to be
overcome? Is not such a day, the day that bends us, humbles us, and that makes
us bow before God, for our faults committed in our prosperity? and yet does it
yield no good unto us? we could not live without such turnings of the hand of
God upon us. We should be overgrown with flesh, if we had not our seasonable
Winters. It Is said that in some Countries Trees will grow, but will bear no
fruit, because there is no Winter there. The Lord bless all seasons to his
peop^^ and help them rightly to behave themselves under all the times that go
over them.

Farewell. I am thine to serve thee in the Gospel, John Bunyan.

Ingenious Reader,
BY reason of the Authors absence, some small faults are escaped,
notwithstanding the diligence of the Printer; which thou art desired to mend
with thy Pen: And particularly in Page 192. l. 25. for buffeted read butted. p.
194. l. 13. r, so I could,

ADVICE TO SUFFERERS.
1 PETER iv.19. Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing as unto a faithful
Creator.


THis Epistle was written to Saints in affliction, specially those of the
Circumcision, for whom this Peter was an Apostle. And it was written to them to
counsel, and comfort them in their affliction. To counsel them as to the cause,
for which they were in afflictions, and as to the right management of
themselves, and their cause under their affliction.

To comfort them also both with respect to their present help from God, and
also with reference to the reward that (they faithfully continuing to the end)
should of God be bestowed upon them: all which we shall have occasion, more
distinctly, to handle in this following discourse.

The Text is a conclusion, drawn from the Counsel and comfort which the Apostle
had before given them in their suffering state. As who should say, my Brethren,
as you are now afflicted, so sufferings are needful for you, and therefore
profitable and advantageous: Wherefore be content to bear them. And that you
may indeed bear them with such Christian contentedness, and patience as becomes
you; commit the keeping of your souls to your God, as unto a faithful Creator.

Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls unto him as unto a faithful Creator.

In this conclusion, therefore, we have three things very fit for sufferers to
concern themselves with.

1. A direction to a duty of absolute necessity. 2. A description of the
persons, who are unto this so necessary a duty directed. 3. An insinuation of
the good effect that will certainly follow to those that after a due manner
shall take this blessed advice.
The duty so absolutely necessary, is, that sufferers commit the keeping of
their souls to God.

The sufferers here intended, are those that suffer according to the will of
God.

The good insinuated, that will be the effect of our true doing of this, is, we
shall find God a faithful Creator.

We will first, begin with the duty, that sufferers are here directed to,
namely the committing of their souls to God: Let them commit the keeping of
their soul to him, in well doing.

And I find two things in it that first call for explaining before I proceed.

1. What we must here understand by the Soul. 2. What by committing the soul to
God.
For the First; The soul, here, is to be taken for that most excellent part of
man, that dwells in the body; that immortal, spiritual substance, that is,
and will be capable of life, and motion, of sense and reason; yea, that will
abide a rational being, when the body is returned to the dust as it was. This
is that great thing, that our Lord Jesus intends, when he bids his Disciples in
a day of Trial, fear him that can destroy both body and soul in Hell. (Luke
12.5.) That great thing, I say, that he there cautions them to take care of.
According to Peter here, Let them commit the keeping of their soul to him in
well-doing.

Secondly, Now to commit this soul to God, is to carry it to him, to lift it to
him, upon my bended knees, and to pray him for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to
take it into his holy care, and to let it be under his keeping. Also, that he
will please to deliver it from all those snares that are laid for it, 'twixt
this and the next world, and that he will see that it be forth coming, safe and
sound, at the Great and Terrible judgment, notwithstanding so many have engaged
themselves against it.

Thus David committed his soul to God, when he said Arise, O Lord, disappoint
him: cast him down: deliver my soul, O Lord, from the wicked, which is thy
Sword. And again, Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me, O Lord, make have to help
me: let them be ashamed and confounded together, that seek after my soul to
destroy it. (Psalm. 17.13. Psalm. 40.13, 14.)

Thus, I have showed you what the soul is, and what it is to commit the soul to
God. This then is the duty that the Apostle here exhorts the sufferers to,
namely, to carry their soul to God, and leave it with him while they engage for
his name in the World.

Now from the Apostles Exhortation to this great duty, I will draw these
following conclusions.

First, That when persecution is raised against a people, there is a design
laid for the ruin of that peoples souls. This, I say, does naturally follow
from the exhortation. Why else, need they to commit the keeping of their souls
to God. For by this word, unto God to keep them, is suggested; there is, that
would destroy them, and that therefore persecution is raised against them.

I am not so uncharitable, as to think, that persecuting men design this: But I
verily believe that the Devil does design this, when he stirs them up to so
sorry a work. In times of Trial, says Peter, The Devil your adversary goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. (1 Pet. 5.8.9.)

Alas! men in their acts of this nature, have designs that are lower, and of a
more inferior rank: Some of them look no higher, than revenge upon the carcass;
than the spoiling of their neighbor of his Estate, Liberty, or Life; than the
greatening of themselves in this world, by the ruins of those that they have
power to spoil. Their possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty; and
they that sell them, say, blessed be the Lord, for I am rich. (Zech. 11.4, 5.

Ay! But Satan will not be put off thus: it is not a bag of Money, or the
punishing of the carcass of such a people, that will please or satisfy him.
It Is the soul that he aims at; the ruin of the precious soul that he has bent
himself to bring to pass. It Is this therefore that Peter here has his heart
concerned with. As, who should say, my Brethren, are you troubled and
persecuted for your Faith? look to it, the hand of Satan is in this thing, and
what ever men drive at by doing as they do, the Devil designs no less than the
damnation of your Souls.

Ware Hawk, says the Falconer, when the Dogs are coming near her: specially if
she be too much minding of her belly, and too forgetful of what the nature of
the Dog is. Beware Christian: take heed Christian; the Devil is desirous to
have thee.

And, who could better give this exhortation than could Peter himself. Who for
not taking heed as to this very thing, had like by the Devil to have been
swallowed up alive: as is manifest to them that heedfully read, and consider
how far he was gone, when that persecution was raised against his Master. (
Luke 22.31-56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62.)

When a Tyrant goes to dispossess a neighboring Prince of what is lawfully his
own: the men that he imployeth at Arms to overcome, and get the Land: They
fight for Half-Crowns, and the like, and are content with their wages: But the
Tyrant is for the Kingdom, nothing will serve him but the Kingdom. This is the
case: Men when they persecute, are for the stuff, but the Devil is for the
soul, nor will any thing less than that, satisfy him. Let him then that is a
sufferer commit the keeping of his soul to God: lest stuff, and soul, and all
be lost at once.

Secondly, A second conclusion that follows upon these words, is this; That
sufferers, if they have not a care, may be too negligent as to the securing of
their souls with God, even when persecution is upon them. For these words, as
they are an instruction, so they are an awakening instruction; they call as to
people in danger; as to people, not so aware of the danger, or as unto a people
that forget (too much) that their souls, and the ruin of them, are sought after
by Satan, when trouble attends them for the Gospel sake. As, who should say,
when troubles are upon you for the Gospel sake, then take heed that you forget
not to commit your souls to the keeping of God. We are naturally apt with that
good man Gideon, to be threshing out our Wheat, that we may hide it from the
Midianites, ( Judge 6.11.) but we are not so naturally apt to be busying our
selves to secure our souls with God. The reason is, for that we are more flesh
than spirit, and because the voice of the world makes a bigger sound in our
carnal mind, than the word of God does. Wherefore Peter, here, calls upon us as
upon men of forgetful minds, saying, Let them that suffer according to the will
of God, have a care of their souls, and take heed, that the fears of the loss
of a little of this world, do not make them forget the fear of the losing of
their souls. That Sufferers are subject to this, may appear by the stir, and
bustle that at such a time they make to lock all up safe that the hand of man
can reach, while they are cold, chill, remiss, and too indifferent about the
committing of their soul to God to keep it. This is seen also, in that many, in
a time of trouble for their profession, will study more to deceive themselves
by a change of notions, by laboring to persuade their consciences to admit
them to walk more at large, by harkening to opinions that please and gratify
the flesh, by adhering to bad examples, and taking evil Counsels, than they
will to make straight steps for their feet: and to commit the keeping of their
souls to God. What shall I say, have their not been many, that so long as peace
has lasted, have been great swaggerers for Religion, who yet so soon as the Sun
has waxt warm, have flagg^d; have been discontented, offended, and turned away
from him that speaks from heaven? All which is because men are naturally apt
to be more concerned, for their goods, carnal peace, and a temporal life: than
they are about securing of their souls with God. Wherefore I say, these words
are spoken to awaken us to the consideration of soul-concerns, and how that
should be safely lodged under the care, protection, and mercy of God, by our
committing of it to him, for that purpose, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thirdly, Another conclusion that follows upon this exhortation, is this:
That persecution does, sometimes, so hotly follow Gods people, as to leave them
nothing but a soul to care for. They have had no House, no Land, no Money, no
Goods, no Life, no Liberty, left them to care for. All is gone but the soul.
Goods have been confiscated, liberty has been in Irons, the life condemned, the
neck in a Halter, or the body in the Fire: So then all, to such, has been gone,
and they have had nothing left them, to care for, but their soul. Let them
commit the keeping of their soul to God. This conclusion, I say, does naturally
flow from the words. For that the Apostle here does make mention only of the
soul, as of that which is left, as of that which yet remains to the sufferer of
all that ever he had. Thus they served Christ, they left him nothing but his
soul to care for. Thus they served Stephen, they left him nothing but his soul
to care for, and they both cared for that. Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit, said Jesus. And Lord Jesus receive my spirit, said Stephen (Luke 23.46.
Acts 7.59.)

As for all other things, they were gone. They parted the very clothes of
Christ among themselves, before his face, even while he did hang pouring out
his life before them, upon the Tree. They parted my garments among them, said
he, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. (Mat. 27.35. Mar. 15.24. Joh.
19.23, 24.) This also has oftentimes been the condition of later Christians,
all has been gone, they have been stripped of all, nothing has been left them but
soul to care for. Job said, that he had escaped with the skin of his teeth: and
that is but a little: but he does not escape with so much, that loses all that
he has, life and all, we now except the soul. But,

Fourthly, Another thing that follows from the words is this, namely, That
when the Devil and wicked men have done what they could, in their persecuting
of the godly: they have yet had their souls at their own dispose. They have not
been able to rob them of their souls, they are not able to hurt their souls.
The soul is not in their power to touch, without the leave of God, and of him
whose soul it is. And fear not them, says Christ, that kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul. (Mat. 10.28.) This, I say, lies clear also in the
Text, for the exhortation supposes, that what ever the sufferers there made
mention of, had lost: They had yet their souls at their own dispose. Let them
that suffer, even to the loss of goods, liberty or life, commit the keeping of
their soul to God. As, who should say, though the enemy has reached them to
their all, and stripped them of their all, yet I know, that their soul is not
among that all: For their soul is yet free from them, at liberty, and may be
disposed of, even as the sufferer will. Wherefore, let him commit the keeping
of his soul to God, lest he also through his negligence or carelessness be also
spoiled of that. The sufferer therefore has his soul at his own dispose, he
may give that away to God almighty, in spite of all that the Devil and the
world can do. He may indeed see men parting his Land, his Household stuff, yea,
his very Raiment among themselves, but they cannot so dispose of his soul. They
have no more that they can do. ( Luke 12.5.)

Fifthly. Another conclusion that follows from these words is this, That a
man, when he is a sufferer, is not able to secure his own soul from the hand of
hell by any other means, but by the committing of the keeping thereof to God.
Do you suffer? are you in affliction for your profession? Then keep not your
soul in your own hand, for fear of losing that with the rest. For no man can
keep alive his own soul, (Psalm. 22.29.) No, not in the greatest calm; no, not
when the Lion is a sleep: how then should he do it at such a time, when the
horrible blast of the terrible ones shall bea^ against his wall. The
consideration of this was that that made holy Paul, who was a man upon whom
persecution continually attended, commit his soul to God ( Acts 20.23. 2 Timothy
1.12.) God as I shall show you by and by, is he, and he alone that is able to
keep the soul, and deliver it from danger. Man is naturally a self deceiver,
and therefore is not to be trusted, any farther than as the watchful eye of God
is over him. But as to hi^ soul he is not be trusted with that at all, that
must be wholly committed to God, left altogether with him; laid at his feet,
and he also must take the charge thereof, or else it is gone, will be lost, and
will perish for ever and ever. Wherefore it is a dangerous thing for a man that
is a sufferer, to be a senseless man, as to the danger that his soul is in, and
a prayerless man, as to the committing of the keeping of it to God. For he that
is such, has yet his soul, and the keeping thereof, in his own deceitful hand.
And so has he also that stays himself upon his friends, upon his knowledge, the
promise of men, or the mercy of his enemies, or that has set in his mind a
bound to himself, how far he will venture for Religion, and where he will stop.
This is the man, that makes not God his trust, and that therefore will surely
fall in the day of his temptation. Satan, who now hunteth for the precious soul
to destroy it, has Power, as well as Policy, beyond what man can think. He has
power to blind, harden, and to make insensible, the heart. He also can make
truth in the eyes of the suffering man, a poor, little, and insignificant
thing. Judas had not committed the keeping of his soul to God, but abode in
himself, and was left in his Tabernacle: And you by and by see, what a worthy
price he set upon himself, his Christ, and Heaven, and all. All to him was not
now worth thirty pieces of Silver.

And, as he can make truth in thy esteem to be little, so he can make
sufferings great, and ten times more terrible, than he that has committed the
keeping of his soul to God, shall ever find them. A Gaol shall look as black as
Hell, and the loss of a few Stools and Chairs, as bad as the loss of so many
baggs of Gold. Death for the Savior of the World, shall seem to be a thing
both unreasonable and intolerable. Such will choose to run the hazard of the
loss of a thousand souls, in the way of the world, rather than the loss of one
poor sorry, transitory life for the holy word of God. But the reason, as I
said, is, they have not committed the keeping of their soul to God. For he that
indeed has committed the keeping of his soul to that great one, has shaken his
hands of all things here. Has bid adieu to the world, to friends, and life: and
waits upon God in a way of close keeping to his truth, and walking in his
ways, having counted the cost, and been persuaded to take what cup God shall
suffer the world to give him for so doing.

Sixthly, Another conclusion that follows from these words is, That God is
very willing to take the charge and care of the soul (that is committed unto
him) of them that suffer for his sake in the world. If this were not true, the
exhortation would not answer the end. What is intended by, Let him commit the
keeping of his soul to God, but that the sufferer should indeed leave that
great care with him? but if God be not willing to be concerned with such a
charge, what bottom is there for the exhortation. But the exhortation has this
for its bottom, therefore God is willing to take the charge and care of the
soul of him that suffers for his name in this world. The Lord redeemeth the
soul of his servants, and none of them that trust in him shall be desolate, (1 Samuel 25.28, 29. Psalm. 34.22.) None, not one that commits his soul ^o Gods
keeping in a way of well doing, but shall find him willing to be concerned
therewith.

Ay, this, says the sufferer, if I could believe this, it would rid me of all
my fears. But I find my self engaged for God, for I have made a profession of
his name, and cannot arrive to this belief that God is willing to take the
charge and care of my soul. Wherefore I fear, that if Trials come so high, as
that life, as well as estate, must go, that both life, and Estate, and soul,
and all will be lost at once.

Well honest heart, these are thy fears, but let them fly away, and consider
the Text again. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their souls to him as unto a faithful Creator. These are Gods words,
Christ's words, and the invitation of the holy Ghost. When therefore thou
read them, be persuaded that thou hear the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, all of them jointly, and severally speaking to thee and saying,
Poor sinner, thou art engaged for God in the world, thou art suffering for his
word: leave thy soul with him as with one that is more willing to save it, than
thou art willing he should: act faith, trust God, believe his word, and go on
in thy way of witness-bearing for him, and thou shall find all well, and
according to the desire of thy heart at last. True, Satan will make it his
business to tempt thee to doubt of this, that thy way may be made yet more
hard, and difficult to thee. For he knows that unbelief is a soul-perplexing
sin, and makes that which would otherwise be light, pleasant, and easy;
unutterably heavy and burdensome to the sufferer. Yea, this he does in hope to
make thee at last, to cast away thy profession, thy Cause, thy Faith, thy
Conscience, thy soul and all. But hear what the Holy Ghost says again. He
shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy. He shall
redeem their soul from deceit and violence, and precious shall their blood be
in his sight. (Psalm. 72.13, 14.) These words also are spoken for the comfort of
sufferers. ( ver. 12.) For he shall delivor the needy when he cries; the poor
also, and him that has no helper. Wherefore let them that are Gods sufferers,
pluck up a good heart, let them not be afraid to trust God with their souls,
and with their eternal concerns. Let them cast all their care upon God, for he
cares for them. (1 Pet. 5.7.)

But I am in the Dark.

I answer, never stick at that. It Is most bravely done, to trust God with my
soul in the dark, and to resolve to serve God for nothing, rather than give
out. Not to see, and yet to believe, and to be a follower of the Lamb, and yet
to be at uncertainty, what we shall have at last; argues Love, Fear, Faith, and
an honest mind, and gives the greatest sign of one that has true sincerity in
his soul. 'Twas this that made Job and Peter so famous, and the want of it that
took away much of the glory of the faith of Thomas. ( Job 1.8, 9, 10. Mat.
19.27. Joh. 20.29.) Wherefore believe verily that God is ready, willing, yea,
that he looks for, and expects that thou who art a sufferer should commit
the keeping of thy soul to him, as unto a faithful Creator.

Seventhly, Another conclusion that follows from these words is this, namely,
That God is able as well as willing, to secure the souls of his suffering
Saints, and to save them from the evil of all their Trials, be they never so
many, diverse, or terrible.

[Let him commit the keeping of his soul to God] but to what boot. if he be not
able to keep it in his hand, and from the power of him that seeks the soul to
destroy it? But my Father that gave them me, says Christ, is greater than all,
and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand. (Joh. 10.29.) So then
there can be no sorrow, affliction, or misery invented, by which the Devil may
so strongly prevail, as thereby to pluck the soul out of the hand of him, who
has received it, to keep it from falling, and perishing thereby. The Text
therefore supposes a sufficiency of power in God to support, and a sufficiency
of comfort and goodness to imbolden the soul to endure for him: let Satan break
out, and his instruments too, to the greatest degree of their rage and cruelty.

First, There is in God a sufficiency of power to keep them that have laid
their soul at his foot to be preserved. And hence he is called the Soul-keeper,
the soul-preserver. (Pro. 24.12.) The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy
shade, upon thy right hand. The Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon
by night, the Lord shall preserve thee from all evil, he shall preserve thy
soul. (Psalm. 1-21.5, 6, 7.) The Sun shall not smite thee: that is, persecution
shall not dry, and wither thee away to nothing ( Mat. 13.6.21.) But that
notwithstanding, thou shall be kept and preserved, carried through and
delivered from all evil. Let him therefore commit the keeping of his soul to
him, if he is in a suffering condition, that would have it secured and found
safe and sound at last. For,

1. Then thine own natural weakness, and timorousness shall not overcome thee.
For it shall not be too hard for God. God can make the most soft spirited man,
as hard as an Adamant, harder than Flint, yea, harder than the northern Steel.
Shall Iron break the northern Iron, and the Steel? (Jer. 15.12.) The Sword of
him is in vain that lays at a Christian, when he is in the way of his duty to
God: if God has taken to him the charge and care of his soul, He can sho^ him
with Brass, and make his hoofs of Iron. He can strengthen the spoiled against
the strong: so that the spoiled shall come against the fortress. ( Ezekiel 13.9.
Deuteronomy. 33.25. Amos 5.8.

He can turn thee into another man, and make thee that which thou never wast.
Timorous Peter, fearful Peter, he could make as hold as a Lion. He that at one
time was afraid of a sorry Girl, he could make at another, to stand boldly
before the Council. ( Mat. 26.69. Acts 4.13.) There is nothing too hard for
God. He can say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong fear not. He can
say, let the weak say I am strong; by such a word, by which he treated the
world. ( Isa. 35.3, 4. Zech. 12.8.)

2. Thine own natural darkness and ignorance shall not cause thee to fall, thy
want of wit he can supply: He can say to the fools, be wise; not only by way of
correction, but also by way of instruction too. He has chosen the foolish
things of this world, to confound the wise: yea, things that are despised, and
things that are not, has God chosen to bring to naught things that are. (1
Cor. 1.28. Wisdom and might are his: and when, and where he will work, none can
at all withstand him. He can give thee the spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation in
the knowledge of his Son. ( Ephesians. 1.17.) Yea, to do this, is that which he
challenges, as that which is peculiar to himself. Who has put wisdom in the
inward part, or who has given understanding to the heart. (Job 30.36.)

And that he will do this, that he has promised, yea, promised to do it to
that degree, as to make his, that shall be thus concerned for him, to Topp, and
overtopp all men that shall them oppose.

I, says he, will give you a mouth and wisdom, that all your adversaries shall
not be able to resist, or gainsay. ( Luke 21.15.)

3. Thine own doubts and mistrusts, about what he will do, and about whither
thou shall go) when thou for him have suffered a while) he can resolve, yea,
dissolve, crush, and bring to nothing.

He can make fear flee far away and place heavenly confidence in its room. He
can bring invisible, and eternal things to the eye of thy soul, and make thee
see that in those things, in which thine enemies shall see nothing, that thou
shall count worth the loss of ten thousand lives to enjoy. He can pull such
things out of his bosom, and can put such things into thy mouth^ yea, can make
thee choose to be gone, though through the flames, than to stay here and die in
silken sheets. Yea, he can himself come near, and bring his Heaven and Glory to
thee. The spirit of glory and of God rests upon them that are but reproached
for the name of Christ. (1 Pet. 4.14.) And what the spirit of glory is, and
what is his resting upon his sufferers, is quite beyond the knowledge of the
world, and is but little felt by Saints at peace: They be they that are
engaged, and that are under the lash for Christ; they are they, I say, that
have it and that understand something of it.

When Moses went up the first time into the Mount to God, the people reproached
him for staying with him so long, saying, As for this Moses, we wot not what is
become of him. Well, the next time he went up thither, and came down, the
spirit of glory was upon him: his face shone (though he wist it not) to his
honor, and their amazement. ( Exodus 31.1. chap. 34.29-35.)

Also while Stephen stood before the Council to be accused, by Suborned men,
All that sat in the Council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face, as it had
been the face of an Angel. Act. 6.15. Those that honor God, he will honor;
yea, will put some of his glory upon them, but they shall be honored.

There is none can tell what God can do. He can make those things, that in
themselves are most fearful and terrible to behold, the most pleasant,
delightful, and desirable things. He can make a Gaol more beautiful than a
palace; restraint, more sweet by far than liberty. And the reproach of Christ
greater riches, than all the treasures in Egypt. (Heb. 11.26.) It Is said of
Christ, That for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and
despised the shame. (Heb. 12.2.) But,

Secondly, As there is in God a sufficiency of power to uphold, so there is in
him also a sufficiency of comfort and goodness to imbolden us: I mean
communicative comfort and goodness. Variety of, and the terribleness that
attends afflictions, call, not only for the beholding of things, but also a
laying hold of them by faith and feeling; now this also is with God to the
making of his to sing in the night. Paul and Silas sang in Prison, the Apostle
went away from the Council rejoicing, when they had shamefully beaten them for
their Preaching in the Temple. ( Acts 5.)

But whence came this, but from an inward feeling by faith of the love of God,
and of Christ, which passes knowledge? Hence he says to those under
afflictions, fear none of those things that you shall suffer. There are things
to be suffered, as well as places to suffer in; and there are things to be let
into the soul for its imboldening, as well as things to be showed to it. ( Rev.
2.20. Romans 5.5.)

Now the things to be suffered are many, some of which are thus counted up,
they were Tortured, had cruel mockings and scourgings: they were stoned, were
sawn asunder, were slain with the sword, were tempted. They wandered about in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented ( Heb.
11.35.) These are some of the things that good men of old have suffered, for
their profession of the name of Jesus Christ. All which they were enabled by
him to bear, to bear with Patience; to bear with rejoicing; knowing in
themselves that they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. (Heb.
10.32, 33, 34, 35, 36.)

And it is upon this account that Paul does call to mind the most dreadful of
his afflictions, which he suffered for the Gospel sake with rejoicing; and that
he tells us that he was most glad, when he was in such infirmities. Yea, it is
upon this account that he boasts, and vaunteth it over Death, Life, Angels,
principalities, powers, things present, things to come, height, depth, and
every other creature: for he knew that there was enough in that love of God,
which was set on him through Christ, to preserve him, and to carry him through
all, (2 Cor. 12.9, 10. Romans 8.37, 38, 39.)

That God has done thus, a thousand instances might be given; and that God will
still do thus, for that we have his faithful promise. ( Isa. 43.2. 1 Cor.
10.13.)

To the adversaries of the Church these things have also sometimes been showed,
to their amazement and confusion. God showed to the King of Babylon, that he
was with the three children in the Fiery Furnace; God showed to the King of
Babylon again, that he would be where his were, though in the Lions Dens ( Dan.
3.24. chap. 6.24, 25, 26.)

Also in later days, who so reads Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments, will also find
several things to confirm this for truth. God has power over all plagues, and
therefore can either heighten, or moderate and lessen them at pleasure. He has
power over Fire, and can take away the intolerable heat thereof. This those in
the Marian days could also testify, namely, Hauks and Bainham, and others: who
could shout for joy, and clap their hands in the very flames for joy. God has
power over hunger, and can moderate it, and cause that one meals meat shall go
as far as forty were wont to do. This is witnessed in Elias, when he went for
his life to the mount of God, being fled from the face of Jezabel. (1 King.
19.8, etc.)

And what a good nights lodging had Jacob, when he fled from the face of his
Brother Esau? When the earth was his Couch, the Stone his pillow, the Heavens
his canopy, and the shades of the night his Curtains? ( Genesis 28.12, 13, 14, 15,
16.)

I can do all things, said Paul, through Christ strengthening me. And again, I
take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake. But how can that be, since no affliction for
the present seems joyous? I answer though they be not so in themselves, yet
Christ by his presence can make them so. For then his power rests upon us. When
I am weak, says he, then I am strong: then Christ does in me mighty things.
For my strength, says Christ, is made perfect in weakness, (in affliction for
the Gospel sake.)

For when my people are afflicted, and suffer great distress for me, then they
have my comforting, supporting, imboldning and upholding presence to relieve
them. An instance of which you have in the three children, and in Daniel, made
mention of before. But what think you, did these servants of the God of Jacob
feel, feel in their souls of his power and comforting presence, when they, for
his name, were suffering of the rage of their enemies. While also one like the
Son of God was walking in the Fire with the three, and while Daniel sat and saw
that the hands of Angels were made Muzzels for the Lions mouths.

I say, was it not worth being in the Furnace, and in the Den, to see such
things as these? O! the grace of God, and his spirit, and power, that is with
them that suffer for him, if their hearts be upright with him: if they are
willing to be faithful to him: if they have learned to say, here am I, when
ever he calls them, and what ever he calls them to. Wherefore when Peter says,
let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator: He concludes, that how
outrageous, furious, merciless, or cruel soever the enemy is: yet there, with
him, they shall find help and succor, relief and comfort. For God is able to
make such as do so, stand.

Eighthly, We will now come to touch upon that, which may more immediately be
called the reason of this exhortation. For although all these things that have
been mentioned before, may, or might be called reasons of the point: yet there
are, that in my judgment, may be called reasons, which are yet behind. As,

First, Because, when a man has by faith and prayer committed the keeping of
his soul to God, he has the advantage of that liberty of soul to do, and suffer
for God, that he cannot otherwise have. He that has committed his soul to God
to keep, is rid of that care, and is delivered from the fear of its perishing
for ever.

When the Jews went to stone Stephen, they laid their clothes down at a
distance from the place, at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul, that they
might not be a cumber, or a trouble to them, as to their intended work. So we,
when we go about to drive sin out of the world, in a way of suffering for Gods
truth against it, we should lay down our souls at the feet of God to care for,
that we may not be cumbered with the care of them our selves: also that our
care of Gods truth may not be weakened, by such sudden and strong doubts, as
will cause us faintingly to say, but what will become of my soul? When Paul had
told his Son Timothy, that he had been before that Lion Nero, and that he was
at present delivered out of his mouth: he adds, And the Lord shall deliver me
from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom. He shall,
and will: here is a man at liberty, here are no cumbersome fears. But how came
the Apostle by this confidence of his well-being, and of his share in another
world? Why, he had committed the keeping of his soul to God; (compare 2 Timothy
1.12. with chap. 4.18.) For to commit the keeping of the soul to God, if it be
done in faith and prayer, it leaves, or rather brings this holy boldness, and
confidence into the soul. Suppose a man in the Country were necessitated to go
to London, and had a great charge of money to pay in there. Suppose also, that
the way thither was become exceeding dangerous because of the high-way-men that
continually abide therein: what now must this man do to go on his Journey
cheerfully? Why, let him pay in his money to such a one in the Country as will
be sure to return it for him at London safely. Why, this is the case, thou art
bound for Heaven, but the way thither is dangerous. It is beset every where
with evil Angels, who would rob thee of thy Soul. What now? Why, if thou
would go cheerfully on in thy dangerous Journey, commit thy treasure, thy
Soul to God to keep. And then thou may say with comfort, well, that care is
over. For whatever I meet with in my way thither, my Soul is safe enough: the
Thieves if they meet me, cannot come at that; I know to whom I have committed my
Soul, and I am persuaded, that he will keep that to my joy and everlasting
comfort against the great day.

This therefore is one reason why we should (that suffer for Christ) commit the
keeping of our Souls to God, because, a doubt about the well-being of that,
will be a clog, a burden, and an affliction to our spirit; Yea, the greatest of
afflictions whilst we are taking up our Cross and bearing it after Christ. The
joy of the Lord is our strength, and the fear of perishing is that which will
be weakening to us in the way.

Secondly, we should commit the keeping of our Souls to God, because the final
conclusion that merciless men do sometimes make with the servants of God, is
all on a sudden. They give no warning before they strike. We shall not need
here to call you to mind about the Massacres that were in Ireland, Paris,
Piedmont, and other places: where the godly in the night, before they were well
awake, had, some of them, their heart blood running on the ground. The savage
Monsters crying out, kill, kill, from one end of a street, or a place, to the
other. This was sudden, and he that had not committed his Soul to God to keep
it, was surely very hard put to it now; but he that had done so, was ready for
such sudden work. Sometimes indeed, the Ax and Halter, or the Faggot, is showed
first; but sometimes again it is without that warning. Up, said Saul to Doeg
the Edomite, and slay the priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 22.11-19. Here was sudden
work, fall on, said Saul, and Doeg fell upon them, and slew on that day
fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen Ephod. Nob also the ci^y of
the Priests he smote with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children,
and sucklings, etc. Here was but a word and a blow. Think thou not, who
read these lines, that all of these who had before committed their Soul to
God to keep, were the fittest folk to die?

And immedately the King sent an Executioner, and commanded his head to be
brought, Mark 6.27. The story is concerning Herod and John the Baptist. Herod's
dancing girl had begged John Baptist's head: and nothing but his head must
serve her turn; well girl, thou shall have it. Have it? I, but it will be long
first. No, thou shall have it now, just now, immediately, And immediately he
sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought.

Here is sudden work for sufferers; here is no intimation before hand. The
executioner comes to John; now, whether he was at dinner or asleep, or whatever
he was about, the bloody man bolts in upon him, and the first word he salutes
him with, is, Sir, strip, lay down your neck; For I come to take away your
head. But hold, stay, wherefore? pray, let me commit my Soul to God. No, I must
not stay, I am in have; slap, says his sword, and off falls the good man's head.
This is sudden work, work that stays for no man: work that must be done by and
by, immediately or it is not worth a rush. I will, said she, that thou give me
by and by in a charger, the head of John the Baptist. Yea, she came in have,
and as hastily the commandment went forth, and immediately his head was brought.

Thirdly, Unless a man commits the keeping of his Soul to God: it is a question
whether he can hold out, and stand his ground, and wrestle with all
temptations. (This is the victory, even your Faith: and who is he that
overcomes the world, but he that believes? etc. And what encouragement has a
man to suffer for Christ, whose heart cannot believe, and whose Soul he cannot
commit to God to keep it?) And our Lord Jesus intimates as much, when he says,
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. Wherefore
says he thus? but to encourage those that suffer for his truth in the world,
to commit the keeping of their Souls to him, and to believe that he has taken
the charge and care of them. Paul's wisdom was, that he was ready to die,
before his enemies were ready to kill him. I am now ready, says he, to be
offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.

This is therefore a thing of high concern, to wit, the committing of the Soul
to God to keep it. It Is, I say, of concern to do it now, just now quickly,
whether thou art yet engaged or no; for it is a good preparatory too, as well
as profitable in a time of persecution: consider it, I say. The Apostle Paul
says, that he and his companions were hold in their God, to profess and stand
to the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.2. but how could that be, if they had the
salvation of their Souls to seek, and that to be sure they would have had, had
they not committed the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing?

But what is committing of the Soul to God?

Answ. I have in general briefly spoken to that already, and now for thy
further help, we will a little enlarge. Wherefore,

First, To commit, is to deliver up to custody to be kept. Hence prisoners when
sent to the Gaol, are said to be committed thither. Thus Paul hated men and
women, comitting them to prison. And thus Joseph's master committed all his
prisoners to him, to his custody, to be kept there according to the Law. ( Acts
8.3. Genesis 39.22.)

Secondly, to commit, is not only to deliver up to custody, but to give in
charge, that that which is committed, be kept safe, and not suffered to be
lost. Thus Paul was committed to Prison, the Jailer being charged to keep him
safely. (Acts 16.23. Luke 16.11.)

Thirdly, to commit, is to leave the whole disposal (sometimes) of that which
is committed, to those to whom such thing is committed. Thus were the Shields
of the Temple committed to the Guard, and Jeremiah to the hands of Gadaliah. (1
Kings 14.27 Jer. 29.14.)

And thus thou must commit thy Soul to God, and to his care, and keeping. It
must be delivered up to his care, and put under his custody. Thou may also
('tho I would speak modestly) give him a charge to take the care of it.
Concerning my sons, and concerning my daughters, and concerning the work of my
hands, command ye me, Isai 45.11. Thou must also leave all the concerns of thy
Soul, and of thy being an inheritor of the next World, wholly to the care of
God. He that does this in the way that God has bid him, is safe, though the sky
should fall. The poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the
fatherless. Ps. 10.14.

And for encouragement to do this, the Lord has bidden us, the Lord has
commanded us, the Lord expects that we should thus do. Yea, thou art also
bidden to commit thy way unto him, thy work unto him, thy cause unto him, thy
Soul to him, and he will take care of all, Psalm. 37.5. Pro. 16.3. Job 5.8. And
if we do this, as we should, God will not only take care of us, and of our
Souls in the general, but that our work and ways be so ordered that we may not
fail in either. I have trusted, said David, in the Lord, therefore I shall not
slide. Psalm. 26.1.

Before I leave this, I will speak something of the way in which this
commitment of the Soul to God must be. And that is in a way of well-doing, Let
them commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing: or in a way of
well-doing. That is therefore the course that a godly man should be found in,
at, in, and after he has committed his Soul to God to keep. And as the Apostle
says in an other place, This is but a reasonable service, Romans 12.1. For if God
be so gracious as to take care of my Soul at my request, why should not I also
be so gracious as to be found in a way of well-doing at his bidding? Take care,
Master, of me for meat and wages; and I will take care, Master, that thy work
shall be faithfully done. This is honest, and thus should Christians say to
God. And he that heartily in this shall mean as he says, shall find that God's
way shall be strength unto him.

A Christian is not to commit his Soul unto God to keep, and so to grow remiss,
carnal, negligent, cold and worldly: concluding as if he had now bound God to
save him, but set himself at liberty, whether he will longer serve him in
trying and troublesome times, or no. He must commit the keeping of his Soul to
him in well-doing. He may not now relinquish Gods cause, play the Apostate,
cast off the Cross, and look for Heaven notwithstanding. He that does thus will
find himself mistaken, and be made to know at last that God takes the care of
no such Souls. If any man draws back says he, my Soul shall have no pleasure
in him. Wherefore he that commits the keeping of his Soul to God, must do it
in that way which God has prescribed to him, which is in a way of well-doing.
Alas, alas! there is never such a word in it: it must be done in a way of
well-doing. You must think of this that would commit your Souls to God in
suffering and troublesome times.

You must do it in well-doing.

In well-doing, that is in persevering in ways of godliness, both with respect
to morals, and also instituted worship. Thou therefore that would have God
take care of thy Soul: as thou believe, so thou must do well, that is, do
good to the poor, to thy neighbor, to all men; specially, to the household of
Faith. Benjamin must have a Benjamins m^ss: and all others, as thou art
capable, must feel and find the fruit of thy Godliness. Thou must thus serve
the Lord with much humility of mind, though thorough many difficulties, and much
temptation.

Thou must also keep close to Gospel Worship, public and private: doing of
those things that thou have warrant for from the Word, and leaving of that, or
those things, for others that will stick to them, that have no stamp of God
upon them. Thou must be found doing of all with all thy heart, and if thou
suffer for so doing, thou must bear it patiently. For what Peter says to
the women he spoke to, may be applied to all believers, whose daughters you
are, says he, meaning Sarahs, so long as you do well, and are not afraid with
any amazement, 1 Pet. 3.6.

So then, the man that has committed his Soul to God to keep, has not at all
disingaged himself from his duty, or took himself off from a perseverance in
that good work that under a suffering condition he was bound to do before. No,
his very committing of his Soul to God, to keep it, has laid an engagement upon
him to abide to God in that calling, wherein he is called of God. To commit my
Soul to God, supposes my sensibleness of hazard and danger; but there is none
among men when the offense of the Cross is ceased. To commit my Soul to God to
keep, concludes my resolution to go on in that good way of God that is so
dangerous to my Soul, if God takes not the charge and care thereof. For he
that says in his heart, I will now commit my soul to God, if he knows what he
says, says thus: I am for holding on in a way of bearing of my Cross after
Christ, though I come to the same end for so doing, as he came to before me. This
is committing the Soul to him in well-doing.

Look to your selves therefore who ever you are that talk of leaving your Souls
with God, but do live loose, idle, profane, and wicked lives. God will not take
care of such men's Souls; they commit them not unto him as they should. They do
but flatter him with their lips, and lie unto him with their tongue, and think
to deceive the Lord. But to no purpose. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption. It Is he that sows to the Spirit, that shall reap life
everlasting, Galat. 6.7, 8.

I shall come now to the second thing contained in the Text, namely, To give
you a more distinct description of the men that are thus bid to commit the
keeping of their souls to God.

And they are thus described [They that suffer according to the will of God.]
Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Two things are here to be inquired into.

1. What the Apostle here means by the will of God. 2. What suffering according
to the will of God, is.
First, For the will of God, it is diverse ways taken in the Scriptures: as
sometimes forelecting, justifying, sanctifying acts of God: Sometimes for
Faith, good Life, and sometimes for suffering for his name. Romans 9. Ephesians.
1.11. Romans 4.6, 7, 8. John. 7.17. 1 John 3.23. 1 These. 4.3. Mat. 7.21. But by
will of God, here, we must 1. Understand, his Law and Testament. 2. His order
and designment.


First, By his will, I understand, his Law and Testament. This is called the
revealed will of God. Or that by which he has made himself, and how he will be
worshipped, known unto the children of men. Now, I understanding these words
thus, must before I go further, make this distinction, to wit, That there is a
difference to be put betwixt them that suffer for the breach, and those that
suffer for keeping of this Law and Testament! For though both of them may suffer
by the will of God: yet they are not both concerned in this Text. A malefactor,
that suffers for his evil deeds, the due punishment thereof; suffers as
other Texts declare, according to the will of God. But, I say, this Text does
not concern it self with them. For both this Text, and this Epistle is writ for
the counsel and comfort of those that suffer for keeping the Law and Testament
of God, that suffer for well-doing, 1 Pet. 3.13, 14, 17. Chap. 4.13, 14.

The man then that is concerned in this advice, is he that suffers from the
hands of men, for keeping of the word of God. And this is he that has license,
leave, yea a command to commit the keeping of his Soul to God in well-doing, as
unto a faithful Creator.

We will a little enlarge upon this. He that keeps the word of God, is such
an one that has regard to both the matter, and manner thereof. The matter is
the Truth, the Doctrine contained therein; the manner is that comely, godly,
humble, faithful way of doing it, which becomes a man that has to do with the
Law and Testament of God. And both these are contained in the Text. For, first,
here is the will of God to be done; and then, secondly, to be done according to
his will. Let them that suffer according to his will. Which words, I say, take
in both matter, and manner of doing. So then, the man that here we have to do
with, and to discourse of, is a man that in the sense now given, suffers.
That which makes a Martyr, is suffering for the word of God after a right
manner. And that is, when he suffers, not only for righteousness, but for
righteousness sake: not only for truth, but of love to truth; not only for Gods
word, but according to it: to wit in that holy, humble, meek manner as the word
of God requires. A man may give his body to be burned for Gods truth, and yet
be none of God's martyrs. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. Yea, a man may suffer with a great
deal of patience, and yet be none of Gods Martyrs, 1 Pet. 2.20. The one,
because he wants that grace that should poise his heart, and make him right
in the manner of doing: the other, because he wants that word of the Holy One
that alone can make his cause good as to matter.

It Is therefore matter and manner that makes the Martyr: and it is this man that
is intended in the Text which is aforesaid described.

So then, they that suffer for the Law and Testament of God in that holy and
humble manner that the word requires, they are they that, by this word of God,
are commanded to commit the keeping of their Souls to God.

From this consideration, two things present themselves to our sight.

First, That a man may be a Christian, and suffer, and yet not suffer, in the
sense last given, according to the will of God.

Secondly, There have been, and may yet be a people in the world that have, and
may suffer, in the sense of the Apostle here, according to the will of God.

A few words to the first of these, namely, that a man may be a Christian, and
suffer, and yet not suffer, in the sense of the Apostle in the Text, according
to the will of God. He may be a Christian and yet not suffer as a Christian. He
may want the matter, or, he may want the manner, of suffering as a Christian.

This is evident from what this Apostle suggests in several places of this
Epistle. For,

1. Says he, If ye be buffeted for your faults, chap. 2.20.

This supposes that a Christian may so be; for he speaks here to the same
people, unto whom he speaks in the Text, though he puts them not under the
same circumstance, as suffering for well-doing. If ye be buffeted for your
faults, for what Gods word calls faults, What thank have you (from God, or good
men) though you take it patiently?

So again, For it is better if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
well-doing than for evil-doing. Chap, 3.17. Here it is plainly supposed that a
Christian man may suffer for evil-doing, yea, that the will of God may be, that
he should suffer for evil-doing. For God, if Christians do not well, will
vindicate himself by punishing of them for their doing ill. Yea, and will not
count them worthy, though they be his own, to be put among the number of those
that suffer for doing well.

Again, But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil
doer, or as a busy-body in other men's matters. Chap. 4.15. These are cautions
to Christians to persuade them to take heed to themselves, their tongues, and
their actions, that all be kept within the bounds of the word. For it would be
a foolish thing to say, That these are cautions to persuade to take heed of
that, into which it is not possible one should fall. It Is possible for
Christians to suffer for evil-doing, and therefore let Christians beware; it is
possible for Christians to be brought to public Justice for their faults, and
therefore let Christians beware. It Is possible for Christians to suffer justly
by the hand of the Magistrate, and therefore let Christians beware. This also
is insinuated in the Text it self, and therefore let Christians beware.

The causes of this are many, some of which I shall now briefly touch upon.

1. Sin is in the best of men: and as long as it is so, without great
watchfulness, and humble walking with God, we may be exposed to shame, and
suffering for it. What sin is it that a child of God is not liable to commit
(excepting that which is the sin unpardonable)? Nor have we a promise of being
kept from any other sin, but on condition that we do watch and pray. Mat. 26.41.

2. It Is possible for a Christian to have anerroneous conscience in some
things, yea, in such things as (if God by his grace prevents not) may bring us
to public justice and shame. Abishai, though a good man, would have killed the
King, and that of conscience to God, and love to his Master. 1 Samuel 26.7.8, And
had David delivered him up to Saul for his attempt, he had in all likelihood
died as a Traitor. Peter drew his Sword, and would have fought therewith, a
thing for which he was blamed of his Master, and bid with a threatening, to put
it up again. Mat. 26.52.

Besides, Oppression makes a wise man mad; and when a man is mad, what evils
will he not do?

Further, The Devil, who is the great enemy of the Christians, can send forth
such Spirits into the World as shall not only disturb Men, but Nations, Kings,
and Kingdoms, in raising divisions, distractions and rebellions. And can so
manage matters, that the looser sort of Christians may be also dipped, and
concerned therein. In Absaloms conspiracy, against his Father, there were two
hundred men called out of Jerusalem to follow him, and they went in their
simplicity, not knowing any thing. 2 Samuel 15.10.11.

I thank God I know of no such men, nor thing: but my judgment tells me, that
if Christians may be drawn into Fornication, Adultery, Murder, Theft,
Blasphemy, or the like, (as they may); why should it be thought impossible for
them to be drawn in here. Wherefore I say again, watch and pray, fear God,
reverence his word, approve of his appointments, that you may be delivered from
every evil work and way.

I said before that the will of God may be, that a Christian should suffer as an
evil doer: but then it is because he keeps not within the bounds of that,
which is also called the will of God. The will of God is, that sin should be
punished, though committed by the Christians; punished according to the quality
of transgressions: and therefore, it is that he has ordained Magistrates.
Magistrates, to punish sin, though it be the sin of Christians. They are the
Ministers of God, revengers, to execute wrath, the wrath of God upon them that
do evil. Romans 13.

Wherefore, though the Christian as a Christian is the only man at liberty, as
called thereunto of God; yet his liberty is limited to things that are good: he
is not licensed thereby to indulge the flesh. Holiness and liberty are joined
together, yea our call to liberty, is a call to holiness. See, and you shall
find, that a quiet and peaceable life, in our respective places, under the
Government, is that which we should pray for, to wit, that we may without
molestation, if it were the will of God, spend our days in all godliness and
honesty among our neighbors. See 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.13,
14, 15, 16, 17.

I would improve this a little, and First, to Christians as Christians: Beware
the cautions, that are here presented to you, be not neglected by you. The
evils are burning hot, as hot as a red hot Iron. It is the greatest blemish
that can be to a Christian, to suffer as an evil doer. To say nothing of the
reproach that such do bring to the name of Christ, their Lord; to his Law,
their rule; and to the Christian profession, which should be their glory: the
guilt and shame that evil actions will load the conscience with at such a time,
can hardly be stood under: The man that suffers as an evil doer, and yet
wears the name of a Christian, what stumbling blocks does he lay in the way
of the ignorant in a Kingdom? The Devil told them before, that a Christian was
a mischievous man; and to suffer for evil-doing, confirms them in that belief.

Consider also the difficulties that surely such must meet with in the last
minutes of their life. For can it be imagined but that such an one must have
combats and conflicts at the last, who carry in their consciences the guilt and
condemnation that is due to their deeds, to the place which Magistrates have
appointed for them to receive the reward of their works at.

Such an one bereaves not only his own Soul of peace, and his name of credit,
but himself of life, his friends of all cause of rejoicing, and casts
reproach upon Religion, as he is stepping out of the world.

What shall I say, Christians, as Christians, have other things to do than to
concern themselves in evil things, or to meddle in other men's matters. Let us
mind our own business, and leave the Magistrate to his work, Office and Calling
among men also.

I speak now to them that are not by the King called to that employ. A
Christian as such has enough to do at home in his Heart, in his House, in his
Shop, and the like. But if thou must needs be meddling, consider what place,
Office, calling or relation, God has put thee in, and busy thy self by the
rule of the word to a conscientious performance of that. Nor shall thou want
Dignity though thou art but a private Christian. Every Christian man is made a
King by Christ. ( Revel. 5.9, 10.) But then, his dominion as such, does reach
no further than to himself. He has not dominion over another faith (2 Cor.
1.24.). His Office is to govern, and bridle, and keep under himself: to watch
over himself, and to bring his body into subjection to the will of God. The
weapons that he has for this purpose, are not, carnal, but spiritual, and
mighty thorough God. Let him govern then, if he will be a Governor, his whole
man by the word. Let him bring down if he must be bringing down, his own high
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God. If he must be a Warrior, let him levy War against his own unruly passions,
and let him fight against those lusts that war against his Soul (2 Cor. 10.3,
4, 5. Gal. 5.17. James 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.11.)

I say therefore, if thou will needs be a Ruler, thou have a tongue, ru^e that;
Lusts, rule them; Affections, govern them; yea, thou have excellent Graces,
manage them, cherish, strengthen and replenish them according to the mind of
that great one who has bestowed such power to rule, upon thee. Mortify,
therefore, your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is Idolatry.
(Colos. 3.5.) Nor do I think that murmuring, shrinking, whinching, complaining,
and the like, when men, Governors, lay a yoke upon our necks, flows from any
thing else, but love to our flesh, and distrust of the faithfulness of God to
manage men, things, and actions for his Church. The powers that be, are
ordered, as well as ordained of God. They are also always in Gods hand, as his
rod or staff for the good and benefit of his people Wherefore we ought with all
meekness and humbleness of mind to accept of what our God by them shall please
to lay upon us. (1 Pet. 5.6.)

By what I now say, I do not forbid groaning and crying to God under
affliction. I speak against striving to deliver our selves from the affliction.
And since men are, as I said, the rod, staff or sword in Gods hand, we should
apply our selves unto him in faith in a way of Prayer, Intercession,
Supplication and giving of thanks for Governors. For since they are sent of
God, they must needs come with some good in their hand for us, also our prayers
may make them more profitable to us. And this we ought to do without wrath and
doubting; for this is that which is good, and acceptable unto God. (1 Timothy 2.)

Besides, it is a sign that we forget our selves when we complain for the
punishment of our sins. If we look into our selves, and ways, we shall see
cause of more heavy stripes than yet God by men has laid upon us. What sin has
yet been suppressed, by all that has happened to us: Are Pride, Covetousness,
Looseness Treacherous dealing, Schisms, and other things, redressed by all the
affliction that we have had? Yea, do we not grow worse and worse? Wherefore
then should we complain? Where is Repentance, Reformation, and amendment of
life amongst us? Why then, do we shrink and whinch. For my part, I have
oft-times stood amazed both at the mercy of God, and the favor of the Prince
toward us; and can give thanks to God for both: and do make it my Prayer to
God for the King, and that God will help me with meekness and patience to bear
what ever shall befall me for my professed subjection to Christ, by men.

We are bid, as I said before, to give thanks to God for all men, for Kings, and
for all that are in authority. Because, as I said, there is no man with whom we
have to do (we doing as we should) but he brings some good thing to us, or
does some good thing for us. We will now descend from them that are supreme in
authority, and will come to inferior men: And suppose some of them to act
beyond measure, cruelly. What? Can no good thing come to us out of this? Do not
even such things as are most bitter to the flesh, tend to awaken Christians to
Faith and Prayer, to a sight of the emptiness of this World, and the fadingness
of the best it yields? Does not God by these things (oft-times) call our sins
to remembrance, and provoke us to amendment of life? how then can we be
offended at things by which we reap so much good, and at things that God makes
so profitable for us?

Does not God, oft-times, even take occasions by the hardest of things that
come upon us, to visit our Souls with the comforts of his Spirit, to lead us
into the glory of his word, and to cause us to favor that love that he has had
for us, even from before the world began, till now. A nest of Bees and honey
did Sampson find, even in the belly of that Lion that roared upon him. And is
all this no good? or can we be without such holy appointments of God? Let these
things be considered by us, and let us learn like Christians to kiss the Rod,
and love it.

I have thought, again, my brethren, since it is required of us that we give
thanks to God for all these men; it follows that we do with quietness submit
our selves under what, God shall do to us by them. For it seems a Paradox to
me, to give thanks to God for them, that yet I am not willing should abide in
that place that God has set them in for me. I will then love them, bless them,
pray for them, and do them good. I speak now of the men that hurt me as was
hinted before. And I will do thus, because it is good so to do, because they do
me good by hurting of me, because I am calcalled to inherit a blessing, and
because I would be like my heavenly Father. Therefore if mine enemy hunger, let
me feed him; if he thirst, let me give him drink. (Mat. 5.43, 44, 45, 46, 47,
48. 1 Pet. 3.9. Romans 12.17, 20)

1. We must see good in that, in which other men can see none. 2. We must pass
by those injuries that other men would revenge. 3. We must show we have grace,
and that we are made to bear what other men are not acquainted with. 4. Many of
our graces are kept alive by those very things that are the death of other men's
Souls.
Where can the excellency of our Patience, of our meekness, of our
long-suffering, of our love, and of our Faith appear, if it be not under
Trials, and in those things that run cross to our flesh? The Devil, they say,
is good when he is pleased: But Christ and his Saints, when displeased.

Let us therefore covet to imitate Christ and the Scripture Saints. Let us show
out of a good conversation, our works with meekness of wisdom. Let us take heed
of admitting the least thought in our minds of evil, against God, the King, or
them that are under him in employ, because, the cup, the King, all men, and
things are in the hand of God. ( Psalm. 75.8. Pro. 8.15. Chap. 21.1. Lam. 3.37.
and he can make them better to us, than if they were as our flesh desires they
should.

I have often thought that the best Christians are found in the worst of times:
and I have thought again, that one reason why we are no better, is because God
purges us no more ( Joh. 15) I know these things are against the grain of the
flesh, but they are not against the graces of the spirit. Noah and Lot, who so
holy as they, in the day of their affliction? Noah and Lot, who so idle as they
in the day of their prosperity? I might have put in David too, who while he was
afflicted, had ways of serving God that were special; but when he was more
enlarged, he had ways that were not so good. Wherefore the first ways of David
are the ways that God has commended; but the rest of his ways, such as had not
pre-eminence. (2 Chro. 17.3.

We have need of all, and of more than all that has yet befallen us: and are to
thank God, since his word and patience have done no more good to us, that he
has appointed men to make us better. Wherefore for a conclusion, as we are to
receive with meekness the engrafted word of God: so also we are with patience
to bear what God by man shall lay upon us. O that saying of God to them of old,
( Why cryest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for the
multitude of thy iniquities: because thy sins were increased, I have done these
things unto thee. (Jer. 30.15.) We have need to consider of, and to sit still
and be quiet, and reverence the ordinance of God: I mean affliction.

And until we can in truth get hither in our Spirits, I neither look to find
very right Christianity amongst us, nor much of God among professors. When I
think of Mordecai, and Daniel, yea, and of David too, and of the behavior of
them all with respect to the powers that they were under: I cannot but think
that a sweet, meek, quiet, loving, godly submission unto men for the Lords
sake, is an excellent token of the grace of God in us. But,

Secondly, as I cannot but condemn the actions of such Christians as have been
touched before: so I would caution weak Christians not to be offended with true
Religion, for the miscarriages of their fellows. There are two things that are
very apt to be an occasion of offense to the weak: one is, when the cross
attends Religion: the other is, when others that profess Religion do suffer,
for evil doing. To both these I would say this.

First, though the Cross, indeed, is grievous to the flesh, yet we should with
grace bear up under it, and not be offended at it.

Secondly, and as to the second, though we should and ought to be offended with
such miscarriage; yet not with Religion, because of such miscarriage. Some
indeed, when they see these things, take offense against Religion it self. Yea,
perhaps are glad of the occasion, and so fall out with Jesus Christ, saying to
him, because of the evils that attend his ways, as the ten Tribes said to
Rehoboam, the son of Solomon the King, What portion have we in David? neither
have we inheritance in the Son of Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: now see to
thine own house, David. (1 Kings 12.16.) and so go quite away from him, and
cleave no more unto him, to his people or to his ways: But this is bad. Shun
therefore the evil ways of Christians, but cleave to the way that is Christian:
cast a way that bad Spirit that thou see in any; but hold fast to thy head
and Lord. Whither can thou go? the Lord Jesus has the words of eternal life
(John 6.) Whither will thou go? there is not salvation in any other ( Acts
4.12.) Take heed therefore of picking a quarrel with Jesus Christ, and with
his ways, because of the evil doings of some of his followers. Judas sold him,
Peter denied him, and many of his Disciples went back and did walk no more with
him: but niether himself nor his ways were the worse for that. Beware therefore
that thou truly distinguish between the good ways of Jesus Christ, and the evil
ways of them that profess him; and take not an occasion to throw away thy own
Soul down the throat of Hell, because others have vilely cast away their lives
by transgressing of the Law of God. Nay let other men's faults make thee more
wary; let other men's falls make thee look better to thy goings: Shun the rock
that he that went before thee, did split his Ship against, and cry to God to
lead thee in a path that is plain and good, because of thy observers.

Further, let not opposite Christians rejoice when they see that evil has
taken their Brother by the heel. Hate the garment, the thing that is bad, and
by which the name, and fame, and life of thy Brother is so vilely cast away,
thou should; (and take good head lest it also touch thee) but yet thou
should pity thy Brother, mourn for his hard happ, and grieve that a thing so
much unbecoming Christianity, should be suffered to show the least part of it
self among any of those that profess the Gospel.

Directions for the shunning of suffering for evil-doing, are they that come
next to hand.

1. Therefore, would thou not suffer as evil doer, then take heed of
committing of evil. Evil courses bring to evil ends; shun all appearance of
evil, and ever follow that which is good. And if ye be followers of that which
is good, who will harm you? (1 Pet. 3.13.) Or if there should be such enemies
to goodness in the world as to cause thee for that to suffer: thou need not
be ashamed of thy suffering for well-doing, nor can there be a good man, but he
will dare to own and stand by thee in it. Yea, thy sufferings for that will
make thee happy, so that thou can by no means be a loser thereby.

2. Would thou not suffer for evil-doing, then take head of the occasions of
evil. Take heed of tempting company. Beware of men, for they will deliver thee
up. There have been men in the world, that have sought to make themselves out
of the ruins of other men. This did Judas, and some of the Pharisees. (Matt.
10.17. Luke 20.19, 20.) Take heed to thy mouth: A fools mouth calls for
strokes, and his lips are a snare to his soul. (Pro. 18.7.) Take heed of
indulging, and hearkening to the ease of the flesh, and of carnal reasonings,
for that will put the upon wicked things.

2. Would thou not suffer as an evil-doer; then take heed of hearing of any
thing spoken that is not according to sound Doctrine: thou must withdraw thy
self from such, in whom thou perceivest not the words of knowledge. Let not
talk against Governors, against Powers, against Men in Authority be admitted;
keep thee far from an evil matter. My Son, says Solomon, fear thou the Lord,
and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to change.

4. Would thou not suffer as an evil-doer; addict not thy self to play with
evil, to joque and jest, and mock at men in Place and Power. Gaal mocked at
Abimelech, and said, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? But he paid
for his disdainful language at last ( Judges 9.)

I have heard of an Innkeeper here in England, whose sign was the Crown, and
he was a meery man; Now he had a Boy, of whom he used to say when he was jovial
among his Guests, This Boy is heir to the Crown, or this Boy shall be heir to
the Crown; and, if I mistake not the story, for these words he lost his life.
It Is bad jesting with great things, with things that are Gods ordinance, as
Kings and Governors are. Yea, let them rather have that fear, that honor,
that reverence, that worship, that is due to their place, their office, and
dignity. How Paul gave honor and respect unto those that were but deputy Kings
and heathen Magistrates, will greatly appear, if you do but read his Trials
before them in the Book called the Acts of the Apostles. And what a charge both
he and Peter have lest behind them, to the Churches to do so too, may be found
to conviction, if we read their Epistles.

5. Would thou not suffer for evil-doing; then take heed of being offended
with Magistrates, because by their Sate-Acts they may cross thy inclinations.
It Is given to them to bear the Sword, and a command is to thee, if thy heart
cannot acquiesce with all things, with meekness and patience to suffer.
Discontent in the mind, sometimes puts discontent into the mouth; and
discontent in the mouth, does sometimes also put a halter about the neck. For
as a man by speaking a word in jest, may for that be hanged in earnest; so he
that speaks in discontent, may die for it in sober sadness. Adonijah's
discontent put him upon doing that which cost him his life, (1 King. 2.13-23.)
Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them: for
they are subjected to the will, and foot of God.

6. But above all, get thy conscience possessed yet more with this, that the
Magistrate is God's ordinance, and is ordered of God as such: that he is the
Minister of God to thee for good, and that it is thy duty to fear him, and pray
for him, to give thanks to God for him, and to be subject to him as both Paul
and Peter admonish us: and that not only for wrath, but for conscience sake,
(Romans 13.) For all other arguments come short of binding the Soul, where this
argument is wanting; until we believe, that of God we are bound thereto. I
speak not these things, as knowing any that are dissaffected to the Government:
(for I love to be alone, if not with godly men, in things that are convenient.)
But because I appear thus in public, and know not into whose hands these lines
may come, therefore thus I write. I speak it also to show my Loyalty to the
King, and my love to my fellow Subjects: and my desire that all Christians
should walk in ways of peace and truth.

I come now to the second thing propounded to be spoken to, as to suffering,
which is this.

That there have been, and yet may be a people in the world, that have and may
suffer in the sense of the Apostle here, according to the will of God, or for
righteousness sake.

That there have been such a people in the world, I think no body will deny,
because many of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles thus suffered. Besides,
since the Scriptures were written, all Nations can witness to this, whose
Histories tell at large of the patience and goodness of the sufferers, and of
the cruelty of those that did destroy them.

And that the thing will yet happen, or come to pass again, both Scripture and
reason affirm.

First for Scripture. The Text tells us, that God has put enmity betwixt the
woman and her seed, and the Serpent and his, (Genesis 3.15.) This enmity put, is
so fixed that none can remove it so, but that it still will remain in the
world. These two seeds have always had, and will have that which is essentially
opposite to one another, and they are the spirit of truth, and the Spirit of
error; sin and righteousness, light and darkness. (1 John 4.6. chap. 3.7, 8. 1
These. 5.5. Hence an unjust man is an abomination to the just, and he that is
upright in the way, is abomination to the wicked (Prove. 29.27. So that unless
you could sanctify and regenerate all men, or cause that no more wicked men
should any where be in Power for ever: you cannot prevent but that sometimes
still there must be sufferers for righteousness sake. Yea, and all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution (2 Timothy 3.12.)

To prove this by reason, is easy. The Devil is not yet shut up in the
bottomless pit: Antichrist is yet alive. The Government in all Kingdoms is not
yet managed with such light, and goodness of mind, as to let the Saints serve
God, as he has said, what ever it is in some.

And until then, there will be in some places, though for my part I cannot
predict where, a people that will yet suffer for well-doing, or for
righteousness sake.

In order to a right handling of this matter, I shall divide this head into
these two parts.

1. Show you what it is to suffer for well-doing, or for righteousness. 2. Show
you what it is to suffer for righteousness sake.
I put this distinction, because I find that it is one thing to suffer for
righteousness, and another to suffer for righteousness sake

To begin with the first, namely to show you what it is to suffer for
righteousness. Now that maybe done either passively or actively.

1. Passively, as when any suffer for righteousness without their own will, or
consent thereto. Thus the little children at Bethlehem suffered by the hands of
bloody Herod, when they died for, or in the room and stead of Jesus Christ
(Mat. 2.16.) Every one of those children died for righteousness, if Christ is
righteousness; for they died upon his account, as being supposed to be he
himself.

Thus also the children of Isreal's little ones, that were murdered with their
Parents, or otherwise, because of the Religion of them that begat and bare
them, died for righteousness. The same may be said concerning those of them
that suffered in the Land of the Chaldeans upon the same account.

I might here also bring in those poor Infants that in Ireland, Piedmont,
Paris, and other places, have had their throats cut, and their brains dashed
against the walls, for none other cause, but for the Religion of their Fathers.
Many, many have suffered for rightetousness after this manner. Their will, nor
consent, has been in the suffering, yet they have suffered for Religion, for
righteousness. And as this has been, so it may be again: for if men may yet
suffer for righteousness, even so for ought I know, even in this sense, may
their children also.

Now, although this is not the chief matter of my Text, yet a few words here
may do no harm. The children that thus suffer, though their own will and consent
be not in what they undergo, may yet, for all that, be accepted as an offering
unto the Lord. Their cause is good, it is for Religion and righteousness. Their
hearts do not recoile against the cause for which they suffer; and although
they are children, God can deal with them as with John the Baptist, cause them
in a moment to leap for Joy of Christ; or else can save them by his Grace, as
he saves other his elect infants, and thus comprehend them, though they cannot
apprehend him; yea why may they, not only be saved, but in some sense be called
Martyrs of Jesus Christ, and those that have suffered for Gods cause in the
world? God comforted Rachel concerning her children that Herod murdered in the
stead, and upon the account of Christ. He bids her refrain her self from tears,
by this promise, that her children should come again from the land of the
enemy, from death. And again says he, Thy children shall come again to their
own border: which I think if it be meant in a Gospel sense, must be to the
heavenly inheritance, (compare Jer. 31.15. with Matt. 2.18.)

And methinks this should be mentioned, not only for her, and their sakes, but
to comfort all those that either have had, or yet may have their children thus
suffer for righteousness. None of these things (as shall be further showed
anon) happen without the determinate counsel of God. He has ordered the
sufferings of little children as well as that of persons more in years. And
it is easy to think that God can as well foresee which of his elect shall
suffer by violent hands in their Infancy, as which of them shall then die a
natural death. He has Saints small in age as well as in esteem or otherwise:
and sometimes the least member of the body suffers violence, as well as the
head or other chief parts.

And although I desire not to see these days again, yet me thinks it will
please me to see those little ones that thus have already suffered for Jesus,
to stand in their white Robes, with the elders of the people, before the throne
to sing unto the Lamb.

But to pass this, and to come to that, which is more directly intended to be
spoken to, namely to show you who does actively suffer for righteousness. And,

1. It Is he that chooses by his own will and consent to suffer for it. All
suffering that can be called active suffering, must be by the consent of the
will, and that is done, when a man shall have sin and suffering set before him,
and shall choose suffering rather than sin. He chose rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: and
again, They did not accept of deliverance, that is, of base and unworthy terms,
that they might obtain a better resurrection. (Heb. 11.25. ver. 35.)

Indeed, no man can force a Christian to suffer as a Christian, without his own
consent. All Christians are sufferers, of will, and consent. Hence it is said,
they must take up their cross, by which taking up, an act of their will is
intended. So again, take my yoke upon you, which also intends an act of the
will. ( Mat. 10.38. Chap. 16.24. Chap. 11.29.)

This therefore, is the first thing that I would present you with. Not that an
act of the will is enough to declare a man a sufferer for righteousness, it
standing alone: for a man thorough the strength of delusion, and the power of
an erroneous conscience, may be willing to suffer for the grossest opinions in
the world. But I bring it to show that actual suffering for righteousness must
also be by the consent of the will, the mind of the man must be in it.

Secondly, He that suffers for righteousness thus, must also have a good
cause. A good cause is that which is essential to suffering for righteousness.
A good cause, what is that? Why verily, It is the truth of God, either in the
whole of it, as contained in the Scriptures of truth: or in the parts of it, as
set before me to believe, or do, by any part of that holy word. This may be
called the matter, for which one suffers: or, as it is called in another
place, the word of righteousness. (Heb. 5.13.) It may also be called the form
of sound Doctrine, or the like. Because without this word, the Matter, and
nature of Gods truths cannot be known. Pilate's question what is truth? will
still abide a question, to those that have not, or regard not the word, the
rule of righteousness. ( John 18.38.) See then that thy cause be good, thou
that would know what it is to suffer for righteousness; Step not an hairs
breadth without the bounds of the word of truth; also take heed of
misunderstanding, or of wringing out of its Place, any thing that is there. Let
the words of the upright, stand upright, warp them not, to the end they may
comply in show with any crooked notion. And to prevent this, take these three
words as a guide, in this matter, to thee. They show men their sins, and how to
close with a Savior; they enjoin men to be holy and humble; they command men
to submit themselves to authority. And what ever is cross to these, comes from
ignorance of, or from a wresting the rule of righteousness out of its place.

But more particularly, the word of righteousness, (thy cause, within the
bounds of which thou must keep, if thou will suffer for righteousness) is to be
divided into two parts.

1. It contains a revelation of moral righteousness. 2. It contains a
revelation of evangelical righteousness.
As for moral righteousness, men seldom suffer, only, for that. Because that is
the righteousness of the World, and that, simply as such, that sets it self up
in every man's conscience, and has a testimony for it self, even in the light of
nature. Besides, there is nothing that makes head against that; but that which
every man is ashamed, by words to plead for, and that is immorality. And this
is that which Peter intends when he says, And if ye be followers of that which
is good, who will harm you? (1 Pet. 3.13.) If ye be followers of moral
goodness. (But if it should so happen, for the case is rare, that any man
should make you sufferers because you love God, and do good to your neighbor,
happy are ye. Though I do not think that the Apostles conclusion terminates
there. But more of these things anon.) For let a man be a good neighbor, in
morals: let him feed the hungry, cloth the naked, give freely out of his purse
to the poor, and do that which he would another should do to him: and stop
there, and not meddle with the name of Christ, and he shall have but few
enemies in the World. For it is not the Law, but Christ that is the stumbling
block, and the rock of offense to men. (Isaiah 8.14, 15. Romans 9.31, 32, 33.)

Wherefore, there is in Gods word a revelation of another righteousness, a
righteousness which is not so visible to, yea, and that suteth not so with, the
reason of man as that moral righteousness does: Wherefore this righteousness
makes men righteous in principle, and practice so, as is foreign to natural
men. Hence it is said to be foolishness to them. And again, Its praise is not of
men. (Romans 2.29. 1 Cor. 2.14.) This righteousness is also revealed in the
Scriptures, but the blind cannot see it. It is the work of the holy Ghost in
the heart, and is therefore called the fruits of the spirit: and the grace,
which in the head and fullness of it, is only to be found in Christ. (John 1.16.
Colos. 1.19. 1 Timothy 1.14.) This righteousness being planted in the heart, leads
a man out by the word of God, to seek for another righteousness, as invisible
to, and foreign from the natural man, as this. And that righteousness is that
which properly is the righteousness of Jesus Christ, a righteousness that
stands in his obedience to his Fathers Law, as he was considered a common, or
public person: a righteousness which he brought into the World, not for
himself, as considered in a private capacity, but for those that shall by faith
venture themselves upon him, to obtain by him life eternal. Romans 5.19. Philip.
3.7, 8, 9, 10.

Again, This closing by faith with this righteousness thus found in Christ, and
being taken therewith, leads me yet to another righteousness, which is
instituted worship, appointed by Christ, for all his followers to be conversant
in; this worship is grounded on positive precepts, and so, on words of
righteousness, called Christ's words, Christ's sayings, etc.

Now upon this bottom begins the difference betwixt the men of God, and the
world.

For first, by this inward principle of righteousness we come to see, and say,
that men by nature are not Christians: what privileges soever they may account
themselves partakers thereof. But whosoever is a Christian, of Gods making so,
is begotten and born of God, and made a new creature by the anointing received
from the holy one. (Jam. 1.18. Joh. 3.3.5. 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Chap. 1.21. 1 John
2.20.24.27.)

Now this these carnal men cannot endure to hear of: because it quite excludes
them as such, from a share in the kingdom of Heaven.

To this again, the Christian stands, and backs what he says by the word of
God. Then the game begins, and the men of the World are thoughtful how they may
remove such troublesome fellows out of the way. But because the Christians love
their Neighbors, and will not let them thus easily die in their sins;
therefore they contend with them, both by Reasonings, Writings, Sermons, and
Books of Gospel Divinity: and stand to what they say. The world, again, are
angry with these sayings, Sermons, and Books, for that by them they are
concluded to be persons that are without repentance, and the hope of eternal
life. Here again, the carnal World judges that these people are proud,
self-willed, Pragmatical, contentious, self conceited, and so unsufferable
People. The Christian yet goes on and stands to what he has asserted. Then the
poor World, as at their last shift, begin to turn, and over-turn the Gospelmans
sayings; perverting, forcing, stretching, and dismembring of them: and so
making of them speak what was never thought, much less intended by the believer.

Thus they served our Lord; for, not being able to down with his Doctrine, they
began to pervert his words, and to make (as also they said afterward of
Luthers) some offensive, some erroneous, some Treasonable, and that both
against God and Caesar, and so they hanged him up, hoping there to put an end
to things.

But his is but the beginning of things: for the Christian man by the word of
the Gospel goes further with his censure. For he also finds fault with all
that this man by the ability of nature, can do for the freeing himself from the
law of sin and death. He condemns him by the word, because he is in a state of
nature, and he condemns also, what ever, while in that state, he does as that
which by no means can please God. ( Romans 14.23. Heb. 1.6.) This now puts him
more out, this is a taking of his gods away from him. This is to strip him of
his raiment, such as it is, and to turn him naked into the presence of God.
This I say puts him out, and out. These wild brained fellows, quoth he, are
never content, they find fault with us as to our state: they find fault with us
as to our works, our best works. They blame us because we are sinners, and they
find fault with us, though we mend: they say, by nature, we are no Christians,
and that our bestdoings will not make us such. What would they have us do. Thus
therefore they renew their quarrel: But the Christians man cannot help it,
unless he would see them go to Hell, and saying nothing. For the word of God
does as assuredly condemn man's righteousness, as it does condemn man's sin, it
condemns not man's righteousness among men, for there it is good and
profitable. ( Job 35.6, 7, 8.) But with God, to save the Soul, it is no better
than filthy rags. (Isa. 64.6.)

Nor will this Christian man suffer these carnal ones to delude themselves with
a change of te^ms; for the Devil who is the great manager of carnal men in
things that concern their Souls, and in the plea that they make for themselves,
will help them to tricks and shifts to evade the power of the word of God.
Teaching them to call the beauties of Nature, Grace: and the acts of natural
Powers, the exercise of the graces of the spirit. He will imbolden them also to
call man's righteousness, the righteousness of Christ, and that by which a
sinner may be justified in the sight of God, from the Law. These tricks the
Christian sees, and being faithful to Gods truth, and desiring the Salvation of
his neighbor, he labors to discover the fallacy of, and to propound better
terms for this poor creature to embrace, and venture his Soul upon: (which
terms are warranted by the new Testament, a stranger to which the natural man
is.) But I say, the things which the Christian presses, being so foreign to
nature, and lying so cross to man's best things, are presently judged by the
natural man, to be fables, or foolishness. (1 Cor. 2.14.) Wherefore here again,
he takes another occasion to maintain his strife, and contention against the
righteous man; Raising of slanders upon him, and laying things to his charge
that he understands not: charging also his Doctrine with many grievous
things. Namely, that he holds that man was made to be damned, that man's
righteousness is no better than sin, that a man had as good do ill, as well.
That we may believe, and do what we list: that holiness pleases not God, and
that sinning is the way to cause grace to abound. Besides, say they, he
condemns good motions, and all good beginnings of heart to God ward. He
casts away that good we have, and would have us to depend upon a justice to
save us by, that we can by no means approve of.

And thus the quarrel is made yet wider between the men of the World, and the
Christian man. But there is not a stop put here

For it is possible for the carnal man to be beaten out of all his arguments for
himself and his own things, by the power and force of the word: and to be made
to consent to what the Christian has said as to the notion of the truth (I must
not speak this of all) But yet the breach does still abide; for that yet there
appears to be no more with the man, but only the notion of things. For though
the notion of things are those that of God are made the means of conveying of
grace into the heart: yet grace is not always with the notion of things: the
word, oft-times, stands in man's understanding alone, and remains there, as
not being accompanied with such grace as can make it the power of God to
salvation. Now when it is thus with the Soul, the danger is as great as ever,
because, there is a presumption now begotten in the heart, that the man is in a
saved condition. A presumption, I say, instead of faith, which puffs up,
instead of enabling the Soul after a godly manner to depend upon God for mercy
through Christ. This is called the word of them that are puffed up; the word
only, because not accompanied with saving grace. (1 Cor. 4.19. Chap. 8.1. 1
Thessal. 1.5.)

This the Christian also sees, and says it is too weak to conduct the Soul to
Glory. And this indeed he says, because he would not that his neighbor should
come short home. But neither can this be born, but here again, the natural man
with his notion of things is offended: and takes pett against his Friend,
because he tells him the truth, and would that he so should digest the truth,
that it may prove unto him eternal life. Wherefore he now begins to fall out
again, for as yet the enmity is not removed? He therefore counts him an
unmercifull man, one that condemns all to Hell but himself; and as to his
singularity in things, those he counts for dreams, for Enthusiasms, for
Allegorical whimsies, vain Revelations, and the effects of an erroneous
Judgment. For the Lord has put such darkness betwixt Egypt and Israel, as will
not suffer them to come together. But this is not all.

For it is possible for these carnal men to be so much delighted in the notion
of things, as to addict themselves to some kind of worship of Christ, whose
notions of truth have by them been received. And because their love is yet but
carnal, and because the flesh is swelling, and is pleased with pomp, and
sumptuousness, therefore to show how great an esteem such have for Christ, whom
they are now about to worship: They will first, count his Testament, though
good, a thing defective, and not of fullness sufficient to give in all
particular things, direction how they should to their own content, perform
their glorious Doctrine. For here, and there, and in another place, cry they,
there is something wanting. Here, say they, is nothing said of those places,
vestures, gestures, shows, and outward greatness that we think seemly to be
found in, and with those that worship Jesus. Here wants sumptuous ceremonies,
glorious ornaments, new fashioned carriages, all which are necessary to adorn
worship withal.

But now here again, the truly godly as he comes to see the evil of things:
makes his objections, and finds fault, and counts them unprofitable and
vain. ( Isa. 29. Mat. 15. Mark. 7.)

But they again, (seeing the things they have made, are the very excellencies
of humane invention, and things added as a supplement to make up what, and
wherein as they think the man that was faithful over his own house as a Son was
defective:) are resolved to stand upon their points, and not to budge an inch
from the things that are so laudable, so necessary, so convenient and so
comely: the things that have been judged good, by so many wise, learned, pious,
holy, reverend, and good men. Nay, if this were all, the godly would make a
good shift: But their zeal is so great for what they have invented, and their
spirits so hot to make others couch and bend thereto, that none must be
suffered to their power to live and breath, that refuses to conform thereto.
This has been proved too true, both in France, Spain, Germany, Italy, and other
places: and upon this account it is that persecution has been kept alive so
many hundred years in some places against the Church of God. From what has been
said as to these things, this I collect as the sum.

First, That man by nature, is in a state of wrath, and condemnation ( Ephesians.
2.1, 2, 3, 4. John 3.18.)

Secondly, that the natural man, by all his natural abilities, is not able to
recover himself from this his condemned condition. ( John 6.44. Ephesians. 1.19,
20.)

Thirdly that a man may have right notions of Gospel things, that has no grace
in his heart, (1 Cor. 13.2, 3.)

Fourthly, That to add human inventions to Christ's institutions, and to make
them of the same force and necessity, of the same authority and efficacy is
naught, and not to be subjected to ( Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8, 9. Mark 7.6, 7.) So
then, he that says these things, says true: for the Scriptures say the same.
This then is a good cause to suffer for, if men will that I shall suffer for
saying so: because it is that which is founded upon the word of God: and the
word is the ground and foundation of all true Doctrine. Let him then that
believes what is here discoursed, and that lives soberly, and peaceably in
this belief among his neighbors, stand by what he has received, and rejoice
that he has found the truth. And if any shall afflict or trouble him for
holding of these things, they afflict or trouble him for holding to good
things: and he suffers at their hands because his cause is good.

And such an one may with boldness, as to this, make his appeal to the Bible,
which is the foundation of his principles, and to God the author of that
foundation, if what he holds, is not good.

He may say,

Lord, I have said, that man by nature, is in a state of condemnation, and they
make me suffer for that.

Lord, I have asserted that man by all his natural abilities is not able to
recover himself from this his condemned state, and they make me suffer for that.

Lord, I have said that a natural man may have right notions of the Gospel, and
yet be without the saving grace thereof, and they make me suffer for that.

Lord, I cannot consent that human inventions and Doctrines of men, should be
joined with thy institutions as matters of worship; and imposed upon my
conscience as such, and they make me suffer for that.

Lord, I own the Government, pray for my Superiors, live quietly among my
Neighbors, give to all their dues, feed the hungry, cloth the naked, relieve
the afflicted, and show my self by my faith, and life, to be a true Christian
man, and yet my neighbors will not let me alone. True, I cannot comply withal
that some men would have me comply with: no more did Daniel, no more did Paul;
and yet Daniel said, that he had to the King done no hurt, and Paul said,
neither against the Law of the Jews, neither against the Temple, nor yet
against Caesar, have I offendeed any thing at all. (Dan. 6.22. Acts 25.8.)

For he that keeps within the compass of Gods word, hurts no man, gives just
offense to no man. Though he complyeth not with all that are modes, and ways of
worship in the World: Nor can this appeal be judged injurious, if it be not
attended with intercessions against them that hate us. But we will pass this,
and come to a second thing.

Secondly, As he that suffers for righteousness must have a good cause: So he
that suffers for righteousness must have a good call.

A man, though his cause be good, ought not by undue ways to run himself into
suffering for it; nature teaches the contrary, and so does the Law of God.
Suffering for a truth ought to be cautiously took in hand, and as warily
performed. I know that there are some men that are more concerned here than
some: the Preacher of the word, is by Gods command made the more obnoxious man,
for he must come off with a woe, if he preaches not the Gospel. (1 Cor. 9.16.)
He therefore, I say (does and) ought more to expose himself than other
Christians are called to do. Yet it behooves him also to beware, because that
Christ has said to him, Behold, I send you forth as Sheep, or Lambs, in the
midst of Wolves, be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves, (Mat.
10.16. Luke 10.3.) A man is not bound by the Law of his Lord, to put himself
into the mouth of his enemy. Christ withdrew himself, Paul escaped the
Governors hands, by being let down in a basket over the wall of the city. (2
Cor. 11.32.33.) And Christ has said, If they persecute you in one City, fly
ye to an other. If they will not let me preach here, I will take up my Bible
and be gone. Perhaps this is because I must preach in some other place. A
Minister can quickly pack up, and carry his Religion with him, and offer what
he knows of his God, to another people, ( Acts 13.44, 45, 46, 47.) Nor should a
Minister strive, I think, with the Magistrate for place, or time. But let him
hearken to hear what God shall say by such opposition. Perhaps the Magistrate
must drive thee out of this place, because the Soul is in another place that is
to be converted, or helped by thy Sermon to day. We must also in all things,
show our selves to be such as by our profession we would that men should
believe we are, to wit, meek, gentle, not strivers, but take our Lord, and our
Brethren the Prophets for our examples.

But I will not here presume to give instructions to Ministers; but will speak
a few words in the general about what I think may be a sufficient call to a man
to suffer for righteousness.

First, Every Christian man is bound by Gods word to hold to, or stand by his
profession, his profession of Faith, and to join to that profession, an holy,
godly life: because the Apostle and high Priest of his profession, is no l^ss a
one than Christ Jesus. (Heb. 3.1. chap. 10.23.) This by Christ himself is
expressed thus, Let your light so shine: No man lights a Candle to put it
under a bushel: Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. And
Paul bids the Philippians hold forth the word of life. (Mat. 5.16. Luke 12.35.
Philip. 2.16.)

And more particularly, by all this, this is intended, that we should hide our
faith in Christ from no man, but should rather make a discovery of it, by a
life that will do so. For our profession thus managed is the badge, and the
Lords livery, by which we are distinguished from other men. So then, if while I
profess the truth of Christ, and so walk, as to make my profession of it more
apparent: I be made a sufferer for it, my call is good, and I may be bold in
God and in my profession. This Peter intends when he says But, and if ye
suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their terror,
neither be troubled. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that
is in you with meekness and fear: (1 Pet. 3.14, 15.) Here then is a call, not
to meddle with the other, but to mind our own business, to walk in our
Christian profession, and to adorn it with all good works, and if any man will
meddle with me, and ask me a reason of the hope that I have, to give it him
with meekness and fear, whatever follows thereupon. (This Peter should have
done himself there, where he denied his Master thrice.)

The reason is, for that Christianity is so harmless a thing, that be it never
so openly professed, it hurts no man. I believe that Christ will save me; what
hurt is this to my Neighbor? I love Christ because he will save me; what hurt
is this to any? I will for this worship Christ as he has bid me; what hurt is
this to any body? I will also tell my neighbors what a loving one my Christ
is, and that he is willing to be good to them as he has been good to me and
what hurt is this to the Governor of a Kingdom? But and if any man will
afflict me for this, my cause is good, and also my call to stand full godly to
my profession.

Secondly, There is sometimes a call to suffer for righteousness, even from the
voice of necessity. That is, either when by my silence the truth must fall to
the ground, or when by my shrinking, the Souls of other men are in danger.
This, I say, is a call to suffer even by the voice of necessity. The case may
be when Gods ways may be trodden under foot. Yea, his Word, and Ways, and Name,
and People, and all. Thus Goliath did do, for several days togetoger, (1 Samuel
17.) and vaunted in his doing, and there was not a man, no not in Israel that
durst answer him a word. And now was the spirit of David stirred in him: and he
would put his life in his hand, and give this man an answer, and he saw there
was reason for it, necessity gave him a call. Is there not a cause says he,
(lies bleeding upon the ground,) and no man of heart, or spirit, to put a check
to the bold Blasphemer, I will go fight with him: I will put my life in my
hand, if I die, I die.

Consider also what Daniel did, when the Law was gone out to forbid for thirty
days, petitioning any God or man save the King only. At that time also, not a
man of Israel ^eeped. ( Dan. 6.7.) Now ne^^^sity walks about the streets,
crying, who is on the Lords side? who, etc. And Daniel answers, I am, by
opening of his window, and praying as at other times, three times a day, with
his face toward Jerusalem, verse 10. He heard this voice of necessity, and put
his life in his hand, and complied with it to the hazard of being torn in
pieces by the Lions.

Much like this was that of the three Children: for when that golden Image was
set up, and worship commanded to be done unto it, not one that we read of,
durst stand upright; when the time was come that bowing was the sign of
worship. Only the three Children would not bow, 'twas necessary that some
should show that there was a God in Heaven, and that divine worship was due
alone to him. ( Dan. 3.10, 11, 12.)

But they run the hazard of being turned to ashes, in a burning fiery furnace,
for so doing. But necessity has a loud voice, and shrill in the ears of a
tender conscience. This voice will awake jealousy, and kindle a burning fire
within, for the name, and cause, and way, and people of the God of Heaven.

Thirdly, there is sometimes a call to suffer for righteousness by the voice of
providence. That is, when by providence I am cast for my profession into the
hands of the enemies of God and his truth, then I am called to suffer for it
what God shall please to let them lay upon me.

Only for the making of thy way more clear in this matter, I will deliver what
I have to say with a caution or two.

1. Thou must take heed that thy call be good to this or that place, at which
by providence thou art delivered up.

2. Thou must also take heed that when thou art there, thou busiest thy self in
nothing but that that good is.

3. Thou must also take heed that thou stay there no longer, than while thou
may do good or receive good there.

4. Thus far a man is in the way of his duty, and therefore may conclude that
the providence of God under which now he is, is such as has mercy, and
salvation in the bowels of it, what soever is by it at the present brought upon
him.

Christ Jesus our Lord, though his death was determined, and of absolute
necessity, and that chiefly for which he came into the world, chose rather to
be taken in the way of his duty than in any other way, or any where else.
Wherefore when the hour was come, he takes with him some of his Disciples, and
goes into a garden, a solitary place to pray: which done, he sets his
Disciples to watch, and falls, himself to prayer. So he prays once; he prays
twice; he prays thrice: and he gives also good doctrine to his Disciples. And
now, behold, while he was here in the way of his du^^, busying himself in
prayer to God, and in giving of good instruction to his followers: upon him
comes Judas, and a multitude with swords and staves, and weapons to take him.
To which providence he in all meekness submits, for he knew that by it he had a
call to suffer. ( Mat. 26, 36, 37, 38.)

In this way also the Apostles were called to suffer, even while they were in
the way of their duty. Yea, God bid them go into the Temple to preach; and
there delivered them into the hands of their enemies. (Acts 4.1, 2, 3. chap.
5.10.25, 26.)

Be we in the way of our duty, in the place, and above the work unto which we
are called of God (whether that work be religious or civil,) we may without
fear leave the issue of things to God, who only does wonderful things. And he
who lets not a Sparrow fall to the ground without his providence, will not
suffer an hair of our head to perish, but by his order. (Luke 12.6, 7.) And
since he has engaged us in his work (as he has if he has called us to it) we
may expect that he will manage, and also bear us out therein: either so as by
giving of us a good deliverance by way of restoration to our former liberty and
service for him, or so as to carry us well out of this world to them that under
the Altar are crying, how long, holy and true. Nor shall we, when we come
there, repent that we suffered for him here. O how little do Saints in a
suffering condition, think of the Robes, the Crowns, the Harps, and the Song
that shall be given to them, and that they shall have when they come upon mount
Sion. (Revel. 6.11. chap. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Fourthly, there is sometimes a call to suffer for righteousness: By an
immediate, and powerful impulse of the spirit of God upon the heart. This I say
is sometimes, and but sometimes: for this is not Gods ordinary way: nor are
many of his Servants called after this manner to suffer for righteousness.
Moses was called thus to suffer, when he went so often unto Pharaoh with the
message of God in his mouth: and he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.
(Heb. 11.25, 26, 27.)

Paul was called thus to suffer, and he obeyed; and went, and performed that
work according to the will of God. This kind of call, Paul calls a binding, or
a being bound in the spirit, because the Holy Ghost had laid such a command
upon him to do so, that he could not by any means get from under the power of
it. And now, behold, says he, I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem: not
knowing the things that shall befall me there. (Acts 20.22.) For he that is
under this call, has, as I said, bonds laid upon his spirit: which carry him to
the place where his testimony is to be born for God. Nor shall he, if he
willingly submits, and goes, as Paul did, but have an extraordinary presence of
God with him, as he. And see what a presence he had. For after the second
assault was given him by the enemy, even the night following, the Lord stood by
him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul: for as thou have testified of me in
Jerusalem: so must thou bear witness also at Rome. (Acts 23.11.) Thus God
meets his people in their service for him when he calls them aloud to do
great service, for him. The power of such a call as this I say is great, and
men of ordinary spirits must needs give place thereto, and leave a man, thus
bound, to the God that thus has bound him. All the help such can afford him is,
to follow him with our prayers, not to judge him, or grieve him; or lay
stumbling blocks before him. No they must not weep nor mourn for him so, as to
make him sorrowful. (See Acts 21.12, 13, 14.)

His friends may suggest unto him what is like to attend his present errand, as
Agabus did by the spirit, to Paul when he took his girdle and bound himself
therewith, to show him how his enemies should serve him whither he went: Thus
says the holy Ghost, said he, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owes this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. (Acts
21.11.)

But if this call be indeed upon a man, all sorrow is turned into joy before
him: For he is ready, not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus. (Acts 21.13.

Instances also of later times might be given of a call extraordinary to suffer
for righteousness. For many, in the first three hundred years persecution, when
no body knew what they were, would boldly come up to the face of their enemies
and tell what they were, and suffer for what they professed, the death: I
remember also the Woman who when her Friends were gone before to suffer, how
she came running, and panting after, for fear she should not come thither time
enough to suffer for Jesus Christ.

But I will give you an instance of later times even in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign of an Hartfordshire man that went as far as Rome to bear his
testimony for God against the wickedness of that place. This man, when he was
arrived there, and had told them wherefore he was come, they took and condemned
him to death, to wit to be burned for an Heretic. Now he was to ride from the
prison to the place of execution upon an Ass with his face to the beasts tail,
and was to be stripped from the shoulders to the waste, that he might be
tormented all the way he went, with burning torches continually thrust to his
sides. But he nothing at all afraid, spoke in his exhortation to the people to
fly from their sin and Idolatry; he would also catch hold of the Forces and put
them to his sides, to show how little he esteemed the worst that they could do.
Also when he was come to the place of execution, he suffered there such
cruelty, with so unconcerned a mind, and with such burning zeal for Gods truth
testified against them while he could speak: That, all amazed, his enemies
cried, he could not have suffered as he did, but by the help of the Devil. His
name I have now forgot, but you will find it with the story at large in the
Third Volum of Acts and Monuments at the 1022. page. But we will pass this, and
come to our second particular.

Namely, to show when it may be said a man does not only suffer for
righteousness, but also for righteousness sake.

To suffer for righteousness sake, must be either with the intention of the
persecutor, or else of the persecuted.

The persecutor, what ever the person suffering is, if he afflicts this
person, for a supposed good that he thinks he has, or professes, he makes
him suffer for righteousness sake. So that in this sense, a man that has no
grace, may, not only suffer for righteousness, but also for righteousness sake.
But this I intend not, because the Text is not concerned with it.

The thing therefore now intended to be spoken to, is this, namely, when a man
may be said to suffer what he suffers upon a religious account, of love to,
or for the sake of that good that he finds in the truths of God, or because his
heart is joined, and espoused to the good of the truths that he professes; not
that there is any thing in any truth of God that is not good: but a man may
profess truth, not for the sake of the goodness that is in it, but upon a
remote account Judas professed truth, not of love to the truth, but of love to
the bag, and to the money that was put therein. Men may profess for a wife, for
a trade, for friendship, or because profession is at such a time, or in such a
place in fashion (I wish that there were no cause to say this.) Now there is
not any of these that profess the truth, for the truth's sake, that profess the
truth of love to it, nor shall they, should they suffer as professors, never so
long, never so much, never so greviously; be counted of God among them that
suffer for righteousness sake: that is, of unfeigned love to righteousness.
Wherefore, that I may show you who may be said to suffer for righteousness
sake, I will propound and speak to several things.

First then, He that suffers in the Apostles sense, for well doing, or for
righteousness sake, sets his face against nothing but sin, in He resists unto
blood, striving against sin. ^^ sin is the object of his indignation, because
it is an enemy to God, and to his righteous cause is the World. ( Heb. 12.4.)
Sin, I say, is that which such a man singleth out, as his opposite, as his
antagonist, and that against which his heart is set: It Is a rare thing to
suffer a right and to have my spirit in my suffering bent only against Gods
enemy, sin, Sin in Doctrine, sin in Worship, sin in Life, sin in Conversation.
Now then he that suffers; for righteousness sake, has singled out sin to
pursue it to death, long before he comes to the cross. It Is sin alas, and his
hatred to it, that have brought him into this condition. He fell out with sin
at home, in his own house, in his own heart before he fell out with sin in the
world, or with sin in public worship. For he that can let sin go free and
uncontrouled at home within, let him suffer while he will, he shall not suffer
for righteousness sake. And the reason is, because a righteous Soul, as the
Phrase is, (2 Pet. 2.8.) has the greater antipathy against that sin that is
most ready to defile it, and that is, as David calls it, ones own iniquity, or
the sin that dwells in ones own flesh. I have kept me, says he, from mine
iniquity, from mine own sin. People that are afraid of fire, are concerned most
with that that burns in their own chimney, they have the most watchful eye
against that that is like to burn down their own house first. He also that
suffers for righteousness sake, does it also because he would not that sin
should cleave to the worship of God, and indeed this is mostly the cause of the
sufferings of the godly. They will not have to do with that worship that has
sinful traditions commixed with Gods appointments, because they know that God
is jealous of his worship: and has given a strict charge that all things be
done according to the pattern showed to us in the Mount. He knows also that God
will not be with that worship, and those worshippers that have not regard to
worship by the rule of the Testament of Christ. He is also against the sin that
is apt to cleave to himself while he stands in the presence of God. I will
wash mine hands in innocence, so will I compass thine altar, O Lord. This man
also chooses to be in the practical parts of worship if possible, for he knows
that to have to do about holy things sincerely, is the way to be at the
remotest distance from sin. He chooses also to be with those holy Ones that are
of the same mind with him against sin: For he knows that two are better than
one, and that a threefold Cord is not easily broken. Wherefore look to your
selves you that do, or may be called to suffer for Religion: if you bend not
your selves against sin, if to be revenged of sin be not the cause of your
suffering, you cannot be said to suffer for righteousness sake. Take heed
therefore that some thing else be not an inducement to thee to suffer. A man
may suffer to save what he has; There is credit also and an applause: there is
shame to conform, there is carnal stoutness of spirit: there is hatred of
persecutors, and scorn to submit: there is fear of contempt, and of the
reproach of the people, etc. These may be motives and arguments to a suffering
state, and may really be the ground of a man's being in the Gaol; though he
cries out in the mean while, of Popery, of Superstition, and Idolatry, and of
the Errors that attend the common modes of the Religions of the World. I charge
no man, as though I knew any such thing by any: But I suggest these things as
things that are possible, and mention them because I would have sufferers have
a care of themselves, and watch and pray, because no man can be upright here
that is not holy, that cannot pray, and watch, and deny himself for the love
that he has to righteousness, I said it before, and will say it again, it is a
rare thing to be set in down-rightness of heart against sin.

Secondly, Is it for the sake of righousness that thou suffer. Then it is
because thou would have righteousness promoted, set up, and established in
the world: also thou art afflicted at those advantages that iniquity gets upon
men, upon things, and against thy self. I beheld, said David, the
transgressors, and was grieved, because men kept not thy Law. (Psalm. 119.) And
again, these are they that mourn for the abominations that are done among men.
(Ezekiel. 9.) There is a great deal of talk about Religion, a great deal of
pleading for Religion, namely, as to the formalities of this and the other way.
But to choose to be Religions, that I might be possessed with holiness, and to
choose that Religion that is most apt to possess me with it, if I suffer for
this, I suffer for righteousness sake. Wherefore say thus to thy Soul, thou
that art like to suffer for righteousness, How is it with the most inward parts
of my Soul, what is there? what designs, desires, and teachings out are there?
Why do I pray? Why do I read? Why do I hear? Why do I haunt, and frequent
places; and ordinances appointed for worship? is it because I love holiness?
would promote righteousness; because I love to see godliness show it self in
others, and because I would feel more of the power of it in my self? if so, and
if thou suffer for thy profession, thou suffer, not only for
righteousness, but also for righteousness sake.

Do thou thus practice, because thou would be taught to do outward acts of
righteousness, and because thou would provoke others to do so too. Do thou
show to others, how thou love righteousness, by taking opportunities to do
righteousness! How is it, do thou show most mercy to thy Dog, or to thine
enemy? to thy Swine, or to the poor? whose naked body have thou clothed? whose
hungry belly have thou fed? Have thou taken delight in being defrauded and
beguiled? have thou willingly sat down by the loss with quietness, and been as
if thou had not known, when thou have been wronged, defamed, abused, and all
because thou wast not willing that black mouthed men should vilify and
reproach Religion upon thy account? (1 Cor. 6.7.)

He that loves righteousness, will do thus, yea and do it as unto God, and of
tenderness to the word of God which he professes. And he that thinks to make
seeing men believe that when he suffers, he suffers for righteousness sake,
and yet is void in his life of moral goodness, and that has no heart to suffer
and bear, and put up, and pass by injuries in his conversation among his
enemies at home, is deceived.

There are some Scriptures that are as if they were out of date amo^^ some
professors, specially such as can for actual holiness and acts of self denial
for God, but it will be found, at the day of judgment that they only are the
peculiar people that are zealous of good works. (Tit. 2.14.) God help us, it is
hard now to persuade professors to come up to negative holiness, that is, to
leave undone that which is bad; and yet this of it self comes far short of ones
being found in practical goodness.

But this is the man that suffers, (when he suffers) for righteousness
sake, that makes it his business by all lawful means, according to the capacity
that God has put him in; to promote, set up, and establish righteousness in the
World: I say this is the man that suffers for righteousness sake, that
suffers for so doing: and I am sure that a life that is moral, when joined to
the profession of the faith of the things that are of the spirit of God, is
absolutely necessary to the promoting of righteousness in the World. Hence
Peter tells them that suffer for righteousness sake, that they must have a good
conscience, a good conscience toward God, toward men, toward friends,
toward enemies. (1 Pet. 3.14, 15, 16. Acts 24.16. chap. 23.1.) They must have
a good conscience in all things, being willing, ready, desirous to live
honestly, godly and righteously in this world, or else they cannot, though they
may suffer for the best doctrine under heaven, s^ffer for righteousness sake. (
Heb. 13.18.) Wherefore,

Thirdly, Is it for righteousness sake that thou suffer? then thy design is
the ruin of sin, this depends upon what was said before: for he that strives
against sin, that seeks to promote righteousness, he designs the ruin of sin.
Be not, said Paul to the suffering Romans, overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with good. (Romans 12.21.) To overcome evil with good, is an hard task. To rail
it down, to cry it down, to pray Kings, and Parliaments, and men in authority
to put it down, this is easier than to use my endeavor to overcome it with
good, with doing of good, as I said before. And sin must be overcome with good
at home, before thy good can get forth of doors to overcome evil abroad.

Abraham overcame evil with good, when he quieted the discontent of Lot, and
his Herdsmen, with allowing of them to feed their Cattle in the best of what
God had given him. ( Genesis 13.7, 8.)

David overcame evil with good, when he saved the life of his bloody enemy that
was fallen into his hand: also when he grieved that any hurt should come to
them that sought nothing so much as his destruction. They rewarded me, says
he, evil for good, to the spoiling of my Soul. But as for me, when they were
sick, my clothing was sackcloth. I humbled my Soul with fasting, I behaved my
self, as if he had been my Friend or Brother. I bowed down heavily, as one that
mourns for his Mother. This is to overcome evil with good, ( Psalm. 35.11, 12,
13, 14.

Job says concerning his enemy, that he did not rejoice when evil found him; (
neither have I, said he, suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his
Soul.) he means he did the quite contrary, and so overcame evil with good. (
Job 31.29, 30.)

Elisha overcame evil with good, when he received the men that came for his
life, and had them where he might feast, and comfort them, and sent them home
in peace to their master. (2 Kings 6.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

The new Testament also is full of this, both in exhortations and examples.

In exhortations where it is said, Resist not evil, that is, with evil, but
overcome evil with good. (Prove. 24.29.) But whosoever shall smite thee on the
right cheek, turn to him the other also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go
a mile, go with him twain. Give to him that asks thee: and from him that
would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you, and persecute you. That you may be the children of your Father which
is in heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, on the
just, and on the unjust. Bless them that persecute you, bless and curse not.
Not rendering evil for evil, nor reviling for reviling, but contrariwise,
blessing, knowing that you are thereunto called, that you should inherit a
blessing. (Mat. 5.38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Romans 12.14. 1
Pet. 3.9, 10, 11.) This is righteousness, these are righteous courses. And as
these are preceptively prepounded, so they were as practically followed by them
that were eminently Godly in the Primitive Church.

We are fools for Christ sake, said Paul, we are despised, we are hungry,
thirsty, naked and buffeted. Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we
suffer it: being defamed, we entreat: we are made as the filth of the world,
and are the offscouring of all things unto this day. (1 Cor. 4.10, 11, 12, 13.)

This is overcoming of evil with good, and he that has chosen to himself that
Religion that teaches these things, and that loves that Religion because it so
teaches him: if he suffers for it, he suffers for righteousness sake.

Fourthly, He that suffers for righteousness sake; will carry righteousness
whithersoever he goes. Neither the enemy, nor thy sufferings shall be able to
take righteousness from thee. Righteousness must be thy chambermate, thy
bed-companion, thy walking-mate: It is that without which thou will be so
uncouth, as if thou could not live, ( Psalm. 26.1 -- 11. Psalm. 25.21.)

Paul in his sufferings would have righteousness with him, for it must be as it
were his armor-bearer: yea his very armor it self. (2 Cor. 6.7.)

It Is an excellent saying of Job, I put righteousness on, and it clothed me, my
judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I
to the lame; I was a father to the poor, etc. (Job 29.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.)

Princes, said David, did sit and speak against me, but thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes. (Psalm. 119.23.)

A man that loves righteousness, does as Abraham did with his Sarah, carry it
every where with him, though he goes, because of that, in danger of his life.
Righteousness! it is the only intimate that a Christian has: It is that by
which he takes his measures, that with which he consults, with respect to what
he does, or is to do in the World. Thy testimonies, said David, are my delight:
and my counselors. ( The men of my council, in the margent.) ( Psalm. 119.24.)

David! he was the man of affliction; the suffering man in his day: but in all
places where he came, he had righteousness, the Law and Godly practice with
him. It was his Counselor, as he was a man, a Saint, a King. I dare say, for
that man that suffers righteousness to be rent away from him by the violence
and rage of men, and that casts it away, as David did Saul's Armor, that he may
secure himself; he has no great love for righteousness, nor to the Cross for
righteousness sake.

My righteousness I hold fast, said Job, and I will not let it go, my heart
shall not reproach me as long as I live. (Job 27.6.) What? part with
righteousness! A righteous Lord! A righteous word! A righteous profession! A
righteous life! to sleep in a whole skin: the Lord forbid it me, and all that
he has counted worthy to be called by his Name. Let us carry it with us from
the Bed to the Cross, and then it shall carry us from thence to the Crown. Let
it be our companion to Prison and death, then shall we show that we are lovers
of righteousness, and that we choose to suffer for righteousness sake.

Fifthly, Do thou suffer for righteousness sake, why then, thy righteousness
is not diminished, but rather increased by thy sufferings. Righteousness
thriveth best in affliction, the more afflicted, the more holy man; the more
persecuted, the more shining man, ( Acts 6.15.)

The prison is the furnace, thy graces are the Silver and the Gold, wherefore
as the Silver and the Gold are refined by the fire, and so made more to show
their native brightness. So the Christian that has, and that loves
righteousness, and that suffers for it is sake, is by his sufferings refined
and made more righteous, and made more Christian, more godly. ( Zech. 13.9.)

Some indeed when they come there, prove Lead, Iron, Tin, and at the best, but
the dross of Silver; and so are fit for nothing, but there to be left and
consumed, and to bear the badg, if ever they come from thence, of reprobate
Silver from the mouth and sentence of their neighbors. ( Ezekiel. 22.18, 19, 20,
21, 22. Jer. 6.28, 29, 30.) But when I, says Job, am tried, I shall come forth
as gold. (Job 23.10.)

When Saul had cast one javelin at David, it made him walk wisely in all his
ways. But when he added to his first fury, plots to take away his life, then
David behaved himself yet more wisely. (1 Samuel 18.10. to 30. verse.)

The hotter the rage and fury of men are against righteous ways, the more those
that love righteousness, grow therein. For they are concerned for it, not to
hide it, but to make it spangle; not to extinguish it, but to greaten it, and
to show the excellency of it in all it is features, and in all it is comely
proportion. Now such an one will make straight steps for his feet, lest that
which is lame be turned out of the way. (Heb. 12.13.) Now he shows to all men
what says is, by Charity, by self-denial, by meekness, by gentleness, by
long-suffering, by patience, by love to enemies, and by doing good to them that
hate us: now he walks upon his high places. Yea, will not now admit that so
slovenly a conversation should come within his doors, as did use to haunt his
house in former times. Now it is Christmas, now it is suffering time, now we must
keep holy day every day.

The reason is, for that a man when he suffers for Christ, is set upon an
Hill, upon a Stage, as in a Theater, to play a part for God in the World. And
you know when men are to play their parts upon a Stage, they count themselves,
if possible, more bound to circumspection; and that for the credit of their
Master, the credit of their Art, and the credit of themselves. For then the
eyes of every body are fixed, they gape and stare upon them. (Ps. 22.17.) and a
trip here, is as bad as a fall in another place. Also now God himself looks on.
Yea, he laugheth, as being pleased to see a good behavior attending the trial
of the innocent.

1. He that suffers for righteousness sake suffers for his goodness, and he
is now to labor by works and ways to convince the world that he suffers as
such an one. 2. He that suffers for righteousness sake has many that are weak
to strengthen by his sweet carriages under the Cross, wherefore he had need to
exceed in virtue. 3. He also is by well-doing to put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men, he had need be curious, and circumspect in all his actions. 4.
He is to come in, and to be a Judge, and to condemn, by his faith and patience
in his sufferings, the World (with his Lord and fellows) at the appearing of
Jesus Christ: he had need be holy himself. (1 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Heb. 11.7.
2 Thessal. 1.5, 6. 1 Pet. 4.3, 4, 5.) This therefore is the fit sign of
suffering for righteousness sake.
Sixthly, He that suffers, not only for righteousness, but also for
righteousness sake, will not exchange his cause, though for it in a Gaol, for
all the ease and pleasure in the world. They that suffered for righteousness
sake of old, were tempted before they were sawn asunder. ( Heb. 11.) Tempted,
that is, allured, to come out of their present sufferings, and leave their
faith and profession, in irons, behind them. Tempted with promises of
promotion, of ease, of friendship, of favor with men. As the Devil said to
Christ, so persecutors of old did use to make great promises to sufferers, if
they would fall down and worship. But this is alone as if they should say,
Butcher, make away with your righteousness and a good conscience, and you shall
find the friendship of the World. For there is no way to kill a man's
righteousness but by his own consent. This Jobs wife knew full well, hence she
tempted him to lay violent hands upon his own integrity. (Job 2.9.)

The Devil, nor men of the World can kill thy righteousness or love to it, but
by thy own hand; or separate that and thee asunder, without thine own, act. Nor
will he that does indeed suffer for the sake of it, or of love he bears
thereto, be tempted to exchange it: for the good of all the World.

It Is a sad sight to see a man that has been suffering for righteousness,
restored to his former estate, while the righteousness for which he suffered,
remains under locks and irons, and is exposed to the scorn, contempt, reproach
of the World, and trodden under the foot of men. It Is better said, Paul, for me
to dye, than that any man should make my glorying void. And it had been a
hundred times better for that man, if he had never known the way of
righteousness, than after he has known, it, to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto him.

The striving is, in persecution, for righteousness; to wit, whether it shall
be, set up or pulled down. The sufferer, he is for setting up, and the
persecutors are for pulling down. Thus they strive for the mastery. Now of a
man stands by his righteousness, and holds fast his good profession, then is
righteousness set up: nor can it, so long, be pulled down. Hence, so long a man
is said to overcome. And overcome he does, though he be killed for his
profession. But if he starts back, gives place, submits, recants, or denies
any longer to own that good thing that he professed, and exposed himself to
suffering for: then he betrays his cause, his profession, his conscience his
righteousness, his Soul, and all: for he has delivered up his profession to be
murdered before his face: And is fallen down before the wicked, like a corrupt
fountain, and a troubled spring, (Prove. 25.26.) But this, I hope, will not he
do that loves righteousness, and that suffers for righteousness sake. I do
not say but that a man may slip here, with Peter, Origin, Hierom, Cranmer,
Baynham, Ormis, and other good folk: but be he one of the right kind a lover of
righteousness indeed, he will return, and take revenge upon himself in a godly
way, for so ungodly a fact.

Seventhly, He that suffers not only for righteousness, but also for
righteousness sake, is not so wedded to his own notions, as to slight or
overlook the good that is in his neighbor. But righteousness he loves,
wherever he finds it, though it be in him that smites him. (Psalm. 141.5.)
Yea, he will own and acknowledge it for the only thing that is of beauty and
glory in the World. With the excellent in the earth is all such a man's delight.
Wherefore I put a difference betwixt suffering for an opinion and suffering for
righteousness, as I put a difference betwixt suffering for righteousness, and
suffering for righteousness sake.

If righteousness, if the stamp of God, if Divine authority, is not found upon
that thing which I hold, let men never suffer for it under the notion of
righteousness. If sin, if Superstition, if Idolatry, if derogation from the
wisdom of Christ, and the authority and perfection of his word, be not found
in, nor joined to that thing that I disown in worship, let me never open my
mouth against it. I had rather fall in with, and be an associate of a righteous
man, that has no true grace, than with a professor that has no righteousness.
It Is said of the young man, though he went away from Christ, that he looked
upon him and loved him; (Mar. 10.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.) But it is not said that
ever he loved Judas. I know that the righteousness, for which a good man
suffers, is not then embraced of the world, for that at such a time it is
under a cloud. But yet there is righteousness also in the World, and wherever
I see it, it is of an high esteem with me. David acknowledged some of his
enemies to be more righteous than he acknowledged some of his servants to be.
(2 Samuel 4.9, 10, 11. chap. 3.3^. 32, 33, 34, 35.) It Is a brave thing to have
righteousness, as righteousness, to be the top piece in mine affections. The
reason why Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, was,
because he loved righteousness, and hated iniquity more than they. (Heb. 1.9.)
Love to righteousness flows from golden graces, and is that, and that only that
can make a man capable of suffering (in our sense) for righteousness sake.

Eighthly, He that suffers not only for righteousness, but also for
righteousness sake, will take care that his sufferings be so managed with
graciousness of words and actions, that it may live when he is dead: Yea, and
it will please him too, if righteousness flourishes, though by his loss.

Hence i^ is that Paul said, he rejoiced in his suffering, namely, because
others got good thereby. And that he said, Yea, and if I be offered upon the
sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. (Colos.
1.24. Philip. 2.16.17.) But why rejoice in this? Why, because though his
sufferings were to the distressing of his flesh, yet they were to the
refreshing, comfort, and stability of others. This was it also that made him
jostle with the false brethren among the Churches: to wit, that the truth of
the Gospel might continue with them. (Gal. 2.4, 5.)

When a man shall run the hazard of the ruin of what he has, and is, for
righteousness, for the good and benefit of the Church of God; that man, (he
managing himself by the rule) if he suffers for so doing, suffers not only for
righteousness, but also for righteousness sake. I endure all things, said Paul,
for the elects sake that they may also obtain the salvation that is in Christ
Jesus with eternal glory. (2 Timothy 2.9, 10.) Here was love, You will say, to
persons; and I will say also, to things; to all the righteousnesses of God that
are revealed in the world, that all the elect might enjoy them to their eternal
comfort, and glory by Christ Jesus. For whether we be afflicted, says he, it is
for your consolation and salvation, which is effectual in the enduring of the
same sufferings which ye also suffer, or whether we be comforted, it is for
your consolation and salvation. (2 Cor. 1.5, 6.)

The end of a man, and his design, if that be to promote righteousness, he
using lawful means to accomplish it, is greatly accepted of God by Christ; and
it is a sign he is a lover of righteousness, and that if he suffers for so
doing, he suffers not for well doing, only, as to matter of fact: but also
for his love to the good thing done, and for its sake.

I have now done with that first head that was to be spoken to, as touching the
Law and Testament: which we have said was to be understood of the will of God
spoken of in the Text. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, that
is, according to his Law and Testament. Now we have showed what it is to suffer
according to that, we come to another thing, namely that by, will of God, we
also understand, His order and designment. For the will of God is active, to
dispose of his people, as well as preceptive, to show unto us our duty. He then
that suffers for righteousness sake; as he suffers for that which is good as to
the matter of it, and as he suffers for that which is good, after that manner
as becomes that truth for which he suffers: So he that thus suffers,
suffers by the order and designment of God. That then is the next thing that
is to be spoken to, Namely,

God is the great orderer of the battle that is managed in the World against
Antichrist: hence that battle is called, The battle of that great day of God
Almighty. (Revel. 16.14.)

It is not what enemies will, nor what they are resolved upon, but what God
will, and what God appoints, that shall be done. This Doctrine Christ teaches
when he says, Are not save sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of
them is forgotten before God. But even the very hairs of your heads are all
numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows. (Luke
12.6, 7.) He speaks in the verses before of killing, and bids them that they
should not be afraid for that. Fear not them that kill the body; and after that
have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you, whom ye shall fear;
Fear him who after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell. Yea, I say
unto you, fear him. Then he leads them to the consideration of this, that the
will of God governs, and disposes of his, to suffering: as well as declares to
them for what, and how they should suffer, saying, Are not five sparrows sold
for two farthings, etc.

Also in Isaiah the 8. at the 9. and 10. and in Isaiah the ^1. at the 12. and
13. You have in sum the same thing inserted again.

But we will not stay upon proof, but will proceed to demonstration hereof.

Pharaoh, said he would, ay, that he would, but he could not touch so much as a
thread or a ragg of Isreal's, because the will of God was in that thing contrary
to him.

Saul said that he would have David, and to that end would search for him among
the thousands of Judah: but David was designed for another purpose, and
therefore Saul must go without him. (1. Sam. 23.2^, etc.)

Rabshakeh said that he was come from Assyria to Jerusalem, to make Judah eat
their own dung, and drink their own piss. But God said he should not shoot an
arrow there. And it came to pass as God had said. (2 King. 18.2. Chron. 28.
Isa. 36. and 37. chap.)

Jeremiah's and Barach's enemies would have killed them, but they could not,
for God hid them.

How many times had the Jews a mind to have destroyed Jesus Christ; but they
could not touch an hair of his head until his hour was come.

Those also that bound themselves in a curse, that they would neither eat nor
drink, until they had killed Paul, were forced to be forsworn, for the will of
God was not, that Paul should die as yet. ( Acts 23. at the 12. verse.)

This therefore should be well considered of Gods Church, in the cloudy and
dark day. All his saints are in thy hand. (Deuteronomy. 33.3.) It is not the way of
God to let the enemies of Gods Church do what they will: no, the Devil, himself
can devour but whom he may. (1 Pet. 5.)

And, as no enemy can bring suffering upon a man when the will of God is
otherwise: so no man can save himself out of their hands, when God will deliver
him up for his glory. It remains then that we be not much afraid of men, nor
yet be foolishly bold, but that we wait upon our God in the way of
righteousness, and the use of those means which his providence offers to us
for our safety; and that we conclude that our whole dispose, as to liberty or
suffering, lie in the will of God: and that we shall, or shall not suffer even
as it pleases him. For,

First, God has appointed who shall suffer: suffering comes not by chance, or
by the will of man, but by the will and appointment of God. Let no man, said
Paul, be moved by these afflictions: for you your selves know that we are
appointed thereunto. (1 Thessalonians. 3.3.)

We are apt to forget God when affliction comes, and to think it a strange
thing that those that fear God should suffer indeed. (1 Pet. 4.12.) But we
should not, for we suffer by the will and appointment of God. Hence they under
the Altar were bid to rest for a while, even until their fellow servants also,
and their brethren that should be killed: (mark that, should be killed, as they
were,) should be fulfilled. (Revel. 6.11.) Wherefore suffering for
righteousness, and for righteousness sake is by the will of God. God has
appointed who shall suffer. That's the first.

Secondly, as God has appointed who shall suffer: so he has appointed when they
shall suffer for his truth in the World. Sufferings for such and such a man are
timed, as to when, he shall be tried for his faith. Hence, when Paul was afraid
at Corinth that the Heathens would fall about his ears, the Lord spoke to him
by night in a vision, saying, Be not afraid Paul, but speak, and hold not thy
peace, for I am with thee, and no man shall set upon thee, to hurt thee. (Acts
18.7, 8, 9, 10.) His time of suffering was not yet come, there. It is also said
concerning Jesus Christ, that even then when they sought to take him, no man
laid his hands on him, for his hour was not yet come. (John 7.30.) The times
then, and the seasons, even for the sufferings of the people of God, are not in
the hands of their enemies, but in the hand of God, as David said, my times are
in thy hand. By the will of God then it is, that such shall suffer at, but not
until that time. But,

Thirdly, as God has appointed who and when, so he has appointed where this,
that, or the other good man shall suffer. Moses and Elias, when they appeared
on the holy Mount, told Jesus of the sufferings which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. Jerusalem was the place assigned for Christ to suffer at, also there
must the whole of his sufferings be accomplished. ( Luke 9.30, 31.) The Saints
are sprinkled by the hand of God here and there, as Salt is sprinkled upon meat
to keep it from stinking. And as they are thus sprinkled that they may season
the earth: so accordingly, where they must suffer is also appointed for the
better conforming of the truth. Christ said, It could not be that a Prophet
should perish out of Jerusalem. (Luke 13.33.) But why could it not be that they
should perish other where? Were there no enemies but in Jerusalem? were there
no good men but at Jerusalem? No, no, that was not the reason. The reason was
for that God had appointed that they should suffer there. So then, who, when,
and where, is at the will of God, and they accordingly are ordered by that will.

Fourthly, As God has appointed who, when, and where: so he has also appointed
what kind of sufferings, this or that Saint shall undergo at this place and at
such a time. God said that he would show Paul (before hand) how great things he
should suffer for his sake. (Acts 9.16.) And it is said that Christ did signify
to Peter before hand, by what death he should glorify God. Joh 21.19.

When Herod had beheaded John Baptist, and when the Jews had crucified Christ,
it is said, that they had but fulfilled what was written of them. (Mark 9.13.
Acts 13.29.)

Our sufferings as to the nature of them; are all writ down in Gods Book: and
though the writing seem as unknown characters to us, yet God understands them
very well. Some of them they shall kill and crucify, and some of them they
shall scourge in their Synagogues, and persecute them from city to city. (Mat.
23.34.) Shall God (think you) say some of them, they shall serve thus, and some
of them, they shall do so too: and yet not allot, which some to this, and which
to that, and which to the other trial?

Doubtless our sufferings fall by the will of God unto us, as they fell of old
upon the people of Jerusalem. 'Twas appointed by God who of them should die of
hunger, who with the sword, who should go into captivity, and who should be
eaten up of beasts. ( Jer. 15.3.) So is the case here, Namely, as God has
appointed who, when, where and the like, so he has also what manner of
sufferings this or that good man shall undergo for his Name. Let it then be
concluded that hitherto it appears that the sufferings of Saints are ordered
and disposed by the will of God. But,

Fifthly, As all this is determined by the will of God, so it is also
appointed, for what truth this or that Saint shall suffer this or that kind of
affliction. Every Saint has his course, his work, and his testimony, as is
alloted him, of God. ( Mark. 13.34.) John had a course, a testimony to fulfill
for God, and so had holy Paul. (Acts 13.25. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7.) and so has every
Saint: also he that is to suffer, has his truth appointed him to suffer for:
Christ had a truth peculiar to himself, to bear witness to, in a way of
suffering. John had a truth peculiar to himself to bear witness to, in a way of
suffering. Stephen had also a truth diverse from them both, to which he bare an
holy testimony, and for which he bravely died. (Mark. 14.61, 62. chap. 6.17,
18. Acts 7.51.52, 53.)

If you read the Book of Acts and Monuments, you may see a goodly variety as to
this, and yet in all, a curious harmony. Some are there said to suffer for the
Godhead, some for the manhood, some for the ordinances of Christ, and some laid
down their lives for the brethren. And thus far we see that he that suffers for
righteousness sake, suffers in this sense according to the will of God.

Sixthly, As it is appointed (who, when, where, what kind, and) for what truth
by the will of God, this and that Saint should suffer: so also it is appointed
by whose hand, this or that man shall suffer for this or that truth.

It was appointed that Moses and Israel should suffer by the hand of Pharaoh.
And for this very purpose, says God, have I raised thee up that is to be a
persecutor, and to reap the fruits thereof. (Exodus 9.13-13.) It was also
determined that Christ should suffer by the hand of Herod and Pontius Pilate,
For of a truth, said they, against thy holy child Jesus, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate with the Gentiles, and the children of Israel were gathered together,
for to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy counsel determined before to be done.
(Acts 4.27.)

These are great instances, from which we may gather how all these things are
ordered from thence down hitherto. For if a sparrow falls not to the ground
without God, she shall not be killed without God: not by, he knows not who. And
if a Christian man is better than many sparrows: It follows, that God concerns
himself more with, for, and about him, than with, for, or about many sparrows.

It follows therefore in right reason, that as the person who, is appointed to
be the sufferer; so the persons who, are appointed to be the rod and sword
thereby to afflict withal.

Thus far therefore the will of God is it, that orders and disposes of us,
and of our sufferings.

Seventhly, As all these pass thorough the hand of God, and come not to us, but
by his will: So how long is also as really determined, as any of them all. It Is
not in man, but God, to set the time how long: the rod of the wicked shall rest
upon the lot of the righteous.

Abraham must be informed of this. Abraham, says God, know of a surety that thy
seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them,
and they shall afflict them four hundred years. (Genesis 15.13.) So the thraldom
of Israel in Babylon was not only in the general appointed, but the time
prefixed, how long. (Jer. 25.11.12. chap. 29.10.) The time of the Beasts Reign,
and of the witnesses walking in sackcloth are punctually fixed, and that beyond
which they cannot go. ( Revel. 11, 12, 13. chapters.

I know these are generals, and respect the Church in the bulk of it, and not
particular persons. But, as was hinted before, we must argue from the greater to
the lesser, that is from four hundred years, to ten days; from ten days, to
three: and so from the Church in general to each particular member, and to the
time and nature of their sufferings. ( Revel. 2.10. Hos. 6.2. Acts 23.11.)

And thus in a word or two I have finished the first two parts of the Text, and
showed you, what there is in Peter's counsel and advice, and showed you also,
to whom his advice is given: in which last, as you see, I have showed you both
what the will of God is, and what to suffer according to it. And particularly I
have in a few words, handled this last; to show you that our sufferings are
ordered and disposed by him, that you might always when you come into trouble
for his Name, not stagger, nor be at a loss: but be stayed, composed and settled
in your minds, and say, the will of the Lord be done. (Acts 21.14.) I will also
say unto you this by the way, that the will of God does greatly work, even to
order and dispose of the spirits of Christians, in order to a willingness,
disposedness, readiness, and resignation of our selves to the mind of God. For
with respect to this, were those words last recited, spoken. Paul saw that he
had a call to go up to Jerusalem there to bear his testimony for Christ, and
his Gospel, but those unto whom he made known his purpose, entreated him with
much earnestness not to go up thither, for that as they believed, it would
endanger his life. But he answers, what mean ye to weep and to break my
heart? for I am ready, not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus. And when he would not be persuaded, says Luke, we
ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.

From what has been thus discoursed, many things will follow, as first, that
the rod as well as the child is Gods; persecutors as well as the persecuted are
his, and he has his own designs upon both. He has raised them up, and he has
ordered them for himself, and for that work that he has for them to do. Hence
Habakkuk speaking of the Churches enemies, says: Thou have ordained them for
judgment, O mighty God, thou have established them for correction. (Hab.
1.12.) And therefore they are in other places called the rod of Gods anger, his
staff, his hand, his sword. (Isa. 10.5. Psalm. 17.13, 14.)

Indeed to be thus disposed of, is a sad Lot; the lot is not fallen to them in
pleasant places, they have not the goodly heritage, but the judgments of God
are a great deep. The thing formed may not say to him that formed it, why have
thou made me thus?

To be appointed, to be ordained, to be established to be a persecutor, and a
troubler of Gods Church! O tremendous judgment! O amazing anger!

Three things the people of God should learn from hence.

First, Learn to pity, and bewail the condition of the enemy; I know thou can
not alter the counsel of God, appointed they are, established they are for
their work, and do it they must and shall. But yet it becomes them that see
their state, and that their day is coming, to pity and bewail their condition,
yea, and to pray for them too. For who knows whether it is determined that they
should remain implacable to the end, as Herod: or whether they may thorough
grace obtain repentance for their doings, with Saul. And, I say again, if thy
prayer should have a casting hand in the conversion of any of them, it would be
sweet to thy thoughts, when the scene is over.

Secondly, Never grudge them their present advantages. Fret not thy self
because of evil men, neither be thou envious at the workers of iniquity. (Prove.
23.19.) Fret not, though they spoil thy resting place. It Is God that has bidden
them do it, to try thy faith, and patience thereby. Wish them no ill with what
they get of thine, it is their wages for their work, and it will appear to them
ere long that they have earned it dearly. Their time is to rejoice but as in a
moment, in what thus is gotten by them: and then they, not repenting, are to
perish for ever, like their own dung. (Job 20.5, 6, 7.)

Poor man, thou that have thy time to be afflicted by them, that thy golden
graces may shine the more, thou art in the fire, and they blow the bellows: but
would thou change places with them? would thou fit upon their place of
ease? do thou desire to be with them? (Prove. 24.1.) O rest thy self
contented, in thy patience possess thy Soul, and pity and bewail them in the
condition in which they are.

Thirdly, Bless God that thy lot did fall on the other side, Namely, to be one
that should know the truth, profess it, suffer for it, and have grace to bear
thee up there under, to Gods glory, and thy eternal comfort. This honor have
not all his Saints; all are not counted worthy thus to suffer shame for his
Name. Do this I say though they get all, and leave thee nothing but the shirt
on thy back, the skin on thy bones, or an hole in the ground to be put in. (
Heb. 11.23, 24, 25, 26.)

Fourthly, Labor to be patient under this mighty hand of God, and be not hasty
to say, when will the rod be laid aside, mind thou thy duty, which is to let
patience have its perfect work, and bear the indignation of the Lord, because
thou have sinned against him, until he please to awake, to arise and to execute
judgment for thee. (Mich. 7.)

But to pass this.

Secondly, Are things thus ordered? then this should teach us that there is a
cause. The rod is not gathered without a cause; the rod is fore determined,
because the sin of Gods people is foreseen, and, oft-times, the nature of the
sin, and the anger of the Father, is seen in the fashion of the rod. The rod of
my anger, says God. A bitter and hasty Nation must be brought against
Jerusalem, an enemy fierce and cruel must be brought against the land of
Israel. Their sins called for such a rod, for their iniquities were grievous.
(Habak. 1.6.)

This should teach us with all earnestness to be sorry for our sins, and to do
what we can to prevent these things, by falling upon our face in a way of
prayer before God. If we would shorten such days, when they come upon us, let
us be lovers of righteousness, and get more of the righteousness of faith, and
of compliance with the whole will of God, into our hearts. Then I say, the days
shall be shortened, or we fare as well, because the more harmless and innocent
we are, and suffer, the greater will our wages, our reward and glory be, when
pay-day shall come: and what if we wait a little for that?

These things are sent to better Gods people, and to make them white, to refine
them as Silver, and to purge them as gold: and to cause that they that bear
some fruit, may bring forth more: we are afflicted, that we may grow. (John
15.1, 2.) It Is also the will of God that they that go to heaven should go
thither hardly or with difficulty. The righteous shall scarcely be saved. That
is, they shall, but yet with great difficulty, that it may be the sweeter.

Now that which makes the way to Heaven, so strait, so narrow, so hard, is the
rod, the sword, the persecutor, that lies in the way, that marks where our
haunt is, that mars our path, digs a pit, and that sets a net, a snare for us
in the way. (1 Samuel 23.22. Job 30.12, 13, 14. Psalm. 9.25. Psalm. 31.4. Psalm.
35.7. Psalm. 119.110. Psalm. 140.5. Psalm. 142.3.)

This, I say, is that which puts us to it, but it is to try, as I said, our
graces, and to make Heaven the sweeter to us. To come frighted, and hard
pursued, thither, will make the safety there, the more with exceeding gladness
to be embraced. And I say, get thy heart yet more possessed with the power of
Godliness; that the love of righteousness may be yet more with thee. For this
blessedness, this happiness, he shall be sure of, that suffers for
righteousness sake.

Thirdly, since the rod is Gods, as well as the child: let us not look upon our
troubles as if they came from, and were managed only by Hell. It Is true, a
persecutor has a black mark upon him, but yet the Scriptures say, that all the
ways of the persecutor, are Gods. ( Dan. 5.23.) Wherefore as we should, so
again, we should not be afraid of men: we should be afraid of them, because
they will hurt us; but we should not be afraid of them, as if they were let
loose to do to us, and with us what they will. Gods bridle is upon them, Gods
hook is in their nose: yea, and God has determined the bounds of their rage,
and if he lets them drive his Church into the sea of troubles, it shall be but
up to the neck, and so far it may go, and not be drownded. (2 King. 19.28. Isa.
37.29. Isa. 8.7, 8.) I say the Lord has hold of them, orders them; nor do they
at any time come out against his people but by his license and commission how
far to go, and where to stop.

And now for two or three objections.

1. Object. But may we not fly in a time of persecution? your pressing upon
us, that persecution is ordered, and managed by God, makes us afraid to fly.

Answ. First, having regard to what was said before about a call to suffer; Thou
may do in this, even is it is in thy heart. If it is in thy heart to fly,
fly: if it be in thy heart to stand, stand. Any thing but a denial of the
truth. He that flys, has warrant to do so; he that stands, has warrant to do
so. Yea, the same man may both fly, and stand, as the call, and working of God
with his heart may be. Moses fled, Moses stood; David fled, David stood;
Jeremiah fled, Jeremiah stood; Christ withdrew himself, Christ stood; Paul
fled, Paul stood. ( Exo. 2.15. Heb. 11.27. 1 Samuel 19.12. chap. 24.8. Jer.
37.11, 12. chap. 38.17. Luke 9.10. John. 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor.
11.32, 33. Acts 20.22, 23.)

There are therefore few rules in this case. The man himself is best able to
judge concerning his present strength, and what weight this or that argument
has upon his heart to stand or fly. I should be loath to impose upon any man in
these things: only if thou fliest, take two or three cautions with thee.

1. Do not fly out of a slavish fear, but rather because flying is an ordinance
of God, opening a door for the escape of some, which door is opened by Gods
providence, and the escape countenanced by Gods word. ( Matt. 10.23.)

2. When thou art fled, do as much good as thou can in all quarters where
thou come, for therefore the door was opened to thee, and thou bid to make
thy escape. ( Acts 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.)

3. Do not think thy self secure when thou art fled, 'twas providence that
opened the door, and the word that did bid thee escape: but whither, and
wherefore, that thou know not yet. Vriah the Prophet fled into Egypt,
because there dwelt men that were to take him, that he might be brought again
to Jerusalem to die there. ( Jer. 26.21.)

4. Should thou fly from where thou art, and be taken in another place. The
most that can be made of it; thy taking the opportunity to fly, as was
propounded at first, can be but this, thou wast willing to commit thy self to
God in the way of his providence, as other good men have done, and thy being
now apprehended has made thy call clear to suffer here or there, the which
before thou were in the dark about.

5. If therefore, when thou have fled, thou art taken, be not offended at God,
or man: not at God, for thou art his servant, thy life and thy all are his: not
at man, for he is but Gods rod, and is ordained, in this, to do thee good. Have
thou escaped? laugh: art thou taken? laugh: I mean be pleased which way soever
things shall go, for that the scales are still in Gods hand.

6. But fly not, in flying, from Religion; fly not, in flying, for the sake of
a trade: fly not, in flying, that thou may have ease for the flesh: this is
wicked, and will yield neither peace nor profit to thy Soul, neither now, nor
at death, nor at the day of judgment.

2. Obj. But if I fly, some will blame me: what must I do now?

Answ. And so may others if thou stand: fly not therefore, as was said
before, out of a slavish fear; stand not, of a bravado. Do what thou do in the
fear of God, guiding thy self by his word, and providence: and as for this or
that man's judgment, refer thy case to the judgment of God.

3. Obj. But if I be taken and suffer, my cause is like to be clothed with
scandals, slanders, reproaches, and all manner of false, and evil speakings:
what must I do?

Answ. Saul charged David with Rebellion. (1 Samuel 22.8.13.)

Amos was charged with conspiring against the King. ( Amos 7.10.) Daniel was
charged with despising the King: and so also were the three children. ( Dan.
6.13 chap. 3.12.) Jesus Christ himself was accused of perverting the nation, of
forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, and of saying that himself was Christ a
King. (Luke 23.2.) These things therefore have been. But

1. Can thou, after a due examination of thy self, say that as to these
things thou art innocent, and clear? I say, will thy conscience justify thee
here. Have thou made it thy business to give unto God the things that are Gods,
and unto Caesar, the things that are his, according as God has commanded? If
so, matter not what men shall say, nor with what lies and reproaches they
slander thee, but for these things count thy self happy. Blessed are you when
men shall revile you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely
(lying) for my name sake, (says Christ.) Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for
great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets that were
before you. ( Mat. 5.11, 12.) Comfort thy self therefore in the innocence of
thy Soul, and say, I am counted a Rebel, and yet am Loyal; I am counted a
deceiver, and yet am true. (1 Samuel 24.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 6.8.) Also refer
thy cause to the day of judgment: for if thou can rejoice at the thoughts
that thou shall be cleared of all slanders and evil speakings then; that will
bear up thy heart as to what thou may suffer now. The answer of a good
conscience will carry a man thorough Hell to Heaven. Count these slanders part
of thy sufferings, and those for which God will give thee a reward, because
thou art innocent, and for that they are laid upon thee for thy professions
sake. But if thou be guilty, look to thy self, I am no comforter of such.

I come now to speak to the third and last part of the Text, Namely, of the
good effect that will certainly follow to those that after a due manner shall
take the advice before given. Let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator.

Two things from the last clause of the Text lie yet before us. And they are
they by which will be shown, what good effect will follow to those that suffer
according to the will of God, and that commit their Souls to his keeping

1. Such will find him to themselves, [ a Creator.]

2. They will find him a [ faithful] Creator. Let them commit the keeping of
their Souls to him, as unto a faithful Creator.

In this phrase [ a faithful Creator] behold the wisdom of the holy Ghost, how
fitly, and to the purpose he speaks.

King, is a great Title, and God is sometimes called a King; but he is not set
forth by this Title here, but by the Title of a Creator: for it is not always
in the power of a King, to succor and relieve his Subjects, that are suffering
for his Crown and Dignity.

Father, is a sweet Title, a Title that carries in it an intimation of a great
deal of bowels and compassion, and God is often set forth also by this Title in
the holy Scriptures. But so he is not here, but rather as a Creator. For a
Father, a compassionate Father, cannot always help, succor or relieve his
Children, though he knows they are under affliction! Oh but a Creator can.
Wherefore I say, he is set forth here under the Title of a Creator.

First, a Creator! nothing can die under a Creators hands. A Creator can
sustain all. A Creator can, as a Creator, do what he pleases. The Lord, the
everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, nor is
weary. (Isa. 40.28.)

The cause of God, for which his people suffer, had been dead and buried a
thousand years a go, had it not been in the hand of a Creator. The people that
have stood by his cause, had been out of both as to persons, name, and
remembrance, had they not been in the hand of a Creator.

Who could have hoped when Israel was going in, even into the mouth of the red
Sea, that ever his cause, or that people should have revived again. A huge host
of the Egyptians were behind them, and nothing but death before and on every
hand of them; but they lived, they flourished, they outlived their enemies,
for they were in the hand of a Creator.

Who could have hoped that Israel should have returned again from the land,
from the hand, and from under the Tyranny of the King of Babylon? They could
not deliver themselves from going thither; they could not preserve themselves
from being diminished when they came there, their power was gone, they were in
captivity, their distance from home was far, their enemies possessed their Land,
their City of defense was ruined, and their houses burned down to the ground:
and yet they come home again, there is nothing impossible to a Creator.

Who could have thought, that the three Children could have lived in a fiery
furnace, that Daniel could have been safe among the Lions, that Jonah could
have come home to his Country, when he was in the Whales belly, or that our
Lord should have risen again from the dead: but what is impossible to a Creator?

This therefore is a rare consideration for those to let their hearts be
acquainted with, that suffer according to the will of God, and that have
committed the keeping of their Souls to him in well doing. They have a Creator
to maintain and uphold their cause, a Creator to oppose its opposers. And hence
it is said, all that burden themselves with Jerusalem, shall be cut in pieces,
though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it. (Zech.
12.3.)

Secondly, A Creator! A Creator can, not only support a dying cause, but also
fainting spirits. For, as he faints not, nor is is weary, So he gives power
to the faint, and to those that have no might he increases strength. (Isa.
4.29.) He is the God of the spirits of all flesh, and has the life of the
spirit of his people in his own hand. Spirits have their being from him, he is
the Father of Spirits. Spirits are made strong by him, nor can any crush that
spirit, that God the Creator will uhpold.

Is it not a thing amazing to see one poor inconsiderable man, in a Spirit of
faith and patience, overcome all the threatenings, cruelties, afflictions, and
sorrows that a whole World can lay upon him? None can quail him, none can crush
him; none can bend down his spirit. None can make him to forsake what he has
received of God a commandment to hold fast. His holy, harmless, and profitable
notions, because they are spiced with grace, yield to him more comfort, joy and
peace, and do kindle in his Soul so goodly a fire of love to, and zeal for God,
that all the waters of the World shall never be able to quench.

Ay, say some, that's because he is headstrong, obstinate, and one that will
hear no reason. No, say I, but it is because his spirit is in the hand, under
the conduct, and preservation of a Creator. A Creator can make spirits, uphold
Spirits, and make one Spirit stronger to stand, than are all the Spirits of the
World to cast down. To stand, I say, in a way of patient enduring, in well
doing, against all that Hell can do to suppress.

Thirdly, A Creator! A Creator can bring down the Spirits that oppose, and make
them weak and unastable as water. The Lord, the everlasting God, the Creator of
the ends of the earth faints not nor is weary. There is no searching of his
understanding. He gives power to the faint, and to those that have no might he
increases strength, now mark even the youth shall faint and be weary, and the
young men shall utterly fall. A Creator can dash the Spirits of the enemies
with fear. God can put them in fear and make them know that they are men and
not God, and that their Horses are flesh, and not spirit. When the enemy came
to take Jesus Christ, their spirits fainted, their hearts died in them; they
went backwards, and fell to the ground. They had hard work to strengthen their
spirits to a sufficiency to boldness and courage, though they brought Halberts,
and Staves, and Swords, and weapons with them, to take a naked man. ( John
18.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

And although this is that which is not so visible to the World as some other
things are, yet I believe that God treads down the Spirits of men in a day when
they afflict his people, oftener than we are aware of, or than they are willing
to confess. How was the hostile Spirit of Esau trod down of God; when he came
out to meet his poor naked brother, with no less than four hundred armed men?
He fainted before his Brother, and instead of killing, kissed him, ( Genesis 33.)
How was the bloody Spirit of Saul trod down, when David met him at the mouth of
the Cave, and also at the hill Hach^lah? (1 Samuel 24.62. --) God is a Creator,
and as a Creator is a Spirit maker, a Spirit reviver, a Spirit destroyer. He
can destroy body and Soul in hell. (Luke 12.)

Fourthly, A Creator! As a Creator he is, over all Arts, Inventions and Crafts
of men that are set on work to destroy Gods people, whether they be Soldiers,
excellent Orators, or any other whatsoever; we will single out one, the Smith,
that roaring fellow, who with his coals and his Bellows makes a continual noise.

I have created the Smith, says God, that blows the coals in the fire, that
brings forth an instrument for his work, and I have created the waster to
destroy. (Isa. 45.16.)

The Smith, what is he? I answer, an Idol-maker, a promoter of false worship,
and one that makes Instruments of cruelty, therewith to help to suppress the
true. ( Chap. 41.7. Chap. 44. the 12. Chap. 46.^. chap. 54.17.)

I have created the Smith, says God, that blows the coals in the fire. The
Idol inventor, the Idol-maker, the supporter of Idol worship, he is my
creature, says God, to teach that he has power to reach him, and to command
his Sword to approach him at his pleasure; notwithstanding his roaring with his
Bellows, and his coals in the fire. So then, he cannot do what he will in the
fire, nor with his Idol when he has made it, the instrument also, that he makes
for the defense of his Idol, and for the suppressing of Gods true worship,
shall not do the thing for the which it is designed by him. And so the very next
verse says. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall condemn, this is the
heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says
the Lord. (ver. 17.) And the Text says moreover; I have created the waster to
destroy. The waster, what is that? why the Smith makes an Idol, and God has made
the rust; the Smith makes a Sword, and God has made the rust. The rust eats
them up, the moth shall eat them up, the fire shall devour them. The wicked,
says the Psalmist, have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast
down the poor and needy: and to stay such as are upright in conversation; their
sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bow shall be broken. (Psalm.
37.14, 15.)

All this can God do, because he is a Creator, and none but God can do it.
Wherefore by this peculiar Title of Creator, the Apostle prepares support for
suffering Saints, and also shows what a good conclusion is like to be made with
them that suffer for righteousness sake, according to his will, and that commit
the keeping of their Souls to him in well doing as unto a faithful Creator.

Fifthly, A Creator! a Creator can make such provision for a suffering people
in all respects, as shall answer all their wants. Have they lost their peace
with the World? have they no more peace with this World? Why, a Creator can
make, create peace, can create peace, peace; Peace with God, and peace with his
conscience, and that is better than all the peace that can be found else where
in the World. ( Isa. 57.19.)

Have they lost a good frame of heart? do they want a right frame of spirit?
Why, though this is to be had no where in the World, yet a Creator can help
them to it. ( Psalm. ^1.10.)

Have they lost their spiritual defense, do they lie too open to their
spiritual foes? Why, this a Creator can help. And the Lord shall create upon
every dwelling place of Mount Sion, and upon all her assemblies, a cloud and
smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all her
glory shall be a defense. (Isa. 4, 5, 6.)

This is the work of the Spirit: for though the Spirit it self be uncreate, yet
all the holy works of it in the heart, are verily works of Creation. Our new
man is a Creation; our graces are a Creation; our joys, and comforts, are a
Creation. (2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Ephesians. 4.24. Isa. 65.17, 18, 19.)

Now a Creation none can destroy but a Creator; wherefore here is comfort. But
again, God has created us in Christ Jesus, that's another thing. the Sun is
created in the Heavens; the Stars are created in the Heavens; the Moon is
created in the Heavens. Who can reach them, touch them, destroy them, but the
Creator? Why, this is the case of the Saint, because he has to do with a
Creator, he is fastened to Christ: yea, is in him by an act of Creation. ( Ephesians.
2.10.) So that unless Christ and the creation of the holy Ghost can be
destroyed, he is safe that is suffering according to the will of God, and that
has committed the keeping of his Soul to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator.

And this I would have you consider moreover; the man that suffers according
to the will of God, commits not such a Soul to this Creator, as dwells in
carnal men; a naked Soul, a graceless Soul, a Soul that has nothing in it but
sin: but he commits a converted Soul, a regenerate Soul, a Soul adorned,
beautified, and sanctified, with the Jewels, and bracelets, earrings and
perfumes of the blessed spirit of grace. And I say again, this is the work of a
Creator, and a Creator can maintain it in its gallantry, and he will do so, but
he will put forth acts of creating power for it every day.

Sixthly, a Creator! he that can create, can turn and alter any thing, to what
himself would have it. He that made the seven Stars and Orion, turns the
shadow of death into the morning. He can make the wilderness a pool of water,
and the dry land springs of water. (Amos 5.8. Isa. 41.18.)

Our most afflicted and desolate conditions he can make as a little haven unto
us; he can make us sing in the wilderness, and give us our vineyards from
thence. (Hos. 2.14, 15.) He can make Paul sing in the stocks, and good Rowland
Tailor dance, as he goes to the burning stake.

Gaols, and mocks, and scourgings, and flouts, and imprisonments, and hunger,
and nakedness, and Peril, and Sword, and Dens, and Caves, and Rocks, and
Mountains; God can so sweeten with the Honey of his word, and make so famous
for situation, by the glory of his presence, and so rich and fruitful by the
communications of the holy Ghost, and so easy by the spreading of his feathers
over us: that we shall not be able to say, that in all the world a more
commodious place, or comfortable condition can be found: some have known this,
and have been rather ready to covet to be here, than to shun, and fly from it
as a most unsavory condition.

All these things, I say, God does as a Creator. He has created Antipathies,
and he can make Antipathies close, and have favor one for another. The Lion
and the Calf, the Wolf and the Lamb, the little Boy and the Cockatrice's den he
can reconcile, and make to be at agreement. So, sufferings and the Saint, the
Prison and the Saint; losses, crosses, and afflictions, and the Saint: he can
make to lie down sweetly together.

Seventhly, A Creator! A Creator can make up all that thou have or shall lose
for the sake of thy profession by the hands of the Children of men, be they
Friends, Relations, a World, life, or what you can conceive of.

1. Have thou lost thy Friend for the sake of thy profession? is the whole
World set against thee for thy love to God, to Christ, his cause, and
righteousness? Why, a Creator can make up all. Here therefore is the advantage
that he has that suffers for righteousness sake. Jonathan the very Son of
bloody Saul, when David had lost the help of all his own Relations, he must
fall in with him, stick to him, and love him as he loved his own Soul. (1 Samuel
18.1, 2, 3.) Obadiah, Ahab's Steward, when the Saints were driven even under
ground by the rage of Jezabel the Queen, he is appointed of God to feed them in
Caves, and holes of the Earth. Yea, the very Raven complied with the will of a
Creator to bring the Prophet bread, and flesh in the morning, and bread and
flesh at night. (1 King, 18.13. chap. 17.6.) When Jeremiah the Prophet was
rejected of all, yea, the Church that then was, could not help him; he was cast
into the Dungeon, and sunk to a great depth there in the mire: God the Creator,
who rules the spirits of all men, stirred up the heart of Ebed-melech the
Ethiopian both to petition for his liberty, and to put him out of the Dungeon
by the help of thirty men. ( Jer. 38.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.) These now, as
Christ says, were both Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, and as a Loving
Wife, or Child. (Mat. 19.29.)

2. Have thou for the sake of thy faith, and profession thereof, lost thy part
in the World? why, a Creator can make thee houses, as he did for the Midwives
of Egypt, and can build thee a sure house as he did for David his Servant, who
ventured all for the love that they had to the fear of God and his way. (Exo.
1.20, 21. 2 Samuel 7.) David was thrust out of Saul's house, and driven from his
own, and God opened the heart of Achish the King of Gath, to receive him, and
to give him Ziklag. David, when under the tyranny of Saul, knew not what to do
with his Father and his Mother who were persecuted for his sake, but a Creator
inclined the heart of the King of Moab to receive them to house and harbor. (1 Samuel 27.5, 6. Chap. 22.3, 4.)

3. Is thy life at stake, is that like to go for thy profession, for thy
harmless profession of the Gospel? Why, God the Creator is Lord of life, and to
God, the Lord belong the issues from death. So then, he can, if he will, hold
thy breath in thy nostrils, in spite of all the World, or if he shall suffer
them to take away this for his glory, he can give thee another ten times as
good, for thy comfort. He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that
hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal. (Joh. 12.25.)

4. Is thy body to be disfigured, dismembered, starved, hanged or burned for the
faith and profession of the Gospel? Why, a Creator can either prevent it, or
suffering it, can restore it the very same to thee again, with great and
manifold advantage. He that made thee to be what thou now art: can make thee to
be what thou never yet wast. It does not yet appear what we shall be, further;
than only by general words. (1 John 3.2. Philip. 3.21.)

Eighthly, A Creator! Peter sets him before us here as a Creator, because he
would have us live upon him as such: as well as upon his grace, love, and
mercy. In Jobs day this was bewailed, that none, or but a few said, where is
God my maker that gives songs in the night. (Job 35.10.)

Creator, as was hinted before, is one of Gods peculiar Titles. It is not given
to him above five or six times in all the Book of God; and usually, when given
him, it is either to show his greatness, or else to convince us, that of duty
we ought to depend upon him: and not to faint, if he be on our side, for, or
under any adversity, according as we are bidden in the Text: Let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their Soul to him in
well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Shall God display his glory before us, under the character, and Title of a
Creator? and shall we yet fear man? shall he do this to us, when we are under a
suffering condition, and that on purpose that we might commit our Souls to him
in well doing? and be quiet; and shall we take no notice of this? Who art thou,
that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of man
that shall be made as grass? and forgettest the Lord thy maker that has
stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth etc. (Isa.
51.12, 13.)

Had God concealed himself, as to his being a Creator: yet since he presents
himself unto us by his word under so many excellent Titles, as are given to no
other God besides: methinks it should make us bold in our God: but when, for
our relief, he shall add to all other, that he verily is a Creator, this should
make us rest in hope indeed.

Every Nation will have confidence for their own Gods, though but Gods that are
made with hands, though but the work of the Smith and Carpenter: And shall not
we trust in the name of the Lord our God, who is not only a God, but a Creator
and former of all things? (Mich. 4.5.) Consequently the only living, and true
God, and one that alone can sustain us.

We therefore are to be greatly blamed, if we overlook the ground, such ground
of support and comfort as presents it self unto us under the Title of a
Creator: But then most of all, if when we have heard, believed and known that
our God is such, we shall yet be afraid of a man that shall die, and forget the
Lord our Maker.

We, I say, have heard, seen, known and believed, that our God is the Creator.
The heavens declare his glory, and the firmament shows his handy work: and
thus he has showed unto us his eternal power and Godhead. (Romans 1.20.)

Behold then, thou fearful worm, Jacob, the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars: behold the Earth, the Sea, the Air, the fire, and Vapors: Behold all
living things from Leviathan and Behemoth, to the least that creeps in the
Earth and Waters. Yea, behold thy self, thy Soul, thy Body, thy fashion, thy
building, and consider; thy God has made even all these things, and has given
to thee this being: yea, and all this also, he made of that which does not
appear. ( Heb. 11.1, 2, 3.) This is that which thou art called to the
consideration of by Peter, in the Text; when he lets fall from his
apostolical meditation, that thy God is the Creator: and commands that thou
in thy suffering for him according to his will, should commit the keeping of
thy Soul to him as unto a faithful Creator.

He that has the art thus to do, and that can do it in his straights, shall
never be trodden down: His God, his faith; his faith, his God, are able to make
him stand. For such a man will thus conclude, that since the Creator of all is
with him; what, but Creatures, are there to be against him. So then, what is
the Ax, that it should boast it self against him that heweth therewith? or the
Saw, that it should magnify it self against him that shakes it? as if the rod
should shake it self against him that lifts it up; or as if the staff should
lift up it self, as if it were no wood. (Isa. 10.15.)

Read also the 40th of Isaiah, from the 12 to the last verse, and then speak,
if God as Creator is not a sure confidence to all the ends of the earth that
trust in, and wait upon him.

As Creator he has formed and upholdeth all things, yea his hands have formed
the crooked Serpent, wherefore he also is at his bay: and thou have made the
Dragon in the Sea: And therefore it follows that he can cut and wound him, and
give him for meat to the Fowls, and to the beasts inheriting the wilderness, if
he will seek to swallow up and destroy the Church and People of God. (Job
26.13. Ps. 74.13, 14. Isa. 51.9. Ezekiel. 29.3, 4.)

Ninthly, A Creator! is God the God unto whom they that suffer according to his
will, are to commit the keeping of their Souls, the Creator? and does he take
charge of them as a Creator? Then this should teach us to be far off from being
dismayed, as the heathens are, at his tokens: for our God, the Lord, is the
true God, the living God, the King of eternity. (Jer. 10.1, 2, 10.)

We should tremblingly glory and rejoice when we see him in the World, though
upon those that are the most terrible of his dispensations. God the Creator
will sometimes mount himself and ride thorough the earth in such Majesty and
glory, that he will make all to stand in the Tent doors to behold him. O how he
rode in his chariots of Salvation, when he went to save his people out of the
land of Egypt; how he shook the Nations. Then his glory covered the heavens,
and the earth was full of his praise. His brightness was as the light: he had
horns coming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power. Before him
went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet: He stood, and
measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations, the everlasting
mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his way is everlasting.
Then says the Prophet, I saw the Tents of Cushan in affliction: the Curtains
in the land of Midian did tremble. Was the Lord displeased against the rivers?
was thine anger against the rivers? was thy wrath against the Sea, that thou
did ride upon thy horses, and thy chariots of salvation? (Habbak. 3.)

So David. The earth shook and trembled, says he: the foundations also of the
hills moved, and were shaken, because he was wroth. There went up a smoke out
of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured, coals were kindled by it.
He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkness was under his feet. And
he rode upon a Cherub, and did fly, he did fly upon the wings of the wind. He
made darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about him were dark waters,
and thick clouds of the skies. At the brightness that was before him, his thick
clouds passed hailstones and coals of fire. The Lord also thundered in the
heavens: and the Highest gave his voice, hailstones and coals of fire. Yea, he
sent out his arrows, and scattered them, and he shot out lightning, and
discomfited them. Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of
the world were discovered: at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of
thy nostrils. (Psalm. 18. from verse 7. to verse 15.)

These are glorious things, though shaking dispensations. God is worthy to be
seen in his dispensations as well as in his word, though the nations tremble at
his presence. O that thou would rend the heavens, that thou would come
down, says the Prophet, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence.
(Isa. 64.1, 2.

We know God, and he is our God, our own God, of whom, or of what should we be
afraid? (Psalm. 46.) When God roars out of Zion, and utters his voice from
Jerusalem, when the heavens and the earth do shake, the Lord shall be the hope
of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel. (Joel 3.16.)

Every man stays up, or lets his spirit fall according to what he knows
concerning the nature of a thing. He that knows the Sea, knows the Waves will
toss themselves: he that knows a Lion, will not much wonder to see his Paw, or
to hear the voice of his roaring. And shall we that know our God, be stricken
with a pannick fear, when he comes out of his holy place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity? We should stand like those that
are next to Angels, and tell the blind world who it is that is thus mounted
upon his steed, and that has the clouds for the dust of his feet, and that
thus rides upon the wings of the wind: we should say unto them, this God is
our God for ever and ever, and he shall be our guide even unto death.

Our God! the Creator! He can turn men to destruction, and say, Return ye
children of men. When our God shows himself, it is worth the while to see the
sight, though it costs us all that we have, to behold it.

Some men will bless and admire every rascally Jugler, that can but make again
that which they only seem to mar, or do something that seems to out go reason:
yea, though they make thundrings and noise in the place where they are, as
though the Devil himself were there.

Shall Saints then, like slaves, be afraid of their God the Creator, of their
own God, when he renteth the heavens, and comes down? when God comes into the
world to do great things, he must come like himself, like him that is a
Creator; Wherefore the Heavens and the earth must move at his presence, to
signify that they acknowledge him as such, and pay him that homage that is due
to him, as their God and great Creator.

We that are Christians have been trained up by his Son in his School this many
a day, and have been told what a God our Father is, what an arm he has, and
with what a voice he can thunder; how he can deck himself, with Majesty, and
excellency, and array himself with beauty and glory. How he can cast abroad the
rage of his wrath: and behold every one that is proud, and abase him. (Job
40.9, 10, 11.) Have we not talked of what he did at the red Sea, and in the
land of Ham many years ago, and have we forgot him now? Have we not vaunted,
and boasted of our God both in Church, Pulpit, and Books; and spoke to the
praise of them, that in stead of stones, attempted to drive Antichrist out of
the World with their lives and their blood? and are we afraid of our God? He
was God, a Creator, then; and is he not God now? and will he not be as good to
us, as to them that have gone before us? or would we limit him to appear in
such ways, as only smile upon our flesh: and have him stay, and not show
himself in his heart-shaking dispensations until we are dead, and gone? what,
if we must go now to Heaven? and what if he is thus come down to fetch us to
himself? If we have been wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves; If we can
say, neither against the Law of the Jews, neither against the Temple, nor
against Caesar, have we offended any thing at all: of what should we be afraid?
let Heaven and Earth come together, I dare say they will not hurt us.

Our Lord Jesus when dilating upon some of the great, and necessary works of
our Creator, puts check beforehand to all uncomely fears: to such fears as
become not the faith, and profession of a Christian: Brother, says he, shall
deliver up the Brother to death, and the Father the Child: and the children
shall rise up against their Parents, and cause them to be put to death. And ye
shall be hated of all men for my names sake. What follows ( ver. 28.) fear them
not. And again, (in ver. 31.) fear ye not. (Mat. 10.)

So again, (Mat. 24.) Nation shall rise against Nation; there shall be famines,
pestilences, and earthquakes, etc. They shall deliver you up to be afflicted,
and shall kill you. Many shall be offended, and shall betray one another. And
many false Prophets shall arise and deceive many. And yet for all this we are
bid not to be afraid, for all these things with all other are ordered, limited
enlarged and straightened, bounded and buffeted by the will, and hand, and power
of that God unto whom Peter bids us commit the keeping of our Souls, as unto a
faithful Creator. (ver. 4. to ver. 11. Mark. 13.5. to the 9. To wait for God in
the way of his judgments, does well become a Christian.

To believe he loves us, when he shows himself terrible to us, is also very
much becoming of us. Wherefore has he given us grace, is it that we should live
by sense? Wherefore has he sometimes visited us, is it that our hearts might be
estranged from him, and that we still should love the World? And I say again,
wherefore has he so plainly told us of his greatness, and of what he can do, is
it not, that we might be still, when the World is disturbed? and that we might
hope for good things to come out of such providence, that to sense, look as if
themselves would eat up and devour all?

Let us wait upon God, walk with God, believe in God, and commit our selves,
our Soul, our Body to God to be kept. Yea, let us be content to be at the
dispose of God, and rejoice to see him act according to all his wondrous
works. For this is a posture highly becoming them that say of God, he is their
Father, and that have committed the keeping of their Soul to him as unto a
Creator.

A comely thing it is for the Soul that fears God, to love, and reverence him
in all his appearances. We should be like the Spaniel-dogg, even lie at the
foot of our God, as he at the foot of his Master: yea, and should be glad,
could we but see his face, though he treads us down with his feet.

Ay, says one Son, I could, if I thought this high God would regard me, and
take notice of my laying of my Soul at his foot, while I suffer for his word
and truth in the World.

Why, do but see now, how the holy Ghost for our help, does hedge up that way,
in at which unbelief would come, that their might as to this, be no room left
for doubting. For as he calls the God, unto whom we are bid to commit the
keeping of our Soul, a Creator: so he says, that he is a Creator that is
faithful. Let them commit the keeping of their Soul unto him in well-doing, as
unto [a faithful] Creator. A Creator that will concern himself with the Soul
committed to his trust; and that will be faithful to it, according to all that
he has promised.

This therefore of Gods faithfulness, being added to his might and power; is in
it self, a ground of great support to those that have in a way of well-doing
committed themselves, their Souls, to him to keep. A Creator, what is it that a
Creator cannot do? A faithful Creator; what is it that one that is faithful
will not do? that is, when he is engaged. And now he is engaged, because thou
have committed thy Soul to him to keep, and because he has bid thee do so. Let
them commit the keeping of their Soul to him, as unto a faithful Creator. I
have sometimes seen an unfaithful man engaged, when a thing has been committed
to him to keep. A man that is a Thief, a cheater, a defrauder, will yet be
faithful to him that will commit a charge to him to keep. And the reason is,
because, though he can steal, cheat, defraud, without being taken notice of;
yet, he must be seen and known, if he be false in that which is committed to
him to keep. I know the comparison is odious, yet such have been made by a
holier mouth than mine, and as the case may be, they may be aptest of all to
illusterate that which a man is about to explain. Hark, what the unjust Judge
says, says the Lord Jesus Christ. ( Luke 18.)

To commit thy Soul to God, is to trust him with it; to commit thy Soul to God,
is to engage him to look to it. And if he should not be faithful now, he will
not be so, in any case. For himself has bidden thee do it, he has also promised
to keep it, as has been already showed in the former part of this discourse.
Besides, he is here said to be faithful, to be a faithful Creator. He
challenges this of faithfulness to himself alone. Yea, let God be true, and
every man a liar. ( Romans 3.4.) This therefore does still help to encourage them
that would be faithful to him, to commit the keeping of our Soul to him. A
faithful man will encourage one much, how much more should the faithfulness of
God encourage us?

Here therefore we have a closing word indeed. A word to wrap up the Text with,
that is as full of good, as the Sun is of light, what can be fi^ter spoken?
What can be added; what now is wanting to the help of him that has committed
his Soul to God to keep it while he is suffering according to his will in the
world? He is engaged, as I said by the act, thou have committed thy Soul to him
to keep. He is engaged by his own word, he has bidden thee commit thy Soul to
him to keep. He is engaged by his declaring of himself to be faithful; for that
has encouraged thee to commit thy Soul to him to keep. Besides, he has promised
to do it; he has sworn to do it.

For when God made promise to Abraham: because he could swear by no greatter,
he swear by himself, Saying, Surely, blessing I will bless thee, and
multiplying I will multiply thee. And so after he had patiently endured, (as
thou must do) he obtained the promise. For men verily swear by the greater, and
an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Wherein God willing
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his
Counsel, confirmed it by an oath. That by two immutable things, in which it was
not possible that God should lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have
fled for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Which hope we have as
an anchor of the Soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that
within the vail, whither the forerunner is for us entered; even Jesus, made an
high Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. (Heb. 6.13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20.)

Thus you see what ground we have, who suffer according to the will of God, and
that have committed the keeping of our Souls to him in well doing, as unto a
faithful Creator. Here therefore I might make a stop, and conclude as to this
advice: but now we are in, we will proceed a little further, and will fall down
upon three or four particulars.

First then, He will be faithful to us in this. He will keep us from those
allurements of the world that a suffering Saint is subject to. They that suffer
have other kind of temptations upon this account than other Christians have.
The liberty of others while they are in bonds, is a temptation to them; The
peace of others, while they are in trouble, is a temptation to them; The
enjoyments of others, while their houses are emptying, and their goods taking
away, while their own water is sold unto them, and while they are buying their
own wood, is a great temptation to them: ( Lamen. 5.4.) And this temptation,
were it not that we have to do with a God that is faithful, would assuredly be
a great snare unto them. But God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be
tempted, as to this, above what you are able. (1 Cor. 10.13.)

Nay, a suffering man has not only these things lying before him as a
temptation, but perhaps the wife of the bosom lies at him, saying, O do not
cast thy self away: if thou take this course, what shall I do, thou have
said, thou love me, now make it manifest by granting this my small request.
Do not still remain in thine integrity. Next to this come the Children, all
which are like to come to poverty, to beggary, to be undone for want of
wherewithal to f^ed, and cloth, and provide for them for time to come.

Now also come Kindred and Relations, and acquaintance, some chide, some cry,
some argue, some threaten, some promise; some flatter, and some do all, to
befool him for so unadvised an act as to cast away himself, and to bring his
Wife and Children to beggary, for such a thing as Religion. These are sore
temptations.

Next to these come the Terrors of men, the gripes of the Laws, the shadow of
death, and no man can tell what. All which are sufficient to pull a man from
the gates of life, were he there, if the faithful Creator stands not to him.
But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are
able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that you may be able
to bear it.

But God is faithful:] It says not, that thou art; But God is faithful, to his
Son, to whom he has given thee; to his promise, the which he has given thee; to
his cause, to which he has called thee; and to thy Soul, the which thou have
committed to his trust, and the which he also has taken the charge of, as he is
a faithful Creator.

And will not suffer thee to be tempted.] How, not tempted! no not above what
thou art able. He that tempts thee, does not at all consider thy strength, so
as to stop when he sees thou art weak: he would have thee overthrown, for
therefore it is that he tempts thee. But God will not suffer that, because he
is faithful, and because thou have committed the keeping of thy Soul unto him
in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Not tempted above that ye are able.] He says not above that ye are well able.
Indeed thy strength shall be proportioned to the temptation, but thou may
have none over, and above, to spare: thou shall not have bigger load, than God
will give thee shoulders to bear. Christ did bear his burden, but it made him
cry out and sweat as it were greats drop of blood to carry it. Bear thy burden
thou shall, and not be destroyed by it; but perhaps thou may sometimes roar
under it by reason of the disquietness of thy heart.

But will with the temptation make a way of escape.] With the temptation, not
without it; thou must be tempted, and must escape too. With the temptation. As
sure as Satan is licensed, so sure he is limited, and when Satan has ended all
the temptation, he shall depart from thee. (Luke 4.13.) He will with the
temptation, by such a managing of it, as shall break its own neck: God can
admit Satan to tempt, and make the Christian wise to manage the temptation for
his own escape.

Make a way.] It may be thou see no way of escape. It may be there is no way,
no way in all the world to escape well; but God can make a way. When Israel was
hemmed in at the Red Sea, there was as then, no way, no way in all the world to
escape. O but God made a way, and a pathway too, and that thorough the mighty
waters. ( Exo. 15.8.16. Psalm. 106.9. Psalm. 78.35.) He will make away with the
temptation: or will with the temptation make away to escape, that you may be
able to bear it.

These are the words of the holy Ghost who is God, and they are spoken, yea
committed to record for this very purpose, that those that are under
affliction, might commit the keeping of their Soul to him in well-doing, as
unto a faithful Creator. That's the first,

Secondly, He will also be faithful to us as to this, He will give us a
competent measure of wisdom that in our suffering condition we may in all
things be made able to manage our state with discretion. We are perhaps weak of
natural abilities, parts of utterance, or the like, and our adversaries are
Learned, Eloquent, and ripe of Parts. Thou have the disadvantage on thy side,
and they have what the world can afford, to encourage them: thou art weak of
Spirit, they are bold, and strong. The great and the mighty are with thy
enemies, but on thy side there is no comforter. (Eccles. 4.1.)

Why now here is, as to this, and to what else can be objected, the
faithfulness of God engaged. First in a general promise; I will not fail thee,
nor forsake thee. (Heb. 13.5.6.) Secondly, we have an invitation to come to
this faithful God for wisdom to assist and help. For after he had said, my
brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations: and let
patience have its perfect work: he adds, If any man lacks wisdom, let him ask
it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall
be given him. (James 1.2, 3, 4, 5.) Here is more then an invitation, here is a
promise, it shall be given him: and all to show us what a faithful Creator we
have committed our Souls unto. Does any lack wisdom to know how to carry it in a
time of Trial, let them ask it of God: of the God that is wisdom it self; let
him ask it of God the liberal giver; who gives to all men all that they have,
and upbraideth not for their unworthiness.

Nor does the holy Ghost stop here, but enlarges himself in a more particular
way to those that suffer according to the Text, saying, But when they deliver
you up, take no thought, how, or what you shall speak: for it shall be given
you in the same hour, what you shall speak. (Mat. 10.19.)

I have often been amazed in my mind at this Text, for how could Jesus Christ
have said such a word, if he had not been able to perform it. This Text
therefore declares him to be God: It is also a proof of faithfulness to those
that suffer for him.

For it is as if he should say, try me and trust me; if I stand not by you in a
day of distress, never believe me more. You suffering according to the will of
God, and committing your Souls to him in well-doing; I will give you a mouth
and wisdom, (for so he has it in Luke 21.15.) which all your adversaries shall
not be able to gainsay or resist. Here is no consideration of what capacity the
people might be of that were to be persecuted, but what is matter what they are;
if fools, it is no matter; if wise, it helps nothing. A mouth and wisdom is
to be given, that of it self shall do. And this is according to that other
Scripture mentioned before, where it says, No weapon formed against thee shall
prosper: and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall
condemn. (Isa. 54.17.)

Although it may happen in this, as in the former temptation: The Devil and his
agents may give the Saints, in their pleading for the truth, their bellies full
both of cross answers, equivocations, sophistications, wrong glosses and
erroneous interpretations. But truth shall prevail, shall turn the scale, and
bear away the victory.

Thirdly, He will also be faithful to us in this, we shall not want spiritual
support to help us to bear up under our particular parts of suffering. I do not
say that thou shall be comforted all the while: but I say he will be to thee so
faithful, as to comfort thee under those thodes, guests, blasts, or battering
storms that beat against thy wall. ( Isa. 32.2.)

Look then what present degrees or aggravating appearances are in thy
afflictions, to such a degree shall thou at times be supported. For as surely
as ever the spirit of God moved Samson at times in the Camp of Dan, when he lay
against the Philistines; so will the spirit of God move in, and upon thee to
comfort and to strengthen thee, whilst thou suffer for his name in the
World. As our afflictions abound for Christ; so shall our consolations abound
by him. (2 Cor. 1.5.6.) I have observed that God lays this, that he uses to
comfort his people in a time of sufferings as an aggravation of sin upon them
that did use to shuck and shrink under sufferings. I, says he, even I am he
that comfort you; who art thou that thou should be afraid of a man that
shall die? (Isa. 51.12.)

God, says the wise man, has set the one against the other, (the day of
adversity, and the day of prosperity) to the end that man should find nothing
after him (to complain of.) For as certainly as there is a time to mourn; so
certainly there is a time to rejoice: set, I say, for them that suffer for Gods
cause according to Gods will. ( Eccles. 7.14. chap. 3.4.)

There are several degrees of suffering for righteousness, there is the scourge
of the tongue. The ruin of an estate, the loss of liberty, a Gaol, a Gibbet, a
Stake, a Dagger. Now answerable to these are the comforts of the holy Ghost
prepared, like to like, part proportioned to part, only the consolations are
said to abound. (2 Cor. 1.)

But the lighter the sufferings are, the more difficult it is to judge of the
comforts of the spirit of God, for it is common for a man to be comfortable
under sufferings, when he suffers but little, and knows also that his enemy
can touch his flesh, his estate, or the like but little: I say, it is common for
such a man to be comfortable in his sufferings, from the consideration that his
enemies can touch him no further. And this may be the joy of the flesh, the
result of reason, and may be very much, if not altogether, without a mixture of
the joy of the holy Ghost therewith. The more deep, therefore, and the more
dreadful the sufferings are, the more clearly are seen the comforts of the
spirit, when a man has comfort where the flesh is dead, stirs not, and can
do nothing. When a man can be comfortable at the loss of all, when he is under
the sentence of death, or at the place of execution. When a man's cause, a man's
conscience, the promise, and the holy Ghost, have all one comfortable voice,
and do all, together with their Trumpets, make one sound in the Soul; then the
comforts are good, of the right kind, of God and his spirit.

I told you before that there are several degrees of sufferings; wherefore it
is not to be expected that he that suffers but little, should partake of the
comforts that are prepared for them that suffer much. He that has only the
scourge of the tongue, knows not what are the comforts that are prepared for
him that meets with the scourge of the whip. And how should a man know what
manner of comforts the holy Ghost does use to give at the Gaol and the Gibbet,
when himself for righteousness never was there.

But whether this or the other Christian knows it, God has his consolations for
his suffering people, and those too such as are proportioned to the nature or
degree of their sufferings. The which shall assuredly be made appear to them
that shall after a godly manner stick to his truth, and trust him with their
Souls. Joseph was cast into Prison, but God was with him. John was banished
into the Isle called Patmos, for the word of God: But what revelations of God
had he there! even such as he was a stranger to all his life before: this
therefore is to be well heeded. For it is a demonstration of the faithfulness
of God to those that, suffering according to his will, do commit the keeping of
their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Fourthly, He will also be faithful to us in this. He will not let the
sharpness, nor keenness nor venom of the arrows of the enemies of his people,
reach so far as to destroy both body and Soul at once: but he will preserve
them, when what can be done, is done to his eternal Kingdom and Glory. Thus
being preserved to his eternal Kingdom and glory, is a m^rvellous thing. But it
must be so, because God has called them to it. Wherefore after Peter had told
them that the Devil their adversary sought to devour them, and had bidden them
resist him, steadfast in the faith, he says, But the God of all grace, who has
called us unto his eternal Kingdom and glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have
suffered a while, make you perfect, strengthen, stablish, settle you. (1 Pet.
5.8, 9, 10.)

The truth is, persecution of the godly was, of God, never intended for their
destruction, but for their Glory, and to make them shine the more when they are
beyond this valley of the shadow of death. Indeed we oft-times, when we are
perscuted do feel the terrors of our adversaries in our minds. But it is not
because they can shoot them thither, nor because they of themselves have power
to reach so far, but we, like fools, by our ignorance and unbelief, do admit
them thither.

No suffering, nor inflicter of suffering, can reach the peace of the sufferer
without his own consent. This is provision of Gods making. Yea and if through
our folly their terror is admitted to touch us, yet since we are not our own,
but are bought with a price, we are not so at our own dispose, but that God
will have the butting and bounding of their rage, as also a power to uphold and
support our spirits, When I said my foot slipped, thy mercy, O Lord, held me
up. And the reason why by Gods ordinance the spirit is not to be touched in
suffering, is, because that is it that is to sustain the infirmity of the
sufferer: therefore God will have the spirit of his servants kept sound, and in
good health, ( Prove. 18.14. Isaiah 57.16.)

The room therefore, and the ground that the enemy has to play upon, is the
body and outward substance of the people of God, but the spirit is reserved,
for the reason hinted before; and also that it might be capable of maintaining
of communion with God. And how else could they obey that command that bids them
rejoice in tribulation, and glorify God in the fires, as it is ( Romans 12 and
Isaiah 24.15.)

But, I say, if they have not power to touch, much less to destroy body and
Soul for ever. The body is Gods, and he gives that to them to destroy; the
spirit is Gods, and he keeps that to himself: to show that he has both power to
do with us what he pleases, and that he will recover our body also out of their
hand; for if the spirit lives, so must the body, when men have done what they
can therewith. This is the argument of our Lord Jesus Christ himself. ( Luke
20.37.38.)

Therefore, the faithfulness of God, not only is, but also will be seen, by
them that dare trust him till the next World, to his glory, and their eternal
comfort.

We will now conclude with a short word by way of use, you see how I have
opened the Text, and what has naturally followed thereupon: from the whole of
which may be gathered,

First, that the people of God are a suffering people, a people subject to
trouble for their faith and profession. The reason is, besides what has been
said already, because the power of truth is in their hearts, and shows it self
in their lives; a thing which the Devil and the World can by no means abide. He
that is born after the flesh, persecuteth him that is born after the spirit.
(Gal. 4.) For they cannot agree in Religion, the godly are so devout, and the
other are so profane, that they cannot do. Not but that Gods People as they are
commanded, are willing to let them alone; but the other they cannot bear, that
they should serve God as they have said. ( Mat. 15.14.) And hence arises
persecution. The World also would have the Religion of the godly to be counted
false; a thing that the others can by no means endure, but will stand by, and
maintain (yet in all peaceable manner) their own ways before them, whatever it
costs.

The Christian, and the carnal professor, are like those two Harlots that you
read of in the Book of Kings: who strove for the living child, whose it should
be, whose contest could not be decided, until it came to the sword of the King.
(1 Kings 3.) O but when the sword was drawn, under a show as if the living
Child must now be cut in two, then the true mother was known from the false.
For her bowels yearned upon her Son. (ver. 26.27.) The World, what show soever
they have for Religion, and however they urge it, that the truth is with them,
have no yearning of bowels for it. Let it be neither mine nor thine, (said she)
but divide it: but the woman, whose the living child was, had not an heart to
say so. Religion may lie and die in a ditch, for all those that are given to
their sins: nor does their zeal appear; except when they are griping of the
godly for his faith toward God. Bowels, yearning of Bowels over Gods condemned
Religion, is only found in the Souls of those who own God has made it.

Secondly, Is it so? are Gods people a suffering people? Then this should
inform them that will be Religious, to prepare themselves for what is like to
attend them for their Religion. To prepare, I say, not with carnal weapons but
with the graces of the spirit of God, that will help them with meekness and
patience to endure. Sit down then, I say, and count up the cost, before for
Religion thou engagest too far; lest thou take upon thee to meddle with that,
which thou will not know what to do with, in the end. (Prove. 25.8. Luke 14.25,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30.)

Many there be that are faulty here, they have taken upon them to profess, not
considering what, what they have taken in hand may cost them. Wherefore when
troubles come indeed, then they start, and cry, This they like not, (because
they looked not for it); and if this be the way to heaven, let who will go on
in it for them. Thus they take offense, and leave Christ's cause and people to
shift for themselves in the World. ( Mat. 13.20, 21.)

Thirdly, But let Gods people think never the worse of Religion, because of the
course entertainment it meets with in the World. It Is better to choose God and
affliction, than the World, and sin, and carnal peace. It Is necessary that we
should suffer, because that we have sinned: And if God will have us suffer a
little white here for his word, instead of suffering for our sins in Hell,
let us be content, and count it a mercy with thankfulness.

The wicked are reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth
to the day of wrath. (Job 21.30.)

How kindly therefore does God deal with us, when he chooses to afflict us but
for a little, that with everlasting kindness he may have mercy upon us. ( Isa.
54.7, 8.) And it is better, if the will of God be so, that we suffer for
well-doing, than for evil-doing. (1 Pet. 3.^7.)

Fourthly, Look not therefore upon the sufferings of Gods people for their
Religion, to be tokens of Gods great anger. It Is, to be sure, as our heavenly
Father orders it, rather a token of his love; for suffering for the Gospel, and
for the sincere profession of it, is indeed a dignity put upon us: a dignity
that all men are not counted worthy of. Count it therefore a favor that God
has bestowed upon thee his truth, and graces to enable thee to profess it,
though thou be made to suffer for it. ( Acts 5.41.) Thou might have been a
sufferer for thy sins in Hell: but thou art not: but contrariwise art, perhaps,
suffering for conscience to God; this is a dignity: for that thou do thus by
virtue of an heavenly gift, on the behalf of Christ, for the Gospel sake, and
according to the will of God. This is a dignity that a persecutor shall not be
counted worthy of, until he first convert to Christ, ( Philip. 1.29.)

Fifthly, take thy affliction with meekness and patience, though thou endurest
grief wrongfully. For this is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief, suffering wrongfully. (1 Pet. 2.) Lay thy hand then upon thy
mouth, and speak not a word of ill against him that does thee wrong, leave thy
cause and thy enemy to God; yea, rather pray that his sin may not be laid to
his charge; wherefore, as I said before, now show thy self a good man, by
loving, pitying, praying for, and by doing good, as thou art commanded, to them
that dispitefully use thee. (Mat. 5.44.)

I know thy flesh will be apt to huff, and to be angry, and to wish, would thou
might revenge thy self. But this is base, carnal, sensual, devilish: cast
therefore such thoughts from thee, as thoughts that are not fit for a
Christians breast: and betake thee to those weapons that are not carnal. For
the Artillery of a Christian, is the word, faith, and prayer: and in our
patience we must possess our Souls. (2 Cor. 10.5. Luke 21.16, 17, 18, 19.)

Sixthly, Be much in the consideration of the All-sufficience of thy Father,
whose cause thou have espoused, whose word thou have chosen for thy heritage,
and whose paths thou delightest to walk in. I say, be much in considering how
all the World is sustained by him, and that all life and breath is in his hand
to continue, or diminish as he pleases. Think with thy self also how able he is
to rescue thee from all affliction, or to uphold thee in it with a quiet mind.
Go to him continually as to a fountain of life that is open, for the supply of
the needy. Remember also, if he comes not at thy call, and comfort thee not
so soon as thou desire: it is not of want of love or compassion to thy Soul,
but to try thy graces, and to show to the fallen Angels that thou will serve
God for naught, rather than give out. Also, if it seems to thee, as if God
took no care of thee to help thee, but that he has rather turned thee over to
the ungodly, count this also as a sign that he delights to see thee hold fast
his name, though thou art laid under the greatest of disadvantages. If the
scourge stay suddenly (that is more than it has done to thee) he will laugh at
the trial of the innocent. (Job 9.23.)

It is a great delight to our God to see his people hold fast their integrity,
and not to deny his Name when under such cloudy dispensations, and discouraging
circumstances. And considerations that thy thus doing is pleasing in his sight
thorough Christ, will be a support unto thee. God sees thee, though thou can
not now see him, and he observes now thy way, though darkness is round about
him: and when he has tried thee, thou shall come forth like Gold.

Seventhly, Take heed of setting of thy self a bound and period to thy
sufferings (unless that period be the grave.) Say not to thy afflictors,
Hitherto, and no further, and here shall your proud waves be stayed. I say take
heed of doing thus, for fear God should let them go beyond thee. For a man is
not prepared to suffer, further than he thinks the enemy may be permitted to
go. Hence Christ sets their bounds at the loss of life, and no nearer. So then
so far as they go beyond thee: so far they will find thee unprovided, and so
not fortified for a reception of their onset with that Christian Gallantry
which becomes thee. Observe Paul, he died daily, he was always delivered unto
death, he despaired of life; and this is the way to be prepared for any
calamity. When a man thinks he has only to prepare for an assault by footmen,
how shall he contend with horses? or if he looks no further than to horses,
what will he do at the swellings of Jordan? (Jer. 12.5, 6.)

Wherefore set thine enemies no bounds: say not, they shall not pursue me to
the death, have the sentence of death in thy self; For though they may but
tick, and toy with thee at first, their Sword may reach thy heart blood at
last. The Cat at play with the Mouse, is (sometimes) a fit emblem of the way of
the wicked with the children of God. Wherefore, as I said, be always dying, die
daily: he that is not only ready to be bound, but to die, is fit to encounter
any amazement.

Eighthly, If thine enemies would, or do put thee under a cloud, if they wrap
thee up in a Bears-skin, and then set the Dogs upon thee, marvel not at the
matter, this was Joseph's, David's, Christ's, Stephen's portion, only be thou
innocent; say nothing, do nothing that should render thee faulty: yea, say and
do always that that should reader thee a good neighbor, a good Christian, and
a faithful Subject. This is the way to help thee to make with boldness thy
appeals to God: This is the way to imbolden thy face against the faces of thine
enemies: this is the way to keep thy conscience quiet and peaceable within
thee, and this is the way to provoke God to appear for thy rescue, or to
revenge thy blood when thou art gone.

And do this, because it is thy duty, we must fear God, and honor the King. And
because this is the way to make the work of thy enemies, hard: Few men have
that boldness as to say, this I do against you, because you profess Christ.
When they persecuted the Lord himself, they said to him, for a good work we
stone thee not. (John 10.32.33.) Religion that is pure is a hot thing, and it
usually burns the fingers of those that fight against it: wherefore it is not
common for men to oppose Religion under its own naked complexion: wherefore the
Jews sought to fasten other matters up on Christ, to kill him for them; though
the great spite they had against him, was for his Doctrine and miracles: 'Twas
for envy to that, that they set themselves against him, and that made them
invent to charge him with Rebellion and Treason. ( Mat. 27.18. Luke 2^.2.)

Ninthly, Wherefore, it becomes all godly men to study to be quiet, to mind
their own business, and as much as in them lies, to be at peace with all men.
To owe no man any thing but love. Pray therefore for all that are in authority,
pray for the peace of the Country in which thou dwell. Keep company with
holy, and quiet, and peaceable men. Seek by all good ways the promotion of
godliness, put up injuries, be good to the poor, do good against evil, be
patient toward all men; for these things are good and profitable to men. (Tit.
3.8.)

Be not enclining to injure men behind their backs, speak evil of no man,
reproach not the Governor, nor his actions: as he is set over thee, all his
ways are Gods, either for thy help or the trial of thy graces. Wherefore he
needs thy prayers, not thy revilings; thy peaceable deportment, and not a
troublesome life.

I know that none of these things can save thee from being devoured by the
mouth of the Sons of Belial. (1 King. 21.12, 13.) Only, what I say, is duty, is
profitable, is commendable, is necessary: and that which will, when the Devil
has done his worst, render thee lovely to thy Friends, terrible to thine
enemies, serviceable in thy place as a Christian, and will crown the
remembrance of thy name to them that survive thee with a blessing. The memory
of the just shall be blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot. (Prove.
10.7.)

Tenthly, I will conclude then, with a word to those professors, if there be
any such, that are of an unquiet, and troublesome spirit. Friends, I may say to
you, as our Lord said once to his Disciples, ye know not of what spirit ye are.
To wish the destruction of your enemies does not become you. If ye be born to,
and are called that you may inherit a blessing, pray be free of your blessing,
bless and curse not. If you believe that the God whom you serve, is Supreme
Governor, and is also wise enough to manage affairs in the World for his
Church: pray keep fingers off, and refrain from doing evil. If the counsel of
Gamaliel was good when given to the enemies of Gods people, why not fit to be
given to Christians themselves? Therefore refrain from these men, and let them
alone: if the work that these men do, is that which God will promote and set up
for ever, then you cannot disannul it; if not, God has appointed the time of
its fall.

A Christian! and of a troblesome spirit, for shame forbear, show out-of a good
conversation thy works with meekness of wisdom, and here let me present thee
with three or four things.

First, consider, that though Cain was a very murderer; yet God forbad any man's
meddling with him under a penalty of revenging his so doing upon his own head,
seven said. And, the Lord said unto him, therefore whosoever slays Cain,
vengeance shall be taken on him seven fold. (Genesis 4.15.) But why not meddle
with Cain, since he was a murderer? The reason is, because he persecuted his
Brother for righteousness sake, and so espoused a quarrel against God: for he
that persecutes another for righteousness sake, sets himself against God,
fights against God, and seeks to overthrow him. Now such an one, the Chrian
must let alone and stand off from, that God may have his full blow at him in
his time. Wherefore he says to his Saints, and to all that are forward to
revenge themselves; Give place, stand back, let me come, leave such an one to
be handled by me. Dearly-beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place
unto wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord.
(Romans 12.19.) Wherefore the Lord set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him;
should slay him. You must not, indeed you must not avenge your selves of your
enemies. Yea, though it was lawful once so to do, it is not lawful now. Ye have
heard that it has been said to them of old time, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy: but I say, said our Lord, love them, bless
them, do good to them, and pray for them that hate you. (Mat. 5.43.44.)

Secondly, Revenge is of the flesh; I mean this our revenge of our selves; and
it proceeds from anger, wrath, impatience under the cross, unwillingness to
suffer, from too much love to carnal ease, to estates, to enjoyments, to
relations, and the like. It also flows from a fearful cowardly spirit, there is
nothing of greatness in it, except it be greatness of untowardness. I know
there may, for all this, be pretenses to justice, to righteousness; to the
liberty of the Gospel, the suppressing of wickedness, and the promoting of
holiness; but these can be but pretenses, or at best, but the fruits of a
preposterous zeal. For since, as has been often said in this Treatise, the Lord
has forbidden us to do so, it cannot be imagined that he should yet animate
any to such a thing by the holy Ghost, and the effects of the graces thereof.
Let them then, if any such be, that are thus minded, be counted the narrow
spirited, carnal, fleshly, angry, waspish spirited professors. The professors
that know more of the Jewish, than of the Christian Religion, and that love
rather to countenance the motions, passions, and gross motions of an angry
mind, than with meekness to comply with the will of a heavenly Father. Thou art
bid to be like unto him, and also thou art showed wherein. ( Mat. 5.45, 46, 47,
48.)

There is a man hates God, blasphemes his Name, despises his Being: Yea, says,
There is no God: And yet the God that he carries it thus toward, does give
him his breakfast, dinner, and supper: clothes him well, and when night comes,
has him to bed, gives him good rest, blesses his Field, his Corn, his Cattle,
his Children: and raises him to high-estate. Yea, and this our God does, not
only once or twice, but until these transgressors become old, his patience is
thus extended, years after years, that we might learn of him to do well.

Thirdly, a professor! and unquiet, and troublesome: discontented, and seeking
to be revenged of thy persecutors: where is, or what kind of graces have thou
got. I dare say, they, even these in which thou thus actest, are none of the
graces of the spirit. The fruits of the spirit, are love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such
there is no Law. But wrath, strife, seditions, traitors, and inventors of evil
things, are reckoned with the worst of sins, and sinners, and are plainly
called the works of the flesh. ( Romans 1.29, 30, 31. 2 Timothy 3.3, 4. Galat. 5.19,
20, 21.)

But I say, where is thy love to thine enemy? where is thy Joy, under the
Cross? where is thy peace? when thine anger has put thee upon being unquiet,
where is thy long-suffering? for, as thou actest not ought, but thy waspishness
can be seen? where also is thy sweet, meek and gentle spirit? and is goodness
seen in thy seeking the life, or the damage of thy enemy? Away, away, thy
graces if thou have any, are by these thy passions, so jostled up into corners,
and so pent for want of room and liberty to show themselves, that by the word
of God thou can not be known to be of the right kind, what a noise soever
thou make.

A Christian, when he sees trouble coming upon him, should not fly in the face
of the instrument that brings it, but in the face of the cause of its coming.
Now the cause is thy self, thy base self, thy sinful self, and thy unworthy
carriages toward God under all the mercy, patience and long-suffering that God
has bestowed upon thee, and exercised toward thee. Here thou may quarrel,
and be revenged and spare not, so thou take vengeance in a right way, and then
thou will do so, when thou take it by godly sorrow. (2 Cor. 7.10, 11.)

A Christian then should bewail his own doings, his own unworthy doings, by
which he has provoked God to bring a cloud upon him, and to cover him with it
in anger. A Christian should say, this is my wickedness, when a persecutor
touches him; yea, he should say it, and then shut up his mouth, and bear the
indignation of the Lord, because he has sinned against him. Thy way, and thy
doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, because it
is bitter, because it reaches unto thy heart. (Jer. 4.18.)

Fourthly, What conviction of thy goodness can the actions that flow from such
a spirit, give unto observers? none at all. Yea a spirit of unquietness under
sufferings, and that seeks to be revenged of those that do, for thy faith and
the profession thereof, persecute thee, is so far off of giving conviction to
beholders, that thou art right, that it plainly tells them that thou art wrong.
Even Julian the Apostate, when he had cast away whatever he could of Christ,
had this remaining with him, that a Christian ought to take with patience what
affliction fell upon him for his masters sake: and would hit them in the teeth
with an unbecoming behavior, that complained, or that sought redress of them
that had abused them for their faith and godly profession. What will men say,
if you shrink and whinch, and take your sufferings unquietly: but that if you
your selves were uppermost, you would persecute also? much more have they
ground to say so, when you will fight lying on your backs. Be quiet then, and
if thine enemy strike thee on one cheek, turn to him the other: and if he also
revile and curse thee, down upon thy knees and pray for him. This is the way to
convince thy observers that thou art a godly man. Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do, was one of those things that convinced the Centurion
that Jesus was a righteous man. For he stood by the Cross to watch, and see how
Jesus carried it in these his sufferings, as well as to see execution done. (
Mat. 27.54. Luke 23.34 -- 47.)

Fifthly, A professor, unquiet, and turbulent under sufferings, and seeking his
own revenge, cannot be a victor over what he should, nor a keeper of Gods
commandments.

1. How can he be a victor over himself, that is led up and down by the nose,
by his own passions? there is no man a Christian victor, but he that conquers
himself, but he that beats down, and keeps under his body, his lusts, his
passions in the first place. Is he that is led away with diverse lusts, a
victor? is he that is a servant to corruption, a victor? And if he that is
captivated by his anger, wrath, passion, discontent, prejudice, etc. be not led
away by them, I am under a mistake. So then to quarrel with Superiors, or with
any that are troublesome to thee for thy faith, and thy profession: bespeaks
thee overmastered, and a Captive, rather than a Master, and a Conqueror.

2. The same may be said upon the second head. He keeps not the Commandments
of God. For those teach him other things, as I have also showed. The great
Gospel-Commands terminate in self-denial; but if self revenge is self denial, I
am besides the Book. Christ in the Book of the Revelations, sets him that keeps
the commandments of God, a great way off from him that takes and smites with
the Sword. He that kills with the Sword, must be killed with the Sword: Here
is the patience, and faith of the Saints; that is, in that they forbear to do
thus and quietly suffer under those that thus, take it, and affl^ct the godly
with it. Again, Here is the patience of the Saints, here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. (Revel. 13.10. chap. 14.12.) A
patient continuing in well-doing: and if suffering for righteousness, be
well-doing, then a patient continuing in that, as in other things, is the way
to keep Gods commandments. ( Romans 2.7.)

So that I say, he keeps not Gods commandments, that is angry with his
enemies, and that seeks to be revenged of him, that does him ill. (You know the
subject I am upon.) The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.
(James 1.20.) Wherefore professors beware, and take heed to your spirits, and
see that you let not out your selves under your sufferings, in such
extravagancies of spirit against your enemies, as is no way seemly nor
convenient.

Sixthly, Men that are unquiet, and discontented, and that seek revenge upon
them that persecute them for their profession, do by so doing, also put
themselves upon the brink of those ruins that others are further from. These
men are like the fly that cannot let the candle alone, until she has burned
her self in the flame. Magistrates and men in Power have fortified themselves
from being attacqued with turbulent and unruly Spirits, by many and wholesome
Laws. And indeed should they not do so, one or other perhaps would be quickly
tempted to seek to disturb them in the due exercise of their authority. Now the
angry man, he is the fly that must be tripping, and running himself upon the
point of these Laws. His angry spirit puts him upon quarrelling with his
Superiors, and his quarrelling brings him, by words spoke in heat, within the
reach of the net, and that with the help of a few more brings his neck to the
halter. Nor is this, what ever men think, but by the just judgment of God.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; and they that
resest, shall receive to themselves damnation. (Romans 13.2. Esth. 2.21, 22, 23.)

Wherefore let the angry man take heed, let the discontented man take heed. He
that has a profession, and has not grace to know in this matter, to manage it,
is like to bring, his profession to shame. Wherefore, I say, let such take
heed. And the graces aforementioned, and the due exercise of them are they, and
that, which can keep us out of all such dangers.

Seventhly, And what comfort can such a man have, who has by his discontent and
unruly carriages brought himself, in this manner, to his end. He has brought
himself to shame, his profession to shame, his friends to shame; and his name
to contempt and scorn. Bad men rejoice at his fall, good men cannot own him,
weak men stumble at him.

Besides, his cause will not bear him out, his heart will be clogged with
guilt, innocence and boldness will take wings and fly from him. Though he
talks of Religion upon the stage or ladder, that will blush to hear its name
mentioned by them that suffer for evil-doing. Wherefore, my brethren, my
Friends, my enemies, and all men, what Religion, Profession, or Opinion so ever
you hold; Fear God, honor the King, and do that duty to both, which is
required of you by the Word and Law of Christ: and then, to say no more, you
shall not suffer by the Power for evil doing.

FINIS.

