FOOLISH TALKING AND JESTING Described and Condemned.

In A DISCOURSE ON Ephesians. 5. 4. Neither Foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are
not convenient.

By DANIEL BURGESS.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Bell and Jonas Luntley, at the Pestle and Mortar,
over against the Horse-shoe-Tavern in Chancery Lane, 1694.

TO ROBERT GROVE Esquire; Of Fernes in Wilsthire; AND TO Madam TRYPHENA His
Consort.
My Honored Friends,
I Do not set here your Names, designing to Celebrate your rare Christian
Virtues. These have long shone brightly in your Country; and their Fame has
rung very loudly in this City. You have good report of all Men, and of the
Truth it self. So that it would be no News if it should be here told what your
Praise is in the Churches.

Wherefore, I Meditate what is more Expedient; what does better Become me, and
will less Displease you. Intending no more, than to make you a small Present of
these Pages, as an Acknowledgment of your Favors.

Their Subject is, unto Most, a Hard-Saying; with too Many, an Obsolete one;
and whereof, not a few will say, Who can bear it? Nor should I have thought it
an Argument grateful to your own Palats, but that I do very well know under
what Shadow you Sit, and whose Fruit it is that is sweet to your Taste Whereby
I am certified, that you will as much more Value this Discourse, as you less
Need it, than others do for the Regulation of your own Speech.

I shall Congratulate my Self the good Nature of my Readers, if it be he who
really Needs it not, that Casts the first Stone at it. But, I will reverence
the Doctrine that I Preach; and Talk no more to you in this Porch.

With a special, Flame my Prayer ascends, for your Selves, and your blessed
Branches. The good Lord continue still, to teach you the Way that you are to
Choose; and to make your Souls dwell at Ease in Grace, till they shall triumph
in Glory! May your Seed after you inherit the Earth; and be such Blessings unto
their Country as your Holy Ancestors have been, and as you your selves are this
Day! Thus, pray, very many; but none more sincerely, than

Your true Honourer, Daniel Burgess.
Bridges-Street, near Covent Garden, Jan. 22. 1693-94.
FOOLISH Talking and Jesting Described and Condemned.
Ephesians. 5. 4. Neither Foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are not convenient.
(...). Nec Sermones Stultitiae, Syriac. Stultiloquia, Aethiopic. and Arabic.

THE Foot of the foregoing Chapter, is the Head of this. The same Precepts
which there conclude, do here begin. Being of extraordinary moment, they are
resumed and farther pressed. Few Words may suffice for Mint and Anise; but the
weightier Things of Religion, as they are more opposed, must be more urged.

Weighty indeed are these Precepts; great be the Duties required, and great the
Sins forbidden.

The Duties, are Imitation of God in our Love unto Offending Men. And,
Conformity to our Redeemer in the Kindness of our Behavior toward them. The
Heavenly Father multiplies to pardon; and so must we, if we will be his
Children. It is said of him, Who is a God like unto thee that pardons
Iniquity? And it should be said of us, What People are like unto you that
forgive one another, as God forgiveth you? Our blessed Redeemer laid down his
Life for us; and looks that, at his Call, we give our Lives for each other, I
John 3. 16. His Love passes all Understanding; and ours is not right, till it
set the World marvelling at it. This is the Gospel, wherever be the
Christians.

The Sins forbidden, are the mighty ones following; Fornication and all
Uncleanness; the Hecticks than consume, and carry apace from the deep Ditch
into the bottomless Pit. Covetousness, the Wen and Wolf in the Heart, more
painful and mortal than any in the Flesh. Filthiness, or filthy Speaking; the
Ileos, the Miserere mei, the Disease which brings up the worst of Excrements
through the Mouth; which vomits. the Ordure of Ribaldry. Foolish Talking; the
Rupture of Speech from Reason: Language, like to that of Balaam's Ass, without
Reason; and much worse, because against it also, Lastly, Foolish Jesting; the
falling Sickness of Wit; it is Phrenzy, and Sportiveness in Games of pernicious
Folly. These, all, are of the same base Blood; all, with the same rare
Emphasis, and self-same Arguments prohibited.

These we are commanded, Not once to name; that is, to abhor unto extremity;
utterly to detest. So the Royal Psalmist, and so our Apostle elsewhere, is
known to have used this pungent Phrase of Not naming, Psalm. 16. 4. 1 Cor. 5. 1.
Of these we are told, They become not Saints; that is, they are not only in
themselves, unrighteous Things; but are, in all Eyes, as unseemly ones for
Saints, as Feeding on Carrion and Lodging in Kennels would be for Kings
Children. It is added, They are Inconvenient; that is, Intolerable; though the
Men of Athens saw nothing very culpable in some of them, and fancied there was
a Spirit very commendable in others. In short, They are pestilent Vices, and
inconsistent with Christian Graces. Indeed Pagan Moralists made some of them to
be egregious Virtues, and the rest to be but very small Faults. But the Gospel
of Christ makes them such Vices, as not only strip us of every Ornament, but of
our very Raiment. And leave us nothing but Shame and Nakedness of our
unsanctified Natures.

Hugely do Men differ from Swine in their Natures and Dignities; but no less do
Saints differ from unsanctified Men in their Qualities and Relations. A Saint
has passed a second Birth. After Redemption by infinite Price, he is
regenerated by infinite Power: Made Partaker of the Divine Nature, and adopted
into the Favor and Family of Heaven. In a word; He is one dearly cleansed, and
richly adorned. More than Heaven and Earth is worth, has been laid out to
Justify and Sanctify him. Wherefore, if he be sick to see, what sensual
Creatures are sick of Lust to enjoy; if he be ashamed of their Glory; if their
Meat be his Poison; it is no more matter of wonder, than that Doves will die
rather than fetch Meat from the Dung and Filth, in which unclean Birds delight.

It is the Filth of the two last named Vices, Foolish Talking and Jesting, that
I essay to discover. The Snakes which lay in the Dunghils of the other, are
more in sight; and are of less specious Colors. Insomuch, that until they do
get them Cloven-feet, Men attain not unto obscene Tongues. Much less do they
further violate the Seventh Commandment. But, sadly it must be said; the Sins
which I set me to detect and shame, are gotten into universal Use, and almost
Catholic Credit also. Their Dunghill is covered with the Snow, which I shall
labor to remove. Their Serpents pass for Fish, even in Religious Men's Markets.

To give the worst its due; Our Age it self does not, by a general Vote,
abrogate all the Ten Commandments. It runs not down every Divine Testimony,
with a Nemine Contradicente. There are Laws made void by many loose Professors,
which are valiantly (that is, practically) propugnated by their Betters. But
the Law against Foolish Talking and Jesting, seems utterly repealed among us.
No Man stands by it; All Men forsake it. It is one, Every where spoken against.
One that suffers in the House of its Friends; yea, by the Tongue of Men and
Angels. I mean, by many consecrated Tongues of the Angels of the Churches.
Tongues, commissioned and commanded to preach this Doctrine, which well
deserves to be every Christian's Observation:

Foolish Talking and Jesting must be detested as things ungodly, unseemly, and
intolerable in Saints. As truly so, as Fornication arid Uncleanness, as
Covetousness and Filthiness; of whose Company and Kindred they are proclaimed
to be.

It shall be shown, 1. What Foolish Talking is? 2. What Foolish Jesting is? 3.
What their detestable Turpitude and Filth is? and specially in Saints. 4. What
the Use of this Doctrine is?


O Lord God and Father of Jesus Christ, I pray thee send me good, speed this
Day! Giving me a Mouth and Wisdom which all my Adversaries shall not be able to
gainsay, or resist! In Faith and Hope, I proceed.

. 1. What is Foolish Talk?
The Nature of it, is not far to seek. All the World will grant, Folly is Sin;
and Sin is Inconformity to the Precept and Example of our Sovereign Prince and
Pattern. Unto us, Christ Jesus is both; and the Speech which he has required
and exemplified, is such as honors God and profits Men. Thereby answering
the unquestionable Ends of so rare a Gift unto our Mature. Thereby serving the
Uses for which Speech was framed, and to which it is fitted. So that Foolish
Talk is all, and only that, which is not designed and adapted unto the foresaid
Ends and Uses. But thwarts the same; contradicts our Savior's Example, and
transgresses his Law. Of such Talk, Nabal is the Name, in Christ's School:
That Folly is with it, his Disciples will attest. Unthinking Creatures do fancy
it to be harmless; but none of these can hold it guiltless. This Transgression
of Talkative Men says within their Hearts, that there is not a just Fear of
God before their Eyes.

The Kinds of this Foolish Talk, are numerous and various: Even as the Follies
of Thought and Action, whereto they run parallel. A Sermon is too small a Map
to hold their wide World. But these Particulars will set in view the most
principal.

1. Profane Talk is foolish. It is Profane, whatever mentions Things sacred,
without Veneration expressed. Whatever makes not its Honors, and its highest
ones, unto their Majesty. Who, but a Fool, will either not bow to the King; or,
no lower than unto one of his Pages? It is a senseless Babbler, that talks of
holy Persons, Things or Actions, without hallowing their Names: Without paying
them their due Observance, by some or other Emphasis. If I speak of them as a
Gallio, I do make my self an Esau!

It is a Profaneness more gross, when Scurrility is added to Sacrilege. When
Veneration is sacrilegiously withheld, and Injury and Indignity is offered.
Indignity, of wretched Tendence to subvert the Faith of Hearers; and to impair
their Reverence. When uncircumcised Lips drop no Praises, but pour out Slights,
upon Religion or its Votaries. He is a more grown Esau, that dares thus to do.
A Gallio is a younger Brother to such a Scorner. And if such Talkers must pass
for wise Men, Senacherib must be canonized for a Saint; and Antiochus be no
more called Mad. Plato, like as Moses, adjudged to Death such Fools. And the
Turks stick not to kill the Man, that presumes to speak contumeliously of
Mahomet or the Alcoran. The words of Bishop Wilkins are very Sunbeams; A
Devout Heathen is better than a Profane Christian.

Indeed there is a Pitch of Profaneness to which not one Esau of many has used
to grow. One which I was minded therefore in silence to pass over. But second
thoughts allow it not; the numbers of those profane Anakims and Giants, being
as we see in this day of ours.

Profane to the uttermost is that Talk, which throws Stones as well as Dirt.
Venteth Wrath as well as Contempt, upon that which is Holy. Breathes forth
Threatenings against Divine Service, with Scoffs at Divine Attributes, and
Statutes. Words turned indeed into Swords; and sent out for the Destruction,
not for the single Disgrace, of God's Servants and Service. He who thus Talks,
is the Goliath of the Profane Host; the Prince of their Nation; of Devils in
Flesh, the Beelzebub. A more Profane Riot, no Tongue can run. Here it must
stand, having no further to go. Unless it be in Glorying in this Shame; in
Boasting, that the Conspiracy of Stupidity and Malice have carried it so far.
And, left nothing save Hell more profoundly Devilish, or bloodily fighting
against Heaven! Thou love all devouring words, O thou Profane Tongue! God
shall likewise destroy thee for ever; he shall take thee away, and pluck thee
out of thy Dwelling place, and root thee out of the Land of the Living.

2. Hypocritical Talk is Foolish. A Hypocrite, is a Liar, in a Cloud, by his
Ambition raised. It is Hypocritical Talk, that designedly misreports the
Speaker's Heart. That speaks better than he thinks, of his State, his
Dispositions, his Aims, his Actions, or any thing that is his. If this be not
Folly, then Darkness excels Light; the Sun is an annoyance to the World; and
Owls and Thieves are Wise, for hating the Light of it. For,

Truth is Light, Falsehood is Darkness. The Fountain of Truth has taken the
Name of Light; and the Father of Lies is called the Prince of Darkness. And is
he a wise Speaker, who is likest to the Devil, and most unlike to God, in his
Words? Likest to the Devil, that has no Truth in him; and Unlikest to God that
cannot lie, and whose Word is the Word of Truth. Were it a matter of choice;
who would not rather be transformed into the ugliest Serpent in Africa than
into such a Monster?

Drunkenness corrupts not Reason, more than Falseness corrupts Speech; both
destroy God's Work, as to its proper Use. And where is the Wisdom of the one or
other Confusion? Tiplers, make Beasts of Men; Dissemblers, do of Men make
Devils.

In speaking unto our Maker, Feigned Words are the worst Indignities and
Affronts we can offer. To belly our selves in Prayer, is to blaspheme him to his
Face. With open Mouth to tell him, our Hearts be not naked and open to him. Now
Men that are themselves, use to beware of their Words unto earthly Kings.

As for Humane Converse, hypocritical Talk is its Bane and Death. Much it
destroys, all it corrupts. Who will converse with one whom he cannot
credit? or who will believe a Liar, even when he speaks Truth? The Mute and
Dumb are more desirable Company, than Men false and deceitful. Which, as other
Snakes, under their fairest Skins, all People do hate; even those whom they
reach not to hurt. And justly; for it is the Nature of both to mischieve us, if
it be not in their Power. What is Life, without Converse? and what is Converse
without Sincerity? He that considers both, shall think it to be wisely and
kindly that God banisheth dissembling Lips. And as cruelly and foolishly, that
any Man recals and uses them.

Where dwells the Man that desires not in his heart, to have all the Town take
his Word? Hypocrites, are undone, when they are Unbelieved; and yet no Man that
knows them can Believe them. Wise Men, are they not? to Desire perfect
Impossibilities; i. e. the Eternal concealment of Lies, or inward belief of
revealed ones. It is not the way of the Wise, to sail East, when they would
land in the West. To directly-oppose their own Desires; as they notoriously do,
whose Tongues run in Dissimulation, while their Hearts lust after the repute of
Veracity.

In short; Men of the falsest Tongues would have nothing but very Truth put
into their own ears. But, does Wisdom either reject ought but Evil, or embrace
the practice of ought but Good? Hypocritical Talk is Innocent, or Harmful; if
Innocent, why Angry with other Men for it? if Injurious, what makes the use of
it Yours? Every Man that uses it, is Self-condemned!

No doubt but Saul was so, when he pressed David to fight the Lord's Battles;
to the end that he might be slain by one or other of his Enemies. Jacob's Sons
were so, when they expressed Zeal for Religion; vaunted, that none but Men of
their Faith, should be taken into their Family; but designed only to make way
for the Swords, wherewith they cut the knot of the Controversy about their
Sister's Marriage. Jezabel was so, when she called for a Fast, for an
After-meal of Naboth's Estate and Life. Judas was so; and so was his Successor,
Julian, when he Preached (what the Historian calls) his Play of Christianity.
(...) Socrat. l. 3.
Plainly; so are we all, as often as our Speech is with Dissimulation. As often as
our Tongues deliver false Copies of our Minds. Yea, though they truly enough do
represent the Things we speak of. As often as we speak for God deceitfully; and
contend for our holy Faith, unfaithfully. Designing to win but the Praise of
Men, or the Peace of our own Minds; which are madly got, when stolen by Lies.
Briefly,

A Lie is the utmost Corruption of Speech; Deviation from its principal
Service; Violation of the Original and principal Law laid upon it. The Tongue's
part being not so much to deliver what things really are, whereof it is no
Judge; as to declare what the Speaker verily thinks of them in his Mind, whereof
it is a Witness. And the most perfect Truth is a Lie in a Hypocrite's Mouth;
when, neither Believing it himself, nor concerned to have others Believe it, he
sets it forth with a false Profession of both. Which Falsity, his own Heart
tells him, is of so great a Malignity: So great, that it turns Words of Honey
into Gall, of Wine into Poison, of Holiness into Profaneness. An aweful
Thought, and worthy thy to be considered! Naturalists reckon Elephants and
Camels among Wild Beasts, though they do the Service of Tame ones; because
their Nature is Wild. Casuists determine Hypocrites to be Liars, though they
fill their Mouths with choicest Truths; because there is no Truth in their
Inward-Parts. Remove from me the way of Lying, and grant me thy Law graciously,
is Wise Men's Common Prayer.

3. Rash Talk is Foolish. That is Rash, wherein, the Tongue out-runs the Wit.
Or, if Wit does indeed Sail, yet Judgment does not Steer. Though, of our whole
Man, except but only the Heart, it is the Tongue that most of all wants
Government. So vast are the Benefits or Mischiefs that it is apt to Produce.
With so much greater Ease and Speed, than our Hands and Feet, it does hasten to
produce them; and so much more Indefatigably. So very difficultly is it brought
to Good-Behaviour; and so palpable a mistake is our Proverb, that Good words
cost nothing. Lions being as soon made to draw Chariots quietly, as our Tongues
to speak inoffensively. So very difficultly also are they restrained from Evil;
no Bears or Tigers more needing to be kept within Rails, and in Chains.
Perpetually is the Tongue presented with Temptations, which suit its inward
Propensions; All Persons are Tempters. If High, to Flatter them; if Low, to
Insult over them; if Kind, to Idolize them; if Cross, to Rage against them. And
all Things are Temptations; Prosperity, to Boast; Adversity, to Murmur;
Grateful things, to be Lavish in their Praises; Grievous ones, to be as
Prodigal of harsh Censures. And, what! are they the Wise in Heart, that let
such a Creature go without a Guard? The Creature, which, if any of the Subjects
of God's Kingdom, needs his Supreme, and our Subordinate Government.

Unnatural it is; the Natural Use is changed, when the Tongue leaps before the
Mind looks. Brute Creatures will not so rebel against their Natures; they open
their Eyes e're they stir their Feet or Wings. Wiser than we are, whose Tongues
gallop with the Eyelids of our Minds shut. Unless Wisdom it be, and Reason, to
put off Nature.

If it be any, it is one full of Impiety; and contrary to the Author and Lord of
Nature. He that Speaks as he Spits, what comes next, and Talks without the use
of his Understanding, he Talks without the Fear of his God: And as truly
against Law, as Nature. Nor is any Thank owing unto his Care, if all the
Commands of the first Table be not broken by his haste. The Rash Talker puts it
to the adventure; and interpretatively says, He will lose his God rather than
his Word. How mad a Choice? But,

Neither is Unadvised Talk more against Piety, than against Justice and
Charity. An ever-flowing Fountain of Iniquity it is. For seldom is it other
than Injurious; as either False, robbing Auditors of Truth; or Contumelious,
robbing them of the Honor due to them; or downright Felonious, robbing them of
Money; or Slanderous, robbing them of their good Name; or someway Tedious,
robbing them of their Patience; at the least, Vain, and robbing them of
invaluable Time. A wretched Folly, thus to Plunder and Devour Men rashly,
without any End; or, if any, the worst that can be proposed! It would be
farther considered also, That,

The Rash Talker is not any manner of Felon more than de se. His Sin does, most
mercilesly of all, rob himself. While it Scratches other Men, it Stabs him.
Much from them it Steals, but himself outright it Kills. His Rash Licentious
Talk, murders all Wise Men's respect unto his Name. Destroys their Credit to his
very Deliberate Words. Mortally wounds the Peace of his Conscience. Cuts the
very Throat of all his just Comfort. Perfectly slays his Friendship with Men of
Worth and Repute. Makes his Tongue worse than none; in the Apostle's Phrase,
Dead while it Lives. Gives Death to his Understanding, the Guide of Life; which
no longer lives in us than it leads us. finally, It is a Mortal Self-Pollution
of his blind Will and Affections; which take an infamous Rot, when Judgment
cease to restrain and regulate them: as, in Talk that is Rash, it perpetually
does. Surely, this is no Wisdom that can be Justified of her Children. If it be
any, it is most Earthly; yea, Sensual and Devilish. They that do make it their
Custom, do first make their Consciences take abundance of Opium. I have
Purposed that my Mouth shall not Offend, Psalm. 17. 3. Set a Watch, O Lord,
before my Mouth; Keep thou the door of my Lips, Psalm. 141. 3.

4. Unsuitable Talk is Foolish. What is not aptly tempered for them to whom it
is ministered. Talk, wherein proper Argument, Language, and Method, are not
selected. Wherein the Talker becomes not all things unto all Men. Wherein he
treats Newborn Babes with Strong Meat; and Strong Men with ABC, and Milk.
Paints the Glass of his Language, to the lost of Light, among the Unlearned
that do need brightest Sunshine: and neglects Decency it self, in his Speech
unto the Judicious. Talk, wherein Superiors are not entertained with condecent
Reverence; Equals, with Affability; Inferiors, with Courtesy; all Men, with
Discretion, and Kindness, and Modesty. Prosperous Men, with Congratulation;
Afflicted ones with Compassion; and every Man, with the best in out Store for
his true Benefit, and innocent Delight.

This, I name Unsuitable. This, that is not seasoned with the Salt, required by
the Holy Ghost. With Prudence seasoning it as may be best for our Designs that
are good. He that is neither Profane, Hypocritical, or Rash, must necessarily
be Wise. And he that is Wise, must necessarily see that all such Talk is
Foolish. That the Beginning of it is Foolish, and the End as Mischievous.

That, from hence it is; very much from hence, that our Tongues are Servants so
Unprofitable; and our Discourses do so little mend each others Minds, Hearts,
and Lives. That Speech, though made for an Engine to turn about all the Human
World, makes no more Conversion unto Good in the very Christian Church. Though
set by God as the Rudder, to Steer all our Affairs; and the Spring, to set
going all Wheels of Action; to stir up Thoughts, to kindle Affections, put to
work our Hands, and to walk our Feet; yet, does none of these mighty Works in
the way of Wisdom and Righteousness; or extremely few.

Unto the Unsutableness of it we must ascribe, the lost Labor of very much
Preaching the Sacred Word. And the general Fruitlesness of all Conference. By
the means thereof it is, that Exhortations, which otherwise might be taken in
and welcomed, are with Contempt and Choler dismissed. Reproofs, which otherwise
might Heal, (being received as Salt, though not as Sugar) do Exasperate, and
turn Men from Bad to Worse, and from Worse to worst of all! And, in short, all
Converses, wherewith the Lips of the Wise might otherwise Feed their
Companions, do but, at best, Divert them. The Fruit of the Lips, becoming as
the Artificial Fruits made of Wax; on which most People will Gaze, but none do
ever Feed.

Yet the Folly of this condemned Talk would be somewhat more Venial, were it
capable of being hatched of any but a Cockatrice's Egg. Of proceeding from any
Causes, but the very Worst. And such as the Unsuitable Talker will not dare own.
He is not easily brought to confess Ignorance; and plead that he knows not how
to Speak properly, or Keep silence and hear those that can. Incogitance and
Forgetfulness, are thin Excuses; and if often put on, will soon be worn out.
Sloth, and unwillingness to go to the pains of proper and pertinent Speech, is
an Apology of Ink; and will make a Negro more Black. The Plea of Pride, and a
Lust to show his own Knowledge without increasing other Men's, is a Man's
pleading that it pleases him to be a Devil Cowardice and fear of being barked
at by Dogs, if he should frame his Discourse for the Edification of Men, is a
flat renunciation of Holy Baptism; nor will it be pleaded, till a Creature is
destitute and at his last shift. To say, it is my Custom thus to transgress
with my Mouth; and I cannot break an ill Way, being become my own; is to plead
a Necessity of Perseverance to Damnation. Covetousness and Ambition are equally
gross Pleas; and till they have the Grace to Repent, few have the Impudence to
Boast; and none have the Modesty to Confess, that their Talk is to Honor
themselves Sacrilegiously, and Enrich themselves Feloniously, That is, by
robbing their Maker to exalt their Names, and by robbing their Neighbor to
advance their Estates. Will any urge the Example of some admired Sophi? and
argue, that, let it do ever so little good, or none at all, yet it is this
Apollo's Argument, Way, and Style. He is strait-way confounded, with as few
words as those wherein he can be told, That unto us Christians there is but one
God, and one Lord Jesus Christ! We can call no Man Master; nor be followers of
a St. Paul, further than he follows his Master and ours! To conclude, who is he
that will plead, He has not the Spirit of Christ? Is not acted by that Wise
and Holy one, who only Knows, and effectually Teaches, to suit and please every
Man unto his Edification, That is; who will plead, that, He is not a Christian?
Not any that is more a Christian, than a Statue of Stone is a Man; or the Paint
on a Sign-Post, that is called so, is an Angel! Lord forgive the Iniquity, and
heal the Disease of this Inexcusable Talk. Let the words of my Mouth be Milk to
Babes, and Meat to stronger Christians, and justly Tempered for both!

5. Unseasonable Talk is Foolish. That which is ever so well suited to Men's
Capacity, Taste and Need, ought as well to be suited to their Opportunity,
Vacancy, and Seasons of advantageous receiving it. Are there some things, which
are never out of Season? Surely, Talking is none of them? But is of those,
which Divine Wisdom pronounces to be beautiful only in their Season. Times
there are, wherein we must be, every one, apart; and our Closet-door shut.
Every Man being, there, both the Speaker and Hearer; and the whole Congregation
there presented before God. Times there are, wherein dutiful Contemplation and
Action brook not Talking and Hearing. And wherein the Best of them are by no
means Good, but the Wisest monstrously Foolish. In Nature so it is, that things
most Beautiful and Beneficent, out of their Season are Ghastly and Malignant.
Roses and Lillies, in the depth of Winter, would be Prodigies; and Sunshine,
at Midnight, would make fearful Outcries among us. It is no otherwise in
Morality; what is Pious and Virtuous at one time, is Profaneness and Vice at
another. Prayer, in the Season of other Duty, is not God's Delight; and Giving
of Alms, when in want wherewith to pay our Debts, is not Bounty but Felony.

Thus must it be said, the unseasonable Calves, of our Lips are the Sacrifice
of Fools. And all their Fruits, not brought forth in due season, are the
Clusters of Sodom. Words have been elegantly named the Children of our Minds;
but, when they come before their time, they are as properly called their foul
Miscarriages. And the greatest Charity that holds Wisdom company, must think
Evil of them; and ever does so. For, whatever their Figure is, or their
Stature, it is certain they are Lepers. Because, so it is; and the Guilty know
it is so, that

God has no pleasure in Fools; Fools that will go unto Tarsus, when sent unto
Nineve. Will be about one thing, when set about another. And neglect the Time,
if not the Manner and very Matter of his Commands. Who doubts but unseasonable
Talk is the Apolluon, and Destroyer of Family and Closet-duty? A more bloody
Persecutor than any Nero; making worse Havoc of Christian Churches. A wretched
Herod, that especially falls foul upon Children; who are left uncatechiz'd, and
have their Souls starved, by means of this Sin of their Parents. Who as they
incense God, do not always please Men. Men, that are wise and good, draw the
Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, upon them. Esteeming them, as Enemies of
Righteousness; and as worthy to be so slain as the Hypocrites and Profane. Unto
Men of but unregenerate Morality, they are an Offense very frequently; and
acceptable to none but the Froth and Skum of a Neighborhood. To the most vile,
or, at best, the most silly and vain Creatures. Who are seldom ever pleased,
but they are poisoned also; and corrupted, in some kind or other, by the
unseasonable Talker. Whose very Hellebore makes mad those whom it finds not
so. Whose best Discourses raise good Men's Passions; and are unlikely Means to
lay ill Men's. In short,

There is no Man, be he Carnal, Moral, or Spiritual; that can or ought to like
the Gnats, that sing about him when he needs Sleep. Or the Pillories, that hold
his Ears when he should be at work. The Turks that take away his Clothes in
cold Weather, wherein he most needs them. Or the Vinegar that falls on his
Nitre, and makes it useless, as the Royal Preacher expresses himself. The
Talkers we are mentioning are perfectly these things; and as unworthy of our
good Esteem and Affections. Consequently, none of Wisdom's Children; being not
accepted of God, or approved of Men. Being also, as many of them are, so very
near to the Good which they rise not up unto. Having it so easy to them to
please God and profit Men, and doing neither of them. For,

Valuable Gifts and Graces many of them do possess; and the Church and World
might be greatly served with their discreet Use, and seasonable. The Diseases
of neither are so incurable, but that if Time and Judgment were discerned, both
might be reformed. Yea, and the Reformation (whose Name is of so frightful
Sound among us) might be wrought with Ease and Pleasure. Very Idiots are not
ignorant, how the Season of Things does facilitate and sweeten them. All know,
the Labor is not great to sail with the Tide; though out of that time, a Boat
is a Gally, and a Rower is a Slave. None question, but that in Hungry-hours,
every Meal is a Feast; and, without any Miracle, Water is turned to Wine, and
every bitter Thing is sweet. Although otherwhiles, Wine is Wormwood, Bread is
Stone, Fish Serpent, and it is an unmerciful thing to make a Man eat and drink.

With sweet Ease, and with exquisite Pleasure, do their Lips feed and feast
many, whose Care and Conscience takes the fit Opportunity: Whose Lips bring
forth their Fruit in due Season. And of them it may be said, Their Leaf does
not wither, and what they say does prosper. Blessed Jesus, give thy Servants
the Learned Tongue to speak our Words in season. So shall they be like the best
Wine for thee, our Beloved; going down sweetly, and causing the Lips of them
that are asleep to speak, Cant. 7. 9.

6. Excessive Talk is Foolish. That is viciously Excessive, which exceeds the
Limit set by Law. It is the End that gives Law unto Means. The End of Speech is
God's Glory, and Man's Good; and the due Measure of it, therefore, is that
which appears most serviceable and best conducive thereto. Whatsoever is more,
comes of Evil. A sinful Defect it is, when we speak less than these require;
as though good Words cost more than we owed to God and our Neighbor. Nor is it
other than a sinful Excess, when we speak more than makes for these, (and,
consequently, must make against them;) as though our Tongues were Masters, and
not Servants; or Servants left to themselves by God and Conscience, to make as
much unprofitable Noise as we list. I will not determine, which Spirit is the
more unclean, the Dumb Devil or the Talkative. Both come from Hell, and both
serve the Kingdom thereof.

This latter is shamed and condemned by the memorable Divine Proverbs; In the
multitude of Words, there wants not Sin; but he that refraineth his Lips is
wise. He that has Knowledge spares his Words. But he that opens wide his
Lips, shall have Destruction. Prove. 10. 19. and 17. 27. and 13. 3. Nature also,
as well as Scripture, condemns this Excess of Speech. This Excess, against
which it has made very observable Provisions: Giving us but one Instrument of
Speech, though two of Hearing, and two of Sight. Not giving us the use of our
one Tongue, neither, till we arrive unto the use of Reason in some measure.
Also then setting Bounds to it, when we come to the Use of it; hedging it in
with Rows of Teeth. So that, we are plainly taught, if we will learn it, that
we are to hear twice as much as we speak in Converses: Are to speak no more
than we understand good Reason for; And when we do otherwise, we do break
Nature's Bounds, ((...), Hom. Iliad.) Wherefore,

All the World agrees, it is no Musical Tongue that keeps not Time. Nor are Men
found to love any Loquacity beside their own; or their own it self, under the
Name of Excess. It Is a common Observation, that the most Tedious Tongues have
the least Patient Ears; and the most Incontinent Talkers do not own their Love
to hear themselves talk. By which they betray their Self-condemnation; and show
how much their Judgment is against their Practice. And who thinks the Man wise,
who condemns himself in a thing that he allows?

Be it further asked; who ever knew a Galloping Tongue, but it often Stumbled?
One that running very much, fell not into Sin very often? The Scripture foresaid,
is in every guilty Company verified. The nimblest Wits are outrun by Tongues
of Perpetual Motion. Much less can the strongest Judgments keep pace with
restless Ones* If the Mountains will be always in travail, Mice will be the
inglorious Birth. The most admired Oracles of Eloquence, must speak Trash if
they speak to excess!

It is easily divined, how very ill this may be applied by corrupt Minds. By
the Impure, to whom all things are impure. Those who take not the Law against
the Excess of any other Talk, are still commencing vexatious Suits against that
of Religious Talk. Against which, Scorners in their Chair, shaking with
Laughter, will wrest what is said. Wherefore let Christian Readers attend what
follows.

Very possible indeed it is, that Religious Talk may be drawn forth to a sinful
Length. What is most laudable for the Matter, may be culpable for the Measure;
and is so, and is not for Edification, but against it, when Religious Prudence
does not gage it: When no Care is taken that Company be not Glutted, as well as
that they be not Starved. But, alas! in our day, real Defects are reputed
Excesses, generally. All Talk-of-another-World, Men would have confined to holy
Days and consecrated Places. Yea, and to Churchmen and Bed-ridden ones. Those
that are one jot wiser, and can relish a little when they can tend for it; do
conclude that what exceeds Laodicean's Use, is Long; and what is Long, is
Tedious; and what is Tedious to their Lusts, may be justly enough Odious to
their Hearts. But, every Man is not a Thief, at whom Dogs do bark; or whom the
Children in the Street call so. Nor is every Religious Talker a Sinful
Oppressor of his Hearers, though he be named so by the Weak and the Wicked
among them. Nor is all that they will call so, Cant and Nonsense. Nor is it
sure that it is Vainglory, and not Godly-Zeal, does act him, because it is
audaciously said so by them. Or, that it is not his Duty to exceed their
Desires; and his Wisdom and Kindness to do it, because they do think otherwise.
In short; They that Fear God, will Speak often of him one to another; and very
much. Even to an Excess of Carnal Men's Patience. Wittingly they will not extend
their Talk of him, beyond what they believe to be for his Glory, and their
Good. And, if, through inadvertence, they sometimes do slip and fall into a
peccant Prolixity, they will truly, upon Reflection, Humble their Souls: And
beseech their God to take away that Iniquity, among others, of their holy
things. Nor is it to be doubted, but his rich Grace will Pardon their Failings,
Accept their Services, Vindicate their Names, and in due time, Abase and Shame
their Reproachers. But,

Upon the whole, it appears that we are Foolish when we make not Conscience of
Keeping Silence, as well as of Breaking it. And that it is our Duty to Pray the
Holy Spirit to teach us always, both to Open our Mouths, and to Shut them, with
Discretion!

7. Uncharitable Talk is Foolish. Uncharitable, is what Positively or
Negatively violates the Royal Law of Love: Love of Men for the Sake of God;
true Love of all Men, and best Love of good Men, exemplified and required by
the God of Love. He talks Uncharitably, whose Talk flows not from Love, and
tends not unto Kindness. Who either speaks Evil of his Neighbor when no just
occasion is offered, or speaks not well of him when opportunity is given!

A Folly most manifest, a Sin most mighty. For, a Practice it is, most Opposite
to the Nature, and Inconsistent with the Tenor of Christianity. Contrary to the
principal Laws, and Destructive of the precious Fruits of its Spirit, and
Grace. Insomuch, that, if this Talk be not Foolish, to Renounce the Gospel and
our Baptism must be to be Wise. The Holy Ghost, expressly and frequently, makes
this Talk the Property of the Wicked, and the Character of the Damned. Yea, and
charges those that hope for Heaven, not to Eat with a Man of such a Tongue, 1
Cor. 5. 11. Declaring thereby, that as such are excluded from Heaven, they are
to be Excommunicated from the Church on Earth. That they are Dogs, to be Kept
out of God's Lower House and Upper one.

Nor need we lift up our Hands with any Wonder, if we open our Eyes with any
Care; and look into the filth of an Uncharitable Mouth. It Is a Superfluity of
Naughtiness, that makes Silent of the Good, and Eloquent of the Evil of our
Neighbors. It Is no less than Contempt and Hatred of God and Men, that is the
true Cause and Spring. And, like Cause like Effects! This Talk fights against
God, and murders Men; and of all Men, the Talkers themselves. It is a World of
Iniquity; full of Iniquity, as the World of things Visible and Invisible. It
Defiles the Body; turns all the Members into Weapons of Unrighteousness; makes
Hands and Feet Swords and Spears. Sets on fire the Course of Nature; horribly
destroys the whole Course of our Lives; takes away the Wheel of Humane
Conversation: Quenches every relickspark of Love, Infuses more Hatred, Kindles
more Malice, Inflames Wrath, Founds a Hell of Revenge; and Makes the very
Heaven and Earth of Friendship to pass away. Hence is it, that Earth, as Hell,
is full of Weeping, Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth. Of Strife and Clamor, of
Tumult and Care, of Suspicion and Fear, of Trouble and Danger, of Vexation and
Regret. No Peace to them that are Uncharitably spoken of, no Peace in them that
speak Uncharitably of them!

In them, who turn the sweetest Instrument of Kindness into the sharpest Weapon
of Bitterness. Who by that excellent faculty of Speech, which distinguishes
them from Bruits, do make themselves far more Noxious Creatures. By that,
which, next to God's Glory, was given us for our Neighbor's Good, do, to God's
Dishonor, do them all manner of Evil; By that which God gave us to Counsel and
Comfort them, do Defame and Disquiet them. Turning the great Gift of Tongues
into the worst of Curses! A Folly, which we call Atheistical, by
Scripture-Authority! Swords are in their Lips, i. e. They Talk Uncharitably.
Who say they shall hear us? i. e. They deny the Deity, Psalm. 59. 7. And vain
are the Fig Leaves, wherewith fond Fools would cover their Shame; e. gr. We
speak ill of none but of ill Men. No? But, a higher than the Kings of the Earth
faith, Speak Evil of no Man. They speak ill of us, of whom we speak ill. It may
be so; but your Savior, when he was Reviled, reviled not again. And his Sheep
do not bark at Dogs when Dogs bark at them. We speak no more ill than we know
of Men. So much the less is your Sin; but it is a very great one, when your
Charity covers not a Multitude of your Neighbors Sins! We cannot but speak ill
when we are Angry. No? It is the Unregenerate Tongue that no Man, can tame.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty and Power; and there is
putting away of Evil Speaking and of Anger: Of both the ill Child and Mother,
of Ishmael and of Hagar. We speak but such ill words as bleak no Bones. How
know you that? but it is too much if you break your Neighbor's Peace in his
Mind, and your own Peace in the highest King's Court. We mean no hurt in the
Ill we speak. Pity but you spoke well, if you meant so. You construe others ill
Words in ill Senses; and so will others construe yours. Men that are Good, do
shun the very Appearance of Evil. They be our Inferiors of whom we speak ill;
and if we wrong them, we recompense them. A Rare Restraint, and most Unfrequent
Restitution! But, what if made, both of 'em? It is he that is void of
Understanding that despises any Neighbor. He only who dares despise his
Maker, dares to mock the Poor. Nor can any Hands heal some Wounds that are
given by Tongues. We speak ill of some Men, as constrained to it by the Love of
God. How good is it to be sure that we are not in an Error, when we presume
that we do well? It is possible to speak wickedly for God. And it is sure,
though you do speak for him, it is wickedly, if you speak without his Call, and
speak not according to his Rule. You dishonor and displease him your King, if
without his Warrant, you inflict a deserved Punishment on your Fellow Subjects.
Nor will he take such an Usurpation of undue Power, for a token of your Love.
And, supposing that you have indeed his Commision, and thereby a just right to
Sentence your Neighbor; making him that has done ill to hear ill; alike
Criminal you will be found, if you transgress his Laws of Equity, Humanity, and
Pity. If you say more than you Know; if what you Know, you speak maliciously,
without Compassion, and to ill Purposes!

What a Malefactor was Achan? and what a Storm raised he to the Public? What a
Lover of his God was Joshua, how True, how Zealous? But with what words does
Joshua fall upon Achan? My Son! What Balm more benign, what Oil more gentle? I
pray thee! How courteous is the Mouth of Love to the most Unlovely? And that
from the Seat of the highest Authority. Give Glory to God, and make Confession.
What Pity is here and Bounty? Pity of a perishing Creature, and Bounty in
instructing and exhorting that he might not perish. Why have thou Troubled us?
No Railing Accusation; a Blow no harder than might serve to awaken Conscience.
The Lord will Trouble thee. No Insultation, no Imprecation. Not, the Curse of
God take thee, See Dr. Barrow, in Loc.
etc. O imitable Example! and worthy of all Acceptance.

In short; as much as our Age does abound in this Uncharitable Talk, and the
rather because it does so, it must be said: He that utters it, is a Fool.
Slander, is as truly Sin and Folly, as either Murder or Adultery. Nor is
Bearing false Witness the only Kind of Slander, though it be the most gross.
Affixing of reproachful Names upon innocent Persons, is Slandering. So is
Aspersing their Actions with Scornfully-expressed-Censures. So is Perverting
their Words by affected Misconstructions. So is Representing their Words or
Deeds but partially, suppressing some part to blemish the whole. So is
Instilling sly Suggestions, apt to breed unworthy opinions of them. So is
Reflecting on them ever so covertly, with design to fasten a reproach by it. So
is Aggravating their faults oat of measure, and making Beams of their Motes. So
is Charging of them with the ill Consequences of their Judgment, which they
themselves aver they do not see, and protest they do much abhor. And so is the
Aiding and Abetting, See Dr. Barrow, on Prove. 10. 18.
and being fosterfathers unto any Slanderous Reports. Nor, are Slanderous Ears
much less odious to God or Wise Men, than Slanderous Tongues. Those Receivers
seem as bad as these Thieves.

And it is more than probable, that all the Guilty would strait-way find
themselves to be Uncharitable; could they but bring their Minds to reflect
better upon their Principles and Ends. To consider what it really is, that
makes Evil-speaking the far greatest part of their Talk; (as Talk is, out of
question, the much biggest Employment of their Life.) They would find, that
either an in-rooted Ill Will, or a rash Anger; an old Spite or a newly raised
Spleen, brought their Neighbors Faults into their Mouths. That either Contempt
of Men, as thought hugely below them; or Envy at them, as supposed someway
above themselves, was the common Parent of their disparaging Talk. That ever
and anon Coveting has brought them to Slandering; and they have for no other
reason disgraced others, but that they might enrich themselves. That, not
unfrequently, Wantonness has given the rise to their Calumny; nor have they
for any thing but Sport murdered Men in their Credit. Yea, and that, sometimes,
there has certainly been a much more abstruse cause; pure Malignity and Love of
Inhumanity without any formed Reason: which has made them bite their
Neighbors, merely to gratify their currish Humors, just as other Maddogs do.
A Disposition that is more common, than is well thought of or Prayed against.
One Planted in corrupt Nature, watered by the Example of all the World, and
Increased by Men's own assiduous Use. But,

Of Uncharitable Talkers come not into the Secret, O my Soul; unto their
Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou United!

I proceed to enquire nextly,

. 2. What is Foolish Jesting?
Foolish-Talking, or Jesting, says the Text; that is, or Jesting which is
Foolish. And, it may be, the Sense designed is somewhat more; q. d. Detest ye
Foolish-talking, of all Kinds; even Jesting it self, that Admired and Beloved
one; that Alamode and Sugared one. Abhor Foolish Talk the Meat, yea, and Jests
that are the Sauce. It is surely predicated of both, that they are ((...)) Not
Pertinent, or conducible to any good Purpose; but only serve very ill ones. Are
insufferable therefore in Jesus Christ's School, as has been aforesaid.

By Jesting, all Men understand Speech framed and intended for Mirth. Talk, is
the Business of the Lips; Jests, are their Play. Speaking, is their Trade;
Jesting, is their Game. In That, they do but make a Noise; in This, they make
Music. That, is the Employment; This, the Recreation, they give their Hearers.
And as of other Recreations, it must be said of Jests; No doubt but some are
Lawful, yea, Needful; and unto some Men they are a Duty, say the gravest
Casuists. When it is that they are our Duty and Wisdom, and when our Folly and
our Sin, is to be judged by the same Rules.

Lawful Recreation, is some Action not forbidden; apt to exhilarate the Fancy,
or exercise the Body, so as to whet the Sith of both, for Sacred and Civil
Work. And Lawful Jesting, is some innocent Expression, apt to raise drooping
Spirits, and sharpen blunted Minds, so as to mend their Plight for all good
Service. All is one, whether it be by its Beauty, or its Rarity; whether by its
Perspicuity, or Abstrusity, an Expression so instilleth Pleasure, and renews
Vigor. Thus may an holy Isaac Sport with his Rebecca; Laugh, as the Hebrew;
Play, as the Chaldee; Jest, as the Syriack and Arabic speak. All that can be
said for Melancholy-Christians of another Mind, is, that their Error erreth
upon the Right hand. He that is no otherwise a Jester, is far from being a
Fool; and he that is contradictiously Morose, therein, is not Wise. Broken
Spirits dry our Bones, and unfit us to fight the Lord's Battles. Merry Hearts
do good like generous Medicines; and strengthen both for Spiritual Warfare, and
for Secular Merchandise.

The ((...)) word, A (...) seu (...).
Jesting, is originally of no ill Signification; the Abuse has brought it into
disrepute, as the anciently honorable Name of Tyrant; and very many others. Our
Wisdom will be, neither to be Frighted with the harsh sound of its Name, among
our selves; nor be Charmed with its Magnificent Titles, found in Pagan
Moralists. But, less regardful of its Denomination, ever to mind its Nature,
End, and Use. By them, forming our judgments of it. Briefly then, All that are
Hatched of Forbidden words are Foolish Jests; such as are Irreligious, are more
Mad than Facetious. And if Eating and Drinking without aiming at God's Glory,
be foolish; Jesting, without that Design, cannot be Wise. Holy Intention, is
essential to all Moral Good, and is the savor of it. If the Salt of Jests be
without that savor, they be good for nothing, but to be cast out. But we will
be more particular;

1. Profane Jesting is Foolish. Prating loosely about things that are Holy.
Trifling with the Names, whereat Heaven and Earth trembles. Making Sport with
the aweful Word, by which we must be judged. A certain Effect of worst Causes,
and as sure a Cause of worst Effects. For, nothing less than a Reign of Sin,
can make a Play of Religion. Nor can it be, but Playing with Religion, must
needs heighten Sins Dominion. Only Contempt of Sacred Things, can breed jocular
Familiarity: and that worse than Devilish Familiarity greatens the Contempt. I
say, worse than Devilish for though Profane Men Believe and Jest, Devils do
Believe and Tremble. If Profane Wits believe not that there is a God, they are
blinder than Heathens. If they do believe there is one, they are, on this
account, more mad than Devils. And who, save mad and blind Men, can think it
valuable Wit, to make God and Men one's Enemies for Merriment? expose one's
self to Everlasting Fire, for a fit of Laughter. Once a Merry Atheist, never a
Sober Christian, says Dr. Hammond.

2. Unclean Jesting is Foolish. The Holy Ghost has named Obscenity, very
Folly; and called words of Smut, Rotten and Corrupt. What an extreme Phrenzy
then is it, ever so wittily to commit this Folly, to Spue forth worse than
Street-Dirt, and name it a Fine Sport? But hereunto rise none, save highest
Graduats in the University of Wickedness. Wherefore I advance but this single
Thought; God's Law, in old time, required, cutting off of the Hand, which did,
an Indecent Act to save the nearest Relation's Life; Deuteronomy. Dura Lex in speciem,
sed ex cujus rigore liqet qantopere Deo placet Verecundia; and qantum
abominatur Impudentiam. Calv.
25. 11. And hereby we may easily judge of his Wrath against the Mouth, that
utters Unclean words, for nothing but an once to Disport and Debauch its
Hearers.

3. Unnatural Jesting is Foolish. That which makes merry with the Sins, and
sporteth with the Miseries of Men. That plays upon their Misdeeds; and taunts
at their Parts, their infirm Bodies, or mean Conditions, and particular
Disasters. A Practice so horrid, that it would be as Impossible as Unrighteous;
did not Men together put off the Humane, and put on Diabolical Nature. For
Humanity will Compassionate, not Patratragediate, on a Stray or a Faln-beast,
and it cannot draw mirth from the Misery of a Man. There is a Beast, and none
of the gentlest neither, which they say sheddeth Tears over them whom it
Devours. But a gentle one it is, and a most merciful Creature, compared to this
Kind of Jester. For, there is a Clemency in those that wound us Modestly; nor
is he near so much the Tyrant that does us our wrongs, as he who Mocks at us
for them. The first gives the Wound; but it is this Second that makes it Smart,
and Kill. In short; he is rather a Stock than a Man that deplores not Evil, but
more a Devil than a Man that derides it. And his monstrous Mirth is seldom long
from a Hell above Ground.

4. Immoral Jesting is Foolish. In all things, the Wisdom that is from above
requires good Manners. Whereinsoever they are not found, good Conscience is
lost. It Is Asleep, Blind, or Dead. The fifth Commandment is without
Restriction; it is not said, Honor thy Father and Mother in all Talk, except
Raillery. Or, Speak not Evil of Dignities, in any Discourse but Drolling. Or,
Honor all Men, unless while you are Jesting. Wherefore they make an unwise
Bargain, who sell God and Men's Peace for the Music of their Jest. For the
tickle of their Fancies, in prejudicial and disgraceful Gibes. For the
luscious, but prodigious Pleasure of a Wasp, to Sting others and Kill it self.

5. Unprofitable Jesting is Foolish. I mean, That which is not as truly
intended, and desired for a Whet to our Minds; as our Eating is intended for
Nourishment, and Sleeping for Refreshment, to our Bodies. That wherein
Religious Profit is not designed; nor any thing more, than the transient
Pleasure of a Laugh and Giggle. A Sorry thing; and below any Ambition, save
that of Children; who prefer their Toy above the Tower of London, as the
Proverb speaks. It would be asked, what Understanding is in them, should Men
use other Whetstones, without Thought or Care whether their Instruments were
sharpened at all by them? and for nothing, but an unaccountable Delight taken in
Grinding for nothing. A practice which would soon so sensibly and notoriously
grind them to the Dust and Depth of Poverty, and Scorn among Men. Awake
Conscience, and say whether all Jesters grind to fetch an Edg, or no!

Particularly, I appeal to God's Register in the Hearts of such, as grind in
the Game of Chess. That operose Syntax of Jests; by which, let them say,
whether they find their Minds more Sharpened, or Blunted, for Business Civil or
Sacred? Wondrous it seems, that the Board whereon Men Strain their Thoughts as
hard as the Mechanic on his Shopboard, or the Lawyer or Divine on his Desk,
should be taken for a Recreation of them; any more, than carrying of Sacks of
Corn on one's Back, should be reputed a Sport for the Body's Refreshment. But
Witchcraft there is in all Error; Candles-Ends and Coals be Sweetmeats, when
Girls are in a Pica. And, Rolling in the Dirt does a wanton Boy's heart good.
Wracks, are Recreations, if Men fancy them such.

This Game, says one, is not only Lawful, but, it may be, the most Ingenious
and Delightful that ever was invented. I hope, he Dreamed not, that, the more
Ingenious the more Lawful; and the more Delightful to his Fancy, the more
undoubtedly Harmless and Innocent in it self. He knows, how Witty, the worst of
Creatures is; and how Sweet, abundance of Forbidden Fruit! Well, but, after
that, he droppeth these more memorable words: Many precious Hours have I
profusely spent in this Game; and, It is a Time-waster. It has had with me a
Fascinating Property; I have been Bewitched by it. When I have Begun, I have
not had the Power to Give over. I will not Use it, till I find I can Refuse it.
Reason and Religion shall order my Recreation. It has not done with me, when I
have done with it. In my Study, in my Pulpit, when I have been Praying or
Preaching, I have, in my Thoughts been Playing of Chess. I have had as it were
a Chess-board before my Eyes. I have been thinking how I might have obviated
the Stratagem of my Antagonist ( or Play-Mate.) I have heard of one, who, as
appeared by his Words, was in his Thoughts playing at Chess, as he lay Dying.
It has caused me (this Game has) to break many solemn Vows and Promises; and
often to Prevaricate sinfully. It has wounded my Conscience and broken my
Peace. Were I now to Die, the remembrance of this Game would greatly Trouble
me. As it did John Huss, a little before his Death. [ One would think such a
Burnt Child should make us all to dread this Fire; but he thus proceeds] My
Using this Game has been Scandalous and Offensive unto others: Godly Friends
have been Grieved. Others (I have reason to fear) have been Hardened by it. My
Using it bath occasioned much Passion, Strife, Idle, if not, Lying Words; the
Neglect of many Duties to God and Men. My Using it shows, I have little
Self-denial. It is altogether Unnecessary to me; it hinders my Soul's health,
and furthers not my my Body's. It has occasioned Expense; I should think much
to give that to Relieve others, that I have wasted this way upon my Wantonness.
He concludes with excellent words of the Master of Christian Sentences, Mr.
Baxter: I know not one of many Hundreds, that needs any Game at all. -- The
Temper of Christ: and his best Servants have been tar from Games and Sports. --
I see but Few, but Distaste in Ministers, even Shooting, Bowling, and the
Healthful Games. -- Therefore there is somewhat in others that Nature it self
has some Suspicion of. In such other Games as fit not the End of Recreations.
That Student that needs Chess or Cards to please his Mind, I doubt has a
Carnal empty Mind. And his Disease should be rather Cured, than Pleased. Aurea
mentis bracteatae Verba.

Reader; Can thy Charity reach to believe, that this Reverend Penitent designs
his Spiritual Benefit, if he returns to his Chess-Board? Or, that other
Christians can easily think thee to be sincere, if thou pretendest to seek
renovation of thy Strength for thy Duty, from a Game which evidently Wearies,
Weakens, and Wastes Spirits? For thy Life look well to thy Aims, in Jests arid
Games! And, for Shame, acknowledge this bright Truth; that Playing (and very
Praying also) is Sinful Folly, when Aims and Ends in them are not Wise! Let the
Matter be what it will; whereinsoever, the Pleasure of the Flesh is, for it
self, Sought, it is Served; and in whatsoever it is Served, the World, and
Devil are Served also; for, their Interests are Conjunct and Undivided.

6. Immoderate Jesting is Foolish. That is Immoderate, which is used in Times
prohibited; spends more time than is allowed; and is without any Serious thing
immixed.

There is a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from the Embraces, of this
sort of Speech. The Lord's Day, is a Temporary-Heaven, into which nothing so
Playful may enter. And other times there are, which require our severest
Composures of Spirit, and admit not its relaxations. Though we may not Faint,
neither may we be Frolic, in a Day of Adversity. When we address unto Solemn
Worship at any time, it behooves us to go with fear and trembling. When we are
among Persons Afflicted, and needing Commiseration;to Jest and Sport, is to
intimate that we are glad of their Hurt; and is directly to foment their Grief.
He is a Glutton of them, who cannot abstain from Jests upon such Fasting-Days.
On which, every Sally of his Sportive Wit, is not a dead Fly, but dead Ox in
his Ointment. But,

So is he also Immoderate, who at any time whatever, spends more Hours in
Tuning of his Instrument, than Using it. In Whetting his Sithe, than in Mowing.
In Baiting of his Horse, than in Riding. As though Pastime were the
Christian-Name of Jesting; and as if it had been said, Six days shall thou, not
Labor, but Play.

But is all Jesting Sober, that is in no Unseasonable time, and is but of an
Hour long? No, by no means. He is no Temperate and Wise Man, that, for half an
Hour together, eats nothing but Sauce, or Speaks nothing but Jests. Salts and
Sawces are not to be ate by themselves; Recreative Jests are such fare.
Unwholesome surely, without somewhat more Substantial taken with it. Some grave
Sentences among the light Kickshaws. Somewhat that may show the Jester to be no
such Ape, as is not Man and Christian; and his Language, when most Merry, to be
bridled by a Heart that is Wise. Somewhat that may both work and witness this
rare Effect; that in the Recreation of our Minds, the Business of our Lives
does not go so far from them, as to be long out of them. In short; he who
indulgeth Fancy any more Jesting than this, his Jesting as truly sets his
Conscience to Sleep as his Fancy to Play.

7. Ostentatious Jesting is Foolish. Of all Sins, Pride is the most Sinful; and
therefore the most Silly. And of all Pride, there is scarcely a more foolish,
than Pride of Skill to play this Game. True, our Age wonders after it; prizes
nothing so much. Men value themselves upon it; and therefore lust to be showing
it. But,

For this appears no more Reason, than the poor Rustic had, for his
Persuasion; that being Condemned to Die, his King would never let him be
Executed, because he had so Rare a Knack of Whistling. No more reason, than
Children have to admire themselves for being Artists at Pushpin. Arts, both of
them, which have less corrupted the World and perverted Mankind, than Jesting
has done. Worthy therefore, if not of more Honor, yet of less Disgrace. In a
word, I ask;

Were they not born among the Cattle of the Field; at least, disclaim they not
the Privilege of a Nobler Birth, who look upon Reason as of less worth? Reason,
their Likeness to Angels, of less worth than Jesting, their Similitude to Apes
and Sportive Brutes. Reason, that in Conjunction with Grace, does all that is
Good and Great for both Worlds; of less Worth than Freakish Wit, which does its
utmost, when it Unknits a Brow, Shakes a Spleen, and lets fall a drop of Oil on
Reason's Wheel. Such Men, if they may be styled Men, do want little more than
Hair and Horns to make them Beasts. For the same Wisdom it is, to break Jests
for the praise of great Parts, and to bring forth Counters for the praise of
great Estates. This is Self-evident, and no more shall be added, but this; My
need of Medicines can prove me to be but an Infirm Man; my Pride of taking them
would prove me a Mad one. No Jesting is Lawful but what is Medicinal, and
restorative of Spirits for nobler Thoughts. My Need hereof, is but my common
Infirmity; my Pride of it would be my perfect Phrenzy.

It is time that we now enquire,

. 3. What makes Foolish-Talking and Foolish-Jesting so Detestable as our
Doctrine speaks?
A Needless Question this were, but that, if any where, here Wicked Love, like
Sacred, will Believe no Evil. Against these their Darling Sins and Dalilahs,
Men will not believe their Eyes. These Plagues of Leprosy have been all along
proved, as well as pronounced such. Nor have the Arguments been too short for
the Censures; but the Discoveries have justified the Invectives. Nevertheless,
Measure pressed down and running over shall be given. I may be Vile in some
Eyes for having laid so much already; but I shall say more, and I will yet be
more Vile, if by any means I may gain some: And bring them to a wiser Heart and
purer Language.

In Foolish Talking and Jesting; Sins of common occurrence to all Men, and of
daily occurrence to every one; it shall be briefly said, what, in general, All
Men do; and, in special, What Good Men do.

1. All Men Sin. In the fore-described Talks and Jests, they, really (and may I
not say, confessedly?) Sin. And, consequently, in the same, they do the worst
that Creatures can do: Sin, is Man's Worst done against God.

They Contemn the Supreme King's Authority; and deny him to be Lord over their
Tongue.

They, Vsurp his Government; and, Deposing God, set up themselves to Reign in
His stead. Subjecting their Lips to their own Lusts; instead of the Divine
Laws. And should Dust and Ashes so set up themselves?

They Deny God's Propriety in them; constructively saying, their Tongues (and,
therefore, their Whole Persons) are their own. The Clay is its own; and what
has the Potter to do with it? Hellish Conceit!

They Believe not his Wisdom; but say in Effect, they have found out a better
Language than the Holy Tongue which he has taught. Thus wiser is Darkness than
Light; and thus do things of Yesterday take themselves for more Prudent than
the Ancient of Days.

They Disown his Goodness; constructively saying, they be Cruel Laws he has
laid on their Lips. As if Reason and Religion bloodily galled their Mouths.
And, as though our heavenly Lawgiver loved us so very little as we love our
selves.

They Confess not his Mercies and Benefits; but deny themselves to be so much
in his Debt, as to owe him the rule of their Mouth. Alas, what have they, that
they have considered themselves to have received of God? And do they owe any
Debt of Gratitude? Is Life, and the Means of Eternal Bliss such a Matter, as
that for them one's Lips should be still praising the Giver? They believe it
not.

They Despise Divine Promises and Threats; and interpretatively tell the World,
that Earth out-bids Heaven. Makes firmer or greater Promises, for Vain words,
than the Gospel makes unto Savoury ones: And thunders more fearful Threats
against Edifying Discourse, than the Gospel does against Corrupt Communication.
For, alas, is Hell such a Little-Ease? And is Heaven so great a Preferment? No,
not in their sight.

They Reject God's very Entreaties; and say in a manner, Though he does Pray
and Beseech them, to Speak Wisely, they will not grant him. No; that wondrous
Condescension shall not move them; that miraculous Good shall not overcome
their Evil. For, why; if All-mightiness will court Worms, must they presently
be won? Nay, they are not. To turn Grace into Wantonness they are Wise; but,
for Grace, to turn from Wantonness they have no Knowledge.

They give the Lie to Eternal Truth: Virtually saying, that the Fountain of
Truth is the Father of a Lie, when he faith that an unbridled Tongue can have
but a Vain Religion. What? cannot they with the same Mouth bless and curse?
Cannot their Fountain send forth sweet Water and bitter? They will not believe
themselves to be Leopards, because of these Spots of their Lips.

They put the Son of God to open Shame: Telling him in the Rhetoric of
Practice, that they cannot think the Blood shed of his Heart, to have deserved
his Lording it over their Mouth. No; and if he expect to command the Doors
thereof, he shall fail of it. What? is Redemption such a Kindness, that the
Redeemed must never speak but as the Redeemer pleases? They have other Thoughts.

They do Despite to the Spirit of Grace: Telling him, that though they hear of
his Divine Essence and Wonderful Office; yet, if his Striving with them be to
circumcisetheir Lips, they shall strive against him, and not so easily part
with those Fore-Skins. Indeed his Coming to fit us for Heaven was friendly
done; but he exacts too much, they think, if he look to have so perpetual
Acknowledgments.

They Reproach the Divine Word, and the Seals of it: They make them ill spoken
of; and cause Men to ask, To what End is your Reading the Word, and so much
Hearing of it? Of what Use is your Baptism? and who is ever the better for the
Lord's Supper? The Mouth utters the Heart; and who among you is any cleaner
than Infidels in the Mouth?

They Imitate Satan and Please him: As he, so they, are Evil-Speakers. A
Likeness to him, which cannot but highly please him; it does so extraordinarily
serve his Interest, and manifest his Empire.

They Murder their own Souls: For Sin's Wages is Death. Tongues set on Fire of
Hell, must bear Fire in Hell. And they, who will not here with holy Waters
cleanse them, shall not there have a Drop of Water to cool them.

They endanger the Lives of all that come into their Companies: For Poison may
be drank in at the Ears, and these fill the Ears of their Companions with it.

They Rob and Steal perpetually: Rob God of his Glory; themselves, of the
Reward that there is in using our Tongues to glorify him; and their Friends, of
innumerable good things. These they rob, one while of their Purity; imparting
to them a Filth, which costs many a Prayer and Tear to scour it out:
other-whiles, of their Patience, which is their Souls very Mansion House: but
always of their Golden Hours, and convertible unto glorious Uses.

They bear false VVitness against Holiness: For they take forbidden Words and
Jests into their Mouths, purely to please themselves. Nor stick they to say,
that this is the main Pleasure that they know under the Sun. Which is plainly
enough to say, God's Commandments are very grievous, and Christ's Yoke is an
uneasy one; and it is in Breaking of his Commands that we can find any Comforts.

They wage a wilful War against God, and Men, and themselves: Sin fights
against all; and it is wilfully that Men do Sin: Without God Tempting, without
Satan Compelling, without any Creature Forcing. The worst Flattery, and all
Force used with them, is their own. In Foolish Talks and Jests, it is most
freely that Fools shoot their Bolts; and at no fewer Marks or lesser. But, it
remains to be said, that in these twain;

2. Godly Men do most aggravatedly sin. They incurring these Guilts, do present
us with the most prodigious Sights. They, committing these Sins, are as follows
in these Particulars.

They are Persons chosen to Glory, Rejecting him who Elected them thereunto.
Putting God out of the Throne, who of most free Grace has appointed unto them
a Kingdom. In foolish Talk, they turn to the foolish God of this World; and
forsake him who is God and their God.

They are Redeemed-Captives, slighting him who died not for the World as he
died for them. Refusing to let him give Law to so much as their Lips.

They are Creatures raised from the Dead, despising him that Quickened them: As
not vouchsafing to obey him in very Words; and as far as very Scribes and
Pharisees do.

They are Pardoned Malefactors, dishonouring the most Gracious King that has
Forgiven them Ten thousand Sins. Yea, Ten thousand times Ten thousand sinful
Thoughts, Words and Works.

They are Adopted Heirs, Provoking to wrath their Adoptive Father. Uttering, in
his Presence, and in Men's Hearing also, Words that he cannot away with.

They are Cleansed-Lepers, making themselves unclean again. Defiling anew the
Temple of God; and in that which is named the very Glory of it. The Tongue is
so called.

They are such, as, being Night and Day accused in the Court of Heaven, have
but one Intercessor; and yet are Incensing him against them. Walking contrarily
unto him, in whose Lips no Guile was found; and the Grace of whose Lips, all
Men admired!

They are Comforted Souls, grieving their holy Comforter. Making him, by their
offensive Breath, to keep far off from them; and to carry it, as kindest
Friends use to do, when our Words much displease them.

They are Men that live by Hope, and yet sin against the only Word whereon
they do, or dare to hope. Their Possession is nothing to their Reversion; it is
in Hope that they rejoice. Hope of the Glory promised in that Covenant, which
promises none at all but to them that obey the Gospel in Word and Deed.

They are Sworn-Men, breaking their Oaths and Vows unto God. Their Vows,
Sacramental, and less solemn ones many, to speak as well as act, by God's Rule
and for his Glory.

They are Seers, and Children of Light, sinning against Light and Knowledge.
Against Light more Heavenly and of a nobler kind, than any unregenerate Men are
endued with.

They are strong Men, and invincible by World and Devil; throwing themselves
down under Divine Wrath. The Grace first infused into every Convert, makes him
certainly able to walk acceptably with God; according to the Grace of the
New Covenant. O what a Sight is it, when, not a Child falls of Weakness; but, a
Giant throws himself down a Precipice!

They are Professors of Purity, wallowing in Mire. What Protestant-Christian
professes not, to take Christ's Word for the Rule of his Words, as well as
Thoughts and Actions? Or who does doubt, but foolish Talks and Jests are hereto
most repugnant?

They are Petitioners unto Heaven; Men that give themselves unto Prayer; no
more able to live without Praying, than without Breathing: and yet do by
contrary words chase away the Spirit, deaden the Grace, and lessen the Gift of
Prayer. Extreme Madness! to disable themselves for that, by which they fetch
from Heaven all they want.

They are Men often Reproved, kicking against the Pricks thereof. They have a
hundred Rebukes for every one that an unregenerate Man has. The Holy Ghost,
their Conscience, their Pastor, their Pious Companions, must be supposed ever
and anon checking them.

They are such as have been enriched by Diamonds, and yet prefer Bits of Glass.
Where is any Godly Man, but he has sometimes heard and sometimes spoke a good
Word; which, for all the World he would not but have spoke and heard? After
this, to take up Foolish Talks, is, after Gold tried to prefer Counters.

They are Children that have been Burnt, and yet fear not the Fire. I take it
for granted, that Foolish Talks and Jests, have cost all good Men dear, at one
time or other. Have blotted their Evidences, expelled their Comforts,
raisedtheir Fears, torn their Hearts. And what? will they sin more, that worse
things may come?

They are such as Revive, what they have took abundance of pains to Kill. Sure,
there is no sincere Convert, but what has labored hard among his other
Spiritual Enemies, to mortify those flying Serpents that proceed from the Lips,
and to spoil the breed of them.

They are Men that most of all deceive Expectation. They have a good Treasure,
and all People look that their Tongues should bring forth good things. From
Dogs we expect but Barking; and from Monkeys nothing wiser than Laughing. In
the Mouth of a Saint, it is expected there should be the Tongue of an Angel. It
is, at least, monstrous, if Doves gaggle as Geese, or Sheep bark as Dogs.

They are, finally, Lambs that murder more than Wolves. Indeed, Sin,
especially Sin of the Tongue, is a catching Disease. But from none is it so
very deeply and dangerously taken, as from Men of real or reputed Religion.
Their Sins are the most deadly Examples; as it were, so many Warrants for other
Men's Sins. If they sin audaciously, many conclude they may then sin by
Authority, ((...), Eurip. Hecub.) There be those whom the Foolish Talk of
another's Mouth shall not hurt; but if it come out of yours, it shall debauch.
Do we not daily find it? Some Men's Names are Swords and Bucklers for other Men's
Sins. But to conclude.

. 4. What are the Truths to be inferred, and what the Duties to be pressed from
this Doctrine?
Of the Truths that I hence infer, these are all I shall offer; having already
trespassed against the Brevity intended.

Tr. 1. Our Tongues are not our own. No, but our Lips are under Law, as well as
our Hearts and Hands. For, if God be not Lord over them, how comes he to give
the Law in my Text, unto them? And in the Day of Judgment, to Justify and to
Condemn, according to our Words? Mat. 12. 37. It is not more, sure that God
has made Man's Mouth, than it is that he has made a Law for it.

T. 2. Metals are known by their Sounds. Hearts are discovered by Talks, to be
Silver or Brass. For God the Judge of them, declares that he does hereby judge
them. And accounts foolish Talkers and Jesters to be Men of impure Hearts, as
truly as Fornicators; and the Covetous, which are Idolaters. If Mouths speak of
Wisdom, and Tongues talk of Judgment, it argues that the Law of God is in the
Heart; Psalm. 37. 30. But, if the Tongue be not bridled, it is sure the Heart is
not sanctified; and the varnished Religion is vain; Jam. 1. 26. In Nature and
Morality, it is a sure Rule; Stinking Breath is from foul Stomachs.

T. 3. Words be Treasonable. By the Gospel-Law they are so. For my Text makes
all foolish Ones to be Mortal Sins; i. e. To be worthy of Death. Men's Proverb
says, Words are but VVind; but the Divine Proverb says, They do blow Life or
Death. He that keeps his Mouth keeps his Life, but he that opens wide his
Lips shall have Destruction, Prove. 10. 19. And, Death and Life are in the Power
of the Tongue, Prove. 18. 21.

T. 4. Heaven and Earth are at a huge Distance. God and this Rebel-world, are
of most contrary Minds. For my Text declares that God cannot bear, the Talks
which they cannot leave. No, but addict themselves to, and affect and prize as
the Melody of their lives. His Soul hates their Foolish Talks, and their Souls
loath this Text and all its Parallels. Who then can please Men, and be the
Servant of Christ? Gal. 1. 10. Without becoming a Fool in the World's Repute
who can become Wise in God's Esteem? 1 Cor. 3. 18. Holy Lips, are a Thread of
Scarlet, Cant. 4. 3. This Thread, in God's Sight, is a rich Ornament; in the
World's Eye, it is only fit for a Fool's Coat. In short, we cannot have God's
Approbation, but we must bear the World's Blame. The World thinks every Man's
Folly wonderful, when he forsakes what God pronounces abominable; Luke 16. 15.
1 Pet. 4. 4.

T. 5. Diamonds have their Clouds. The truest Israelites have somewhat of the
Botch of Egypt. Horrid Spots are ever and anon found on very Nazarites, Lips.
For, foolish Talks and Jests are detestable; and yet there is not a just Man on
Earth that is perfectly free from them. Though every Saint be pressing on
toward Perfection, there is not any one has already attained it; Phil. 3. 12,
14. There is not one upon Earth, that never offends in word. O by what Grace
is it, that an Usher, an Owen, a Baxter is saved?

T. 6. The Horses in Pharaoh's Chariots, need Bridles in their Months. The
Phrase that I use is Christ's own, Cant. 1. 9. Believers are so called for
Spiritual Strength and Beauty. Egyptian Horses were the best of the World; and
doubtless, Pharaoh's were the best of Egypt, for Spirit and Shape. Believers
are compared to these; and yet have they no Tongue but needs Discipline. For,
so much is demonstrated by the Ephesian Saints being thus cautioned; Cautioned
in the Text and Context, against the detestable Sins of the Tongue. A Principle
of Grace in the Heart, excuses not a Bridle in the Mouth. Without which, a very
Moses will speak unadvisedly with his Lips; a Job will curse his Birthday; a
David's Fire will burn and break out; a Jeremy will abdicate himself from his
Ministry, Jer. 20. 9.

T. 7. Wisdom is a valuable Commodity. For, it seems that there is not a word
that can be safely spoke without it. Foolish ones, be Treason and Poison; and
without a Stock of Wisdom in our Hearts, all we speak must be Foolish. That is,
traitorous against God, and poisonous to our Selves and our Neighbors.
Silence, we would not be willingly condemned to; there are few but would rather
be deprived of the Motion of their Hands and Feet, than of their Tongues. Nor
indeed can a holy Manor Angel, choose to be Dumb. All the Creatures beside, are
Mutes; and but tuned instruments. They are Angles and Men, that are to make the
Music. They are the Orators of the University of the Creation. Miserable are
they, whose Mouths must necessarily speak, and yet their Hearts cannot
prudently indite!

T. 8. Thoughts be not free. For if the Words of the Mouth are not, why should
the Words of the Heart be so? If Foolish Talk with Men be detestable Sin, why
not Foolish Talk with our selves, also? Thoughts be nothing but unfledged
Words; Words, not yet taking wing? and flying forth. What we commonly name a
Word, is a Thought flown abroad; a Spark ascended from the fire of the Heart's
Coal. True; Foolish Oral-Talks and Jests do sin against our Neighbors, which
mental ones do not. But, the Fox is an unclean Beast while it hides in its
Hole, as well as when it comes forth for its Prey. And secret Sins, are
certain Sins as any. The old Law pronounced the Swan Unclean, though Feathers
of Snow hid its black Skin. The Viper is not more detestable than the
Cockatrices-Egg. Evil Thoughts grieved God to his Heart; Evil Thoughts made him
repent that he had made Man!

T. 9. Foolish Actions be gross Shames. For, if Foolish Words be Detestable,
Works much more; Because in them, Sin is obeyed and served by the whole Man.
And, if I may so speak, the Devil is denied nothing you can grant him. Also, in
them is the most Wilful of all Sin; for, as our Words are much more easily
restrained than our Thoughts, so our Actions are much more easily restrained
than our Words. Besides, in them is the most Laborious Sin; In wicked Thoughts
and Words, Men offer Satan what costs them next to nothing. Minds being
volatile as Air, and Tongues as active as Fire. But the Work of the Hands
ordinarily requires some Sweat of the Brows. Again, in Sins of Action, is
commonly a powerful Contagion; no Language is so persuasive to Good or Evil as
the Language of Practice. Evil Communication much corrupts good Manners; but,
I think, not more than Evil Manners corrupt good Communication!

T. 10. It Is little Wonder that Peace is grown so scarce. For, if Foolish Talks
and Jests be what has been said, the wonder is, that any Peace at all is left
among us. Because, every where, these are eaten as Men eat Bread; no Conscience
is made of them. And, it were a Marvel if such Poisons made no stirs in our
Souls; if such Enemies of all righteousness raised no Wars in our Consciences;
and no Variances with one another. Surely, we must less grieve the holy
Comforter, before he very much comfort us with Peace in our selves, and with
each other.

T. 11. It is not True that All Men say. For, generally, All do say, that this
Talk, which God pronounces Abominable, is very Innocent and Useful: And its
daily Practice is very consistent with true Godliness. God declares it to be a
Plague of Leprosy; and he is a rare and singular Man, that will not take it for
very Comeliness and Beauty. If any Spot, a Beauty-Spot.

T. 12. Rods are for the back of Fools. Severe Reproofs are due to Foolish
Talkers. For, it seems, their Sin is detestable, as well as Drunkards and
Whoremongers. And it should be considered by Ministers and Parents, that
neither of them ought to Whisper and but Mutter, against that which God does
Thunder: Or to tempt their Pupils to believe, that Folly of Words is None, or
but Small, by making their Reproofs of it Such.

T. 13. Honey may be Poisoned. For, what more grateful than Jesting? yet, what
more Mortal than Foolish Jests? The Natural Historian tells us of an Honey in
Africa, lusciously sweet, but perpetually distracting all that eat of it; being
by the Bees gathered from poisonous Flowers. Just like it is the Foolish
Jocularity so much admired in our day; the Haut-goust of all Discourses, the
Comedy of every Playful Chat. So valued, that it is proverbially said, They will
rather lose their Friend, and Soul also, than their Jest. Most poisonous are
the Weeds whence this Honey is gathered; and most wild and mad are the
operations of it. It destroys habitual Seriousness, and Gravity; inducing a
Wantonness and Levity Prejudicial, if not Deadly, to all Christian Temper and
Business. So St. Chrysostom on our Text; (...), It makes effeminate the Soul,
and impatient of severe Thoughts.

T. 14. Idle Company is a Swine-Sty. Wherein is nothing to feed, but much to
turn the Stomach of a good Man. For, sooner are the Men of it to be found
without Tongues, than without Talk; and much sooner without any Talk, than
without Foolish. And what is so loathsome, as has been foreshown. I judge of
others by my self, says the blessed Author of the Christian Directory; I fly
from a vain Talkative Person, as from a Bed that has Fleas or Lice. I would
shut my Doors against him, as I would stop my Windows against Wind and Cold in
Winter.

T. 15. The Snuffers of the Sanctuary ought to be of pure Gold. Who ever would
effectually Reprove and Reform others ill Ways, must Keep a good Tongue in his
Head. For if Foolish Talks and Jests be so detestable, as we have heard; he
that shall use them will have too ill a Name, to do any good Service. Because,
the best Meat is loathed when uncleanly Cooks dress it; and best Admonitions be
nauseated, when they are by Infamous Mouths delivered. Wisely the Spartan
Princes required such good things as were spoke by any ill Man, to be taken up
and repeated by some very good one: as fearing that the useful Documents would
not look like themselves, coming out of a Foot's Mouth. Rhetoric gilds the
Mouth, and gives it a rare gloss; but it is Grace that scowrs it clean, and
fits it for use!

T. 16. Holy-Tongues are God's Silver Trumpets. Gracious Discourse, is the
Music of his Delight. For, if the contrary be so detestable, this must needs
be as delectable. It is not for nothing that the Holy Scripture gives it such
Eulogies. Naming it Bread, to Feed; Silver, to Enrich; Health, to make Strong
and Useful; Honey, to Delight and give Pleasure; Wells of Water, to Refresh and
Cleanse; Scarlet, to Adorn and make Honorable; Glory, to Exalt and Magnify
God's Glory. For our Natural Faculties and our Supernatural Graces, without
Holy Discourse, are Mutes. We commend not God to others, nor draw others unto
God, by all our Knowledge and Wisdom, all our Hope and Love and Joy in Christ
Jesus, without holy Discourse. Wherefore, It is only the Devil and his Angels
would have us Dumb, and refrain from it. Nor is it to be doubted, but that such
as style it Cant and Nonsense, and fain would make an end of it; if it were in
their Power, they would disturb the Heavenly Quire also; break up that Meeting;
silence Angels and Glorified Spirits; make an end of the Song of God and of the
Lamb; destroy together our Hosanna's here, and their Hallelujah's above!

Of the Duties which might be hence pressed, I commend these principal; though
I have room but for short Exhortations, and must leave it to your selves to
make just Enlargements.

Duty 1. Learn the Weight of Words. Great is the Moment of your least Talk.
Light Words do make heavy Troubles here, and heavy Accounts for hereafter. None
weigh light in God's Balance. The Psalmist says of some, Their own Tongue
shall fall on them, Psalm. 64. 8. A fearful Weight! a Man would be easier under
a Mountain of Lead. Origin conceited, that the Tongue of Dives was eminently
his tormented Part in Hell, because it had been eminently his Sinning Part on
Earth. And St. Austin in his Confessions cried out, That his Tongue had been
the Furnace which had Vomited forth his impure Fires.

D. 2. Vnlearn false Rules of ordering your Words. The Philosopher says of
Youth; but it is true of every Age, (...). They Speak and Act more by Custom
than by Reason. More as others do, than as all ought to do. The Precept of my
Text cannot be obeyed, if this be not considered: that, the Most Men's Talks and
Jests are nothing but Faults, and the Best Men's be not Faultless. That Most
Men's are stark Naught, and the Best Men's are very Imperfect. And he that will
be a Christian, (...) Christ Jesus his Pattern. As his (...) so his Pattern. He
must (...) contrary Precepts and (...) addict himself unto Christ's (...) late
ones. Out of this (...) out of the Christian World.

D. 3. Buy rich Furniture (...) Discourse. While Heads have (...) Tongues will
have Talks; but (...) Hearts be Wise, Tongues Talk must (...) Foolish. The Lips
of the Wise disperse Knowledge, but the Heart of the Foolish does not so, Prove.
15. 7. The Heart is the Shop whence the Tongue takes all its Wares. If that be
poor, and empty of things of Value, this may and will vend abundance of Wares,
but no Goods. Buy the Truth, then, as its Divine Author counsels you. In short,
Go to the Price of true Wisdom; Do not expect it for nothing, though Grace
offers you a good Bargain; for you may have it for Asking, though not without.
God, of his Wistom and Holiness, will not Give unless you Ask; Pray and
Continue (...) Prayer. Men, of their (...), and worse, will (...) their
Teaching on any (...) from Asking. Wherefore, (...) come out of the Prison of
(...), break the great Bar of (...) Ask Wisdom, of God and (...) ask it; and
give neither (...) rest, till you sweetly Understand the Mystery of Christ and
the Laws of his Kingdom. Till you fear not being asked the meaning, of any
Article of the Apostles Creed, any Petition of the Lord's Prayer, any
Commandment of the Ten; or being put to give an account of the Nature and Use
of Holy Bapism and the Lord's Supper. When these you Know, then be Instructive;
till you Know these, let your Tongues be perpetually Inquisitive. To be Dumb is
no Wisdom; it is only to hide Folly* He is Wise who Opens the Door of his
Mouth, first, to call Wisdom in, and afterward to send it out!

D. 4. Enact a Law of (...) Lay a Command on your (...) come behind your
Thought. (...) the first Judges of your (...) God and Men will not so often (...)
them, when you your selves (...) Judge them before you do (...) To think before
we speak, is (...) vent abundance of God's Wrath (...) Man's, and abundance of
our (...) Repentance. When we do so, (...) Prevent many, and Lessen all the
Faults of our Speech. For then, if Bad, yet it is our Best; and to speak the
best a Man can, is some Praise. He that uses it, shall find, among equal
Judges, as much Pity as Blame for his very Faults. Besides; the Holy Ghost is
offended at the contrary Haste. And He is much pleased with this sort of
Slowness to Speak. Insomuch, that, by means of his Holy Aids, Children Speak
better when Deliberate, than Doctors when they are Rash. Want of Discretion
banes the Talk of Millions; but want of its Exercise as truly banes the Talk of
Thousands.

(...) Keep a strict Hand upon the (...) of the Tongue. Upon (...), I mean.
Love and Hate (...) What you ought, and as Much (...). Joy and Grieve, (...)
Fear, none but right Matters (...) due Measures. This will make (...) to your
Mind to School your (...). But Diseases of the (...) be, very Mortal to our
Under^tandings. Their Fumes put out the Eye of its Judgment, and Kill the Heart
of its Attention to our Acts. So that in what we call a Passion, the Tongue is
as an Horse in a Chafe, not to be curbed; as a Ship in a Tempest, not to be
managed.

D. 6. Set up full Purposes against Vicious Talks. Full ones are such as the
Understanding approves, the Conscience commands, the Will chooses, the Memory
prompts; all Powers conspire unto. You are Christians, and have such Purposes
against Sin in general. But many, I fear, are incautelous Christians, and have
not such Purposes against foolish (...) and Jests, in particular. These (...)
ones do honor God, and (...) will honor them. They be the (...) ward Votes
and Laws of our (...) Souls; and they will stand up (...) what is their own.
And (...) Provision for their Execution, as (...) does not ordinarily suffer to
be fruitless. Great is the Power of a Hoy^ Purpose.

D. 7. Follow Resolutions with Prayers. When the black Ignorance is dispelled,
and base Reluctance of our Hearts is conquered; the Falseness and Inconstance
remains to be feared. And as neither Hearts nor Tongues are to be safe kept but
by Divine Power; the Custody of neither is to be expected without Holy Prayer.

D. 8. Give your Selves the Joy of every Victory. Let him that hears your
Prayer have the Praise, which is entirely his own; but take you the Comfort,
which he allows and requires; when, through his Grace, you (...) speak; This
Day, being (...) I Reviled not; I Suffered, (...) not; Being tempted (...) Wits
unto Levity, I (...) argued them into (...) etc. -- When thus you (...) the
Grace of your Lord, (...) in the Lord and in his (...) Joyfully Praise the
Giver, (...), and Worker, and Triumph (...) his Goodness. This exquisite
Pleasure will cherish Care, and sweeten Endeavors and Prayers for more such
Victories!

D. 9. Let nothing Supersede the Watch of your Lips. Prayer engages to
Watchfulness, and not excuses it. Spiritual Conquests also, excuse not Care;
but together encourage and engage unto them. For, after them, Satan most rages;
and Christians Souls, like as their Bodies, when in highest places, are most
liable to Tempests. In short; no Beasts are at all times more apt to Stray, and
to do Injury, than our Lips. No Fire more easily breaks out and (...) hurt than
the Tongue, It is (...) and Iniquity at any time, to (...) over watching so
wild Cattle, and (...) let them go without Yokes and (...). To give over
looking to (...) Fire, of which, all know, we can (...) be too Careful.

D. 10. Exercise an Holy Revenge on your selves. For the Sin of your Tongues,
sharply Reprove and Shame your Selves. Let Repentance have its Perfect Work;
Humble your Souls deeply, and give not over hastily. Spare not the Rod; and
give not over for the crying of Flesh and Blood. Unto them this Work is
grievous; but by this Sorrow of the Countenance, Heart and Tongue are made
better. And, sooner shall faulty Oxen go better without the Goad, and wildest
Children be reclaimed without the Rod, than an Extravagant Tongue without this
Rebuke.

D. 11. Associate with none but Men of a pure Language. Who knows not (...)
most-Omnipotency of chosen (...) any? It is certain that in (...) Company, God
deserts (...) and Satan is let loose on them; (...) that they have is very much
(...) tower. They are as it were (...), and Satan the Potter; (...) them into
any sort of (...) unto Dishonor. Hypocrites can (...) Endure; but the Heart of
a (...) does Prefer, the Lip and Language of Canaan. And they are Wisely Good,
who willingly go near none, from whom they cannot come Wiser and Better, Prove.
14. 7.

D. 12. Make your Friends your Monitors. Give them your Leave, yea Entreaty, to
tell you when you speak amiss. Raise their Posse for your Defense. It will be
no contemptible one; unless when you have engaged them against your Sins, you
side and take part with your Sins against them. A wonder it is there should be
any need to urge this Practice. We make other Admonition the Condition of
Friendship; and cannot (...) Friend see our Feet in a wrong (...) and does not
haste to give us notice. We should reckon his Silence of our Error, a
Proclamation of his Unfaithfulness and Guile.

D. 13. Remember into what an Ear* every Word of yours droppeth. The Divine
aweful One hears all you say, as plain as if there were no Tongue in the World
stirring but yours. And when the Thoughts hereof are stirring in your Mind,
Experience can tell you how they facilitate the Rule of your Tongue. In the
hearing of a wise Man, no Fool will prate foolishly, but a drunken One.
Especially if, as the wise Man is endued with Wisdom to despise him, he be
also armed with Authority to punish him. What Mouths should we have, if we duly
minded how open God's Ear is now unto us; and how quickly his Mouth will be
opened to judge us?

D. 14. Esteem it glorious Martyrdom to bear Reproach, for the Purity of your
(...) Language of one (...) to the Natives of (...) you are born from Heaven,
(...) Citizens of that (...), and speak its Language, (...) no avoiding of
cruel Mockings (...) the People of this Earth. These, (...) enough to endure;
no, but you (...) as a Treasure. And (...) that you are dignified with them;
counting them to have more (...) the Crown than the Cross in them. The Zeal of
Socrates made him speak (...) hot as to scald his vicious Hearers; the Wildfire
of their Scoffs cast on him, moved him not. Famous is his Saying, That if
VVild-Asses kicked him, he would never commence a Suit against them. And shall
the Saints do no more than Socrates?

D. 15. Be Salt to all on Earth in whom you have any interest. Smartly Reprove
the Vices of their Speech: Put forth your utmost Authority and Power to purge
them away: Give your best Counsels, with Entreaties, for holy Language: Follow
with swee(...) Encouragements, as many as (...) the favor to be reformed by
you (...) many as receive the Divine Law from your Mouth. What a Charity is it
to cure such a Leprosy as that of Foolish Talking and Jesting? A Labor of Love
that God will not forget. A Service, in which you will find unknown Reward. The
Blessing of many Souls will come upon you; and your (...) will prosper. God
will cast more Salt into your Heart, and put more good Words into your Mouth.
For, to faithful Sowers he will minister Seed. Liberal Souls he will make Fat.
Sweetly will he amend us all, when all do dutifully correct one another. Would
you be made Clean, cleanse your Company.

D. 16. Finally, Bless God for your Truth, while you are short of the
Perfection that you seek. He that seeks not Perfection, is not sincere; but he
that indeed is sincere, through the Grace of the Gospel he is a perfect
Creature. (...) Man in Christ, and (...); he has no (...) on him; the Lord
(...) unto him; but honors (...) styles him a Perfect Man: (...) in him as a
Jewel, and an Apple (...) Eye: Deals with him most (...), withholding no good
thing (...) and making every thing (...) or good to him; as though no (...)
were found in him, while much (...) finds, and knows there is vastly (...) than
he can find, in himself; and his daily Cry is, Who shall deliver me from this
Body of Sin and Death? So that, as the Husbandman may with Joy look on his
Cornfieldsd, and bless God for the Riches thereof, though there be thousands
and Ten thousands of offensive Weeds therein; no less may you joyfully praise
God for his rich Saving-Grace, having the Testimony of your Consciences, that
in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, not slothfully, but with all diligence
given, you obey my Text. Although, full often, the Good that you (...) speak,
you do not; and the (...) you would not, that you do speak. (...) rather, Not
you, but Sin that (...) in you, speaks it. O bless the (...) that you are not
under the Law, (...) Grace. Not under the (...) of personal, perfect and (...);
but under the Law (...) of Repentance, Faith, and (...) Obedience! That you
have a (...) Righteousness of Jesus Christ (...) to you; and shall not be
rejected for the Imperfection of the Righteousness inherent in you.

It is not the least use to be made of my Doctrine, to bless God for our
blessed Pair of Advocates. For his Holy Spirit, who works in us Evangelical
Perfection; and his Holy Son, who has redeemed us from Damnation for want of
Legal Perfection, and of Absolute Inoffensiveness in our Talks. He makes an ill
Use of it indeed, who scares himself into Desperation either (...)
Attainableness of sincere (...) to it, or of the Acceptableness (...) to our
Supreme Judge. Against (...) I give Warning in my (...) Words; as supposing them
(...) keliest to pass unregarded. (...) already published Directions (...) to
Holy Discourse; I (...) no more added, than the (...) Alarms, Whosoever shall
keep (...) Law, and yet offend, in the one (...) (of my Text) he is guilty of
(...). And, if any Man seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but
deceives his own Heart, this Man's Religion is vain.

FINIS.

