The Church's Triumph over Death.

A Funeral-Sermon PREACHED Upon the Decease of Blessed Mr. Robert Fleming, Late
Pastor of a Church in Rotterdam.

By DANIEL BVRGESS.

Miseri Infideles appellant Mortem; Fideles vero quid nisi Pascham? Bern. de
Divin. Amor. Mors, Christianis Ludus est; Vinc. Lirinens. London, Printed by J.
D. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, and Andr.
Bell and J. Luntley at the Pestle and Mortar in Chancery Lane. 1694.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Henry Ashhurst, Baronet.
SIR,
THERE is a Frenzy abroad, of which Men do together Adore the Pipes, and
Neglect the Fountain. Make great court to his Ministers, and slight the King;
the King eternal. Worshipping the Stars that do lead to Christ, and crucifying
to themselves afresh, the Christ that they lead unto; yea, by Unbelief and
Disobedience, putting him to open Shame. But, I must Hope better things of You.
And believe it to be your Love of Christ, that constrains you to receive a
Paul, and an Apollos, as an Angel of God, yea as Christ himself.

Wherefore, as your extraordinary Kindness to another renowned Saint has been
told to the World by incomparable Pens; By Mr. Baxter (...), and by Dr. Bates
in Dedicat. Epistles.
I do resolve, that wheresoever this Sermon shall be read, your like Affection
to our heavenly FLEMING shall have its Memorial.

Very deeply I am impressed with your Favors done unto both: For their Love
was eminent, and much exceeded the Fame of it, to a Man Born to Reproach. And
not pretending to be Richer than his Brethren, in any other Treasure.

A Love to be wondered at; had it not been so known, that God is Love. And
that, therefore, Love is Godliness. And, where Godliness abounds,
Loving Kindness overflows. As we see in Angels, that do flagrantly Love the
least of Abraham's Children. And highly honor the meanest of sanctified Worms.

As for the Former, Jonathan must needs have known his David; and the World
will by and by have his Life in Folio to read. And, as concerning the Latter,
as little as any Man do you need to be told, with what a Fullness of God he was
filled. Sir, Your wondering Eyes were your Witnesses. The great Love he bare
you, gave you more than common Knowledge of him; whose Humility and Modesty hid
him so, that he was not much known, unto those who knew him most. As Ezekiel
speaks of other Angels, his Wings so covered his Feet. However, so much you
saw, that, as very well you might, you singularly loved him. And esteemed his
Love unto you, to be of that Kind which is most valuable next unto God's own
Love.

For the Information of others, somewhat is said of this Man of God, in the
following Pages. Whereto I can add this, which was said of the famous Antonine;
He has this Praise crowning all the rest, that he has no Gain-sayer of his
Praises. I hear not of any Dust to be blown off from this Diamond.

Honored Sir; Two or three of your Letters to me, bewailed the World's Loss,
the Church's, and Your own, in the Departure of holy FLEMING. Nor do I doubt,
but the best of the Church, and World do lay it to heart. Even, generally, all
that hear, how much Light, and Salt, and Balm, is taken from a needy Age.

For your Relief, and others, this is all in this Place to be said. It is
elsewhere shown, how we may hold Departed Saints in our Sight and in our
Service. Commemoration of Saints departed, on Heb. 13.7.
If the Course there prescribed be duly followed, I am certain that this
Saint's Death shall not be only his own Gain: But his Ascension to Heaven,
shall be made to further our Conversation therein. And notably contribute unto
the Victory, Joy, and Triumph of Faith, which this Sermon describes.

Thereto I dismiss you, without any Sallies of Flattery; the common Sin and
Scandal of Dedications. It must be confessed, that if all Praise of Sir Henry
Ashhurst be Flattery, Old England and New are overrun with that Leprosy. And,
the Israelites are much more sick of its Plague, than the Egyptians be. The
Name of ASHHURST was left richly perfumed by your excellent Father. And, I hear
not but it is so kept by your Self and your Right Honorable Brother. Sir
William A. Lord Mayor.
Otherwise, you had before this time loudly heard of it. For they do sink
deepest, who fall from Pinacles highest; they who were at first the best
Angels, are now the worst Devils, says Du Moulin. And by the Old Law, you had
been condemned to be burnt for the Profanation of such a Father's Name.
Comprehenditur cum filia filius, etc. Calv.
Lev. 21.9.

Surely the Sun must have looked Pale, and the Spheres have cast out their
Stars, if such as You and my Lord had forsaken your God, and the God of your
Fathers! And had left no better to be said of you, than Philostratus says of
Perinthius; Barely, that he was the Son of Rufus.

But, Sir, as you very well know; my Office is to bring low all Mountains and
Hills; not, the contrary. And, as my own Heart sweetly knows, my Ambition is to
Edify, not Magnify you; to serve your Faith, not your Fame; which, as it less
needs it, does less deserve it. Much rather would I provoke you to one good
Work, than make known all that ever you did. And be the meanest Instrument to
make you a better Man, than a Trumpet to proclaim you a good one.

Plain dealing is a Jewel; and will appear so one day, though now there be much
more of it at the Mill than about the Throne. And, I do account that
Earthly-Gods themselves are seldom so richly treated, as my Friends that be
entertained with these Complements. Sc. That, BARONETS must perish without the
New Birth. That, A Repenting Lazarus is of better Estate than a Jovial Dives.
That, A Grain of holy Faith is worth more than a Mountain of pure Gold. That,
In the Day of Judgment, Christ will be Ashamed of the Greatest, that are now
Ashamed of Christianity. That, Royal Heads, Honorable, and Worshipful Ones,
must worship God's Majesty, or bear his Fury! That, There is no Safety for the
Highest on Earth, without Trust in the most High in Heaven. That, They shall
suffer eternal Death, who Love not Christ Jesus above the richest Life. That,
No Greatness can save them from Vengeance, who deny Christ Reverence. That,
Whatever their Rank is in this World, their Portion shall be everlasting Shame,
who do not all that they do to God's Glory. That, The most Prosperous who will
not submit to God's Afflicting-hand, shall not escape his Revenging-hand! That,
If they Love not their Enemies, and Bless them that Curse them, and Do good to
them that Hate them, and Pray for them that Despitefully use them, and
Persecute them; they shall not be the Children of God. Finally, that, Whosoever
of them shall Live without Dying Thoughts, he shall Die without Living Comforts!

SIR, My Prayers cease not to Ascend for You, your Pious Consort, and eminently
Hopeful Branches: May You ever be more and more Honors to them; and They be
more and more Joys unto You. May neither of You, now sleep in the Afternoon;
for to that Time of Day it is come in your Lives! And may both of Them, have
their Noon and Evening answerable to their fair Morning. May Self-denial be
Your and their Business; without which, all Religion is but your Play: May your
Prosperity neither slay, or so much as wound you; in your Eye may the Paradises
which have no Tree of Life in them be contemned, though they are possessed. May
great Roots under Ground make you great Trees above it; rich Truth in the
inner-parts make you rich in good Works. May you prefer Heaven above Earth, as
manifestly as others prefer it above Hell! Not accounting your selves to have
much profited in Christianity, till you count that you have nothing else to
profit much in. And always remembering, that if you take not the Kingdom of
Heaven by force, the Kingdom of Hell will take you by it. May the Mercy of the
Lord rest upon the Family of the Ashhursts, and his Righteousness be to their
Childrens Children.

Under many Obligations, and in sweet Hopes, thus prays,

SIR, Your Honourer, and Humble Servant, DANIEL BURGESS.

BOOKS published by Mr. Robert Fleming.
1. THe Fulfilling of the Scripture: In three Parts. 2. The Confirming Work of
Religion. 3. The Treatise of Earthquakes. 4. The Epistolary Discourse;
Dedicated to the Queen's Majesty. 5. The One thing Necessary. 6. The Survey of
Quakerism. 7. The Present Aspect of the Times. 8. The Healing Work; written
twelve Years ago upon the account of Divisions among Professors in Scotland.
A SERMON on the Death of Mr. Robert Fleming.
1 COR. XV. 55, 56, 57. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory?

The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law.

But Thanks be to God who gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

(...).

(...).

(...).

Ubi est Aculeus tuus, O Mors? Ubi est Victoria tua, Inferne? Syriac. Ubi
suprema Vis tua, O Mors? Arabic. Ubi igitur Mortis Victoria? Ubi igitur Mortis
Stimulus? Aethiopic.
UPON this mournful Occasion I present this Text as a Pearl-Cordial, and the
most Restorative that I could find in the Divine Dispensatory.

Wonderful Words it consists of, such as seem too high to be uttered below
Heaven, and too soon-spoken before the Resurrection.

But what Heavenly Scribe wrote them, you do all know; and with how like a
Boldness and Bravery of Faith our holy FLEMING did use to sing them, all of you
are not ignorant.

They are made the Theme of this Discourse for this end, that they may also
become our Song in the House of our Pilgrimage.

There are obvious in them; A triumphant Song, v. 55. A justifying Reason, v.
56. A holy Gratulation, v. 57.


A triumphant Song, wherein Rhetoric has even exhausted it self; such is the
Melody of its Prosopopaeia, speaking to Death and the Grave as Persons and not
Things: Such is the Pungency of its Interrogation, which does not here doubt,
but upbraid and insult: Such the Elegancy of the Meiosis, covering the biggest
part of its meaning, asking no more than what is become of their Power to hurt,
though meaning, that both are made to work for Good: Such is the Glory of the
Celeusma and Shout, wherein Victory, Faith and Joy, as above Expression, are
published in Form of Admiration.

O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? O Death! O Grave!
our one Enemy bearing these two Names, once so strong as to conquer all, and so
cruel as to spare none; once a Dragon that swallowed up the World! an Abaddon
and Apolluon of Jewish World and Gentile! Christian Faith now dares look thee
in the Face, and ask, in Zebul's Words to Gaal, Where is now thy Mouth? It
proclaims thee to be as the Beast in the Revelation, which was and is not; yea
as a corrected Viper, of an horrid Poison to be made a sovereign Medicine! of a
King of Terrors to be made a gracious Prince of Peace; the loathsome Prison of
thy Grave to be turned to a quiet Bedchamber; and thy Sepulchers to be no more
Hell's Gates, Camero in Myrothec. in Mat. 16.18.
but Heaven's Porches.

It is true, thou retainest Power to kill the Bodies of Saints; but having so
done, thou can do no more: and what is it that thou do therein? Thou
killest, but make not an end of them: Thou curest them of Sin, their loathsome
Disease; and art a real Savior, and but a seeming Destroyer.

Power indeed thou have, sometimes to affrighten Souls. Abraham our Father was
affrighted by thee, Genesis 12. David the valiant was also scared, 1 Samuel 21.
Miserably thou did terrify upright Hezekiah, Isa. 38. And Peter's Magnanimity
vanished at a Shadow of thee, Mat. 26. But egregiam laudem, spolia ampla! Is
this thy Praise? To affrighten is no more than every Shadow can do; and what is
more inglorious than a Bugbear that is harmless? Thy affrightning Believers
speaks much Weakness in them, but not any Strength in thee.

It is confessed, as for thy Appearance, it is as of a Curse and not a
Blessing. Thou come with a Warrant in thy Hand from the supreme King, and
irresistably turnest all Flesh into Destruction. Upon thy devouring Sword
Christians do read Sin's terrible Mark, though Socinian Eyes see nothing but
mere Nature's. Punctura peccati morimur, is the Saints Motto: They believe thee
sent from their God to execute Wrath on their Sins; and full often do fear thee
sent to inflict it on their Souls; so much do thy cruel Hands look like God's
vindictive ones: but simillimum non est idem. And what art thou, O Death, but
as the End of Plants and Brutes, and the Ruin of Sinners, so the Gain of
Believers? such a Gain as passes Understanding, and makes their holy Faith to
proclaim thee more than a spoiled Spoiler, even a good and faithful Servant
become unto them; a Servant unto thy old Servants, who were all their days
subject to Bondage through fear of thee; all the days of their Christless
Estate subject to Bondage: But now that they are Christ's, thou, O Death, art
theirs! Thy Name has a Place in the Inventory of their Goods; 1 Cor. 3. Feed
on then upon thy Egyptians; Psalm. 49.14. But know, O Pharaoh and thy Princes! O
Death and thy Harbingers! the Heads of Leviathan are broken in pieces, they are
given to be Meat to Israelites inhabiting the Wilderness, Psalm. 74.14.

If it be insolently said, that this Triumph is too loud; that Death is the
great Fear of none but little Souls, and deserves not so lofty a Song; or that
it is not yet so dead but that it has Sting enough left to pinch and pain, and
poison its most exulting Victors; and Strength enough to hold them in its
Dungeon till the Resurrection. This Mouth of Infidelity is presently stopped.
Here follows,

A justifying Reason, such as clears the Triumph from the Charge of Absurdity.
It is confessed, if Death were but it self, and not Pars minima sui, it would
be unworthy of the Honor of being insulted over; it would be an Insect of an
inconsiderable Sting, if not a perfect Drone. An Enemy too despicable to be
triumphed over with Harp and Psaltery; nor would Christians blow a Trumpet for
the Overthrow of a Wasp. But Death's Name is Legion, and as it is an Host of
Enemies in one, it is a formidable one.

The Sting of Death is Sin, q. d. Sin is the whole Element of Evil, it is all
the Evil of Doing: Nothing beside is Evil essentially, or meritoriously. This
Hell of Sin being infused into Death, makes it like it self; even the whole
Element of Misery, and all the Evil of Suffering; where then, if not here,
shall be found a Trophy for Faith? Here, in Death envenomed by Sin: By Sin,
whereof a Spark made Devils of the most blessed Creatures. And no more than the
imputed Guilt made the ever-living God to sweat Blood! Seems this to be a
Paradox? Hear then;

The Strength of Sin is the Law, q. d. No wonder that Sin is so pernicious a
thing; for the Curse of the Divine Law is on it: And who can think what is
God's Power, or his Law's Terror? His Law must be like himself, as in its
Precepts and Promises, so in its Threats. The Punishments of so great a King
must necessarily be great: The Breach of his Law's Duty can deserve no less
than Extremity and Eternity of Misery; and the Curse laid upon it is no less.
No marvel then that Sin's Guilt makes a Hell of Death, being the Law's Curse
makes Sin a worse thing than Death or Hell; an Evil that Hell it self must
have all Eternity to punish.

But over both Law and Sin God gives us the Victory. As fiery as this Law is,
Christ's Blood quenches it: As boiling a Furnace as it makes of Sin, it cannot
make Sin to be the Death of a Believer's Soul. These, the worst of Enemies, are
first slain: For upon our first believing Christ's Righteousness is imputed;
and by that Imputation the Law's Curse and Sin's Condemnation are removed. Over
them we have Triumph sounded; Romans 7.4. Ye are dead to the Law by the Body of
Christ. And ver. 24, 25. Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Death's Dominion is therefore at an
end, though its Power to kill the most holy Body, and to detain the most sacred
Dust for a time, be not taken from it. In short, the Grace of Christ has made
Sin a broken Enemy, the Law a kind Friend, and Death a useful Servant. Does the
Saints Triumph therefore precede or exceed Victory? let the Wise judge.

When Israel was brought through the Red Sea, what Songs of Praise were
straitway sung? though they had a howling Desert to be passed through, and were
not presently in Canaan. Their Songs injected Terror to the Dukes of Edom, and
the mighty Men of Moab. Yea, the Greeks no sooner heard the Articles of Peace
purchased for them by Titus Flaminius, but they cried (...), a Savior, a
Savior. Plutarch in vit. T. Flam.
And with such Shouts of Joy, as made the Air to ring, and the Birds to drop
down astonished! A deep Lethargy it is that makes Christians Joy to be less,
while their Reason for it is infinitely more: That restrains them from such
Triumph, as would make the Infidel World to tremble.

But O where shall Offerings, and whole Burnt-offerings be found? For this
Victory, this Inchoate one, Lebanon is not sufficient, or the Cattle upon a
thousand Hills. But, as Jehoshaphat in Berachah, the Saints throughout the
Earth do bless the Captain of their Salvation and Conquest. The next Verse and
Breath, is

An holy Gratulation. A lovely Heaven of it, in a little Globe of Words.

Thanks be to God! To the Father, Son, and Spirit, our One God, be all holy
Obedience! Whereof, Gratitude is the principal Part; that which contains and
animates all. Laws bind to Obedience, and Benefits unto Thankfulness. But God
our Lawgiver is in all things our Benefactor. His very Laws, all, are
Benefits. To him be therefore all Obedient Thankfulness, and all Thankful
Obedience! To him,

Who gives us the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Of his Saints
Victory, we publish the Truth. We declare his Gift of Grace, to be the
Original. We testify the Limitation of this Gift, unto Believers only; and the
Extent of it, unto all Believers. As well to Babes in the Cradle of
Christianity, as the oldest Mnason's in God's Kingdom. We proclaim the never to
be forgotten Purchaser of it, the Lord Jesus Christ. Whose Death gave the Angel
of Death his mortal Wound. Whose Resurrection certified and exemplified
Believers. Whose Righteousness, by Faith received, instateth them in the Power
of an endless Life. Whose Sanctifying Spirit mortifieth sinful Lusts, which be
not the least Stings of Death. Whose Comforting Spirit takes out the Pain and
Anguish that Sin sticks into our Souls. And whose Glorious Appearing one day,
will fulfill his old Word to a tittle; O Death I will be thy Plague, O Grave I
will be thy Destruction!

Waving all others, the Argument I take hence, is this.

Holy Believers on Christ, do rejoice in their Victory over Death. Truly,
Righteously, and Holily, they rejoice in their Salvation by Christ. They sing,
O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? etc. The Plural
Number in which he speaks, may assure us that the Apostle sung in Consort:
Thanks be to God, who gives us the Victory. And it shall be shown, that this
Text is all the Holy Catholic Church's Song. Which, while Militant, is so far
triumphant. We may say of Death, and of all Enemies in Combination with it, as
St. John says of the World, Whosoever is born of God, overcomes them. And
this is the Victory that overcomes them, even our Faith. Consequently, he that
overcomes, and shall not be hurt of the second Death, must take it for his
Duty, and make it his Practice, to joy in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of
his Salvation.

But lest, with the Dogs, I should shut Children out of the Church-Doors, and
wound any that have already the Arrows of the Almighty sticking in them, I must
premise two things.

Obstructions are allowed for. It is not affirmed, that all, or any Believers,
do always rejoice. Full often they are hindered, by Bodily Maladies, by Mental
Mistakes, by Satan's Buffetings, and by Divine Desertions. Under which, their
Harp is turned to Mourning, and their Organ into the Voice of them that weep.
And Secondly,

Degrees be wondrously different. Of them that sing Triumph; the Voice of some
is as Thunder, which all hear; the Voice of others is a scarcely audible
Whisper. Some have but a Drop of the Oil of Joy; others, in comparison, a very
Sea of it.

However, this is asserted of all Believers. The Joy of Faith is the chief Joy
of every sort of them. Of them that want it none dare to slight it. None can
rest, or be very easy, till they have it. The New Nature in them pants for
it, as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks. And as often as they get from
under the foresaid Obstructions,

. 1. Believers do truly rejoice in their Victory over Death.
Here Examples shall show THAT they do so, and Reasons shall satisfy WHY they
must so do.

The Time would fail to tell of Abraham, foreseeing the Day and Work of his
victorious Lord, and rejoicing in it. Of Jacob, cheering himself under heaviest
Pressures, with the same comforting Prospect. Of Job, insulting over Death, and
glorying in his Assurance of a blessed Resurrection. Of David, proclaiming that
his God would not leave him in Death: And that he would fear no Evil, when he
walked through the Valley of its Shadow.

The Heart of the Saints of the Old Testament, is to be seen in the Song of
Solomon. Hear it uttering it self to the Lord Jesus Christ; We will be glad,
and rejoice in thee: In thee, that is, by whose Stripes we are healed. In thee,
on whom the Lord has laid the Iniquities of us all, and by the Faith of whom
he justifies us. In thee, to whom a Portion is divided with the Great, and who
do divide the Spoil with the Strong, as the Evangelical Prophet speaks. We
will remember thy redeeming Love more than Wine: I sat down under his Shadow
with great Delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my Taste. Consult, with these
Manifesto's, the Psalms and Songs of his Father David. It shall appear, that
the Church was dancing for Joy, before the Day brake, and the Shadows flew
away, and the Sun of Righteousness arose with the Light and Glory of the New
Testament.

Under which, who needs to be told, what a Spirit of Joy was presently poured
out? Glad Tidings of great Joy, the heavenly Heralds called the Gospel.
Wherever it comes, a Torrent of Joy follows it. Gladly it is received, at its
first Publication, though with the loss of all things adventured. Philip
preaches it at Samaria, and there is great Joy in all the City. We glory in
Tribulations: We rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory: We are more
than Conquerours. We are always confident, and willing rather to be absent from
the Body, and present with the Lord. We are -- always rejoicing. We rejoice in
the Hope of the Glory of God. Thus speak the Apostles, as well of their
Converts as of Themselves.

And what says Ecclesiastical History, of the Ages ever since? The same Spirit
of Joy and Gladness has been in all times of the Church: They that have loved
the Lord Jesus, have rejoiced in him. And in his Name have wished for Death,
have welcomed it, and have been unterrified with its most ghastly Shapes and
Pomps. Polycarp desires his Executioners to let him show them, that he could
burn at a Stake without being tied to it. Lucius, thanketh a barbarous Judge for
the Favor of sending him to his God, and Father. Cyprian, thanks God for his
Jail-delivery by Death. Hilarion cries, Out of this Body O my Soul! What, is
there any thing for thee to fear? For thee, an old Servant of Christ! But to
come nigher our own days. Cranmer thrusts his Right Hand into the Fire, to be
revenged on it for subscribing a Damned Scroll, as he called it, for fear of
Death. Think you that I have not learned to die? said Adam Damlip. Be at my
burning, you shall see and say, There Is a Soldier of Christ, said Kirby.
Ridley called his Death his Wedding. And Latimer told the Bishop going before
him to the Stake, he would have after him as fast as he could: And when Fire
was put to him, with a smiling Face, he uttered these Words, God is faithful,
who does not suffer us to be tempted above our Strength. Bainam, in the Fire
professed he felt no more Pain than on a Bed of Down. Death in the most hideous
Shapes, has been thus triumphed over. Clouds of Instances are to be read, even
in English Books.

And do we not know Multitudes of surviving Friends and Neighbors, whom we
discern to be of the Mind of the Martyr, Adam Wallack? If Death be ready, we
are ready. Blessed be God this Age is not so forsaken by him, but that there
are Multitudes to whom Christ's Word is verified; Your Heart shall rejoice, and
your Joy shall no Man take from you.

Is it yet, with any of you, a hard Saying, which holy Hildersam has written?
He that does not desire, and strive to be willing to die, he has cause to
suspect that there is no true saving Grace in him. Or that harmonious Passage
of great Calvin on Hebrews 2.14. He that is not able to quiet his Heart in holy
Contempt of Death, let him know that he has made but little progress in the
Faith of Christ. For as excessive Fear of Death arises from Ignorance of the
Grace of Christ, so it is a sure Sign of Unbelief. Or, that of Dr. Hammond on 1 Timothy 1.15. If the Conversion of a Sinner be not accompanied with unwonted Joy
and Sorrow, a Godly Sense of past Distress, and a Godly Triumph for his
Delivery, I counsel not to Distrust but to Fear; to a solicitous, though not a
suspicious Trembling. Let me add one more of Mr. Ward of Ipswich; If we had but
half the Strength of St. Paul 's Faith, or Life of his Hope, or
Fore-imaginations which he had of his future Felicity, we could not but have
the same Desires and Longings for our Fruition of them. I think few Truths to
be more evident. But it is possible that these following Reasons may add to its
Evidence.

These Reasons I give, why Believers must needs rejoice in their Victory over
Death.

First; Believers are Men: And it is the Nature of Man to rejoice in his most
desired Good, when he knows it to be obtained.

Victory over Death is certainly the most desired, and the obtained Good of
Believers. And, ordinarily, they do know themselves to have obtained it,
through Christ their Lord. For, the Law of Grace, through Faith they do
understand. Their own Acts of Grace, by Sense they do perceive. And, their
State of Grace, by Reason they do infer. And the Spirit which is of God they do
receive, whereby they know the things which are freely given them of God, 1
Cor. 2.12. What our Savior, in his days on Earth, said to the Ears of some,
the Holy Ghost says now to Believers Hearts, Be of good cheer, your Sins are
forgiven: Witnessing with their Spirits, that they are the Children of God,
Romans 8.16. Not only enlightening their Minds to see the Truth of their Graces,
and thence to conclude themselves in a State of Grace; but, verbis mentalibus,
by secret spiritual Words, by internal mysterious Whispers, testifying unto
them that they are in that blessed State. For, the Matter of Witnessing is more
than Enabling a Person to read his Evidence. In Westminster Hall he would not
be taken for a Witness, who should do no more than hold a Candle to one reading
his Evidence. But the Holy Ghost the Comforter is expressly named a Witness to
Believers, of their being taken into the Number, and being blessed with all the
Privileges of the Sons of God.

Ordinarily, therefore, I say, that Believers do know the Cause of Joy that
they have. Though, as has been foresaid, Times of Desertion there are, in
which they know it not. And it is most certain, the heavenly Comforter, does
not at all times comfort. Nor is joyful Assurance, of the very Essence of
justifying saving Faith. But, by reason of forenamed Obstructions, Children of
Light may sit all their days in the Dark and in the Deeps: And ascend to Heaven
at last, in a thick Cloud. Otherwise, we do all generally believe and teach,
that the Spirit of Adoption being given unto Sons, as Sons of God, he is given
unto every Child of God: And, commonly, they do know themselves Conquerors, who
are in Christ, and are not reprobate, unsound Christians.

This being admitted, they must be dead, and not lively Stones, as St. Peter
calls them, if they Rejoice not. They must cease to be Men, if they become not
joyful Ones. They must be stupefied, as soon as Justified and Adopted. For, the
Humane Nature has an inseparable Instinct and Power; which, on good Tidings
heard, does transport Minds and Bodies into Expressions of Gladness. Diffusing
Spirits, and by them sending forth the News; trying, as it were, by
communicating, to multiply it. Gaudio, cogendi vis inest; The Roman Orator
says, and all Men feel it: Joy enters with a Violence, and with a grateful
Violence, that we are not able to resist, breaks forth from us. Who thinks that
David was able to forbear his Dance before the Ark? Or, that the healed Cripple
could contain himself from Running, Leaping, and Praising God? We have read of
them who have died of Joy: and it is true which one says; Should Believers
have the Degrees of Assurance, which imprudently they do sometimes desire, they
must presently Die for Joy, or be kept Alive by Miracle. In short then;

Believers must put off Nature if they rejoice not in Christ's Grace: They must
be without natural Affection if they be without any spiritual Consolation, if
ordinarily they be so.

Secondly; Believers are wise Men: And it is Wisdom to rejoice in such Felicity
as Victory over Death.

In the Day of Prosperity Nature necessitates Joy, and Reason enforces it: For
Happiness is a Feast made for Mirth; and how monstrous a Folly must it be to
frustrate so kind a Design upon us? Wisdom is a true Gust and right Relish of
things; Sapit cui res sapiunt ita ut sunt: But how far be they from it who
taste no Sweetness in the Milk and Honey that flow in this Victory? Hearts
delighting not themselves in Substances, do most certainly delight themselves
in Shadows: And what a Delusion is that? what a gathering together of all
Folly, and a very Sea of it?

The Laughter of Wretches laden with Irons, or standing on the Ladder ready for
Execution, seems not greater Madness than the Disconsolateness of them when
they are both pardoned and advanced. Should the Saints and Angels in Heaven
cease rejoicing, it were to be asked, What Wisdom is in them? They would be to
be charged with extreme Folly. Unreasonable it would be for them to give over
Rejoicing, as it would be for Devils and damned Ghosts to begin: And yet it is
most certain, that Justified and Adopted Believers have as true Cause of Joy as
Angels and glorified Spirits; are in a State, only in Degree, less blessed;
consequently have as true Reason to sing Hosannah's here below, as they to sing
Hallelujah's above; and cannot but hold on Songs of Joy in the House of their
Pilgrimage, without first becoming senseless of their Conquest: Joyful Praise is
comely for them. Nor is Triumph on the way to Hell more unreasonable, than on
the way to Heaven it is discreet. In a word;

To think that Saints did ordinarily incur and indulge the Guilt of its
Neglect, would be to think them what the World styles them, Men besides
themselves. This Guilt would be a dead Fly in their Ointment, and make it to
send forth so stinking a Savor of the most loathsome Folly.

Thirdly; Believers are Righteous Men; and it is their Justice to be glad, and
triumph in their Victory over Death.

Justice witholds not what is due, when it is in the Power of its Hand to
repay: To repay Vengeance to Evildoers, and Praise to them that do well. Death
and its Accomplices, the Law, Sin, Satan and Hell, are Enemies that have
tragically used Believers; made them to bear God knows what, shamed them, and
tempted them to curse the Day of their Birth; held them subject to Bondage,
through Fear, all the time that they laid under their Power. A holy Revenge is
now owing to Sin and to Satan; and now that through Christ they are taken out
of those cruel Hands, they are able to pay it; able to expose them, and put
them to open Shame; to show abroad how they themselves have been used by one
mightier than they; how the Law, as damning, is abolished; Sin is condemned;
Satan's Head is bruised; Death is plagued; the Grave is destroyed; and Hell
has its Mouth stopped.

On the contrary, there is no finding out to Perfection, the Breadth and
Length, the Depth and Height of God's Grace. The Love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord passes all Understanding: His Grace, and his Gift by Grace unto
Believers, are ineffable; infinitely free, without Merit in us or any Motive.
Astonishingly rich, while we were Enemies, most defiled and deformed ones; and
equally without Power to resist damning Justice, and without the Prudence to
ask Saving-Mercy: Angels, our Elders and Betters, were not pitied, but
irreversably doomed to Destruction. More than Angels and all the Creation was
worth, was given to redeem us; even as much more than they are worth, as God by
Essence exceeds the mere Creature. Christ is God by eternal Essence; and yet
God spared not that his Son, but gave him up to redeem Rebels: whereat Hell
envies, and Heaven wonders. A vast Tribute of Praise must hence rise due; so
due, that if Believers be silent, the Stones must needs cry out. Believers,
that now are no longer Mutes, have the dumb Devil expelled, and their Mouths
opened for Praise; their Tongues touched with a Coal from the holy Altar, and
qualified to lift up the Name of their Redeemer.

But what save Triumph in their Victory, through him, can render to Death the
things that are Death's, or to Christ the things that are Christ's? If Faith
does not now play on the Hole of that Asp, and boldly put its Hand on that
Cockatrice's Den, what Shame does it thereto? If it does not joy in the Lord,
and rejoice in the God of its Salvation, what Honor does it pay him? How makes
it to be seen, either that Death is disarmed, or that it was Christ who did
take away its two-edged Sword? That, of worst Loss it is made our great Gain;
or that Christ was he who so blessedly converted it? Wherefore,

Believers must not be thought to put on Righteousness, or to deserve the Name
of just Men, but to be most unlike to their righteous Lord, who loves
Righteousness, if they are taken for Men void of David's Resolution; I will
sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing Praise to my God while I have
my Being.

Fourthly; Believers are crowned Heads, Men of Honor, Kings and Priests to
God; and it is their Honor to rejoice and triumph over Death.

Fight is not honorable without Victory, nor Victory without Triumph.
Believers fight the good Fight of Faith, and overcome by the Blood of the Lamb;
but without the Joy and Triumph of Faith they appear but as Sampson when
shaven, like any other Man. Joy is their sensible and visible Principality, the
conspicuous Crown of their Glory: take away that, and they are Kings deprived
of their Crowns; Priests unadorned with their holy Garments for Beauty and for
Glory, inglorious and unlike themselves; Eye-sores, and offensive to him that
made them Kings and Priests; and, in the World's Eyes, the vilest Abjects; yea,
many an one becomes a Magor-missabib, a Terror to himself and all about him.
The Israelites, when their Ornaments were off, were naked, to their shame:
Believers are so when their Joy cease. If there come in among them those that
are Unlearned or Unbelievers, they cannot think God to be in them of a Truth,
or see what they are, or do more than others.

Certain it is, that God does not willingly grieve them; and the World and
Devil cannot take away their Joy from them, till they themselves do cast it
away. Divine Grace fails not to minister Comfort to them, while they keep in
the way of Comfort: So that their Joy never dies but when they kill it; their
Honor is not laid in the Dust but by their own Hands. Wherefore,

How unworthy a Judgment must we make of Believers, if we take them for a
Generation so careless of their Honor? yea such Murderers of it? for they are
no less who cast away the joyful Confidence and Hope which keeps them from
appearing of all Men the most miserable. The Garment of Praise that can very
much distinguish between God's Heirs, and Satan's Slaves.

Fifthly; Believers are Lovers of true Pleasures; and it is their only Pleasure
to joy and triumph in Christ Jesus, and in God through him.

Pleasure is the Life of Life; the End of Action, and the Strength of Agents
unto it. Carnal Men do in all things pursue carnal Pleasures; and spiritual Men
spiritual ones. Pleasure is the Spring of Action in both: and in both, Joy is
Strength, and Sorrow lays amort.

Heaviness in the Heart of a Man boweth it down: Like a Moth in a Garment it
bites asunder its Strings and its Strength; insomuch that the Counsels and
Determinations of disconsolate Souls are faint and tottering, like the Motions
of wounded Bodies. But merry Hearts do good like Medicines; they prevent and
remove Indispositions: they are also continual Feasts, and preserve Spirits:
Salt and Sauce they are, to sweeten all things in Peace; and as Drums and
Trumpets they inspire Courage in War. Wherefore the Love of Action draws with
it the Love of Joy: And inseparable are the Desires of holy Life and holy
Mirth; Mirth and Joy (as the Water of Aesculapius his Well was feigned to be)
incapable of Putrefaction.

But what Joy is so, save Joy in the Salvation of the Lord? All others,
corporal and intellectual, are vanishing in themselves; and without this are
delusive and corruptive. A Nature they have that is clogging, and such as makes
Variety needful to keep out Loathing. Believers do see this, and therefore
despise the Cucumbers and Melons, which they did eat freely in their dark
Egyptian State. Manna they must have now, or they die: a Bread and a Joy that
the World knows not of; one in a higher Object, and perfect without defect,
perpetual without Decay; wherein all Desires may be satisfied, and all Wants be
supplied. Now,

What Charity, which thinks no Evil, can think Believers to be a Number of
bewitched Creatures? which they must be above any heard of upon this Earth, if
having a Desire of Joy as of Life, and having no other Joy, or at least none
that they can exercise without this of their Victory by Christ, they do not
constantly rejoice herein. Is it credible that the New Creature is one that is
averse from his sole Pleasure? negligent of what is dear to it as its Life?

Sixthly; Believers are the Lights of the World, and Salt of the Earth: and it
is their capital Service to the Church and World to triumph over Death.

The Work of converting, confirming, and comforting Souls, is the whole
Business of a Minister; but it is the true Business of every Believer. Doing
Good unto all Men is the Duty of all, and the Practice of all that be truly
good: It is sure that all such do desire and endeavor, in their places, to
make others good; and accordingly have the honorable Names given them in the
Word, which speak them to be very useful in the World.

Touching the Means of their Usefulness, it is known, even to a Proverb, that
Precepts do far less avail than Examples: and of Examples of holy Life, it
needs not to be said how incomparably most beneficial those are which are most
resplendent with Divine Consolation! How much more than others these do attract
and win the Tractable, shame and silence the Incorrigible, quicken the supine
and slothful Christian, strengthen the weak and wavering, and solace all!
These, it is confessed, do singularly lift up the Hands that hang down, and the
feeble Knees; and keep what is lame from being turned out of the way, and heal
it. But it is to be awfully thought on, what I add.

Unspeakable are the sad Effects and Consequences of holy Men's sad and utterly
comfortless Walk. Weak Christians see it, and call in question the Truth of
Christianity: Scorners do open wide their Mouth: Ignorant Wanderers from the
way of Truth are hardened against it: The Lovers of God are grieved. And till
such time as good Men's Sackcloth is put off, and they become girded with
Gladness, their Light hardly sends forth any convincing or converting Beams:
Their Salt emits little piercing and purifying Savor.

If therefore the Love of God, or Love of Men moves them, Believers must watch
and pray for the Voice of Joy and Gladness: without which, as their own Souls
be disquieted, others are dismayed; and the Ways of their God are by them
exposed to the Jealousies of his Children, and to the Prejudices of his
Enemies. Their Character is blotted, and they must be taken rather for the
defiling Pitch than the cleansing Salt of the Earth.

Lastly; Believers are obedient Children of God; and it is their required
Obedience to triumph in their Victory through Christ.

It is not only a License for it that the Gospel gives them, but it is a
Precept. The old Primitive Law bound Man innocent to Joy and Glory in his
blessed Life: The Redeemer's Law does not less oblige Man renewed, to Joy and
Glory in his more wonderful Salvation; in his more blessed Life brought out of
Death.

Who knows not how expressly and repeatedly this Precept is proclaimed? Be glad
in the Lord, and rejoice ye Righteous! Shout for Joy all ye that are upright!
Let the Saints be joyful in Glory, let them sing aloud. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad: Rejoice in the Lord; and again I say, Rejoice: Rejoice
evermore. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with Joyfulness and
Gladness of Heart, thou shall serve thine Enemies, etc. Texts are numberless.
Under the Law it self many were the Feasts instituted for one Fast. In the
Gospel-day the Holy Ghost is sent to be a Comforter extraordinary. It were
endless to enumerate the Ways in which God expresses his Zeal for his Saints
Joy. The Reasons of which Zeal are both great and evident. For,

Joy is the commanding Affection, the End of all others, that which all do
subserve and seek: And if this Ruler be corrupted, all its Servants are
necessarily wicked. If this Potentate be not obedient to God, it draws the
whole Man into Rebellion. He that rejoiceth not in Christ Jesus, feels a
thousand Temptations to forsake him; yea, in a fearful Degree he does forsake
him: for not to delight and rejoice in him is to vilify and dishonor him; and
that is to forsake him, with whatever unpleasant Services you shall all the
while follow him. All is Carrion that is not cheerfully given; it is not pure
Sacrifice that is not offered with Joy and Gladness. In short, Thoughts of a
Christ not delighted in will come but seldom, and stay but little in any Mind:
and a Heart not delighted in him, will soon believe a little Meditation of him
to be enough; and all the Duties which are laborious to be an Excess. Why are
secret ones, and public, so generally neglected? What makes Backwardness to
them, and Weariness in them? Whence rise Christians Inclinations to foolish
forbidden Chats and Games? Whence comes their Quarrelsomness with each other,
and with their spiritual Fathers and Nurses? To these and many like Questions
it must be answered, They rejoice not in Christ Jesus. It needs not be said how
impossible it is, without Joy in him, to rejoice in Tribulations, to take
joyfully the spoiling of outward Goods, and to lay down our Lives for him!
Sense does sufficiently certify it.

What shall we then judge of Believers, if we take them for Men that make no
Conscience of rejoicing in Christ? We must judge them in the worst sense to be
Solifidians; very Demoniacks that break all Bonds, and cast the strongest Cords
of God behind their Backs; which is as truly impossible as it would be
unrighteous for a sound Believer ordinarily to do.

Extraordinary is the Case of Persons obstructed by a melancholy Habit of Body
and temporary Temptations: To will is present with them, though how to do they
find not: They are not Fugitives, but Captives, and sold under Sorrow: So that
it is a Duty they would do, which they do not do: while remembering Death, they
are troubled, they complain, and their Spirit is overwhelmed. Of other
Christians I stick not to say, They do not rightly seek the Lord who rejoice
not, and are not glad in him through whom they are Conquerors of Death; who are
Strangers to the Peace, the Joy, and the Glory of Faith; Romans 5.1, 2, 3.

I am next to show, that

. 2. Saints do Righteously triumph aloud over Death.
To shout for Joy as soon as they are in Christ, is their reasonable Service:
The Equity of the Command is apparent as the Authority of the Lawgiver; and
the Objections against it are Chaff easily blown away.

The Sum of them all is this: Heaven only is the Seat of high Joy. On Earth
it is (...), absurd, and out of Place. It is a Business proper for none but
Spirits made perfect; unspotted with Sin, unclouded with Sorrow, unalarmed with
Fear: but most unfit for Souls that are bemired with Corruption, laden with
Guilt, clothed with Infirmities, surrounded with Temptations, and in Jeopardy
every Hour.

The Answer is of no Difficulty: Though the King's Presence makes the Fullness
of Joy above, it gives abundance below. The Victory given to Believers in
Vocation and Adoption, possesses them of an Heaven on Earth. We which have
believed do enter into Rest, Heb. 4.3. Ye that believe on the Name of the Son
of God, may know that ye have eternal Life, 1 John 5.13. This but-inchoate
Victory, makes all old things pass away, and all things become new. The
Believer's Corruption is mortified, Guilt's pardoned, Infirmities gradually
healed, Temptations rebuked, Persecutions sweetened, Death disarmed; and all
things are made to serve his Interests: All things are yours, 1 Cor. 3. What is
there to hurt, after removal of Sin's Guilt, and the Law's Curse, which is the
Divine Hatred and Wrath? What is lacking to his Comfort, whose Transgression is
forgiven and Sin covered? In short;

There do meet in this inchoate Victory of Believers, all things requisite to
make an Object of Joy unspeakable; and, thereby, to justify the most lofty
Triumph. For, what should put a Soul into Exultation, if not,

First, So Great a Blessing? One if it must be called, it is One and All. And
of a Greatness shining forth in the extreme and eternal Evil, from which it
exempts; and Good, wherewith it endows. If the Pitch of Joy should be
proportionable to the Good of its Object, here can be no Excess.

Secondly, So Everlasting an One? The greatest things, if like Jordan's
Streams, they hasten to a sulphurous Lake, are unworthy of Delight. It is a
sorry Feast, on which Death it self must one day feed. But, Duration makes
things of value to be invaluable. And nothing is more durable than a Believer's
Victory. His Crown is immortal: And Heaven shall no longer be a Kingdom, than
he reigns in it with Christ. Peccata non redeunt; his Pardon is irrevocable;
the Love of God to him is unchangeable; the Seed of God in him is
incorruptible. If then Immortality it self does appretiate; all Joy is not too
much for him, whose Object is for all Eternity. (...).

Thirdly, So Suitable an One? The most durable Goodness gives little Joy without
Sutableness. Pleasure, is applicatio convenientis convenienti. All the Mines of
India would less transport a famishing Man, than a Morsel of Bread. But never
was Gift so suited to a Creature's Need, as Believer's Victory is. Herein, being
in themselves dead, in Christ they are made alive. Being blind, they receive
their sight. Being weak, they are made strong. Being miserable, they are made
blessed. Being mutable, they are eternally established; Joh. 6.57. As the
living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats me
shall live by me. They must, therefore, die for Joy, who joy too much for their
Victory: And scarcely could that it self, be called too much.

Fourthly, So Sumptuous an One? All the World rates high what is bought dear.
But, was there ever such a Purchase as the Believer's Conquest? It astonished
the Angels. Our Savior mentions it, not without Wonder, Joh. 3.16. The Price,
was the very Blood of God. And only the Mind of God, can comprehend the Worth
of the Blood of God. Wherefore, of the most triumphant Joy herein, it is boldly
to be asked, Is there not a Cause?

Fifthly, So Rare a Blessing? Rarity does extremely enhanse Value. Diamonds
would be no Idols, if they were no Rarities. Yea, what would Crowns be, if
every Head wore one? It is what few attain, that all do admire. Now of
Believers Victory, who knows not how little there is of Commonness, to take
away from the Comfort? Alas, of the Many called to it, how Few are chosen, how
Few will come to Christ for it? And of the lapsed Angels, not so much as One
recovered his Fall. Believers highest Joy is then surely unblamable, if Rarity
makes good things delectable; and adds Sweetness to Honey it self.

Sixthly, So Present an One? It is most true, absent Good is the Object but of
Desire; it must be present, before it can be embraced with Delight. Infidels
ask, therefore, of Believers, Are they not mad? Mad, to pretend their Souls
filled with the Marrow and Fatness of things far from them. But, they are to be
told, Believers are not drunken as they suppose! It is in things present, that
they exult. Present, though to the World invisible. And real, though every
where spoken against, as very Chimera's. The Glories of their Victory are
present, in the Eye of Faith seeing them, in the Hand of Faith receiving them,
in the Mouth of Faith tasting them. Or, (to speak more to the Capacities of
Infidel Objectors) it must be said that the Blessing wherein they rejoice, is
in their Minds in daily Contemplation; is in their Hearts in constant
Expectation, is in their whole-Man in sweet Fruition. And how are the things in
which they themselves do triumph, any more, or otherways present to them? Do
natural things incur their natural Senses? As truly do spiritual Ones incur the
spiritual Senses of Believers. Whose spiritual Sight and Taste, do therefore
make their Exultations as just.

No more Candles shall be lighted in this Sun. I proceed to evince that the
Souls so joyful and thankful, are holy; that,

. 3. Believers do triumph Holily over Death.
Their Laughter is not Madness. If it be asked of their Mirth, what does it? it
must be answered, It does on Earth, what Saints and Angels Mirth does in
Heaven. It gives Praise and Thanks to God, and to the Lamb: For,

O Death, where is thy Sting? never goes before, but Thanks be to God follows
fast after. Thankful Repentance, thankful Faith, Hope, and Love, thankful
New-Obedience.

Blind Seers are the Romanists, and others, who teach otherwise: And would bear
us in hand, that Assurance of Victory over Death, is a Wine too strong for the
Head of any Viator; any living Believer. Such, whose Mirth would be Madness;
and the Joy of it, turn the Grace of God into Wantonness: Dispose us to nothing
but Sloth and Security, Pride and Presumption. But, what do the Arguings of Men
so sensual, and void of the Spirit of Faith, avail?

It is true, there are Wretches of slight and frothy Spirits, who will be
boasting of a false Gift, a Cloud without Water. Proclaim their wondrous Joy,
and speak swelling words; though their Cloven-feet do manifestly confute their
flaming Tongues. And, not walking in the Fear of the Lord, it is sure they do
not walk in the Joy of the Holy Ghost. No small stumbling Block this has been
to Men of Senses, not exercised to discern. But these following Particulars,
will convince or confound all Gainsayers.

First; The Efficient Worker of the Joy and Triumph we speak of, is the Holy
Ghost. Expressly it is named his: Whose Operations, no doubt, are holy, and make
for Holiness. His comforting Work tending as much to sanctify, as his
sanctifying Work tends to comfort us. A contrary Thought would be Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, and plainly make him a Minister of Sin.

Secondly; The Law of this Joy, is the Holy Gospel. Believers Joy is as surely
by the Gospel's Warrant, as by the Spirit's Work. For, he never speaks of his
own; never, as a Judge, speaks Life and Joy to any; but those to whom the
Gospel, as the Law of Grace and Peace, does assign it. There is a perfect
Consent between Christ's Spirit, and his Word. The Joy given by one, is given
by both. And, to think that the Joy by them given is a Servant of Sin, were
fearfully to blaspheme both; belying them with a Brow of Brass.

Thirdly; The End of this Joy, is holy Conversation. Whereby is our heavenly
Father glorified, but by our bringing forth much Good Fruit? Or, what does he
either constitute in his Word, or dispense by his Spirit, but for the End that
he may thereby be glorified? If we imagine that this Joy of Believers, so
constituted and so dispensed for this End, is no apt Means for it, but for the
contrary; how foolishly must we charge him, who is only wise?

Fourthly; The Means whereby this Joy is wrought, are holy Ordinances, and
vigorous Exercise of Grace therein. The holy Spirit uses not to lift Souls out
of the Hell of their Fears; much less to lift them up to the Heaven of
triumphant Joys, but in this Way. And, is it likely that the Effect. should be
an Enemy to its Causes? That the Believer's Joy, like a Viper, should be Death
to its Parents? That Communion with God, should beget such a Delight in him, as
should make us by and by weary of him.

Fifthly; The Subjects of this Joy are holy Souls; others are incapable of it:
nor need we say what Use they would make of it, who make the worst use of all
the Grace (objective and subjective) that they do receive. Most sure it is, the
holy Spirit first works Grace, then witnesses it to be in a Man; and so
comfort him, and causes him to triumph in his State of Grace. Christ is
formed in the Soul before the Soul rejoiceth in Christ: and it is then a
prepared Subject for Joy; is it not? And who can believe that then, like a
Dunghill, it will be made the fuller of Stench and noisome Fumes by the Shines of
Heaven on it? and not, like a Garden, have its Spices flow forth the more
abundantly. Bees do suck Honey out of sweet Flowers, whatever it be that
Spiders do extract.

Sixthly; The very Essence of this Joy is holy Obedience: And is not Obedience
the Womb of Obedience, as Sin is the Womb of Sin? What carries to obey God more
than obeying him does? Naturally Acts do strengthen Habits; and institutively
also. God of admirable Love rewards Grace with Grace. The Believer's Joy
answering a known Precept, prepares his Ear and Heart to answer all the Divine
ones. In a word, how fruitful of Holiness is the Joy of Saints in Heaven?
Believers Joy is of the very same Nature; and why should it not be their holy
Strength also?

Seventhly; The constant visible Concomitants of this Joy are extraordinarily
holy. Satan's Delusion it is, and not divine Consolation, which shows not,
out of an excelling Conversation, its Works with Meekness of Wisdom. Holy Joy
has these Jewels shining in the Crown of it. High Esteem of Christ Jesus. No
Star leads to Christ more than Joy in him does. Profound Humility: The most
joyful Apostle styled himself least of Saints, chief of Sinners. Spiritual
Flame is herein like natural; the higher it rises the more it trembles. Sorrow
for Sin after the most godly manner. No where are so bitter Herbs eaten, and so
sweetly, as in this joyful Feast of Passover. Strictest Watchfulness against
Sin. The more Joy in a Treasure, the stronger Guard is set upon it against the
Robber: Because Joy breeds Jealousies, omnia tuta timet, (the Disciples for
very Joy believed not, Luke 24.41.) and Jealousy suffers not to sleep or to
slumber. Thoughtfulness of Heaven. The joyful Israelite had Canaan in his Mind
all the while he was in the Desert. True Contempt of this World's Gaudies. What
are Candles or Stars when the Sun appears? When the Good of all the Land of
Egypt was before Jacob and his Sons, they regarded not their Stuff, Exodus
45.20. The Joy of Paradise stains the Glory of a Paris. Sweet Content in the
most bitter worldly State. The Joy of Faith finds Meat in the Eater, and
Sweetness in the Strong. The God whom we serve is able, and he will deliver us,
say the Hebrew Heroes. And what follows? Upon their Bodies the Fire had no
Power; not a Hair of their Heads is singed; they walk in the midst of the Fire,
and have no Hurt. Lions Dens are quiet Rooms to Daniels. Prisons are
Musick-houses to such as Paul and Silas. Exquisite Pleasure in all holy
Services. Being full of holy Joy, St. Paul was well pleased to be kept out of
Heaven for a time, to serve Christ's Interest on Earth. And joyful Luther
professed, he had rather honor God with his Service, than be honored by God
with any Gifts which made great and noted in the World: Mallem obedire quam
miracula facere. Lastly, A real Indifferency toward this present Life. It is
only the joyful Christian that can possess this; but the Heart of every one
that is such does say as his Lord, Father, not my Will but thy Will be done.
Concerning his stay in the Body, it thus says most sincerely.

To conclude; Is God to be thought now a Loser, and not a Gainer in his Glory
by Believers Joy? Or is it possible that Holiness should languish, in a Joy
wherein these Fruits do flourish? In a Joy that so evidently makes God to be
the Center of the rejoicing Heart? the Center toward which it moves, and in
which it rests.

There are many Inferences of most humbling, instructing, and comforting Truth,
which do here offer themselves; and, I presume, will be darting in their Beams
upon Minds not shut up against them: Their Light is such as is ready for every
prepared Eye.

It is therefore a tripartite Exhortation, wherewith I conclude; 1. To those
who have not ever sang Triumph over Death. 2. To those who have sung it, but
have lost that Voice of Joy and Gladness. 3. To those that have for any time
sung it, and are still singing it.


I must have leave to think that all three Sorts are present among us. Unto the
first, I first address my self.

. 1. To such of you as have not yet sung Triumph over Death.
If now you believe the Truth which has been irrefragably proved, I exhort as
follows:

First; Acknowledge your selves to have no Saving-Faith, if you have no stirring
Desires to attain a joying Faith. It has been said by what Means a Child of
God may be kept, it may be all his Days, from the Joy of Faith; but it cannot
be said, whereby he should be so kept from desiring it and from pursuing it.
Nothing but a reigning and damning Presumption, or Despair, is able to keep a
Soul from these. Review my seven Arguments, which I may not repeat; and assure
you, it is no Child of Light that sits unconcernedly in the dark, as if nothing
ailed him; and unto whom it is not as Death it self, that he cannot triumph
over Death: who travels not from Ordinance to Ordinance for the Power and the
Act; and follows not Heaven with unutterable Sighs and Groans until he gains
them. Comfortless Believers are represented so doing; Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. and
Cant. 5.6, 7.

Secondly; When you bestir your selves for the Joy of Faith, be not impatient
if it does not presently become triumphant. To be using the Means appointed for
getting it, is your unquestionable Duty; but to fret against God, as though he
wronged you if he made you wait long for it, is your certain Sin and Folly.
Doubt not but God will give it as soon as he sees you fit for it: And nothing
save Ignorance and Pride can make that wild Question, Why should I wait on the
Lord any longer? In a word; Let him not go till he bless you with it; but let
him take his own time to bless you with his richest Gift. It is Unbelief that
makes Haste, and that Haste makes Woe.

Thirdly; When you are waiting for the Joy of Faith, be praising and blessing
God for putting you upon the Pursuit of it, and enabling of you to wait
therein. This Grace well deserves your best Thanks. Had you ever ran after it,
if Grace had not drawn you? or had not you laid violent Hands on your selves,
as others have done under their Terrors, if Grace had not restrained you?
Thanks are Sacrifices with which God is well pleased. And who was ever known to
be thankful for Twilight, but he had e're long a shining Noonday? On the
contrary; from him who is unthankful, Sun, Moon, and Starlight is full often
removed, and he is left as without Hope.

Fourthly; When you are blessing God for drawing you to seek the Joy of Faith,
fail not to multiply the two first Acts of Faith. That which prepares for
Union to Christ, and that which uniteth unto him. Plainly thus; Night and Day
tell your Souls, that God, propitiated by Christ, will surely save them if they
truly repent, and believe on him. Proceed also, and perpetually be saying to
your God, that, as far as the Holy Spirit does and shall assist, you do, and
you ever will commit you to his Saving-Mercy, and submit you to his ruling
Authority in Christ. Multiply Direct Acts if you would have the Comfort of
Reflex, say all our Divines. This is the only way wherein a trembling Faith may
be expected to be made a triumphing one.

Fifthly; When you act holy Faith attend upon God in all holy Ordinances. It is
at Wisdom's Gates that the Hearts of the Poor and Sorrowful are made to sing
for Joy. Be you constantly found at every one of them; for you know not whether
your waiting at this or that shall best prosper: But you may be certain your
Neglect of any one will provoke God to send you away empty from all the other.
Sometimes it is in Reading and Hearing that Joy is infused: Sometimes it is in
Prayer, that, as Peter's Bonds, ours be loosed: Sometimes it is with
Sacramental Wine that Hearts are cheered: Sometimes it is the Conference of
holy Friends that sharpneth a Man, as Iron sharpneth Iron: Many times singing
of Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, does together make glad the Heart of
God and Man. Try all, and continue in them, and fear not but you shall have
Beauty given you for Ashes, and the Oil of Joy for Mourning.

Sixthly; When you attend on holy Ordinances, cast away all your
Transgressions. As soon shall heavenly Joy enter Hell, as a presumptuous
Sinner's Heart. It is only the Conqueror that is capable of Triumph; the
Conqueror of all wilful Sin: he that being made free from all such, has now
his Fruit unto Holiness. We lie, says St. John, if we say we have Fellowship
with him, and do not the Truth. They who, like Devils, are ever in the Fire,
and be never refined; be ever using holy things, but are not made holy by them;
they are, as certainly as Devils, held in Chains of Darkness. Old and New
Testament say, There is no Peace to the Wicked. Allow then no Sin, if you would
attain any Peace.

Seventhly; When you cast away all your Sins, be ye Doers of all Christ's Word.
Negative Goodness is a very Chimera. Christ loves and manifests himself to them
only who have his Commands, and keep them. Though Duties be not the Merits,
they are the Means, and commonly the Measures of Peace and Joy; and of all
Duties, those arduous ones that do most cross the Grain of corrupt Nature, and
most thwart our secular Interest. Would you have your Light to rise in
Obscurity, and your Darkness be made as Noonday? Draw out your Soul to the
Hungry, satisfy the Afflicted. Would you be made appear to be the Children of
God and Coheirs of Christ? Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you. Would
you have your Consciences, and all the World, be made to know that God is not
ashamed to be called your God? Be not you ashamed then of the Gospel of Christ
at any time, but courageously own and confess Him and It, in the midst of
Gainsayers. Would you be most certain you are not Reprobates? Keep under your
Bodies, and bring them into Subjection. By rare Duties you may rise up to as
rare Joys.

Eighthly; When you are Doers of the Word, give not way to such Scruples as have
no bottom on the Word. Unreasonable Fears are the Sins of our Hearts as truly
as they be Thorns in our Sides: they grieve the Holy Spirit; and they together
deny and impair, and tend to destroy his Work in us. Thieves they are that do
waste the Candle of the Lord; and Worms that eat up the hidden Manna.

As many as are liable to these Distempers would do well to take to heart these
and like Antidotes.

God accepts Mites, though his Due be ten thousand Talents: Else what would
become of the richest in Faith and Works?

Holiness is less than Sinlesness. The Field which has Millions of Weeds in it
is a Corn-field for all that: There were none upon this Earth else.

Damning Sins be somewhat more than terrifying Falls: Yea, we receive the least
Hurt by the Sins that put us into the greatest Fright. He that exclaims, I am
dead, expresses a Conceit which he confuteth. David's Fall, and Peter's were
terrible, but were not, mortal. It is keeping under Water drowns a Man; it is
not his falling into it that kills him.

Smoking Flax has more Fire in it than is thought of. No doubt but Heman was
stored with God's Graces while he was distracted with his Terrors.

Travelers be not out of their way as often as they be out of sight of the City
they would be at: No, but they are as truly moving toward it when they are in
the Vale, and do but think of it, as when they are on the top of a Hill, and do
pleasantly behold it. The Way to Heaven is through great Changes and many
Vicissitudes, up-hill and down-hill: But in the Deep as truly as on the Mount,
in Temptation as truly as out of it, a Saint makes way toward Heaven. The Will
and Work of his God he very profitably suffers, when he knows not what he does.
And on he goes toward Heaven, as Sinners do toward Hell, not knowing whither
they go.

Trees do grow downward when they have scarce Sap enough to show that they be
alive upward. Wondrously gainful are many spiritual Losses themselves: Good
Words and Works are a Christian's Leaves and Fruits. Self-denial and Faith in
Christ are his Root. By the Winter-Season, which does deaden him to those
former, he is enlivened and strengthened in these lattter. And the Temptations
and temporary Desertions, which take from him his Activity, do make him amends
by notable Additions unto his Humility, even all Days of his Life. Most true
are judicious Hooker's Words; Happier a great deal is he whose Soul by inward
Desolation is humbled, than he whose Heart, through abundance of spiritual
Delight, is lifted up above-measure. Remember, troubled Soul, remember it well,
bitterly humbling Winters do make sweet and fruitful Summers. And know thou,

If the Corn upon the Ground be good, it matters not how little deep the Plough
went. Do not torment thy self, as the manner of some is, with Fears that thou
art not of the good Ground, upon a Surmise that God has not broken thee up
with Convictions and Humiliations sufficiently deep. Examine more thy Corn, and
be less concerned about the Plough. If thy Reliance on Christ's Righteousness
be entire, and thy Imitation of his Holiness be constant and cordial, the
Plough has done its Part upon thee. Consider on the other Hand too, that

There are valuable things kept in Brine as well as in Sugar. Dream not, that
because thy Life is made sorrowful, God intends not ever to advance thee to his
Fullness of Joy. The Fruits which are preserved in Sweetness that exceeds
Honey, be not more intended for the Table of the Lord, than the Meats that are
buried in Salt and Bitterness.

All the Fruits of Christ's Garden be not of a size, not equally Ratheripe.
Conclude not, that thou art none of his Plants, because others do vastly excel
thee in all Christian Virtues, and outdo thee in all the Works of
Righteousness. One Rose upon a Bush, though but a little one, and though not
yet blown, proves that which bears it to be a true Rose-tree. Look well to thy
Sincerity, and to thy sincere Labor for Proficiency: Then know, that neither
God or Men do cut down good Trees, because small; or despise unripe Flowers and
Fruits, if they be ripening.

A sorry Speaker may be a most excellent Wrestler. Milo had not the Tongue of
Cicero. Moses, that greater Prevailer with God, was a Man of a very slow
Utterance. Do not say, you cannot pray because you cannot speak much, or well,
or long. Praying is Wrestling with God. The Heart is the Wrestler: Holy Faith
is the Strength of it. If by Means of this Strength thy Heart be a good
Wrestler, though thou art ever so Tongue-tied, thou will be a Prevailer.
Rhetoric goes for little in the heavenly Court; but sincere Groans have a kind
of Omnipotence.

A Mine of Gold may be a long time unknown. The Heat of the Sun may make it
many a Year before the Light of the Sun does discover it. It is long before the
Spirit does witness to some what he works in them.

A King is not the less a King for dreaming himself a Beggar. Suppositio nil
ponit in esse. Victorious Believers are most truly so, when they are not
sensibly so.

The most bruised Reed makes no little Melody to the Lord. Our compassionate
Savior tells his affrighted Dove, when driven into the Clefts of the Rock,
that her Voice was sweet; Cant. 2.14.

The little Specks in the milky way be as real Stars as the Sun. We must not
argue that we are Darkness it self, because we are not the most burning and
shining Lights.

The crying Child is alive as sure as the laughing one. If whatever stole away
our Joy, did steal away our Faith also, where would Faith be found upon Earth?
The World and Church will be soon at an end, when all shall kill that makes to
cry.

It does often rain and shine together in the Heart of a Believer. His Soul
has the Joy that is his Duty, and shines with Grace acted in Desires and
Endeavors to triumph: When as yet it has not the Joy that is the Largess of
God's Bounty, by which its Clouds must be chased away; no, but is lamenting
after the Lord for it: Dolet, and de dolor gaudet. Joyfully it laments after
him for it, singing our renowned Gataker's most delectable Lamentations.

I thirst for Thirstiness, I weep for Tears;
Well pleased I am to be displeased thus:
The only thing I fear, is want of Fears;
Suspecting I am not Suspicious!
I cannot choose but live, because I die;
And when I am not dead, how glad am I?
Yet, when I am thus glad for sense of Pain,
And careful am, lest careless I should be;
Then do I grieve for being glad again;
And fear, lest Carelessness take care from me!
Amidst these restless Thoughts, this Rest I find,
For those that rest not here, there is Rest behind.
And as for sinful Sorrow it self, be it observed, A Believer may gloriously
conquer, even when he is miserably conquered. And he does so, when, tho Sin
strikes him down, it cannot make him yield. Positive Nolition is Conquest of
Sin. Of the unconsenting and outcrying Virgin, over-powred by the Strength of a
Ruffian, God did pronounce that there was no Sin in her worthy of Death. By
resisting she made the Destroyer flee, even then when she could not make the
Defiler flee. The Believer that resists, is not struck down under the Wrath of
God, when he is struck down into the Mire of Sin. Glory be to God in the
highest. Fight against Sin, though it be upon our Knees, is Conquest.

And therefore, Lastly, Rahab is in Heaven as sure as Abraham. St. James says,
that Dwarf in Faith was justified by it as well as this Giant. And it is sure,
if justified, is glorified. Now,

Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, they shall to their Joy
understand the Loving Kindness of the Lord.

My next Exhortation is;

. 2. To those that have formerly sung Triumph over Death, but have lost that
Voice of Joy and Gladness.
All such, are to be thus exhorted. First; Despise not your Loss. For it is a
Loss of more than all the World is worth. It Is a Loss of Heaven upon Earth. A
Loss, that was to David as a Sword in his Bones: And cannot but be grievous, to
a Heart that is not perfectly senseless. Unto any other, to joy in Christ's
Love is sweeter than Life; and to have that Joy taken away, must be more bitter
than Death. Yet,

Secondly; Despair not under this Loss. You are not the first that have fallen
under it. David lost his Joy, and cried, O spare me! Jeremy was afraid to die,
Jer. 37.20. Hezekiah turned to the Wall, and wept at the Tidings of Death. Holy
Latimer told his Ridley, that sometimes he could run into a Hole for Fear. A
Balm in Gilead there was for them, and a Physician that restored them. Nor is
there any reason, why your Wound should be presumed to be incurable. It is
surely your Duty to pray for the Cure. And it were a fond Conceit that you
might not look for, the things you are bound to pray for.

Thirdly; Enquire how you came by your Loss. Whether Pride were not swelling in
you; and made needful this Loss, to keep you from being exalted above measure.
Or, whether Earthly-Mindedness got not into you: for, as in Nature, it cannot
be Night till the Earth interpose between the Sun and us; so I question whether
ever a very dark Night fall on the Face of a Soul, but by some earthly things
interposing between Christ and it. The Achan that is the Troubler, must be
stoned e're you are like to be quiet. To which purpose, you are to make
diligent search after it.

Fourthly; Blame not God for your Loss. Justify God, as David did; and to your
selves take all the Blame and Shame. To be sure, your own Sin was all the
culpable Cause. And this know; till a Job let us go his hard Thoughts of God,
and abhors himself in Dust and Ashes, his Captivity is not to be turned. But,
then it is presently turned, and his Comforts be forthwith multiplied.

Fifthly; Conceal not your Loss. Hide it not from those to whom God says,
Comfort ye, comfort ye my People. Peace and Joy are created by God, but they
are ministered by his Servants. Whom, not to consult in your Troubles, is to
despise. And whom to despise, is to despise Christ and him that sent him.

Sixthly; Consent to God's Terms for the Repair of your Loss. With a thousand
Thanks, go and enter anew the Covenant of his Grace. He cannot in honor make
the Terms thereof any lower. But if you humble you as low as the Gospel
demands, you will be seasonably exalted to the glorious Joy that it promises.
Lazy Desires of Comfort on other Conditions, will shame you much, and profit
you nothing.

Seventhly; Ply all appointed Means for recovering your Loss. Be much in the
Ordinances wherein you first found Comfort. Read much the Gospel, which was
written that Saints Joy might be full. Hear it much, as preached by Christ's
Ministers; who are given to be Helpers of your Joy. Pray much; our Savior
having said, Ask and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full. Look much to
Christ in the Seals of the Covenant also, until you are lightened. Of all
Ordinances, they are the highest Restoratives.

Lastly; Resolve to follow God, though he never in this Life repair your Loss.
To follow him, and persevere in his Service mournfully, if you cannot
comfortably. Yea, and labor to show all about you, that you are so sensible of
your Transgressions, and of his punishing you less than they deserve; that your
Soul loves him and blesses him for his Essential Goodness and his Benignity,
even whilst he gives you no Kid to make merry.

Thus, Wait on the Lord, and he shall renew your Strength: He gives Power to
the Faint, and to them that have no Might he increases Strength.

A few Words remain to be spoken,

. 3. To those of you that are Singing, O Death, where is thy Sting? etc.
First; Forget not your envious Enemy. Satan envies none so much as you, who
are mounted on the highest Pinnacle of the Temple. If he casts you down, the
Greatness of your Fall gives an Eminence to his Conquest. And he will spare no
Pains for his Glory in your Shame.

Secondly; Remember your undoubted Duty, i. e. Of doing more than others.
Walking more Holily, Righteously, and Soberly than other Saints; even Saints
more aged, and more richly gifted. For it is to you, of all Saints on the
Earth, that much is given; and from whom much is required. Much more than was
required from you, before you were taken up into this third Heaven.

Thirdly; Consider the Difficulty of kindling again the Fire, that is easily
quenched. Your Joy is a holy Flame; but it is extinguishable by one Sin of
Presumption. And then where are you? That Measure of Repentance that fitted you
for your first Consolation, will not fit you for its Renovation.

Fourthly; Bind the Gospel Covenant about your Neck: Write it on the Table of
your Heart. It has been said, He who understands this, is a good Divine. Sure
I am, he that shall not keep it as the Apple of his Eye, is not like to be a
joyful Christian very long. Let the Terms hereof slip out of our Minds, we are
strait-way, like the Waves of the Sea, at the Mercy of the next Wind that blows.

Fifthly; Fear Motes as truly as Beams, Gnats as Camels. Your greatest Danger
is of incurring the Guilt of Sins, comparatively, least. And Fear of falling
into them, is a Means of keeping free from them. Bear it ever in your Minds
then; though Rapes do not violate Wedlock, yet a wanton Glance, which is a
wilful Wickedness, strikes at the heart of it. And Bodkins do stab as mortally
as broad Swords.

Sixthly; Defer not to pay your Vows. Few, I suppose, do come to the Joy of
Faith without this natural Worship of Vowing to God. But, surely, none that
perfidiously break their Vows do long hold their Joys. Jacob, styled usually
the Father of Vows, paid dear for his Unmindfulness of them.

Seventhly; Be Eyes to the Blind, Feet to the Lame, and make the Hearts of your
disconsolate Brethren to sing for Joy. As much as in you lies, this do. For
this End, among others, are you comforted, that you might comfort others by the
Comfort wherewith you are comforted of God. If you neglect this Duty, no wonder
if your Sun be turned into Darkness, and your Joy into Mourning. No wonder if
God withdraw from you, and Sin and Satan getting advantage against you, do
again plunge you into the Pit where there is no Water. He that withholdeth
Corn, the People shall curse him: He that withholdeth spiritual Bread from the
Poor and Needy, his God will chastise him. But, the liberal Soul shall be made
(and kept) fat; he that waters, shall be watered also himself. His Heart
shall rejoice, and his Joy no Man shall take from him. To conclude;

Would you not lose the Sense of God's Love? Would you not bear anew his hot
Displeasure? Would you not be loaded with oppressing Appresions of his temporal
Judgments? Would you not be scorched with Fears of being eternally rejected by
him? Would you not be perfectly dispirited unto Duty, and be made to cry as
David, I am not able to look up? These things, then do; and the God of Peace
shall be with you. God your Maker, shall give you Songs in every Night. Your
Redeemer shall be a Prince of Peace, as well as of Righteousness to you. The
Holy Ghost your Sanctifier, shall make you to know him by his glorious
Attribute, the Comforter. Wherefore, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord; for as much as ye know your Labor is not in
vain in the Lord.

Piety and Charity do require, that somewhat be now said of the rare Servant of
Christ, whose Decease has occasioned this Discourse. Mr. ROBERT FLEMING; a
Name most worthy of precious and everlasting Memory. A Saint, in whose Life and
Death the holy Triumph of my Text has been admirably exemplified.

Piety, I say, requires it; for Saints Characters, are God's Praises more than
theirs. And Charity requires it; for the Example of their Graces and Comforts,
more edifieth the Church than Doctrinal Arguments and Motives. Very Sacrilege
therefore it would be; a Robbery of God and his Church, to be silent of this
Saint; this One of a Thousand. To cover his unexpressable Grace, as Painters
used to do Agamemnon's Grief, with a Vail; and to say nothing, because the one
half cannot be told, would be but a proud Humility.

Panegyric and Encomium, indeed, here needs not be any. The Jews say true in
this, Just Men do find sufficient Stones for their Monuments. All that is
needed or intended, is a plain Narrative what our FLEMING was, and what he did.
What he was, through the Grace of God; and what he did, or rather, what the
Grace of God did in him.

A copious Subject this is; and lest the Multitude of things memorable
overwhelm us, in this Order they are presented.

His COUNTRY, was Scotland. Honored by God, the Fountain of Honor.
Honorable with Saints, the next-best Judges of Honor. And the more honorable
for the Birth of this renowned Saint therein. Which was An. 1630, at Bathens,
alias Easter; the Seat of the Earls of Tweddale; where his Reverend Father Mr.
James Fleming, was long a Minister of the Gospel. Serpent's Hissings are
despised; if any thing less earthly stirs its Tongue against the Church of
Scotland, as sufficient to their Shame, it is here told what is well known. The
most Learned Prince that ever swayed the Scepter of these Kingdoms, affirmed it
to be the purest of all the Reformed Churches. And, the Divine to whom the
Prelacy, the Dissenters, and the Foreign Churches, do rise up with greatest
Veneration, as to a Theological Prince, does now name that Church the
Morning Star of the Reformation.

Of his PARENTAGE, suffice it to be said, He was the Seed of God's Friends. His
Family was Honorable in its Relations, and most eminent for Religion.

His EDUCATION, was first in the College of Edinburgh: Wherein he ran through
the Course of Philosophy with great Applause. And made laudable progress in the
Learned Languages. Then, translated to the University of St. Andrew's; he
traveled through Theology under the Conduct of the Learned and Holy Mr.
Rutherford.

His NATURAL PARTS were excellent: His Understanding quick and penetrative. His
Judgment clear and profound. His Fancy rich and fluent. His Memory strong. His
Expression masculine, and of a Grace that did take with those who were not
unacquainted with his Idiotisms and Accents. By which it was indeed clouded to
us of England.

His ACQUIRED LEARNING was great. Answerable to his happy Parts, and their
Culture. Through the Divine Blessing on his pious Diligence, it was Rathe-Ripe.
History, the Eye of Learning, he singularly affected. Especially, Sacred
History, the Right Eye. But unto him, all History was sacred; for he considered
God's Actions more than Man's in all of it. Nor valued he Man's, but for the
Knowledge of God's. With whose holy Counsels and Ways he was so well acquainted,
that, before he was 23 Years old, he was called to a Pastoral Charge. And was
settled therein at Campuslang in the Shire of Cliddsdale. Where he served his
God till the Year 1661. In which the Storm rose that drove out thousands,
whereof the Age was not worthy. He had taken in Marriage Christina Hamilton,
justly famed for her Person, Gifts, and Graces, which were all eximious. By her
he had seven Children; and with them and himself sweetly committed unto his
God's Provision, he humbly received the Honor of his Ejection. Of the
Children, the Lord received to himself three of them before their Mother, and
two of them since. Blessed be his Name, two do still survive!

As for WORLDLY SUBSTANCE, his Share seems according to Agur's Desire. He has
told me, that, as Luther, he never, to his knowledge, desired much of it, or was
very careful about it. During the most tragical days, his Table was spread, and
Cup filled, and Head anointed with fresh Oil. Liberally his Children were
educated; and in good Works he was profusely rich. Of his own Laying up, I have
good warrant to say, he had no Treasure but in Heaven. His own Testimony of his
Life was this; It was one made up of seeming Contraries: Great outward Trouble,
and great inward Comfort. And I never found (said he) more Comfort, than when I
was under most Affliction.

Touching his NAME and NOTE in the World, this only shall be said; Against all
his Projects and Pains to restrain it, his Fame has flown through the Christian
World. His Conferences, Sermons, and Writings, made it too big and too bright
to be covered. A Name more sweet and precious, and more generally so, to
Christians of all Minds and Gusts, I Hear not of, nor Read I any one!

To the Praise of our English Court I write it; the Sun and Moon, as well as
other rare Stars thereof, admired holy Fleming, and shone propitiously on him.
May the everlasting Love of his God, be the Reward of their Love unto his
faithful Servant.

But I am yet in the lower Hemisphere. More high and honorable things remain
to be said of this Man of God!

His CONVERSION to his God was early and illustrious. It was but a little while
that he had dwelt in this World, before God dwelt in him, and he in God. And
that, so evidently, by the Exilience of all Christian Virtues, that little more
doubt was made of his being Born of God, than of his being Born of a Woman.

His WALK with God was admirable: And to the many of this Age will seem
incredible. It is certain, not one Enoch of many does walk so exactly. So
universally in all holy Ways; and so humbly, with Self-denial to Extremity. It
was extraordinarily that his Spirit was composed for Adoration; and accordingly
his Life was a Life of Worship extraordinary. His Solemn Dedications of himself
to his God were frequent. His Soliloquies with him, almost perpetual. He was
ever with Him! And his always-serene Countenance spoke it enlightened always by
the Divine One. His always-gracious Speech showed from what Altar the Coal
touched his Tongue. Not without cause it has been a Fear, that, should his
Diary come abroad, most Readers would be too weak Vessels for his strong Wine.

His ACTIVITY for God in his Ministry, was such as was to be expected from a
Mr. Fleming. From a large Soul, comprehensive of the Interests of God and his
Church and the World, the present Age and future. And from a Soul most enflamed
with Love; and thereby constrained to spend it self, and be spent, for no petty
Faction or Party, but for Certain and Catholic Christianity. What a Writer he
was, needs not here to be written. In Preaching he was Boanerges, and
Barnabas also. Nor knew any Man better, how to use Law and Gospel; without
either opposing or confounding them. For Converse, and for all things useful,
what might Campuslang testify of him? What might Edinburgh, and adjacent
Places, wherein, after his Ejection, he lived and labored? What might
Rotterdam say, where, from the Year 1678 to this present Year, he burned and
shined? The Sun I think stood still all the time wherein he had no Design for
God going on. It is well known, the Sun of his Life did set upon an excellent
Design. Which was of sending forth a Treatise concerning the Way of the Holy
Ghost's working on the Souls of Men; especially, after Conversion, in Communion
between God and them.

His SUCCESS from God given in his Work, was not ordinary. He had a numerous
spiritual Progeny. And they are very many who have thankfully commemorated in
my hearing, their Benefit from his Writings. The Holy Spirit that blows in
whose Books he lists, has singularly honored his. And, I well know, does
still continue to honor them. Of both his surviving Sons, it must be said,
though it be here a very high word, they do Patrizare: And do make it manifest
that the holy Saint's Prayers were heard, and his Pains richly prospered unto
them.

His PEACEFULNESS in God's House is by no means to be omitted. Controversies he
declined, not because of Insufficiency, but of Dislike. Seeing, better than
others do, or will see, that many Errors will be sooner struck to death by a
Just Contempt, than by a Full Confutation. And will be less apt to revive,
after they have been generously disdained, than after that they have been
operously exploded. Well he knew, and often he would say, what a Servant the Bond
of Love is to the Unity and Purity of Faith.

Speaking of the Differences of Brethren in this City, he thus expressed
himself; I am amazed to see good Men thus tear one another in the dark. Nor can
I understand how they should have Grace in due Exercise who value their
particular Designs above the Interest of the Catholic Church: and who confine
Religion to their own Notions and Models.

To another complaining of Reproaches from pretended Friends, his Answer was;
To me to be judged of Man and of Man's Judgment is a small thing. I bless God I
value not my own Name, but God's only. I do confess, when Men wound the Credit
of the Gospel through me, it is hard then to bear up.

Nor may it be forgotten what he has said to his dear and excellent Friend,
and spiritual Son of this City, (Dr. D. H.) I bless God in fifteen Years time I
have not ever given any Man's Credit a Thrust behind his Back: But when I had
ground to speak well of any Man, I did so with Faithfulness; and when I wanted
a Subject that way, I kept Silence. O in what Concord might Prelatists and
Dissenters walk, much more the Dissenters themselves, had they more of this
Balsamic Spirit? What? agree in Principles of Faith, in all substantial Parts
of Worship, and assert, all of us, the same Necessity of Holiness, and yet bite
and devour one another? Blessed Savior! send down thy Spirit to us with the
Wisdom that is pure and peaceable. But to return: Of the Man so pure and
peaceable it must be added;

His TRIUMPHS in the Favor of God were transcendent; Triumphs over Law, Sin,
Death, Grave and Hell: Too few do I discern to aspire to such as he had long
attained. O how dwelt he on the Mount? How often was he as in the third Heaven?
What a Jacob, what an Israel, was holy Fleming? Such a Wrestler and Prevailer
with God; such a Moses, to whom God spoke as it were Face to Face; such a
Nazarite, with a Soul, with a Life, and with a Name, darkened with no Cloud;
except but that of his own Humility, which does together darken a Man to
himself, and beautify him in the Eyes of God and Saints. A Man so highly
favored of God, and blessed with so much of Heaven upon this Earth, is not often
found, I suppose, in any one Age. There is no end of Instances, every Day
seeming to have been a holy Sabbath and Communion-day, and Day of spiritual
Jubilee unto him. In his last Sickness he had more than one wondrous
Manifestation of God's Love to his Soul: and one which he declared he had not
Strength enough to have born much longer. But now,

Of his DEATH in the Lord what shall my trembling Heart utter? It was but July
the 17th that his Sickness seized him; and the 25th, he who had so much seen
the Salvation of God, departed in Peace. On his first Arrest, O Friends, said
he to such as were about him, Sickness and Death are serious things. But till
the Sparks of his Fever had risen to a Flame, he was not aware that that
Sickness was to be unto Death; for he told a Relation of his, that if it should
so be, it was strange, being the Lord did not use to hide from him the things
that he did with him and his.

His heavenly Father knew his through Preparedness for Glory, and pleased not to
give the Premonition which he saw him not to want. Sudden Death is sudden Glory
to such Saints. Yet before his Expiration he was apprehensive of its Approach.
Calling to him a Friend, he asked, What Freedom do you find in Prayer for me?
Seems God to becken to your Petitions? or does he bind you up, and leave dark
Impressions on your Mind? This way, said he, I have often known the Mind of the
Lord. His Friend telling him he was under Darkness, in the case, he said, Well,
I know your Mind: Trouble not your self for me. I think I may say, that I have
been long above the Fear of Death.

His Groans and Struglings argued his Flesh to be under no small Pains: But his
Answers to enquiring Friends certified that the Irons did not enter his Soul.
Always he would say, I am very Well; or, I was never Better; or, I feel no
Sickness. Thus would he say, while he was seen to be very sensible of every
thing beside Pain.

The malignant Distemper wasting his Natural Spirits, he could speak but
little. But what he spoke, was all of it like himself. Having felt himself
indisposed for his wonted Meditation and Prayer, he thus said to some near him;
I have not been able in a manner to form one serious Thought since I was sick:
Or, to apply my self unto God as I ought. But, though I have not been able to
apply my self unto God, he has applied himself unto me. And one of his
Manifestations was such as I could have born no more.

Opening his Eyes after a long Sleep, one of his Sons asked him how he did? he
replied, Never better: Do you know me? said the Son; unto which, with a sweet
Smile, he answered, Yes, yes, dear Son, I know you! This was about two Hours
before his Ascension. About an Hour after it, he cried earnestly, Help, help,
for the Lord's Sake! And then breathing weaker and weaker, he soon gave up his
precious Ghost. The renewed Eagle took flight to the Mountain of Spices.

As his Life, his Death also speaks. And whosoever has Ears to hear, let him
hear what the Spirit speaks by both of them, unto the Churches.

His Diary, the rich Treasure of his Experiences, is not at hand: And therefore
cannot, as yet, be brought into public Light. But from the few Manuscripts
which are here found, I shall add some Hints that I judge to be very directive
and incentive. I mean, unto the Faith of Reliance and of Assurance, in which he
was so eminent; Unto the Love of God and Men, wherein he was so vigorous; Unto
Meditation and Prayer, and Heavenly Mindedness, wherein he was so grand an
Exemplar.

They are indeed but Hints: And, if any Difference be, they are the most
ordinary of his Memorials. The more sublime and extraordinary ones are kept
back, of a Suspicion that the Generality of good and honest Readers might be
more amused than edified by things so stupendous. And so very much out of the
common Road of Christian Experience. But to proceed:

Aug. 16, 1685. Thus he wrote; I found some sweet Access to the Lord in the
Morning, in the lively Actings of Grace; and after I had this Day set down some
Remarks of the Day before, I had some clear Impress of this. Since thou art
careful to improve thy Talent of Observation, more shall be given, and the Oil
shall not fail, whilst there are Vessels to receive.

And now, O the sweet Evening of this same Day, when in the outer-Walk, (where
I had found a sore Damp for some time) the Door was as it were cast open, with
such a clear imparting of these great Confirmations, that I hope with assured
Confidence, was the Voice of my beloved God and Master; yea, as indeed it had
been, with an audible Voice said: I will do for thee even exceeding abundantly,
etc. I will surely give thee a Deliverance, that shall make thee glad above all
thy Sorrows past. I do remember thy Prayers and Groans often in this Walk; and
though I was only a Witness of them then, yet now as I have seen in secret, so
will I reward thee openly. The time is now come, and it shall linger no more;
rejoice and be glad, O my Prisoner of Hope, for the Time of thy Release is
come! I remember thy Kindness, and know thy Love; be still and know that I am
God. I know thy Distress, and that thy Straits now draw near: but fear not, I
will take care of thee; and the greater the Extremity be, the greater Testimony
thou give to me, etc.

This Thursday Evening, the 17th of Aug. when I came in, with some Challenges,
I got first great Access to my dear God in Confession, and the sense of his
Peace; which was so lively and sweet, as is unexpressible. After, I found some
sweet renewing of former Confirmations, with Power impressed on me, thus; 1. As
your latter Works have exceeded your former, so shall your latter Days also. 2.
As you have not made haste, until my time; so this is the time I have watched
for; when you are now so low, to make my Power known. 3. And do you fear to
trust me? Are the Consolations of God small, or have they ever failed you? 4.
You know not, my Child, what I am to do for you, and how near it is, etc.

After I went down this last Night, what Confirmation had I from God further?
And now this Morning, Aug. 18. I had some lively Exercise of the same nature as
before, etc.

And now this Saturday, Aug. 19. how clear an Evidence did God himself give me
of the Evidence of the Work of Grace in my Soul, in some most lively Actings
thereof, so as to rejoice in him as my alone Portion, so as to say, He only is
my Salvation and my Defense, my All, in whom I desire to triumph and boast? And
therewith what a sweet Inbreaking followed from himself, when he said thus to
my Soul: I will deliver you, in a Way you know not; and when all Means fail,
then is the Time I choose. I know thou have none to look to but me. It is not
yours to see now. But blessed are they that believe; for there shall be a
Performance of things promised. Do thou see the Pledges I have given you; and
the Conveyance of them with such Sealings and Embracements of my Love? Remember
the Text, that Hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad
in thy Heart. Thou have been long trading with the Talent of the Cross, for
some Fruit unto me. But now I will also give thee a Talent of Comfort, and put
it in trust under thy Hand, etc.

And O how remarkable has this Evening been, and Close of this Week, which I
may call a most solemn Confirming Week! And now in its close had I most near
and sweet Access to my dear God in Prayer. And I hope I may own these immediate
Confirmations from himself. As, 1. What shall be done to the Man whom the King
delights to honor, to whom my Honor and Service has been dear? 2. Have I
said I will never leave thee nor forsake thee; and can I leave thee now, when
thou have most need of me, and when all Refuge fails? 3. I know thou art at
the hardest Part of that Lesson, to believe in Hope against Hope: but fear not,
I am with thee, (which in an extraordinary Way was then spoken) and though thou
see not what thy Outgate shall be, leave that to me. 4. And what a mavelous
and sweet Confirmation did the Lord give to his poor Servant, as I came down?
Return unto thy Rest, and be still! Which did so deeply surprise and astonish,
as answering so directly to what that Day had been my Exercise; what he would
do with my Hope, which seemed to be against Hope: This was the giving me a new
Text to answer what I had long been upon, etc.

He spent his Days and Years after this Manner. And in order to have the Year
rightly carried on, it was (we find) his Custom, from the 15th or 16th Year of
his Age, to his last, to set apart the first Day of every Year, in renewing
his Covenant with God, in a new Self-surrender and Dedication of himself to
him; or, if interrupted the first Day, then to take the first convenient Day
following. We cannot give any Account of the Manner of his doing this, for the
first Years of his Life; but we may guess what they have been, by the few
Instances following.

1691. It is in the Entry of this new Year, (as I have done now for many Years
past most solemnly) that I desire to renew again my personal Engaging of my
self to the Lord my God, and for him; and with my whole Heart and Desire to
enter my self into his Service, and take on his blessed Yoke, and humbly to lay
claim, embrace and take him, (O Him!) to be my God alone, my All, my Light and
my Salvation, my Shield and exceeding great Reward. Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, O Lord, or in the Earth whom do I desire besides thee?

And now, under thy blessed Hand, my Soul desires, and does here testify my
Trusting my self, and securing my whole Interest, my Credit, my Conduct, my
Comfort, my Assistance, my Thorowbearing, and my poor Children; and to leave my
self herein, on the gracious Hand of my dearest Lord, whilst I am within time.
As I write this the 2d Day of Jan. 1691.

R. Fleming.

1692. It is in the Entry and first Day of this new Year, that I desire here as
formerly, to enter (in this hidden Record) a new Surrender and Offering of my
self to my dearest Lord and Master, who has been wonderfully tender and
gracious to me; and has brought me by his immediate Conduct through the Days
and Years of my Pilgrimage past; has still cared for his poor Thing, and given
more singular Mercies and Evidences of Respect than to many else; and now (as
still formerly) has taken me through this last Year with singular Evidences of
his Presence and Assistance. And as I trusted my self to my Lord, so has he
graciously answered: for which, and his special Grace hitherto, I desire to
insert this Witness of my Soul's blessing the Lord my God.

And now I do here, with my full and joyful Consent, testify my giving up my
self again to the Lord, and to his Work and Service here, and wherever he
shall call me, with desire to consecrate my old Age to my God, and the Guide of
my Youth. I love my Master and his Service; and let my Ears be nailed to the
Posts of his Door, as one that would not go free from that blessed Yoke and
Service; and lays, in Hope, the whole Assistance hereof on his Grace and Help.
And how, in so extraordinary a Case, as is alone to my Lord, I desire to
witness and renew the same here, with my humble and entire Reliance on him, who
is my Trust from my Youth to this day, my Shield and exceeding great Reward. To
him I commit my Self, my Ways, my Work and Service, which with my Soul's
Desire, I offer to my Lord: In whose Hand I desire to secure my Credit for the
Gospel's sake, my Comfort and Enlargement in this Day of deep Trouble and
Anguish; together with my poor Children, and the whole Interest of my Family
and Concerns; desiring to put my self, with humble Confidence, and all that is
dear to me, under his Care and Conduct. O my Soul bless thou the Lord! This I
write the 1st of Jan. 1692.

R. Fleming.

My Lord and my God.
1694. It is in the first Day, and Monday, of this new Year 1694. that as I
have formerly through most of my Life past, so now do desire to renew my
Dedication and Engagements to the Lord my God, and to join in the same Witness
with what herein has been formerly, with my whole Heart and Desire; and to
offer unto my dearest Lord Praise, in remembrance of what he has been through
the Year past, and in the whole of my Life; whose gracious tender Conduct has
been so wonderful (and well have thou my Lord dealt with thy Servant according
to thy Word) in all has befallen me. And, as my Soul does now move, and betake
my self alone to him, as my own God, my Father, my Redeemer and blessed
Comforter, and my only All; so do I hereby witness the settling of my Trust, my
Hope, and Reliances alone upon him, for this new Year, or what Time of my Life
may yet remain, with earnest Desire to enter yet again and continue in his
Service, even in that delightful Service of my dearest Lord and Master.

And now I do again, by a new Surrender, witness my entire Commitment of my
self, my poor Children, my Credit for the Gospel, my Conduct and Comfort, in so
extraordinary a Juncture, to my dearest Lord, to his gracious and compassionate
Care and Providence; together with my Works, and any small Design to serve him
and my Generation. And I do entreat new Supplies of his Grace and Strength, to
secure and make his poor Servant, (if it were his blessed Will) yet more
abundantly forthcoming to him. And with hope of Acceptance, I write this, Jan.
1, 1694.

R. Fleming.

Post tenebras spero Lucem.
At another time, thus flows his sacred Pen: O my Soul, never forget this
solemn Wednesday Night, nor the last Monday Night; what solemn Visits I had
from my Lord, after so serious a Work of Trial about the Warrant of my Hope,
and Petition for the heightning of my Faith, and sealing Testimony of his
Spirit: In how mavelous a Way did my dearest Lord, I hope, bear Evidence to
the great Assurance he had formerly given me! etc.

O let my Soul bless and adore the Lord for this sweet and mavelous Visit
this Monday Night, which my dearest Lord, I hope, has given his poor Servant,
when so near sinking; and I hope said to my Soul: Fear not, I forget you not,
for I have graven you on the Palms of my Hands, etc. I look on thee with
Delight, and the Time is come when I will give thee an Account of thy Prayers
and Tears, of thy many Groans and long On-waiting. Have I spoken, and will I
not do it? etc. O thou afflicted, tossed with Tempests, -- in an acceptable
Time have I heard thee! Trust thou in the Lord, for I will make thee a Sign to
this Generation, etc. I am leading thee right, and thy Strength is to sit
still. Is the Lord's Hand shortened, that it cannot save? etc.

O how shall I entertain this mavelous Day, and Appearance of my dearest Lord
to his poor Servant! O wonderful Condescension this Morning, after so sweet an
Evening before, that he should please to give so near an Approach of himself!
O, I hope, it was his Voice! I am come, I am surely come, my Servant, in the
fourth Watch of the Night, to bring forth my Prisoner and set him at liberty,
who has stayed so long for me, etc. -- I embrace you as an Over-comer;
rejoice, for great is your Reward in Heaven. I am now entering thee on a Day of
rejoicing: Be not doubtful, it is I who comforts thee, etc. And when I said, O
how shall I manage such a wonderful Enlargement? how discernably was it
returned, I hope from himself! I will manage it for thee: Thou have stayed for
me; but thou have got the Victory, and the Day shall be thine, and thou shall
know what I have been doing with thee and for thee.

O let me never forget the 25th of December. at Night; when after 60 Years under
the Lord's special Conduct, he gave me so sweet and remarkable a Visit, never
to be forgotten! O what a Night was it, when I went home, pressed to sing the
103d Psalm! etc.

But it were endless to name Passages of this nature; since almost every Day
was a Communion-day between God and him. And how remarkably God has answered
his Prayers, may easily be inferred from hence. One Instance to this Purpose we
may see, in his Epistolary Discourse, Page 68. of a Minister, who had a violent
Colic immediately taken off, upon his praying to God for that End. It is
known to be himself he speaks of there; though he expresses it Modestly, in the
Third Person.

I shall now present a few Things, which he sets down in Writing by themselves,
under this Title; A short Index of some of the great Appearances of the Lord,
in the Dispensations of his Providence to his poor Servant, etc. And, although
the Brevity and Obscurity of the Hints, must needs leave us in the dark as to
the full Meaning of most of them, (as being written only for his own Memory, as
the Title shows;) yet they will serve to show us, the particular Care of his
Great Master, over this his faithful and eminent Servant. They are the Remarks,
which he calls the Appearances of the Lord toward him; in his own Words.

1. How near I was brought to Death in my Infancy; given over, yea and esteemed
a Burden to my Friends, so as my Death was made desirable to them, I being as
the Refuse of my Father's Children: yet even then I was God's Choice, and in a
most singular way restored.

2. That remarkable Deliverance on receiving a Blow by a Club, when a Child,
which was so near my Eye, as endangered both my Sight and Life.

3. That strange and extraordinary Impression I had of an audible Voice, in the
Church, at Night; when, being a Child, I had got up to the Pulpit; calling to
me, to make haste, etc.

4. That I, of all my Father's Sons, being four, should be spared, when the
other three were so promising and desirable above me; and should thus come to
be the only Male-heir surviving of such a Stock.

5. That solemn and memorable Day of the Communion at the Gray-Friars, in the
Entry of the Year 1648. where I had so extraordinary a Sense of the Lord's
Presence; yea, whence I can date the first sealing Evidence of my Conversion,
now 40 Years past.

6. The Lord's gracious and signal Preservation and Deliverance given me at
Dunbar-Fight.

7. Those solemn Times and near Approaches of the Lord to my Soul: the first at
the Elve, when I went there; and the other a little after my Eather's Death in
the High-study.

8. That Scripture Acts 12. was by an observable Providence given to be my
first Text; and how I was unexpectedly, and by a surprizal, engaged therein.

9. Those two great Deliverances at Sea, in going to Dundee: the first time in
Company with the Duke of Lauderdale; the other time in Company with Mr. Andrew
Gray of Glasgow.

10. That extraordinary Dream, and mavelous Vision I had twice repeated, with
the unexpressible Joy after the same.

11. Those memorable Impressions and Presages about my Health, when it seemed
hopeless, at my first Entry upon the Ministry; and the strange Expression of
Mr. Simpson to that purpose at New-mills.

12. The Lord's immediate and wonderful Appearance for me, in my first Entry
upon the Ministry; with that extraordinary Storm on the Day of my Ordination;
and the amazing Assault which followed the same, in what befell; -- wherein
Satan's immediate Appearance against me was so visible.

13. The great and conspicuous Seal given to my Ministry from the Lord, in the
Conversion of several Persons; with that mavelous Power which then
accompanied the Word on the Hearts of the People.

14. That signal Appearance of the Lord, and his mavelous Condescendence, in
my Marriage-lot, and in the whole Conduct of the same.

15. My Deliverance from so eminent Hazard of my Life, in my Fall from my Horse
at Kilmarnock.

16. The Lord's mavelous Assistance and Countenance at the two Communions of
Cathcart and Dillop; with that great Enlargement I had at the last of these
Places, at the last Table.

17. That as my Entry to my Charge was with so bright a Sunshine, so no less
did the Lord appear at my parting from that Place; wherein all things did meet,
in a remarkable Juncture, to make the same both honorable and comforting.

18. The Lord's special Providence; as to my outward Lot, after my Removal
thence, in many Instances that way.

19. His gracious sparing my dear Wife so long, when her Life was in such
Hazard in the Years 65 and 72.

20. The Preservation I had in going over to Fife, in the Year 72, with the
solemn Times I got there.

21. That Dream at Bonssy; wherein I got such express Warning as to my Wife's
Removal; with the Lord's mavelous Appearance and Presence with me the
Thursday after at St. Johnstown.

22. That extraordinary Warning I got again of my dear Wife's Death, and of the
Manner of it, at London, in the Year 1674.

23. Those two remarkable Scriptureplaces given me at Westnisbet, in my return
from London, 1674; viz. that in Romans 4. in the Forenoon, and that in 115 Psalm
in the Afternoon.

24. Those great and signal Confirmations given me, at my Wife's Death: And
that extraordinary Voice so distinct and clear, which I had a few Nights after
her Death.

25. Those special Confirmations given me, at my first leaving my Country, at
Westnisbet, Ridsdale, Stanton, and the first at Sea from the Sheils.

26. Those solemn Passages to confirm my Faith, from Heb. 11. and Exodus 33. and
at other times at London; and the last Night there, before I went away.

27. Those extraordinary and signal Times I had, at my first entry at Rotterdam.

28. Those two observeable Providence which did occur to me at Woerden, and
about the Business of William Mader.

29. The mavelous Sign given me of the State of my Family, in what happened
as to sudden withering of the Tree, and its extraordinary reviving again, at my
first entry into my first House in Rotterdam.

30. The great Deliverance from Fire in the High Street.

31. The special Providence in preserving my Son from perishing in the Water.

32. The good Providence in returning my Diary, after it had been long lost.

33. That surprising Relief, when cited by the Council of Scotland to appear;
with that sweet Resignation to the Lord, which I had then, under so pungent a
Trial.

34. The remarkable Event of a Warning I was forced to give, that some present
should be called away by Death before the next Lord's Day.

35. The Lord's immediate supporting under a long Series of pungent Trials in
this Place, by a Series of Wonders (I may truly say;) for which I am obliged in
a singular Way to set up my Ebenezer, that hitherto has the Lord helped.

36. The remarkable Appearance of the Lord with me (which I omitted in its
place) in that strange Providence relating to Mr. Moneyenny's Death at
Preston-pans.

37. That most solemn Providence and Wonder of my Life, my Fall under the York
Coach in Aug. 1674. when the great Wheel went over my Leg, so as I could feel
it pressing me, without hurting, far less breaking my Leg; as if it had been
carried thus over in a just Poize, to let me see how Providence watched over
me, etc.

38. The Comfort God gave me in my Children, and those extraordinary
Confirmations I got from God, upon the Death of those sweet Children whom God
removed from me to himself.

Now, go, Reader, go and do thou likewise: For

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing;
Mat. 24.26.
(...) to the Memory (...) Reverend and Worthy Mr ^ERT FLEMING who de^sed July
25, 1694.
By a Friend.
My Pen must be like to an Angel's Quill,
And my weak Parts must equalize my Will;
Should I presume him fully to set forth,
(Though in rude Characters) or draw his Worth.
Extol him as you please, yet still you shall
Remaining find behind, This is not All.
Renowned Men and righteous are this Day,
( O sad Prognostic!) quickly plucked away.
Rehold how fast he is gone, as if he grieved
Enjoying of his Life, whilst here he lived.
Rare Fruit's soon plucked, and Souls to Ripeness grown,
Too good for Earth, are snatched up to the Throne.
Free and unbiased for the Truth he stood:
Lived all he knew; knew all that is understood.
Each Virtue in him did so equal dwell,
Men hardly could perceive which did excel.
In endless Bliss he is now, whilst mournful I
Nothing can think, but how he pierced the Sky,
G'ot into Heaven, and seemed amazed to cry;
Reviewing (O Behold!) Eternity's Rich Throne,
From Living Earthly Mounted I Am Now Gone.
-- Vivacem nolo Dolorem;
Sed memor aeterno tempore vivat Amor!

FINIS.

