John Bunnyon


THE WORK OF JESUS CHRIST, AS AN ADVOCATE, Clearly Explained, AND Largely
Improved, FOR THE BENEFIT OF ALL BELIEVERS. FROM 1 John 2.1. And if any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. By John
Bunyan, Author of the Pilgrims Progress.

London, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultry, 1688.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
OF all the Excellent Offices, which God the Father has conferred upon Jesus
Christ our Lord, this of his being an Advocate with him for us, is not the
least, though to the shame of Saints it may be spoken, the blessed benefits
thereof have not with that diligence and fervent desire been enquired after as
they ought.

Christ as Sacrifice, Priest, and King, with the glories in, and that flow from
him, as such, has, God be thanked, in this our day, been much discovered by our
Seers, and as much rejoiced in by those who have believed their words: but as
he is an Advocate with the Father, an Advocate for us, I fear the excellency of
that does still too much lie hid. Though, I am verily of opinion, that the
People of God in this Age, have as much need of the knowledge thereof (if not
more need) than had their Brethren that are gone before ^^em.

T^^^^ words ( if not more need) perhaps may seem to some to be somewhat out of
Joint, but let the Godly-wise consider the Decays that are amongst us, as to
the Power of Godliness: And what abundance of foul miscarriages the generality
of Professors now stand guilty of; as also how diligent their great Enemy is to
accuse them at the Bar of God for them: And I think they will conclude, that in
so saying, I, indeed, have said some truth.

Wherefore, when I have thought on this, and have somewhat considered also the
transcendent excellency of the Advocateship of this our Lord: And again, that
but little of the Glory thereof has by writing been in our day communicated to
the Church, I adventured to write what I have seen thereof, and do by what does
follow present it unto her for good.

I count not my self sufficient for this or for any other truth, as it is in
Jesus: But yet I say, I have told you somewhat of it, according to the
proportion of Faith. And I believe that some will thank God for what I here
have said about it; but it will be chiefly those whose Right and Title to the
Kingdom of Heaven, and Glory, does seem to themselves to be called in question
by their Enemy, at the Bar of the Judge of all.

These, I say, will read, and be glad to hear that they have an Advocate at
Court, that will stand up to plead for them, and that will yet secure to them a
Right to the heavenly Kingdom. Wherefore it is more particularly for those that
at present, or that hereafter may be in this dreadful plight, that this my Book
is now made public: Because it is, as I have showed, for such that Jesus
Christ is Advocate with the Father.

Of the many and singular advantages therefore that such have by this their
Advocate in his Advocating for them, this Book gives some account: As where he
pleads, how he pleads, what he pleads, when he pleads, with whom he pleads, for
whom he pleads, and how the Enemy is put to shame and silence before their God,
and all the holy Angels.

Here is also showed to those herein concerned, how they indeed may know that
Jesus is their Advocate: Yea, and how their matters go before their God, the
Judge. And particularly that they shall well come off at last: Yea, though
their Cause, as it is theirs is such, in Justification of which, themselves
don't dare to show their Heads.

Nor have I left the dejected Souls without Directions how to entertain this
Advocate to plead their Cause. Yea, I have also shown that he will be with
case prevailed with to stand up to plead for such, as one would think, the very
Heavens would blush to hear them named by him.

Their comfort also is, that he never lost a Cause, nor a Soul, for whom he
undertook to be an Advocate with God.

But Reader, I will no longer detain thee from the perusal of the Discourse.
Read and think, read and compare what thou read with the Word of God. If
thou find any benefit by what thou read, give the Father and his Son the
Glory; and also pray for me. If thou find me short in this, or to exceed in
that, impute all such things to my weakness, of which I am alway^ full.

Farewell. I am thine to serve thee what I may, JOHN BUNYAN.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
THe Apostle's divine Policy, to beget a due regard to his divine Doctrine of
Eternal Life. Page 1 The Apostle's Explication of this Expression, viz. The
Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin. Page 2 The Apostle's Exhortation
to separation from sin: as a good effect of a good Cause: Viz. forgiveness. ib.
The Apostle's Addition, to prevent misunderstanding, viz. we have an Advocate
with the Father. Page 3 This brings to the Text, in which are two great Truths
contained. ib. 1. A Supposition: viz. that Men in Christ may sin. ib. 2. An
Expression, by way of Consolation, in case of sin, viz. we have an Advocate
with the Father. ib.
An Enquiry into the First: Viz. what our Apostle means by sin: In which is
considered, a difference in the Person, and in the sin. Page 4, 5 An Enquiry
into the Second: viz. what it is for Christ to be an Advocate: viz. To plead
for another in a Court of Judicature. Page 6 Seven things supposed in the
Office of Advocate. ib. 1. That God as Judge, is on the Throne of Judgment. ib.
2. That Saints are concerned at that Bar. Page 7 3. That Christians have an
Accuser. Page 8 4. That sinning Saints dare not appear at this Bar, to plead
their own Cause. Page 9 5. That Ch^istians are apt to forget their Advocate,
and remember their Judge. Page 10 6. To remember our Advocate, is the way to
support Faith, and Hope. Page 11 7. That if our Advocate plead our Cause
(though that be never so black) he is able to bring us off. Page 12
The Apostle's triumph in Christ on this account. Page 13 An Exhortation to the
difficult task of Believing. Page 14 Christ's Advocateship, declares us to be
sorry creatures. Page 16 The Method observed in the ensuing discourse. Page 17
First, To speak of this Advocate's Office. ib. 1. By touching on the Nature of
this Office. Page 18 2. By treating of the Order or Place of this Office. Page
19 3. The occasion of this Office: viz. some great sin. Page 21 Christ as
Advocate, pleads a bad Cause. Page 23 A good Cause will plead for it self. Page
24 A pestilent passage of a Preacher. Page 25 A bad man may have a good Cause;
and a good man may have a bad Cause. Page 26 Christ the righteous pleading a
bad Cause, is a Mystery. ib. The best Saints are most sensible of their sins.
Page 27 Second, To show how Christ does manage his Office. Page 28 1. ALONE,
Not by any Proxy, or Deputy. ib. 2. Christ pleads at God's Bar: the Cause
cannot be removed into another Court. Page 29 If removed from Heaven, we have
no Advocate on Earth. Page 30 In pleading, Christ observes these Rules. 1. He
grants what is charged on us. ib. 2. He pleads his own goodness for us. Page
32 He pays all our debt down. Page 33 All mouths stopped, who would not have
the sinner delivered. Page 34 Christ requires a Verdict in order to our
deliverance. ib. The sinner is delivered, God contented, Satan confounded, and
Christ applauded. Page 35 II. How Christ manages his Office of an Advocate
against the Adversary, by Argument. ib. 1. He pleads the pleasure of his
Father, in his Merits. Page 37 Satan rebuked for finding fault therewith. Page
38 2. He pleads God's Interest in his People. Page 39 Haman's mishap in being
engaged against the King's Queen: NB. Page 40 It seems a weak Plea, because of
Man's unworthiness: But it is a strong Plea, because of God's worthiness. Page
41 The Elect are bound to God, by a sevenfold cord. Page 42, 43 The weight of
the Plea weighed. Page 44 3. Christ pleads his own Interest in them. Page 45 A
Parallel between Cattle, in a Pound, and Christ's own Sheep. Page 46 Six
weighty Reasons in this Plea. Page 47 1. They are Christ's own. ib. 2. They
cost him dear. ib. 3. He has made them near to himself. Page 48 They are his
Spouse, his Love, his Dove: They are Members of his Body. Page 49 A Man cannot
spare a Hand, a Foot, a Finger. Page 50 Nor can Christ spare any Member. Page
51 4. Christ pleads his right in Heaven, to give it to whom he will. ib. Christ
will: Satan will not: Christ's Will stands. Page 52 5. Christ pleads Satan's
enmity against the godly. Page 53 Satan is the Cause of the Crimes he accuses
us of. Page 55 A Simile of a weak witted Child. ib. 6. Christ can plead those
sins of Saints, for them, for which Satan would have them damned. Page 58
Eight Considerations to clear that. Page 60, 61 Seven more Considerations to
the same end. Page 62, 63 Men care most for Children that are infirm. ib. A
Father offended, has been appeased, by a Brother turning Advocate. Page 64
Third Head, To show, who have Christ for an Advocate: Wherein are three things
contained. Page 65 I. This Office of Advocate, differs from that of a Priest.
ib. 1. They differ in Name. ib. 2. They differ in Nature. Page 66 3. They
differ as to their Extent. ib. 4. They differ as to the Persons, with whom they
have to do. ib. 5. They differ as to the Matter, about which they are employed.
ib. 6. Christ as Priest, preceeds: Christ as Advocate succeeds. Page 67 II. How
far this Office of an Advocate is extended: In five Particulars. Page 68 III.
Who have Christ for their Advocate. ib. 1. In general: All adopted Children.
Page 69 Obj. The Text says, if any Man sin. Page 70 Answ. Any Man, is not any
of the Wo^ld: But any of the children of God. A difference in Children: some
bigger than some. Page 73 Christ an Advocate for strong men. Page 74, 75 2. In
particular, to show if Christ be our Advocate. Page 76 I. If one have
entertained Christ to plead a Cause. ib. Quest. How shall I know that? Page 77
Answ. By being sensible of an Action commenced against thee in the High Court
of Justice. ib. II. If one have revealed a Cause to Christ. Page 79 An Example
of one revealing his Cause to Christ in a Closet. Page 80 In Order to this, one
must know Christ, 1. To be a Friend. Page 81 2. To be faithful. Page 82 III. If
one have committed a Cause to Christ. Page 83 In order to this, one must be
convinced. 1. Of Christ's Ability to defend him. Page 84 2. of Christ's
Courage, to plead a Cause. ib. 3. Of Christ's Will for this Work. Page 85 4. Of
Christ's tenderness, in case of his Clients dullness. ib. 5. Of Christ's
unweariedness. Page 86 IV. If one wait till things come to a legal Issue. Page
87 Quest. What is it thus to wait? Page 88 Answ. 1. To be of good Courage. Look
for deliverance. Page 89 2. To keep his way, in waiting. ib. 3. To observe his
Directions. ib. 4. To hearken to future Directions, which may come from the
Advocate. ib. 5. To come to no ill conclusion in waiting: viz. that the Cause
is lost, because one hears not from Court. Page 90 6. To wait waking: Not
sleeping. ib. Ordinances, and Minister compared to a Posthouse, and Carriers of
Letters. Page 91 The Clients comfortable conclusion about his Advocate, and
Cause. ib. But yet doubting and desponding. Page 92, 93 The Author's reply to,
and comply with the Clients conclusion: And his Council in the case. Page 94
Fourth Head, To show the Clients Privileges, by the benefit of this Office of
Advocate. Page 95 Priv. 1. The Advocate pleads a price paid. ib. Of a rich
Brother, and his poor Brethren. Page 96 Of the ill-conditioned Man, their
Enemy. ib. Farther cleared, by three considerations. Page 97 Priv. 2. The
Clients Advocate pleads for himself also; both concerned in one bottom. Page 99
1. He pleads the price of his own Blood. ib. 2. He pleads it for his own Page
100 A Simile of a lame Horse. ib. Of Men going to Law for a thing of little
worth. ib. Obj. I am but one. Page 101 Answ. Christ cannot lose one. Page 102
Priv. 3. The Plea of Satan is groundless. ib. Satan must be cast over the Bar.
Page 103 A Simile of a Widow owing a Sum of Money. Page 105 Of an old Law
nulled by a new Law. Page 106 Satan pleads by the Old Law: Christ by the New.
ib. Priv. 4. Is consequential. The Clients Accuser, must need be overthrown.
Page 107 The Clients solemn Appeal to the Almighty. Page 108 In case the
accused have no Advocate, Satan prevails. ib. Priv. 5. The Advocate has pity
for his Client: And indignation against the A^cuser. Page 109 Men choose an
Advocate, who has a Quarrel against their Adversary. Page 110 Priv. 6. The
Judge counts the Accuser his Enemy. Page 111 To procure the Judges Son to
plead, is desirable. ib. Priv. 7. The Clients Advocate has good courage. He
will set his Face like a Flint. Page 112 He pleads before the God, and all the
Host of Heaven. Page 113 He is the old Friend of Publicans, and sinners. ib. He
pleads a Cause, bad enough to make Angels blush. Page 114 Love will do, and
bear, and suffer much. Page 115 Priv. 8. The Advocate is always ready in Court.
Page 116 He appears consider the Presence of God. Page 117 Priv. 9. T^^ Christ
^^^^cate will not be blinded with Bribes. ^^ Page 118 Priv. 10. The Advocate is
Judge in the Client's Cause. Page 120 Joseph's Exaltation was Israel's
Advantage. Page 121 God's care of his Peoples welfare. Page 122 Priv. 11. The
Advocate has all that is requisite for an Advocate to have. Page 123 Last
Head, To show the necessity of Christ for our Advocate. Page 124 I. To
vindicate the Justice of God, against the cavils of the Devil. Page 125 Satan
charges God with unjust Words, Actions. Page 126 God is pleased with his design
to save sinners. ib. II. There is Law to be objected against us. Page 128
Christ appeals to the Law it self. Page 130 Christ is not ashamed to own the
way of Salvation. Page 132 III. Many things give our Accuser advantage Page 133
1. Many things relating to the Promises. ib. 2. Many things relating to our
Lives. Page 134 3. The threats annexed to the Gospel. Page 137 IV. To plead
about our afflictions for sins. Page 139 A Simile of a Man indicted at the
^ssize: And his malicious Adversary. ib. An allusion to Abishai, and ^^i^^ain,
who cursed David. Page 141 V. To plead the efficacy of our Law. ^^i^les to our
Inheritance, if questionable, because of new sins. Page 142 Saints do not sell
their Inheritance by sin. Page 143 VI. Our Evidences are often out of our hand
and we recover them by our Advocate. Page 147 Obj. What need all these Offices,
or nice Distinctions? Page 150 Answ. The Wisdom of God is not to be charged
with folly. ib. God's People are baffled with the Devil, for want of a distinct
knowledge of Christ in all his Offices. Page 152 Obj. 2. My Cause being bad,
Christ will desert me. Page 153 Answ. Sin is a deadly destruction to Faith. ib.
A five-fold Order observed in the exercise of Faith. Page 154 Obj* ^. But who
shall pay the Advocate his (...)? Page 157 Answ. There is Law and Lawyers too
without money. ib. Christ pleads for the Poor. ib. David's strange gift to God.
Page 159 Obj. 4. If Christ be my Advocate once, he will always be troubled with
me. Page 160 Answ. He is an Advocate to the utmost. Page 162 Use 1. To consider
the Dignity God has put upon Christ, by Offices, Places of Trust, and Titles
of Honor, in general. ib. Use 2. To consider this Office of an Advocate in
particular: By which consideration these advantages come. Page 168 1. To see
one is not forsaken for sin. ib. 2. To take courage to contend with the Devil.
Page 169 3. It affords relief for discouraged Faith. ib. 4. It helps to put off
the Vizard, Satan puts on Christ. Page 170 A Simile of a Viza^^ on the Face of
a Father. Page 171 Study this peculiar Treasure of an Advocate. 1. With
reference to its peculiarity. Page 172 2. Study the Nature of this Office. Page
173 3. Study its efficacy and prevalency. ib. 4. Study Christ's Faithfulness in
his Office. Page 174 5. Study the need of a share therein. Page 175 Use 3. To
wonder at Christ's condescension, in being an Advocate for the base and
unworthy. Page 177 Christ acts in open Court. 1. With an holy, and just God.
Page 179 2. Before all the Heavenly Host. Page 180 3 The Client is unconcerned,
for whom the Advocate is engaged. Page 181 4. The Majesty of the Man, that is
an Advocate. Page 182 Use 4. Improve this Doctrine to strengthen Grace. ib. 1.
To strengthen Faith. ib. 2. To encourage to Prayer. Page 184 3. To keep humble.
Page 186 4. To encourage to perseverance. Page 188 Obj. I cannot pray: My Mouth
is stopped. Page 189 Answ. Satan cannot silence Christ. Page 190 5. Improve
this Doctrine to drive Difficulties down. ib. Use 5. If Christ pleads for us
before God, we should plead for him before Men. Page 191 Nine Considerations to
that end. Page 192 The last Res^^^e for a dead lift Page 193 Use 6. To be wary
of sin against God. Page 194 Christianity teaches Ingenuity. ib. Christ is our
^^^ocate on free cost. Page 195 A comely conclusion of a Brute. Page 198 Three
Considerations added. ib. Use 7. The strong are to tell the weak of an Advocate
to plead their Cause. Page 199 A word in season is good. ib. Use 8. All is
nothing to them that have none to plead their Cause. Page 202 An Instance of
God's terrible Judgment. Page 203 Obj. There is Grace, the Promise, the Blood
of Christ, cannot these save, except Christ be Advocate? ib. Answ. These, and
Advocate, and all little enough. Page 204 Christ no Advocate for such as have
no Sense of, and Shame for sin. Page 206 Obj. Is not Christ an Advocate for his
Elect, uncalled? Page 207 Answ. He died, and prays for all his Elect, as
Priest; as Advocate, pleads for the called only. ib.
ERROR.
Page 167. line 10. for Matter, read Water.

1 John II.1. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous.
THat the Apostle might obtain due regard from those to whom he wrote, touching
the things about which he wrote, he tells them, That he received not his
Message to them, at second or third hand, but was himself an Eye and
Ear-Witness thereof. That which was from the Beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, and our Hands have
handled of the Word of Life, (for the Life was manifest, and we have seen it,
and bear witness; and show unto you, that eternal Life which was with the
father, and was manifest unto us:) That which we have seen and heard, declare
we unto you. Having thus told them of his ground for what he said, he proceeds
to tell them also the matter contained in his Errand; to wit, That he brought
them news of Eternal Life, as freely offered in the Word of the Gospel to them;
or rather that that Gospel which they had received, would certainly usher them
in at the Gates of the Kingdom of Heaven, were their Reception of it sincere,
and in truth. For, says he, then The Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God
cleanses you from all sin.

Having thus far told them what was his Errand, he sets upon an Explication of
what he had said, specially touching our being cleansed from all sin; not,
says he, from a Being of Sin: For should we say so, we should deceive our
selves, and should prove that we have no truth of God in us; but by cleansing,
I mean a being delivered from all sin, so, as that none at all shall have the
dominion over you, to bring you down to Hell; for that for the sake of the
Blood of Christ, all trespasses are forgiven you.

This done he exhorts them to shun, or sly Sin, and not to consent to the
Motions, Workings, Inticeings, or the Allurements thereof, saying, I write unto
you that you sin not. Let not Forgiveness have so bad an effect upon you, as to
cause you to be remiss in Christian Duties, or as to tempt you to give way to
Evil. Shall we sin, because we are forgiven? or shall we not much matter what
manner of Lives we live, because we are set free from the Law of Sin and Death?
God forbid! Let Grace teach us another Lesson; and lay other Obligations upon
our Spirits. My little Children, says he, these things I write unto you, that
you sin not. What things? why, tidings of Pardon and Salvation, and of that
nearness to God, to which you are brought by the precious Blood of Christ. Now
lest also by this last exhortation, he should yet be misunderstood, he adds,
and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. I say he adds this to prevent desponding in those weak and
sensible Christians, that are so quick of feeling, and of decerning the
Corruptions of their Natures. For these cry out continually, That there is
nothing that they do, but it is attended with sinful Weaknesses. Wherefore in
the Words we are presented with two great truths.

First, with a Supposition, that Men in Christ, while in this World, may Sin.
If any man sin; any man, none are excluded; for all, or any one of the all of
them that Christ has redeemed and forgiven, are incident to Sin. By may, I
mean not a Toleration, but a Possibility. For there is not a Man, not a Just
Man upon the Earth, that does good and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. 1 Kin. 8.46.

Secondly, the other thing with which we are presented, is, an Advocate: If any
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Now there lies in these two truths, two things to be enquired into; as,

1, What the Apostle should here mean by sin.

2. And also what he here does mean by an Advocate. If any man sin, we have an
Advocate.

There is ground to enquire after the first of these, because, tho here he
says, they that sin have an Advocate; yet in the very next Chapter, he says,
such are of the Devil, have not seen God, neither know him, nor are of him.

There is ground also to enquire after the Second, because an Advocate is
supposed in the Text, to be of use to them that sin. If any Man sin, we have an
Advocate.

1. For the First of these, to wit, what the Apostle should here mean by Sin,
If any Man Sin.

I answer, since there is a difference in the Persons, there must be a
difference in the Sin. That there is a difference in the Persons, is showed
before; one is called a Child of God, the other is said to be of the wicked
One. Their Sin differ also in their Degree at least, for no Child of God sins
to that Degree as to make himself incapable of Forgiveness: For he that is born
of God keeps himself, and that wicked one, touches him not, Chap. 5.17, 18.
Hence the Apostle says there is a sin unto Death, Mat. 12.32. which is the Sin
from which he that is born of God is kept.

The sins therefore are thus distinguished, The Sins of the People of God, are
said to be sins that Men commit, the others are counted those, which are the
Sins of Devils.

First, the Sins of God's People, are said to be Sins which Men commit; and for
which they have an Advocate, tho they, who sin after the example of the wicked
one, have none.

When a Man or a Woman, says Moses, shall commit a Sin, which Men commit; they
shall confess their Sin, and an atonment shall be made for them, Numb. 5.5, 6,
7. Mark, It is when they commit a Sin, which Men commit. Or as Hosea has it,
when they transgress the Commandment like Adam, Hos. 6.7. Now these are the
Sins under consideration by the Apostle, and to deliver us from which we have
an Advocate with the Father. But for the Sins mentioned in the third Chapter,
since the Persons sinning, go here under another Character; they also must be
of another Stamp, to wit, a making Head against the Person, Merits and Grace of
Jesus Christ: these are the Sins of Devils in the World; and for these there is
no Remission: These they also, that are of the wicked one, commit; and
therefore sin after the similitude of Satan, and so fall into the Condemnation
of the Devil.

Secondly, but what is it for Jesus to be an Advocate for these? If any Man sin
we have an Advocate.

An Advocate is one who pleads for another at any bar, or before any Court of
Judicature, but of this more in its place. So then we have in the Text, a
Christian, as supposed, committing Sin: and a Declaration of an Advocate
prepared to plead for him. If any Man sin we have an Advocate with the Father.

And this leads me first to enquire into what by these words the Apostle must
of necessity presuppose. For making use here of the Similitude or Office of an
Advocate, thereby to show the preservation of the sinning Christian; He must,

1. Suppose, That God, as Judge, is now upon the Throne of his Judgment. For an
Advocate is to plead at a Bar, before a Court of Judicature. Thus it is among
Men; and for as much as our Lord Jesus is said to be an Advocate with the
Father, it is clear, that there is a Throne of Judgment also. This the Prophet
Micaiah affirms saying, I saw the Lord sitting upon a Throne, and all the Host
of Heaven standing by him on the Right hand, and on the Left, 1 Kin. 22.19, 20.
Sitting upon a Throne for Judgment; for from the Lord, as then sitting upon
that Throne, proceeded that Sentence against King Ahab, that he should go and
fall at Ramah gilead. And he did go, and did fall there, as the award, or fruit
of that Judgment. That Is the First.

2. The Text also supposes, that the Saints, as well as Sinners, are concerned
at that Bar; for the Apostle says plainly, That there we have an Advocate. And
the Saints are concerned at that Bar, because they transgress as well as
others, and because the Law is against the Sin of Saints, as well as against
the Sins of other Men. If the Saints were not capable of committing of Sin,
what need would they have of an Advocate? [1 Chr. 21.3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Samuel 12.13,
14. Yea though they did sin, yet if they were by Christ so set free from the
Law, as that it could by no means take cognizance of their Sins, what need
would they have of an Advocate? none at all. If there be twenty places, where
there are Assizes kept in this Land, yet if I have offended no Law, what need
have I of an Advocate? specially if the Judge be Just, and knows me altogether,
as the God of Heaven does. But here is a Judge that is just, and here is an
Advocate also; an Advocate for the Children, an Advocate to plead, (for an
Advocate, as such, is not of use, but before a Bar to plead) therefore here is
an Offense, and so a Law broken by the Saints as well as others. That Is the
Second thing.

3. As the Text supposes that there is a Judge, and Crimes of Saints: So it
supposes that there is an Accuser: one that will carefully gather up the
Faults of good Men, and that will plead them at this Bar against them. Hence we
read of the Accuser of the Brethren, that accuses them before God day and
night, Rev. 12.10, 11, 12. For Satan does not only tempt the godly Man to sin;
but, having prevailed with him, and made him guilty, he packs away to the
Court, to God the Judge of all, and there addresses himself to accuse that Man,
and to lay to his charge the heinousness of his offense: pleading against him
the Law that he has broken, the light against which he did it, and the like.
But now, for the relief and support of such poor People; the Apostle by the
Text presents them with an Advocate. That is, with one to plead for them, while
Satan pleads against them: With one that pleads for Pardon, while Satan by
accusing seeks to pull Judgment, and Vengeance upon our Heads. If any Man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous That Is the
Third thing.

4. As the Apostle supposes a Judge, crimes, and an Accuser: So he also
supposes, that those here-in concerned, to wit, the sinning Children, neither
can, nor dare attempt to appear at this Bar themselves, to plead their own
Cause before this Judge, and against this Accuser. For if they could, or durst
do this, what need they have an Advocate; for an Advocate is of use to them,
whose cause themselves neither can, nor dare appear to plead. Thus Job prayed
for an Advocate to plead his Cause with God, Job 16.20.21. And David cries out,
Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O God, for in thy sight shall no Man
living be justified, Psalm. 14.3.1, 2, 3. Wherefore it is evident that Saints
neither can, nor dare adventure to plead their cause. Alas the Judge is the
Almighty, and Eternal God. The Law broken, is the holy and perfect Rule of God,
in it self a consuming Fire. The Sin is so odious, and a thing so abominable,
that it is enough to make all the Angels blush to hear it but so much as once
mentioned in so holy a place as that is, where this Great God does sit to
judge. This Sin now hangs about the neck of him, that has committed it, yea it
covers him, as does a mantle: The Adversary is bold, cunning, and audacious,
and can word a thousand of us into an utter Silence in less than half a quarter
of an hour. What then should the Sinner (if he could come there) do at this Bar
to plead? Nothing, nothing for his own Advantage. But now comes in his Mercy,
he has an Advocate to plead his Cause. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. That Is the fourth thing: But again,

5. The Apostle also supposes by the Text, That there is an aptness in
Christians, when they have sinned, to forget that they have an Advocate with
the Father. Wherefore this is written to put them in Remembrance; If any Man
sin, let him remember, we have an Advocate. We can think of all other things
well enough, namely that God is a just Judge, that the Law is perfectly holy,
that my Sin is an horrible and an abominable thing, and that I am certainly
there of accused before God by Satan.

These things I say, we readily think of, and forget them not. Our Conscience
puts as in mind of these, our Guilt puts us in mind of these, the Devil puts us
in mind of these, and our Reason and Sense holds the Knowledge and
Remembrance of these close to us; all that we forget, is, that we have an
Advocate, an Advocate with the Father; that is, one that is appointed to take
in hand in open Court, before all the Angels of Heaven, my cause; and to plead
it by such Law and Arguments, as will certainly fetch me off, tho I am clothed
with filthy Garments. But this I say, we are apt to forget, as Job, when he
said, Oh that one might plead for a Man with God, as one pleads for his
Neighbor, Job 16.21. Such an one Job had, but he had almost at this time
forgot it, as he seems to intimate also, where he wishes for a days-man that
might lay his Hand upon them both. Chap. 9.33. But our Mercy is, we have one to
plead our cause; an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who
will not suffer our Soul to be spilt, and spoiled before the Throne, but will
surely plead our Cause.

6 Another thing that the Apostle would have us learn from the words, is this,
That to remember, and to believe that Jesus Christ is an Advocate for us, when
we have sinned, is the next way to support and strengthen our Faith and Hope.
Faith and Hope are very apt to faint, when our sins in their Guilt do return
upon us, nor is there any more proper way to relieve our Souls, than to
understand that the Son of God is our Advocate in Heaven. True, Christ died for
our Sins as a Sacrifice, and as a Priest he sprinkleth with his Blood the
Mercy-seat: Ay, but here is one that has sinned after Profession of Faith; that
has sinned grievously, so grievously, that his Sins are come up before God;
yea, are at his Bar pleaded against him by the Accuser of the Brethren; by the
Enemy of the godly. What shall he do now? Why, let him believe in Christ.
Believe, that is true; but how now must he conceive in his mind of Christ, for
the encouraging of him so to do? Why, let him call to mind that Jesus Christ is
an Advocate with the Father, and as such he meets the Accuser at the Bar of
God, pleads for this Man that has sinned against this Accuser, and prevails
for ever against him. Here now, tho Satan be turned Lawyer, tho he accuses,
yea tho his charge against us is true, (for suppose that we have sinned) yet
our Advocate is with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Thus is Faith encouraged, thus is Hope strengthened, thus is the Spirit of the
sinking Christian revived, and made to wait for a good deliverance from a bad
cause, and a cunning Adversary: Specially if you consider,

7. That the Apostle also does further suppose by the Text, That Jesus Christ,
as Advocate, if he will but plead our Cause, let that be never so black, is
able to bring us off, even before Gods Judgment Seat to our Joy, and the
confounding of our Adversary. For when he says, we have an Advocate, he speaks
nothing if he means not thus. But he does mean thus, he must mean thus, because
he seeks here to comfort and support the Fallen. Has any Man sinned, we have
an Advocate. But what of that, if yet he be unable to fetch us off, when
charged for Sin at the Bar, and before the Face of a righteous Judge.

But he is able to do this, the Apostle says, so in that he supposes a Man has
sinned, as any Man among the Godly ever did: for so we may understand it; and
if he gives us not leave to understand it so, he says nothing to the purpose
neither. For it will be objected by some; But can he fetch me off, tho I have
done as David, as Solomon, as Peter, or the like? It must be answered yes, the
openness of the terms [anyman], the indefiniteness of the word [ Sin] does
naturally allow us to take him in the largest Sense; besides he brings in this
Saying as the chief, most apt and fittest to relieve one crushed down to Death
and Hell by the Guilt of Sin, and a wounded Conscience.

Further, methinks by these words, the Apostle seems to triumph in his Christ:
Saying, my Brethren, I would have you study to be holy: but if your Adversary
the Devil, should get the Advantage of you, and besmear you with the filth of
Sin, you have yet, besides all that you have heard already, an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Who is as to his Person, interest with
God, his Wisdom, and Worth, able to bring you off to the comforting of your
Souls.

Let me therefore for a Conclusion, as to this, give you an exhortation to
believe, to hope and expect that though you have sinned (for I now speak to the
fallen Saint) that Jesus Christ will make a good end with thee; trust I say in
him, and he shall bring it to pass. I know I put thee upon a hard and difficult
task, for believing, and expecting Good, when my guilty Conscience does nothing
but clog, burden, and terrify me with the Justice of God, the Greatness of my
Sins, and the burning Torments is hard and Sweating work. But it must be, the
Text calls for it, thy case calls for it, and thou must do it, if thou would
glorify Christ. And this is the way to hasten the issue of thy Cause in Hand,
for believing daunts the Devil, pleases Christ, and will help thee
beforehand, to sing that Song of the Church, saying, O Lord, thou have pleaded
the Causes of my Soul, thou have redeemed my Life, Lam. 3.55, 56, 57, 58, 59.
Yea, believe, and hear thy pleading Lord say to thee, Thus says the Lord, the
Lord and thy God, that pleads the Cause of his People, Behold, I have taken
out of thy Hand the Cup of trembling, even the dregs of the Cup of my Fury,
thou shall no more drink it again, Isa. 51.20, 21, 22. I am not here
discoursing of the sweetness of Christ's Nature, but of the Excellency of his
Offices, and of his Office of Advocateship in particular, which as a Lawyer for
his Client, he is to execute in the Presence of God for us. Love may be where
there is no Office, and so where no Power is to do us good: but now, when Love
and Office shall meet, they will surely both combine in Christ to do the fallen
Christian good. But of his Love we have treated elsewhere; we will here
discourse of the Office of this loving One. And for thy further Information,
let me tell thee, That God thy Father, counts that thou will be, when
compared with his Law, but a poor one all thy Days. Yea, the Apostle tells thee
so, in that he says, there is an Advocate provided for thee When a Father
provides Crutches for his Child, he does as good as say, I count that my Child
will be yet Infirm. And when God shall provide an Advocate, he does as good as
say, my People are subject to Infirmities: Do not therefore think of thy self
above what by plain Texts, and fair Inferences, drawn from Christ's Offices,
thou art bound to think. What does it bespeak concerning thee, That Christ is
always a Priest in Heaven, and there ever lives to make Intercession for thee,
Heb. 7.24. but this that thou art at thy best in thy self, yea, and in thy best
exercising of all thy Graces too, but a poor, pitiful, sorry, sinful Man. A Man
that would, when yet most holy, be certainly cast away, did not thy High Priest
take away for thee, the iniquity of thy holy things. The Age we live in is a
wanton Age, the Godly are not so humble and low, and base in their own Eyes as
they should. Tho their daily experience calls for it, and the Priesthood of
Jesus Christ too.

But above all, the Advocateship of Jesus Christ, declares us to be sorry
Creatures. For that Office does as it were predict, that some time or other we
shall basely fall, and by falling be undone, if the Lord Jesus stand not up to
plead. And as it shows this concerning us; so it shows concerning God, that he
will not lightly, or easily lose his People: He has provided well for us: Blood
to wash us in; a Priest to pray for us, that we may be made to persevere; and
in case we foully fall, an Advocate to plead our Cause, and to recover us from
under, and out of all that danger, that by Sin and Satan, we at any time may be
brought into. But,

Having thus briefly passed through that in the Text, that I think the Apostle
must necessarily presuppose, I shall now endeavor to enter into the Bowels of
it, and see what in a more particular Manner, shall be found therein.

And for my more profitable doing of this work, I shall choose to observe this
Method in my discourse.

First, I shall show you more particularly of this Advocate's Office, or what,
and wherein Christ's Office as Advocate does lie.

Secondly, After that, I shall also show you how Jesus Christ does manage this
Office of an Advocate.

Thirdly, I shall also then show you, who they are, that have Jesus Christ for
their Advocate.

Fourthly, I shall also show you, what excellent Privileges they have, who have
Jesus Christ for their Advocate.

Fifthly, And to silence Cavillers, I shall also show the necessity of this
Office of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly, I shall come to answer some Objections. And Lastly to the Use and
Application.

To begin with the First of these; namely to show you more particularly of
Christ's Office as an Advocate, and wherein it lies. The which I shall do
these three ways

1. Touch again upon the Nature of this Office. And then,

2. Treat of the Order and Place that it has among the rest of his Offices.
And,

3. Treat of the Occasion of the Execution of this Office.

First, To touch upon the Nature of this Office. It is that which impowereth a
Man to plead for a Man, or one man to plead for another, not in common
Discourses, and upon common Occasions, as any man may do; but at a Bar, or
before a Court of Judicature, where a Man is accused or impleaded by his Enemy.
I say this Advocate's Office, is such both here, and in the Kingdom of Heaven.
An Advocate is as one of our Attorneys, at least in the general, who pleads
according to Law and Justice for one or other that is in trouble by Reason of
some Miscarriage, or of the naughty Temper of some that are about him, who
trouble, and vex, and labor to bring him into danger of the Law. This is the
Nature of this Office, as I said, on Earth; and this is the Office that Christ
executes in Heaven. Wherefore he says, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate;
one to stand up for him, and to plead for his deliverance before the Bar of
God, Joel 3.2. Isa. 66.16. Ezekiel. 38.22. Jer. 2.

For tho in some Places of the Scripture, Christ is said to plead for his, with
Men, and that by terrible Arguments, as by Fire, and Sword, and Famine, and
Pestilence; yet this is not that which is intended by this Text, for the
Apostle here says, he is an Advocate with the Father, or before the Father, to
plead for those, that there, or that to the Fathers Face shall be accused for
their Transgressions. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. So then this is the employ of Jesus Christ, as he
is for us an Advocate. He has undertaken to stand up for his People at God's
Bar, and before that great Court, there to plead by the Law and Justice of
Heaven, for their Deliverance; when, for their Faults, they are accused,
indicted, or impleaded by their Adversary.

2. And now to treat of the Order or Place that this Office of Christ has,
among the rest of his Offices, which he does execute for us, while we are here
in a State of Imperfection: And I think it is an Office that is to come behind,
as a Reserve, or for an Help at last, when all other Means shall seem to fail.
Men do not use to go to Law, upon every Occasion; or, if they do, the Wisdom of
the Judge, the Jury, and the Court, will not admit that every Brangle and
foolish Quarrel shall come before them; but an Advocate does then come into
Place, and then to the Exercise of his Office, when a Cause is counted worthy
to be taken notice of by the Judge, and by the Court. Wherefore he, I say,
comes in the last Place, as a reserve, or help at last to plead; and by
pleading to set that right by Law, which would otherwise have caused an
increase to more doubts and to further Dangers.

Christ as Priest, does always works of Service for us; because in our most
spiritual things there may faults and Spots be found, and these he takes away
of Course by the Exercise of that Office. For he always wears that Plate of
Gold upon his Forehead before the Father, whereon is written, Holiness to the
Lord. But now, besides these common Infirmities, there are Faults that are
highly gross and foul, that often are found in the Skirts of the Children of God.
Now these are they that Satan takes hold on, these are they that Satan draws
up a Charge against us for. And to save us from these, it is, that the Lord
Jesus is made an Advocate. When Joshua was clothed with filthy Garments, then
Satan stood at his right Hand to resist him, and then the Angel of the
Covenant, the Lord Jesus pleaded for his Help, Zech. 3. By all which it
appears, that this Office comes behind, is provided as a Reserve, that we may
have help at a pinch, and then be lifted out, when we sink in mire where there
is no standing.

This is yet further hinted at by the several Postures that Christ is said to
be in, as he exercises his Priestly, and Advocate's Office. As a Priest he
sits, as an Advocate he stands, Isa. 3.13. The Lord stands up when he pleads.
His sitting is more constant and of Course; Sit thou, etc. but his standing is
occasional, when Joshua is indicted; or when Hell and Earth is broken loose
against his Servant Stephen. For as Joshua was accused by the Devil, and as
then the Angel of the Lord stood by; so when Stephen was accused by men on
Earth and that Charge seconded by the fallen Angels before the Face of God,
it is said the Lord Jesus stood on the Right Hand of God, Act. 7.55. to wit, to
plead, for so I take it, because standing is his Posture as an Advocate, Heb.
10. not as a Priest, for as a Priest he must sit down, but he stands as an
Advocate, as has been showed before. Wherefore,

Secondly, The Occasion of his exercising of this Office of Advocate, is, as
has bee^ hinted already, when a Child of God shall be found guilty before God
of some heinous Sin, of some grievous thing in his Life and Conversation. For
as for those Infirmities that attend the best, in their most spiritual
Sacrifices; if a Child of God were guilty of ten thousand of them, they are of
Course purged through the much Incense that is always mixed with those
Sacrifices, in the golden Censer that is in the Hand of Christ: And so he kept
clean and counted upright notwithstanding those Infirmities. And therefore you
shall find that notwithstanding those common Faults the the Children of God are
counted good and upright in Conversation, and not charged as Offenders. David,
says the Text, did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned
not aside from any thing that he commanded him, all the days of his Life, save
only in the matter of Uriah the Hi^^ite, 1 Kin. 15.5. But was David in a strict
Sense without Fault in all things else? No verily: But that was foul in a
higher degree than the rest, and therefore there God sets a blot: Ay, and
doubtless, for that he was accused by Satan before the Throne of God: For here
is Adultery, and Murder and Hypocrisy, in David^s doings: Here is notorious
matter, a great Sin, and so a great Ground for Satan to draw up an Indictment
against the King; and a thundering one to be sure shall be preferred against
him. This is the time then for to Christ stand up to plead. For now there is
room for such a Question, can David's Sin stand with Grace, or is it possible
that a Man that has done as he has, should yet be found a Saint, and so in a
Saved State? Or can God repute him so, and yet be Holy and Just? Or can the
Merits of the Lord Jesus reach, according to the Law of Heaven, a Man in this
Condition? Here is a Case dubious, here is a Man whose Salvation, by his foul
Offenses, is made doubtful: Now we must to Law and Judgment; wherefore now let
Christ stand up to plead. I say now was David's Case dubious, Psalm. 51. he was
afraid that God would cast him away, and the Devil hoped that he would, and to
that end charged him before God's Face, if perhaps he might get Sentence of
Damnation to pass upon his Soul. But this was David's Mercy he had an Advocate
to plead his Cause, by whose, Wisdom and Skill in Matters of Law and Judgment,
he was brought off of those heavy Charges, from those gross Sins, and delivered
from that eternal Condemnation, that by the Law of Sin and Death was due
thereto.

This is then the occasion that Christ takes to plead, as Advocate, for the
Salvation of his People: to wit the Cause; he pleads the Cause of his People.
Not every Cause but such and such a Cause; the Cause that is very bad, and by
the which they are involved not only in Guilt and Shame, but also in danger of
Death and Hell. I say the Cause is bad, if the Text be true; if Sin can make it
bad, yea if Sin it Self be bad. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate. An
Advocate to plead for him; for him as considered guilty, and so consequently as
considered in a bad Condition. It Is true we must distinguish between the Person
and the Sin: and Christ pleads for the Person, not the Sin. but yet, he cannot
be concerned with the Person, but he must be with the Sin; for tho the Person
and the Sin may be distinguished, yet they cannot be separated. He must plead
then not for a Person only, but for a guilty Person, for a Person under the
worst of Circumstances: If any Man sin, we have an Advocate for him as so
considered.

When a Man's Cause is good, it will sufficiently plead for it self, yea and
for its Master too: specially when it is made appear so to be, before a Just
and Righteous Judge. Here therefore needs no Advocate, the Ju^ge himself will
pronounce him righteous. This is evidently seen in Job, Thou movest me against
him (this said God to Satan) to destroy him without a Cause, Job 2.3. Thus far
Job's Cause was good, wherefore he did not need an Advocate; his Cause pleaded
for its self, and for its owner also. But if it was to plead good Causes for
which Christ is appointed Advocate, then the Apostle should have written thus:
If any Man be righteous, we have an Advocate with the Father. Indeed I never
heard but one in all my Life preach from this Text, and he, when he came to
handle the Cause for which he was to plead, pretended it must be good, and
therefore said to the People see that your Cause be good, else Christ will not
undertake it. But when I heard it, Lord, thought I, if this be true, what shall
I do, and what will become of all this People; yea and of this Preacher too?
Besides, I saw that by the Text, the Apostle supposes an other Cause, a Cause
bad, exceeding bad, if Sin can make it so. (And this was one Cause why I
undertook this work.)

When we speak of a Cause, we speak not of a Person simply as so considered:
For, as I said before, Person and Cause must be distinguished. Nor can the
person make the Cause good, but as he regulates his Action by the Word of God:
If then a good, a righteous man does what the Law condemns, that thing is bad;
and if he be indicted for so doing, he is indicted for a bad Cause; and he that
will be his Advocate, must be concerned in, and about a bad Matter, and how he
will bring his Client off, therein does lie the Mystery.

I know that a bad Man may have a good Cause depending before the Judge, and so
also good Men have, Job 31. but then they are bold in their own Cause and fear
not to make mention of it, and in Christ to plead their Innocence before the
God of Heaven, as well as before Men, Psalm. 71.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 1.23. Gal. 1.20.
Phil. 1.8. But we have in the Text a Cause that all Men are afraid of, a Cause
that the Apostle concludes so bad, that none but Jesus Christ himself can save
the Christian from it. It is not only sinful, but Sin it self. If any Man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father.

Wherefore there is in this Place handled by the Apostle one of the greatest
Mysteries under Heaven. To wit, That an innocent and holy Jesus, should take in
hand to plead for one before a just and righteous God, that has defiled himself
with Sin. Yea, that he should take in Hand to plead for such an one against the
fallen Angels; and that he should also by his Plea effectually rescue, and
bring them off from the Crimes and Curse whereof they were verily guilty, by
the Verdict of the Law and Approbation of the Judge.

This I say is a great Mystery, and deserves to be pried into by all the godly,
both because much of the Wisdom of Heaven is discovered in it, and because the
best Saint is, or may be concerned with it.

Nor must we by any means let this truth be lost, because it is the truth, the
Text has declared it so: And to say otherwise is to belie the Word of God, to
thwart the Apostle, to sooth up Hypocrites, and to rob Christians* of their
Privilege, and to take the Glory from the Head of Jesus Christ, Luke 18.11, 12.

The best Saints are most sensible of their Sins, and most apt to make
Mountains of their Mole-hills: Satan also, as has been already hinted, does
labor greatly to prevail with them to sin, and to provoke their God against
them, Job 2.9. by pleading what is true, or by surmising evilly of them, to the
end they may be left with him to be tried, that they may be accused by him.
Great is his malice toward them, great is his Diligence in seeking their
Destruction; wherefore greatly does he desire to sift, to try, and winnow them,
if perhaps he may work in their Flesh to answer his Design; that is, to break
out in sinful Acts that he may have by Law to accuse them to their God and
Father. Wherefore for their Sakes this Text abides, that they may see, that
when they have sinned they have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous.

And thus have I showed you the Nature, the Order, and Occasion of this Office
of our blessed Lord Jesus. How Christ manages the Office of an Advocate.
I come now to show you, How Jesus Christ does manage this his Office of an
Advocate for us.

And that I may do this to your Edification, I shall choose this Method for the
opening of it.

First, show you how he manages this Office with his Father.

Secondly, I shall show you how he manages it before him, against our Adversary.

How he manages this his Office of Advocate with his Father.

First, He does it by himself, by no other, as Deputy under him. No Angel, no
Saint, no Work has place here, but Jesus, and Jesus only. This the Text
implies, we have an Advocate, speaking of one, but one, one alone, without an
Equal or an Inferior. We have but one, and he is Jesus Christ.

Nor is it for Christ's Honor, nor for the Honor of the Law or of the Justice
of God, that any but Jesus Christ should be an Advo^^^e for a sinning Saint.
Besides, to assert (...) contrary, what does it but lessen Sin, and make the
Advocateship of Jesus Christ superfluous? It would lessen Sin, should it be
removed by a Saint or Angel: It would make the Advocateship of Jesus Christ
superfluous, yea, needless should it be possible that Sin could be removed from
us by either Saint or Angel.

Again, If God should admit of more Advocates than one, and yet make mention of
never an one but Jesus Christ, or if John should allow another, and yet speak
nothing but of Jesus only: Yea that an Advocate under that title should be
mentioned but once, but once only in all the Book of God, and yet that diverse
should be admitted, stands neither with the Wisdom or Love of God, nor with the
Faithfulness of the Apostle. But Saints have but one Advocate, if they will use
him, or improve their Faith in that Office for their Help, so; if not, they
must take what follows.

This I thought good to hint at, because the times are corrupt and because
Ignorance and Superstition always waits for a Countenance with u^ and these
things have a natural tendency, as to darken all truth, so especially this,
which brings to Jesus Christ so much Glory, and yields to the Godly so much
Help and Relief.

Secondly, As Jesus Christ alone is Advocate, so God's Bar, and that alone, is
that before which he pleads. For God is Judge himself, Deuteronomy. 32, 36. Heb. 13
23. Nor can the Cause which now he is to plead be removed into any other Court,
either by appeals, or otherwise.

Could Satan remove us from Heaven to another Court he would certainly be too
hard for us, because there we should want our Jesus, our Advocate to plead our
Cause. Indeed sometimes he impleads us before Men, and they are glad of the
Occasion, for they and he are often one; but then we have Leave to remove our
Cause, and to pray for a Trial in the highest Court: Saying, Let my Sentence
come forth from thy Presence, and let thine eyes behold the things that are
Equal, Psalm. 17.2. This wicked World does sentence us for our good Deeds, but
how then would they sentence us for our bad ones? But we will never appeal from
Heaven to Earth for Right: For here we have no Advocate; our Advocate is with
the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

Thirdly, As he pleads by himself alone, and no where else but in the Court
of Heaven with the Father: So as he pleads with the Father for us, he
observes this Rule;

1. He grants, and confesses whatever can rightly be charged upon us: Yet
so, as that he takes the whole Charge upon himself; acknowledging the Crimes
to be his own.

O God, says he, thou know my foolishness, and my Sins, my Guiltiness is not
hid from thee, Psalm. 69.5. And this he must do, or else he can do nothing: If
he hides the Sin, or lesseneth it, he is faulty: If he leaves it still upon us,
we die: He must then take our Iniquity to himself, make it his own, and so
deliver us. For having thus taken the Sin upon himself, as he lawfully may, and
lovingly does, for we are Members of his Body, (so it is his Hand, it is his
Foot, it is his Ear that has sinned:) It follows that we live, if he lives,
and who can desire more. This then must be thoroughly considered, if ever we will
have Comfort in a day of Trouble and Distress for Sin.

And thus far there is, in some kind, a harmony betwixt his being a Sacrifice,
a Priest and an Advocate; as a Sacrifice our Sins were laid upon him, Isa. 53.
as a Priest he bears them, Exodus 28.38. and as an Advocate he acknowledges
them to be his own, Psalm. 69.5. Now, having acknowledged them to be his own,
the Quarrel is no more 'twixt us and Satan: For the Lord Jesus has espoused our
Quarrel, and made it his. All then that we, in this matter, have to do, is, to
stand at the Bar, by Faith among the Angels, and see how the business goes. O
Blessed God! What a Lover of Mankind art thou, and how gracious is our Lord
Jesus, in his thus managing matters for us?

2. The Lord Jesus having thus taken our Sins upon himself, next pleads his own
Goodness to God, on our Behalf: Saying, Let not the^ that wait on thee, O Lord
God of Hosts, be ashamed for my Sake: Let not those that seek thee, be
confounded for my Sake, O God of Israel. Because for thy Sake I have born
Reproach: Shame has covered my Face, Psalm. 69.6, 7, Mark, let them not be
ashamed for my Sake, let them not be confounded for my Sake. Shame and
Confusion, are the Fruits of Guilt, or of a Charge for Sin, Jer. 3.25. and are
but an entrance into Condemnation, Dan. 12.2. Joh. 5.29. But behold, how
Christ pleads, saying, Let not that be, for my Sake, for the Merit of my Blood,
for the Perfection of my Righteousness, for the Prevalency of my Intercession,
Let them not be ashamed for my Sake, O Lord God of Hosts. And let no Man
object, because this Text is in the Psalms, as if it were not spoke by the
Prophet, of Christ; for, both John and Paul, yea, and Christ himself, do make
this Psalm a Prophecy of him: Compare ver. 9. with Joh. 2.17. and ver. 9, with
Romans 15.3. And ver. 21. with Matthew. 27.48. and M^t. 15.25.

But is not this a wonderful thing, That Christ should first take our Sins, and
account them his own; and then plead the value and worth of his whole self, for
our Deliverance? For, by these Words [ for my Sake,] he pleads his own self,
his whole self, and all that he is and has: And thus he puts us in good Estate
again, tho our Cause was very bad.

To bring this down to weak Capacities, Suppose a Man should be indebted twenty
thousand Pounds, but has not twenty thousand farthings wherewith to pay; And
suppose also, that this Man be arrested for this Debt, and that the Law also,
by which he is sued, will not admit of a penny bate: This Man may yet come well
enough off, if his Advocate, or Attorney will make the Debt his own, and will,
in the Presence of the Judges, out with his Bags and pay down every Farthing.
Why this is the way of our Advocate. Our Sins are called Debts, Matthew. 6.12. we
are sued for them at the Law, Luke 12.59. and the Devil is our Accuser; but
behold, the Lord Jesus comes out with his Worthiness, pleads it at the Bar,
making the Debt his own, Mark 12.42. 2 Cor. 3.5. and says, now let them not be
ashamed, for my Sake, O Lord God of Hosts, let them not be confounded for my
Sake, O God of Israel. And hence, as he is said to be an Advocate, so he is
said to be a Propitiation, or a mends-Maker, or one that appeaseth the Justice
of God for our Sins, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins.

And who can now object against the Deliverance of the Child of God? God
cannot; for he for Christ's Sake, according as he pleaded, has forgiven us all
Trespasses, Col. 2.13. Ephesians. 4.32. The Devil cannot; his Mouth is stopped as is
plain in the Case of Joshua, Zech. 3. The Law cannot, for that approves of
what Christ has done. This then is the way of Christ's pleading.

You must know, That when Christ pleads with God, he pleads with a just and
righteous God, and therefore he must plead Law and nothing but Law: And this he
pleaded in both these Pleas. First, in confessing of the Sin, he justified the
Sentence of the Law, in pronouncing of it evil, and then in his laying of
himself, his whole self, before God, for that Sin he vindicated the Sanction,
and Perfection of the Law. Thus therefore he magnifies the Law and makes it
Honorable, and yet brings off his Client, safe and sound in the view of all the
Angels of God.

Thirdly, the Lord Jesus, having thus taken our Sins upon himself, and
presented God with all the Worthiness that is in his whole self, for them, in
the next place, he calls for Justice, or a just Verdict upon the Satisfaction
he has made to God and to his Law. Then Proclamation is made in open Court
saying take away the filthy Garments from him, from him that has offended, and
cloth him with Change of Raiment, Zech. 3.

Thus the Soul is preserved that has sinned; thus the God of Heaven is content
that he should be saved; thus Satan is put to Confusion, and Jesus applauded
and cried up by the Angels of Heaven, and by the Saints on Earth.

Thus have I showed you how Christ does Advocate it with God, and his Father,
for us, and I have been the more particular in this, because the Glory of
Christ, and the Comfort of the Dejected, is greatly concerned, and wrapped up in
it. Look then to Jesus, if thou have sinned; to Jesus, as an Advocate pleading
with the Father for thee: Look to nothing else, for he can tell how, and that
by himself, to deliver thee: yea, and will do it, in a way of Justice, which is
a Wonder, and to the Shame of Satan; which will be his Glory, and also to thy
complete Deliverance, which will be thy Comfort and Salvation.

But to pass this, and to come to the Second thing, which is, to show you, how
the Lord Jesus manages this his Office of an Advocate, before his Father,
against the Adversary: For he pleads with the Father, but pleads against
the Devil; he pleads with the Father, Law and Justice; but against the
Adversary he lets out himself.

I say as he pleads against the Adversary, so he enlarges himself, with
Arguments, over and besides those which he pleads with God his Father.

Nor is it meet, or needful, that our Advocate, when he pleads against Satan,
should so limit himself to matter of Law, as when he pleads with his Father.
The Saint by sinning owes Satan nothing, no Law of his is broken thereby, why
then should he plead for the saving of his People, justifying Righteousness to
him?

Christ, when he died, died not to satisfy Satan, but his Father; not to
appease the Devil, but to answer the Demands of the Justice of God, nor did he
Design when he hanged on the Tree, to triumph over his Father, but over Satan.
He redeemed us therefore from the Curse of the Law, by his Blood, Gal. 3.13.
and from the Power of Satan, by his Resurrection, Heb. 2.14. He delivered us
from righteous Judgment by Price, and Purchase; but from the Rage of Hell by
Fight and Conquest.

And, as he acted thus diversely in the Work of our Redemption; even so he also
does in the Execution of his Advocate's Office. When he pleads with God, he
pleads so: And when he pleads against Satan he pleads so. And how he
pleads with God, when he deals with Law and Justice, I have showed you; and
now I will show you how he pleads, before him, against the Accuser of the
Brethren.

First, He pleads against him the well Pleasedness that his Father has in his
Merits, saying, This shall please the Lord. Or this does, or will please the
Lord, better than any thing that can be propounded, Psalm. 69.31. Now this Plea
being true, as it is, being established upon the liking of God Almighty:
Whatever Satan can say, to obtain our everlasting Destruction, is without
Ground, and so, unreasonable. I am well pleased, says God, Mat. 3.17. and
again, The Lord is well pleased for [his] Christ's Righteousness Sake, Isa.
42.21. All that enter Actions against others, pretend that wrong is done,
either against themselves, or against the King. Now Satan will never enter an
Action against us in the Court above, for that wrong by us has been done to
himself, he must pretend then, that he sues us for that Wrong has by us been
done to our King: But behold, we have an Advocate with the Father, and he has
made Compensation for our Offenses: He gave himself for our Offenses. But still
Satan maintains his Suit; and our God says he is well pleased with us for this
Compensation Sake, yet he will not leave off his Clamor. Come then, says the
Lord Jesus, the Contention is not now against my People, but my self, and about
the Sufficiency of the Amends that I have made for the Transgressions of my
People. But he is near that justifies me, that approves and accepts of my
Doings, Therefore shall I not be confounded. Who is mine Adversary? let him
come near me. Behold, the Lord God will help me, Isa. 50.7, 8, 9. Who is he
that condemns me? Lo, they shall all (were there ten thousand times as many
more of them) wax old as a Garment, the Moth shall eat them up. Wherefore, if
the Father says Amen to all this, as I have showed already that he has, and
does, the which also further appears, because the Lord God has called him the
Savior the Deliverer and the Amen: What follows, but that a Rebuke should
proceed from the Throne against him? And this, indeed, our Advocate calls for,
from the Hand of his Father; saying, O Enemy, The Lord rebuke thee: Yea he
doubles this Request, to the Judge, to intimate his Earnestness for such a
Conclusion, or to show that the Enemy shall surely have it, both from our
Advocate and from him, before whom Satan has so grievously accused us, Zech. 3.

For what can be expected to follow from such an Issue in Law as this is, but
sound and severe snibs, from the Judge, upon him that has thus troubled his
Neighbor and that has, in the Face of the Country, cast Contempt upon the
highest act of Mercy, Justice, and Righteousness, that ever the Heavens beheld?
And all this is true, with reference to the Case in Hand; wherefore, The Lord
rebuke thee, is that which, in Conclusion, Satan must have for the Reward of
his Works of Malice, against the Children, and for his contemning of the Works
of the Son of God.

Now, our Advocate having thus established, by the Law of Heaven, his Plea with
God, for us, against our Accuser, there is way made for him to proceed, upon a
Foundation that cannot be shaken: Wherefore he proceeds in his Plea, and
further urges against this Accuser of the Brethren,

Secondly, God's Interest in this People, and prays that God would remember
that. The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke
thee. True, the Church, the Saints, are despicable in the World, wherefore Men
do think to tread them down. The Saints are also weak in Grace, but have
Corruptions, that are strong, and therefore Satan, the God of this World, does
think to tread them down: But the Saints have a God, the living, the eternal
God, and therefore, they shall not be ^roden down: Yea, They shall be holden
up; for God is able to make them stand, Romans 14.4.

It was Haman's mishap, to be engaged against the Queen, and the Kindred of the
Queen. 'Twas that that made him he could not prosper; that brought him to
Contempt and the Gallows. Had he sought to ruin another People, probably he
might have brought his Design to a desired Conclusion: But his compassing the
Death of the Queen spoiled all. Satan also, when he fights against the
Church, must be sure to come to the worst; For God has a Concern in that:
Therefore it is said, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; but this
hinders not but that he is permitted to make almost what Spoils he will, of
those that belong not to God: Oh! how many does he accuse and soon get out from
God, against them, a License to destroy them? As he served Ahab and many more.
But this I say, is a very great Block in his Way, when he medleth with the
Children: God has an Interest in them. Has God cast away his People? God
forbid! Romans 11.1, 2. The Text intimates, That they, for Sin, had deserved it,
and that Satan would fain have had it been so. But God's Interest in them,
preserved them: God has not cast away his People which he fore-knew.
Wherefore, when Satan accuses them before God? Christ, as he pleads his own
Worth and Merit; pleads also against him, that Interest that God has in them.

And, tho this to some may seem but an indifferent Plea; for what Engagement
lies, may they say upon God to be so much concerned with them: for they sin
against him; and often provoke him most bitterly? Besides, in their best State
they are altogether Vanity, and a very thing of naught. What Is Man, (sorry Man)
that thou art mindful of him, or that thou should so be?

I answer, tho there lies no Engagement upon God, for any Worthiness that is
in Man, yet there lies a great deal upon God, for the Worthiness that is in
himself. God has engaged himself with his, having chosen them to be a People to
himself. And by this means they are so secured from all that all can do against
them; that the Apostle is bold, upon this very Account, to challenge all
despite to do its worst against them; saying, who shall lay any thing to the
Charge of God's Elect? Romans 8.33. Who? Says Satan, Why that will I. Ay says
he, but who can do it and prevail? It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? ver. 34. By which Words, the Apostle clearly declares, That
Charges against the Elect, tho they may be brought against them, must needs
prove ineffectual, as to their Condemnation; 'cause their Lord God still will
justify for that Christ has died for them.

Besides, a little to enlarge. The Elect are bound to God by a sevenfold Cord,
and a threefold one is not quickly broken.

First, Election is eternal, as God himself, and so without Variableness, or
Shadow of Change. And hence it is called an eternal Purpose, and a Purpose of
God that must stand, Ephesians. 3.11. Romans 9.11.

Secondly, Election is absolute, not conditional. And therefore cannot be
overthrown by the Sin of the Man who is wrapped up therein. No Works foreseen to
be in us, was the Cause of God's choosing of us: No Sin in us shall frustrate or
make Election void. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect? It is
God that justifies, Romans 9.11. chap. 11.6, 7.

Thirdly, By the Act of Election the Children are involved, wrapped up, and
covered in Christ (he has chosen us in him) not in our selves, not in our
Virtues, no not for, or because of any thing, but of his own Will, Ephesians. 1.4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.

Fourthly, Election includes in it a permanent Resolution of God to glorify
his Mercy on the Vessels of Mercy, Thus foreordained unto Glory, Romans 9.15, 18,
23.

Fifthly, By the Act of electing Love it is concluded, that all things
whatsoever, shall work together for the Good of them whose Call to God, is the
Fruit of this Purpose; this eternal Purpose of God, Romans 8.28, 29, 30.

Sixthly, The Eternal Inheritance is, by a Covenant of free and unchangeable
Grace, made over to those thus chosen. And to secure them from the Fruits of
Sin, and of the Malice of Satan it is sealed by this our Advocate's Blood as he
is Mediator of this Covenant: Who also is become surety to God for them, to
wit, to see them forthcoming at the great Day, and to set them then safe and
sound before his Fathers Face after the Judgment is over, Romans 9.24. Heb. 9.15.
chap. 7.22. chap. 13.20. chap. 9.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Joh. 10.28, 29.

Seventhly, By this Choice, Purpose, and Decree, the Elect, the concerned
therein, have allotted them by God, and laid up for them in Christ, a
Sufficiency of Grace, to bring them, through all Difficulties, to Glory. Yea
and they; every one of them, after the first Act of Faith, the which also they
shall certainly attain, (because wrapped up in the Promise for them) are to
receive the earnest and first Fruits thereof into their Souls, 2 Timothy 1.9. Acts
14.22. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 13, 14.

Now, put all these things together, and then feel if there be not weight in
this Plea of Christ against the Devil. He pleads God's Choice and Interest in
his Saints against him, an Interest that is secured by the Wisdom of Heaven; by
the Grace of Heaven; by the Power, Will, and Mercy of God in Christ. An
Interest in which all the three Persons in the Godhead have engaged
themselves, by mutual Agreement and Operation, to make good when Satan has done
his All. I know there are some that object against this Doctrine, as ^^^se: But
such perhaps are ignorant of some things else as well as of this. However they
object against the Wisdom of God, whose truth it is, and against Christ our
Advocate, whose Argument, as he is such, it is, yea, they labor, what in them
lies to wrest that Weapon out of his Hand, with which he so cudgelleth the
Enemy, when, as Advocate, he pleads so effectually against him for the
rescuing of us from the Danger of Judgment: Saying: The Lord rebuke thee, O
Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee.

Secondly, As Christ, as Advocate, pleads against Satan, the Interest that his
Father has in his chosen. So also he pleads against him, by no less Authority,
his own Interest in them. Holy Father, says he keep through thine own Name
those whom thou have given me, Joh. 17. 11. Keep them while in the World, from
the Evil, the Soul-damning Evil of it. These Words are directed to the Father,
but they are levelled against the Accusations of the Enemy, and were spoken
here, to show what Christ will do for his, against our Foe, when he is above.
How, I say, he will urge, before his Father his own Interest in us, against
Satan, and against all his Accusations when he brings them to the Bar of God's
Tribunal with Design to work our utter Ruin. And is there not a great deal in
it? As if Christ should say, Father, my People have an Adversary who will
accuse them for their Fault before thee; but I will be their Advocate, and, as
I have bought them of thee, I will plead my Right against him, Joh. 10.28. Our
English Proverb is, Interest will not lie. Interest will make a man do that
which otherwise he would not. How many thousands are there for whom Christ does
not so much as once open his Mouth, but leaves them to the Accusations of
Satan, and to Ahab's Judgment, nay a worse, because there is none to plead
their Cause? And why does not he concern himself with them, but because he is
not interested in them? I pray not for the World, but for those thou have given
me, for they are thine, And all mine are thine, and I am glorified in them,
Joh. 17.9, 10.

Suppose so many Cattle in such a Pound, and one goes by, whose they are not;
does he concern himself? No, he beholds them and goes his way. But suppose that
at his Return he should find his own Cattle in that Pound; would he now carry
it toward them as he did unto the other? No, no. He has Interest here: they are
his that are in the Pound: Now he is concerned, now he must know who put them
there, and for what Cause too they are served as they are. And if he finds them
rightfully there, he will fetch them thence by Ransom; but if wrongfully he
will replevy them, and stand a Trial at Law with him that has thus illegally
pounded his Cattle.

And thus it is 'twixt Jesus Christ and his, he is interested in them, the
Cattle are his own, his own Sheep, Joh. 10.3, 4. but poundded by some other by
the Law, or by the Devil. If pounded by the Law, he delivers them by Ransom;
if pounded by the Devil, he will replevy them, stand a Trial at Law for them,
and will be against their Accuser, their Advocate himself. Nor can Satan
withstand his Plea, though ^e should against them join Argument with the Law,
for as much as has been proved before, he can and will by what he has to
produce and plead of his own, save his from all Trespasses, Charges, and
Accusations. Besides all Men know that a Man's proper Goods are not therefore
forfeited, because they commit many, and them too great Transgressions. And if
any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

Now the Strength of this Plea thus grounded upon Christ's Interest in his
People, is great: And has many weighty Reasons on it is side, as,

First, They are mine: Therefore in Reason at my Dispose not at the Dispose of
an Adversary. For while a thing can properly be called mine, no Man has
therewith to do but my self; nor does (a Man, nor) Christ lose his Right to
what he has by the Weakness of that thing which is his proper Right. He
therefore as an Advocate, pleads Interest; his own Interest in his People,
and Right must with the Judge of all the Earth take Place. Shall not the Judge
of all the Earth do right? Genesis 18.25.

Secondly, They cost him dear, and that which is dear bought is not easily
parted with, 1 Cor. 6.20. They were bought with his Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. 1 Pet.
1.18, 19. they were given him for his Blood, and therefore are dear Children,
Ephesians. 5.1. For they are his by the highest Price. And this Price he as Advocate
pleads against the Enemy of our Salvation: Yea I will add, they are his,
because he gave his All for them, 2 Cor. 8.9. when a Man shall give his All for
this or that, then that which he so has purchased, is become his All. Now
Christ has given his all for us, he made himself poor for us, Ephesians. 1.23.
Wherefore we are become his All, his Fullness, and so the Church is called. Nay
further. Christ likes well enough of his Purchase, though it has cost him his
All. The Lines, says he, are fallen to me in pleasant Places, I I have a goodly
Heritage, Psalm. 16. Now put all these things together, and there is a strong
Plea in them. Interest, such an Interest, will not be easily parted with. But
this is not all; for,

Thirdly, As they cost him dear, so he has made them near to himself, near by
way of Relation. Now that which did not only cost dear, but that by way of
Relation is made so: That a Man will plead heartily for. Said David to Abner,
Thou shall not see my Face, except thou first bring Michal Readiness Daughter,
when thou come to see my Face, 2 Samuel 3.13, 14. Readiness Daughter cost me dear;
I bought her with the jeopardy of my Life: Readiness Daughter is near to me, she
is my beloved Wife. He pleaded hard for her because she was dear and near unto
him.

Now, I say, the same is true in Christ. His People cost him dear, and he has
made them near unto him; wherefore, to plead Interest in them, is to hold by an
Argument that is strong.

1. They are his Spouse, and he has made them so. They are his Love, his Dove,
his Darling, and he accounts them so. Now should a wretch attempt in open Court
to take a Man's Wife away from him, how would this cause the Man to plead! Yea,
and what Judge, that is just, and knows that the Man has this Interest in the
Woman pleaded for, would yield to, or give a Verdict for the Wretch against the
Man, whose Wife the Woman is? Thus Christ in pleading Interest, in pleading
[thou gave them me] pleads by a strong Argument; an Argument that the Enemy
cannot invalidate. True, were Christ to plead this before a Saul, 1 Samuel 25.44.
or before Sampson's Wives Father, the Philistian, Judge. 14.20. perhaps such
treacherous Judges would give it against all Right. But I have told you the
Court in which Christ pleads, is the Highest and the Justest, and that from
which there can be no Appeal. Wherefore Christ his Cause; and so, the Cause of
the Children of God, must be tried before their Father, from whose Face to be
sure, just Judgment shall proceed. But,

2. As they are called his Spouse, so they are called his Flesh, and Members of
his Body, 1 Cor. 12.27. Now, said Paul to the Church, Ye are the Body of Christ
and Members in particular, Ephesians. 5.30. This Relation also makes a Man plead
hard. Were a Man to plead for a Limb, or a Member of his own, how would he
plead! What Arguments would he use! and what Sympathy and feeling would his
Arguments slow from!

I cannot lose a Hand, I cannot lose a Foot, cannot lose a Finger: Why, Saints
are Christ's Members, his Members are of himself. With what Strength of
Argument would a Man plead the Necessaryness of his Members to him, and the
Vnnaturalness of his Adversary in seeking the Destruction of his Members, and
the Deformity of his Body. Yea, a Man would shuck, and cringe, and weep, and
entreat, and make Demurrs and Halts, and Delays to a thousand Years if
possible) before he would lose his Members, or any one of them.

But I say, how would he plead, and Advocate it* for his Members, if Judge, and
Law, and Reason, and Equity were all on his side; and if by the Adversary there
could be nothing urged, but that against which the Advocate had long before
made Provision for the effectual Overthrow thereof? And all this is true as to
the Case that lies before us.

Thus we see what Strength there lies in this second Argument that our
Advocate brings for us against the Enemy. They are hi^ Flesh and Bones, his
Members: He cannot spare them: He cannot spare this, because; nor that,
because; nor another because; nor any because they are his Members. As such
they are lovely to him, as such they are useful to him, as such they are an
Ornament to him: Yea, tho in themselves they are feeble, weak, and through
Infirmity much disabled from doing as they should. Thus If any Man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. But,

Fourthly, As Christ, as Advocate, pleads for us against Satan, his Fathers
Interest in us, and his own: So he pleads against him that Right and property
that he has in Heaven to give it to whom he will. He has a Right to Heaven, as
Priest and King; it is his also by Inheritance. And since he will be so good a
Benefactor as to bestow this House on some Body; but not for their Deserts, but
not for their Goodness: And since again he has to that end spilt his Blood for,
and taken a Generation into Covenant Relation to him that it might be bestowed
on them, it shall be bestowed on them: And he will plead this if there be need,
if his People sin and if their Accuser seeks, by their Sin, their Ruin and
Destruction. Father, says he, I will that those whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory, Joh. 17.24. Which thou have
given me. Christ's Will, is the Will of Heaven, the Will of God; shall not
Christ then prevail?

I will, says Christ; I will, says Satan: But whose Will shall stand? It Is
true, Christ in the Text speaks more like an Arbitrator than an Advocate: More
like a Judge than one pleading at a Bar. I will have it so, I judge that so it
ought to be and must. But there is also something of Plea in the Words both
before his Father, and against our Enemy. And therefore he speaks like one
that can plead and determine also, yea like one that has Power so to do. But
shall the Will of Heaven stoop to the Will of Hell? Or the Will of Christ to
the Will of Satan? Or the Will of Righteousness to the Will of Sin? Shall
Satan, who is God's Enemy, and whose Charge wherewith he charge us for Sin,
and which is grounded not upon Love to Righteousness, but upon Malice against
God's Designs of Mercy against the Blood of Christ, and the Salvation of his
People: I say, shall this Enemy and this charge prevail with God against the
well-grounded Plea of Christ, and against the Salvation of God's Elect! and so
keep us out of Heaven? No, no, Christ will have it otherwise. He is the great
Donator, and his Eye is good. True, Satan was turned out of Heaven for that he
sinned there, and we must be taken into Heaven tho we have sinned here; this is
the Will of Christ and as Advocate he pleads it against the Face and Accusation
of our Adversary. Thus, If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. But,

Fifthly. As Christ, as Advocate pleads for us against Satan, his Father's
Interest in us and his own; and pleads also what Right he has to dispose of
the Kingdom of Heaven: So he pleads against this Enemy, that Malice and
Enmity that is in him, and upon which chiefly his Charge against us is
grounded, to the Confusion of his Face. This is evident from the title that our
Advocate bestows upon him while he pleads for us against him. The Lord rebuke
thee, O Satan; O Enemy says he. For Satan is an Enemy, and this Name given him
signifies so much. And Lawyers, in their Pleas, can make a great Matter of such
a Circumstance as this, Saying, My Lord, we can prove that what is now pleaded
against the Prisoner at the Bar, is of mere Malice and Hatred, that has also of
a long time lain burning and raging in his Enemy's Breast against him. This I
say will greatly weaken the Plea and Accusation of an Enemy. But, says, Jesus
Christ, Father, here is a Plea brought in against my Joshua that clothes him
with filthy Garments: But it is brought in against him by an Enemy, by an Enemy
in the Superlative or highest Degree. One that hates Goodness worse than he,
and that loves Wickedness more than the Man against whom at this time he has
brought such an heinous Charge. Then leaving with the father the Value of his
Blood for the Accused, he turns him to the Accuser and pleads against him as
an Enemy. O Satan! Thou that accusest my Spouse, my Love, my Members, art,
Satan, an Enemy: But it will be Objected, That the things charged are true
Grant it. Yet what Law takes Notice of the Plea of one who does professedly act
as an Enemy, because it is not done of Love to Truth, and Justice, and
Righteousness, nor intended for the Honor of the King, nor for the good of the
Prosecuted; but to gratify Malice, and Rage and merely to kill and destroy.
There is therefore a great deal of Force, and Strength in an Advocate's
pleading of such a Circumstance against an Accuser: Specially when the Crimes
now charged are those and only those for which the Law in the due execution of
it has been satisfied before, wherefore now a Lawyer has double and treble
ground of Matter to plead for his Client against his Enemy. And this Advantage
against him has Jesus Christ.

Besides, it is well known that Satan as to us, is the original Cause of those
very Crimes for which he accuses us at the Bar of God's Tribunal. Not to say
any thing of how he comes to us, sollicites us, tempts us, ^^^tters us, and
always (in a manner) lies at ^s to do those wicked things, for which he so
hotly pursues us to the Bar of the Judgment of God. For tho it is not meet for
us thus to plead, to wit, laying that Fault upon Satan but rather upon our
selves; yet our Advocate will do it, and make work of it too before God. Simon,
Simon, Satan has desired to have thee, that he might sift thee as Wheat, but I
have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not, Luke 22.31, 32. He ma^^th here
mention of Satan's Desires, by way of Advantage against him; and doubtless so
he did in his Prayer with God for Peter's Preservation. And what he did here,
while on Earth, as a Savior in general, that he does now in Heaven as a
Priest, and an Advocate in special.

I will further suppose that which may be supposed, and that which is suitable
to our Purpose. Suppose therefore that a Father that has a Child whom he
loves, but the Child has not half that Wit that some of the Family has; (and
I am sure that we have less Wit than Angels) and suppose also that some bad
minded Neighbor, by tampering with, tempting of, and by unwearied
Solicitations should prevail with this Child to steal something out of his
Father's House, or Grounds, and give it unto him: And this he does on purpose
to set the Father against the Child. And suppose again that it comes to the
Fathers Knowledge that the Child through the Allurements of such an one has
done so and so against his Father; Will he therefore disinherit this Child? Yea
suppose again that he that did tempt this Child to steal should be the first
that should come to accuse this Child to its Father, for so doing, would the
Father take Notice of the Accusation of such an one: No verily; we, that are
evil, can do better than so. How then should we think, That the God of Heaven
should do such a thing, since also we have a Brother that is wife, and that
will, and can plead the very Malice of our Enemy, that does to us all these
things, against him, for our Advantage? I say, this is the Sum of this fifth
Plea of Christ our Advocate, against Satan. O Satan, says he, Thou art an Enemy
to my People, thou pleadest not out of Love to Righteousness, nor to reform,
but to destroy my Beloved, and Inheritance. The Charge wherewith thou chargest
my People, is thine own, Joh. 8.44. not only as to a matter of Charge; but the
things that thou accusest them of, are thine; Thine, in the Nature of them:
Also thou have tempted, allured, flattered and daily labored with them, to do
that, for which, now, thou so willingly would have them destroyed. Yea, all
this have thou done of Envy to my Father, and to Godliness; of Hatred to me and
my People, and that thou might destroy others besides, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. And
now what can this Accuser say? Can he excuse himself? Can he contradict our
Advocate? He cannot. He knows that he is a Satan, an Enemy, and, as an
Adversary, has he sown his Tares among the Wheat, that it might be rooted up:
But he shall not have his End, his Malice has prevented him, and so has the
Care and Grace of our Advocate: The Tares therefore he shall have returned to
him again, but the Wheat for all this shall be gathered into God's Barn, Mat.
13.25, 26, 27, 28.

Thus therefore our Advocate makes Use, in his Plea against Satan, of the Rage
and Malice that is the Occasion of the Enemies Charge, wherewith he accuses
the Children of God. Wherefore when thou read these Words, [ O Satan] say
with thy self, Thus Christ our Advocate accuses our Adversary of Malice and
Envy against God and Goodness, while he ac^useth us of the Sins which we
commit, for the which we are sorry, and Christ has paid a Price of Redemption:
And (thus) If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous. But,

Sixthly, Christ, when he pleads as an Advocate for his People in the Presence
of God, against Satan, He can plead those very Weaknesses of his People, for
which Satan would have them damned, for their Relief and Advantage. Is not this
a Brand plucked out of the Fire. This is part of the Plea of our Advocate
against Satan for his Servant Joshua, when he said, The Lord rebuke thee, O
Satan, Zech. 3.2. Now to be a Brand plucked out of the Fi^e, is to be a Saint
impared, weakened, defiled, and made imperfect by Sin. For so also the Apostle
means when he says, And others s^ve with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire;
hat^^ng even the Garment spotted by the Flesh, Jude 23. By Fire, in both these
Places we are to understand Sin: For that is burns and consumes as Fire, Romans
1.27. Wherefore a Man is said to burn, when his Lusts are strong upon him; and
to burn in Lusts to others, when his wicked Heart runs wickedly after them, 1
Cor. 7.9.

Also when Abraham said, I am but Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18.27. he means, he was
but what Sin had left: Yea he had something of the Smutch and besmearings of
Sin yet upon him. Wherefore it was a Custom with Israel, in Days of old, when
they set Days apart for Confession of Sin, and Humiliation for the same, to
sprinkle themselves with, or to wallow in Dust and Ashes, Est. 4.1, 3. Jer.
6.26. Job 30.9. chap. 42.6. as a token that they did confess, that they were
but what Sin had left, and that they also were defiled, weakened and polluted by
it.

This then is the next Plea of our goodly Advocate for us. O Satan, This is a
Brand plucked out of the Fire. As who should say, thou objectest against my
Servant Joshua, That he is black like a Coal, or that the Fire of Sin, at
times, is still burning in him. And wh^t then, the Reason why he is not totally
extinct as ^ow, is not thy Pity, but my Father's Mercy to him: I have plucked
him out of the Fire, yet not so out, but that the smell thereof is yet upon
him; and my Father and I, we consider his Weakness, and pity him. For since he
is as a Brand pulled out; can it be expected by my Father or me, that he should
appear before us as clear, and do our biddings as well as if he had never been
there? This is a Brand plucked out of the Fire, and must be considered as such,
and must be born with as such, Thus, as Mephibosheth pleaded for his Excuse,
His Lameness, 2 Samuel 17.24, 25, 26. So Christ pleads the Infirm, and indigent
Condition of his People, against Satan, for their Advantage.

Wherefore Christ, by such Pleas as these for his People, does yet further show
the Malice of Satan, (for all this Burning comes through him) yea, and by it he
moves the Heart of God to pity ^s, and yet to be gentle, and long suffering,
and merciful to us. For Pity and Compassion are the Fruits of the yearning of
God's Bowels toward us, while he considers us as infirm and weak and subject
to Slips and Stumbles, and Falls, because of Weakness.

And that Christ our Advocate by thus pleading does turn things to our
Advantage, consider,

1. That God is careful that through our Weakness our Spirits do not fail
before him when he chides, Isa. 57.16, 17, 18.

2. He stays his rough Wind in the Day of his East Wind, Isa. 27.7, 8, 9. and
debates about the Measure of Affliction, when for sin we should be chastened,
lest we should sink thereunder.

3. He will not strictly mark what is done amiss because if he should, we cannot
stand, Psalm. 130.3.

4. When he threatens to strike, his Bowels are troubled, and his Repentings
are kindled together, Hos. 11.8, 9.

5. He will spin out his Patience to the utmost length, because he knows we are
such Bunglers at doing, Jer. 9.24.

6 He will accept of the Will for the Deed, because he knows that Sin will make
our best Performances imperfect, 2 Cor. 8.12.

7. He will count our little a very great deal, for that he knows we are so
unable to do any thing at all, Job 1.21.

8. He will excuse the Souls of his People, and lay the Fault upon their Flesh
(which has greatest Affinity with Satan) if through Weakness and Infirmity we
do not do as we should, Mat. 26.41. Romans 7.

Now, as I said, all these things happen unto us, both Infirmities and Pity,
because, and for that we were once in the Fire, and for that the Weakness of
Sin abides upon us to this Day. But none of this Favor could come to us, nor
could we, by any Means, cause that our Infirmities should work for us thus
advantageously: But that Christ our Advocate stands our Friend, and pleads for
us as he does.

But again, before I pass this over, I will, for the clearing of this, present
you with a few more Considerations, which are of another Rank: to wit that
Christ our Advocate, as such, makes mention of our Weaknesses so against Satan,
and before his Father, as to turn all to our Advantage.

1. We are therefore to be saved by Grace, because, by Reason of Sin we are
disabled from keeping of the Law, Deuteronomy. 9.5. Isa. 64.6.

2. We have given unto us the Spirit of Grace to help, because we can do
nothing that is good without it, Ephesians. 2.5. Romans 8.26. Ezekiel. 16.8.

3. God has put Christ's Righteousness upon us to cover our Nakedness
therewith, because we have none of our own to do it withal, Phil. 3.7, 8.

4. God allows us to r^^e in the Bosom of Christ to the Grave, and from
thence in the Bosom of Angels to Heaven, because our own Legs are not able to
carry us thither, Isa. 40.11. chap. 46.4. Psalm. 67.17. Luke 16.2.

5. God has made his Son our Head, our Priest, our Advocate, our Savior, our
Captain that we may be delivered from all the Infirmities, and all the ^iends
that attend us and that plot to do us Hurt, Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 1.18. Heb. 7.12.

6. God has put the fallen Angels into Chains, 2 Pet. 2.4. Rev. 20.1, 2. that
they might not follow us too fast, and has enlarged us, Psalm. 34.7. and
directed our Feet in the way of his Steps, that we may haste us to the strong
Tower, and City of Refuge for Succor and Safety: And has given good Angels a
Charge to look to us, Heb. 1 14.

7. God has promised, That we, at our counting days shall be spared, as a Man
spares his own Son that serves him, Mal. 3.17.

Now, from all these things, it appears that we have Indulgence at God's Hand,
and that our Weaknesses, as our Christ manages the Matter for us, are so far
off from laying a Block or Bar in the Way to the Enjoyment of Favor, that,
they also work for our good: Yea, and Gods Foresight of them, has so kindled
his Bowels and Compassions to us, as to put him upon devising of such things
for our Relief, which, by no means could have been, had not Sin been with us in
the World: And had not the best of the Saints been as a Brand plucked out of
the Burning.

I have seen Men (and yet they are worse than God) take most care of, and also
best provide for those of their Children, that have been most infirm and
helpless: (And our Advocate shall gather his Lambs with his Arm, and carry them
in his Bosom.) Ye^, and I know that there is such an Art in showing and making
mention of Weaknesses, as shall make the Tears stand in a Parents Eyes, and as
shall make him search to the bottom of his Purse, to find out what may do his
Weakling good. Christ also has that excellent Art, as he is an Advocate with
the Father for us: He can so make mention of us, and of our Infirmities, while
he pleads before God, against the Devil, for us; that he can make the Bowels of
the Almighty yearn toward us, and to wrap us up in their Compassions.

You read much of the pity, Compassion, and of the yearning of the Bowels of
the mighty God toward his People: All which, I think, is kindled, and made
burn toward us, by the pleading of our Advocate.

I have seen Fathers offended with their Children; but when a Brother has
turned a skilful Advocate, the Anger has been appeased, and the means have been
concealed. We read but little of this Advocate's Office of Jesus Christ; yet
much of the Fruit of it is extended to the Churches. But as the Cause of
Smiles, after Offenses committed, is made manifest afterward; so at the Day
when God will open all things, we shall see, how many times our Lord as an
Advocate pleaded for us, and redeemed us by his so pleading into the enjoyment
of Smiles and Embraces, who for Sin, but a while before, were under Frowns and
Chastisements.

And thus much for the making out, how Christ does manage his Office of being
an Advocate for us with the Father. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And I shall come now to the Third Head,
to wit, To show you more particularly, who they are, that have Jesus Christ for
their Advocate.

In my handling of this Head, I shall show,

1. That this Office of an Advocate, differs from that of a Priest, and how.

2. I shall show yout how far Christ extends this his Office of Advocateship.
I mean in Matters concerning the People of God: And then,

3 I shall come more directly, to show who they are that have Christ for their
Advocate.

For the first of these, That this Office of Christ as an Advocate, differs
from that of a Priest. That he is a Priest, a Priest for ever, I heartily
acknowledge: But that his Priesthood and Advocateship should be one and the
self-same Office, I cannot believe.

1. Because they differ in Name. We may as well say a Father, as such, is a
Son; or, That Father, and Son is the self same Relation; as, say a Priest and
an Advocate, as to Office, are but one and the same thing. They differ in Name
as much as Priest and Sacrifice do. A Priest is one, and a Sacrifice is
another; and tho Christ is Priest, and Sacrifice too; yet as a Priest he is not
a Sacrifice, nor as a Sacrifice, a Priest.

2. As they differ in Name, so they differ in the Nature of Office. A Priest is
to slay a Sacrifice, an Advocate is to plead a Cause. A Priest is to offer his
Sacrifice, to the end, that by the Merit thereof, he may appease: An Advocate
is to plead, to plead according to Law. A Priest is to make Intercession by
Virtue of his Sacrifice, an Advocate is to plead Law, because Amends is made.

3. As they differ in Name, and Nature, so they also differ as to their Extent.
The Priesthood of Christ extends it self to the whole of God's Elect; whether
called or in their Sins: But Christ as Advocate pleads only for the Children.

4. As they differ in Name, in Nature, and Extent, so they differ as to the
Persons, with whom they have to do. We read not any where that Christ, as
Priest, has to do with the Devil, as an Antagonist: But as an Advocate he has.

5. As they differ in these, so they differ as to the Matters about which they
are employed. Christ as Priest concerns himself with every wry thought, and
also with the least Imperfection or Infirmity that attends our most holy
things; but Christ as Advocate does not so, as I have already showed.

6. So that Christ, as Priest, goes before, and Christ, as an Advocate, comes
after; Christ as Priest, continually interceeds, Christ as Advocate, in Case of
great Transgression, pleads: Christ as Priest has need to act always; but
Christ, as Ad^ocate, sometimes only* Christ, as Priest, acts in times of Peace;
but Christ, as Advocate, in times of Broils, Turmoils and sharp Contentions.
Wherefore Christ, as Advocate, is, as I may call him, a Reserve. And his time
is then to arise, to stand up and plead, when his are clothed with some filthy
Sin, that of late, they have fallen into, as David, Joshua, or Peter. When some
such thing is committed by them, as ministers to the Enemy a show of Ground,
to question the truth of their Grace. Or when it is a Question, and to be
bebated, whether it can stand with the Laws of Heaven, with the Merits of
Christ, and the Honor of God that such an one should be saved? Now let an
Advocate come forth, now let him have time to plead, for this is a sit
Occasion, for the Saints Advocate to stand up to plead for the Salvation of his
People. But,

Secondly, I come next to show you, How far this Office of an Advocate is
extended. I hinted at this before, so now shall be the more brief.

1. By this Office, he offers no Sacrifice, he only as to Matter of Justice,
pleads the Sacrifice offered.

2. By this Office, he obtains the Conversion of none: He only thereby,
secureth the converted from the Damnation, which their Adversary, for Sins
after Light and Profession endeavors to bring them to.

3. By this Office he prevents not temporal Punishment: But by it, he chiefly
preserves the Soul from Hell.

4. Be this Office, he brings in no justifiing Righteousness for us; he only,
thereby, prevails to have the Dispose of that brought in by himself, as
Priest, for the justifiing of those by a new, and fresh Act, who had made their
Justification doubtful by new Falls into Sin. And this is plain in the History
of our Joshua, Zech. 3. o^ often mentioned before.

5. As Priest he has obtained eternal Redemption for us; and as Advocate he by
Law maintains our Right thereto, against the Devil and all his Angels.

I come now to show you, Who they are that have Jesus Christ for their
Advocate. And this I shall do first more generally, and then shall be more
particular and distinct about

First, more generally. They are all the truly Gracious; those that are the
Children by Adoption: And this the Text affirms; I write unto you, little
Children, that you sin not: And if any Man sin, we have on Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. They are then the Children, the Children by
Adoption, that are the Persons concerned in the Advocateship of Jesus Christ.
The Priesthood of Christ extends it self to the whole Body of the Elect; but
the Advocateship of Christ does not so, this is further cleared, by this
Apostle, and that in this very Text, if you consider, what immediately follows.
We have an Advocate, says he, and he is also the Propitiation for our Sins. He
is our Advocate and also our Priest. As an Advocate, ours only; but as a
Propitiation, not ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World; to be
sure, for the Elect throughout the World, and they that will extend i^ further,
let them.

And I say again, had he not intended that there should have been a straighter
Limit put to the Advocateship of Christ, than he would have us put to his
Priestly Office, What needed he, when he speaks of the Propitiation which
relates to Christ as Priest, have added, And not for ours only? As an Advocate
then, he ingageth for us that are Children; and as a Priest too, he has
appeased God's Wrath for our Sins. But, as an Advocate, his Offices are
confined to the Children only, but as a Priest he is not so. He is the
Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only. The Sense therefore of the
Apostle should, I think, be this: That Christ, as a Priest, has offered a
Propitiatory S^crifice for all; but, as an Advocate, he pleads only for the
Children. Children, we have an Advocate to our selves, and he is also our
Priest; but as he is a Priest, he is not ours only, but makes, as such, amends
for all that shall be saved. The Elect therefore have the Lord Jesus for their
Advocate then and only then when they are, by calling, put among the Children,
because as Advocate he is peculiarly the Childrens. My little Children we have
an Advocate.

Object. But he also says, if any Man sin, we have an Advocate. Any Man that
sins seems by the Text, notwithstanding what you say, to have an Advocate
with the Father.

Answ. By any Man, must not be meant, any of the World, nor any of the Elect;
but any Man in Faith and Grace: For he still limits this general Term of [any
Man] with this Restriction [ we.] Children, if any Man sin, we have an
Advocate. We, any Man of us. And this is yet further made appear; since he
says that it is to them he writes, not only here, but further in this Chapter.
I write unto you, little Children: I write unto you, Fathers: I write unto you,
young Men, ver. 12, 13, 14. These are the Persons intended in the Text. For
under these three Heads, are comprehended all Men: For they are either
Children, and so Men in Nature, or young Men, and so Men in Strength, or else
they are Fathers, and so aged, and of Experience. Add to this, by [ any Man]
that the Apostle intends, not to enlarge himself beyond the Persons that are
in Grace; but to supply what was wanting by that Term, [ little Children,] for
since the strongest Saint may have need of an Advocate, as well as the most
feeble of the Flock; why should the Apostle leave it to be so understood, as if
the Children and the Children only, had an Interest in that Office? Wherefore
after he had said, my little Children, I write unto you, that you sin not, he
then adds with Enlargement, And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father. Yet the little Children may well be mentioned first, since they most
want the Knowledge of it, are most feeble, and so by Sin, may be forced most
frequently to act Faith on Christ as Advocate: Besides, they are most ready
through Temptation to question whether they have so good a Right to Christ in
all his Offices, as has better and more well grown Saints: and therefore, they,
in this the Apostles Salutation, are first set down in the Catalogue of Names.
My little Children, I write unto you that ye sin not, And if any Man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous. So then, the
Children of God are they, who have the Lord Jesus, an Advocate for them with
the Father. The least and biggest, the oldest and youngest, the feeblest and
the strongest; all the Children have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous.

First, Since then the Children have Christ for their Advocate; art thou a
Child? Art thou begotten of God by his Word? Jam. 1.18. Have thou in thee the
Spirit of Adoption? Gal. 4.6. Can thou in Faith, say, Father, Father, to
God? Then is Christ thy Advocate. Thine Advocate, Now to appear in the Presence
of God for thee, Heb. 9.24. To appear there, and to plead there, in the Face of
the Court of Heaven for thee: To plead there against thine Adversary, whose
Accusations are dreadful, whose Subtilty is great, whose Malice is
inconceivable, and whose Rage intolerable: To plead there before a just God, a
righteous God, a Sin revenging God: Before whose Face thou would die, if thou
wast to show thy self, and, at his Bar to plead thine own Cause. But,

Secondly, There is a difference in Children, some are bigger than some: There
are Children, and little Children. My little Children I write unto you. Little
Children. Some of the little Children can neither say Father, nor so much as
know that they themselves are Children.

This is true in Nature, and so it is in Grace. Wherefore, notwithstanding what
was said under the first Head, it does not follow, that if I be a Child I must
certainly know it, and also be able to call God Father. Let the first then
serve to poise and balance the Confident ones, and let this be for the Relief
of those more feeble. For they that are Children, whether they know it or no,
have Jesus Christ for their Advocate. For Christ is assigned to be our Advocate
by the Judge, by the King, by our God and Father, although we have not known it.
True, at present, there can come from hence, to them that are thus concerned in
the Advocateship of Christ, but little Comfort, but yet it yields them great
Security. They have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
God knows this, the Devil feels this, and the Children shall have the Comfort
of it afterward. I say the time is coming when they shall know, that even
then, when they knew it not, they had an Advocate with the Father: An Advocate
who was neither loath nor afraid, nor ashamed to plead for their Defense,
against their proudest Foe.

And will not this, when they know it yield them Comfort? Doubtless it will,
yea more, and of a better kind than that which flows from the Knowledge that
one is born to Crowns and Kingdoms.

Again, As he is an Advocate for the Children, so he is also, as before was
hinted, for the strong and experienced. For no Strength, in this World,
secureth from the Rage of Hell; nor can any Experience while we are here
fortify us against his Assaults. There is also an Incidency in the best to
sin, and the bigger Man the bigger Fall; for, the more hurt, and the greater
Damage. Wherefore, it is of as absolute Necessity that an Advocate be provided
for the strong, as for the weak. Any Man: He that is most holy, most reformed,
most refined, and most purified, may as soon be in the Dirt as the weakest
Christian. And, so far as I can see, Satan's Design is against them most. I am
sure the greatest Sins have been committed by the biggest Saints. This
wayfaring Man came to David's House, and when he stood up against Israel he
provoked David to member the People, 2* Sam. 12.4, 7. 1 Chr. 21.1. wherefore
they have as much need of an Advocate, as have the youngest, and most feeble of
the Flock. What a Mind had he to try a Fall with Peter? and how quickly did he
break the Neck of Judas? The like, without Doubt, he had done to Peter, had not
Jesus, by stepping in, prevented. As long as Sin is in our Flesh, there is
danger. Indeed he says of the young Men that they are strong, and that they
have overcome the wicked one; but he does not say, they have killed him; as
long as the Devil is alive there is Danger; and though a strong Christian may
be too hard for, and may overcome him in one thing, he may be too hard for, yea
and may overcome him, two for one afterward. Thus he served David, and thus he
served Peter; and thus he, in our Day, has served many more. The strongest are
weak, the wisest are Fools, when suffered to be sifted as Wheat, in Satan's
Sieve: Yea and have often times been so proved to the wounding of their great
Hearts, and the Dishonor of Religion.

To conclude this; God, of his Mercy, has sufficiently declared the Truth of
what I say, by preparing for the best, the strongest, and most sanctified, as
well as for the least, weakest, and most feeble Saint, an Advocate. My little
Children, I write unto you that you sin not, And if any Man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

Obj. But some may object, That what has been said, as to discovering for whom
Christ is an Advocate, has been too general, and therefore would have we come
more to particulars, else they can get no Comfort.

Ans. Well, inquiring Soul, so I will; and therefore harken to what I say.

First, Would thou know whether Christ is thine Advocate or no? I ask, Have
thou entertained him so to be? When men have Suits of Law depending, in any of
the King's Courts above, they entertain their Attorney, or Advocate to plead
their Cause, and so he pleads for them.

I say have thou entertained Jesus Christ for thy Lawyer to plead thy Cause?
Plead my Cause, O God, said David, Psalm. 35.1. and again, Lord, plead thou my
Cause, Psalm. 43.1. This therefore is the first thing that I would propound to
thee. Have thou with David entertained him for thy Lawyer, or with good
Hezekiah, cried out, O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me, Isa. 38.14. What
say thou, Soul? Have thou been with him, and prayed him to plead thy Cause,
and cried unto him to undertake for thee? This I call entertaining of him to be
thine Advocate. And I choose to follow the Similitude, both because the
Scripture seems to smile upon such a way of Discourse, and because thy question
does naturally lead me to it. Wherefore ^ ask again, have thou been with him?
Have thou entertained him? Have thou desired him to plead thy Cause?

Quest. Thou will say unto me, How should I know that I have done so?

Answ. I answer, art thou sensible that thou have an Action commenced against
thee in that high Court of Justice that is above? I say art thou sensible of
this? For the Defendants (and all Gods People are Defendants) do not use to
entertain their Lawyers, but from Knowledge, That an Action either is, or may
be commenced against them, before the God of Heaven. If thou say, yea; then I
ask who told thee that thou stand accused for Transgression before the
Judgment Seat of God? I say who told thee so? has the holy Ghost, has the
World, or has thy Conscience? For nothing else, as I know off, can bring such
Tidings to thy Soul.

Again, have thou found a Failure in all others that might have been
entertained to plead thy Cause? Some make their Sighs, their Tears, their
Prayers, and their Reformations, their Advocates; Have thou tried these, and
found them wanting?

Have thou seen thy state to be desperate, if the Lord Jesus does not undertake
to plead thy Cause? for Jesus is not entertained so long as Men can make shift
without him: But when it comes to this Point I perish for-ever notwithstanding
the Help of all, if the Lord Jesus steps not in: Then Lord Jesus, Lord Jesus,
good Lord Jesus, undertake for me.

Have thou therefore been with Jesus Christ as concerned in thy Soul, as
heartily concerned, about the Action that thou perceivest to be commenced
against thee?

Quest. You will say, how should I know that?

Answ. I answer, Have thou well considered the Nature of the Crime wherewith
thou stand charged at the Bar of God? Have thou also considered the Justness
of the Judge?

Again, I ask, have thou considered what Truth, as to Matter of Fact, there is
in the things whereof thou stand accused? Also have thou considered the
Cunning, the Malice, and Diligence of thine Adversary with the Greatness of the
Loss thou art like to sustain? Should thou with Ahab (in the Book of Kings,)
1 King. 22.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. or with the Hypocrites (in the sixth of
Isaiah), Isa. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. have the Verdict of the Lord God
go out from the Throne against thee?

I ask thee these Questions, because, if thou art, in the Knowledge of these
things, to seek; or if thou art not deeply concerned about the Greatness of the
Damage that will certainly over-take thee, and that for-ever, (should thou
be indeed accused before God and have none to plead thy Cause:) Thou have not,
nor can not, let what will come upon thee, have been with Jesus Christ to
plead thy Cause; and so, let thy Case be never so desperate, thou stand
alone, and have no Helper, Job 30.13. chap. 9.13. or if thou have, they not
being the Advocate of God's appointing, must needs fall with thee, and with thy
Burden. Wherefore, consider of this seriously, and return thy Answer to God,
who can tell if Truth shall be found in thy Answers better by far than any: For
it is he that tries the Reins, and the Heart, and therefore to him I referr
thee. But,

Secondly, Would thou know whether Jesus Christ is thine Advocate? Then: I
ask again, have thou Revealed thy Cause unto him? I say have thou Revealed thy
Cause unto him? For he that goes to Law, for his Right, must not only go to a
Lawyer, and say, Sir, I am in Trouble, and am to have a Trial at Law with mine
Enemy, pray undertake my Cause; but he must also Reveal to his Lawyer his
Cause. He must go to him, and tell him what is the Matter, how things stand,
where the shoe pinches, and so.

Thus did the Church of old, and thus does every true Christian now. For tho
nothing can be hid from him, yet he will have things out of thine own Mouth. He
will have thee to Reveal thy Matters unto him, Mat. 20.32. O Lord of Hosts,
said Jeremy, that judge righteously and tryest the Reins, and the Heart, let
me see thy Vengeance on them, for unto thee have I revealed my Cause, Jer.
11.20. And again, But O Lord of Hosts, that tryest the righteous, and see the
Reins and the Heart, let me see thy Vengeance on them, for unto thee have I
opened my Cause, Chap. 20.12. See thou here how Saints of old were wont to
do? How they did, not only in a general way entreat Christ to plead their
Cause, but in a particular way, go to him and Reveal, or open their Cause unto
him?

O it is excellent to behold how some Sinners will do this, when they, get
Christ and themselves in a Closet alone. When they upon their bare Knees are
pouring out of their Souls before him: Or like the Woman in the Gospel, telling
of him all the Truth. Mark 5.

O Says the Soul, Lord, I am come to thee upon an earnest Business, I am
arrested by Satan; the Bailiff was mine own Conscience, and I am like to be
accused before the Judgment Seat of God; my Salvation lies at Stake; I am
questioned for my Interest in Heaven; I am afraid of the Judge; my Heart
condemns me, 1 John 3: 20. Mi^e Enemy is subtle, and wants not Malice to
prosecute me to Death, and then to Hell. Also, Lord, I am sensible the Law is
against me, for indeed I have horribly sinned; and thus and thus have I done.
Here I lie open to Law, and there I lie open to Law; Here I have gi^en the
Adversary Advantage, and there he will surely have a hank against me: Lord I am
distressed, undertake for me. And there are some things that thou must be
acquainted with about thine Advocate, before thou will venture to go thus far
with him. As,

1. Thou must know him to be a Friend and not an Enemy unto whom thou openest
thy Heart; and, until thou come to know, That Christ is a Friend to thee, or
to Souls in thy Condition, thou will never reveal thy Cause unto him: Not thy
whole Cause unto him. And it is from this, That so many that have Soul-Causes
hourly depending, before the Throne of God; and that are in Danger, every day,
of eternal Damnation, forbear to entertain Jesus Christ for their Advocate, and
so wickedly conceal their Matters from him. But he that hides his Sins shall
not prosper, Prove. 28.13. This therefore must first be believed by thee, before
thou will reveal thy Cause unto him.

2. A Man, When his Estate is called into Question, I mean his Right and Title
thereto, will be very cautious, specially if he also questions his Title to it
himself, unto whom he reveals that Affair. He must know him to be one that is
not only friendly, but faithful, to whom he reveals such a Secret as this. Why
thus it is with Christ and the Soul. If the Soul is not somewhat persuaded of
the Faithfulness of Christ, to wit, that if he can do him no good, he will do
him no harm, he will never reveal his Cause unto him; But will seek to hide his
Counsel from the Lord.

This therefore is another thing by which thou may know that thou have Christ
for thine Advocate; If thou have heartily, and in very Deed, revealed thy Cause
unto him.

Now they that do honestly reveal their Cause to their Lawyer, will endeavor
to possess him, as I hinted before, with the worst: They will, with Words, make
it as bad as they may, for, think they, by that Means I shall prepare him for
the worst that mine Enemy can do. And thus Souls deal with Jesus Christ. See
the fifty first Psalm, also the thirty eighth, with several others that might
be named, and see if God's People have not done so. I said, says David, That I
would confess my Transgressions against my self, and thou forgavest the
Iniquity of my Sin. But,

Thirdly, Have thou Jesus Christ for thine Advocate? Or wou^dst thou know if
thou h^^^* Then I ask again have thou committed thy Cause to him? When a Man
entertains his Lawyer to stand for him and to plead his Cause, he does not only
reveal, but commit his Cause unto him. I would seek unto him, says Eliphas to
Job, and unto him would I commit my Cause, Job 5.8. Now there is a Difference
betwixt revealing my Cause, and committing of it to a Man. To reveal my Cause,
is to open it to one, and to commit it to him, is to trust it in his Hand. Many
a Man will reveal his Cause to him unto whom he will yet be afraid to commit
it. But now, he that entertains a Lawyer, to plead his Cause, does not only
reveal, but commit his Cause unto him: As suppose Right to his Estate be called
into Question; why then he not only r^^eals his Cause to his Lawyer, but puts
into his Hands his Evidences, Deeds, Leases, Mortgages, Bonds, or what else he
hat^, to show a Title to his Estate by. And thus does the Christians deal with
Christ: They deliver up all unto him, to wit, all their Signs, Evidences,
Promises, and Assurances which they have thought they have had for Heaven and
the Salvation of their Souls; and have desired him to peruse, to search and try
them every one, Psalm. 139.23. And if there be Iniquity in me, lead me in the
way everlasting. This is committing of thy Cause to Christ, and this is the
hardest Task of all: For the Man that does thus, he trusts Christ with all,
and and implies that he will live and die, stand and fall, lose and win
according as Christ will manage his Business, thus did Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. and
thus Peter admonishes us to do.

Now he that does this must be convinced,

1. Of the Ability of Jesus Christ to defend him: For a Man will not commit so
great a Concern as his All is, to his Friend; no, not to his Friend, be he
never so faithful; if he perceives not in him Ability to save him, and to
preserve what he has, against all the Cavils of an Enemy. And hence it is that
the Ability of Jesus Christ as to the saving of his People, is so much insisted
on in the Scripture: As, I have laid Help upon one that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19.
I that speak in Righteousness, mighty to save, Isa. 63.1. And again, I will
send them a Savior, and a great one, Chap. 19.20.

2. As they must be convinced of his Ability to help them, so they must of his
Courage. A Man that has Parts sufficient, may yet fail ^is Friend for want of
Courage. Wherefore, the Courage and Greatness of Christ's Spirit, as to his
undertaking of the Cause of his People, is also amply set out in Scripture. He
shall not fail nor be discouraged until he has set Judgment in the Earth:
Until he has brought Judgment into Victory, Isa. 42.4. Mat 12.20.

3. They must also be convinced of his Willingness to do this for them; for tho
one be able, and of Courage sufficient, yet, if he is not willing to undertake
ones Cause, what is it the better? Wherefore he declares his Willingness also,
and how ready he is to stand up, to plead the Cause of the Poor, and of them
that are in want. The Lord will plead their Cause, and spoil the Soul of those
that spoiled them, Prove. 22.23.

4. They must also be convinced of this, That Christ is tender and will not be
offended at the Dullness of his Client. Some Men can reveal their Cause to their
Lawyers, better than some, and are more serviceable and handy in that Affair
than others, but, says the Christian, I am dull, and sorry that way, will not
Christ be shuff and shy of me because of this? Honest Heart, he has a Supply
of thy Defects in himself, and knows what thou want, and where the Shoe
pinches, though thou art not able distinctly to open Matters to him. The Child
is pricked with a Pin, and lies crying in the Mothers Lap, but cannot show to
its Mother where the Pin is, but there is pity enough in the Mother to supply
this Defect of the Child: Wherefore she undresses it, opens it, searches every
Clout from Head to the Foot of the Child, and so finds where the Pin is. Thus
will thy Lawyer do, he will search and find out thy Difficulties; and, where
Satan seeks an Advantage of thee, accordingly will provide his Remedy.

5. O but will he not be weary? The Prophet complains of some that they weary
God, Isa. 7.13. And mine is a very cross and intricate Cause: I have wearied
many a good Man while I have been telling my tale unto him: And I am afraid,
That I shall also weary Jesus Christ.

Answer, Soul, he suffered and did bear with the manners of Israel, forty Years
in the Wilderness, Acts 13.18. and have thou tried him half so long? The good
Souls that have gone before thee, have found him a tried Stone, a sure one to
be trusted to as to this, Isa. 28.16. and the Prophet says positively, That he
faints not, neither is weary, and that there is no searching of his
Understanding, chap. 40.28. let all these things prevail with thee, to believe,
that if thou have committed thy Cause unto him he will bring it to pass, to a
good pass, to so good a pass, as will glorify God, honor Christ, save thee,
and shame the Devil.

Fourthly. But fourthly, would thou know whether Jesus Christ is thine
Advocate; whether he has taken in hand to plead thy Cause? Then, I ask, Do
thou together with what has been mentioned before, wait upon him according to
his Counsel, until things shall come to a legal Issue! Thus must Clients do.
There is a great many Turnings and Windings about Suits and Trials at Law; the
Enemy also with his Supersedes, Cavils, and Motions, often deferrs a speedy
Issue. Wherefore, the Man, whose is the concern, must wait, as the Prophet
said: I will look, said he unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my
Salvation. But how long, Prophet, will thou wait? Why, says he, until he plead
my Cause and execute Judgment for me, Mich. 7.7, 8, 9, 10.

Perhaps, When thy Cause is tried, things for the present are upon this Issue.
Thy Adversary indeed is cast, but whether thou shall have an absolute
Discharge, as Peter had, or a conditional one as David, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 14.
and as the Corinthians had that is the Question. True, thou shall be completely
saved at last, but yet whether it is not best to leave to thee a Memento of
God's Displeasure, against thy Sin, by awarding, that the Sword shall never
depart from thy House; or that some sore Sickness or other Distresses shall
haunt thee as long as thou live or perhaps that thou shall walk without the
Light of God^s Countenance, for several Years, and a Day. Now if any of these
three things happen unto thee, thou must exercise Patience and wait. Thus did
David, I waited patiently: And again, He exercises his Soul in this Virtue,
saying, My Soul, wait thou only upon him, for my Expectation is from him, Psalm.
62.5. For now we are Judged of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the
World: And by this Judgment, (though it sets us free from their Damnation) yet
we are involved in many Troubles: And perhaps must wait many a Day before we
can know, That, as to the main, the Verdict has gone on our Side. Thus
therefore in order to thy waiting upon him, without fainting, it is meet, that
thou should know the Methods of him that manages thy Cause for thee, in
Heaven; And, suffer not Mistrust to break in and bear sway in thy Soul: For he
will (at length) bring th^e forth to the Light, and thou shall behold his
Righteousness. She also that is thine Enemy shall see it, and Shame shall cover
her that said unto thee, where is thy God?

But what is it to wait upon him according to his Counsel?

Answ. 1. To wait, is to be of good Courage; to live in Expectation, and to
look for Deliverance, tho thou have sinn^^ against thy God. Wait on the Lord,
be of good Courage and he shall strengthen thy Heart: Wait I say on the Lord,
Psalm. 7.14. Psalm. 31.24.

2. To wait upon him, is, to keep his way: To walk humbly in his Appointments.
Wait on the Lord and keep his Way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land,
Psalm. 37.3.

3. To wait upon him, is, to observe and keep those Directions which he gives
thee; to observe, even while he stands up to plead thy Cause. For without this,
or not doing this, a Man may further mar his Cause in the Hand of him that is
to plead it. Wherefore keep thee far from an evil Matter, have no
Correspondence with thine Enemy; walk humbly for the Wickedness that thou have
committed; and loath and abhor thy self, for it in Dust and Ashes. To these
things does the Scripture every where direct us.

4. To wait, is also to incline, to harken to those further Directions which
thou may receive, from the Mouth of thine Advocate, as to any fresh Matters
that may forward, and expedite a good issue of thine Affair in the Court of
Heaven. The want of this, was the Reason, that the Deliverance of Israel did
linger so long in former times. O! Says he, that my People had harkened unto
me, and Israel had walked in my Ways; I should soon have subdued their Enemies,
and turned mine Hand against their Adversaries. The Haters of the Lord should
soon have submitted themselves: But their Time should have end^^ed forever,
Psalm. 81.13, 14, 15.

5. Also, if it tarry long, wait for it: Do not conclude that thy Cause is
lost, because, at present, thou do not hear from Court. Cry if thou will, O
when will thou come unto me! But never let such a wicked thought pass through
thy Heart, saying, This Evil is of the Lord; why should I wait upon the Lord
any longer? 2 King. 6.33.

6. But, take heed that thou turnest not thy Waiting into Sleeping. Wait thou
must, and wait patiently too, but yet wait with much longing, and Earnestness
of Spirit to see, or hear how Matters go above. You may observe, that when a
Man that dwells far down in the Country, and has some Business at the Term, in
this or another of the Kings Courts, though he will wait his Lawyers time and
convenience, yet he will so wait, as still to enquire at the Post House, or at
the Carriers, or, if a Neighbor comes down, from Term, at his Mouth, for
Letters, or any other Intelligence, if possibly he may arrive to know how his
Cause speeds, and whether his Adversary, or he, has the day.

Thus, I say, thou must wait upon thine Advocate: His Ordinances are his
Post House, his Ministers are his Carriers, where Tidings from Heaven are to be
had, and where those that are sued, in that Court, by the Devil, may, at one
time or another, hear from their Lawyer, their Advocate, how things are like to
go. Wherefore, I say, wait, at the Posts of Wisdom's House; go to Ordinances
with Expectation to hear from thy Advocate there. For he will send, in due
time; Tho it tarry wait for it, because it will surely come and will not tarry,
Hab. 2.1, 2, 3. And now, Soul, I have answered thy Request; and, let me hear
what thou say unto me.

Soul. Truly, says the Soul, methinks, that by what you have said, I may have
this blessed Jesus to be mine Advocate; for, I think verily, I have entertained
him to be mine Advocate; I have also revealed my Cause unto him; yea committed
both it and my self unto him. And, as you say, I wait: O I wait! And my Eyes
fail with looking upward. Fain would I hear, how my Soul stands in the Sight
of God, and whether my Sins, which I have committed (Since Light and Grace was
given unto me) be, by mine Advocate, taken out of the Hand of the Devil, and by
mine Advocate, removed as far from me as the Ends of the Earth are asunder:
Whether the Verdict has gone on my side. And what a Shout there was among the
Angels when they saw it went well with me. But alas! I have waited, and that a
long time; and have, as you advise, ran from Ordinance to minister, and from
Minister to Ordinance, or, as you phrase it, from the Post to the Carrier, and
from the Carrier to the Post House, to see if I could hear ought from Heaven,
how Matters went, about my Soul there. I have also asked those that pass by the
way, if they saw him whom my Soul loves, and if they had any thing to
communicate to me, but nothing can I get or find but Generals; as, that I have
an Advocate there, and that he pleads the Cause of his People, and that he
will thoroughly plead their Cause, but what he has done for Me, of that, as yet,
I am ignorant. I doubt, if my Soul shall, by him, effectually be secured, that
yet, a conditional Verdict will be awarded concerning me, and that much Bitter
will be mixed with my Sweet, and that I must drink Gall and Wormwood for my
Folly: For, if David and Asa, and Hezekiah, and such good Men, were so served,
for their Sins, 2 Chronicles. 16.7, 12. why should I look for other Dealing at the
Hand of God? But as to this, I will endeavor to bear the Indignation of the
Lord because I have sinned against him, Isa. 39.3, 8. and shall count it an
infinite Mercy, if this Judgment comes to me from him, that I may not be
condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. I know, it is dreadful walking in
Darkness, but if that also shall be the Lord's Lot upon me, I pray God I may
have Faith enough to stay upon him till Death, and then will the Clouds blow
over, and I shall see him, in the Light of the Living.

Mine Enemy, the Devil, as you say, is of an inveagling Temper, and although he
has accused me, before the Judgment Seat of God, yet, when he comes to me, at
any time, he glavers and flatters, as if he never did mean me harm: But, I
think, it is that he might get further Advantage against me. But I carry it now
at a further distance than formerly; and O that I was at the remotest Distance,
not only from him, but also from that self of mine that labors with him for
my undoing!

But, although I say these things now, and to you, yet I have my solitary hours,
and, in them, I have other strange thoughts. For thus I think; my Cause is bad:
I have sinned, and I have been vile. I am ashamed my self of mine own doings,
and have given mine Enemy the best end of the Staff. The Law and Reason, and my
Conscience, plead for him against me and all is true, he puts into his Charge
against me, That I have sinned more times than there he Hairs on my Head. I
know not of any thing that ever I did in my Life but it had flaw, or wrinkle,
or Spot or some such thing in it. Mine Eyes have seen vileness in the best of
my doings, what then, think you, must God needs see in them? Nor can I do any
thing yet, for all I know that I am accused by my Enemy before the Judgment
seat of God, better than what already is imperfect. I lie down in my Shame, and
my Confusion covers my Face, I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
Preserver of Men! Jer. 3.24, 25. Job 7.20.

Reply, Well Soul, I have heard what thou have said, and, if all be true which
thou have said, it is good, and gives me Ground of Hope, That Jesus Christ is
become thine Advocate. And, if that be so, no Doubt, but thy Trial will come to
a good Conclusion. And, be not afraid because of the Holiness of God; for thine
Advocate has this for his Advantage, that he pleads before a Judge that is
just, and against an Enemy that is unholy and rejected. Nor let the thoughts of
the badness of thy Cause terrify thee over much. Cause thou have indeed to be
humble, and thou do well to cover thy Face with Shame; And, it is no matter
how base and vile thou art in thine own Eyes, provided that it comes not by
renewed Acts of Rebellion, but through a spiritual Sight of thine
Imperfections. Only, let me advise thee here to stop; let not thy Shame, nor
thy self-abasing Apprehension of thy self, drive thee from the firm and
permanent Ground of Hope, which is the Promise, and the Doctrine of an Advocate
with the Father. No, let not the Apprehension of the Badness of thy Cause do it
for as much as he did never yet take Cause in Hand that was good, perfectly
good of it self: And his Excellency is, to make a Man stand that has a bad
Cause, yea he can make a bad Cause good, in a way of Justice and Righteousness.

And, for thy further Encouragement in this Matter, I will here bring in the
fourth chief Head, to wit, to show, what excellent Privileges (I mean over and
above what has already been spoke of) they have that are made Partakers of the
Benefit of this Office. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous.

First Priv. 1. Thy Advocate pleads to a Price paid, to a Propitiation made;
and this is a great Advantage. Yea he pleads to a Satisfaction made for all
Wrongs done, or to be done, by his Elect: For by one Offering he has perfected
for-ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. ver. 10. chap. 9.26. By one
Offering: That is, by the Offering of himself; by one Offering once offered,
once offered in the end of the World. This, I say, thine Advocate pleads. When
Satan brings in fresh Accusations, for more Transgressions against the Law of
God, he forces not Christ to shift his first Plea, I say, he puts him not to
his Shifts at all. For the Price, once paid, has in it sufficient Value (would
God impute it to that end) to take away the Sin of the whole World. There is a
Man that has Brethren, he is rich, and they are poor, (and this is the Case
'twixt Christ and us) and the rich Brother, goes to his Father, and says,
thou art related to my Brethren with me; and out of thy Store, I pray thee, let
them have sufficient, and, for thy Satisfaction, I will put into thy Hand the
whole of what I have, which perhaps is worth an hundred thousand Pounds by the
Year; and this other Sum, I also give, that they be not disinherited: Now will
not this last his poor Brethren to spend upon a good while? But Christ's Worth
can never be drawn dry.

Now, set the Case again, that some ill-conditioned Man should take Notice,
that these poor Men live all upon the spend, (and Saints do so) and should come
to the good Man's House, and complain to him of the spending of his Sons, and
that while their elder Brother stands by: What do you think the elder Brother
would reply, if he was as good-natured as Christ? Why he would say, I have yet
with my Father in store for my Brethren: Wherefore then seek thou to stop
his hand? As he is just, he must give them for their Convenience; yea, and as
for their Extravagancies, I have satisfied for them so well, that, however he
afflicts them, he will not disinherit them. I hope you will read and hear
this, not like them that say, let us do evil that Good may come, but like
those, whom the Love of Christ constrains to be better: however, this is the
Childrens Bread, that which they have need of and without which they cannot
live; and they must have it tho Satan should put Pins into it, therewith to
choke the Dogs.

And, for the further clearing of this, I will present you with these few
Considerations:

1. Those that are most sanctified, have yet, a Body of Sin and Death in them,
Romans 7.24. and so also it will be while they continue in this World.

2. This Body of Sin, strives to break out, and will break out, to the
polluting of the Conversation, (if Saints be not the more watchful) Chap. 6.12.
yea it has broke o^^ in most sad Manner, and that in the strongest Saints, Gal.
5.17.

3. Christ offers no new Sacrifice for the Salvation of these his People;
for, being raised from the Dead, he dies no more, Rom 6.9. So then, if Saints
sin they must be saved (if saved at all) by Virtue of the Offering already
offered; and if so, then all Christ's Pleas, as an Advocate, are grounded upon
that one Offering, which before, as a Priest, he presented God with, for the
taking away of Sin. So then, Christians l^^e upon this old Stock, their
T^^^sgressions are forgiven for the Sake of (...) ^o^th, that ye^ (...) ^inds
in the Offering that Christ has o^^^red. And all Christ's Pleading^ as an
Advocate, are grounded upon the Sufficiency, (...) Worth of that one Sacrifice.
I mean all his Pleadings with his Father, as to the Charge, which the Accuser
brings in again (...) them. For, tho thou art a Man of Infirmity; and so
incident to nothing, as to stumble and fall, if Grace does not pr^^^^ and it
always preventeth not;) yet the (...) Worth of the Price that was once paid for
thee, is not yet worn out, and Christ, as an Advocate, still pleads (as
Occasion is given) that, with Success, (...) thy Salvation. And this Privilege
they (...) indeed have Christ for their Advo^^^^ (...) I put it here in the
first Place, because all other do depend upon it.

Priv. 2. Secondly, Thine Advocate, as he pleads a Price already paid, so,
and therefore, he pleads for himself as for thee. We are all concerned in one
bottom; if he sinks we sink, if we sink he sinks. Give me leave to make out my
meaning.

1. Christ pleads the Value and Virtue of the Price of his Blood and Sacrifice
for (...) And admit of this horrible Supposition, a little for Argument's Sake,
That tho Christ pleads the Worth of what, as Priest, he offers, yet, the
Soul, for whom he so pleads, perishes eternally. Now where lies the Fault? In
Sin; you say tru^^; but it is, because there was more Virtue in Sin to damn,
than there w^^^ (...)* Blood pleaded by Christ, to save: (...) pleaded his
Merit, he put it into the Balance against Sin, but Sin has weighed down the
Soul of the Sinner to Hell, notwithstanding the Weight of Merit that he did p^^
i^ against it. Now, what is the Result but that the Advocate goes down, as well
as we, we to Hell, and he in Esteem? Wherefore, I say, he is concerned with us,
his Credit, his Honor, his Glory, and Renown, flies all away, if those, for
whom he pleads, as an Advocate, perish for want of Worth, in his Sacrifice
pleaded: (...) shall this ever be said of Christ, or will it be found, that
any, for whom Christ, as Advocate, pleads, yet perish for want of Worth in the
Price, or of Neglect in the Advocate to plead it? No, no, himself is concerned,
and that as to his own Reputation and Honor, and as to the Value, and Virtue
of his Blood, nor will he lose these for want of pleading for them concerned in
this Office.

2. I argue again: Christ, as Advocate, must needs be concerned in his Plea;
for that every one, for whose Salvation he advocates, is his own. So then, if
he loses, he loses his own, his Substance and Inheritance. Thus if he lose the
whole, and if he lose a part, one, any one of his own, he loses part of his
All, and of his Fullness: Wherefore, we may well think, that Christ, as
Advocate, is concerned, (...) concerned with his People, and therefore will
thoroughly plead their Cause.

Suppose a Man should have an Horse, tho ^ame, and a piece of Ground, tho
somewhat barren; yet, if any should attempt to take these away, he would not
sit still and so lose his own. No, says he, since they are mine own, they
shall cost me five times more than they are worth, but I will maintain my Right.

I have seen Men, sometimes, strongly engaged in Law for that, which, when
considered by itself, one would think, was not worth regarding. But when I have
asked them, why so concerned for a thing of so little Esteem? They have
answered, O! It Is some of that by which I hold a Title of Honor, or my Right
to a greater in come, and therefore I will not lose it. Why, thus is Christ
engaged; what he pleads for, is his own, his All, his Fullness; yea, it is that
by which he holds his Royalty, for he is King of Saints, Rev. 15 3. Joh. 6.37,
38, 39. Psalm. 16.5, 6. It Is part of his Estate* and that by which he holds some
of his Titles of Honor, Ephesians. 5.6. Jer. 51.34. Romans 11.26. Heb. 2.10. Savior,
Redeemer, Deliverer and Captain, are some of his Titles of Honor: But, if he
loses any of those, upon whose Account he wears these Titles of Honor, for
want of Virtue in his Plea, or for want of Worth in his Blood, he loses his
own; and not only so, but also Part of his Royalty; and does also diminish, and
l^y a blot upon his glorious Titles of Honor. And he is jealous of his Honor,
his Honor he will not give to another.

Wherefore, he will not, (be not afraid) he never will leave nor forsake those,
who have given themselves unto him, and for whom he is become an Advocate with
the Father, to plead their Cause: Even because thou art one, one of his own,
one by whom he holds his glorious Titles of Honor.

Obj. O but I am but one, and a very sorry one too: And what is one, specially
such an one as I am? Can there be a miss of the Loss of such an one?

Answ. One and one makes two, and so ad infinitum. Christ cannot lose one, but
as he may lose more, and so, in Conclusion, lose all. But of all that God has
given him he will lose nothing, Joh. 6.38, 39. Besides, to lose one, would
encourage Satan, disparage his own Wisdom, make him incapable of giving in, at
the Day of Account, the whole tale to God, of those that he has given him.
Further, this would dishearten Sinners and make them afraid of venturing their
Cause, and their Souls in his Hand; and would, as I said before, either prove
his Propitiation, in some Sense, ineffectual, or else himself defective in his
pleading of it. But, none of these things must be supposed. He will thoroughly
plead the Cause of his People, Mic. 7. execute Judgment for them, bring them
out to the Light, and cause them to behold his Righteousness.

Priv. 3. Thirdly, The Plea of Satan is groundess; and that is another
Privilege. For, albeit thou have sinned, yet, since Christ before has paid thy
Debt, and also paid for more; since thou have not yet run beyond the Price of
thy Redemption; it must be concluded, That Satan wants a good bottom to ground
his Plea upon, and therefore must, in Conclusion, fail of his Design. True,
there is Sin committed, there is a Law transgressed; but there is also a
Satisfaction for this Transgression, and that which super-abounds. So ^ho there
be Sin, yet there wants a Foundation for a Plea. Joshua was clothed with
filthy Garments, but Christ had other Garments prepared for him; Change of
Raiment: Wherefore Iniquity, as to the Charge of Satan, vanishes. And the Angel
answered and said, Take away the filthy Garments from him, [This intimates that
there was no Ground, no sufficient Ground for Satan's Charge;] and to him, he
said, behold, I have caused thine Iniquity to pass from thee, and will cloth
thee with Change of Raiment, Josh. 3.4. Now, if there be no Ground, no sound
and sufficient Ground, to build a Charge against the Child upon, I mean, As to
Eternal Condemnation, for that is the thing contended for; then, as I said,
Satan must fall like Lightning to the Ground, and be cast over the Bar, as a
corrupt, and illegal Pleader: But this is so, as, in part, is proved already,
and will be further made out by that which follows. They that have, indeed,
Christ to be their Advocate are themselves, by Virtue of another Law, than that
against which they have sinned, secured from the Charge that Satan brings in
against them. I granted before that the Child of God has sinned, and that there
is a Law that condemns for this Sin: But here is the thing, this Child is
removed by an Act of Grace into, and under another Law. For we are not under
the Law, Romans 6.14. chap. 8.1. and so consequently there is now no Condemnation
for them: Wherefore, when God speaks of his dealing with his, he says, it
shall not be by their Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.61. That is, not by that of the Law;
they then being not under the Law. What if a Plea be commenced against them, a
Plea for Sin, and they have committed Sin; a Plea grounded upon the Law, and
the Law takes Cognizance of their Sin? Yet, I say, the Plea wants a good
bottom, for that the Person, thus accused, is put under another Law. Hence he
says, Sin shall not have Dominion over you, for you are not under the Law. If
the Child was under the Law, Satan's Charge would be good, because it would
have a substantial Ground of Support, but since the Child is dead to the Law,
Gal. 2.16. and that also dead to him; for both are true, as to Condemnation,
Romans 7.6. how can it be that Satan should have a sufficient Ground for his
Charge, tho he should have Matter of Fact, sufficient Matter of Fact, that is
Sin? for by his change of Relation, he is put out of the reach of that Law.
There is a Woman, a Widow, that owes a Sum of Money, and she is threatened to
be sued for the Debt; now what does she, but marries; so, when the Action is
commenced against her as a Widow, the Law finds her a married Woman, what now
can be done? Nothing to her, she is not who she was, she is delivered from that
State by her Marriage. If any thing be done, it must be done to her Husband.
But, if Satan will sue Christ, for my Debt, he owes him nothing: And, as for
what the Law can claim of me, while I was under it, Christ has delivered me by
Redemption, from that Curse, being made a Curse for me, Gal. 3.13.

Now, the Covenant into which I am brought, by Grace, by which also I am
secured from the Law, is not a Law of Sin and Death, as that is from under
which I am brought, Romans 8.2. but a Law of Grace and Life; so that Satan cannot
come at me, by that Law and by Grace, I am by that secured also from the Hand,
and Mouth and S^ing^ of all other: I mean still as to an eternal Concern.
Wherefore God says, if we break his Law, the Law of Works, he will visit our
Sin with a Rod, and our Iniquity with Stripes, but his Covenant, his new
Covenant, will he not break, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. but will
still keep close to that, and so secure us from eternal Condemnation.

Christ also is made the Mediator of tha Covenant, and therefore an Advocate by
that: For his Priestly Office, and Advocateship are included by his Mediation.
Wherefore, when Satan pleads by the Old, Christ pleads by the new Covenant, for
the Sake of which, the Old one is removed. In that he says, A new Covenant, he
has made the first Old; now, that which decays and waxes old, is ready to
vanish away, Heb 8.13. So then, the Ground of Plea is with Jesus Christ, and
not with our Accuser. Now what does Christ plead, and what is the Ground of his
Plea? Why, he pleads for Exemption and Freedom from Condemnation, tho by the
Law of Works, his Children have deserved it: And the Ground for this his Plea,
as to Law, is, the Matter of the Covenant it self. For thus it runs, For I will
be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and Iniquities will I
remember no more, ver. 12. Now here is a Foundation, a Foundation in Law, for
our Advocate to build his Plea upon; a Foundation in a Law not to be moved, or
removed, or made to give Place, as that is forced to do, upon which Satan
grounds his Plea against us.

Men, when they plead before a Judge, use to plead matter of Law. Now, suppose
there is an old Law in the Realm by which Men deserve to be condemned to Death;
and there is a new Law in this Realm, that secureth Men from that Condemnation,
which belongs to them by the old; and suppose also that I am completely
comprehended by all the Provisoes of the new Law, and not, by any tittle
thereof, excluded from a share therein: And suppose again, that I have a
brangling Adversary that pursues me by the old Law, which yet cannot in Right
touch me, because I am Interested in the New; my Advocate also is one that
plead^ by the new Law, where only there is a Ground of Plea: Shall not now mine
Adversary feel the Power of his Plea to the delivering of me, and the putting
of him to Shame? Yes verily, specially since the Plea is good, the Judge just;
nor can the Enemy find any Ground for a Dem^^ to be put in against my present
Discharge in open Court, and that by Proclamation: Specially since my Advocate
has also, by his Blood, fully satisfied the old Law, that he might establish
the New, Heb. 10 9, 10, 11, 12.

Priv. 4. Fourthly, Since that which goes before is true, it follows, That he
that enters his Plea against the Children must needs be overthrown. For
always, before just Judges it is the Right that takes place. Judge the right, O
Lord, said David, or let my Sentence come forth from thee, according to the Law
of Grace. And he that knows what strong Ground, or bottom our Advocate has for
his Pleadings, and how Satan's Accusations are without sound Foundation, will
not be afraid, he speaking in Christ, to say, I appeal to God Almighty, since
Christ is my Advocate by the new Law, whether I ought to be condemned to Death
and Hell for what Satan pleads against me by the Old. Satan urges that we have
sinned, but Christ pleads to his propitiatory Sacrifice, and so Satan is
over-thrown. Satan pleads the Law of Works, but Christ pleads the Law of Grace:
Further, Satan pleads, the Justice and Holiness of God against us: and there,
the Accuser is over-thrown again. And to them Christ appeals, and his Appeal is
good, since the Law testifies to the^ sufficiency of the Satisfaction that
Christ has made thereto by his Obedience, Romans 3.22, ^3. and also, since by
another Covenant God himself has given us to Jesus Christ, and so delivered us
from the Old. Wherefore you read nothing as an effect of Satan's pleading
against us, but that his Mouth is stopped; as appears by the 3. of Zechariah,
and that he is cast; yea cast down, as you have it in the 12. of the
Revelations.

Indeed when God admits not, when Christ wills not to be an Advocate, and when
Satan is bid stand at the right Hand of one accused, Psalm. 109.6, 7. to
enforce, by pleading against him, the things charged on him by the Law; then he
can prevail, prevail for-ever against such a wretched one: But, when Christ
stands up to plead, when Christ espouses this or that Man's Cause; then Satan
must retreat, then he must go down. And this necessarily flows from the Text,
we have an Advocate, a prevailing one, one that never lost Cause, one that
always puts the Childrens Enemy to the rout before the Judgment Seat of God.
This therefore is another Privilege that they have, who have Jesus Christ for
their Advocate: Their Enemy must n^eds be overthrown, because both Law and
Justice is on the other side.

Priv. 5 Fifthly, Thine Advocate has pity for thee, and great Indignation
against thine Accuser: And these are two excellent things. When a Lawyer has
pity for a Man, whose Cause he pleads, it will engage him much; but when he
has Indignation also against the Man's Accuser, this will yet engage him more.
Now, Christ has both these, and that not of Humor, but by Grace, and Justice;
Grace to us, and Justice to our Accuser. He came down from Heaven that he might
be a Priest, and returned thither again, to be Priest and Advocate for his: And
in both these Offices, he levelleth his whole Force and Power against thine
Accuser. For this Cause was the Son of God manifest, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil, Joh. 3.8.

Cunning Men will, if they can, entertain such an one to be their Advocate, who
has a particular Quarrel against their Adversary: For thus, think they, he that
is such, will not only plead for me, but for himself, and to right his own
Wrongs also, and, since (if it be so, and it is so here) my Concerns and my
Advocate's are interwoven, I am like to fare much the better, for the Anger
that is conceived in his Heart against him. And this, I say, is the Childrens
Case; their Advocate, counts their Accuser his greatest Enemy, and waits
for a time to take Vengeance, and he usually then takes the opportunity, when
he has ought to do for his People against him. Hence he says, The D^y of
Vengeance is in my Heart and the Year of my redeemed is come, Isa 63.3, 4.

I do not say that this Revenge of Christ, is, as often times is a Man's, of
Spite, Prejudice, or other irregular lettings out of Passions; but it arises
from Righteousness and Truth. Nor can it be, but that Jesus must have a Desire
to take Vengeance on his Enemy and ours, since Holiness is in him, to the
utmost bounds of Perfection. And I say again, that in all his Pleading, as an
Advocate, as well as in his offering as a Priest, he has a hot and slaming
Desire and Design to ^ight himself upon his F^^ and ours. Hence he triumphed
over him, when he died for us upon the Cross, and designed the spoiling of his
Principality, while he poured out his Blood for us before the Face of God, Col.
2.14, 15. we then have this Advantage more, in that Christ is our Advocate, our
Enemy is also his, and the Lord Jesus counts him so.

Priv. 6. Sixthly, As thine Advocate, so thy Judge holds thine Accuser for
his Enemy also. For it is not of Love to Righteousness and Justice that Satan
accuses us to God, but that he may destroy the Workmanship of God. Wherefore
he also sighteth against God, when he accuses the Children. And this thy
Father knows right well: He must therefore needs distinguish between the
Charge, and the Mind that brings it: Specially when what is charged upon us is
under the gracious Pr^mise of a Pardon (as I have showed it is.) Shall not the
Judge then hear his Son, (for our Advocate is his Son) in the Cause of one that
he favors, and that he justly can against an Enemy, who seeks his Dishonor,
and the Destruction of his eternal Designs of Grace?

A Mention of the Judges Son, goes far with Countrymen, and great striving
there is, with them, who have great Enemies and bad Causes, to get the Judges
Son to plead; promising themselves that the Judge is as like to hear him, and
to yield a Verdict to his Plea, as to any other Lawyer. But what now shall we
say concerning our Judge's Son, who takes part, not only with his Children, but
with him, and with Law and Justice, in pleading against our Accuser? Yea, what
shall we say when both Judge, and Advocate and Law are all bent to make our
Persons stand and escape, whatever, and how truly soever the Charge and
Accusation is, by which we are assaulted of the Devil. And yet, all this is
true, wherefore here is another Privilege of them that have Jesus for their
Advocate.

Priv. 7. Seventhly, Another Privilege that they have, who have Jesus Christ
for their Advocate, is, That he is undaunted and of a good Courage, as to the
Cause which he undertakes: For that is a requisite Qualification for a Lawyer,
to be bold and undaunted in a Man's Cause: Such an one is coveted, especially
by him that knows he has a brazen-faced Antagonist. Wherefore he says that he
will set his Face like a Flint, Isa. 50.5, 6, 7. when he stands up to plead the
Cause of his People. Lawyers, of all Men, need this Courage, and to be above
others Men of hard Foreheads, because of the Affronts that sometimes they meet
with, be their Cause never so good* in the Face, sometimes, of the chief of a
Kingdom. Now Christ is our Lawyer and stands up to plead, not only sometimes,
but always for his People, before the God of Gods, and that not in a Corner,
but while all the Host of Heaven stands by both on the right Hand and on the
Left. Nor is it to be doubted, but that our Accuser brings many a sore Charge
against us, into the Court: But, however, we have an Advocate that is valiant
and courageous: One that will not fail nor be discouraged till he has brought
Judgment into Victory. Hence John inserts his Name, saying, If any Man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ.

Men love to understand a Man, before they commit their Cause unto him, to wit,
whether he be fitly qualified for their Business. Well, here is an Advocate
propounded; an Advocate to plead our Cause against our Foe. But what is he?
What Is his Name? Is he qualified for my Business? The Answer is, it is Jesus
Christ. How! Jesus Christ! What, that old Friend of Publicans and Sinners!
Jesus Christ! He used never to fail, he used to set his Face like a Flint
against Satan, when he pleads the Cause of his People. Is it Jesus Christ,
says the knowing Soul, then he shall be mine Advocate?

For my part, I have often wondered, when I have considered, what sad Causes
Jesus Christ sometimes takes in Hand, and for what sad Souls he sometimes
pleads with God his Father; he had need of a Face as hard as Flint, else how
could he bear up in that Work, in which, for us, sometimes he is employed. A
Work enough to make Angels blush. Some, indeed, will lightly put off this, and
say, it is his Office, but I say, his Office notwithstanding, the Work in it
self is hard, exceeding hard; when he went to die, had he not despised the
Shame, he had turned his Back upon the Cross, and left us in our Blood: And now
it is his turn to plead, the Case would be the same, only he can make Argument
upon that, which to us seems to yield no Argument at all, to take Courage to
plead for a Joshua, for a Joshua clothed, clothed with filthy Garments. He,
says he, that is ashamed of me and my Words in this adulterous Generation, of
him will I be ashamed, etc. Mark 8.38. Hence it follows that Christ will be
ashamed of some, but why not ashamed of othe^s? It is not because their Cause
is good, but because they are kept from denying of him professedly; wherefore,
for such, he will force himself and will set his Face like a Flint, and will,
without Shame, own, plead, and improve his Interest with God for them, even for
them, whose Cause is so horribly bad and gross, that themselves do blush while
they think thereof.

But what will not Love do? What will not Love bear with? And what will not
Love suffer? Of all the Offices of Jesus Christ, I think this tries him as
much as any. True, his offering himself in Sacrifice, tried him greatly, but
that was but for a while; his grapling as a Captain with the Curse and Death
and Hell tried him much, but that also was but for a while: But this Office of
being an Advocate, tho it meets not with such sudden Depths of Trouble, yet,
what it wants in Shortness it may meet with in length of time. I know Christ
being raised from the Dead, dies no more. Yet he has not left off, tho in
Heaven, to do some works of Service for his Saints on Earth: For there he
pleads as an Advocate, or Lawyer for his People, Heb. 8.1, 2. And let it be,
that he has no Cause of Shame, when he stands thus up to plead for so vile a
Wretch as I, who have so vilely sinned; yet I have Cause to think, that well he
may, and to hold my Hands before my Face for Shame: and to be confounded with
Shame, while he, to fetch me off from Condemnation for my Transgressions, sets
his Face like a Flint to plead for me, with God, and against my Accuser. But
thus much for the Seventh Privilege that they have by Christ, who have him for
their Advocate.

Priv. 8. Eighthly, Another Privilege that they have, who have Jesus Christ to
be their Advocate, is this; He is always ready, always in Court, always with
the Judge, then and there to oppose, if our Accuser comes, and to plead against
him what is pleadable for his Children. And this the Text implies, where it
says, we have an Advocate with the Father: Always with the Father. Some
Lawyers, tho they are otherwise able and shrewd, yet not being always in Court,
and ready, do suffer their poor Clients to be baffled and nonsuited by their
Adversary; yea it so comes to pass, because of this Neglect, that a Judgment is
got out against them, for whom they have undertaken to plead, to their great
Perplexity and Damage. But no such opportunity can Satan have of our Advocate,
for he is with the Father, always with the Father; as to be a Priest, so to be
an Advocate: We have an Advocate with the Father. It is said of the Priests,
they wait at the Altar, and that they give Attendance there, 1 Cor. 9.13. also
of the Magistrate, that, as to his Office, he should attend continually on this
very thing. And as these, so Christ, as to his Office of an Advocate, attends
continually upon that Office with his Father, Romans 13.6. we have an Advocate
with the Father; always with the Father. And truly such an Advocate becomes the
Children of God, because of the Vigilance of their Enemy: For it is said of him,
that he accuses us Day and Night, Rev. 12.10. So unweariedly does he both seek
and pursue our Destruction. But behold, how we are provided for him, we have an
Advocate with the Father. If he comes Adays, our Advocate is with the Father;
if he comes a-Nights, our Advocate is with the Father. Thus then is our
Advocate ready to put check to Satan, come he when he will, or can, to accuse
us to the Father. Wherefore these two Texts are greatly to be minded; one of
them for that it shows us the Restlessness of our Enemy, the other for that it
shows us the Diligence of our Advocate.

That also in the Hebrews shows us the Carefulness of our Advocate, where it
says, He is gone into Heaven, Now to appear in the Presence of God for us,
Heb. 9.24. Now, just the time present. Now, the time always present: Now, let
Satan come when he will. Nor is it to be omitted, that this Word, that thus
specifies the time, the present time, does also conclude it to be that time in
which we are imperfect in Grace, in which we have many failings, in which we
are tempted and accused of the Devil to God: This is the time, and in it, and
every whit of it, he now appears in the Presence of God for us. O the
Diligence of our Enemy! O the Diligence of our Friend, the one against us, the
other for us, and that continually. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. This then, that Jesus Christ is always
an Advocate with the Father for us, and so continually ready to put a check to
every Accusation that Satan brings into the Presence of God against us, is
another of the Privileges that they have, who have Jesus Christ for their
Advocate.

Priv. 9. Ninthly, Another Privilege that they have, who have Jesus Christ to
be their Advocate, is this, He is such an one that will not by Bribes, by
Flattery nor fair Pretenses, be turned aside from pursuing of his Clients
Business. This was the Fault of Lawyers in old time, that they would wrest
Judgment for a Bribe: Hence the holy one complained, That a Bribe did use to
blind the Eyes of the Wise, and pervert the Judgment of the Righteous, 1 Samuel
12.3. Amos 5.12. Deuteronomy. 16.19. There are three things in Judgment, that a Lawyer
must take heed of: One is the Nature of the Offense, the other is the meaning,
and intendment of the Lawmakers, and a third is to plead for them in Danger
without Respect to Affliction or Reward. And this is the Excellency of our
Advocate, he will not, cannot be biased to turn aside from doing Judgment. And
this the Apostle intends when he calls our Advocate, Jesus Christ the
righteous. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Or
as another Prophet calls him, to wit, The Just Lord, one that will do no
Iniquity, that is, no Unrighteousness, in Judgment, Zeph. 3.5. He will not be
provoked to do it, neither by the continual Solicitations of thine Enemy, nor
by thy continual Provocations, wherewith, by Reason of thy infirm Condition,
thou do often tempt him to do it. And remember, that thy Advocate pleads by
the new Covenant, and thine Adversary accuses by the Old; and again remember
that the new Covenant is better and more richly provided with Grounds of
pleading for our Pardon and Salvation, than the old can be with Grounds for a
Charge to be brought in by the Devil against us, suppose our Sin be never so
heinous. It Is a better Covenant, established upon better Promises.

Now put these two together; namely that Jesus Christ is righteous, and will
not swerve in Judgment: Also that he pleads for us by the new Law, with which
Satan has nothing to do, nor (had he) can he by it, bring in a Plea against
us, Jer. 31.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Heb. 8.8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13. because that Law in the very body of it, consists in free
Promises of giving Grace unto us, and of an everlasting Forgiveness of our Sin.
O Children, your Advocate will stick to the Law, to the new Law, to the new and
everlasting Covenant, and will not admit that any thing should be pleaded by
our Foe, that is inconsistent with the Promise of the Gift of Grace, and of the
Remission of all Sin. This therefore is another Privilege that they are made
Pertakers of who have Jesus Christ to be their Advocate. He is just, he is
righteous, he is Jesus Christ the righteous. He will not be turned aside to
judge awry, either of the Crime, the Law, or for Favor or Affection. Nor is
there any sin, but what is pardonable, committed by those that have chosen
Jesus Christ to be their Advocate.

Priv. 10. Tenthly, Another Privilege that they have, who have Jesus Christ to
be their Advocate, is this, The Father has made him, even him that is thine
Advocate, the Vmpire and Judge in all Matters that have, do or shall fall out
'twixt him and us. Mark this well. For when the Judge himself, before whom I am
accused, shall make mine Advocate the Judge of the Nature of the Crime, for
which I am accused, and of matter of Law, by which I am accused, to wit,
whether it* is in Force against me, to Condemnation, or whether, by the Law of
Grace, I am set free: (specially, since before my Advocate has espoused my
Cause, promised me Deliverance, and pleaded my Right to the State of eternal
Life) must it not now go well with me? Yes, verily. The Judge then making thine
Advocate the Judge, for he has committed all Judgment unto the Son, Joh. 5.22.
has done it also for thy Sake, who have chosen him to be thine Advocate. 'Twas
a great thing that happened to Israel, when Joseph was become their Advocate,
and when Pharaoh had made him a Judge: Thou, says he, shall be over my House,
and according to thy Word shall all my People be ruled. See, I have set thee
over all the Land of Egypt; and without thee shall no Man lift up his Hand or
Foot in all the Land of Egypt: Only in the Throne, I will be greater than
thou, Genesis 41.39, 4^, 44. Joseph in this was a type of Christ, and his
Government here, of the Government of Christ for his Church.

Kings seldom make a Man's Judge his Advocate; they seldom leave the Issue of
the whole Affair to the Arbitration of the poor Man's Lawyer. But, when they
do, methinks it should even go to the Hearts desire of the Client, whose the
Advocate is: Specially when as I said before, the Cause of the Client is become
the Concern of the Advocate; and that they are both wrapped up in the self same
Interest; yea, when the Judge himself also is therein concerned: And yet thus
it is with that Soul who has Jesus Christ for his Advocate. What say thou
poor Heart to this? The Judge, to wit, the God of Heaven, has made thy Advocate
Arbitrator in thy Business: He is to judge, God has referred the Matter to him,
and he has a Concern in thy Concern, an Interest in thy good speed. Christian
Man, do thou hear? Thou have put thy Cause into the Hand of Jesus Christ, and
have chosen him to be thine Advocate to plead for thee before God and against
thy Adversary; and God has referred the Judgment of that Matter to thy
Advocate; so that he has Power to determine the Matter. I know Satan is not
pleased with this, he had rather things should have been referred to himself,
and then woe had been to the Child of God: But, I say, God has referred the
Business to Jesus Christ, has made him Vmpire, and Judge in thine Affair. Art
thou also willing that he should decide the Matter? Can thou say unto him as
David, Judge me, and plead my Cause, O Lord, Psalm. 43.1.

O the Care of God toward his People, and the Desire of their Welfare. He has
provided them an Advocate, and he has referred all Causes, and things, that may
by Satan be objected and brought in against us, to the Judgment and Sentence of
Christ our Advocate. But, to come to a Conclusion for this, and therefore,

Priv. 11. Eleventhly, The Advantage that he has, that has the Lord Jesus for
his Advocate, therefore is very great. Thy Advocate has the Cause, has the Law,
has the Judge, has the Purse, and so consequently has all that is requisite for
an Advocate to have. Since together with these, he has Heart, he has Wisdom, he
has Courage, and Loves to make the best Improvement of his Advantages, for the
benefit of his Client. And that which adds to all, is, he can prove the Debt
paid, about which Satan makes such ado; a Price given for the Ramsom of my
Soul, and for the Pardon of my Sins. Lawyers do use to make a great Matter of
it, when they can prove, That that very Debt is paid, for which their Client is
sued at the Law. Now this Christ Jesus himself is Witness to: Yea, he himself
has paid it, and that out of his own Purse, for us, with his own Hands, before
and upon the Mercy-Seat according as the Law requires, Lev. 16.13, 14, 15.
Heb. 9.11.14.15, 16, 23, 24. what then can accrue to our Enemy, or what
Advantage can he get by his thus vexing and troubling of the Children of the
most High? Certainly nothing, but, as has been said already, to be cast down.
For the Kingdom of our God, which is a Kingdom of Grace, and the Power of his
Christ will prevail. Sampson's Power lay in his Hair, but Christ's Power, his
Power to deliver us from the Accusation and Charge of Satan, lies in the Worth
of his Undertakings. And hence it is said again and they overcame him by the
Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.10, 11, 12. and he was cast out, and down. And thus
much for the Privileges that those are made Pertakers of who have Jesus Christ
to be their Advocate.

I come now to the Sixth and last thing, The Necessity of Christ's being an
Advocate.
which is, to show you, what Necessity there is that Christ should be our
Advocate.

That Christ should be a Priest to offer Sacrifice, a King to rule, and a
Prophet to teach, All seeing Men acknowledge, is of Necessity; but, that he
should be an Advocate, a Pleader for his People, few see the Reason of it. But
he is an Advocate, and as an Advocate, has a Work and Employ distinct from his
Priestly, Kingly, or prophetical Office: John says, he is our Advocate, and
signifies also the Nature of his Work as such, in that very Place, where he
asserteth his Office. As also I have showed you in that which goes before: But,
having already showed you the Nature, I will now show you the Necessity of this
Office.

First, it is necessary, for the more full and ample Vindication of the Justice
of God, against all the Cavils of the infernal Spirits. Christ died on Earth,
to declare the Justice of God to Men, in his justifying of the ungodly. God
stands upon the Vindication of his Justice, as well as upon the Act thereof:
Hence the Holy Ghost, by the Prophets and Apostles, so largely disputes for
the Vindication thereof, Romans 3.24. Isa. Jer. Mal. While it asserteth the
reality of the pardon of sin, the justification of the unworthy, and their
glorification with God, Romans 3 chap. 4. chap. 8. Gal. 3 and 4. I say, w^^^e it
disputes the justness of thi^ high Act of God, against the cavils of
implacable s^^ners* Now the Prophets and Apostles in those Disputes by which
they seek to vindicate the Justice of God, in the Salvation of sinners, are not
only Ministers of God to us, but Advocates for him: Since, as Elihu has it,
They speak on God's behalf, Job 36.2. Or, as the Margent has it, I will show
thee that there are yet Words for God; Words to be spoken, and pleaded against
his Enemies, for the justification of his Actions. Now, as it is necessary,
that there should be Advocates, for God on Earth, to plead for his Justice and
Holiness, while he saves sinners, against the cavils of an ungodly People; so
it is necessary that there should be an Advocate also in Heaven, that may there
vindicate the same Justice and Holiness of God, from all those Charges that the
fallen Angels are apt to charge it with, while it consents that we, tho
ungodly, should be saved.

That the fallen Angels are bold enough to charge God, to his Face, with
Vnjustness of Language, is evident in the first and second of Job: And, that
they should not be as bold to charge him with Unjustness of Actions, nothing
can be showed to the contrary: Further, that God seeks to clear himself of this
unjust Charge of Satan, is as manifest; for all the Troubles of his Servant Job
were chiefly for that purpose: And why he should have one also in Heaven, to
plead for the Justness of his Doings, in the Forgiveness and Salvation of
Sinners, appears also as necessary, even because there is one, even an Advocate
with the Father, or on the Father's Side, seeking to vindicate his Justice,
while he pleads with him, for us, against the Devil and his Objections.

God is wonderfully pleased with his Design in the saving of Sinners; it
pleases him at the Heart: And since he also is infinitely just, there is need,
that an Advocate should be appointed to show, how in a Way of Justice, as well
as Mercy, the Sinner may be saved.

The good Angels did not at first see so far into the Mysteries of the Gospel
of the Grace of God, but that they needed further Light therein, for the
Vindication of their Lord, as Servants: Wherefore they yet did pry, and look
narrowly into it further, and also bowed their Heads and Hearts to learn yet
more, by the Church, of the manifold Wisdom of God, 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.9, 10.
And if the standing Angels were not yet, to the utmost, perfect in the
Knowledge of this Mystery, (and yet surely they must know more thereof, than
those that fell could do,) no Wonder if those Devils, whose emnity could not
but animate their Ignorance, made, and do make their Cavils against Justice,
insinuating that it is not impartial and exact, because it, as it is just,
justifies the ungodly.

That Satan will quarrel with God, I have showed you, and that he will also
dispute against his Works with the holy Angels, is more than intimated by the
Apostle Jude, Jude 9. And why not quarrel with, and accuse the Justice of God
as unrighteous for consenting to the Salvation of Sinners? Since his best
Qualifications are most profound and prodigious Attempts to dethrone the Lord
God of his Power and Glory.

Nay all this is evident since we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous. And again, I say, it is evident that one part of his Work,
as an Advocate, is to vindicate the Justice of God, while he pleads for our
Salvation; because he pleads a Propitiation. For a Propitiation respects
God, as well as us, the appeasing of his Wrath and the reconciling of his
Justice to us, as well as the redeeming of us from Death and Hell. Yea it
therefore does the one, because it does the other. Now if Christ, as an
Advocate, pleads a Propitiation with God, for whose Conviction does he plead
it? Not for God's, for he has ordained it, allows it, and gloriously acquiesces
therein, because he knows the whole Virtue thereof. It is therefore for the
Conviction of the fallen Angels, and for the confounding of all those Cavils
that can be invented and objected against our Salvation, by those most subtle,
and envious ones. But,

Secondly, There is Matter of Law to be objected and that both against God and
us. At least there seems to be so, because of the Sanction that God has put
upon the Law, and also, because we have sinned against it.

God has said in the Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die; and, the
Soul that sins it shall die. God also stands still upon the Vindication of
his Justice, he also saves Sinners. Now, in comes our Accuser, and charge us
of Sin, of being guilty of Sin, because we have transgressed the Law. God also
will not be put out of his way and steps of Grace to save us, also he will say
he is just and righteous still. I, but these are but sayso^s, how shall this be
proved? Why, now here is room for an Advocate that can plead to Matter of Law,
that can preserve the Sanction of the Law, in the Salvation of the Sinner. He
shall magnify the Law and make it honorable, Isa. 42.21. the Margent says,
and ma^^ him honorable. That is, he shall save the Sinner and preserve the
Holiness of the Law and the Honor of his God. But who is this that can do
this? It is the Servant of God, says the Prophet, ver. 1. ver. 13. the Lord, a
Man of War. But how can this be done by him? The Answer is, it shall be done,
for God is well pleased for his Righteousness Sake. For it is by that that he
magnifies the Law and makes his Father honorable.

That is, he as a Public Person, comes into the World, under the Law, fulfils
it, and having so done, he gives that Righteousness away; for he, as to his own
Person, never had need thereof: I say he gives that Righteousness to those that
have need, to those that have none of their own, that Righteousness might be
imputed to them.

This Righteousness then he presents to God for us, and God, for this
Righteousness Sake, is well-pleased that we should be saved, and for it can
save us, and secure his Honor, and preserve the Law in its Sanction. And this
Christ pleads against Satan as an Advocate with the Father for us. By which
he vindicates his Fathers Justice, holds the Child of God, notwithstanding
his Sins, in a State of Justification, and utterly overthrows and confounds
the Devil.

For Christ, in pleading thus, appeals to the Law it self. If he has not done
it Justice. Saying, most mighty Law, what Command of thine have I not
fulfilled? what Demand of thine have I not fully answered? where is that jot,
or tittle of the Law that is able to object against my Doings, for want of
Satisfaction? Here the Law is mute, it speaks not one Word, by way of the
least Complaint, but rather testifies of this Righteousness that it is good and
holy, Romans 3.22, 23. Romans 5.1^, 16, 17, 18, 19. Now then, since Christ did this
as a public Person, it follows, that others must be justified thereby. For
that was the end, and Reason of Christ's taking upon him to do the
Righteousness of the Law. Nor can the Law object against the Equity of this
Dispensation of Heaven. For why might not that God who gave the Law his Being
and his Sanction, dispose as he pleases, of the Righteousness which it
commends? Besides, If Men be made righteous, they are so, and if by a
Righteousness which the Law commends, how can Fault be found with them by the
Law? Nay, It is witnessed to by the Law and the Prophets, who consent, that it
should be unto all and upon all them that believe, for their Justification,
Romans 3.20, 21.

And, that the mighty God suffers the Prince of the Devils to do with the Law
what he can, against this most wholesome and godly Doctrine, it is, to show the
Truth, Goodness and Permanency thereof. For this is as who should say, Devil do
thy worst. When the Law is in the Hand of an easy Pleader, tho the Cause that
he pleads be good, a crafty Opposer may overthrow the right, but here is the
Salvation of the Children in debate, and whether it can stand with Law and
Justice. The Opposer of this is the Devil, his Argument against it is the Law,
he that defends the Doctrine, is Christ, the Advocate, who, in his Plea, must
justify the Justice of God, defend the Holiness of the Law, and save the
Sinner from all the Arguments, Pleas Cavils, Stops and Demurrs, that Satan is
able to put in against it. And this he must do fairly, righteously, simply,
Pleading the Voice of the self-same Law for the justification of what he
stands for, which Satan pleads against it. For, tho it is by the new Law that
our Salvation comes, yet by the old Law, is the new Law approved of, and the
way of Salvation thereby, by it consented to.

This shows therefore that Christ is not ashamed to own the way of our
Justification and Salvation, no not before Men and Devils: It shows also that
he is resolved to dispute and plead for the same, tho the Devil himself shall
oppose it. And, since our Adversary pretends a Plea in Law against it, it is
meet, that there should be an open Hearing before the Judge of all about it:
But for as much as we neither can nor dare appear to plead for our selves, our
good God has thought fit we should do it by an Advocate: we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

This therefore is the second thing that shows the need that we have of an
Advocate; to wit, our Adversary pretends that he has a Plea in Law against us,
and that by Law we ^^^uld be otherwise disposed of than to ^e made Possessors
of the Heavenly Kingdom. But,

Thirdly, There are many things relating to the Promise to our Life, and to the
Threatenings that minister Matter of Question and Doubt; and give the Advantage
of Objections unto him that so eargerly desires to be putting in Cavils
against our Salvation; all which it has pleased God to refel by Jesus Christ
our Advocate.

1. There are many things relating to the Promises, as to the largeness and
straitness of Words, as to the Freeness and Conditionality of them, which we
are not able so well to understand; and therefore, when Satan deals with us,
about them, we quickly fall to the Ground before him; we often conclude that
the Words of the Promise, are too narrow and strait to comprehend us, we also
think verily that the Conditions of some Promises do utterly ^^ut us out from
hope of Justification and Life. But our Advocate who is for us, with the
Father, he is better acquainted with, and learned in this Law, than to be
ba^^e^ out with a bold Word or two, Isa. ^0.4. or with a subtle piece of
Hellish Sophistication. He knows the true Purport, Intent, Meaning, and Sense
of every Promise, and piece of Promise, that is in the whole Bible, and can
tell how to plead it, for Advantage, against our Accuser; and does so: And I
gather it not only from his Contest with Satan for Joshua, Zech. 3. and from
his Conflict with him in the Wilderness, Mat. 4. and in Heaven, Rev. 14. but
also from the Practice of Satan's Emissaries here. For what his Angels do, that
does he. Now there is here nothing more apparent, than that the Instruments of
Satan do plead against the Church, from the pretended Intricacy, Ambiguity, and
Difficulty of the Promise, whence I gather, so does Satan before the Tribunal
of God, but there we have one to match him, we have an Advocate with the
Father, that knows Law and Judgment better than Satan, and Statute and
Commandment, better than all his Angels: And by the Verdict of our Advocate,
all the Words, and Limits, and Extensions of Words, with all Conditions of the
Promises, are expounded and applied. And hence it is, that it sometimes falls
so out, that that very Promise that we have thought could not reach us to
comfort us by any Means, has at another time swallowed us up with Joy
unspeakable: Christ the true Prophet has the right Understanding of the Word,
as an Advocate, has pleaded it before God against Satan, and having overcome
him at the common Law, he has sent to let us know it by his good Spirit, to
our Comfort, and the Confusion of our Enemy. Again,

2. There are many things relating to our Lives, that minister to our Accuser,
occasions of many Objections against our Salvation; for, besides our daily
Infirmities, there are in our Lives, gross Sins; many horrible Backslidings;
also we oft-times suck and drink in many abominable Errors and deceitful
Opinions, of all which Satan accuses us before the Judgment Seat of God, and
pleads hard, that we may be damned forever for them. Besides, Some of these
things are done after Light received, against present Convictions and
Disswasions to the contrary, against Solemn engagement to Amendment, when the
Bonds of Love were upon us, Jer. 2.20. These are crying Sins, they have a lo^d
voice in themselves against us, and give to Satan great Advantage and Boldness
to sue for our Destruction before the Bar of God. Nor does he want Skill to
aggravate, and to comment profoundly upon all Occasions, and Circumstances that
did attend us, in these our Miscarriges; to wit, that we did it without a
Cause, also when we had, had we had Grace to have used them, many things to
have helped us against such Sins, and to have kept us clean and upright. There
is also a Sin unto Death, 1 John 5. and he can tell how to labor, by Argument
and Slight of Speech, to make our Transgressions not only to border upon, but
to appear in the Hue, Shape, and Figure of that, and thereto make his Objection
against our Salvation. He often argues thus with us, and fastneth the Weight
of his Reasons upon our Consciences, to the almost utter Destruction of us, and
the bringing of us down to the Gates of Despair, and utter Destruction: The
same Sins with their aggravating Circumstances, as I said, he pleads against
us at the Bar of God: But there he meets with Jesus Christ our Lord, and
Advocate, who enters his Plea against him, unravels all his Reasons and
Arguments against us, and shows the guile and falsehood of them; he also
pleads as to the Nature of Sin, as also to all those high Aggravations, and
proves that neither the Sin in it self, nor yet as joined with all its
advantageous Circumstances, can be the Sin unto Death, Col. 2.19. because we
hold the Head, and have not made Ship wrack of Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19. but still as
David and Solomon, we confess and are sorry for our Sins. Thus, tho we seem,
through our Falls, to come short of the Promise with P^^er, Heb. 4.3. and leave
our Transgressions as stumbling Blocks to the World with Solomon, and minister
Occasion of a Question of our Salvation among the Godly: Yet our Advocate
fetches us o^^ before God, and we shall be found safe (and in Heaven at last)
by them in the next World, who was afraid they had lost us in this.

But all these Points must be managed by Christ for us, against Satan, as a
Lawyer, an Advocate; who to that end, now appears in the Presence of God for
us: And wisely handles the very Crisis of the Word, and of the Failings of his
People, together with all those nice and critical Juggles by which our
Adversary labors to bring us down, to the Confusion of his Face.

3. There is also the Threatenings that are annexed to the Gospel; and they fall
now under our Consideration. They are of two sorts, such as respect those who
altogether neglect and reject the Gospel, or those that profess it, yet fall
in, or from that Profession thereof.

The first sort of threatening cannot be pleaded against the Professors of the
Gospel as against those that never professed it. Wherefore he betaketh himself
to manage those Threatenings against us that belong to those that have professed
and that have fallen in, or from that Profession, Psalm. 109.6. Joshua fell in
it, Zech. 3.1, 2. Judas fell from it. And the Accuser stands at the Right Hand
of them both to resist them before the Judgment of God. To resist them by
pleading the Threatenings against them. To wit, that God's Soul should have no
Pleasure in them. [ If any Man draws back my Soul shall have no Pleasure in
them.] Here Is a Plea for Satan, both against one and the other, they are both
Apostatized, both drawn back, and he is subtle enough to manage it. Ay but,
Satan, here is also Matter sufficient for a Plea for our Advocate against thee,
for as much as the next Words distinguish betwixt drawing back, and drawing
back unto Perdition; every one that draws back, does not draw back unto
Perdition, Heb. 10.38, 39. Some of them draw back from, and some in the
Profession of the Gospel. Judas drew back from, and Peter in the Profession of
his Faith: Wherefore Judas perishes, but Peter turns again, because Judas drew
back unto Perdition, but Peter yet believed to the saving of the Soul. Nor does
Jesus Christ when he sees it is to no boot, at any time step in to endeavor to
save the Soul. Wherefore, as for Judas for his backsliding from the Faith,
Christ turns him up to Satan, and leaves him in his Hand. Saying, when he
shall be judged let him be condemned, and let his Prayer become Sin, Psalm.
109.7. But he will not serve Peter so, The Lord will not leave him in his Hand,
nor condemn him when he is judged, Psalm. 37.33. He will pray for him before,
and plead for him after he has been in the Temptation, and so secure him by
Virtue of his Advocation, from the Sting and Lash of the Threatening, that is
made against final Apostasy. But,

Fourthly, The Necessity of the Advocate's Office of Jesus Christ appears
namely in this, To plead about the Judgments, Distresses, Afflictions and
Troubles that we meet withal in this Life for our Sins. For though by Virtue of
this Office, Christ fully takes us off from the Condemnation that the
Unbelievers go down to, for their Sins: Yet he does not thereby exempt us from
temporal Punishments, for we see and feel, that they daily overtake us. But for
the proportioning of the Punishment or Affliction, for Transgression, seeing
that Comes under the Sentence of the Law, it is fit that we should have an
Advocate that understands both Law and Judgment to plead for equal Distribution
of Chastisement, according, I say, as the Law of Grace: And this the Lord Jesus
does.

Suppose a Man for Transgression, be indicted at the Assizes: his Adversary is
also full of Malice, and would have him punished sorely, beyond what by the Law
is provided for such Offense: And he pleads that the Judge will so afflict and
punish as he in his malicious Mind desires. But the Man has an Advocate there:
And he enters his Plea against the Cruelty of his Clients Accuser: Saying, My
Lord, it cannot be as our Enemy would have it. The Punishment for these
Transgressions are prescribed by that Law that we here ground our Plea upon.
Nor may it be declined to satisfy his Envy, we stand here upon Matters of Law,
and appe^l to the Law. And this is the work of our Advocate in Heaven.
Punishments for the Sin of the Children, come not headlong, not without
Measure, as our Accuser would have them; nor yet as they fall upon those, who
have none to plead their Cause: Has he smote the Children according to the
Stroke wherewith he has smitten others? No, In Measure when it shoots forth,
(or seeks to exceed due Bounds) thou will debate with it: He stays his rough
Wind in the Day of his East Wind, Isa. 27.7, 8, 9. Thou will debate with it;
enqui^ing and reasoning by the Law, whether the shootings forth of the
Affliction (now going out for the Offense committed) be not too strong, too
heavy, too hot, and of too long a time admitted to Distress and break the
Spirit of this Christian. And if it be, he applies himself to the Rule, to
measure it by, he fetches forth his Plum-Line, and sets his Plum-line in the
midst of his People, Amos 7.7, 8. Isa. 28.17. and lays Righteousness to that,
and will not suffer it to go further; but according to the Quality of the
Transgression, and according to the Terms, Bounds, Limits and Measures which
the Law of Grace admits: So shall the Punishment be. Satan often says of us,
When we have sinned, as Abishai said of Shimei after he had cursed David, Shall
not this Man die for this? 2 Samuel 19.21. But Jesus our Advocate answers as
David, what have I to do with thee, O Satan, thou this Day art an Enemy to me:
Thou seek for a Punishment for the Transgressions of my People, above what
is allotted to them by the Law of Grace under which they are, and beyond what
their Relation that they stand in to my Father and my self, will admit.
Wherefore as Advocate, be pleads against Satan when he brings in against us a
Charge for Sins committed, for the regulating of Punishments both as to the
Nature, Degree and Continuation of Punishment. And this is the Reason why, when
we are judged, we are not condemned, but chastened, 1 Cor. 11.32. that we
should not be condemned with the World. Hence David says, the Lord had not
given him over to the Will of his Enemy, Psalm. 27.12. And again, The Lord has
chastned me sore, but he has not given me over unto Death, Psalm. 118.18.
Satan's Plea was, that the Lord would give David over to his Will, and to the
Tyranny of Death. No says our Advocate, that must not be, to do so would be an
Affront to the Covenant under which Grace has put them; that would be to deal
with them by a Covenant of Works under which they are not. There is a Rod for
Children, and Stripes for those of them that transgress, this Rod is in the
Hand of a Father, and must be used according to the Law of that Relation, not
for the Destruction, but Correction of the Children: Not to satisfy the Rage
of Satan, but to vindicate the Holiness of my Father. Not to drive them further
from, but to bring them nearer to their God. But,

Fifthly, The Necessity of the Advocateship of Jesus Christ is also manifest in
this, For that there is need of one to plead the efficacy of old Titles to our
eternal Inheritance, when our Interest thereunto seems questionable by reason
of new Transgressions. That God's People may by their new and repeated Sins, as
to Reason at least, endanger their Interest in the eternal Inheritance, is
manifest by such Groanings of theirs as these, Why do thou cast me off? Psalm.
43.2. Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away from thy Presence, Psalm. 60.1. and O God,
why have thou cast us off forever? Psalm. 74.1. Yet I find in the book of
Leviticus, that tho any of the children of Israel should have sold, morgaged or
made away with their Inheritance, they did not thereby utterly make void their
title to an Interest therein, but it should again return to them, and they
again enjoy the Possession of it in the Year of Jubilee. In the Year of
Jubilee, says God, you shall return every Man to his Possession. The Land
shall not be sold ^^r ever, not be quite cut off, for the Land is mine, for ye
are Strangers and Sojourners with me. In all the Land of your Possession you
shall grant a Redemption for the Land, Levit. 25.23, 24, 25.

The Man in Israel that, by waxing Poor, did sell his Land in Canaan, was
surely a type of the Christian, who by Sin and Decays in Grace, has forfeited
his Place and Inheritance in Heaven: But as the ceremonial Law provided that
the poor Man in Canaan, should not by his Poverty lose his Portion in Canaan
forever, but that it should return to him in the Year of Jubilee: So the Law of
Grace has provided that the Children shall not for their Sin lose their
Inheritance in Heaven forever, but that it shall return to them in the World to
come; the last Jubilee, or Day of Judgment: For then, They are not to be
condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. All therefore that happens in this
Case, is, They may live without the Comfort of it here, as he that had sold his
House in Canaan might live without the Enjoyment of it, till the Jubilee: They
may also seem to come short of it when they die. As he in Canaan did that
deceased before the Year of Jubilee: But as certainly as he that died in Cannan
before the Jubilee, did yet receive again his Inheritance, by the Hand of his
relative Surviver when the Jubilee came so certainly shall he that dies, and
that seems in his dying to come short of the Celestial Inheritance now, be
yet admitted at his rising again, to the Re-possession of his old Inheritance
at the Day of Judgment. But, here is now Room for a Caviller to object and to
plead against the Children, saying, They have forfeited their Part of Paradise
by their Sin, what Right then shall they have to the Kingdom of Heaven? Now let
the Lord stand up to plead, for he is Advocate for the Children. Yea, let them
plead the Sufficiency of their first Title to the Kingdom, and that it is not
their doings that can sell the Land forever. The Reason why the Children of
Israel could not sell the Land forever, was because the Lord, their Head,
reserved to himself a Right therein: The Land shall not be sold forever, for
the Land is mine. Suppose two or three Children have a lawful Title to such an
Estate, but they are all profuse and prodigal; but there is a Brother also that
has by Law a chief Right to the same Estate. This Brother, he may hinder the
Estate from being sold forever, because it is also his Inheritance, and he may,
when the limited time that his Brethren had sold their share therein, is out,
if he will, restore it to them again. And in the mean time if any that are
unjust should go about utterly and forever, to deprive his Brethren, he may
stand up and plead for them; that in Law the Land cannot be sold forever, for
that it is his as well as theirs, he being resolved not to part with his Right:
O my Brethren, Christ will not part with his Right of the Inheritance unto
which you are also born. Your Profuseness, and Prodigality shall not make him
let go his hold that he has for you of Heaven, nor can you according to Law*
sell the Land forever, since it is his, and he has the principal and chief
Title thereto. This also gives him Ground to stand up to plead for you against
all those that would hold the Kingdom from you forever. For let Satan say what
he can against you, yet Christ can say the Land is mine: And consequently that
his Brethren could not sell it.

Yes, says Satan, if the Inheritance be divided.

O but, says Christ, The Land is undivided, no Man has his part set out, and
turned over to himself. Besides my Brethren yet are under Age, and I am made
their Guardian: They have not Power to sell the Land forever, the Land is mine,
also my Father has made me Feoffee in trust for my Brethren, that they may have
what is allotted them when they are all come to a perfect Man, to the Measure
of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. and not before, and I
will reserve it for them till then, and thus to do is the Will of my Father,
the Law of the Judge, and also my unchangeable Resolution. And what can Satan
say against this Plea? Can he prove that Christ has no Interest in the Saints
Inheritance? Can he prove that we are at Age, or that our several Parts of the
Heavenly House, is already delivered into our own Hands and is in our own
Power? And if he goes about to do this is not the Law of the Land against him:
Does it not say that our Advocate is Lord of all, Acts 10.36. that the Kingdom
is Christ's, that it is laid up in Heaven for us, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 1.5. Yea that
the Inheritance which is incorruptible undefiled, and that fades not away, is
reserved in Heaven for us who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. Thus therefore is our old Title to our Heavenly
Inheritance made good by our Advocate, against the thwartings and branglings of
the Devil, nor can our new Sins make it invalid, but it abides safe to us at
last, notwithstanding our Weaknesses. Tho if we sin, we may have but little
Comfort of it, or but little of its present Profits while we live in this
World. A Spend-thrift tho he loses not his Title, may yet lose the present
Benefit. But the Principal will come again at last for we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Sixthly the Necessity of the Advocateship of Jesus Christ for us further
appears in this, to wit, for that our Evidences, which declare that we have a
Right to the eternal Inheritance, are often out of our own Hand, yea, and also
sometimes kept long from us. The which we come not at the Sight or Comfort of
again but by our Advocate: Specially when our Evidences are taken from us
because of a present forfeiture of this Inheritance to God by this or that most
soul Offense. Evidences when they are thus taken away, as in David's Case;
Psalm. 51.12. they were, why then they are in the Hand of God, laid up I say
from the sight of them to whom they belong, till they even forget the Contents
thereof, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Now when Writings and Evidences are out of the Hand of the Owners, and laid up
in the Court where in Justice they ought to be kept, they are not ordinarily
got thence again but by the Help of a Lawyer, an Advocate. Thus it is with the
Children of God. We do often forfeit our Interest in eternal Life, but the
Mercy is, the Forfeit falls into the Hand of God; (not of the Law, nor of
Satan) wherefore he takes away also so our Evidences, (if not all, yet) some
of them, as he says, I will take away my Peace from this People, even loving
Kindness and Mercy, Jer. 16.5. This he took from David, 1 Chronicles. 17.13. Psalm.
51.12. yet (not as he took it from him that went before him) and he entreats
for the Restoration of it, saying, Restore unto me the Joy of thy Salvation,
and uphold me with thy free Spirit. And, Lord, Turn us again; cause thy Face to
shine, and we shall be saved, Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19.

Satan now also has an opportunity to plead against us, and to help forward
the Affliction, as his Servants did of old, when God was but a little angry,
Zech 1.15. But Jesus Christ our Advocate is ready to appear against him, and to
send us from Heaven our old Evidences again, or to signify to us that they are
yet good and Authentic, and that cannot be gainsaid. Gabriel, says he, make
this Man understand the Vision, Dan. 8.16. And again says he to another, Run,
speak to this young Man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as Towns without
Walls. Jerusalem had been in Captivity, had lost many Evidences of God's Favor
and Love by Reason of her Sin, and her Enemy stepped in to augment her Sin and
Sorrow. But there was a Man among the Myrtle trees that were in the bottom,
that did prevail with her God to say I am returned to Jerusalem with Mercies:
And then commands it to be proclaimed That his Cities through Prosperity should
yet be spread abroad, Zech. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Thus by Virtue of our
Advocate we are either made to receive our old Evidences for Heaven again, or
else are made to understand that they yet are good and stand valid in the Court
of Heaven; nor can they be made ineffectual, but shall abide the test at last
because our Advocate is also concerned in the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. Christians know what it is to lose their Evidences for Heaven, and to
receive them again, or to hear that they hold their Title by them: But perhaps
they know not how they come at this Privilege. Therefore the Apostle tells
them, they have an Advocate. And that by him as Advocate they enjoy all these
Advantages, is manifest, because his Advocates Office is appointed for our Help
when we sin; that is, commit Sins that are great and heinous. If any Man sin,
we have an Advocate.

By him the Justice of God is vindicated, the Law answered, the Threatenings
taken off, the Measure of Afflicton that for Sin we undergo, determined; our
Titles to eternal Life preserved, and our comfort of them restored,
notwithstanding the Wit, and Rage, and Envy of Hell. So then, Christ gave
himself for us, as a Priest; died for us, as a Sacrifice; but pleads Justice
and Righteousness, in a way of Justice and Righteousness (for such is his
Sacrifice) for our Salvation, from the Death that is due to our soul or high
Transgressions, as an Advocate.

Thus have I given you (thus far) an Account of the Nature, End, and Necessity
of the Advocateship of Jesus Christ: And should now come to the use and
Application, only I must first remove an Objection or two.

Obj. But what need all these Offices of Jesus Christ, or what need you trouble
us with these nice Distinctions, it is enough for us to believe in Christ, in
the general, without considering him under this and that Office.

Answ. The Wisdom of God is not to be charged with needless doing, when it
gives to Jesus Christ such Variety of Offices, and calls him to so many
sundry Employments for us. They are all thought necessary, by Heaven and
therefore should not be counted superfluous by Earth. And to put a Question
upon thy Objection: What Is a Sacrifice, without a Priest; and what is a Priest,
without a Sacrifice? And the same I say of his Advocates Office, what is an
Advocate without the Exercise of his Office? And what need of an Advocates
Office to be exercised, if Christ as Sacrifice and Priest, by God, was thought
sufficient? Each of these Offices are sufficient for the perfecting of the Work
for which they are designed, but they are not all designed for the self same
particular thing. Christ as Sacrifice offers not himself, it is Christ as
Priest does that: Christ as Priest dies not for our Sins, it is Christ as
Sacrifice does so. Again, Christ as a Sacrifice, and a Priest, limits himself
to those two Imploies, but as an Advocate, he lances out into a third. And
since, these are not confounded in Heaven, nor by the Scriptures, they should
not be confounded in our Apprehensions nor accounted useless.

It Is not therefore enough for us that we exercise our thoughts upon Christ in
an undistinct, and general way, but we must learn to know him in all his
Offices, and to know the Nature of his Offices also. Our Condition requires
this: It requires it, I say, as we are guilty of Sin, as we have to do with
God, and with our Enemy the Devil. As we are guilty of Sin, so we need a
Sacrifice; and because we are also Sinners, we need one perfect to present our
Sacrifice for us to God: We have need also of him as Priest to present our
Persons and Services to God. And since God is just and upon the Judgment Seat;
and since also we are subject to sin grievously; and again, since we have an
Accuser who will by Law plead at this Bar of God our Sins against us, to the
end we might be condemned, we have need of, and also have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Alas! How many of God's precious People, for the want of a distinct Knowledge
of Christ in all his Offices, are at this day sadly baffled with the
Sophistications of the Devil. To instance no more than this one thing: When
they have committed some heinous Sin after Light received; How are they, I say,
tossed, and tumbled, and distressed with many Perplexities? They cannot come to
any Anchor in this their troubled Sea. They go from Promise to Promise, from
Providence to Providence, from this to that Office of Jesus Christ, but forget
that he is (or else understand not what it is for this Lord Jesus) to be an
Advocate for them. Hence they so often sink under the Fears that their Sin is
unpardonable, and that therefore their Condition is desperate. Whereas if they
could but consider that Christ is their Advocate, and that he is therefore made
an Advocate, to save them from those high Transgressions that are committed by
them and that he waits upon this Office continually before the Judgment Seat of
God; they would conceive Relief, and be made hold up their Head, and would more
strongly twist themselves from under that Guilt and Burden (those Ropes and
Cords wherewith by their Folly they have so strongly bound themselves) than
commonly they have done or do.

Obj. 2. But notwithstanding what you have said, this Sin is a deadly stick in
my way. It will not out of my Mind, my Cause being bad, but Christ will desert
me.

Answ. It Is true, Sin is and will be a deadly stick and stop to Faith, attempt
to exercise it upon Christ as considered under which of his Offices, or
Relations you will: And above all, the Sin of Unbelief is the Sin that does so,
or most easily beset us, Heb. 12.1, 2. And no marvel, for it never acts
alone, but is backed, not only with Guilt and Ignorance, but also with carnal
Sense, and Reason. He that is ignorant of this, knows but little of himself, or
of what believing is. He that undertaketh to believe, sets upon the hardest
Task that ever was proposed to Man; not because the things imposed upon us are
unreasonable or unaccountable, but because the Heart of Man, the more true any
thing is, the more it sticks and stumbleth thereat. And says Christ, because
I tell you the truth, ye believe me not, Joh. 8.45. Hence believing is called
laboring, Heb. 4.11. and it is the forest Labor (at times) that any Man can
take in Hand, because assaulted with the greatest Oppositions; but believe thou
must, be the Labor never so hard, and that, not only in Christ in a general
way, but in him as to his several Offices, and as to this of his being an
Advocate in particular; else some Sins and some Temptations will not, in their
Guilt nor vexations Trouble, easily depart from thy Conscience, no not by
Promise nor by thy Attempts to apply the same by Faith. And this the Text
insinuates, by it is setting forth of Christ as Advocate; as the only or best
and most speedy Way of Relief to the Soul, in certain Cases.

There is then an Order that thou must observe in the Exercise of thy Soul in a
way of believing.

1. Thou must believe unto Justification in general, and for this thou must
direct thy Soul to the Lord Christ, as he is a Sacrifice for Sin, and as a
Priest, offering that Sacrifice: So as a Sacrifice thou shall see him appeasing
Divine Displeasure for thy Sin, and as a Priest spreading the Skirt of his
Garment over thee, for the covering of thy Nakedness; thus being clothed thou
shall not be found naked.

2. This when thou have done (as well as thou can) thou must in the next
Place keep thine Eye upon the Lord Christ as improving, as Priest in Heaven,
the Sacrifice which he offered on Earth, for the continuing of thee in a state
of Justification, thy Life time, notwithstanding those common Infirmities that
attend thee, and to which thou art incident in all thy holy Services, or best
of thy Performances, Romans 5.10. Exodus 28.31, 38. For therefore is he a Priest
in Heaven, and by his Sacrifice interceding for thee.

3. But if thy Foot slippeth; if it slippeth greatly, then know thou, 'twill
not be long before a Bill be in Heaven preferred against thee by the Accuser of
the Brethren; wherefore then thou must have Recourse to Christ as Advocate to
plead before God, thy Judge, against the Devil, thine Adversary, for thee.

4. And as to the badness of thy Cause, let that nothing move thee, save to
Humility, and self-Abasement: For Christ is glorified by being concerned for
thee. Yea the Angels will shout aloud to see him bring thee off. For what
greater Glory can we conceive Christ to obtain as Advocate, than to bring off
his People when they have sinned, no^withstanding Satan's so charging of them,
for them, as he does.

He gloried when he was going to the Cross to die, he went up with a Shout and
the Sound of Trumpet to make Intercession for us: And shall we think that by
his being an Advocate he receives no additional Glory! It Is Glory to him
doubtless to bear the Title of an Advocate, and much more to plead and prosper
for us against our Adversary as he does.

5. And, I say again, for thee to think that Christ will reject thee for that
thy Cause is bad, is a kind of thinking Blasphemy against this his Office, and
his Word. For what does such a Man but side with Satan while Christ is pleading
against him. I say it is as the Devil would have it, for it puts Strength unto
his Plea against us, by increasing our Sin and Wickedness. But shall Christ
take our Cause in Hand, and shall we doubt of good Success? This is, to count
Satan stronger than Christ, and that he can longer abide to oppose, than Christ
can to plead for us. Wherefore away with it, not only as to the Notion, but
also as to the Heart and Root thereof.

Oh! When shall Jesus Christ our Lord be honored by us as he ough^? this
dastardly Heart of ours, when shall it be more subdued, and trodden underfoot
of Faith? when shall Christ ride Lord, and King, and Advocate upon the Faith of
his People as he should? He is exalted before God, before Angels, and above all
the Power of the Enemy, there is nothing comes behind but the Faith of his
People.

Obj. 3. But since you follow the Metaphor so close, I will suppose, if an
Advocate be entertained, some Recompense must be given him: His Fee, who shall
pay him his Fee? I have nothing; could I do any thing to make this Advocate
part of Amends, I could think I might have Benefit from him, but I have
nothing; what say you to this?

Answ. Similitudes must not be strained too far, but yet I have an Answer for
this Objection. There is, in some Cases, Law for them that have no Money, ay,
Law, and Lawyers too: And this is called a suing in Forma Pauperis; and such
Lawyers are appointed by Authority for that Purpose. Indeed I know not that it
is thus in every Nation, but it is sometimes so with us in England: and this is
the way altogether in the Kingdom of Heaven before the Bar of God. All is done
there for us in Forma Pauperis, on free c^st: For our Advocate, or Lawyer is
thereto designed and appointed of his Father.

Hence Christ is said to plead the Cause, not of the rich and wealthy, but of
the Poor and Needy; not of those that have many Friends, but of the Fatherless
and Widow; not of them that are fat and strong, but of those under sore
Afflictions, Prove. 22.22, 23. chap. 23.10, 11. chap. 31.9. He shall stand at
the right Hand of the Poor to save him from them that condemn his Soul, Psalm.
109.31. or as it is in the Margent, from the Judges of his Soul. This then is
the manner of Jesus Christ with Men: He does freely what he does, not for Price
nor Reward. I have raised him up, says God, And I will direct all his Ways,
Spoke of Cyrus a Type of Christ.
he shall build my City, and he shall let go my Captives, not for Price, nor
Reward, Isa. 45.13.

This I say is the manner of Jesus Christ with Men; he pleads, he sues in Forma
Pauperis, gratis, and of mere Compassion. And hence it is that you have his
Clients give him thanks; for that is all the Poor can give. I will greatly
praise the Lord with my Mouth, I will praise him among the Multitude, for he
shall stand at the right Hand of the Poor to save him from them that condemn
his Soul, Psalm. 109.30.

They know but little, that talk of giving to Christ, except they mean, they
would give him Blessing and Praise. He bids us come freely, take freely; and
tells us that he will give, and do, freely, Rev. 22.17. chap. 21.6. Let him
have that which is his own, to wit, thy self, for thou art the Price of his
Blood. David speaks very strangely of giving to God for Mercy bestowed on him.
I call it strangely, because indeed it is so to Reason. What, says he, shall I
render to the Lord for all his Benefits, I will take this Cup, and call for
more, Psalm. 116.12, 13. God has no need of thy Gift, nor Christ of thy Bribe to
plead thy Cause. Take thankfully what is offered and call for more: That Is the
best giving to God. God is rich enough: Talk not then of giving, but of
receiving, for thou art poor: Be not too high, nor think thy self too good to
live by the Alms of Heaven: And since the Lord Jesus is willing to serve thee
freely, and to maintain thy Right to Heaven against thy Foe, to the saving of
thy Soul, without Price or Reward, Let the Peace of God rule in thee, to the
which thou art also called as is the rest of the Body, and be thou thankful,
Col. 3.15.

This then is the Privilege of a Christian, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. One that pleads the Cause of his People
against those that rise up against them, of his Love, Pity, and mere good Will.
Lord open the Eyes of dark Readers, of disconsolate Saints that they may see
who is for them, and upon what Terms.

Obj. 4. But if Christ does once begin to plead for me, and shall become mine
Advocate: He will always be troubled with me, unless I should of my self
forsake him, for I am ever in Broils, and Suits of Law, Action after Action is
laid upon me, and I am sometimes ten times in a Day summoned to answer my
Doings before God.

Answ. Christ is not an Advocate to plead a Cause or two, nor to deliver the
Godly from an Accusation or two: He delivers Israel out of all his Troubles,
2 Samuel 22.28. and chooses to be an Advocate for such. Therefore the Godly of
old, did use to make from the Greatness of their Troubles and the abundance of
their Troublers, an Argument to the Lord Christ to send, and lend them help.
Have Mercy upon me, said David, consider my Trouble which I suffer of them that
hate me, Psalm. 9.13. And again, Many are they that rise up against me, many
there be that say of my Soul, there is no help for him in God, Psalm. 3.1, 2.
Yea the Troubles of this Man were so many and great that his Enemies began to
triumph over him, saying, There is no help for him in God, ver. 7. But could he
not deliver him, or did the Lord fors^ke him? No no; thou have smitten, says
he, all mine Enemies upon the Cheek-bone, thou have broken the Teeth of the
ungodly. And as he delivers them from their Troublers, so also he pleads
all their Causes: O Lord, says the Church, thou have pleaded the Causes of my
Soul, thou have redeemed my Life, Lam. 3.58. Mark, troubled Christian, thou
say thou have been arrested often times in a Day, and as often summoned to
appear at God's Bar, there to answer to what shall be laid to thy Charge: And
here for thy Encouragement thou read that the Church has an Advocate that
pleads the Causes of her Soul, that is, all her Causes, to deliver her. He
knows that so long as we are in this World, we are subject to Temptation and
Weakness, and through them made guilty* of many bad things: Wherefore he has
prepared himself to our Service, and to abide with the Father an Advocate for
us. As Solomon says of a Man of great Wrath, Prove. 19.19. so it may be said of
a Man of great Weaknesses (and the best of Saints are such) he must he
delivered again, and again. Yea many a time says David did he deliver them,
Psalm. 106.44, 45. to wit, more than once and twice; and he will do so for thee,
if thou entertain him to be thine Advocate. Thou talkest of leaving of him, but
then whither will thou go? all else are vain things, things that cannot profit,
1 Samuel 12.20, 21, 22, 23. and he will not forsake his People tho their Land be
filled with Sin against the holy One of Israel, Jer. 51.5. I know the modest
Saint is apt to be abashed to think what a troublesome one he is, and what a
make-work he has been in God's House all his Days: And let him be filled with
holy blushing, but let him not forsake his Advocate.

Having thus spoken to these Objections, let us now come to make some use of
the whole, and,

Use 1. First, I would exhort the Children to consider the Dignity that God
has put upon Jesus Christ their Savior. For by how much God has called his
Son to Offices and Places of trust, by so much he has heaped Dignities upon
him. It Is said of Mordecai, That he was next to the King Ahasuerus. And what
then? Why then the Greatness of Mordecai and his high Advance must be written
in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Media and Persia, Esth. ^0.1, 2,
3. to the end his Fame might not be buried nor forgot, but remembered and talked
of in Generations to come. Why, my Brethren, God has exalted Jesus of
Nazareth: Has made him the only great one, having given him a Name above every
Name. A Name did I say, a Name and Glory, beyond all Names, and above all
Names, as does witness both his being set above all, and the many Offices which
he executes for God on behalf of his People: It Is counted no little Addition
to Honor, when Men are, not only made near to the King, but also entrusted
with most, if not almost with all the most weighty Affairs of the Kingdom. Why
this is the Dignity of Christ, he is, it is true, the natural Son of God, and so
high and one that abounds with Honor; but this is not all, God has conferred
upon him as Man, all the high and most mighty Honors of Heaven. He has made
him Lord Mediator betwixt him and the World. This in general. And particularly,
he has called him to be his high Priest forever, Heb. 7.21, 22, 23, 24. and
has sworn he shall not be changed for another, he has accepted of his
Offering once forever, counting that there is wholly enough in what he did
once, to perfect forever them that are sanctified, to wit set apart to Glory,
Heb. 10.11, 12, 13.

He is Captain General of all the Forces that God has in Heaven and Earth, the
King and Commander of his People, Chap. 9.25, 26.

He is Lord of all, and made Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. and
is our Advocate with the Father. O the Exaltation of Jesus Christ! Let
Christians therefore in the first Place consider this. Nor can it but be
profitable to them if withal they consider that all this Trust, and Honor is
put, and conferred upon him in Relation to the Advantage and Advancement of
Christians. If Christians do but consider the nearness that is 'twixt Christ
and them, and withal consider how he is exalted, it must needs be matter of
Comfort to them. He is my Flesh and my Bone that is exalted, it is my Friend
and Brother that is thus set up and preferred. 'Twas something to the Jews when
Mordecai was exalted to Honor, they had thereby Ground to rejoice and be glad,
for that one of themselves was made the Lord Chief by the King, and the great
Governor of the Land, for the good of his Kindred. True, when a Man thinks of
Christ, as severed from him, he sees but little to his Comfort in Christ's
Exaltation, but when he looks upon Christ and can say my Savior, my Priest, or
the chief Bishop of my Soul, then he will see much in his being thus promoted
to Honor. Consider then of the Glories to which God has exalted our Savior in
that he has made him so high. It Is comely also when thou speak of him, that
thou name his Name with some additional Title, thereby to call thy Mind to the
Remembrance, and so to the greater Reverence of the Person of thy Jesus. As,
our Lord Jesus; our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; the Apostle and High Priest
of our Profession Christ Jesus, 2 Pet. 2.20. Heb. 3.1, etc. Men write
themselves by their Titles; As John, Earl of such a Place; Anthony, Earl of
such a Place; and Thomas Lord, etc. It Is common also to call Men in great
Places by their Titles rather than by their Names, yea it also pleases such
great ones well: As my Lord High Chancellor of England, my Lord Privy Seal, my
Lord high Admiral, etc. And thus should Christians make mention of Jesus Christ
our Lord, adding to his Name some of his Titles of Honor, specially since all
Places of Trust and Titles of Honor conferred on him are of special Favor to
us. I did use to be much taken with one Sect of Christians, for that it was
usually their way, when they made mention of the Name of Jesus, to call him,
The blessed King of Glory. Christians should do thus; 'twould do them good. For
why does the Holy Ghost, think you, give him all these Titles, but that we
should call him by them, and so make mention of him one to another. For the
very calling of him by this or that Title, or Name belonging to this or that
Office of his, gives us Occasion, not only to think of him as exercising that
Office, but to enquire by the Word, by Meditation, and one of another, what
there is in that Office, and what by his exercising of that, the Lord Jesus
profits his Church.

How will Men stand for that Honor that by Superiors is given to them,
expecting, and using all things, to wit, Actions, and Carriages so, as that
thereby their Grandeur may be maintained. And, says Christ, ye call me Master
and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am, Joh. 13.13. Christ Jesus our Lord would
have us exercise our selves in the Knowledge of his glorious Offices and
Relative Titles; because of the Advantage that we get by the Knowledge of them,
and the Reverence of, and Love to him that they beget in our Hearts. The
Disciple, says the Text, whom Jesus loved, said unto Peter, It is the Lord.
And when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord: He girt his Fishers Coat unto
him (for he was naked) and did cast himself into the Sea: And the other
Disciples came in a little Ship, to wit, to Shore to wait upon their Lord,
Chap. 21. The very naming of him under the Title of Lord, bowed their Hearts
forthwith to come with Joint-readiness to wait upon him. Let this also learn us
to distinguish Christ's Offices and Titles, not to confound them: For he
exercises those Offices and bears those Titles for great Reason, and to our
Commodity.

Every Circumstance relating both to Christ's Humiliation and Exaltation ought
to be duly weighed by us, because of that Mystery of God, and of Man's
Redemption that is wrapped up therein. For as there was not a pin, nor a loop,
nor a tack in the Tabernacle, but had in it an use of Instruction to the
Children of Israel; so there is not any part, whether more near or more remote
to Christ's Suffering and Exaltation, but is, could we get into it, full of
spiritual Advantage to us.

To instance, the Matter that came out of Christ's Side; a thing little taken
Notice of, either by Preachers, or Hearers, and yet John makes it one of the
Witnesses of the Truth of our Redemption, and a Confirmation of the Certainty
of that Record that God to the World has given of the Sufficiency that is in
his Son to save, Joh. 19.34. 1 John 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Gal. 3.17. Romans 4.9, 10,
11, 12.

When I have considered that the very timing of Scripture Expressions, and the
Season of administering of Ordinances, has been argumentative to the promoting
of the Faith, and way of Justification by Christ; it has made me think that
both my self and the most of the People of God, look over the Scriptures too
slightly, and take too little Notice of that or of those many Honors that God
for our good has conferred upon Christ. Shall he be called a King, a Priest, a
Prophet, a Sacrifice, an Altar, a Captain, a Head, a Husband, a Father, a
Fountain, a Door, a Rock, a Lion, a Savior, etc. and shall we not consider
these things? And shall God to all these, add moreover, that he is an Advocate,
and shall we take no Notice thereof, or jumble things so together that we lose
some of his Titles and Offices, or so be concerned with one, as not to think we
have need of the Benefit of the rest? Let Us be ashamed thus to do or think, and
let us give to him that is thus exalted the Glory due unto his Name.

Use 2. Secondly, As we should consider the Titles and Offices of Christ in
general: So we should consider this of his being an Advocate, in particular:
for this is one of the Reasons which induced the Apostle to present him here
under that very Notion to us, namely that we should have Faith about it, and
consider of it to our Comfort. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. An Advocate. An Advocate as I said is one
that has Power to plead for another, in this, or that, or any Court of
Judicature. Be much therefore in the Meditation of Christ as executing of this
his Office for thee: For many Advantages will come to thee thereby; As,

1. This will give thee to see, that thou art not forsaken when thou have
sinned; and this has not in it a little Relief only, but yields Consolation
in time of need.

There is nothing that we are more prone unto than to think we are forsaken
when we have sinned, when for this very thing, to wit, to keep us from thinking
so, is the Lord Jesus become our Advocate. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate.
Christian, thou that have sinned, and that with the Guilt of thy Sin art driven
to the brink of Hell, ^ bring thee news from God, thou shall not die but live,
for thou have an Advocate with the Father. Let this therefore be considered by
thee because it yields this Fruit.

2. The Study of this Truth will give thee ground to take Courage to contend
with the Devil concerning the largeness of Grace, by Faith; since thy Advocate
is contending for thee against him at the Bar of God. It Is a great
Encouragement to a Man to hold up his Head in the Country, when he knows he has
a special Friend at the Court. Why our Advocate is a Friend at Court, a Friend
there ready to give the onset to Satan come he when he will. We have an
Advocate with the Father. An Advocate, or one to plead against Satan for us.

3. This Consideration will yield Relif when by Satan's ^buse of some other of
the Offices of Christ, thy Faith is discouraged and made afraid. Christ as a
Prophet pronounces many a dreadful Sentence against Sin, and Christ as a King
is of Power to execute them: And Satan as an Enemy has Subtilty enough to abuse
both these to the almost utter Overthrow of the Faith of the Children of God.
But what will he do with him as he is an Advocate: Will he urge that he will
plead against us? He cannot, he has no such Office. Will he plead against thee
with his great Power? No, but he would put Strength into thee, Job 23.3, 4, 5,
6. Wherefore Satan does all he may to keep thee ignorant of this Office, for he
knows, that as Advocate when he is so apprehended, the Saints are greatly
relieved by him, even by a believing thought of that Office.

4. This Consideration, or the Consideration of Christ as exercising of this
Office, will help thee to put by that vizor wherewith Christ by Satan is
misrepresented to thee to the weakening and affrighting of thee. There is
nothing more common among Saints, than thus to be wronged by Satan: For as he
will l^bour to fetch Fire out of the Offices of Christ to burn us, so to
present him to us with so dreadful and so ireful a Countenance, that a Man in
Temptation and under Guilt, shall hardly be able to lift up his Face to God.

But now, to think really that he is my Advocate this heals all. Put a Vizor
upon the Face of a Father, and it may perhaps for a while fright the Child, but
let the Father speak, let him speak in his own Fatherly Dialect to the Child,
and the Vizor is gone, if not from the Father's Face, yet from the Child's
Mind: Yea the Child, notwithstanding that Vizor, will adventure to creep into
it is Fathers Bosom. Why thus it is with the Saints when Satan deludes, and
abuses them by disfiguring of the Countenance of Christ to their view: Let them
but hear their Lord speak in his own natural Dialect, (and then he does so
indeed when we hear him speak as an Advocate) and their Minds are calmed, their
Thoughts settled, their Guilt made to vanish, and their Faith to revive.

Indeed the Advocateship of Jesus Christ is not much mentioned in the Word: And
because it is no oftener made mention of, therefore, perhaps it is that some
Christians do so lightly pass it over when on the contrary the rarity of the
thing should make it the more admirable. And perhaps it is therefore so little
made mention of in the Bible, because it should not by the common sort be
abused: But is as it were privately dropped in a corner to be found by them that
are for finding Relief for their Soul by a dilligent search of the Scriptures.
For Christ in this Office of Advocateship is only designed for the Child of
God. The World has nothing therewith to do. Methinks that which alone is
proper to Saints, and that which by God is peculiarly designed for them, they
should be mightily taken withal. The peculiar Treasure of Kings; the peculiar
Privilege of Saints! Oh! This should be affecting to us. Why Christ as an
Advocate is such. Remember me, O Lord, said the Psalmist, with the Favor that
thou bear to thy People: O visit me with thy Salvation: That I may see the
good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, that I
may glory with thine Inheritance, Psalm. 106.4, 5. The Psalmist you see here is
crying out for a share in, and the Knowledge of the peculiar Treasure of
Saints: And this of Christ as Advocate is such, wherefore study it, and prize
it so much the more. This Advocate is ours.

1. Study it with reference to its Peculiarity. It is for the Children and no
body else. For the Children little and great. This is Childrens Bread, this is
a mess for Benjamin: This is to be eaten in the holy Place. Children use to
make much of that which by way of speciality is by their Relations bestowed on
them. And Naboth said to Ahab, the Lord forbid it me, that I should give the
Inheritance of my Father to thee, 1 Kin. 21 3. no truly will I not. Why so?
because it was my Father's Gift, not in common to all, but to me in special.

Secondly, Study this Office in the Nature of it. For therein lies the
Excellency of any thing, even in the Nature of it. Wrong thoughts of this or
that, abuses it, and takes its natural Glory from it, take heed therefore of
misapprehending, while thou art seeking to apprehend Christ as thy Advocate.
Men judge of Christ's Offices, while they are at too great a distance from
them, but Let them come near says God, then let them speak, Isa. 41.1. or as
Elibu said to his Friends (when he had seen them judge amiss,) Let us choose to
us Judgment, let us know among our selves what is good, Job 34.4. So say I,
study to know, rightly to know the Advocate-Office of Jesus Christ. It is one
of the easiest things in the World to miss of the Nature, while we speak of the
Name and Offices of Jesus Christ. Wherefore look to it that thou study the
Nature of the Office of his Advocateship: Of his Advocateship for, for so you
ought to consider it, there is an Advocate for, not against the Children of
God, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Thirdly, Study this Office with reference to its efficacy, and prevalency; Job
says, After my Words they spoke not again. Job 29.22. And when Christ stands up
to plead, all must keep silence before him. True, Satan had the first Word, but
Christ the last in the Business of Joshua, and such a last, as brought the poor
Man off well, tho clothed with filthy Garments, Zech. 3. Satan must be
speechless after a Plea of our Advocate how rampant soever he is before; or as
Elibu has it, He was amazed, he answered no more, he left off speaking. Shall
he that speaks in Righteousness give place, and he who has nothing but Envy and
Deceit be admitted to stand his Ground? Behold the Angels cover their Faces
when they speak of his Glory: How then shall not Satan bend before him? In the
Days of his Humiliation he made him cringe and creep, how much more then now he
is exalted to Glory, to glory to be an Advocate, an Advocate for his People? If
any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

Fourthly, Study The Faithfulness of Christ in his Execution of this Office:
For he will not fail nor forsake them that have entertained him for their
Advocate. He will thoroughly plead their Cause, Jer. 50.34. Faithful and true, is
one of his Titles, and you shall faithfully be served by him. You may boldly
commit your Cause unto him, nor shall the badness of it, make him fail or
discourage him in his work, for it is not the badness of a Cause that can
hinder him from prevailing, because he has wherewith to answer for all thy
Sins, and a new Law to plead by, through which he will make thee a Conqueror.
He is also for sticking to a Man to the End if he once engages for him, Joh.
13.1, 2. He will threaten, and love; he will chastise, and love; he will kill,
and love; and thou shall find it so And he will make this appear at the last,
and Satan knows it is so now, for he finds the Power of his Repulses while he
pleads for us at the Bar against him. And all this is in very Faithfulness.

Fifthly, Study also the need that thou have of a Share in the Execution of the
Advocateship of Jesus Christ. Christians find that they have need of washing in
the Blood of Christ, and that they have need of being clothed with the
Righteousness of Christ: They also find that they have need that Christ should
make Intercession for them and that by him (of Necessity) they must approach
God, and present their Prayers and Services to him: But they do not so well see
that they need that Christ should also be their Advocate. And the Reason
thereof is this: They forget that their Adversary makes it his Business to
accuse them before the Throne of God; they consider not the long Scrowls, and
many Crimes wherewith he charge them in the Presence of the Angels of God: I
say this is the Cause that the Advocateship of Christ is so little considered
in the Churches. Yea many that have been relieved by that Office of his, have
not understood what thereby he has done for them.

But perhaps this is to be kept from many till they come to behold his Face,
and until all things shall be revealed, that Christ might have Glory given him
in the next World for doing of that for them, which they so little thought of
in this. But do not thou be content with this Ignorance, because the Knowledge
of his advocating of it for thee, will yield thee present Relief. Study
therefore thine own Weakness, the Holiness of the Judge, the badness of thy
Cause, the Subtilty, Malice, and Rage of thine Enemy, and be assured that
whenever thou sinnest, by and by thou art for it accused before God at his
Judgment Seat. These things will as it were by way of Necessity instill into thy
Heart the need that thou have of an Advocate, and will make thee look, as to
the Blood and Righteousness of Jesus Christ to justify thee, so to Christ as
an Advocate to plead thy Cause, as did holy Job in his Distresses, Job 16.21.

Use 3. Thirdly, Is Christ Jesus not only a Priest of, and a King over, but an
Advocate for his People? Let this make us stand and wonder, and be amazed at
his Humiliation and Condescension. We read of his Humiliation on Earth when he
put himself into our Flesh, took upon him our Sins: And made them as his own
unto Condemnation and Death. And to be an Advocate, is an Office reproachful to
the malicious, if any Man be such an one for those that are base and unworthy.
Yea, and the higher and more honorable the Person is that pleads for such, the
more he humbles himself. The Word does often, in effect, account him, now in
Heaven as a Servant for us, and Acts of Service are Acts of Condescension. And
I am sure some Acts of Service have more of that in them than some. And I
think, when all things are considered, that Christ neither does, nor can do any
thing for us there, of a more condescending Nature than to become our Advocate.
True, he glories in it but that does not show that the work is excellent in it
self. It is also one of his Titles of Honor. But that is to ^^ew how highly
God esteems of, and dignifies all his Acts, and tho this shall tend at last to
the greatning of his Honor and Glory in his Kingdom, yet the Work it self is
amazingly mean.

I speak after the manner of Men: It is accounted so in this World: How ignoble
and unrespectful does a Man make himself, specially to his Enemy, when he
undertaketh to plead a bad Cause, if it also happens to be the Cause of the
base and unworthy. And I am sure we are every one so in our selves, for whom he
is become an Advocate with the Father. True, we are made worthy in him, but
that is no thanks to us; as to our selves, and our Cause, both are yet bad
enough. And let us now leave off disputing, and stand amazed at his
Condescension. He humbles himself to behold things that are in Heaven, Psalm.
113.4, 5, 6. and Men of old did use to wonder to think that God should so much
stoop, as to open his Eyes to look upon Man, or once so much as to mind him,
Job 14.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 144.3, 4. Job 7.17. Psalm. 8.4. And if these be Acts that
bespeak a Condescension, what will you count of Christ's standing up as an
Advocate to plead the Cause of his People? Must not that be much more so
accounted. Oh the Condescension of Christ in Heaven! While Cavillers quarrel at
such kind of Language, let the Saints stay themselves and wonder at it, and be
so much the more affected with his Grace. The Persons are base, the Crimes are
base with which the Persons are charged, wherefore one would think, that has
but the Reason to think, that it is a great Condescension of Christ now in
Heaven to take upon him to be an Advocate for such a People: Specially if you
consider the openness of this Work of Christ, for this thing is not done in a
Corner.

This is done in open Court.

First, with an holy and just God: for he is the Judge of all, and his Eyes are
purer than to behold Iniquity, yea his very Essence, and Presence is a
consuming Fire, yet before, and with this God, and that f^^ such a People,
Jesus Christ the King will be an Advocate. For one mean Man to be an Advocate
for the base, with one that is not considerable, is not so much: But for Christ
to be an Advocate for the base, and for the base too under the basest
Consideration, this is to be wondered at. When Bathsheba the Queen, became an
Advocate for Adonijah unto King Solomon, you see how he flounced at her, for
that his Cause was bad, And why, says he, do thou ask, Abishai, for
Adonijah: Ask for him the Kingdom also, 1 Kin. 2.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23. I told you before, that to be an Advocate, did run one upon Hazards of
Reproach, and it may easily be thought that the Queen did blush when from the
King her Son she received such a Repulse: Nor do we hear any more of her being
an Advocate; I believe she had enough of this. But oh! this Christ of God, who
himself is greater than Solomon, he is become an Advocate; an Advocate with the
Father, who is the eternally just, and holy, and righteous God: And that for a
People with Respect to him far worse than could be Adonijah in the Eyes of his
Brother Solomon. Majestly, and Justice are dreadful in themselves, and much
more so when approached by any, specially when the Cause, as to matter of Fact,
is bad that the Man is guilty of, who is concerned in the Advocateship of his
Friend. And yet Jesus Christ is still an Advocate for us, an Advocate with the
Father.

Secondly, Consider also before whom Jesus Christ does plead as an Advocate,
and that is before or in the Presence and Observation of all the heavenly Host.
For while Christ pleads with God for his People all the Host of Heaven stands
by, on the right Hand and on the Left, Mat. 10.32. And tho as yet there may
seem to be but little in this Consideration, yet Christ, would have us know,
and account it an Infinite Kindness of his to us, that he will confess, and not
be ashamed of us before the Angels of his Father, Mark 8.38. Angels are holy
and glorious Creatures; and in some Respect may have a greater Knowledge of the
Nature and baseness of Sin than we, while here, are capable of, and so may be
made to stand and wonder while the Advocate pleads with God for a People from
Head to Foot clothed therewith. But Christ will not be ashamed to stand up for
us before them, though they know how bad we are, and what vile things we have
done. Let this therefore make us wonder.

Thirdly, Add to these how unconcerned, oft-times those are with themselves and
their own desolate Condition, for whom Christ as an Advocate labors in
Heaven with God. Alas the Soul is as far off of knowing what the Devil is doing
against it at God's Bar, as David was when Saul was threatening to have his
Blood, while he was hid in the Field, 1 Samuel 20.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. But
O true Jonathan! How did thou plead for David? Only here thou had the
Advantage of our Advocate, thou had a good Cause to plead, for when Saul thy
Father said David shall surely die: Thy Reply was, wherefore shall he be slain?
What evil has he done? But Christ cannot say thus, when he pleads for us at
God's Bar, nor is our present Senselessness and unconcernedness about his
pleading, but an Aggravation to our Sin. Perhaps David was praying while
Jonathan was playing the Advocate for him before the King his Father: But
perhaps the Saint is sleeping, yea, sinning more, while Christ is pleading for
him in Heaven! Oh! This should greatly affect us, this should make us wonder;
this should be so considered by us as to heighten our Souls to Admiration of
the Grace and Kindness of Christ.

Fourthly, join to these, the Greatness, and Gravity; the highness and glorious
Majesty of the Man that is become our Advocate, says the Text, it is Jesus
Christ, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ.

Now that he should become an Advocate, that he should embrace such an Employ
as this of his Advocateship, let this be a wonderment and so be accounted. But
let us come to the fourth Use.

Use 4. Fourthly, Is it so, is Jesus Christ the Savior also become our
Advocate? Then let us labor to make that Improvement of this Doctrine as
tends to strengthen our Graces, and us in the management of them. Indeed this
should be the Use that we should make of all the Offices of Christ, but let us
at this time concern our selves about this. Let, I say, the poor Christian thus
expostulate with himself.

1. Is Christ Jesus the Lord mine Advocate with the Father? Then awake, my
Faith, and shake thy self like a Giant: Stir up thy self and be not faint:
Christ is the Advocate of his People, and pleads the Cause of the poor and
needy. And as for Sin which is one great stumble to thine actings, O my Faith,
Christ has not only died for that as a Sacrifice, nor only carried his
Sacrifice unto the Father into the holiest of all; but is there to manage that
Offering as an Advocate, pleading the efficacy and Worth thereof, before God
against the Devil for us.

Thus, I say, we should strengthen our Faith, for Faith has to do, not only
with the Word, but also with the Offices of Christ. Besides, considering how
many the Assaults are that are made upon our Faith, we find all little enough
to support it against all the Wiles of the Devil.

Christians too little concern themselves, as I have said with the Offices of
Jesus Christ, and therefore their Knowledge of him is so little, and their
Faith in him so weak. We are bid to have our Conversation in Heaven, and then a
Man so has, when he is there in his Spirit by Faith observing how the Lord
Jesus does exercise his Offices there for him. Let us often by Faith go to the
Bar of God, there to hear our Advocate plead our Cause, we should often have
our Faith to God's Judgment Seat, because we are concerned there. There we are
accused of the Devil, there we have our Crimes laid open, and there we have our
Advocate to plead. And this is suggested in the Text, for it says, we have an
Advocate with the Father. Therefore thither our Faith should go for help and
relief in the Day of our straits. I say we should have our Faith to God's
Judgment Seat and show it there by the Glass of our Text what Satan is doing
against, and the Lord Jesus for our Souls: we should also show it how the Lord
Jesus carries away every Cause from the Devil, and from before the
Judgment Seat, to the Comfort of the Children, the Joy of Angels, and the Shame
of the Enemy. This would strengthen, and support our Faith indeed: And would
make us more able than for the most part we are to apply the Grace of God to
our selves. And hereafter to give more strong Repulses to Satan. It Is easy
with a Man, when he knows that his Advocate has overthrown his Enemy, at the
King's Bench Bar, or Court of common Pleas, less to fear him the next time he
sees him, and more boldly to answer him when he renews his Threats upon him.
Let Faith then be strengthened from its being exercised about the Advocateship
of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, As we should make use of Christ's Advocateship for the strengthening
of our Faith, so we also should make use thereof to the encouraging of us to
Prayer. As our Faith is, so is our Prayer, to wit, cold, weak and doubtful if
our Faith be so. When Faith cannot apprehend that we have access to the Father
by Christ, or that we have an Advocate when charged before God for our Sins by
the Devil, then we flag and faint in our Prayer: But when we begin to take
Courage to believe, and then we do so when most clearly we apprehend Christ,
then we get up in Prayer: And according as a Man apprehends Christ in his
Undertakings, and Offices, so he will wrestle with and supplicate God. As
suppose a Man believes that Christ died for his Sins, why then he will plead
that in Prayer with God. Suppose also that a Man understands that Christ rose
again for his Justification, why then he will also plead that in Prayer: But if
he knows no further, no further will he go: But when he shall know that there
is for him also an Advocate with the Father, and that that Advocate is Jesus
Christ: And when the Glory of this Office of Christ shall shine in the Face of
this Man's Soul; Oh then he takes Courage to pray with that Courage he had not
before, yea then is his Faith so supported and made strong that his Prayer is
more fervent and importuning abundance.

So that I say the Knowledge of the Advocateship of Christ is very useful to
strengthen our Graces, and as of Graces in general so of Faith and Prayer in
particular. Wherefore our Wisdom is so to improve this Doctrine that Prayer may
be strengthened thereby.

Thirdly, As we should make use of this Doctrine to strenghthen Faith and
Prayer: So we should m^ke use of it to keep us humble. For the more Offices
Christ executes for us with the Father, the greater Sign that we are bad: And
the more we see our badness the more humble should we be. Christ gave for us
the Price of Blood, but that is not all. Christ as a Captain has conquered
Death and the Grave for us, but that is not all. Christ as a Priest intercedes
for us in Heaven, but that is not all: Sin is still in us, and with us, and
mixes it self with whatever we do; whether what we do be religious or civil:
For not only our Prayers and our Sermons, our Hearings, and Preaching and so;
but our Houses, our Shops, our Trades and our Beds are all polluted with Sin.
Nor does the Devil, our Night and Day Adversary, forbear to tell our bad Deeds
to our Father, urging that we might forever be disinherited for this. But what
should we now do if we had not an Advocate? Yea, if we had not one who would
plead in Forma Pauperis; yea if we had not one that could prevail, and that
would faithfully execute that Office for us? Why we must die. But since we are
rescued by him, let us, as to our selves, lay our Hand upon our Mouth, and be
silent, or say, not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name give Glory. And
I say again, since the Lord Jesus is fain to run through so many Offices for us
before he can bring us to Glory, O! How low, how little, how vile and base in
our own Eyes should we be?

It Is a Shame for a Christian to think highly of himself, since Christ is fain
to do so much for him, and he again not at all able to make him Amends; but
some whose Riches consist in nothing but Scabs and Lice will yet have lofty
looks.

But are not they much to blame who sit lifting up of lofty Eyes in the House,
and yet know not how to turn their Hand to do any things so, but that another,
their betters, must come and mend their Work. I say is it not more meet that
those that are such, should look, and speak, and act as such that declare their
Sense of their Vnhandiness, and their Shame, and the like for their
Unprofitableness? Yea is it not meet that to every one they should confess what
sorry ones they are? I am sure it should be thus with Christians, and God is
angry when it is otherwise. Nor does it become these helpless ones to lift up
themselves on high. Let Christ's Advocateship therefore teach us to be humble.

Fourthly, as we should improve this Doctrine to strengthen Faith, to encourage
Prayer, and to keep us humble: So we should make Use of it to encourage to
Perseverance; that is, to hold on, to hold out to the end. For, for all those
Causes the Apostle sets Christ before us as an Advocate: There is nothing
does more discourage the truly Godly than the Sense of their own Infirmities
(as has been hinted at all along); consequently, nothing can more encourage
them to go on, than to think that Christ is an Advocate for them. The Services
also that Christ has for us to do in this World, are full of Difficulty, and so
apt to discourage: But, when a Christian shall come to understand that (if we
do what we can) it is not a failing either in Matter or Manner that shall render
it wholly unserviceable, or give the Devil that Advantage as, to plead thereby
to prevail for our Condemnation and Rejection; but that Christ by being our
Advocate saves us from our falling short, and also from the Rage of Hell: This
will encourage us to hold on though we do but hobble in all our goings, and
fumble in all our doings. For we have Christ for an Advocate in case we sin in
the Management of any Duty. If any Man sin we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous.

Let us therefore go on in all God's Ways, as well as we can for our Hearts,
and when our Foot slips let us tell God of it, and his Mercy in Christ shall
hold us up, Psalm. 84.18.

Darkness, and to be shut up in Prison is also a great Discouragement to us;
But our Advocate is for giving us Light and for fetching us out of our Prison.
True, he that Joseph chose to be his Advocate to Pharaoh remembered not Joseph
but forgot him, Genesis 40.14, 23. but he that has Jesus Christ to be his Advocate
shall be remembered before God. He remembered us in our low Estate, for his
Mercy endures forever, Mich. 7.8, 9, 10. Psalm. 136.23. Yea, he will say to the
Prisoners show your selves, and to them that are in the Prison House go forth.

Satan sometimes gets the Saints into the Prison, when he has taken them
Captive by their Lusts, Romans 7.23. but they shall not be always there; and this
should encourage us to go on in godly Ways: For we must through many
Tribulations enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Obj. But I cannot pray, says one, therefore how should I persevere? When I go
to Prayer, instead of praying my Mouth is stopped: What would you have me do?

Well, Soul, tho Satan may baffle thee, he cannot so serve thine Advocate. If
thou must not speak for thy self, Christ thine Advocate can speak for thee.
Lemuel was to open his Mouth for the Dumb, to wit, for the Sons of Destruction,
and to plead the Cause of the poor and needy, Prove. 31.8, 9. If we knew the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ so as the Word reveals it, we would believe, we
would hope, and would, notwithstanding all Discouragements, wait for the
Salvation of the Lord. But there are many things that hinder; wherefore Faith,
and Prayer, and Perseverance are made difficult things unto us. But if any Man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And, God
shall sight for you and you shall hold your Peace, was once a good Word to me,
when I could not pray.

Fifthly, As we should improve this Doctrine for the Improvement and
Encouragement of these Graces: So we should improve it to the Driving of
Difficulties down before us, to the getting of Ground upon the Enemy. Resist
the Devil, drive him back; this is it for which thy Lord Jesus is an Advocate
with God in Heaven, and this is it for the Sake of which thou art made a
Believer, on Earth, 1 Pet. 5.9. Heb. 13.4. wherefore has God put this Sword [
we have an Advocate] into thy Hand, but to fight thy way through the World.
Fight the good Fight of Faith, lay hold on eternal Life: And say I will go in
the Strength of the Lord God: And since I have an Advocate with the Father
Jesus Christ the righteous, I will not despair tho the Iniquity of mine Heels
should compass me about, Psalm. 49.5.

Use 5. Fifthly, Does Jesus Christ stand up to plead for us with God, to plead
with him for us against the Devil. Let this teach us to stand up to plead for
him before Men, to plead for him against the Enemies of his Person and Gospel.
This is but reasonable: For if Christ stands up to plead for us, why should not
we stand up to plead for him? He also expects this at our Hands, saying, who
will rise up for me against the evil Doers? Who will stand up for me against
the Workers of Iniquity? The Apostle did it and counted himself engaged to do
it, where he says he preached the Gospel of God with much Contention, 2 These.
2.2. Nor is this the Duty of Apostles, or Preachers only, but every Child of
God should earnestly contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jud. 3.

And, as I said, there is Reason why we should do this. He stands for us: And
if we

1. Consider the Disparity of Persons, to plead, it will seem far more
reasonable. He stands up to plead with God, we stand up to plead with Men. The
Dread of God is great, yea greater than the Dread of Men.

2. If we consider the Persons pleaded for: He pleads for Sinners, for the
inconsiderable, vile, and base: We plead for Jesus, for the Great, Holy, and
Honorable. It Is an Honor for the Poor to stand up for the Great and Mighty:
But what Honor is it for the Great to plead for the base? Reason therefore
requires that we stand up to plead for him, tho there can be but little
rendered why he should stand up to plead for us.

3. He stands up to plead for us in the most Holy Place, tho we are vile: And
why should we not stand up for him in this vile World, since he is holy?

4. He pleads for us though our Cause is bad, why should not we plead for him
since his Cause is good?

5. He pleads for us against fallen Angels, why should we not plead for him
against sinful Vanities?

6. He pleads for us to save our Souls, why should not we plead for him, to
sanctify his Name?

7. He pleads for us before the Holy Angels, why should not we plead for him
before Princes?

8. He is not ashamed of us, tho now in Heaven, why should we be ashamed of him
before this Adulterous and sinful Generation?

9. He is unwearied in his pleading for us, why should we faint and be dismayed
while we plead for him?

My Brethren, is it not reasonable that we should stand up for him in this
World? Yea, is it not Reason that in all things we should study his Exaltation
here since he in all things contrives our Honor, and Glory in Heaven? A Child
of God should study in every of his Relations to serve the Lord Christ in this
World, because Christ by the Execution of every one of his Offices seeks our
Promotion hereafter.

If these be not sufficient Arguments to bow us to yield up our Members, our
selves, our whole selves to God, that we may be Servants of Righteousness unto
him: Yea if by these and such like we are not made willing to stand up for him
before Men; it is a Sign that there is but little, if any of the Grace of God in
our Hearts.

Yea, further that we should have now, at last, in Reserve, Christ as
authorized to be our Advocate to plead for us, for this is the l^st of his
Offices for us while we are here: And is to be put in practice for us when
there are more than ordinary Occasions. This is to (...) we say, at a dead
lift. Even then (...) a Christian is taken for a Captive: Or when he sinks in
the mire where is no standing; or when he is clothed in filthy Garments; or
when the Devil does desperately plead against us our evil Deeds; or when by our
Lives we have made our Salvation questionable, and have forfeited our Evidences
for Heaven: And why then should not we have also in reserve for Christ? And
when Profession, and Confession, will not do: When Loss of Goods and a Prison
will not do: When Loss of Country and of Friends will not do: Then to bring it
in; then to bring it in as the Reserve, and as that which will do: To wit,
willingly to lay down our Lives for his Name, Isa. 24.15. Joh. 21.19. and since
he does his part without grudging for us, let us do ours with rejoicing for him.

Use 6. Sixthly, Does Jesus Christ stand up to plead for us and that of his
mere Grace and Love? Then this should teach Christians to be watchful and wary
how they sin against God. This Inference seems to run Retrograde; but whosoever
duly considers it will find it fairly fetched from the Premises. Christianity
teaches Ingenuity, and aptness to be sensible of Kindnesses, and does instruct
us to a lothness to be over-hard upon him from whom we have all a free-cost,
Shall we sin that Grace (...) abound? God fo^bid. Shall we do evil (...) good
may come? God forbid. Shall we sin (...) cause we are not under the Law, but
under Grace? God forbid, Romans 6.1, 2, 15.

It is the most disingenious thing in the World not to care how chargeable we
are to that Friend that bestows all upon us gratis. When Mephibosheth had an
Opportunity to be yet more chargeable to David, he would not, because he had
his Life and his All from the mere Grace of the King, 2 Samuel 19.24, 25, 26, 27,
28. also David thought it too much for all his Household to go to Absalom's
Feast because 'twas made of free-cost. Why, Christ is our Advocate of
free-cost, we pay him neither Fee nor In-come for what he does, nor does he
desire ought of us, but to accept of his free doing for us thankfully.
Wherefore let us put him upon this Work as little as may be, and by so doing we
shall show our selves Christians of the right make and stamp. We count him but
a Fellow of a very gross Spirit, that will therefore be lavishing of what is
his Friends, because it is prepared of mere Kindness for him. Esau himself was
loath to do this, and shall Christians be disingenious?

I dare say, if Christians were sober, watchfu^ and of a more self-denying
Temper, they need not put the Lord Jesus to that to which for the want of these
things they do so often put him. I know he is not unwilling to serve us, but I
know also that the ^^ve of Christ should constrain us, to live (...) Selves but
to him that loved us, (...) us, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.14. we (...) do that
which is naught too much (...) then when we watch and take care what we can to
prevent it. Our Flesh, when we do our utmost Diligence to resist it, will
defile both us and our best Performances. We need not lay the reins on its
Neck, and say what care we, the more Sin the more Grace, and the more we shall
see the Kindness of Christ, and what Virtue there is in his Advocates Office to
save us. And should there be any such here I would present them with a
Scripture or two. The first is this, Do ye thus require the Lord, O foolish
People and unwise? Deuteronomy. 32.6. and if this gentle check will not do, then read
the other, Shall we say, let us do evil that good may come? their Damnation is
just, Romans 3.8. besides, as nothing so swayeth with us as Love, so there is
nothing so well pleasing to God as it. Let a Man love, tho he has Opportunity
to do nothing, it is accepted of the God of Heaven: But where there is no Love,
let a Man do what he will, it is not at all regarded, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. Now to
be careless, and negligent, and that from a supposed Understanding of the Grace
of Christ in the Exercise of his Advocateship for us, in Heaven, is as clear a
Sign as can be that in thy Heart there is no Lov^ (...) ^^rist, and that
consequently thou ar^ (...) nothing instead of being a Chri^^^^^ (...).

Talk then (...) thou will, and profess never so large^^, (...) ^ist is no
Advocate of thine, nor shall thou, thou so continuing, be ever the better for
any of those Pleas that Christ at Gods Bar, puts in against the Devil, for his
People.

Christians, Christ Jesus is not unwilling to lay out himself for you in
Heaven, nor to be an Advocate for you in the Presence of his Father: But yet he
is unwilling that you should render him evil for good; I say that you should do
so by your remissness and carelessness. For want of such a thinking of things,
as may affect you Hearts therewith. 'Twould be more comely in you, would please
him better, would better agree with your Profession, and also better would
prove you gracious, to be sound in the Power and Nature of these Conclusions.
How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein? Romans 6.2. Col. 3.1,
3, 5, 6, If ye be risen with Christ seek those things that are above where
Christ sits at the right Hand of God. For ye are dead and your Life is hid
with Christ in God. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the Earth;
Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, Evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness which is Idolatry, for which things sake the Wrath of God comes
upon the Children of Disobedience.

I say 'twould be more comely for Christians to say, we will not sin, because
God will pardon, we will not commit Iniquity, 'cause Christ will advocate for
us: I write unto you that you sin not, tho if any Man sins we have an Advocate
with God the Father. Why the brute will conclude, I will not do so 'cause my
Master will beat me: I will do thus, for then my Master will love me: And
Christians should be above Men, brutish Men.

And for a Conclusion as to this, let me present you with three Considerations.

1. Know, that it is the Nature of Grace, to draw holy Arguments to move to
goodness of Life, from the Love and Goodness of of God: But not thence to be
remiss, 1 Cor. 5.14.

2 Know therefore that they have no Grace that find not these Effects of the
Discoveries of the Love and Goodness of God.

3. Know also that among all the Swarms of Professors that from Age to Age make
mention of the Name of Christ, they only must dwell with him in Heaven that
depart from Iniquity and are zealous of good Works, 2 Timothy 2.19. He gave
himself for these, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14 not that they were so antecedent to
this Gift: But those that he has redeemed to himself, are thus sanctified by
the Faith of him, Acts 26.18.

Seventhly, Is it so? Is Jesus Christ an Advocate with the Father for us? Then
this should encourage strong Christians to tell the weak ones, where, when they
are in their Temptations and Fears through Sin, they may have one to plead
their Cause. Thus the Apostle does, by the Text; and thus we should do one to
another. Mark, he tells the weak of an Advocate. My little Children, I write
unto you, etc.

Christians, when they would comfort their dejected Brethren talk too much at
rovers, or in generals: They should be more at the Mark. A Word spoke in
season, how good is it? I say, Christians should observe and enquire that they
may observe, the Cause or ground of their Brothers Trouble; and having first
taken Notice of that, in the next place consider under which of the Offices of
Jesus Christ this Sin or Trouble has cast this Man; and so labor to apply
Christ in the Word of the Gospel to him. Sometimes we are bid to consider him
as an Apostle, and High Priest, and sometimes as a fore- runner and an
Advocate. And he has, as was said before, these diverse Offices with others that
we by the Consideration of him might be relieved under our manifold
Temptations. This, as I said, I perceive John teaches us here, as he does a
little before of his being a Sacrifice for us; for he presents them that
after Conversion shall sin, with Christ as an Advocate with the Father. As who
should say, my Brethren are you tempted, are you accused, have you sinned, has
Satan prevailed against you? We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous.

Thus we should do, and deliver our Brother from Death, there is nothing that
Satan more desires than to get good Men into his Sive to sift them as Wheat
that if possible he may leave them nothing but bran, no Grace, but the very
husk and shell of Religion: And when a Christian comes to know this, should
Christ as Priest, or Advocate be hid from him, what could bear him up? But let
him now remember and believe that we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and ^e forthwith conceives Comfort. For an Advocate is
to plead for me according as has been showed before, that I may be delivered
from the Wrath and Accusation of my Adversary, and still be kept safe under
Grace.

Further, by telling of my Brother that he has an Advocate: I put things into
his Mind that he has not known, or do bring them to Remembrance which he has
forgot: To wit, that tho he has sinned he shall be saved in a way of Justice.
For an Advocate is to plead Justice and Law, and Christ is to plead these for a
Saint that has sinned: Yea so to plead them that he may be saved: This being
so, he is made to perceive that by Law he must have his Sins forgiven him: That
by Justice he must be justified. For Christ as an Advocate pleads for
Justice, Justice to himself, and this Saint is of himself, a Member of his
Body, of his Flesh and of his Bones.

Nor has Satan so good a Right to plead Justice against us tho we have sinned,
that we might be damned, as Christ has to plead it tho we have sinned that we
might be saved. For Sin cannot cry so loud to Justice, as can the Blood of
Christ: And he pleads his Blood as Advocate by which he has answered the Law,
wherefore the Law having nothing to object, must needs acquit the Man for whom
the Lord Jesus pleads. I conclude this with that of the Psalmist. Surely his
Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that Glory may dwell in our Land. Mercy
and Truth are met together: Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other.
Truth shall spring out of the Earth, and Righteousness shall look down from
Heaven: Yea the Lord shall give that which is good, and our Land shall yield
her Increase. Righteousness shall go before him, and shall lead us the Way of
his Steps.

Use 8. Eighthly, But what is all this to you that are ^ot concerned in this
Privilege? The Children indeed have the Advantage of an Advocate, but what is
this to them that have none to plead their Cause? Jer. 30.12, 13. They are as
we say left to the wide World, or to be ground to Powder between the Justice of
God and the Sins which they have committed. This is the Man that none but the
Devil seeks after, that is pursued by the Law, and Sin, and Death, and has none
to plead his Cause. It Is sad to consider the plight that such an one is in. His
Accuser is appointed, yea ordered to bring in a Charge against him [ let Satan
stand at his right Hand] Ps. 109 6, 7. in the Place where Accusers stand, And
when he shall be judged let him be condemned, let there be none to plead for
his Deliverance. If he cries or offers to cry out for Mercy or Forgiveness [
let his Prayer become Sin:] This is the Portion of a wicked Man. Terrors take
hold on him as Waters, a Tempest steals him away in the Night, the East Wind
carries him away, and he departs, and as a Storm hurleth him out of his
Place. For God shall cast upon him and not spare: he would fain free out of his
Hand. Men shall clap their Hands at him and shall hiss him out of his Place,
Job 27.^0, 21, 22, 23. And what shall this Man do? Can he over-stand the
Charge, the Accusation, the Sentence, and Condemnation? No, he has none to
plead h^s Cause. I remember that somewhere I have read, as I think, concerning
one, who when he was carrying upon Men's Shoulders to the Grave, cried out as he
lay upon the Bier, I am accused before the just Judgment of God; and a while
after, I am condemned before the just Judgment of God. Nor was this Man but
strict as to the Religion that was then on Foot in the World, but all the
Religion of the World amounts to no more than nothing, I mean as to eternal
Salvation, if Men be denied an Advocate to plead their Cause with God. Nor can
any Advocate, save Jesus Christ the righteous, avail any thing at all: Because
there is none appointed, but him to that Work, and therefore not to be admitted
to enter a Plea for their Client at the Bar of God.

Obj. But some may say there is God's Grace, the Promise, Christ's Blood, and
his second Part of Priesthood now in Heaven: Can none of these ^everally, nor
all of them jointly save a Man from Hell, unless Christ also become our
Advocate?

Answer: All these, his Advocates Office not excluded, are few enough, and
little enough to save the Saints from Hell; For the righteous shall scarcely be
saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. There must then be the Promise, God's Grace, Christ's
Blood, and him to advocate too, or we cannot be saved. What Is the Promise,
without God's Grace, and what is that Grace without a Promise to bestow it on
us? I say what Benefit have we thereby? Besides, if the Promise, and God's
Grace without Christ's Blood would have saved us, wherefore then did Christ
die? Yea, and again I say, if all these without his being for us an Advocate,
would have delivered us from all those Disadvantages that our Sins and
Infirmities would bring us to, and into; surely in vain and to no purpose was
Jesus made an Advocate. But, Soul, there is need of all, and therefore be not
thou offended that the Lord Jesus is of the Father made so much to his, but
rather admire and wonder that the Father and the Son should be so concerned
with so sorry ^^ump of Dust and ashes as thou art. And I say again, be
confounded to think that Sin should be a thing so horrible, of Power to
pollute, to captivate and detain us from God, that without all this ado (I
would speak with Reverence of God and his Wisdom) we cannot be delivered from
the everlasting Destruction that it has brought upon the Children of Men.

But I say what is this to them that are not admitted to a Privilege in the
Advocates Office of Christ? Whether he is an Advocate or no the Case to them is
the same. True, Christ as a Savior is not divided: He that has him not in
all, shall have him in none at all of his Offices in a saving manner. Therefore
he for whom he is not an Advocate, he is nothing, as to eternal Life.

Indeed Christ by some of his Offices is concerned for the Elect, before by
some of them he is. But such shall have the Blessing of them all before they
come to Glory. Nor has a Man ground to say Christ is here or there mine,
before he has ground to say he also is mine Advocate. Tho that Office of his
as has been already showed stands in the last place and comes in as a Reserve.
But can any imagine that Christ will pray for them as Priest, for whom he will
not plead as Advocate? Or that he will speak for them, to God for whom he will
not plead against the Devil? No, no; they are his own that he loves to the
end, Joh. 13. to the end of their Lives, to the end of their Sins, to the end
of their Temptations, to the end of their Fears and of the Exercise of the Rage
and Malice of Satan against them. To the end may also be understood, even until
he had given them the Profit and Benefit of all his Offices in their due
Exercise and Administration: But I say, what is all this to them that have him
not for their Advocate?

You may remember that I have already told you that there are several who have
not the Lord Jesus for their Advocate. To wit, those that are still in their
Sins pursuing of their Lusts, those that are ashamed of him before Men, and
those that are never otherwise but lukewarm in their Profession: And let us now
for a Conclusion make further enquity into this matter.

Is it likely that those should have the Lord Jesus for their Advocate to plead
their Cause, who despise and reject his Person, his Word and Ways? Or those
either who are so far off from Sense of and Shame f^r Sin, that it is the only
thing they hug and embrace? True he pleads the Cause of his People, both with
the Father and against the Devil, and all the World besides; but open
Profaneness, Shame of good, and without Heart or Warmth in Religion are no
Characters of his People.

It is irrational to think that Christ is an Advocate for, or that he pleads
the Cause of such, who in the self same Hour and before his Enemies are
throwing dirt in his Face, by their profane Mouths and unsanctified Lives and
Conversations.

If he pleads as an Advocate for any, he must plead against Satan for them, and
so consequently must have some special bottom to ground his Plea upon: I say a
bottom better than that upon which the carnal Man stands. Which bottom is,
either some special Relation that this Man stands in to God, or some special
Law he has Privilege by: That he may have some ground for an Appeal if need
be, to the Justice and Righteousness of God: But none of these things belong to
them that are dead in Trespasses and Sins. They stand in no special Relation to
God; they are not privileged by the Law of Grace.

Obj. But does not Christ as Advocate plead for his Elect, tho not called as
yet?

Answ. He died for all his Elect, he prays for all his Elect as a Priest: But
as an Advocate he pleads only for the Children, the called only. Satan
objecteth not against God's Election, for he knows it not: But be objecteth
against the called, to wit, whether he be truly godly or no, Job 1.9, 10. Zech
3. or whether they ought not to die for their Transgressions. And for these
things he has some color to frame an Accusation against us: (And now it is time
enough for Christ to stand up to plead,) I say for these things he has some
Color to frame a Plea against us, for there is Sin and a Law of Works, and a
Judge too that has not respect of Persons. Now to overthrow this Plea of Satan
is Jesus Christ our Advocate: Yea to overthrow it by pleading Law and Justice,
and this must be done with respect to the Children only. My little Children, I
write unto you that ye sin not: And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 31 Line 22 for acknowledges read acknowledged, p. 65 l. 13 f. your r.
you, p 70. l. 2 r. his Office is, p, 77. l 19 f. world r. word, p. 87 l. 13 f.
deferrs r. defers, p. 102 l. 24 f groundess r. groundless, p. 108 l. 15 f. these
v. the, p. 118. l. 27 f. affliction r. affection. p. 127 l. 10 f. matter r.
water.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for and sold by Dorman Newman, at the Sign of the
Kings Arms in the Poultrey.
THere is likewise Published by this Author, An useful Book entitled, The Holy
War, made by Christ upon the Devil for the regaining of Man, or the losing and
taking again of the Town of Man-Soul.

The Pilgrims Progress from this World to that which is to come, delivered in
the Similitude of a Dream, wherein is discovered the manner of his setting out,
his dangerous Journey, and safe Arrival at the desired Country, the First part.
Price 1 s.

The Pilgrims Progress from this World to that which is to come, the Second
part, delivered in the Similtude of a Dream, wherein is set forth the manner of
the setting out of Christians Wife and Children, their dangerous Journey, and
safe Arrival at the desired Country. Price 1 s.

A Treatise of the Fear of God, showing what it is, and how distinguished from
that which is not so. Also whence it comes. Who has it. What are the effects.
And what the Privileges of those that have it in their Hearts. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Life and Death of Mr. Badman, presented in a familiar Dialogue between Mr.
Wiseman and Mr. Attentive. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Doctrine of the Law, and Grace unfolded, or a discourse touching the Law
and Grace, the Nature of the one, and the Nature of the other, showing what
they are, as they are the two Covenants, and likewise who they be, and what
their conditions are, that be under either of these two Covenants. Very easy
to be read, and as easy to be understood by those that are the Sons of Wisdom,
the Children of the Second Covenant. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Grace abounding to the chief of Sinners. Or a brief and faithful Relation of
the exceeding Mercy of God in Christ to his poor Servant John Bunyan. Namely in
his taking him out of the Dunghill, and Converting of him to the Faith of his
Blessed Son Jesus Christ. Here is also particularly showed what sight of, and
what trouble he had for sin, and also what various Temptations he has met
with, and how God has carried him through them. Corrected, and much inlargged
in this Edition. Price 1 s.

Questions about the Nature and perpetuity of the Seventh Day-Sabbath, and
proof that the First day of the Week is the true Christian Sabbath. Price 6 d.

A Book for Boys and Girls, or Country Rhimes for Children. Price 6 d.

Sighs from Hell, or the Groans of a damned Soul.

Come and welcome to Jesus Christ.

A Discourse upon the Pharisee and Publican.

Seasonable Counsel or Advice to Sufferers.

The barren Fig Tree.

The Greatness of the Soul.

A Discourse of Prayer; or I will pray with my Spirit and with my Understanding
also.

Questions about the Nature and Perpetuity of the Seventh-day Sabbath.

The Holy City; or the Heavenly Jerusalem.

The Advocateship of Jesus Christ.

His four last things, Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell.

The Present State of his Majesty's Isles and Territories in America, viz.
Jamaica, Barbados, S. Christophers, M^vis, Antego, S. Vincent, Dominica,
New Jersey, Pensilvania, Monserat, Anguilla, Bermudas, Carolina, Virginia,
New England, Tobago, New Foundland, Maryland, New York. With New Maps of
every Place. Together with Astronomical Tables, which will serve as a constant
Diary or Calendar, for the use of the English Inhabitants in those Islands;
from the Year 1686, to 1700. Also a Table by which, at any time of the Day or
Night here in England, you may know what Hour it is in any of those parts. And
how to make Sun Dials fitting for all those places.

Choice and Practical Expositions on the Ten Commandments preached by James
Durham, late Minister in Glasgow.

A Golden Key to open hidden Treasure, or several great points, which referr to
the Saints present blessedness, and their future happiness; with the resolution
of several Important questions. The Active, and Passive obedience of Christ,
Vindicated and Improved; two serious, and singular pleas which all sincere
Christians may safely make to all those ten Scriptures which speak of the
General, and particular Judgment that must certainly pass on all, etc. The 1
st. and 2 d. part by Tho. Brooks late preacher of the Gospel at St. Margaret
new Fish street.

A Collection of Sermons preached at the Morning Lecture in Southwark and
elsewhere, by Nicholas Blakie.

The Morning seeker, showing the benefit of being good betimes, with directions
to make sure work about early Religion, by John Ryther.

The Interest of Reason in Religion, with the Import and use of Scripture
Metaphors, and the matter of union between Christ and believers, with
reflections on several late writings, especially, Mr. Sherlock's discourse
concerning the knowledge of Christ modestly enquired into and stated by R.
Ferguson.

The Works of Mr. James Janeway containing these six following Treatises,
Heaven upon Earth, or the best friend in the worst of times; Death unstung, A
Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Moseley, an Apothecary, with a Narrative
of his life and death; also the manner of Gods dealing with him before and
after his conversion. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Savage:
Invisible realities demonstrated in the Holy life and Triumphant death of Mr.
John Janeway; his Legacy to his friends containing 27. famous Instances of Gods
Providence in, and about Sea dangers and deliverances, with a Sermon on that
subject.

Life in God's favor, a seasonable discourse in Death-threating times, being
the substance of sundry Sermons on Psalm. 30.5. In his favor is Life. By O.
Haywood Minister of the Gospel.

A call to prayer, in two Sermons on that subject: lately preached to a Country
Auditory, with an account of the Principles and Practices of the Quakers in
matter of prayer subjoined, wherein is showed that the Quakers religion is much
wanting in prayer, and they themselves grossly guilty in not calling upon God,
and of Fathering much impiety on the Spirit of God, alleging him in defense of
their prayer-less cause.

Quakerism Subverted, being a further discovery and confutation of the Gross
Errors of the Quakers, Published and maintained by Will. Penn, and others of
that Sect.

A warning to Souls to beware of Quakers and Quakerism, by occasion of a late
dispute at Early in Cheshire, all three written by John Cheyney Minister of the
Gospel.

Gospel remission, or a Treatise showing, that true blessedness consists in
Pardon of sin, wherein is discovered the many Gospel-Mysteries therein
contained, the glorious effects proceeding from it, great mistakes made about
it, the true Signs and Symptoms of it; Way and means to obtain it; by Jeremiah
Borough.

A Protestants resolution, showing his reasons why he will not be a Papist,
digested into so plain a method of Question and Answer, that an ordinary
Capacity may be able to defend the Protestant Religion against the most cunning
Jesuit or popish Priest.

Mr. Wadsworth's Legacy, being his serious exhortation to an Holy Life: Or a
plea for the absolute necessity of Inherent Righteousness, in those that hope
to be saved.

The triumphs of Gods revenge against the crying and execrable sin of murder,
expressed in 30 several Tragical Histories, to which is added, Gods revenge
against the abominable sin of Adultery.

A Token for Children, being an exact account of the Conversion, Holy and
Exemplary lives and joyful deaths of several young Children, in 2 parts. By
James Janeway Minister of the Gospel.

FINIS.

