THE STRAIT GATE, OR, Great Difficulty of Going to HEAVEN;

PLAINLY Proving by the Scriptures, that not only the rude and profane; but
many great professors will come short of that Kingdom.

By John Bunyan.

Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in there* at* Because
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it. Matt. 7. 13, 14. LONDON.

Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. 1676.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
GOd (I hope) has put it into my heart to write unto thee another time, and
that about matters of greatest moment (for now we discourse not about things
controverted among the godly, but directly about the saving or damning of the
soul, yea, moreover this discourse is about the ^ewne*s of them that shall be
saved, and (...) proves, that many an high professor will come ^hort of eternal
life;) wherefore the matter must needs be sharp and so disliked by some, but
^et it not be rejected by thee. The text calls for* sharpness, so do the times,
ye^, the faithful discharge of my duty toward thee, has put me upon it.

I do not now pipe but mourn, and 't will be well for the^, if thou can
graciously lament, M^^^* 11. 17. Some (say they) make the gate of heaven too
wide, and some make it too narrow: for my part I have here presented thee with
as true a measure of it as by the word of God I can: read me therefore, yea,
read me and compare me with the bible; and if thou find my doctrine, and
that book of God concur; embrace it, as thou will answer the contrary in the
day of Judgment: This awakning work (if God will make it so) was prepared for
thee* If there be need and it wounds, get ^ealing by blood; if it disquiets g^t
peace by blood: if it takes away all thou have because 'twas naught, (for this
book is not prepared to take away true grace from any) then buy of Christ gold
tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may
be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness does not appear, and anoint
thine eyes with eye salve that thou may see, Revel. 3. 18 Self-flatteries,
self-deceivings, are easy and pleasant, but damnable! the Lord give thee an
heart / to Judge right of thy self, right of this book, and so to prepare for
eternity, that thou may not only expect entrance, but he received into the
kingdom of Christ and of God, Amen.

So prays thy friend, J. B.

Luke. 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many, I say unto you,
seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
THese are the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and are therefore in an especial
manner to be heeded; besides, the subject matter of the words, is the most
weighty, to wit, how we should attain salvation, and therefore also to be
heeded.

The occasion of the words, was ^ question which one that was at this time in
the company of the disciples, put to Jesus Christ; the question was this, Lord,
are there few that be saved? ver. 2^. A serious question, not such as tended to
the subver^ion of the hearers, as too many now adays do, but such as in its
own nature tended to the awakening of the company to good, and, that called for
such an answer that might profit the people also: This question also, well
pleased Jesus Christ, and therefore he prepares, and gives such an answer, as
was without the least retort, or show of distaste, such an answer I say, as
carried in it the most full resolve to the question it self, and help to the
persons questioning; And he said unto them, strive to enter in, etc. The words
are an answer, and an instruction also.

1. An answer, and that in the affirmative, the gate is strait many that seek
will not be able, therefore but few shall be saved.

2. The answer, is an instruction also, strive to enter in, etc. good counsel,
and instruction; pray God help me, and my Reader, and all that love their own
salvation to take it.

My manner of handling the words will be, first by way of Explication, and then
by way of Observation.

By way of Explication.

1. The words are to be considered, with reference to their general scope.

2. And then with reference to their several phrases.

1. The general scope of the text is to be considered, and that is that great
thing Salvation; for these words do immediately look at, point to, and give
directions about salvation. Are there few that be saved? strive to enter in at
the strait gate.

The words, I say, are to direct us, not only to talk of, or to wish for, but
to understand how we shall, and to seek that we may be effectualy saved; and
therefore of the greatest importance. To be saved! what, is like being saved?
to be saved from sin, from hell, from the wrath of God, from eternal damnation,
what is like it? To be made an heir of God! of his grace! of his kingdom and
eternal glory! what is like it? and yet all this is included in this word,
saved, and in the answer to that question, are there few that be saved? indeed
this word, saved, is but of little use in the world, save to them that are
heartily afraid of damning. This word lies in the Bible, as excellent salves
lie in some men's houses, thrust into a hole, and not thought on for many
months, because the household people have no wounds nor sores: In time of
sickness, what so set by, as the Doctors glasses, and gally-pots full of his
excellent things; but when the person is grown well, the rest is thrown to the
dunghill. Oh when men are sick of sin, and afraid of damning, what a text is
that, where this word saved is ^ound? yea, what a word of worth and goodness
and blessedness is it to him that lies continually upon the wrath of a guilty
conscience? but the whole need not the physician: He therefore, and he only,
knows what saved means, that knows, what hell and death and damnation means:
what shall I do to be saved? is the language of the trembling sinner; Lord save
me, is the language of the sinking sinner, and none admire the glory that is in
that word saved, but such as see without being saved, all things in heaven and
earth are emptyness to them, they also that believe themselves privileged in
all the blessedness that are wrapped up in that word, bless and admire God
that has saved them: wherefore, since the thing intended both in the question
and the answer is no less then the salvation of the soul, I beseech you to give
the more earnest heed, Heb. 21.

But to come to the particular phrases in the words, and to handle them orderly
in the words I find four things.

1. An intimation of the kingdom of heaven. 2. A description of the entrance
into it. 3. An Exhortation to enter into it; and, 4. A motive to enforce that
exhortation.
First, An Intimation of the kingdom of heaven, for when he says, strive to
enter in; and in such phrases there is supposed a place or state or both to be
enjoyed; enter in, enter into what, or whether but into a state or place or
both; and therefore when you read this word, enter in, you must say there is
certainly included in the text that good thing that yet is not expressed; enter
in, into heaven, that is the meaning: where the saved are, and shall be, into
heaven, that place, that glorious place, where God, and Christ, and Angels are:
and the souls or spirits of just men made perfect* enter in; that thing
included, though not expressed in the words, is called in another place, the
Mount Sion, the heavenly Jerusalem, the general assembly and Church of the
first born which are written in heaven, Heb. 12. And therefore the words
signify unto us, that there is a state most glorious, and that when this world
is ended; and that this place and state is likewise to be enjoyed, and
inherited by a generation of men for ever. Besides, this word, enter in,
signifies that salvation to the full is to be enjoyed only there, and that
there only is eternal safety; all other places, and conditions, are hazzardo^s,
dangerous, full of snares, imperfections, temptations and afflictions, but
there all is well; there is no devil to tempt, no desperatelywicked heart to
deliver us up, no deceitful lusts to entangle, nor any enchanting world to
bewitch us: there all shall be well to all eternity. Further all the parts of,
and circumstances that attend salvation, are only there to be enjoyed: there
only is immortality and eternal life; there is the glory, the fullness of joy,
and the everlasting pleasures; there is God and Christ to be enjoyed by open
vision, and more; there are the Angels, and the Saints; further, there is no
death, nor sickness, no sorrow, nor sighing, for ever: there is no pain, nor
persecutor, nor darkness to eclipse our glory. O this Mount Sion! O this
heavenly Jerusalem! 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 16. 11. Luke 20 35, 36. Heb.
12. 12, 23, 14.

Behold therefore what a great thing the Lord Jesus has included by this
little word, in, in this word is wrapped up an whole heaven, and eternal life:
even as there is also by other little words in the holy Scriptures of truth; as
where he says, knock, and it shall be opened unto you, and the elect have
obtained it.

This should teach us, not only to read but to attend in reading, not only to
read, but to lift up our hearts to God in reading, for if we be not heedful, if
he give us not light and understanding; we may easily pass over without any
great regard, such a word as may have a glorious kingdom and eternal salvation
in the bowels of it: yea sometimes, as here, a whole heaven is intimated, where
it is not at all expressed. The Apostles of old, did use to fetch great things
out of the Scriptures, even out of the very order and timeing of the several
things contained therein, see Romans 4. 9, 10, 11. Gala. 3. 16, 17. Heb. 8. 13.
but,

Secondly, As we have here an intimation of the kingdom of heaven, so we have a
description of the entrance into it, and that by a double similitude.

1. It is called a gate. 2. A strait gate: strive to enter in at the strait
gate.
1. It is set forth by the similitude of a gate. A gate, you know, is of a
double use, it is to open and shut, and so consequently, to let in, or to keep
out; and to do both these at the season; as he said, let not the gates of
Jerusalem be opened till the sun be hot; and again, I commanded that the gates
should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened till after the
Sabbath: ( Neh. 7. 3. chap. 13. 19, 20.) And so you find of this gate of
heaven, when the five wise virgins came, the gates were open, but afterward
came the other virgins, and the door was shut, Matt. 11.

So then, the entrance into heaven, is called a gate, to show, there is a time
when there may be entrance, and there will come a time when there shall be
none; and indeed this is a chief truth contained in the text: strive to enter
in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you will seek to enter in and shall
not be able.

I read in the Scriptures of two gates or doors, through which they that go to
heaven must enter.

1. There is the door of faith, the door which the grace of God has opened to
the gentiles, this door is Jsus Christ, as also himself does testify, saying,
I am the door, etc. ( Acts. 14. 27. Joh. 10. 9.) By this door men enter into
Gods favor, and mercy, and find forgiveness through faith in his blood, and
live in hope of eternal life; and therefore himself also has said, I am the
door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, that is, received to mercy
and inherit eternal life: but

2. There is another door, or gate; (for that which is called in the text, a
gate, is twice in the next verse, called, a door): there is, I say another
gate, and that is the passage into the very heaven it self; the entrance into
the celestial mansion house, and that is the gate mentioned in the text, and
the door mentioned twice in the verse that follows. And thus Jacob called it,
when he said Bethel was the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven, that
is, the entrance, for he saw the entrance into heaven, one end of Jacobs ladder
stands in Bethel, Gods house, and the other end reaches up to the gate of
heaven. Genesis 28. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Jacobs ladder was the figure
of Christ, which ladder was not the gate of heaven, but the way from the Church
to that gate which he saw above at the top of the ladder: Genesis 28. 12. and Joh.
1. 51.

But again that the gate in the text, is the gate, or entrance into heaven,
consider,

1. It is that gate that lets men into, or shuteth men out of that place or
kingdom where Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob is, which place is that paradise
where Christ promised the thief, that he should be that day, that he asked to
be with him in his kingdom: it is that place into which Paul said, he was
caught, when he heard words unlawful or impossible for a man to utter, Luke 13.
^0. chap. 23. 24. 2 Cor. 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.

Quest. But is not Christ the gate or entrance into this heavenly place?

Answ. He is he without whom no man can get thither, because by his merits men
obtain that world, and also because he (as the father) is the doner and
disposer of that kingdom to whom he will: further, this place is called his
house, and himself the master of it ( when once the master of the house is
risen up, and has shut to the door ( ver. 25.) But we use to say, that the
master of the house, is not the door: men enter into heaven then, by him, not
as he is the gate or door, or entrance into the celestial mansionhouse, but as
he is the giver and disposer of that kingdom to them who he shall count worthy,
because he has obtained it for them.

2. That this gate is the very passage into heaven, consider the text has
special reference to the day of judgment, when Christ will have laid aside his
mediatory office, which before he exercised for the bringing to the faith his
own elect; and will then act, not as one that justifies the ungodly, but as one
that judges sinners; he will now be risen up from the throne of grace, and
shut up the door against all the impenitent, and will be set upon the throne of
judgment, from thence to proceed with ungodly sinners.

Object. But Christ bids strive, strive n^w to enter in at the strait gate, but
if that gate be as you say, the gate, or entrance into heaven, then it should
seem, that we should not strive till the day of judgment, for we shall not come
at that gate till then.

Answ. Christ, by this exhortation, strive, etc. does not at all admit of, or
countenance delays, or that a man should neglect his own salvation, but
puts poor creatures upon preparing for the judgment, and counsels them
now to get those things that will then give them entrance into glory. This
exhortation, is much like these, be ye therefore ready also, for at such an
hour as you think not, the son of man comes: and they that were ready went in
with him to the marriage, and the door was shut. Matt. 24. 44. Chap. 25. 10.

So that when he says, strive to enter in, it is as if he should say, blessed
are they that shall be admitted another day to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but they that shall be counted worthy of so unspeakable a savor, must
be well prepared, and fitted for it beforehand: now the time to be fitted, is
not the day of judgment, but the day of grace; not then, but now: therefore
strive now for those things, that will then give you entrance into the heavenly
kingdom: but,

Secondly, As it is called a gate, so it is called a strait gate; strive to
enter in at the strait gate.

The straightness of this gate, is not to be understood carnally, but
mistically: you are not to understand it, as if the entrance into heaven was
some little pinching wicket, no, the straightness of this gate is quite another
thing. This gate is wide enough, for all them that are the truly gracious, and
sincere lovers of Jesus Christ, but so strait, as that not one of the other can
by any means enter in: open to me the gates of righteousness, I will go into
them, and I will praise the Lord, this gate of the Lord into which the
righteous shall enter, Psalm. 118. 19, 20. by this word therefore Christ Jesus
has showed unto us that without due qualifications there is no possibility of
entering into heaven; the straight gate will keep all others out: when Christ
spoke this parable he had doubtless his eye upon some passage or passages of
the old testament, with which the Jews were well acquainted. I will mention two
and so go on.

1. The place by which God turned Adam and his wife out of paradise; possibly
our Lord might have his eye upon that, for though that was wide enough for them
to come out at, yet it was to strait for them to go in at, but what should be
the reason of that? why they had sinned and therefore God set at the east of
that garden, cherubins and a flaming sword, turning every way, to keep the way
of the tree of life: Genesis ^, 24. These Cherubins and this flaming sword, they
made the entrance too (...)r it for them to enter in: souls, there are
Cherubins and a flaming sword at the gates of heaven to keep the way of the
tree of life, therefore none but them that are duly fitted for heaven can
enter in at this strait gate, the flaming sword will keep all others out. Know
you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, be not
deceived, neither fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor ^ff^m^nate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thievs, nor covteous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6. 9.

2. Perhaps our Lord might have his eye upon the gates of the temple, when he
spoke this word unto the people, for though the gates of the temple were six
cubits wide, yet they were so strait, that none that were unclean in any thing
might enter in thereat, Ezekiel 40 48. because there were placed at them gates,
porters whose office was to look that none but those that had right to enter,
might go in thither: and so it is written, Jehojadah set porters at the gates
of the house of the Lord, that none that were unclean in any thing might enter
in. 2 Chro. 23. 19. Souls, God has porters at the gates of his temple, at the
gate of heaven; porters, I say, placed there by God, to look that none that are
unclean in any thing may come in thither. In at the gate of the Church, none
may enter now, that are open profane and scandalous to religion; no, though
they plead they are beloved of God; What has my beloved to do in mine house
(says the Lord,) seeing she has wrought leudness with many, Jer. 11. 15.

I say, I am very apt to believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ had his thoughts
upon these two texts, when he said, the gate is strait, and that which confirms
me the more in the thing, is this, a little below the text he says, there
shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, when you shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of heaven, and you your selves
thrust out, ver. 28. thrust out, which signifies a violent act, resisting with
striving; those that would (though unqualified) enter: the porters of the
temple were, for this very thing, to wear arms if need were, and to be men of
courage and strength, lest the unsanctified or unprepared should by some means
enter in.

We read in the book of the Revelations, of the holy city, and that it had
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, but what did they do there? why
amongst the rest of their service, this was one thing, that there might in no
wise enter in, any thing that desileth, or works abomination, or that makes
a lie: Revel. 21. 12. 21.

But more particularly to show what it is, that makes this gate so strait:
there are three things that make it strait.

1. There is sin. 2. There is the word of the law. 3. There are the Angels of
God.
First, there is sin, the sin of the profane, and the sin of the professor.

1. The sin of the profane, but this needs not be enlarged upon, because it is
concluded upon, at all hands, where there is the common belief of the being of
God, and the judgment to come, that the wicked shall be turned into hell, and
all the nations that forget God: Psalm. 9 17.

2. But there is the sin of professors, or take it rather thus, there is a
profession that will stand with an unsanctified heart and life, the sin of such
will overpoise the salvation of their souls, the sin-end being the heaviest end
of the scale: I say, that being the heaviest end which has sin in it; they
tilt over; and so are, notwithstanding their glorious profession, drowned in
perdition and destruction: for none such has any inheritance in the kingdom
of Christ and of God, therefore let no man deceive you with vain words, for
because of these things, comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience; neither will a profession be able to excuse them, Ephesians. 5. 3. 4.
5. 6. The gate will be too strait for such as these to enter in thereat. A man
may partake of salvation in part, but not of salvation in whole: God saved the
children of Israel out of Egypt, but overthrew them in the wilderness: I will
therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord,
having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them
that believed not: so we see, (that notwithstanding their beginning) they could
not enter in, because of unbelief, Jud^. 5. Heb. 3. 19.

Secondly, There is the word of the Law, and that will make the gate strait
also: none must go in thereat but those that can go in by the leave of the law,
for though no man be or can be, justified by the works of the law, yet unless
the righteousness and holiness by which they attempt to enter into this
kingdom, be justified by the law, it is in vain once to think of entering in at
this strait gate: now the law justifies not, but upon the account of Christ's
righteousness; if therefore thou be not indeed found in that righteousness, thou will find the law, lie just in the passage into heaven to keep thee out; every
man's work must be tried by fire, that it may be manifest of what sort it is.
There are two errors in the world about the law, one is, when men think to
enter in at the strait gate by the righteousness of the law, the other is, when
men think, they may enter into heaven, without the leave of the law; both
these, I say, are errors: for, as by the works of the law, no flesh shall be
justified, so without the consent of the law, no flesh shall be saved, heaven
and earth shall pass away, before one jot, or title of the law shall fail,
till all be fulfilled: he therefore must be damned, that cannot be saved by the
consent of the law, and indeed this law is the flaming sword that turns every
way, yea, that lies to this day, in the way, to heaven, for a bar to all
unbelievers and unsanctified professors, for it is taken out of the way for the
truly gracious only; it will be found as a roaring lion to devour all others:
because of the law therefore the gate will be found too strait for the
unsanctified to enter in; when the Apostle had told the Corinthians, that the
unrighteous should not inherit the kingdom of God, and, that such were some of
them, he adds, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified,
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.
11. closely concluding, that had they not been washed, and sanctified, and
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, the law, for their transgressions,
would have kept them out, it would have made the gate too strait for them to
enter in.

Thirdly, There are also the Angels of God, and by reason of them the gate is
strait. The Lord Jesus, calls the ^ ^ ^ ^ to gather the ungodly into bundels
to burn them, Matt. 13. 39. 41. 49. unless therefore, the man that is
unsanctified, can master the law, and conquer Angels: unless he can, as I may
say, pull them out of the gateway of heaven, himself is not to come thither for
ever no man goes to heaven but by the help of the Angels, I mean at the day of
Judgment, For the son of man, shall send forth his angels with a great sound of
a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from
one end of heaven to the other, Mat. 24. 31. If those that shall enter in at
the strait gate shall enter in thither by the conduct of the holy Angels, pray
when do you think those men will enter in thither, concerning whom the Angels
are commanded, to gather them, to bind them in bundles, to burn them; This
therefore is a third Difficulty: the Angels will make this entrance strait,
yea, too strait for the unjustified and unsanctified to enter in thither.

I come now to the Exhortation, which is to strive to enter in; strive to enter
in at the strait gate.

These words are fitly added, for since the gate is strait, it follows, th^^
they that will enter in must strive.

Strive, this word strive, supposes that great idleness is natural to
professors, they think to get to heaven by lying as it were on their elbows. 2.
It also suggesteth, that many will be the difficulties that professors will
meet with before they get to heaven. 3. It also concludes, that only the
laboring Christian, man or woman will get in thither.

Strive, etc.

Three questions I will propound upon the word, an answer to which may give us
light into the meaning of it.

1. Quest. What does this word, strive, import?

2. Quest. How should we strive?

3. Quest. Why should we strive?

First, What does this word strive, import?

Answ. When he says, strive, It is as much as to say, bend your selves to the
work with all your might: Whatsoever thy hand finds to do; do it with all thy
might, for there is no work nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither thou go. Eccles. 9. 10. thus Sampson did, when he set himself to
destroy the Philistines, he bowed himself with all his might, Judge. 16. 30. Thus
David did also when he made provision for the building and beautifying of the
temple of God, 1 Chro. 29. 2. And thus must thou do if ever thou entrest into
heaven.

2ly, When he says strive, he calls for the mind and the will, that they
should be on his side, and on the side of the things of his kingdom; for none
strive indeed, but such as have given the son of God their heart, of which the
mind and will are a principal part, for saving conversion lies more in the
turning of the mind and will to Christ, and to the Love of his heavenly
things, then in all knowledge and Judgment: and this the Apostle confirms
when he says, stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving etc. Philip.
1. 27.

3ly, And more particularly, this word strive, is expressed by several other
terms, as,

1. It is expressed by that word, so run that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9. 24. 25.

2. It is expressed by that word, fight the good fight of faith, lay hold of
eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12.

3. It is expressed by that word, labor not for the meat that perishes, but
for that meat that endures to everlasting life, Joh. 6. 27.

4. It is expressed by that word, we wrestle with principalities and powers,
and the rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12. Therefore when he
says, strive, it is as much as to say, run for heaven, fight for heaven,
labor for heaven, wrestle for heaven, or you are like to go without it.

Secondly, the second question, is how should we strive?

Answ. 1. The answer in general is, thou must strive lawfully; and if a man
also strive for the mastery, yet is he not crowned, except be strive lawfully,
2 Timothy 25.

But you will say, what is it to strive lawfully?

Answer 1. to strive against the things which are abhored by the Lord Jesus,
yea, to resist to the spilling of your blood, striving against sin, Heb. 12. 4.
to have all those things that are comdemned by the word, yea, though they be
thine own right hand, right eye, or right foot, in abomination; and to seek by
all godly means the utter suppressing of them, Mar. 9. 43, 45, 47.

2ly, To strive lawfully is to strive for those things that are commended in
the word; But thou O man of God fly, the world, and follow after, that is
strive for righteousness, godlyness, faith, love, patience, meekness, fight the
good ^ight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 11. 12.

3ly, He that striveth lawfully must be therefore very temperate in all the
good and lawful things of this life. And every one that striveth for the
mastery, is temperate in all things: now they do it to obtain a corruptible
crown, but we an incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9. 25. most professors give leave to the
world, and vanity of their hearts, to close with them and to hang about their
necks, and make their striving to stand rather in an outcry of words, then a
hearty labor against the lusts, and love of the world, and their own
corruptions, but this kind of striving is but a beating of the air, and will
come to just nothing at last, 1 Cor. 9, 26.

4ly, He that striveth lawfully, must take God and Christ along with him to the
work, otherwise he will certainly be undone: whereunto, said Paul, I also
labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily, Colo.
1. 29. and for the right performing of this, he must observe these following
particulars.

1. He must take heed, that he does not strive about things, or words to no
profit, for God will not then be with him: of these things, says the Apostle,
put them in remembrance; charging them before the Lord, that they strive not
about words to no profit, but (...) the subverting of the hearers, 1 Timothy 2.
14. But alas! how many professors in our days are guilty of this transgression,
whose religion stands chi^fly, if not only, in a few unprofitable questions,
and vain ranglings, about words and things to no profit, but to the destruction
of the hearers, Tit. ^. 9.

2. He must take heed, that whilst he strives against one sin, he does not
harbor and shelter another, or that whilst he cries out against other men's
sins, he does not countenance his own.

3. In the striving, strive to believe, strive for the says of the Gospel, for
the more we believe the Gospel, and the realitie of the things of the world to
come, with the more stomach and courage shall we labor to possess the
blessedness, Philip. 1. 27. Heb. 4. let us labor therefore to enter into that
rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief.

4. As we should strive for, and by faith, so we should strive by prayer, Romans
15. 30. by fervent and effectual prayers; O the swarms of our praierless
professors! what do they think of themselves! surely the gate of heaven was
heretofore as wide as in these our days, but what striving by prayer was there
then among Christians for the thing that gives admittance into this kingdom,
over there is in these latter days?

5. We should also strive by mortifying our members that are upon the earth: I
therefore so run, said Paul, so fight I, not as one that beats the air, but I
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, left that by any means when I
have preached the Gospel to others I my self should be a castaway. 1 Cor. 9.
27. But all this is spoken principally to professors, so I would be understood.

I come now to the third question, namely but why should we strive?

Answer 1. Because the thing for which you are here exhorted to strive, it is
worth the striving for: it is for no less then for a whole heaven, and an
eternity of felicity there; how will men that have before them, a little
honor, a little profit, a little pleasure, strive? I say again, how will they
strive for this? now they do it for a corruptible crown, but we an
incorruptible. Methinks this word heaven, and this eternal life, what is there
again either in heaven or earth like them to provoke a man to strive?

2. Strive, because otherwise the devil, and hell, will assuredly have thee. He
goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking who he may devover: 1 Pet. 5. 8. these
fallen Angels, they are always watchful, diligent, unwearied, they are also
mighty, subtle, and malicious, seeking nothing more then the damnation of thy
soul; O thou that art like the heartless dove, strive.

3. Strive because every lust strives and wars against thy soul; the flesh
lusts against the spirit; dearly beloved, I beseech you, said Peter, as
strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul:
Gal. 5. 17. it is a rare thing to see, or find out a Christian, that indeed can
bridle his lusts, but no strange thing to see such professors that are not only
bridled, but sadled too, yea, and ridden from lust to sin, from one vanity to
another, by the very devil himself, and the corruptions of their hearts.

4. Strive, because thou have a whole world against thee, the world hates
thee, if thou bee^t a christian: the men of the world hate thee, the things of
the world are snares for thee, even thy bed and table, thy wife and husband,
yea, thy most lawful enjoyments have that in them that will certainly sink thy
soul to hell, if thou do not strive against the snares that are in them,
Romans 11. 9.

The world will seek to keep thee out of heaven, with mocks, flouts, taunts,
threatenings, goals, gibbits, halters, burnings, and a thousand deaths, therefore
strive Again, if it cannot overcome thee with these, it will flatter, promise,
allure, (...), entreat, and use a thousand tricks on this hand to destroy thee;
and observe, many that have been stout against the threats of the world, have
yet been overcome with the bewitching flatteries of the same: there ever was
enmity betwixt the devil and the Church, and betwixt his seed and her seed too;
Michael and his Angels, and the dragon and his angels: these make war
continually. Genesis 3. Revel. 12. There has been great desires and endeavors
among men to reconcile these two in one, to wit, the seed of the serpent, and
the seed of the woman, but it could never be yet accomplished: the world says,
they will never come over to us, and we again say, by Gods grace, we will never
come over to them, but the business has not ended in words, both they and we
have also added our endeavors to make each other submit, but endeavors have
proved ineffectual too: They for their part have devised all manner of cruel
torments to make us submit, as flaying with the sword, stoning, sawing asunder,
flames, wild beasts, banishments, hunger, and a thousand miseryes; we again on
the other side have labored by prayers, and tears, by patience, and
long-suffering, by gentleness, and love, by found doctrine, and faithful
witness-bearing against their enormities, to bring them over to us, but yet the
enmity remains; so that they must conquer us, or we must conquer them, one
side must be overcome, but the weapons of our war fare are not carnal but
mighty through God.

5. Strive, because there is nothing of Christianity got by idleness, idleness
clothes a man with rags, and the vineyard of the slothful is grown over with
nettles, Pro. 23. 21. chap. 24. 30. 31. 32. profession that is not attended
with spiritual labor cannot bring the soul to heaven, the fathers before us
were not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.
Therefore be not slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience
inherit the promises; Romans 12. 11. Heb. 6. 12.

Strive to enter in.

Methinks the words at the first reading, do intimate to us, that the Christian
in all that ever he does in this world, should carefully heed and regard his
soul, I say, in all that ever he does; many are for their souls by fits and
starts, but a Christian indeed in all his doings, and designs which he
contriveh and manageth in this world, should have a special eye to his own
future and everlasting good, in all his labors he should strive to enter in.
Wisdom (Christ) is the principal thing: therefore get wisdom, and in all thy
gettings get understanding, Pro. 4. 7. Get nothing, if thou can not get
Christ and grace, and further hopes of heaven, in that getting; get nothing
with a bad conscience, with the hazard of thy peace with God, and that in
getting it, thou weakenest thy graces which God has given thee, for this is
not to strive to enter in: add grace to grace, both by religious and worldly
duties, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1. 1. 8. 9.
10. 11. religious duties are not only the striving times, he that thinks so, it
out: thou may help thy faith, and thy hope in the godly managment of thy
calling, and may get further footing in eternal life, by studying the glory
of God, in all thy worldly employment. I am speaking now to Christians that are
justified freely by grace, and am encouraging, or rather counselling of them,
to strive to enter in, for there is an entering in by faith and good conscience
now, as well as an entering in, in body and soul hereafter; and I must, add,
that the more common it is to thy soul to enter in now by faith, the more
steadfast hope shall thou have of entering in hereafter in body and soul.

S^rive to enter in.

By these words also the Lord Jesus gives sharp rebuke to those professors
that have not eternal glory, but other temporal things in their eye, by all the
bustle that they make in the world about religion: some there be, what a stir
they make, what a noise and clamor, with their notions and forms, and yet
perhaps all is but for the loaves; because they have eaten of the loaves and
are filled Joh. 6. 26. these strive indeed to enter, but it is not into heaven;
they find, religion has a good trade at the end of it, or they find, that it
is the way to credit, repute, preferment, and the like, and therefore they
strive to enter into these; but these have not the strait gate in their eye,
nor yet in themselves have they love to their poor, and perishing souls:
wherefore this exhortation nippeth such, by predicting of their damnation.

Strive to enter in.

These words also sharply rebuke them who content themselves as the Angel of
the Church of Sardis did, to wit, to have a name to live, and be dead, Revel.
3. 1. or as they of the Laodiceans, who took their religion upon trust, and was
content, with a poor, wretched, lukewarm profession: For such as these do
altogether unlike to the Exhortatian in the text; that says, strive; and they
sit and sleep, that says strive to enter in, and they content themselves with a
profession that is never like to bring them thither.

Strive to enter in.

Further, these words put us upon proving the truth of onr graces, now ^ I say,
they put us upon the proof of the truth of them now: for if the strait gate be
the gate of heaven, and yet we are to strive to enter into it now; even while
we live, and before we come thither, then, doubtless Christ means by this
exhortation, that we should use all lawful means to prove our graces in this
world whether they will stand in the judgment or no: strive to enter in, get
those graces now that will prove true graces then, and therefore try them you
have, and if upon trial they prove not right, cast them away, and cry for
better, lest they cast thee away, when better are not to be had: Buy of me gold
tried in the fire, mark that, Revel. 13. 20. Buy of me faith and grace that
will stand in the judgment, strive for that faith, buy of me that grace, and
also white raiment that thou may be clothed, that the shame of thy
wickedness does not appear, and anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou
may see: mind you this advice, this is right sttiving to enter in.

But you will say, how should we try our graces? would you have us run into
temptation to try if they be ^ound or rotten?

Answ. You need not run into trials, God has ordained that enough of them shall
overtake thee to prove thy graces either rotten or sound before the day of thy
death: sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, if thou ha^t but a
sufficiency of grace to withstand. I say, thou shall have trials, enough,
overtake thee, to prove thy graces sound or rotten: thou mai^^ therefore, if
God shall help thee, see how it is like to go with thee before thou go out
of this world, to wit, whether thy graces be such as will carry thee in at the
gates of heaven or no*

But how should we try our graces now?

Ans. How do thou find them in outward trials? see Heb. 11. 15. 16. how
do thou find thy self in the inward workings of sin ( To. 7. 24.) how do
thou find thy self under the most high enjoyment of grace in this world? Phil.
3. 14.

But what do you mean by these three questions?

Answ. I mean graces show themselves at these their seasons whether they be
rotten or sound.

How do they show themselves to be true under the first of these?

Ans. By mistrusting our own sufficiency, by crying to God for help, by
desiring rather to die then to bring any dishonor to the name of God, and by
counting, that if God be honored in the trial, thou have gained more then all
the world could give thee, 2 Chro. 20. 12. chap. 14. 11. Acts. 4. Acts. 20. 24.
2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Heb. 11. 24, 25.

How do they show themselves to be true under the second?

Answ. By mourning and confessing, and striving, and praying against them: by
not being content, should thou have heaven if they* live, and defile thee,
and by counting of holiness the greatest beauty in the world, and by flying to
Jesus Christ for life. Zech. 12. 10. Joh. 19. Heb. 12. 4. Psalm. 19. 12.

How do they show themselves to be true under the third?

By prizing the true graces above all the world, by praying heartily that God
will give thee more, by not being content with all the grace thou can be
capable of enjoying on this side heaven and glory, Psalm. 84. 10. Luke 17. 5.
Philip. 3. chapter.

Strive to enter in.

The reason why Christ adds these words, to enter in, is obvious; to wit,
because there is no true and lasting happiness on this side heaven; I say none
that is both true and lasting, ^ mean, as to our sense and feeling, as there
there shall, for here have we no continuing city but we seek one to come; Heb.
13. 14. the heaven is within, strive therefore to enter in; the glory is
within, strive therefore to enter in; the Mount Sion is within, strive
therefore to enter in; the heavenly Jerusalem is within, strive therefore to
enter in; Angels, and Saints are within, strive therefore to enter in; and to
make up all, the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that glorious
redeemer is within, strive therefore to enter in.

Strive to enter in.

For without are dogs, sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie: without are also the devils,
and hell, and death, and all damned souls; without is houling, weeping,
wailing, and guashing of teeth; yea without are all the miseries, sorrows, and
plagues that an infinite God can in justice and power inflict upon an evil and
wicked generation: strive therefore to enter in at the strait gate. Revel. 22.
15. Matt. 25. 41. Revel. 12. 9. Isai. 65. 13. 14. Matt. 22. 13. Deuteronomy. 29. 18.
19. 20.

Strive to enter in at the strait gate, [for many] I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able.

We are now come to the motive which our Lord urges to enforce his exhortation:
he told us before, that the gate was strait, he also exhorted us to strive to
enter in thereat, or to get those things now that will further our entrance
then, and to set our selves against those things that will hinder our entering
in.

In this motive there are five things to be minded.

1. That there will be a disappointment to some at the day of judgment, they
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. 2. That not a few, but many, will
meet with this disappointment, for [many] will seek to enter in, and shall not
be able. 3. This doctrine of the miscariadge of many, then, it stands upon the
validity of the word of Christ; for many [I say] will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able. 4. Professors shall make a great heap, among the many that
shall fall short of heaven, for many I say [unto you] will seek to enter in,
and shall not be able. 5. Where grace and striving are wanting now, seeking,
and contending to enter in, will be unprofitable then, for many, I say unto you
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
But I will proceed in my former method, to wit, to open the words unto you.

For many, etc.

If he had said, for [some] will fall short, it had been a sentence to be
minded: If he had said, for some that seek* will fall short, it had been very
awakening, but when he says, many, many will fall short, yea many among
professors will fall short, this is not only awakning, but dreadful.

For many, etc.

I find this word many, variously applied in the Scripture.

1. Sometimes it intends the open profane, the wicked, and ungodly world, as
where Christ says, wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; Matt. 7. 13. I say by the
many here, he intends those chiefly, that go on in the broad way of sin, and
prophanness, bearing the tokens of their damnation in their foreheads, those
whose daily practice proclaims, that their feet go down to death, and their
steps take hold of hell. Job, 21. 29. 30. Isa. 3. 9. Pro. 55.

2. Sometimes this word, many, intends those that cleave to the people of God
deceitfully, and in hypocrisy; or as Daniel has it, many shall cleave unto the
Church with flatteries* Dan. 11. 34. The word many, in this text, includes all
those who feign themselves better then they are in religion; it includes I say
those that have religion, only, for an holy day saint to set them out at
certain times and when they come among suitable company.

3. Sometimes this word many, intends them that apo^tati^e from Christ, such
as for a while believe and in time of temptation fall away, as John says of
some of Christ's disciples, from that time many of his disciples went back, and
walked no more with him. Joh. 6. 66.

4. Sometimes this word many, intends them that make a great noise, and do
many great things in the Church, and yet want saving grace, many, says Christ,
will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name,
and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works:
mark, there will be many of these.

5. Sometimes this word many intends those poor ignorant deluded souls that
are ledd away with every wind of doctrine: those who are caught with the
cunning and crafty deceiver, who lies in wait to beguile unstable souls. And
many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth
shall be evil spoken of, ^ Pet. 2. 2.

6. Sometimes this word many includes all the world, good and bad. And many of
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life,
and some to everlasting sha^^ and contempt: Dan. 12. 2. compared with Joh. 5.
28. 29.

7. La^^ly, Sometimes this word many intends the good only, even them that
shall be saved, Luke 1. 10. chap. 2. 34.

Since then that the word is so variously applied, let us enquire how it must
be taken in the text, and.

1. It must not be applied to the sincerely godly, for they shall never perish,
Joh. 10. 27. 28.

2. It cannot be applied to all the world, for then no flesh should be saved.

3. Neither is it to be applied to the open profane only, for then the
hypocrite is by it excluded.

4. But by the many in the text our Lord intends in special the professor,
the professor I say, how high soever he seems to be now, that shall be found
without saving grace in the day of Judgment.

Now that the professor, is in special intended in this text, consider; so soon
as the Lord had said, many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, he
points, as with his finger, at the many that then he in special intends, to
wit, them among whom he had taught; them that had eat and drunken in his
presence; them that had prophesied, and cast out devils in his name, and in his
name done many wonderful works. Luke 13. 26. Matt. 7. 22. These are the many
intended by the Lord in this text, though others are also included under the
sentence of damnation by his word in other places.

For many, etc.

Matthew says concerning this strait gate, That there are but few that find
it: but it seems the cast-aways in my text, did sinde it, for you read that
they knocked at it, and cried, Lord open unto us: so then, the meaning may seem
to be this, many of the few that find it, will seek to enter in, and shall not
be able.

I find at the day of Judgment, some will be crying to the rocks to cover
them, and some at the gates of heaven for entrance: suppose that those that cry
to the rocks to cover them, are they whose conscience will not suffer them,
once to look God in the face because they are falen under present guilt, and
the dreadful fears of the wrath of the lamb. Revel. 6. 16. And that those that
stand crying at the gate of heaven, are those whose confidence holds out to the
last, even those whose boldness will enable them to contend even with Jesus
Christ for entrance. Them, I say, that will have, profession, ca^^ing out of
devils, and many wonderful works to plead: of this sort are the many in my
text; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

For many, etc.

Could we compare the professors of the times with the everlasting word of God,
this doctrine would more easily appear to the children of men. How few among
the many, yea among the many swarms of professors have heart to make conscience
of walking before God, in this world, and to study his glory among the children
of men: How few, I say, have his name lie nearer their hearts, then their own
carnal concerns, nay, do not many make his word, and his name, and his ways a
stalking-horse, to their own worldly advantages. God calls for faith, good
conscience, moderation, self-denial, humility, heavenly-mindedness, love to
Saints, to enemies: and for conformity in heart, in word, and life to his will,
but where is it? Mar. 11. 22. Pet. 3. 16. Heb. 13. 5. Philip. 4. 5. Matt. 10.
37, 38, 39. Colo. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, Mich. 6. 8. Revel. 2. 10. Joh. 15. 17. 1 John
4. 21. Matt. 5. 4^ Pro. 23. 26. Colo. 4. 6.

For many [ I say unto you].

These latter words carry in them a double argument to prove the truth asserted
before. First, in that he directly points at his followers. I say unto [
you]: many I say unto you, even to you that are my disciples, to you that have
eat and drunk in my presence. I know that sometimes Christ has directed his
speech to his disciples, not so much upon there accounts, as upon the accounts
of others: but here it is not so: the I say unto you, in this place, it
immediately concerned some of themselves. I say unto you, ye shall begin to
stand without, and to knock saying, Lord, Lord open to us, and he shall answer,
and say unto you, I know you not, whence you are; then shall ye begin to say,
we have eat, and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets:
But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence you are, depart from me,
^all^^^ workers of iniquity, it is you, you, you, that I mean.

I say unto you.

It is common with a professing people, when they hear a smart and thundering
Sermon, to say, now has the preacher paid off the drunkard, the swearer, the
lier, the covetous, and adulterer; forgetting that these sins may be committed
in a spiritual and mistical way. There is spiritual drunkenness, spiritual
adultery, and a man may be a lier that calls God his father when he is not, or
that calls himself a christian and is not. Wherefore perhaps all these thunders
and lightnings in this terrible Sermon, may more concern thee then thou art
aware of, I say unto you: unto you professors may be the application of all
this thunder, Rev. 2. 9. chap. 3 9.

I say unto you.

Had not the Lord Jesus designed by these words, to show what an overthrow will
one day be made among professors, he needed not to have you'ed it at this rate,
as in the text, and afterward he has done, the sentence had run intelligible
enough without it; I say, without his saying [ I say unto you;] but the truth
is, the professor is in danger, the preacher, and hearer, the workers of
miracles, and workers of wonders may all be in danger of damning,
notwithstanding all, their seize. And to a waken us all about this truth
therefore, the text mu^t^run thus, for many. I say unto you, will seek to enter
in* and shall not be able.

See you not yet, that the professor is in danger, and that these words, I say
unto you, are a Prophecy of the everlasting perdition of some that are famous
in the congregation of Saints: I say, if you do not see it, pray God your eyes
may be opened, and beware that thy portion be not as the portion of one of
those that are wrapped up in the twenty eight verse of the chapter. There shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of heaven, and you your selves
thrust out.

For many [ I say] unto you.

These words, I told you, carry in them a double argument for confirmation of
the truth asserted before: first, the professors are here particularly pointed
at; and secondly it is the saying of the truth himself; for these words I say,
are words full of authority. I say it, I say unto you, sais Christ, as he says
in another place, It is I that speak, behold it is I. ^he person whose words we
have now under consideration, was no blundering raw-headed preacher, but the
very wisdom of God, his son, and him that has l^in in his bosom, from
everlasting, and consequently, had the most perfect knowledge of his fathers
will, and how it would ^are with professors at the end of this world. And now
hearken what himself does say of the words which he has spoken; heaven and
earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away, Matt. 24. 35.

[I say] unto you.

The Prophets used not to speak after this manner, nor yet the holy Apostles;
for thus to speak is to press things to be received upon their own authority.
They used to say, thus says the Lord, or Paul, or Peter an Apostle, or a
servant of God. But now we are dealing with the words of the son of God, it is
he that has said it, wherefore we fin^e the truth of the perishing of many
professors, asserted, and confirmed by Christ's own mouth. This consideration
carries great awakning in it, but into such a fast sleep are many now adays
fallen, that nothing will awaken them but that shril and terrible cry, behold
the bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him.

I say unto you.

There are two things upon which this assertion may be grounded.

1. There is in the world a thing like grace that is not.

2. There is a sin called, the sin against the holy Ghost, from which there is
no redemption, and both these things befall professors.

First, There is in the world a thing like grace that is not.

1. This is evident, because we read that there are some that not only make a
fair show in the flesh, that glory in (...), that* appear beautiful on ward,
(...) Gods people, but have not the grace (...) Gods people, Gal. 6. 12. (...)
^ut. 23. 27. Is^. 5

2 (...)ose frequent cautions that are every where in the Scriptures given us
about this thing: Be not deceived, let a man examine himself; examine your
selves whether you be in the faith: all these expressions intimate to us, that
there may be a show of, or a thing like grace where there is no grace indeed,
Galat. 6. 7. 1 Cor. 11. 28. 2 Cor. 13. 5.

3. This is evident from the conclusion made by the holy Ghost upon this very
thing, for if a man thinks himself to be something when he is nothing, he
deceives himself. Gal. 6. 3. The holy Ghost here concludes, that a man may
think himself to be something, may think he has grace, when he has none, may
think himself something for heaven and another world, when indeed he is just
nothing at all with reference thereto: the holy Ghost also determ^n^s upon this
po^^^, to ^^t, that they do ^o ^c^e^ve themselves; for (...) is nothing, he
deceives himself, he deceives his own soul, he deceives himself of heaven
and salvation: so again, let no man beguile you of your reward, Col. 2. 18.

4. It is also manifest from the text, for many I say unto you will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able: alas! great light, great parts, great works,
and great confidence of heaven may be where there is no faith of Gods elect, no
love of the spirit, no repentance unto salvation, no sanctification of the
spirit, and so consequently no saving grace, but

Secondly, as there is a thing like grace which is not, so there is a sin
called the sin against the holy Ghost, from which there is no redemption, and
this sin does more ordinarily befall professors.

1. There is a sin called the sin against the holy Ghost, from which there is
no redemption; this is evident both from Matthew and Mark* But whosoever
speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this
world, neither in the world to come. But he that shall blaspheme against the
holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation,
Matt. 12. 32. Mar. 3. 29. wherefore when we know that a man has sinned this
sin, we are not to pray for him, or to have compassion on him 1 John 15. 16.
Judge. 22.

2. This sin does most ordinarily besal professors, for there are few, if any,
that are not professors, that are at present capable of sinning this sin. They
which were once e^lightned, and have tasted the heavenly gift, that were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, Heb. 6. 4. 5. of this sorr are they that commit
this sin; Peter also describes them to be such, that sin the unpardonable sin.
For if after they have escaped the pollution of the world through the knowledge
of our Lord and savi^^r Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and
overcome, the latter end is wors^ with them then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 2.
That other passage in the tenth of the hebrews holds forth the same thing;
for if we sin wilfully after w^ have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain, fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery indignation that shall devour the adversaryes. Heb. 10. 26.
27.

These therefore are the persons that are the prey for this sin: this sin
feeds upon professors, and they that are such do very often fall into the
mouth of this eater. Some fall into the mouth of this sin, by delusions, and
doctrins of devils and, some fall into the mouth of it, by returning with the
dog to his own vomit again, and with the sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the mire. 1 Pet. 2. 22. I shall not here give you a particular description
of this sin, that I have done elsewhere; but such a sin there is, and they that
commit it shall never have forgiveness; and I say again, there be professors
that commit this unpardonable sin, yea more then the most are aware of: let all
therefore look about them; the Lord awaken them that they may so do: for what
with a profession without grace, and by the venom of the sin against the holy
Ghost, many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Will seek to enter in.

This kingdom, at the gate of which the reprobate will be stopped, will be at the
last Judgment, the desire of all the world, and they, especially they in my
text will seek to enter in. For then they will see that the blessedness is to
those that shall get into this kingdom, according to that which is written,
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the tree
of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city, R^vel. 22. 14.

To prove that they will seek, although I have done it already, yet read these
texts at your leisure; Matt. 25. 11. chap. 7. 22. Luke 13. 28*

And in a word to give you the reason why they will seek to enter in.

1. Now they will see what a kingdom it is, what glory there is in it, and now
they shall also see the blessedness which they shall have that shall then be
counted worthy to enter in: the reason why this kingdom is so little regarded,
it is because it is not seen, the glory of it is hid from the eyes of the
world: their eye has not seen, nor their ear heard, etc. I, but then they
shall hear and see too, and when this comes to pass, then even then he that
now most seldom thinks thereof, will seek to enter in.

2. They will now see what hell is, and what damnation in hell is, ^^^e clear
then ever; They will also see how the breath of the Lord like a stream of
brimstone does kindle it: O the sight of the burning fiery furnace which is
prepared for the devil and his Angels! this, this will make work in the souls
of casraways at that day of God almighty, and then they will seek to enter in.

3. Now they will see what the meaning of such words as these are, hellfire,
everlasting fire, devouring fire, fire that never shall be quenched: now they
will see what for ever, means: what eternity means: now they will see what this
word means, the bottomless pit: now they will hear roaring of sinners in this
place, howling in that, some crying to the mountains to fall upon them, and
others to the rocks to cover them; now they will see blessedness is no where
but within.

4. Now they will see what glory the godly are possessed with, how they rest in
Abraham's bosom, how they enjoy eternal glory, how they walk in their white
robes, and are equal to the Angels. O the savor, and blessedness, and
unspeakable happyness that now Gods people shall have, and this shall be seen
by them that are shut out, by them that God has rejected for ever, and this
will make them seek to enter in. Luke 16. 22. 23. 13. 28.

Will seck to enter in.

Q. But some may say, how will they seek to enter in?

Answ. They will put on all the considence they can, they will trick, and trim
up their profession, and adorn it with what bravery they can. Thus the foolish
virgins sought to enter in, they did trim up their lamps, made themselves as
fine as they could, they made shift to make their lamps to shine a while, but
the son of God, disccovering himself, their confidence failed, their lamps went
out, the door was shut upon them, and they were kept out. Matt. 25. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

2. They will seek to enter in, by crouding themselves in among the godly. Thus
the man without the wedding garment, sought to enter in, he goes to the
wedding, gets into the wedding-chamber, sits close among the guests, and then,
without doubt, concluded, he should escape damnation* but you know, one black
sheep is soon seen, though it be among an hundred white ones, why even thus it
faired with this poor man; And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw
there a man that had not on a wedding garment. He spied him presently, and
before one word was spoken to any of the other, he had this dreadful
salutation, friend how came thou in hither, not having on a weddinggarment?
and he was speechless, though he could swagger it out amongst the guests, yet
the Master of the Feast, at first coming in, strikes him dumb, and having
nothing to say for himself, the King had something to say against him: Then
said the king to the servants (the Angels) bind him hand and foot, and take him
away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth (Matt. 22. 11, 12, 13.)

3. They will seek to enter in by pleading their profession and admittance to
the Lords Ordinances, when they were in the world, Lord we have eat and drunk
in thy presence and thou have taught in our streets, we sat at thy table and
used to frequent sermons and Christian assemblies; we were well thought of by
thy saints, and were admitted into thy Churches, we professed the same faith as
they did, Lord, Lord, open unto us.

4. They will seek to enter in, by pleading their virtues, ho^ they subjected
to his ministry, how they wrought for him, what good they did in the world, and
the like, Matt. 7. 22. but neither will this help them; the same answer that
the two former had, the same have these; depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

5. They will seek to enter in by pleading excuses, where they cannot evade
conviction. The flothful servant went this way to work, when he was called to
account for not improving his Lords money. Lord, says he, I knew thou wast an
hard man, reaping where thou have not sowed, and gathering where thou have not
strewed, and I was a fraid, etc. (either that I should not please in laying out
thy money, or that I should put it into hands, out of which I should not get it
again at thy need) and I went and hid thy talent in the earth, lo, there thou
have that is thine; as if he had said, true Lord, I have not improved, I have
not got, but consider also, I have not imbezled I have not spent, nor lost thy
money, lo there thou have that is thine, Matt. 25. 24, 25, 26, 27. There are but
few will be able to say these last words at the day of judgment; the most of
professors are for imbezzeling, mis pending and slothing away their time, their
talents, their opportunities to do good in; but, I say, if he that can make so
good an exeuse as to say, lo, there thou have what is thine: I say if such an
one shall be called a wicked and slothful servant, if such an one shall be put
to shame at the day of judgment, yea if such an one, shall, notwithstanding
this care to save his Lords money, be cast as unprofitable into utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, what will they do that have
neither took care to lay out, nor care to keep what was committed to their
trust?

6. They will seek to enter in by pleading, that ignorance was the ground of
their miscarrying in the things wherein they offended; wherefore when Christ
charges them with want of love to him, and with want of those fruits that
should prove their love to be true, as, that they did not seed him, did not
give him drink, did not take him in, did not cloth him, visit him, come unto
him, and the like: they readyly reply, Lord, when saw we the an hungered, or at
hirst, or a strunger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee: Matt. 25. 41. 42. 43. 44. As who should say, Lord, we are not
conscious to our selves, that this charge is worthyly laid at our door. God
forbid that we should have been such sinners, but Lord, give an instance; when
was it, or where? true, there was a company of poor sorry people in the world
very inconsiderable, set by with no body, but for thy self we professed thee,
we loved thee, and had thou been with us in the world, would thou have
worn gold, would thou have eaten the sweetest of the world, we would have
provided it for thee; and therefore, Lord, Lord open to us. But will this plea
do? no, then shall he answer them, in as much as you did it not to one of the
least of these my brethren, ye did it not to me. This plea then though grounded
upon ignorance, which is one of the strangest pleas for neglect of duty, would
not give them admittance into the kingdom. These shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

I might add other things by which it will appear how they will seek to enter
in; as,

1. They will make a stop at this gate, this beautiful gate of heaven, they
will begin to stand without at the gate, as being loath to go any further:
never did malefactor so unwillingly turn off the ladder, when the rope was
about his neck, as these will turn away, in that day, from the gates of heaven
to hell.

2. They will not only make a stop at the gate; but there they will knock and
call, this also argues them willing to enter: they will begin to stand without
and to knock at the gate saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. This word, Lord, being
doubled, shows the vehemence of their desires: Lord, Lord, open unto us. The
devils are coming; Lord, Lord, the pit opens her mouth upon us: Lord, Lord
there is nothing but but hell and damnation left us, if Lord, Lord thou have
not mercy upon us; Lord, Lord open to us.

3. Their last argument for entrance is their tears, when groundless
considence, pleading of virtues, excuses and ignorance, will not do; when
standing at the gate, knowing and calling Lord Lord, open to us* will not do,
then they betake themselves to their tears: tears are sometimes the most
powerful arguments, but they are nothing worth here: Esau also sought it
carefully, with tears, but it helped him nothing at all, Heb. 12. 15. 16. There
shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, for the gate is shut for ever, mercy
is gone for ever, Christ has rejected them for ever: all their pleas, excuses,
and tears, will not make them able to enter into this kingdom.

For many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in and shall not be able.

I come now to the latter part of the words which closely shows us the reason
of the rejection of these many that must be damned, they will seek to enter in,
and shall not be able.

An hypocrite, a false professor may go a great way, they may pass through the
first and second watch, to wit, may be approved of Christians and Churches, but
what will they do when they come at this iron gate that leads into the city?
there the workers of iniquity will fall, be cast down, and shall not be able to
rise.

And shall not be able.

The time, as I have already hinted, which my Text respects, it is the day of
judgment, a day when all masks and vizzards shall be taken off from all faces:
It is a day wherein God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
will make manifest the counsels of the heart, 1 Cor. 4. 5. It is also the day
of his wrath, the day in which he will pay vengeance, even a recompense to his
adversaries.

At this day those things that now these many count sound and good, will then
shake like a quagmire, even all their naked knowledge, their feigned faith,
pretended love, glorious shows of gravity in the face, their holy day words and
specious carriages will stand them in little stead: I call them holy day ones,
for I perceive that some professors do with religion, just as people do with
their best apparel, hang it against the wall all the week, and put them o^^ on
Sundays: for as some scarce ever put on a Suit, but when they go to a Fair or a
Market, so little housereligion will do with some; they save religion till they
go to a Meeting; or till they meet with a godly chapman: O poor religion! O
poor professor, what will thou do at this day, at the day of thy trial and
judgment? cover thy self thou can not, go for a Christian thou can not,
stand against the Judge thou can not; what will thou do? The ungodly shall
not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.

And shall not be able.

The ability here intended, is not that which stands in carnal power or
fleshly subtilty, but in the truth and simplicity of those things, for the sake
of which, God gives the kingdom of heaven to his people.

There are five things, for the want of which, this people will not be able to
enter.

First, this kingdom belongs to the elect, to those for whom it was prepared
from the foundation of the world, Matt. 25. hence Christ says, when he comes,
he will send forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to
another, Matt. 24. and hence he says again, I will bring forth a seed out of
Jacob, and out of Judah, an inheritor of my mountains, and mine elect shall
inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there; they shall deceive, if it were
possible, the very elect, but the elect has obtained it, and the rest were
blinded, Romans 11. 7.

Secondly, They will not be able to enter, because they will want the birth
right; the kingdom of heaven is for the heirs, and if children then heirs, if
born again then heirs: wherefore it is said expressly, except a man be born
again he cannot see the kingdom of God; by this one word, down goes all carnal
privilege of being born of flesh, and blood, and of the will of man, can
thou produce the birthright, but art thou sure thou can? for it will little
profit thee to think of the blessed kingdom of heaven, if thou want a
birthright to give thee inheritance there? Esau, did despise his birthright,
saying, what good will this birthright do me? and there are many in the world
of his mind to this day: tush (say they,) they talk of being born again, what
good shall a man get by that? they say, no going to heaven without being born
again, but God is merciful, Christ died for sinners, and we will turn when we
can tend it, and doubt not but all will be well at last. But I will answer
thee, thou child of Esau, that the birthright and blessing go together, miss
of one, and thou shall never have the other; Esau sound this true, for having
first despised the birthright, when he would afterward have inherited the
blessing he was rejected, for he found no place of repentance though he sought
it carefully with tears; Genesis 25. Heb. 12. 14, 15. 16.

Thirdly, they shall not be able to enter in who have not believed with the
faith of Gods operation, the faith that is most holy, even the faith of Gods
elect: He that believes on the son of God has ^verlasting life, he that
believes not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
Joh. 3. But now, this faith is the effect of electing love, and of a new birth,
Joh. 1. 11, 12. therefore all the professors that have not that faith which
flows from being born of God, will seek to enter in and shall not be able.

Fourthly, they shall not be able to enter in, that have not Gospel-holyness;
holiness that is the effect of faith is that which admits into the presence of
God, and into his kingdom too. Blessed and holy are they that have part in the
first resurrection, on such the second death (which is hell and eternal
damnation Revel. 20. 14.) has no power, Revel. 20. 6. Blessed and holy, with
the holiness that flows from faith which is in Christ, for to these the
inheritance belongs. That they may receive forgivenes of sins and inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith (said Christ) which is in me. Acts. 26.
18. this holiness which is the natural effect of faith in the son of God,
Christ Jesus the Lord, will at this day of judgment, distinguish from all other
shows of holiness, and sanctity be they what they will, and will admit the
soul that has this holiness into his kingdom, when the rest will seek to enter
in, and shall not be able.

Fifthly, They shall not be able to enter in, that do not persevere in this
blessed faith and holiness, not that they that have them indeed, can finally
fall away, and everlastingly perish, but it has pleased Jesus Christ to bid
them that have the right, to hold fast that they have, to endure to the end,
and then tells them they shall be saved: though it is as true, that none is of
power to keep himself, but God works together with his children, and they are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, which is also laid up in
heaven for them: 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5.

The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou h^^est the workers of iniquity.
The foolish are the unholy ones, that neither have says nor holiness, nor
perseverance in godliness, and yet lay claim to the kingdom of heaven: but
better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues without right: Psalm.
55. Pro. 16. 8. what is it for me to claim a house, or a farm without right; or
to say, all this is mine, but have nothing to show for it: this is but like the
revenues of the foolish: his estate lies in his conceit; he has nothing by
birthright, and law, and therefore shall not be able to inherit the
possession: for many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able.

Thus you see, that the non elect, shall not be able to enter, that ^^e that is
not born again, shall not be able to enter, that he that has not saving faith,
with holiness and persever^nce flowing therefrom, shall not be able to enter:
wherefore consider of what I have said.

I come now to give you some Observations from the words, and they may be three.

First, When men have put in all the claim they can for heaven, but few will
have it for their inheritance; for many I say unto you, will seek to enter in,
and shall not be able.

Secondly, Great therefore will be the disappointment that many will meet with
at the day of judgment; for many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Thirdly, Going to heaven therefore will be no trivial business, salvation is
not got by a dream, they that would then have that kingdom must now strive
lawfully to enter: for many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not
be able.

I shall speak chiefly, and yet but briefly to the first of these Observations,
to wit,

That when men have put in all the claim they can to the kingdom of heaven, but
few will have it for their inheritance: The Observation stands of two parts.

First, that the time is coming when every man will put in whatever claim they
can to the kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, there will be but few of them that put in claim thereto that shall
enjoy it for their inheritance.

I shall speak but a word or two to the first part of the Observation, because
I have prevented my enlargement thereon by my explication upon the words; but
you find in the 25. of Matthew, that all they on the left hand of the Judge,
did put in all the claim they could for this blessed kingdom of heaven: If you
shall take them on the left hand, as most do, for all the sinners that shall be
damned, then that completely proves the first part of the Observation, for it
is expressly said, then shall they, (all of them jointly, and every one apart)
also answer him saying, Lord, when saw we thee thus and thus, and did not
minister unto thee, Matt. 25. 44. I could here bring you in the plea of the
slothful servant, the cry of the foolish virgins; I could also here enlarge
upon that passage Lord, Lord, have we not eat and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets; but these things are handled already, in the
handling of which, this first part of the Observation is proved; wherefore
without more words, I will God assisting by his grace, descend to the second
part thereof, to wit.

There will be but few of them that put in cl^im thereto, that will enjoy it
f^r their inheritance.

I shall speak di^inctly to this part of the Observation, and shall first
confirm it by a S^^ipture or two.

Str^igh^ is the gate and narr^w is the way t^^t leads un^o life, and few
there (...) the find it; M^^. 7. 13. 14.

Fear not little fl^^k it is your fathers good pl^^sure to give you the
kingdom; Luk* 12. 32. By these two Texts, and by many more that will be urged
anon you may see the truth of what I have ^ai^. To enlarge therefore upon ^^e
truth; and.

First, more generally.

Secondly, more particularly.

First, more generally I shall prove that in all ages, but few have been saved.

Secondly, more particularly, I shall prove but few of them that profess have
been saved.

First, in the old world, when it was most populous, even in the days of Noah,
we read but of eight persons that were saved out of it; well therefore might
Peter call them but few, but how few? why but eight souls; wherein few, that
is, eight souls were saved by water, 1 Pet. 3. ^0. He touches a second time
upon this truth, saying, he spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eight
person, pre^c^er of righteousness, bringing in the sloud upon the world of the
ungodly: mark all the rest are called the ungodly, and* there were also a world
of them. 2 Pet 2. 5. These are also taken notice of in Job, and go there also,
by the name of wicked men, Have thou marked the old way, which wicked men have
trodden, which were cut down out of nine, whose foundation was overflown with a
sloud, which said unto God, depart from us, and what can the almighty do for
them? Job. 22. 15. 16. 17. 18.

There were therefore but eight persons that escaped the wrath of God, in the
day that the sloud came upon the earth, the rest were ungodly; there was also a
world of them, and they are to this day in the prison of hell. Heb. 6. 11. 6. 1
Pet. 3. 19. 20.

Nay I must correct my pen, there were but seven of the eight that were good,
for Ham though he escaped the Judgment of the water, yet the curse of God
overtook him to his damnation.

Secondly, when the world began again to be replenished, and people began to
multiply therein: how few even in all ages do we read of, that were saved from
the damnation of the world.

1. One Abraham and his wife, God called out of the land of the Caldeans, (I
called (said God) Abraham alone Isa. 51. 1. 2.

2. One Lot out of Sodom and Gomorah, out of Adma and Zeboim, one Lot out of
four cities; indeed, his wife and two daughters, went out of Sodom with him,
but they all three proved naught, as you may see in the nineteenth of Genesis:
wherefore Peter observes, that Lot only was saved: He turned the citys of Sodom
and Gomorah into ashes, condemning them with an overthrow, making them an
example unto those that often should live ungodly, and delivered just Lot; that
righteous man, read 2 Pet. 2. 6. 7. 8.

Jude says, that in this condemnation, God over-threw, not only Sodom and
Gomorah, but the cities about them also: and yet you find none but Lot, could
be found that was righteous either in Sodom or Gomorah, or the cities about
them, wherefore they, all of them, suffer the vengance of eternal fire verse. 7.

Thirdly, come we now to the time of the Judges, how sew then were the godly,
even then when the inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel,
the high ways (of God) were then unoccupied, Judge. 5. 6. 7.

Fourthly, there were but few in the days of David; help Lord says he, for the
godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the children of men. Psalm.
12. 1.

Fifthly, In Isaia's time the saved were come to such a few, that he positively
says, but that there were a very small number left, God had made them like
Sodom, and they had been like unto Jomorah, Isa. 1. 8, 9.

Sixthly, It was cried unto them in the time of Jeremiah, that they should run
to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see, and know, and seek in the
broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it, Ier. 5. 1.

Seventhly, God showed his servant Ez^kiel how few there would be saved in his
day, by the vision of a few hairs, saved out of the midest of a few hairs; for
the saved were a few saved out of a few. Ez^k. 5. 3, 4, 5.

Eighthly, you find in the time of the Prophet Micha how the godly complain,
that as to number they then were, so few, that he compares them to those that
are left behind when they had gathered the summer-fruit, Mic. 7. 1.

Ninthly, when Christ was come, how did he confirm this truth, that but few of
them that put in claim for heaven will have it for their inheritance. But the
common people could not hear it, and therefore upon a time when he did but a
little hint at this truth, the people, even all in the Synagogue where he
preached it, were filled with wrath, rose up, thrust him out of the City, and
led him unto the brow of the hill (whereon their city was built) that they
might cast him down headlong, Luke 4. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Tenthly, John, who was after Christ, says, that the whole world lies in
wickedness, that all the world wondered after the beast, and that power was
given to the beast, over all kindreds, tongues and nations; power to do what?
why to cause all, both great and small, rich and poor, bond and free, to
receive his mark, and to be branded for him: Joh. 5. 19. Revel. 13. 3, 8, 16.

Eleventhly, should we come to observation and experience, the show of the
countenance, of the bulk of men, does witness against them, they deciare their
sin like Sodom, they hide it not, Isa. 3. 9. where is the man that makes the
almighty God his delight, and that designeth his glory in the world; do not
even almost all, pursue this world, their lusts and pleasures? and so,
consequently, say unto God, depart from us, for we desire, not the knowledge of
thy ways, or what is the Almighty that we should serve him? it is in vain to
serve God, etc.

So that without doubt, it will appear a truth in the day of God, that but few
of them, that shall put in their claim to heaven, will have it for their
inheritance.

Before I pass this head, I will show you to what the saved are compared in the
Scriptures.

First, they are compared to an handful, there shall be an handful of corn in
the earth upon the top of the mountains, etc. Psalm. 27. 16. this corn is
nothing else but them that shall be saved, Matt. 3. 12. chap. 13. 30.

But mark, there shall be an handful; what is an handful when compared with the
whole heap, or what is an handful out of the rest of the world?

Secondly, As they are compared to an handful, so they are compared to a lilly
among the thorns, Song, 2. 2. which is rare, and not so commonly seen. As the
lilly among thorns, says Christ, so is my beloved among the daughters. By
thorns we understand the worst and best of men, even all that are destitute of
the grace of God, for the best of them is as a bryer, and the most upright of
them as a thornhedge, Mich. 7. 4. 2 Samuel 23. 6. 2. I know that she may be
called a lilly amongst thorns also, because she meets with the pricks of
persecution, Ezekiel. 2. 6. chap. 29. 24. 3. she may also be thus termed, to show
the disparitie that is betwixt hypocrites and the Church, Luke 8 14. Heb. 8.
But this is not all, the saved are compared to a lilly among thorns, to show
you, that they are but few in the world; to show you, that they are few and
rare; for as Christ compares her to a lilly among thorns, so she compares him
to an apple tree among the tres of the wood, which is rare, and scarce, not
common.

Thirdly, they that are saved, are called but one of many, for though there be
threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number, yet my
love, says Christ, is but one, my undesiled is but one, Song. 6. 8. 9.
according to that of Jeremiah, I will take you, one of a city. Ier. 3. That
saying of Paul is much like this, know you not, that they which run in a race
run all, but one receives the prize, 1 Cor. 9. 24. but one, that is, few of
many, few of them that run, for he is not here, comparing them that run, with
them that sit still, but with them that run, some run and lose, some run and
win; they that run and win, are few in comparison of them that run and lose:
They that run in a race run all, but one receives the prise: let there then be
threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number, yet
the saved are but few.

Fourthly, they that are the saved, are compared to the gleaning after the
vintage is in: woe is me, said the Church, for I am as when they have gathered
the summer fruit, as the grape gleanings after the vintage is in, Mich. 7. 1.
The gleanings! what is the gleanings to the whole crop? and yet you here see, to
the gleanings are the saved compared; it is the devil and sin that carry away
the cart-loads, while Christ and his ministers come after a gleaning: But the
gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim are better then the vintage of Abiezer, Jud.
8. Them that Christ and his ministers glean up and bind up in the bundle of
life, are better then the loads that go the other way: you know it is often the
cry of the poor in harvest, poor gleaning, poor gleaning: And the rainisters of
the Gospel, they also cry, Lord who has believed our report? and to whom is
the arm of the Lord revealed? Isa. 53 1.

When the prophet speaks of the saved under this metaphor of gleaning, how does
he amplify the matter? Gleaning grapes shall be left, says he, two or three
berries in the top of the upper most bough, four or five, in the outmost
fruitful branches thereof, says the Lord. Isa. 17. 6. Thus you see what
gleaning is left in the vineyard, after the vintage is in, two or three here,
four or five there. Alas! they that shall be saved, when the devil and hell
have had their due, they will be but as the gleaning, they will be but few,
they that go to hell, go thither in clusters, but the saved go not so to
heaven, Matt. 13. 30. Mich. 7. wherefore when the prophet speaks of the
saved, he says, there is no cluster, but when he speaks of the damned, he
says, they are gathered by clusters, Revel. 14. 18. 19. O sinners, but few
will be saved. O professors, but few will be saved!

Fifthly, they that shall be saved, are compared to jewels; And they shall be
mine, says the Lord, in the day that I make up my jewels. Malachi, 3. 13.
Jewels, you know, are rare things, things that are not found in every house:
Jewels will lie in little room, being few and small; though lumber takes up
much; In almost every house, you may find brass, and iron, and lead; and in
every place you may find hypocritical professors, but the saved are not these
common things: they are Gods peculiar treasure, Psalm. 35. 4. wherefore Paul
distinguishes betwixt the lumber, and the treasure in the house; there is,
says he, in a great house, not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of
wood, and of earth, and some to honor, and some to dishonor. 2. Tim. 2. 20
here is a word for wooden and earthy professors, the jewels and treasure are
vessels to honor, they of wood and earth are vessels of dishonor, that is,
vessels for destruction. Romans 9. 21.

Sixthly, they that shall be saved are compared to a remnant; except the Lord
had left in us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and should
have been like unto Gomorrah: Isa. 1. 9. A remnant, a small remnant, a very
small remnant: O how does the holy Ghost word it, and all to show you, how few
shall be saved: every one knows, what a remnant is, but this is a small
remnant, a very, small remnant. So again, sing with gladness for Jacob, and
shout among the chief of the nations, publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Lord,
save thy people* the remnant of Israel; Jer. 31. 7. What shall I say, the saved
are often in Scripture called, a remnant, E^r. 9. 8. 14. Isa. 10. 20 21, 22.
chap. 11. 11* 16. Ier. 23. 3. Joel 2. 32. But what is a remnant, to the whole
piece: what is a remnant of people to the whole kingdom, or what is a remnant of
wheat to the whole harvest.

Eighthly, the saved are compared to the tithe, or tenth part, wherefore when
God sends the prophet to make the hearts of the people fat, their ears dull,
and to shut their eyes: The prophet asks, how long! to which God answers,
until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses with ut man, and
the land be utterly desolute, and the Lord have removed man far away, and there
be a great forsaking in the midst of the land: but yet, (as God says in
another place, I will not make a full end,) in it shall be a tenth, so the holy
seed shall be the substance thereof; Isae. 6. 10. 11. 12. 13. but what is a
tenth: what is one in ten? and yet so speaks the holy Ghost when he speaks of the
holy seed, of those that was to be reserved from the Judgment; and observe it,
the fatning, and blinding of the rest, it was to their everlasting destruction,
and so both Christ and Paul expounds it often in the new Testament. Matt. 13.
14. 15. Mar. 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. Joh. 12. 40. Acts. 28. 26. Romans 11. 8. So that
those that are reserved from them that perish, will be very few, one in ten. A
tenth shall return, so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.

I shall not add more generals at this time, I pray God that the world be not
offended at these: but without doubt, but few of them that shall put in their
claim for heaven will have it for their inheritance; which will yet further
appear in the reading of that which follows.

Secondly, therefore I come more particularly to show you, that but few will be
saved, I say, but few of professors themselves will be saved, for that is the
truth that the text does more directly look at and defend. Give me therefore
thy hand (good reader) and let us soberly walk through the rest of what shall
be said, and* let us compare as we go each particular with the holy Scripture.

First, it is said, The daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vinyard, as a
lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city Isa. 18. The vineyard was
the Church of Israel, Isa. 5. 1. the cottage in that vinyard, was the daughter
of Zion, or the truly gracious amongst or in that Church: a cottage: God had
but a cottage there, but a little habitation in the Church, a very few that
were truly gracious amongst that great multitude that professed; and had it not
been for these, for this cottage, the rest had been ruined as Sodom: Except the
Lord of hosts had left in us, in the Church, a very few, they had been as
Sodom: v. 9. wherefore among the multitude of them that shall be damned,
professors will make a considerable party.

Secondly, for though thy people Israel, be as the sand of the sea, a remnant
shall return, a remnant shall be saved. Isa. 10. 22. To. 9. 27. for though thy
people Israel* whom thou brought out of Egypt, to whom thou have given
Church-constitution, holy laws, holy ordinances, holy prophets, and holy
covenants* thy people, by separation from all people, and thy people by
profession: though this thy people be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall
be saved: wherefore among the multitude of them that shall be damned,
professors will make a considerable party.

Thirdly, Reprobate silver shall men call them because the Lord has rejected
them; Jer. 6. 30. the people here under consideration, are called in verse 27.
Gods people, his people by profession. I have set thee for a tower and a
fortress among my people, that thou may know and try their way, what
follows? They are all grievous revolters, walking with standers, reprobate
silver, the Lord has rejected them. In chapter ^. ver. 29. they are called
also the generation of his wrath: for the Lord has rejected, and forsaken the
generation of his wrath. This therefore I gather out of these holy Scriptures;
that with reference to profession, and Church-constitution, a people may be
called the people of God, but with reference to the event and final conclusion
that God will make with some of them, they may be truly the generation of his
wrath.

Fourthly, In the 5. of Isa. you read again of the vinyard of God, and that it
was planted on a very fruitful hill, planted with the choicest vines, had a
wall, a tower, a wine press belonging to it, and all things that could put it
into right order and good government, as a Church, but this vinyard of the Lord
of hosts brought forth wild grapes, fruits unbecoming her constitution and
government, wherefore the Lord takes from her his hedge and wall, and lets her
be ^roden down: read Christ's exposition upon it in Matt. 2. and 33. etc. look
to it professors, these are the words of the text, for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Fifthly, Son of man, said God to the Prophet, the house of Israel is to me
become dross, all they are brass and tin, and iron and lead, in the midest of
the furnace, they are the dross of silver: Ezekiel. 22. 18. God had silver there,
some silver, but it was but little, the bulk of that people was but the dross
of the Church, though they were the members of it, but what does he mean by the
dross? why he looked upon them as no better notwithstanding their
Church Membership, then the rabble of the world, that is, with respect to their
latter end, for to be called dross, it is to be put among the rest of the
sinners of the world in the judgment of God, though at present they abide in
his house: Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross, therefore
I love thy testimonies, Psalm. 119. 119.

God says of his saved ones, he has chosen them in the furnace of affliction.
The refiner, when he puts his silver into his furnace, he puts lead in also
among it; now this lead being ordered as he knows how, works up the dross from
the silver, which dross still as it rises, he puts by, or takes away with
an instrument; and thus deals God with his Church, there is silver in his
Church, I, and there is also dross; now the dross are the hypocrites, and
graceless ones that are got into the Church, and these will God discover and
afterward put away as dross. So that it will without doubt prove a truth of
God, that many of their professors that shall put in claim for heaven, will not
have it for their inheritance.

Sixthly, It is said of Christ, his ^an is in his hand, and he will thoroughly
purge his floor, and will gather his wheat into his garner, but will burn up
the chaff with unquenchable fire. Mat. 3. 12.

1. The floor, is the Church of God. ( O my threshing and the corn of my
floor,) said God by the prophet, Isa. 21. 10. to his people,

2. The wheat are those good ones in his Church that shall be undoubtedly
saved, therefore he says, gather my wheat into my garner.

3. The chaff grows upon the same stalk, and ear, and so is in the same
visible body with the wheat, but there is not substance in it, wherefore in
time, they must be severed one from the other, the wheat must be gathered into
the garner, which is heaven: and the chaff, or professors, that want true
grace, must be gathered into hell, that they may be burned up with unquenchable
fire: therefore let professors look to it.

Seventhly, Christ Jesus casts away two of the three grounds that are said to
receive ^^e word, l^k. 8. The stony ground, received it with joy, and the
thorny ground brought forth fruit almost to perfection: indeed the highway
ground was to show us that the carnal, while such, receive not the word at all,
but here is the pinch, two of the three that received it, fell short of the
kingdom of heaven; for but one of the three received it, so as to bring forth
fruit to perfection; look to it professors.

Eighthly, The parable of the unprofitable servant, the parable of the man
without a wedding garment, and the parable of the unsavory salt, do each of
them ju(...)ie this for truth Matt. 25. 24, 25 chap. 22. 11, 12, 13. chap. 5.
13. that of the unprofitable servavt, is to show us, the ^^^th and idleness of
some professors; that of the man without a wedding garment, is to show us, how
some professors have the shame of their wickedness seen by God, even when they
are among the children of the bridgroome; and that parable of the unsavory
salt, is to show, that as the salt that has lost its savor is fit for nothing,
no, not for the dunghill, but to be trodden under the foot of men; So some
professors (yea and great ones too, for this parable reached one of the
Apostles:) will in Gods day be counted fit for nothing but to be trodden down as
the mire in the streets: oh the slothful, the naked and unsavory professors,
how will they be rejected of God and his Christ, in the judgment; look to it
professors.

Ninthly, The parable of the tare: also; gives countenance to this truth* for
though it be said, the field is the world, yet it is said, the tares were sown
even in the Church; And while men slept, the enemy come and sowed tares among
the wheat, and went his way: Matt. 13. 24, 25.

Obj. But some may object, the tares might be sowed in the world among the
wheat, though not in the Churches.

Answer; But Christ by expounding this parable tells us, the tares were sown in
his kingdom (the tares, that is, the children of the devil, ver. 30. 39. As
therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the
end of this world. The son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom, all things that offend, and them that do iniquity,
and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing
of teeth, ver. 40. 41. 42. 43. look to it professors.

Tenthly, the parable of the ten virgins also, suiteth our purpose; them ten
are called the kingdom of heaven, Ma^t. 25. 1. that is, the Church of Christ,
the visible rightly-constituted Church of Christ, for they went all out of the
world, had all lamps and all went forth to meet the bridegroom, yet behold what
an overthrow the one half of them met with at the gate of heaven, they were
shut out, bid to depart, and Christ told them he did not kn^w them, ver. 10 11.
tremble professors, pray professors.

Eleventhly, the parable of the not that was cast into the sea, Matt. 13. 41.
42. that also count(...)eth this truth: the substance of that parable is to
show, that souls may be gathered by the Gospel, there compared to a net, may be
kept in that net, drown to shore, to the worlds end by that net; and yet may
th^n prove bad fishes, and be ca^ away: the parable runs thus, The Kingdom of
heaven (the Gospel) is like u(...) a net, which was cast into the sea (the
world) and gathered of every k^^d (good and bad) which when it was full, they
drew it to sh^re (to the end of the world) and sat down (in judgment) and
gathered the good into vessels, and cast the bad away: some bad fishes, nay I
doubt a great many will be ^ound in the net of the Gospel, at the day of
Judgment; watch and be sober, professors.

Twelfthly, and many shall come from the east, and from the west, and shall sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, and the
children of the kingdom shall be cast out. Matt. 8. 12. The children of the
kingdom whose privileges were said to be these, to whom pertained the
Adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the
service of God, and the promise: Romans 9. 4. I take liberty to harp the more
upon the first Church, because that that happened to them, happened as tipes and
examples, intimating there is ground to think, that things of as dreadful a
nature are to happen among the Church of the gentiles, 1 Cor. 10. 11. 12.
neither indeed have the gentile-Churches security from God, that there shall
not as dreadful things happen to them. And concerning this very thing
sufficient caution is given to us also, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Gal. 5. 19. 20. 21.
Ephesians. 5. 3. 4. 5. 6. Phil. 3. 10. 19. 2. These. 2. 11. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 20. 21. 2
Heb. 6. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. chap. 10. 26. 27. 28. 2 Pet. 2. chap. 3. 1 John 5. 10.
Revel. 2. 20. 21. 22.

Thirteenthly, the parable of the true vine and its branches, confirm what I
have said, Joh. 15. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. By the vine there, I understand Christ,
Christ as head; by the branches I understand his Church, some of these branches
proved fruitless cast-aways, were in time cast out of the Church, were gathered
by men and burned.

Fourteenthly, and Lastly, I will come to particular instances.

1. The twelve had a devil among them. Ioh. 6. 70.

2. Ananias and Saphira were in the Church of Jerusalem, Acts. 5.

3. Simon Magus was among them at Samaria, Acts. 8.

4. Among the Church of Corinth were them that had not the knowledge of God 1
Cor 15.

5. Faul tells the Galatians, false brethren crept in unawares, and so does the
Apostle Jude, and yet they were as quick-sighted to see as any now adays, Gala.
2. Jude. 3. 4.

6. The Church in Sardis had but a few names in her to whom the kingdom of
heaven belonged, Thou have a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled
their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy,

7. As for the Church of the Laodiceans, it is called a wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3. So that put all things
together, and I may boldly say as I also have said already, That among the
multitude of them that shall be damned, professors will make a considerable
party; or to speak in the words of the observation, when men have put in all
the claim they can for heaven, but few will have it for their inheritance.

I will now show you some reasons of the point, besides those five that I
showed you before.

But first, I will show you why the poor carnal ignorant world miss of heaven,
and then why the knowing professors miss of it also.

First, the poor carnal ignorant world miss of heaven, even because they love
their sins, and cannot part with them; men love darkness rather then light
because their deeds be evil, Joh. 3. the poor ignorant world miss of heaven,
because they are enemies in their minds to God, his word and holiness: They all
must be damned who take pleasure in unrighteousness; 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. The
poor ignorant world miss of heaven because they stop their ears against
convictions, and refuse to come when God calls, because I have called and ye
refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but have set at
naught all my counsels, and would none of my reproofs; I also will laugh at
your calamities, and mock when your fear comes as desolution, and your
destruction like a whirlwinde, when distress and anguish comes upon you; then
shall you call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early but
shall not find me, Pro. 1. 24. 25 26. 27. 28.

Secondly, the poor ignorant world miss of heaven because the God of this world
has blinded their eyes, that they can neither see the evil, and damnable state
they are in at present, nor the way to get out of it, neither do they see the
beauty of Jesus Christ, nor how willing he is to save poor sinners 2 Cor. 4. 2.
3.

Thirdly, the poor ignorant world miss of heaven, because they putt off and
defer coming to Christ, until the time of Gods patience and grace is over: some
indeed are resolved never to come, but some again say, we will come hereafter,
and so it comes to pass, that because God called and they did not hear, so they
shall cry and I will not hear, says the Lord. Zech. 7. 11. 12. 13.

Fourthly, the poor ignorant world miss of heaven, because they have false
apprehensions of Gods mercy, they say in their hearts, we shall have peace,
though we walk in the imagination of our heart, to add drunkenness to thirst:
but what says the word, the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the
Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that
are written in this book shall be upon him, and God shall blot out his name
from under heaven. Dent. 29. 19, 20, 21.

Fifthly, the poor ignorant world miss of heaven, because they make light of
the Gospel that offers mercy to them freely, and because they lean upon their
own good meanings and thinkings and doings, Matt. 22. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 9.
30, 31.

Sixthly, The poor carnal world miss of heaven, because by unbelief, which
reigns in them, they are kept for ever from being clothed with Christ's
righteousness, and from washing in his blood, without which there is neither
remission of sin, nor justification.

But to pass these till anon.

I come in the next place to show you some reasons why the professor falls
short of heaven.

First, In the general, they rest in things below special grace, as in
awakenings that are not special, in repentance that is not special, in faith
that is not special, etc. and a little to run the parallel betwixt the one and
the other, that if God will, you may see and escape.

1. Have they that shall be saved awakenings about their ^^are by nature, so
have they that shall be damned: they that never go to heaven may see much of
sin and of the wrath of God due thereto: this had Cain, and Judas, and yet they
came short of the kingdom. Genesis 4. Matt. 27. 4. The saved have convictions in
order to their eternal life, but the others convictions are not so: the
convictions of the one does drive them sincerly to Christ, the convictions of
the other does drive them to the law, and the law to desperation at last.

2. There are also convictions that show a man his necessity of Christ, but
wanting grace to lay hold effectually on Christ, they join the law also with
the Savior, and so perish, or through despair of obtaining the power of grace,
they rest in the notions and profession of grace, and so perish.

3. There is a repentance that will not save, a repentance to be repented of,
and a repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. yet so
great a similitude, and likeness there is betwixt the one and the other, that
most times the wrong is taken for the right, and through this mistake
professors perish.

As 1. In saving repentance there will be an acknowledgement of sin; and one
that has the other repentance may acknowledge his sins also, Matt. 27. 4.

2. In saving repentance there is a crying out under sin, but one that has the
other repentance may cry out under sin also, Genesis 4. 13.

3. In saving repentance there will be humiliation for sin, and one that has
the other repentance may humble himself also, 1 King. 21. 29.

4. Saving repentance is attended with self-loathing, but he that has the
other repentance may have loathing of sin too, 2 Pet. 2. 22. a loathing of sin,
because it is sin, that he cannot have, but a loathing of sin because i^ is
offensive to him, that he may have* the dog does not loath that which troubles
his stomach because it is there, but because it troubles him* when it has done
troubling of him, he can turn to it again, and li^k it up as before it troubled
him.

5. Saving repentance is attended with prayers and tears, but he that has none
but the other repentance, may have prayers and tears also* Genesis 27. 34, 35.
Heb. 12. 14, 15, 16.

6. In saving repentance there is fear and reverence of the word, and
Ministers, that bring it; but this may be also where there is none but the
repentance that is not saving: for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a
just man, and holy, and observed him; when he heard him, he did many things,
and heard him gladly, Mark. 6. ^0.

7. Saving repentance makes a man's heart very tender of doing any thing against
the word of God: But Balaam could say, If Balak would give me his house full of
silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord, Numb. 24. 13. Behold,
then how far a man may go in repentance, and yet be short of that which is
called repentance unto salvation not to be repented of.

1. He may be awakened. 2. he may acknowledge his sin. 3. he may cry out under
the burden of sin. 4. he may have humility for it. 5. he may loath it. 6. may
have prayers and tears against it. 7. may delight to do many things of God. 8.
may be afraid of sinning against him, and after all this may perish for want of
saving repentance.

Secondly, Have they that shall be saved, faith; why they that shall not be
saved, may have faith also. Yea a faith in many things, so like the faith that
saves, that they can hardly be distinguished (though they differ, both in root
and branch:) to come to particulars.

1. Saving faith has Christ for its object, and so may the faith have that is
not saving; those very Jews, of whom it is said, they believed on Christ;
Christ tells them, and that after their believing: you are of your father the
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. Jo. 8. from ^. 30. to v 44

2. Saving faith is wrought by the word of God, and so may the faith be, that
is not saving, Luke 3. 13.

3. Saving faith looks for justification without works, and so may a faith do
that is not saving, Jam. 2. 18.

4. Saving faith will sanctify and purify the heart and the faith that is not
saving may work a man off from the pollutions of the world, as it did Judas and
Demas, and others, see 2 Pet. 2.

5. Saving faith will give a man tastes of the world to come, and also joy by
them tastes, and so will the faith do that is not saving, Heb. 6. 4. 5. Luke 8.
13.

6. Saving faith will help a man, if called thereto, to give his body to be
burned for his religion, and so will the faith do to that is not saving, 1 Cor.
13. 1. 2. 3. 4.

7. Saving faith will help a man to look for an inheritance in the world to
come, and that may the faith do that is not saving: all those virgins took
their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom, Matt. 25. 1.

8. Saving faith will not only make a man look for, but prepare to meet the
bridegroom, and so may the says do that is not saving; then all th^se virgins
arose and trimmed their lamps, Matt. 25. 7.

9. Saving faith will make a man look for an interest in the kingdom of heaven
with confidence, and the faith that is not saving will even demand entrance of
the Lord: Lord, Lord, open unto us; Matt. 2^. 11.

10. Saving faith will have good works follow it into heaven, and the faith
that is not saving, may have great works follow it, as far as to heaven gates,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, and
in thy name done many wondrous works. Matt. 7. 22.

Now then, if the says that is not saving, may have Christ for its object, be
wrought by the word, look for justification without works, work men off from
the pollutions of the world, and give men tastes of, and joy in the things of
another world; I say, again, if it will help a man to bu^^^ for his Judgment,
and to look for an inheritance in another world, yet if it will help a man to
to prepare for it, claim interest in it, and if it can carry great works, many
great and glorious works as far as heaven gates, then no marvel if abundance of
people take this faith for the saving faith, and so fall short of heaven
thereby. Alas friends! there are but few that can produce such for repentance,
and such says, as yet you see, I have proved even reprobates have had in
several ages of the Church. But,

Thirdly, they that go to heaven are a praying people, but a man may pray that
shall not be saved; pray! he may pray, pray daily, yea, he may ask of God the
ordinances of Justice, and may take delight in approaching to God, nay further,
such souls may as it were cover the altar of the Lord with tears, with weeping,
and crying out, Isa 28. 2. Mala. 12. 13.

Fourthly, do Gods people keep holy-fasts, they that are not his people may
keep fasts also, may keep fasts often, even twice a week, The pharisee stood,
and prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican: I fast twice a
week, I give tithes of all that I possess. Luke 10. 11. 12. I might enlarge
upon things, but I intend but a little book: I do not question but many
Balaamites will appear before the Judgment Seat to condemnation: men that have
had visions of God, and that knew the knowledge of the most high, men that have
had the spirit of God come upon them, and that have by that been made other
men, yet these shall go to the generations of their fathers, they shall never
see light: Numb. 24. 2. 4. 16. 1 Samuel 10. 6. 10. Psalm. 49. 19.

I read of some men, whose excellency in religion mounts up to the heavens,
and their head reaches unto the clouds, who yet shall perish for ever like
their own dung, and he, that in this world has seen them, shall say, at the
Judgment, where are they? Job. 20. 5. 6. 7. There will many an one that were
gallant professors in this world, be wanting among the saved in the day of
Christ's coming: yea many whose damnation was never dreamed of: which of the
twelve ever thought that Judas would have proved a devil? nay, when Christ
suggested that one among them were naught, they each were more afraid of
themselves then of him: Matt. 26. 21. 22. 2^. who questioned the salvation of
the foolish virgins, the wise ones did not, they gave them the privilege of
communion with themselves: Matt. 25. The discerning of the heart; and the
insallible proof of the truth of saving-grace, is reserved to the Judgment of
Jesus Christ at his coming; the Church and best of saints, sometimes hit, and
sometimes miss in their judgments about this matter; and the cause of our
missing in our judgment, is; 1. partly because we cannot infallibly, at all
times, distinguish grace that saves, from that which does but appear to do so.
2. partly also because some men have the art to give right names to wrong
things. 3. and partly because we being commanded to receive him that is weak,
are afraid to exclude the least Christian, by a hid means* hypocrites creep
into the Churches, but what says the Scripture? I the Lord search the heart, I
try the reins: And again, all the Churches shall know that I am he that
searches the reins and hearts, and I will give to every one of you, according
to your works: Jer. 11. 20. chap. 17. 10. Revel. 2. 23. To this searcher of
hearts, is the time of infallible discerning reserved, and then you shall see
how far grace that is not saving, has gone; and also how few will be saved
indeed. The Lord awaken poor sinners by my little book.

I come now to make some brief Use and Application of the whole: and my first
word shall be to the open profane: poor sinner, thou read here, that but a
few will be saved, that many that expect heaven, will go without heaven; what
say thou to this, poor sinner? Let me say it over again: There are but few to
be saved, but very few, let me add, but few professors; but few eminent
professors; what say thou now sinner? If Judgment begins at the house of God,
what will the end of them be that obey not the Gospel of God? This is Peter's
question, can thou answer it, sinner? yea, I say again, if judgment must
begin at them, will it not make thee think, what shall become of me? and I add,
when thou shall see the stars of heaven to tumble down to hell, can thou
think that such a muck-heap of sin as thou art, shall be lifted up to heaven?
Peter asks thee another question, to wit, If the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the ungodly, and sinners appear? 1 Pet. 14. 18, 19. can thou
answer this question sinner? stand among the righteous thou may not; ( the
ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the
righteous: Psalm. 1. 5.) stand among the wicked thou then wilt not dare to do;
where will thou appear sinner? to stand among the hypocrites will avail thee
nothing: the hipocrite shall not come before him, that is, with acceptance, but
shall perish: Job. 13. 16. Because it concern^ thee much, let me over with it
again: when thou shall see less sinners then thou art bound up by angels in
bundles to burn them, where will thou appear sinner? Thou may wish thy self
another man, but that will not help thee sinner; thou may wish, would I had
been converted in time, but that will not help thee neither; and if like the
wise of Jeroboam, thou should fain thy self to be another woman, the
prophet, the Lord Jesus would soon find thee out; what will thou do poor
sinner: heavy tidings, heavy tidings will attend thee, except thou repent, poor
sinner! 1 King. 14. 2, 5, 6. Luke 13. 3, 5. O the dreadful state of a poor
sinner, of an open profane sinner: every body that has but common sense knows
that this man is in the broad way to death, yet he laughs at his own damnation.

Shall I come to particulars with thee?

1. Poor unclean sinner, the harlots house is the way to hell, going down to
the chambers of death: Pro. 2. 18. chap. 5. 5. chap. 7. 27.

2. Poor swearing, and theivish sinner, God has prepared the curse, that every
one that steals shall be cut off, as ^n this side, according to it, and every
one that swrareth, shall be cut off on that side, according to it. Zech. 5. 3.

3. Po^r drunken sinner, what shall I say to thee - Woe to the drunkards of
Ephreim; woe them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strong drink; they
shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Isa. 28. chap. 5. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10.

4. Poor covetous worldly man, Gods word says, that the covetous the Lord
abhors; that the covetous man is an idolater, and that the covetous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. Psalm. 10. 3. Ephesians. 5. 5. Joh. 2. 15. 1 Cor. 6.
9, 10.

5. And thou liar. what will thou do? All liars shall have their part in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstome: Revel. 21. 8, 27.

I shall not in large, poor sinner, let no man deceive thee, for because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience: Ephesians.
5. 6. I will therefore give thee a short call and so leave thee.

Sinner awake, yea, I say, unto thee awake: sin lies at thy door, and Gods axe
lies at thy root, and hellfire is right underneath thee: I say again, awake.
Every tree therefore that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire. Genesis 4. 7. Matt. 3. 10.

Poor sinner awake, eternity is coming, and his son, they are both coming to
judge the world, awake; art yet asleep? poor sinner! let me se^ the trumpet to
thine ear once again. The heavens will be shortly on a burning flame, the earth
and the works thereof shall be burned up, and then wicked men shall go into
perdition, do thou hear this sinner? 2 Pet. 3.

Hark again, the sweet morsels of sins will then be fled, and gone, and the
bitter burning fruits of them only left, what say thou now sinner? can^t thou
drink hell fire? will the wrath of God be a pleasant dish to thy ta^t? this
must be thine every days meat and drink in hell, sinner.

I will yet propound to thee Gods ponderous question, and then for this time
leave thee. Can thine heart endure, or can thy hands be strong in the day that
I shall deal with thee says the Lord? Ezekiel. 22. 14. what say thou? will thou
answer this question now? or will thou take time to do it? or will thou be
desperate and venture all? And let me put this text in thine ear to keep it
open, and so the Lord have mercy upon thee; upon the wicked shall the Lord rain
snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this shall be the portion
of their cup: Psalm. 11. 6. repent sinners.

Secondly, my second word is to them that are upon the potters wheel,
concerning whom, we know not, as yet, whether their convictions, and awaknings
will end in conversion or no; several things I should say to you, both to
further your convictions, and to caution you from staying any where below, or
short of saving grace.

1. Remember that but few shall be saved, and if God should count thee worthy
to be one of that few, what a mercy would that be. Ephesians. 2. 45.

2. Be thankful therefore for convictions, conversion begins at conviction,
though all conviction does not end in conversion. It is a great mercy to be
convinced that we are sinners, and that we need a Savior, count it therefore a
mercy, and that thy convictions may end in conversion; do thou

1. Take heed of stiffling of them* it is the way of poor sinners, to look upon
convictions, as things that are hurtful, and therefore they use to shun the
awakening ministry, and to check a convincing conscience: such poor sinners,
are much like to the wanton boy that stands at the maids elbow to blow out her
candle as sa^^ as she lights it at the fire: convinced sinner, God lights thy
candle, and thou put ^ it out; God lights it* again, and thou put it out; (
yea how of^ is the candle of the wicked put out? Job. 21. 17. At la^ God
resol^eth he will light thy candle no more, and then like the Egyptians, you
dwell all your days in darkness, and never see light more, but by the light of
hellfire; wherefore give glory to God, and if he awakens thy conscience,
quench not thy convictions, do it, says the prophet, before he cause darkness,
and before your feet ^^^^ble up in the dark mountains; and he turn your
convictions into the shadow of death, and make them gross darkness. Jer. 13. 16.

1. Be willing to see the worst of thy condition, it is better to see it here,
then in hell: for thou may see thy misery here or there.

2. Beware of little sins, they will make way for great ones, and they again
will make way for bigger, upon which Gods wrath will follow, and then may thy
latter end be worse then thy beginning 2 Pet. 20.

3. Take heed of bad company, and evil communications, for that will corrupt
good manners: God says, evil company will turn thee aw^y from following him,
and will tempt thee to serve other Gods* devils: so the anger of the Lord, will
be kindled against thee, and destroy thee suddenly, Deuteronomy. 7. 3.

4. Beware of such a thought as bids thee delay repentance, for that is
damnable, Pro. 1. 24. Zee. 7. 12. 13.

5. Beware of taking example by some poor carnal professor, whose religion lies
in the tip of his tongue* Beware I say of the man whose head swims with
notions, but his life is among the unclean, Job. 36. 14. He that walks with
wise men shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed, Pro. 13.
20.

6. Give thy self much to the word, and prayer, and good conference.

7. Labor to see the sin that cleaves to the best of thy performances and
know that all is nothing if thou be not found in Jesus Christ.

8. Keep in remembrance that Gods eye is upon thy heart, and upon all thy
ways: can any hide himself in secret places that I should not see him says
the Lord? do not I fill heaven and earth, says the-Lord? Jer. 23. 24.

9. Be often imeditating upon death, and judgment. Eccle. 11. 9 chap 12. 14.

10. Be often thinking what a dreadful end, sinners, that have neglected
Christ, will make at that day of death, and judgment: Heb. 10. 31.

11. Put thy self often, in thy thoughts, before Christ's judgmentseat, in thy
sins, and consider with thy self, were I now before my judge, how should I
look, how should I shake and tremble.

12. Be often thinking of them that are now in hell past all mercy, I say, be
often thinking of them, thus,

1. They were once in the world, as I now am. 2. They once took delight in sin,
as I have done. 3. They once neglected repentance as Satan would have me do. 4.
But now they are gone, now they are in hell, now the pit has shut her mouth
upon them,
Thou may also doubt thy thoughts of the damned, thus.

1. If these poor creatures were in the world again, would they sin as they did
before? would they neglect salvation as they did before?

2. If they had sermons, as I have; if they had the bible, as I have; if they
had good company, as I have; yea if they had a day of grace, as I have; would
they neglect it as they did before? sinner, coulde*t thou soberly think of
these things they might help (God blessing them) to awaken thee, and to keep
thee awake to repentance, to the repentance that is to salvation ^^ver to be
repented of.

Object. But you have said, few shall be saved, and some that go a great way,
yet are not saved; at this therefore, I am even discouraged, and awakned: I
think I had as good go no further, I am indeed under conviction, but I may
perish, and if I go on in my sins I can but perish, and it is ten, twenty, a
hundred to one, if I be saved should I be never so earnest for heaven.

Answ. That few will be saved must needs be a truth, for Christ has said it;
that many go far, and come short of heaven, is as true, being testified by the
same hand: but what then? why then I had as good never seek: who told thee so?
must no body seek, because few are saved, this is just contrary to the text,
that bids us, th(...) strive: strive to enter in, because (...) gate is strait,
and because many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. ^u^ why go back
again, seeing that is the next way to hell, never go over hedge and ditch to
hell, if I must needs go thither, I will go the sa^dest way about; but who can
tell though there should not be saved so m^^y as there shall, but thou may be
^ne of that few. They that miss of l^^e perish because they will not let go
their sins, or because they take up in profession short of the saving says of
the Gospel: They perish I say, because they are content with such things as
will not prove graces of a saving nature, then they come to be tried in the
sire, otherwise the promise is free and full, and everlasting. Him that comes
to me, says Christ, I will in no wise c^st out for God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him might not perish
but have everlasting life. Ioh. 6. 37. wherefore let not this thought, few
shall be saved, weaken thy heart, but let it cause thee to mend thy pace, to
mend thy cries, to look well to thy grounds for heaven; let it make thee fly
faster from sin, to Christ, let it keep thee awake and out of carnal security,
and thou may be saved.

Thirdly, my third word is to professors, sirs, give me leave to set my trumpet
to your ears again a little, when every man has put in all the claim they*can
for heaven, but few will have it for their inheritance. I mean but few
professors, for so the text intends, and so I have also proved, f^r many, I
say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Let me therefore a little expostulate the matter with you, O ye thousands of
professors.

First, I begin with you whose religion lies only in your tongues, I mean you
who are little or nothing known from the rest of the rabble of the world, only
you can talk better then they: hear me a word or two. If I speak with the
tongue of men and angels, and have not charity, that is, love to God, and
Christ, and saints, and holiness, I am nothing, no child of God; and so have
nothing to do with heaven, 1 Cor. 13. a prating tongue will not unlock the
gates of heaven, nor blind the eyes of thy judge; look to it: the wise in
heart will receive commandments but a prating fool shall fall: Pro. 10. 8.

Secondly, covetous professor, thou that mak'n a gain of religion, that usest
thy profession to bring grift to thy mill; look to it also, gain is not
godlyness; Iudas's religion lay much in the bag, but his soul is now burning in
hell; all covetousness is Idolatry, but what is that or what will you call it,
when men are religions for filthy ^u^re ^uke, Ezekiel. 33. 31.

Thirdly, wanton professors I have a word for you; I mean, you that can tell
how to misplead Scripture, to maintain your pride, your banqueting, and
abominable idolatry: read what Peter says, you are the share and damnation of
others; you allure through the lust of the flesh, through much wantonness,
those that were clean escaped from them who live in error, 2 Pet. 2. 18.
besides the holy Ghost has a great deal against you, for your feastings, and
eating without fear, not for health, but gluttony: Jud. 12. further Peter
says, that you that count it pleasure to riot in the day time, are spots and
blemishes, sporting your selves with your own deceivings. 2 Pet. 2. 13. And let
me ask, did God give his word to justify your wickedness, or does grace teach
you to plead for the flesh, or the waking provision for the lusts thereof; of
these, also are they that feed their bodies to strengthen their lusts under
pretense of strengthening frail nature. But pray remember the text, many, I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Fourthly, I come next to the opinionist, I mean to him whose religion lies in
some circumstantials of religion; with this sort this kingdom swarms at this
day; these think all out of the way that are not of their mode, when themselves
may be out of the way in the midest of their zeal for their opinions, pray do
you also observe the text, many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able.

Fifthly, neither is the formalist exempted from this number: he is a man that
has lost all but the shell of religion, he is hot indeed for his form, and no
marvel, for that is his all to contend for, but his form being without the
power and spirit of godlyness, it will leave him in his fins; nay, he stands
now in them, in the sight of God, 2 Timothy 3. 5. and is one of the many that will
seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Sixthly, The legalist comes next, even him that has no life but what he makes
out of duties, this man, has chosen to stand and fall by Moses who is the
condemner of the world, there is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye
trust. Joh. 5. 45.

Seventhly, There is in the next place the libertine, he that pretends to be
against forms, and duties, as things that gender to bondage, neglecting the
order of God: this man pretends to pray always, but under that pretense, prays
not at all; he pretends to keep every day a sabath, but this pretense serves
him only to cast off all set times for the worship of God. This is also one of
the many that will seek to enter in and shall not be able. Tit. 1. 16.

Eighthly, There is the temporizing Latitudinarian, he is a man that has no God
but his belly, nor any religion but that by which his belly is worshipped, his
religion is always like the times, turning this way and that way, like the cock
on the steeple, neither has he any conscience but a benumned or seared one,
and is next door to a down right athiest, and also is one of them many that
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Ninthly, There is also the wilfully ignorant professor, or him that is afraid
to know more, for fear of the cross; he is for picking and choosing of truth,
and loves not to hazard his all for that worthy name by which he would be
called: when he is at any time overset by arguments, or awaknings of
conscience, he uses to heal all, by, I was not brought up in this faith, as if
it were unlawful for Christians to know more then has been taught them at
first conversion, there are many Scriptures that lie against this man, a^ the
(...) of great guns, and he is one of the many that will seek to enter in and
shall not be able.

Tenthly, we will add to all these, the professor that would prove himself a
Christian by comparing himself with others, instead of comparing himself with
the word of God. This man comforts himself because he is as holy as such, and
such: he also knows as much as that old professor, and then concludes he shall
go to heaven: as if he certainly knew, that those with whom he compares
himself would be undoubtedly saved, but how if he should be mistaken, nay may
they not both fall short; but to besure he is in the wrong that has made the
comparison. 2 Cor. 10. 12. and a wrong foundation will not stand in the day of
Judgment. This man therefore is one of the many that will seek to enter in and
shall not be able.

Eleventhly, There is yet another professor; and he is for God and for Baal
too, he can be any thing, for any company: he can throw stones with both hands,
his religion alters as fast as his company: he is a frog of Egypt and can live
in the water, and out of the water, he can live in religious company and again
as well out, nothing that is disorderly comes a miss to him, he will hold with
the hair, and run with the hound, he carries fire in one hand, and water in the
the other; he is a very any thing but what he should be: This is also one of the
many that will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Twel^thly, There is also that freewiller who denies to the holy Ghost the sole
work in conversion, and that Socinian, who denies to Christ that he has made
to God satisfaction for sin: and that Quaker who takes from Christ the true
natures in his person, and I might add as many more: touching whose damnation
(they dying as they are) the Scripture is plain: these will seek to enter in
and shall not be able.

But Fourthly, if it be so, what a strange disapointment, will many professors
meet with at the day of Judgment: I speak not now to the open profaner, every
body (as I have said) that has but common understanding between good and evil,
knows that they are in the broad way to hell and damnation, and they must needs
come thither, nothing can ^inder it, but repentance unto salvation, except God
should prove a lier to save them, and it is hard ventring of that.

Neither is it amiss, if we take notice of the examples that are briefly
mentioned in the Scriptures concerning professors that have miscarried.

1. Judas perished from among the Apostles. Acts. 1. 2. Demas as I think
perished from among the Evangelists 2 Timothy 4. 10. 3. Diotrephes from among the
Ministers, or them in office in the Church. 3. Ioh. 9. 10. 4. And as for
Christian professors, they have sell by heaps, and almost by whole Churches, 2 Timothy 1. 15. Revel. ^. 4. 15. 16. 17. 5. Let us add to these, that the things
mentioned in the Scriptures about these matters, are but brief hints, and items
of what is afterward to happen; as the Apostle said; some (...) are open
before hand, going before (...) judgment, and some men they ^^l^ow after, 1 Timothy 5 24. So t(...) fellow-professor, let us fear, (...)mise being le^t us of
en^^ing into (...) ^e^t, any of us should seem ^o come short of it* O to come
(...) nothing kills like it, nothing will burn like it.

I intend not discouragements but awaknings, the Churches have need of awakning
and so has all professors, do not despise me therefore, but hear me over
again? what a strange disappointment will many professors meet with at the day
of God almighty! a disappointment, I say and that as to several things.

1. They will look to escape hell, and yet fall just into the mouth of hell!
what a disappointment will here be. 2. They will look for heaven but the gate
of heaven will be shut against them! what a disappointment is here? 3* They
will expect, that Christ should have compassion for them, but will find that
he has shut up all bowels of compassion from them! what a disappointments
here?
(...), fifthly, As this disappointment will be fearful, ^o certainly it (...).

(...)o be (...) and

2. Will it not be amazing to them to see their own madness and folly, while
they consider how they have dallyed with their own souls, and took lightly for
granted, that they had that grace that would save them but has left them in
damnable state.

3. Will they not also be amazed one at another, while they remember how in
their life time, they counted themselves fellow-heirs of life. To allude to
that of the prophet: they shall be amazed one of another, their faces shall be
as flames. Isa. 13. 8.

4. Will it not be amazing to some of the damned themselves, to see some come
to hell that then they shall see come thither. To see preachers of the word;
professors of the word, practisers in the word, to come thither; what wondering
was there among them at the fall of the king of Babylon, since he thought to
have swallowed up all because he was run down by the Modes and Persians, how
art thou fallen from heaven Lucifer, sun of the morning? how art thou cut down
to the ground that did weaken the nations? If such a thing as this, will with
amazement, surprise the damned, what an amazement will it be to them to see
such an one as he, whose head reached to the clouds: to see him come down to
the pit, and perish for ever like his own dung. Hell from beneath is moved for
thee, to meet thee at thy coming, it stirs up the dead for thee, even all
the chief ones of the earth. Isa. 14. they that see thee, shall ^narrowly look
upon thee and consider thee, saying, is this the man^^ Is this he that
professed and dispu^^d, and forsook us, but now he is come to us again? is this
he that separated from us, but how is he fallen with us into the same eternal
damnation with us?

Sixthly, yet again, one word more, if I may awaken professors 1. consider,
though the poor carnal world, shall certainly perish, yet they will want these
things to aggravate their sorrow which thou will meet with in every thought
that thou will have of the condition thou wast in when thou wast in the world.

1. They will not have a profession to bite them when they come thither.

2. They will not have the tastes of a lost heaven, to bite them when they come
thither.

3. They will not have the thoughts* of, I was almost at heaven, to bite them
when they came thither.

4. They will not have, the thoughts of, how they cheated saints, Ministers,
Churches, to bite them, when they come thither.

5. They will not have the dying thoughts of false faith, false hope, false
repentance, and false holiness to bite them when they come thither. I was at
the gates of heaven, I looked into heaven, I thought I should have entered into
heaven! O how will these things sting! they will, if I may call them so, be the
sting of the sting of death in hell fire.

Seventhly, Give me leave now in a word, to give you a little advice.

1. Do thou love thine own soul, then pray to Jesus Christ for an awakned
heart, for an heart so awakned, with all the things of another world, that thou
may be allured to Jesus Christ.

2. When thou come there, beg again for more awaknings about sin, hell,
grace, and about the righteousness of Christ.

3. Cry also for a spirit of discerning, that thou may know that which is
saving-grace indeed.

4. Above all studies, apply thy self to the study of those things, that show
thee the evil of sin, the shortness of men's life, and which is the way to be
saved.

5. Keep company with the most godly among professors.

6. When thou hear what the nature of true grace is, defer not to ask thine
own heart, if this grace be there; and here take heed,

1. That the preacher himself be^ound, and of good life.

2. That thou take not seeming graces for real ones, nor seeming fruits for
real fruits.

3. Take heed that a sin and thy life goes not unrepented of, for that will
make a ^law in thine evidence, a wound in thy conscience, and a breach in thy
peace, and an hundred to one if at last, it does not drive all the grace in
thee into so dark a corner of thy heart, that thou shall not be able, for a
time, by all the torches that are burning in the Gospel to find it out to
thine own comfort and consolation.

FINIS.

