THREE QUESTIONS Resolved briefly and plainly, VIZ. What Conceptions ought we
to have of the blessed God? What are those Truths, whereof the Knowledge
appears most indispensibly necessary unto our Salvation; and (therefore) to
be first and most Learnt by us? What is the Change wrought in a Man by God's H.
Word and Spirit, before he can safely conclude himself passed from Death to
Life? Being the Sum of three Sermons. By Daniel Burgess.

John 21.15. Jesus says unto him, Feed my Lambs (i. e. Souls, even the
Lowest.) 1 Cor. 3.2. I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, (i. e.
Doctrine fit for weaklings, not folk of strong understanding.) LONDON, Printed
for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower end of
Cheapside, and Robert Gibbs at the Golden Ball in Chancery Lane. 1688.

TO THE Congregation under my Care.
IT is said, my Brethren, that whatever Affections be in the Middle, they have
two sharp Ends.

Our first Love has been as Zealous, as our first Knowledge was Wondrous. I am
persuaded also, that when we shall be Parted, it will be no less Ardent. And
our separation will be, as that of our Limbs from each other would be. May it
be our Care, that, whiles we are Kept together by good Providence, we admit no
chill in that sweet and useful Grace; but show it to be a godly Love, by having
it like the Love of God, That is Unchangeable.

I have nothing for you Great, but my Love. Next unto it, is my Labor: But, as
my Talent is slender, that it self is shorter than my Desire. Without your very
great Affection, I can expect little success of my Preaching or Writing.
Thereby I am encouraged unto both, and in both, as yet. It is that which has
given the Imprimatur unto these Notes. For, though of the Truths of God in them,
I study to think most honorably: yet, as to any thing that is mine in them, I
praise God, I do think very despicably. And am prepared to hear it
undisturbedly, if others shall think so too.

Neither do I purpose to put you off with these Fragments. But pay the whole
that I am Debtor of by Promise unto you, if the Lord will, and I live. I must
beg your Patience indeed for some time. Nor need I say for what Reasons; being
all that know me, know them also.

You think, (as I do, though on a different reason,) my Days on Earth will be
few. Be they more or less, the greatest part of them shall be spent in Pains
and Prayers for your Persons and Families. While I am capable of either, You,
more than any others, shall have them. Even Self-love bids you Pray for me: and
I know you have other Motives. Therefore I Expect it, and not Entreat it.

I am, An Affectionate Servant of your Faith, Obedience and Joy, D. Burgess.

Q 1. What Conceptions ought we to have of God?
OF all Truths, it is the most evident, that there is a God. And of all things
Knowable, it is most necessary that we Know, what He is. This to Know
perfectly, is impossible. An Oyster-shell cannot contain the Ocean; nor a
finite Mind comprehend an infinite Object. It Is only God himself can fully Know
himself. But, He made our Minds to Know Him, with a Knowledge sufficient to
serve and enjoy Him. Of this, we are Capable. For this, He vouchsafes us means
Plentiful. And without this, every Mother's Child must be everlastingly
miserable.

Our Thoughts of Him, are the Seed of all our Affections, Words, and
Conversation toward Him. I, and toward one another too. If these be corrupt,
nothing is sound, of all that is in us, or comes from us. Nor can these be
Good, but when they are True, and agreeable unto their Rule; Powerful, and
Answerable unto their End. The Rule of them, is God's own Word; in the Books of
Nature, and Scripture published.

The End of them, is the Exaltation of God's Name, the Subjection of us to his
Authority, the Actuation of us unto Obedience to his Law. When they follow this
Rule, and obtain this End, our Conceptions of God are what they ought to be.

Indeed, Revelation is the Measure of Faith God requires, for Degree, according
to what He gives. He gives some, an hundredfold more advantages for Knowing
Him, than he bestows on others. And He will accept an hundredfold less from
some men, than others. Let Ministers, Rich men, and such as sit under the best
Ministry of the Word, remember this and tremble. Let the Unlearned, the Poor,
and those that live necessitously under the worst Ministry, think of this, and
in hope get all they are able.

Nevertheless, be it considered by all. We all have the great Volume of the
World, that the Heathens had: and Moses and the Prophets, that the Jews had:
and Christ and his Apostles, and the Gospel Light, that they had not. Yea, and
such Displays of it in England, as the very Churches beyond the Seas have not.
[And I wish it better observed, what London has, that most Country parts are
destitute of.] Much is given to England, very much to London. And the Thoughts
of Himself that God will require from us Englishmen, and specially Londoners,
must be presumed to extend unto these sixteen Particulars.

Seven concerning his Essence. Three concerning his Relations, common unto all
his Creatures. And six concerning his Relations special unto our selves. If any
one seem Excusable, I pray the Reader to give me his reason for that
appearance. If all do seem Impossible to be gotten and held in Memory, I desire
that it be thought as true as I can make it appear, viz. that I find Children
of ten years old, that can perfectly and pleasantly get and retain them in
their Memories. And if grown people cannot so do, they must take what follows
such their reprobate Mind. Read on, ye who have Will and Power.

Concerning God's Essence or Nature; to wit, that by which He is what He is,
and is differenced from all other things; it is to be born in Mind, that,

1. He is an Vncaused, or Unmade Being. A Creature is a thing contrived by
God's Wisdom, and made out of nothing by his Power; and this, freely, of his
own Will and Choice. But God is a Being that never came out of Not-being. Was
never Contrived by his own or any other Wisdom. Never Made by his own or any
other Power, and Will. For a thing to be the Cause of it self, is confessed by
all the World to be Impossible. And for a Creature or second Being to be the
Cause of its God or first Being, is such an absurdity as no unbewitched Mind
can swallow. That which is Nothing, can do nothing: If there was a time, when
God was Nothing, surely at that time he could do Nothing. And if so; He could
not make Himself. As for other Causes, I ask, as the Apostle in another case,
Who has first given to Him, and it shall be recompensed? Romans 35.11.

2. He is an Eternal Being. A Creature is a thing that has a Morn, a Noon, and
a Night. A Beginning, Change, and End. An End, and a Return unto it is first
Nothingness, the first moment that God ceases to uphold it. Angels and our
Souls, are of themselves Mortal: It Is only by divine Will, Power and
Sustentation that they are Immortal, Heb. 1.3. But God, is Je, Ho, Vah. A Being
that Shall be, that Is, and that Has ever been. Without Beginning, Psalm. 90.2.
Without Change, Psalm. 102.27. Without End, Psalm. 102.26.

3. He is an Vndependent Being. A Creature, is a thing that cannot stand alone.
Material, Mixed, and Spiritual Creatures all are weak, all as unable to Sustain
themselves as to Produce themselves. But God, is a Being that is above
Depending. He came not into Being, by any Help, He continues not in Being by
any. He Depends on nothing; that is, He depends not. Genesis 17.1. He is El
Shaddai, God All-sufficient. So all, that He can need nothing: So all, that He
can support every thing.

4. He is a Necessary Being. A Creature, is a thing that may, or may not, be.
That must be, or must not be, as its God pleases. Rev. 4.11. But God is a
Being; that cannot but Be. One, to which it is eternally repugnant and
impossible either never to have Been, or to cease from Being. One who only has
Being, necessarily; and Immortality, necessarily. 1 Timothy 6.16. One whose Being
and Immortality, never cost one act of his Will or Power! Nor are capable of
being made to cease.

5. He is an All-perfect Being. A Creature is a thing of Imperfection in every
reference. One, that has more of Nothing, than Thing, say the Schools. One,
whose Perfection, such as it is, is threefold: Of Being, of Working, of
Well-being. Every Creature is Imperfect in all: And after the day of Judgment,
will in all be but Finite. Nor has any one Creature, the Perfections that
divine Goodness has dispersed among all. But God is a Being of excellent
Perfection, and perfection in every Excellency. Every one Conceivable, by Men,
and Angels. I, and whatever is by both Unconceivable. God, is above the
Blessing and Praise of both. Neh. 9.5. He is Above all that He has Revealed
Himself unto us to be: And more than unto us finite things is Revealed, or
possible to be Revealed. [See, Children, your Larger Catechism. See, others,
Mr. Charnock of the Divine Attributes.] God's infinite Mind cannot conceive,
what He should be better or greater than He is. And finite Minds must needs
conclude, He is infinitely above all that they can conceive.

6. He is a Tri-une Being. Or, a Being that subsists in three distinct Persons.
Here is the Mystery of Mysteries. The hardest to be Understood; but easy, as
any, to be Believed. With such a Brightness it is revealed in the blessed
Gospel. How necessary it is to be Believed, is hence evident: To wit, that (1.)
This manner of Being is the Top-most glory of God. It is the best manner of
Being, that can be. That without which, it is hard to think how God should be in
Himself glorious infinitely, or blessed infinitely. His Creatures are, and can
be, but finite. And what can they speak infinite! The Infinite glory of the
divine Persons, shines in their Relations one to the other. I, and their
Blessedness consists in their Loving, and being Loved of one another. [Dr.
Cheynel of the Trin. chapter 5th. deserves good reading.] (2.) The Doctrine of
God's subsisting in, or being Father, Son, and Spirit, distinctly; is most
firmly connected with all the parts of our Christian Religion: And so, that if
Ignorance or Unbelief of the glorious Trinity prevail on us, our Christianity
is lost. And it is another Gospel, even a high Road to Sin and Hell that we
betake us unto. See Matthew. 28.19. 1 John 5.7. John 14.26. John 15.26. A Tree,
is one. Its Root, Trunk, and Branch, are three. Have three Manners of Being:
the Root is of it self; the Trunk is of the Root; the Branches are from both
Root and Trunk. They give forth Fruit, in a threefold manner: the Root,
originally and firstly; the Trunk continuedly, and secondly; the Branch
completely and immediately. Who cannot apply this? God is one. This one God, is
Father, Son, and Spirit; three Persons. The Father is of Himself. The Son is of
the Father. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and Son. In the Communication of
good, they all work jointly, yet there are distinct Personal operations, by
which they make way for the glory of each oother. Inchoation or Beginning of
good, is from the Father; Dispensation is by the Son; Consummation, or
completing, is by the Spirit. I do not forget, and I would have my Reader
remember, St. Hilarie's often quoted saying; viz. All Comparisons, though
Helpful, are yet disproportionable. It Is very true; no Similitude can reach the
thing, but this, and others like it, may help our understandings.

7. He is the All-working Being. That Fore-ordains whatever comes to pass, and
Effects whatever he Fore-ordains. To wit, in Works of Creation and
Providence. A Creature is a thing that cannot it self come (that infinite
space,) from Nothing into Being. Cannot, afterward, uphold its Being, Virtues,
Actions. Cannot govern it self, Acts 17.28. Cannot be undepending in respect of
Working, any more than in respect of Being. But God is a Being, All-working.
His Word speaks all into Being: His Conserving influence goes to our
Preservation: His Assisting influence to our Operation. This his Assisting
influence or concurrence fore-goeth the Operation of Creatures. Fore-goes it in
Order, though not in Time. It is Cooperation, or Co-working with the Creature.
Without the Creature's Operation, God will not produce many Effects: And
without God's Cooperation, the Creature cannot produce any. God's Co-working,
is also Immediate. With Immediateness of Virtue and Power; without which there
could be no Effect: And with Immediateness of Presence too; for God is every
where. He is called Hamakom, the Place. Lastly, it is determining. There can be
but one absolute Determiner and Overruler of Operations. And who is He, but
God? And, if by Him, the Operations of Creatures were not absolutely
Determined, it would be very possible that He might be Frustrated, and
Disappointed of his Ends sometimes. But there is nothing more impossible than
that. Be it Observed. Though in the sense foresaid, God Works all; yet so,
so Works He, that he Changes not the Nature of things, Offers no violence to
them, Suffers them to act by and under him; and that as Freely, as though there
were no Decree upon them, or Hand overruling them. [See Mr. Norton's Orthod.
Evangelist.]

Concerning God's Relations common unto all his Creatures, let it be attended
that follows in few words.

1. He is the Supreme Benefactor. Creatures can be but the Bearers of his
Benefits unto us. And of but some of 'em; and that but of the Out-parts of them
too. The Benefactor is God. All-good we ever Have had, Have, and Shall ever
have, God Contriveth, Wills, Executes. He Begins all, Carries on all,
Compleats all; Freely, without Necessity; Graciously, without Merit.

2. He is the Supreme Ruler. Creatures, have no Power or Authority but from
Him, and under Him, and for Him His infinite Perfections, make him most Fit to
rule. His Creation and Conservation of all things, give Him infinite Right and
Title to rule all. To make Laws; to Judge according to them; to Execute
Judgment so passed.

3. He is the Absolute Proprietor, and Owner. Creatures are things that are not
their Own, or one another's, any farther than, under Himself, God makes them
so. God, is entirely his Own. And his Own, be all the Works of his hands. And
without the shadow of a spot on his Justice, He may do what He will with his
Own: Whether it be a Person, Family, Kingdom, Church, World. His Authority can
no more be Disproved, than his Power be Resisted, if He set to Exalt, or
Debase, or Destroy. I, and this without giving any account of his Matters.

Concerning God's Relations special and particular unto our selves, be it
considered. It Is of importance, as great, as true; and as plain, as it is great,
that every Soul come as near as may be to a full and just Conclusion concerning
these; [Con, O my Friends, Mr. Baxter of Self-knowledge!] I appeal to my
Readers, how needful it is that these six things be ever in our deepest and
severest thoughts. That every of us get able to say, and keep saying concerning
God.

1. He is my Quondam-Friend and Father, even Immediate. He that before Sin's
Entrance, dearly Loved and was Beloved by me. And that without a Mediator,
Sacrificing and Interceeding for me. It Is He, that made me in his Likeness
Natural; an Intelligent and Immortal Being. And in his Likeness Moral; for
Holiness, Blessedness, and Dominion over inferior Creatures. It Is He, that
entered Covenant with me in my first Parent. A Covenant, to sweeten his
Government, and to secure my Obedience. A Covenant, of Terms unexceptionable.
Yea, and founded not only in his Will, but in the very Nature of things
themselves. For it bound me, but to be blessed; that is, to be Holy. And
threatened no evil at all, unless I first committed the worst of all; that is,
Sin. A Covenant also, signed and sealed with Sacraments. Such appear the Trees
of Knowledge and Life to have been.

2. He is next my angry and armed Enemy, and in all appearance Unreconcilable.
It Is He, that as soon as I sinned, in Adam, loathed me, and my Soul also
abhorred Him. He it is, that then took away his H. Spirit from me, and gave me
up unto the bondage of the Law, that I had broken. To the Servitude of the Sin,
that I had committed. To the Tyranny of Satan, to whom I had hearkened. To the
Power of Death, that I had deserved. O the Wrath! oh the Vengeance! And alas!
what Hope appeared to Men, or to Angels, of any Reconciliation? Neither could
imagine a Reconcilement to be Possible; and much less think it Future, or
Coming.

3. He is my Propitiated God, reconcilable, and inviting me to Reconciliation.
Come seize me O Wonder and Joy! It Is He, that did not so for fallen Angels; but
for fallen Men, gave his Co-essential Eternal Son for a Sin-offering. An
Offering, satisfying for all Iniquity, and meriting every Mercy. And that so
fully, that now upon the account hereof, I have Leave, Commandment, and
Encouragement to Seek, Pray, and Wait for the best, and all good things.
Without Money, and without Price; without any Quality or Work of my own,
Satisfying, or Deserving. I, it is He, that by his Christ, his Spirit, and his
Ministers, does even stoop to Entreat, and Pray, and Beseech me, to be friends
with Him, 2 Cor. 5.20. It Is He, that has made it now the worst of sins, that I
am capable of sinning; to Presume that I am a Reprobate; and that there is no
hope for my Recovery out of my Sin and Misery, by his Grace in Christ unto All
offered, without Exception.

4. He is, as sure as I Repent and Believe, my Reconciled God. He it is, that
Lays aside all his Anger; Loves freely; Pardons fully; Accepts graciously my
Soul, saying, All that I have is thine, Luke 15. and I will be thy God: And all
this in the first instant, wherein I Mourn for, and Turn from my Sin, so as to
Believe on his Son. That is, to resign up my self to be Taught, Saved, and
Ruled by Him. He it is that then turns from all his Judicial Wrath: yea, and
when I Live up unto the Grace by me received, turns from all his very Paternal
or Fatherly Displeasure. He it is that lessens his Love of Complacence in me,
and Assistance of me, for none but Wilful and Presumptuous Sins. Sparing me for
sins of invincible infirmity and incursion, as a Father does the Son that
desires to serve him.

5. He, as sure as He is my Reconciled, is my Covenanted God also. He never
dealt with Man, in other way than this most sweet one, of Covenant! Hallowed be
his Name, He did not. And He it is, that now has as well bound Himself to be
my God, as me to be his Servant. He it is, that to my wondrous advantages has
thus Covenanted with me. (1.) He has Covenanted with me Doubly. First, in my
Parents; promising me Mercy for their sakes, Romans 11.28. Promising them Mercy
for me, Exodus 20.6. Secondly, in my Person. He has made a Covenant with me, 2 Samuel 23.5. Ezekiel. 16.8. (2.) He Covenanted with me Sacramentally; or Signedly
and Sealedly. For Sacraments are Signs and Seals on God's part, Bonds and
Badges on our parts, [as I have elsewhere shown.] Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 20.16.
Bless his Name, O my Soul! He has Visibly covenanted with thee in H. Baptism,
and at his H. Table, and most Sensibly. (3.) He has Covenanted with me, as not
Nakedly but with Signs and Seals, so not Tardily, but (to my great benefit,)
Early. Early, in my very Infancy. Before I could Commit an Actual sin; so
setting forth my Original sin. Before I could Desire Grace; so showing abroad
the Freeness of his Grace. So Early was I Baptized, and encouraged and engaged
to Obey the Gospel, when I came to years of capacity, that I cannot but see
God's Kindness in forestalling Satan's Seducements. And all days of my Life, I
will remember it, as David does, Psalm. 22.10. Thou art my God, [that is, my
Covenant-God] from my Mother's belly, v. 9. Thou did make me to Hope when I
was on my Mother's breasts: [That is, Thou did even then, by the Covenant
then signed and sealed unto me, lay in grounds and motives for my Hope in Thee,
when I should come to years of understanding.] (4.) He has signed and sealed
Covenant with me Frequently. I am no stranger at his Table. His holy Bread many
a time have I eaten. Times numberless, He has cheared me therewith.

6. He is my God, Oppignorated; or Engaged to me by Pawns and Pledges. Promises
are much: Signs and Seals be wonderful Appendages to Divine Promises. But,
behold here are also unexpressibly rich Pawns superadded! God is He, that has
given me the highest, and most solemn, and sweetest Testifications of his Will
to be for ever my God, and Portion. The Earnest of his Spirit, with his blessed
Graces and Consolations, ensure all the good things of the Covenant. They are
such First Fruits, as make the best security for the whole Harvest. And these
has Grace made mine.

And now I beg Pardon in my Savior's Blood, for all the Defects of this Paper.
They whose Entreaties, Letters, and Messages have extorted it, are both to
Pardon and Accept it. Let them, with me, ever remember this saying of the great
Light of our Age; The Sun may more easily be included in a spark of Fire, than
the infinite Perfections of God be comprehended in a finite Mind.

FINIS.
Q. 2. What are those Truths, (...) of the Knowledge appears (...)
indispensibly necessary unto our ^^^vation? and in the first ^^^^^sirable?
ALL sober Christians do (...) some Truths there be (...) must needs Know, or
(...) ever, Isa. 27.11. Hos. (...) over Truths there be, which (...) unto our
Comfort in our (...) our Usefulness unto others, (...) out our Salvation: though
the (...) them be not absolutely necessary working out the same.

It seems not the Mind of God (...) us Know, which the former sort of (...) are
in particular. And how Many o^ (...) there be. Nor can it be said, the (...)
Uncertainty about them, is of dis^^^^^tage unto us. For, what if we were (...)
so certain which they were? Being (...) capacity of getting Knowledge of (...)
sort of Truths, it would be inconsistent with both Reason and Grace, to take up
content with the Knowledge of the former only.

Sufficient it is for our Duty, Safety, and Comfort, to Know what those Truths
be; which, considering our Condition and Capacity, we are concerned first of
all to Acquaint us with. And those, which afterward our Interest obliges us,
above all others, to get Informed of. It Is enough for us to Know, what are the
Essential and Integral Doctrines, which made and enriched the Christians which
are gone to Heaven before us: and the right Knowledge of which, will certainly
make us Christians, and Rich ones. God has revealed in his Word, what these
are. And from his H. Word, and agreeably unto it, I assay to declare what they
are. With that plainness, which weak Understandings; and that compendiousness,
which infirm Memories, do require at my hands.

Be it premised, Sanctification is Salvation begun; Salvation is Sanctification
perfected. Grace and Glory differ but in degree. What is necessary to the one,
is so unto the other. Now Sanctification is our Conformity unto God through Jesus
Christ. And this is made by Covenant. By the Covenant of Grace, and (...)
other; which is called all our Salvation and all our Desire. Those Truths
therefore, which do most directly lead unto the same, and that acquaint us with
it, and show us the use of it, are of the greatest weight and importance: and
are to be attended unto in the first place. It has not been without some
success, that I have commended to be first learned (before any Catechism it
self) these seven Articles.

A. 1. God, the Father, Son, and Spirit, created the World. He created Man,
Wise, Holy, Blessed, and Honorable. He Covenanted with the first Man, and with
his Posterity in him; that, if they Obeyed perfectly, they should be for ever
Happy, if they Sinned, they should Die. This is called the Covenant of Works.

A. 2. Adam the first Man, and his Posterity in him, brake that Covenant, and
thereby fell under God's wrath and curse, and Sin and Satan's power. Note this
Breach of Covenant.

A. 3. God, the Father did, from eternity, Covenant with his Son Jesus Christ,
for the Redemption of Sinners from Sin and Misery: to wit, by his being made
Man, and a Servant, and a Curse and afterward an Intercessor for them. This is
named the Redemption-Covenant.

A. 4. In pursuance of this Redemption-Covenant, when Man had sinned, Christ
the Savior was Preached. And in Him, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption offered: with Repentance, Faith in God through Him, and New Obedience
required. This is called the Covenant of Grace.

A. 5. For our Encouragement to believe God's Promises made unto us in the
Covenant of Grace; and for our farther Engagement to fulfill the Demands from us
in it; God always pleased to order this Covenant to be solemnised, by some
outward Rites and Ceremonies of his own appointment. And his Ceremonies
appointed for these ends, in the New-Testament-Church, are Baptism and the
Lord's Supper. These are called therefore, the Signs and Seals of the Covenant.

A. 6. Obedience unto the Gospel, in the Faith of Christ, and by the Help of
the Holy Ghost, is of necessity unto all that have inwardly consented unto the
Covenant of Grace; and that have had it outwardly solemnised betwixt God and
them, in Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

A. 7. Besides lesser Rewards in this life to those that Enter and Keep the
Covenant of Gra^^ (...) on those that En^^ (...) has set a day wherein (...)
the Bodies of all men out of the (...) unite them to their Souls: and, ^o
E^^^nity, will Reward the former, and Punish the latter, in Soul and Body.

In an Hour's time, an attentive Mind of ordinary capacity, will Ken these
Articles. If but happily opened by a skilful Teacher. [Yet contain they much
more, than multitudes of our people understand at forty and fifty years of age.
Be astonished, oh Heavens!] I judge them the most apt for Explication and
Inculcation on first Beginners, whether Children or Grown People.

Being competently acquainted with this shortest Summary, that which I would
next commend, follows in these, not many, but orderly Positions.

P. 1. The Rule, and the Object of saving Truth is most Considerable by
enquirers after Truth.

P. 2. The Rule is, the Old and New Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ, Penned
by Moses and the Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles. Whereof the Authority
and Sufficiency are certain.

P. 3. The Object is He whose name JAM. Glorious, above all Blessing and
Praise, for his Essence, which is One: Subsistence, which is in Three distinct
Persons: Works, which are inward, and outward. [Of Essence and Subsistence see
before, p.]

P. 4. The Outward Works of God are of Creation, and Providence. One is God's
giving first Being unto all things. The other, is his preserving and ordering
them unto his own wise and holy End.

P. 5. God's General Providence, is over all things. His Principal, is over Men
and Angels.

P. 6. God's Providence over Man, respects man's fourfold Estate: to wit, of
Innocence, of Misery, of Grace, and of Glory.

P. 7. Of Grace toward man, considerable are the Fountains, Election and
Redemption. The Vessels, God's Church and People. The Degrees, Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification. The Means, Word, Sacraments, and Prayer.

P. 8. Of Glory conferred by God upon his Children, observable are the four
steps. In Assurance of eternal Love obtained; in the Heavenly Mansions
possessed from the day of Death to the day of Judgment; in the Honor put on at
the day of Judgment; in the complete Glory bestown after the day of general
Judgment, and for ever to endure.

Trial will best discover with how small pains, and great Profit, this
Compendium may begotten. And when gotten it is by Understanding and Memory, I
advise that that which follows in twelve particulars, be studied. Namely, three
concerning GOD, three concerning MAN, three concerning CHRIST, three concerning
the APPLICATION of Christ that is saving unto us.

P. 1. There is one only God, an Infinite, Perfect, and Spiritual Essence.

P. 2. This one God, is Father, Son, and Spirit. Distinguished into three
manners of Subsistence, after a way incomprehensible. The Father eternally
Begetting, the Son Begotten, the Holy Ghost Proceeding.

P. 3. This one God is the Maker, Preserver, Governor of all things, by
infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness.

P. 4. Man was made of such a Body and Soul, that he was able to have attained
for himself and his Posterity, that eternal Life, which was provided for his
reward if he had stood obedient.

P. 5. Man thus made, was Envyed and Tempted by the Devil, and Yielded wilfully
unto his temptation, and brake the Law and Covenant of God, and made himself
and all his posterity cursed by God, and envassalled to Sin and Satan; and
unable to escape the threatened Death.

P. 6. Man thus immiserated, was Pitied by God. Who (in prosecution of an
eternal Counsel and Covenant of peace) provided, preached, and offered a
Savior to him: even Jesus Christ the righteous.

P. 7. Jesus Christ, this Savior, is, as to his Natures, perfect God and
perfect Man, in one Person: and, as to his Offices, he is both Prophet, Priest
and King; in both his states, of Humiliation, and Exaltation.

P. 8. Jesus Christ's Humiliation in being made under the Law, Obeying the
Precepts, and Suffering the Curse of it, was deeper than was possible for any
mere creature to undergo. And his Exaltation, in Rising from the Dead as He
did, Ascending up into Heaven, and Having all Power in Heaven and Earth given
unto Him, was higher than any mere creature could possibly be exalted unto.

P. 9. Jesus Christ, being so Exalted, is Able to save to the uttermost, and
Willing to save Sinners the chiefest; welcomes all that penitently come unto
Him, and mourns over all that obstinately keep away from Him.

P. 10. Application of Christ, that avails unto our Salvation by Him, is
twofold; viz. such as is made by God, and such as is made by our selves. God
applies Christ to us by his H. Spirit, when by him he does give us will and
power to embrace him as offered in the Gospel. We apply Christ unto our selves,
when by Faith in-worked in us, we do embrace him as Prophet, Priest, and King,
Covenanting with Him, as such, for ever.

P. 11. Application of Christ so described, is that which every Soul should
seek, pray, and wait for, in the use of all God's Means appointed. Resting not
quietly, without some well built Hopes that they have through grace attained it.

P. 12. Application of Christ so desirable, no man may hope for, out of the
Means by God appointed: but in the constant and diligent use of those Means, no
man need fear but he shall find it.

When Novices have gotten thus far, they are more than a little advantaged to
learn any of our Catechisms. The Westminster Assemblies, with blessed Mr. Lies
most useful Exposition; or any other. Yet (for Reasons nameless) let me say, I
would not have that, or any other, singly addressed to.

All Methods, are imperfect; says our great Methodist. But he sticks not to
say, (What my heart thinks,) that the Creed, Lord's Prayer, Ten Commands, and
Doctrine of the Sacraments, make the compleatest body of Truths, that we can
form. The Rule of Faith, is in the first: the Rule of our Prayers, in the
second: the Rule of our Practice, in the third: the great Encouragement and
Engagement to Believe, Pray, and Live holily, is set forth in the fourth. I
conclude therefore with such as small a Map of the World of Truths in these, as
some candid Hearers have not thought Vnuseful. In number thirty seven.

Creed Truths twelve.
1. There is a God that is three distinct Persons, whose Revelations of himself
are to be Credited; his Promises to be Relied on; his Demands from us Consented
unto heartily, and practically. And the First Person of these three, [First in
Order, though not in Time, of Being and Working,] is named the Father. Father of
All things by Creation; of his Church by Adoption; of his Christ, by Generation
in time, as he was Man; and by Generation eternal and inconceivable, as He is
God. Father Almighty, as to Right to do whatever He pleases, and as to
Strength wherewith to do it. And Maker of Heaven and Earth, that is, of all
things. Of the University of Beings.

2. The Second Person of the Godhead, is, as to Office, Jesus; a Savior from
Sin, by Price, by Prayer, and by Power. As to his Authority, He is Christ; set
apart by God, Qualified, and Commissioned to be a saving Prophet, Priest, and
King. As to his Essence and Relation to God the Father, He is His Only Son; to
wit, by Eternal, Natural, Inconceivable generation. As to His Supremacy and
Honor, He is our Lord; to wit, by Natural right, as He is God; and by
Delegated right, as he is the Lord to whom all Dominion is given, upon a double
consideration. That is, of the Price wherewith He bought it from God: and of
the Victory whereby He gained it all from Creatures.

3. This Christ, as Man, was without humane Father. Conceived, that is,
Prepared, by the H. Ghost; who, first extraordinarily sanctified a portion of
the Virgin-Mother's Flesh and Blood, and then Made thereof his sinless Body.
Born He was of that Virgin Mary, according to the Prophecy, Isa. 7.14. Mary, a
Princess, by Extraction from King David, and Father Abraham, though, of condition
poor, and espoused to a mean Artificer: Mary, an holy creature and humble. Yet,
never called Mother by our Savior Himself: nor ever made a Goddess by his
Order.

4. This Christ Suffered, from God, Men, and Devils, in Soul, Body, Raiment,
Name, and Friends. Under Pontius Pilate, that is, in the Time of his Presidency
under Tiberius Caesar. Was Crucified; a manner of death by the Romans used, and
by God especially Cursed. Dead, Buried, and Descended into Hell; that is, His
Soul and Body were separated from each other, though neither of them were
separated from the Godhead at all. His Body, agreeably to Moses Law, but
contrary to the Roman, was, the same day, Buried. And for part of three days,
about thirty eight or forty hours, it abode apart from his Soul.

5. The third day (after his Death) He rose again from the Dead. By his
Father's power, Romans 6.4. By his own power, John 2.19. by the Holy Spirit's
power, 1 Pet. 3.18. By the One power of all the Divine Persons. Else, He could
not have saved one Soul, 1 Cor. 15.13, 14.

6. This Christ, forty days after his Resurrection, Ascended into Heaven, (as
Enoch and Elias his Types fore-shewed.) And this in the view of his Disciples A
Jury of Witnesses.
. He sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; that is, He becomes
next to God in Dignity, Power, and Glory. And under God, does Administer all
things. Sitting, notes Security, Rest, and honorable Dominion.

7. This Christ shall thence come to Judge the Quick and the Dead: All, alive
at the Last day: and all, before that time Dead. True, God as God, in that day,
is Judge Supreme. Christ Mediator, is Judge Delegate and Constitute, that
pronounces Sentence. And his very Saints are Judges by Assession and
Approbation of his Sentence. It must not be forgot, that He judges every of us
when we Die. Though not all of Us together; nor with Execution of all his
Judgment upon our Souls and Bodies, till the Last day.

8. The third Person of the Godhead is named Holy, and Ghost. Ghost signifies
Breath or Spirit. This glorious Person, bears this name with a specialty; as
being eternally and inconceivably Spirated or Breathed forth from the Father
and Son. And is in like sort styled Holy; as being by Office the Worker of all
renewed Holiness in fallen Man.

9. This, Father, Son, and Spirit, have an Holy, Catholic Church. A Church; or
Christian Society called forth of the Heathen and Jewish world, by God's Word
and Spirit. After mention of the holy Ghost, the Church is mentioned in our
Creed as a Work, of the Holy Ghost. Catholic, it is called; or Universal;
because the New Testament Church consists of folk of all Nations. And is not,
as the Jewish Church was, confined unto one Nation. It comprehends all the
Christians of all Ages, past, present, and future, in the World; which are
indeed but one Body. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Holy, it is said, to be, as having 1.
Christ, it is Head, Holy. 2. The blessed Spirit, it is Indweller, Holy. 3. The
Gospel, it is Rule, Holy. 4. All that are truly of it, are truly, tho
imperfectly Holy. 5. Their Ministers Office, is Holy. 6. Their Worship, as Gods
Ordinance, is Holy. 7. All Baptized members, are Sacramentally Holy, though not
Spiritually. Bound to the Gospel, though they do not really Obey it.

10. The Communion of Saints, is the Effect of the Holy Spirits Sanctifying of
them, and the End of Church Relation. Saints are people Separated from Unclean
and Common conversation, Carried by the virtue of infused grace unto the Fear,
Love, and Service of God in Christ. Communion, supposes such Union as is
between the Members of the Body. This said Communion consists, 1. In their
common holy Friendship with Father, Son and Spirit. 2. In their mutual Love of
one another as themselves. 3. In their Care and just Labor for each others
welfare. 4. In their joining with one Heart and Soul in God's public Worship
by Christ ordained.

And The Saints of this Communion, have the Forgiveness of their Sins. God, for
the Satisfaction and Merit of Christ's Obedience and Intercession, Pronounces
them Acquitted. And actually Delivers them from the Execution of their sin's
deserts. God may be said to Punish them for their sins: but not to punish them
with the punishment of their Sins. It Is for their good, that God ever Chastens
them.

11. These Saints must also hereafter have the Resurrection of their Bodies.
And by consequence have Immortal Souls. For otherwise, of what use would the
Bodies be? All Objections against this said Resurrection, be vain. Being it is
so brightly revealed in Scripture. Cavillers, do not Know the Scriptures or the
Power of God.

12. Life everlasting is the portion of these Saints foresaid. By Life,
understand all good. And by Everlastingness, perfect Duration without Change or
End. By consequence we may determine, that Sinners dying in their sins, shall
have the contrary; Everlasting Death. All Evil, without an End of any.

Seems it strange, that the Reward of short and slender Obedience, should be so
Immense and Everlasting? And the Punishment of finite Creatures sin, in a few
years committed, should be of such Extremity, and to all Eternity? The Wonder
vanishes, if thou but consider the greatness of the God, who orders the
Punishment, and the Reward. A great God does all things great and like Himself.
His Rewards must be great, and his Punishments great. They would otherwise be a
Reproach unto Him.

Amen, is here, as much as to say, I do verily Believe these things upon Divine
Revelation, though they exceed the reach of my Sense and my Reason.

Lords Prayer Truths eight.

1. There is a God eternal, unto whom we may and ought to Repair, for the
Supply of all our wants. Even, as a Child unto his Father. For though He be in
Heaven; that is, be of incomprehensible Perfection: and cannot without a vast
condescension, regard and affect the best of creatures; yet He is by Creation
Father. And by Redemption in Christ. ['Tis Sin, for the worst of Sinners alive,
to say, "God redeemed not me.] He is the Father of penitent Believers, by
Regeneration, and Adoption also. Bare wants do not destroy men. It Is neglect of
right Repair unto the Lord, (that is, a Father, a Heavenly Father, and our
Heavenly Father,) that can and does undo the World.

2. Exaltation of God's Name, and Subjection unto his Authority, and Obedience
unto his Will and Precept, are the chief End of Man. For these He Made us. And
for these He Redeemed us. For these by his Word and Spirit He Calls us. For
these we live. Yet unto all and each of these, are all men insufficient. For
Will. Skill, and Power, unto these, all men, (the best, the worst, and middle
sort,) all are to Pray unto Him. I, and in the very first place to Pray.

3. Bread, or the necessaries of this Life, and Pardon of Sin, and Preventive
Grace restraining from Sin, are the Means unto that foresaid End. To the
Exaltation, Subjection, and Obedience aforesaid. For other Ends only, or
chiefly, they may not be desired or prayed for. It Is Self-Idolatry to desire
one bit of Bread, or the Pardon of one Sin, or the repulse of one Temptation,
either singularly, or principally for our own Ends. To wit, that our Bodies may
not suffer, or our Souls and Bodies suffer, or our Names and Estates suffer.
But for the formentioned Ends they must be Desired. And more; they must be
Prayed for, Begged with all humble Importunity. We are infinitely unworthy of
them. Our Prayers deserve not God's bestowing them. But our Prayer is the only
way, in which God warrants our expectation of them. And in which, He gives
ground to expect them without doubting. There is a kind of Omnipotency, which
Holy Prayer is honored with by Free Grace.

4. Conservation of our Beings, is the first of our Personal wants; Pardon of
Sin, is the second; Deliverance from Temptation, and Sin, is the third.
[Reader, mark this Order. And Desire them in this Order. Let the Shame be on
me, if thou lose by this Use.] If God preserve us not in Being, we are then
incapable of Doing and Receiving any good. Being, we therefore first pray for.
If God Pardon not our Sins, our Being is a cursed one; and worse than none at
all. For we cannot avoid his Wrath, which is the Hell of Hell. Pardon,
therefore we pray for in the second place. If God deliver us not from sinful
Temptation's prevalence, our Being and past Pardon are very sorry things. For
Sin, after Pardon, is worse Sin; and 'twill kindle a worse Wrath of God. And
what then becomes of us? Deliverance from it we therefore Pray for in the third
place. We content us not to Pray but for the two former. We Pray for all these;
and in this natural Method that our dear Redeemer teaches.

5. High and honorable Thoughts of God, must (...) in all that Pray unto Him.
And must be expressed in the entrance of their Prayer. The Preface of the
Lord's Prayer so teaches us. Father, signifies Creator, Ruler, Benefactor.
These words, Art in Heaven, do not speak God's place; for He is every where,
and is Place it self. They signify God's eternally being of such Perfections;
as near above our minds, as the Heavens are above the Earth. Our Father, also
speaks much; Our, does express Him to be the whole Church and World's Father I,
and so Loveful a Father, that He has bound^^s Children every one, to Love and
Pray for all.

6. Kingdom, Power, and Glory, are the three steps by which our Minds rise in
the Praise of God. Kingdom, signifies his just Right to govern all things.
Power, signifies his perfect Strength wherewith to do it. Glory, signifies his
forth-shining Excellency which does and will for ever be in it. The Excellency,
I mean, of all his Perfections. We do, or should, conceive of God as a Ruler
most rightful, and powerful, and amiable, or beautiful.

7. Praise, that is the highest of all Worship, must not be sparingly used in
Prayer. The Preface and Conclusion of the Lord's Prayer, are an Heaven if all
of the Stars of Praise! And no wonder: for Greatness and Goodness are
comprehensive of all God's Perfections. Thanksgiving it self, which is a
Worship more noble than that which is more on the receiving hand: it confiders
but the Divine Goodness. Yea, and that it self but little more, than as it
derives and streams unto us. But, Praise considers and exalts God, both as
Great and as Good. In Himself, and to us Good. Praising God, can never be
enough Praised or Practiced by Us, Psa. 50. penult.

8. Prayer is as necessarily to be Ended with Amen, as to be Begun with Our
Father. My meaning is; it must be concluded by all means, with Desire, Faith,
and Hope. Amen, signifies all. Listlesness, Unbelief, and Want of waiting and
looking for Prayers returns, do make Prayers as no Prayers. Without the Heart's
actual Amen after Prayer, you interpretatively say, Lord, my mind's already
altered. I, now am indifferent whether Thou do grant or deny me. I believe
Thou will Deny. And I will not wait or look for thy Grant. Without an Amen with
the mouth uttered, some do suppose the Congregation injured. It Is certain,
where holy Amen's be not found, Prayers be lost.

Commandment Truths twelve.
1. The Object unto whom all supreme worship is to be paid, is God Only. To Him
it must be paid, by all Souls, in all times, with all strength. And unto no
other. It Is Treason to pay a penny Tribute to a rebellious Usurper. Or, to
worship with divine worship, any tempting Creature. If Jesus Christ were not
God by Eternal nature, I would not be Baptized into his name. Or, Pray unto
Him, any more than unto a Star.

2. It Is as necessary that God be the Author, as the Object of all religious
worship; We must give Him no worship, but such as is prescribed by his Word.
His Worship must suit his blessed Nature and Will. And who can Know them, but
by his Word? Idolatry is officious foolery. Will Worship, a like Phrenzy.

3. It Is not enough to worship the true God by the true Will of God for the
Matter of it; but the Manner also must be far from Profane. It must be with
holy Reverence and humble Complacence, and hearty Truth.

4. It Is not enough to worship the true God, by the true Rule, in the true and
right Manner; unless we also keep holy unto Him all such Time, as He demands
from us. Such portions of every Day time, and such of every Weeks time. [For
the Lord's Day, against Judaizers, read Mr. Ben, Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter.] Holy
Observance of the Lords day, and of hour^ of Worship on our own days, is the
Practi^^ and Pleasure of men sincere.

5. Obedience to all the former Commands suffices not, without Duty unto Men.
Especially Superiors. Principally, Honor of Parents natural. The which, are our
Governors in time before Kings. On a deeper foundation than that of Contract,
even of very Nature. To them are we most Obliged: and by them most Loved. [Well
is the 5th Command called the hinge of both Tables. I am sure, this being
broke, all are broke. And would Children and Parents but do their Duties toward
each other, it would make a sweet change of our English familys. But hereof
elsewhere.] Parents and Rulers, are God's Vicegerents over us: and next unto
God, should be Honored by us Loaded with honor, as the Hebrew word is.

6. As, of our Duty toward man, preservation of just Honor is the first;
Preservation of his Life, is the next. Death takes away time of Repentance, and
Earthly mercies all. Look how near you come unjustly to Kill a man, so near you
come to the Devil's first service. From the beginning he was a Murderer. And so
near come you, to deprive him of all the good of this World; and, if he be not
already Converted, to throw him into Hell. If you do Murder a man, you rob God,
the King, and the Country, of a Servant in this world.

7. The third Kind of duty toward Mankind, is preservation of Chastity; in
our selves, and others. To defile, is next to Kill one Obscene thoughts, words,
and deeds, be next unto Murderous ones. Lascivious Goats, and bloody Wolves, be
much like odious in God's eyes.

8. The fourth part of our Duty toward man, is preservation of his Estate. To
Contemn, to Kill, or to Defile is worse; but to Rob and Injure, in ever so
little a matter, is a Sin that God will not let go unrevenged. Of how great
infamy among men, is the name of a Thief? O that Thieves knew but God's
thoughts of them!

9. The fifth sort of duty to Man, is preservation of them in their Causes, and
Suits of Law. By bearing true witness, when called; and abhorring all false.
All that tends to pervert public Justice. Liars, be Satan's Pictures.

10. The sixth duty toward man, is such Love of him as we bear unto our selves.
Such distance from begrudging him any good, as we are at from begrudging it to
our selves.

The first Command, is a Summary of all Duty unto God; the second, is a like
Summary of all Duty unto Man.

11. The Children of Men, ever since the Fall, are averse from all the W^^^
God. Their Minds are unteachable, Memories unfaithful, Wills untractable. Else,
what needed the New-Edition of the Ten Commands? And why were they so
delivered, as we read, Exodus 19.20?

12. The Motives that God gives, and we ought to take and urge our hearts
withal, unto the Obedience of every of God's Laws, are three.

The three contained in God's Preface unto the Ten Commandments. Which are,
God's Sovereignty over us, his Covenant with us, his Redemption-grace and
bounty unto us. Woe unto our best Motions, which these three do not move to!

Sacramental-Truths five.
1. The Law of God for Sacraments, is not Natural, but Positive. He required
them not, because their use is good, antecedently. No: their Use is therefore
only good, because He requires them. From whence it follows, that though it be
impossible not to Use the Sacraments but we must offend God, because God has
commanded them: it is very possible to use Sacraments, and not please God.
Because God has commanded them not for their own sakes, but for certain Ends.
Which Ends, if we do not aim at, and answer, in our use of the Sacraments, God
has no pleasure, and we no profit by our use of them.

2. The End for which God has ordained Sacraments, is his Testifying his Mind
and Will unto Us. And our Testifying back our Hearts toward Him. It Is true;
God's Word is a Testimony of his Will; a first, a sweet, and a sure Testimony.
But it has pleased Him to add a second sort of Testification of his
Covenant-Will. And by Visible Rites and Ceremonies of his own appointing, to
Testify it farther. As after their Word given, Men use by Sign and Seal to
testify their Minds. Likewise we, at our first Conversion, by our Hearts and
Mouths testify unto God our Wills, henceforward for ever to be his. But it
pleases God to require our second and more public, solemn Testification
thereof. To wit, in and by the use of those Rites and Ceremonies which he has
prescribed. Now, if we aim not at both these Ends in the use of Sacraments; and
answer not these Ends, we mock God and delude our selves in their use. Other
Ends of Sacraments there be, I know; but these are the chief, and comprehensive
of all.

3. The Order of the two Sacraments, of the Gospel New Covenant, is this, Holy
Baptism enters a Disciple of Christ; makes him that was before Covenanted, to
become by Sign and Seal Covenanted with God. The Lord's Supper, renews that
Covenant betwixt God and a Baptized Disciple of Jesus Christ. Both Baptism and
the Lord's Supper do confirm the Covenant; mutually, upon God's part, and upon
ours; and extensively, as to all the Promises in the Covenant from God unto us,
and as to all the Demands in the Covenant, from us unto God.

4. The Dignity and Usefulness of the Holy Sacraments, is surpassing. In no
Ordinances has God condescended so Low unto us, as in these. In none therefore,
has he so much honored us, as in these. The Apostle reckons Sacraments, as the
prime of Church Priviledges, 1 Cor. 10. As for Usefulness, they are Towers of
David, builded for spiritual Armories Of all the outward Means of Grace, the
most Mighty.
We cannot warrantably expect the Holy Spirit to make the Word a-near so
helpful to us without the Sacraments, as with them. If ordinarily He should so
do, He would disparage them. But to be sure, He will never do that.

5. The Way to improve the Holy Sacraments unto Holiness and Comfort, is by a
double Pleading of them. By Pleading them with our own Souls, upon God's
behalf. And this, either when we would bring them out of a bad frame into a
good: or from a less holy unto a more holy frame for God. By (then) urging our
hearts in such like words, My Soul, my Soul, why against God? or why so coldly
for Him? The Kingdom of Hell suffers violence. Violent Sinners take it by
Force. And wilt not thou take the Kingdom of Heaven by it? Sinners be Patient
Creatures; they forsake Father and Mother, take up their Cross, and follow
Satan; and thorough many tribulations enter the Kingdom of Hell. Blush and
bleed thou, to think, that thy Patience should be short of theirs! and that
thou should not without regret enter the Kingdom of Heaven that is better,
through Tribulations that be lesser than theirs. Think, think my Soul! Thou art
Baptized; the God of Heaven for thy Encouragement and Engagement has signed and
sealed his Covenant with thee! Thou have been at his Holy Table; He has again
and again signed and sealed it. Can thou, thou a signed, sealed Covenanter,
Distrust or Disobey? Thou, a frequently repeated Covenanter, and an early one
too? O for shame, stir up thy self, and on with the Armor of God; and follow
the Captain of thy Salvation; and fight (not flourish) against Flesh, World and
Devil, according to thy Sacramental Engagement! Show that it is unto thee a
Covenant of Salt, not of Snow. An Adamantine bond, not a Rope of Sand, etc.
Again, we must also humbly Plead them with our heavenly Father, upon our own
behalf. Under Oppression by any evil, or Deprivation of any good, we may and
ought to plead them, in Prayer before Him. It Is often that Ministers do press
Christians to plead the Promises. I would that we (all) as often pressed them,
to plead the same as signed and sealed. God has not a Promise but what is
signed and sealed in Baptism, and in the Holy Supper. And we plead them but
imperfectly, and at halves, when we plead them not as signed and sealed. Go,
distressed Christian, fill thy mouth with the arguments of the Covenant of
Grace, and plead thy Cause at the Throne of Grace, to this purpose. O thou that
can not Lie, thou have sworn unto me, that in thy Gospel-way I shall have
Grace, Glory, and have no good thing withheld from me. Thou signedst and
sealedst Promise hereof to me, in my Baptism: and so have thou done again and
again, at thy Table. I, in thy Gospel-way, have waited, do wait, and will to my
last breath, through thy grace, wait; O Lord, can thou choose but perform what
thou have so, so Promised, so Sworn, so Engaged under Sign and Seal, etc? This
is the way to Mortify Corruptions, Repel Temptations, Quicken Graces, Revive
Hopes, Attain Joys unspeakable and full of Glory. O that our best Pulpits were
less silent, and our best Pues less Ignorant, of the practick use of Holy
Sacraments!

Q 3. What is that Change wrought in a Man by God's Holy Word and Spirit,
before he can safely conclude himself to be passed from Death to Life?
BY one man sin entered into the World, and Death by sin, Romans 5.12. Satan was a
Murderer from the beginning. He slew Adam by the first sin: And slew all
mankind in that first Adam. Spiritually considered, we are all Dead born. Dead
in sin, and Dead for it. Dead in respect of Corruption, Dead in respect of
Condemnation. Condemnation to the Prison of Hell, to the Torment of Fire, to
the Duration of Eternity.

But God has so loved the World, that he has given his only begotten Son to
redeem us from so great a Death, John 3.16. He desires not our Death to be
Continued, and Ruin to be Completed. He reveals Jesus Christ the way from
Death to Life. He Commands, and He even Beseeches us, to take Him for our Way
thereto.

If you ask, by what Steps? I have told you in my Call to Sinners, by three
Steps. Namely, by Conviction, by Compunction or Humiliation, and by Union unto
Christ. Which Steps if you take aright, I am content to Lose Heaven if you do
not Find it.

Indeed, unassistedly no man can take them. Whatever is a Creature, has no
Power but what is Given from God, and Kept by Him. But Man a fallen Creature,
until he be by grace raised again, is without strength unto that we speak of,
Romans 5.6. Knowledge, Will, and Power hereto are all the Gifts of God's Love,
and the Purchases of his Son's Blood, and the Works of his Holy Spirits
Almightiness. That Holy Spirit, who constantly works by the Holy Word. Who
wrought not Christ's victory over Satan, without the use of the Word: And will
not, without it, work our Victory over him, Mat. 4.

Possible it is. And Necessary it is, for all that take this way to Life
aforesaid, to Ensure their so doing, 2 Pet. 1.10. Psalm. 50. ult. etc.
Uncertainty about it, is the Effect of sin. God does not ordinarily, if ever,
withold Assurance from his Children, but upon Provocation. To wit, by
Indulged Lusts, by Unexercised Graces, by Omitted Duties, by Slighted
Ordinances. And to be sure, Uncertainty is then it self a sin, when it is
meritoriously procured by sin. The eyes are very blind that see not, how
fruitful a Cause of sin it is. And as hard are the hearts, that dread it not as
a sin, an Effect of sin, and a Cause of sin. I grant that all Assurance
attainable on Earth, is Imperfect. But, by the Romanists leave, that which is
attainable is both True, Proper, and Powerful. True and Proper, as built upon
proper and eternally true Grounds for it. Powerful, as operative of Peace and
Joy in our selves and Holiness and Thanksgiving unto God.

Nevertheless, it is very long before most of God's Children know their Father.
And cease from tormenting fear that Satan is he. In the first Conversion of the
Gentile world unto Christ, it was not so. The Holy Spirit did then for the most
part Witness grace, wheresoever He did work it in any. Nay, to go no farther
back; Our old English Puritans, of sweetest Memory, had Assurance more plenty
among them, than it is seen in our day. Nor wanted they our Light, so much as we
want their Heat. Horresco referens. Unacquaintedness with the Covenant of
grace, breeds every where groundless Hopes, and as unreasonable Fears. I speak
as I find: With some of our people, every shadow of Turning goes for
substantial Conversion. And with others, that which is right substantial
Conversion, goes for but a shadow of Turning. Of Turning from Death to Life.

With fear and trembling I assay therefore to resolve this Question. Plainly,
that I may be understood; Briefly, that I may be remembered; Fully, that my End
may be attained; in making Sinners ashamed of their Peace, and Good men ashamed
of their Trouble. If my Method be new, my Doctrine is not. I do go forth by the
footsteps of Christ's flock; praying that this Paper be made successful by his
Holy Spirit.

That Change after which we enquire, appears a five-fold one. Namely of Spirit,
Covenant, Qualities, Conversation, and Company.

C. 1. Of SPIRIT. Man, is an Embodied Spirit. His Body, is (we know not how,)
Indwelt and Actuated by his Spirit. His Spirit, though it be a Free Agent, is (in
as unaccountable a way,) Indwelt and Influenced by some other Spirit. In our
Created state, the Holy Spirit was in us, and swayed us. Now, in our Corrupted
state, it is Satan that is in us, and leads us. It Is certain, that by the First
Transgression we forfeited and lost the foresaid Sanctifier: And deserved to be
given up, and were given up, to the last named Tempter. Satan is now called the
God of this World. And, He that is in the World, 1 John 4.4. The Prince -- that
works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.3 Works energetically. And like
as Fire in Iron works, converting it into a huge likeness unto its own Nature.
. And such Children are named, persons not having the Spirit; to wit, the Holy
One, Jude ver. 19. But in our Renewed state, there is a change of the Actuating
Spirit. Satan is deposed and cast out, Acts 26.18. 2 Timothy 2.26. The Holy Spirit
is Sent, Given, Administered, Put into us, Poured out on us, Comes on us, Rests
on us, Leads us. Is said to be He, that is in Believers, 1 John 4.4. Yea, and
to be great in them. That is, in them to be mighty, and victorious over the
assaulting impure Spirit.

Looks he then like a Soul passed from Death to Life, in whom there is no such
change of the ruling Spirit? I trow not. Nor can it be said, because these
Spirits forenamed be both Invisible; therefore the change of them is hardly
Discernable. Let these plain things be considered. They are infinitely Unlike
ones. Yea perfectly Contrary unto each other. They are also most Active, both
of them. Satan always works to the utmost of his Power; the Holy Spirit works
according to his Will and Pleasure. But both do work continually and strongly.
Nor are their Natures so Invisible, but that their Operations are as much
Sensible. Satan carries unto evil; and so does the H. Ghost carry unto good. Of
all things, Satan averteth and turns away Souls from Jesus Christ; from his
Person, and Gospel. And of all things, the Holy Ghost carries Souls unto the
Study and Acceptance of both. His great work is to Receive of Christ's, and
show it unto us, John 16.14. His first work, is to convince (as of Sin in
general, so) principally of the Sin of Unbelief on Christ. Of its being the
only Sin, that does keep men in all Sin. To convince us also of the
Righteousness of Christ; its Perfection in it self, its Communicableness unto
us, and its Acceptableness with God. Of its being the only, that God will
accept, whatever men conceit of Natural Righteousness or of Legal. To convince
likewise of the Conquest of Christ over all his and our Enemies. His having
Subjugated Satan, as well as Satisfied God, Joh. 16.9, 10, 11. But I forbear.
See his twelve Convictions, in my Call unto Sinners; together with his
Humiliation-work, and Vnion-work. Having United us unto Christ, no doubt but he
Actuates us for Him. So the Apostle, Romans 8. But that falls under consideration
elsewhere.

To conclude this particular; Let the Enquiring Christian thus argue! Christ is
mine, before Life is mine! Christ and his Spirit are always given together. If
his Holy Spirit be put into me, Satan is deposed. The Holy Spirit and the
Unclean, cannot reign together. By the Temper of my Heart and Ways, toward
Christ especially, it is not hard to know whether he be expelled, or still hold
the Throne in my Soul. These I will diligently watch. And examine whose
Superscription they bear; whether the H. Advocate's, or the Enemy's. Enemies
lead to Death, Advocates to Life. By my Guide, I will judge of my Way and End.
And Him I will account to be my Guide, whom I do ordinarily and allowedly, and
most desirously follow: whether it be the Holy Ghost, or the contrary Spirit.
If I find, that it is but now and then, when terrors force it, that I disgust
Satan's suggestions, or relish the Holy Spirit's: that deliberately and freely
I use to embrace Satan's, and reject His: that set aside the next World's
accounts, I should desire rather that Satan led me in a Sensual Life, than the
Holy Ghost in an Evangelical: I will tell my Soul, and all that is within me,
plainly, as John 5.42. I know you that ye have not the Love of God in you. On
the contrary, if I find all; and discern that though I have been a Cage to the
uncleanest Bird, yet I am by grace turned into a Temple of the Holy Ghost: that
the very self-same Spirit that dwelt in Christ, dwells in me: that as little as
yet I know, He Is daily a Teaching me; as Forgetful as I am, He brings daily the
things of my peace unto my Remembrance; as Dull as I am, He daily by one
thought or other Quickens me unto my duty, so that I dare not omit it; as sad
and sour as I am, He denies me not all Comfort, but every day sweetens some
Word of God or other unto me; as often as I am out of Frame for Communion with
God, and that is too often, He lets me not alone till I am in again, and am
Restored. If thus I find, I will conclude there cannot but be Life where there
is such a Spirit. And there cannot but be the best Spirit, where there be but
such Operations. Hereby we know that He abides in us, by the Spirit that He
has given us, 1 John 3.24.

C. 2. Of COVENANT. God ever delighted to deal with Man in the way of Covenant.
He bound the first Man He made, and all his Posterity, in one. One
unexceptionable for the Promises unto us, and for the Demands from us. These
latter were Just and Good; the former Rich and Honorable. But, as we have
heard, Man Fell. Unless I shall rather say, he Leapt into Sin. For, wilfully he
brake this Covenant of Works, as we call it. Yea, and by the Fall so brake
himself, that he was never able since to do ought pleasing unto God. I mean,
before the Renewing grace of God give ability. But this grace, God never did or
will dispense but in a New Covenant. All He Recovereth, He takes into
New Covenant relation with Himself. Souls mindless of any Covenant with God,
mind no Religion: Ezekiel. 16.8.
none, at least, that God will accept. Those that hang upon the Old Covenant of
Works; and have all their Religion run in that Channel: Doing all they do, with
design and hope to be forgiven for the sake and merit of it: the Gospel
declares their mistake to be mortal. They that are of the Works of the Law, are
under the Curse. That is, they that expect Life and Salvation for their own
Works of the Law, are every creature of them under God's Curse, Gal. 3.10.
They, who being sensible what it is to be out of Covenant, and what to be under
the Covenant of Works, do enter the New Gospel Covenant; the Marriage-Covenant
unto Christ: they are the Souls, the only ones that bring forth fruit unto God.
And have Life of either Peace with Him, or Holiness unto Him, Romans 7.4.

Surely, God never signed their Pass for Heaven, who never made his Covenants
the matter of many of their Thoughts. A serious heart cannot but ask, In what
relation, more than that of a Creature, do I stand in unto God? As a Creature,
I can deserve no reward, whatever I do! And why should I expect any? If I may
be a Covenanter, and was so, without my knowledge in my first Parents: does it
not now concern me to get informed, what the Terms of that Covenant were? For
Covenants bind mutually; and if I know not that which I am bound in, I must
unavoidably be false unto it. If it be such as is Good for me, I cannot improve
it: and if unto me it become by any means destructive, I am not capable of
preventing it. If the Sovereign Lord make, and offer to take me into a better
Covenant; how concerned am I, above all things in this World, to learn out the
terms thereof? etc. But, suppose the greatest study of these Covenants, and the
best Acquaintance with them: the best that is possible to be without profound
Thankfulness for the Covenant of Grace, and hearty Consent thereunto; what
avails it? Much every way indeed, to men's Condemnation! Knowledge of that
Covenant without Consent, is the most frightful symptom that I know of a
Reprobate.

A Soul in earnest careful to know its state, should in this wise debate with
it self, Were I under no Covenant, it would be reasonable to expect Hell for my
least sin. For it deserves it: and the Divine Justice is unquestionable. It
would be unreasonable, if I could yield Sinless Obedience, to be presumptuous
of other reward than is in the yielding of it. For in that, is more than a
Creature merits. And I can make no Plea, if God make no free Promise. There are
but two Covenants; of Works, and of Grace. These are vastly different. And so
are the states of men, under the one and under the other. Of my state I am
peremptorily resolved to make Judgment, as I am under this or that. My Hopes
shall die if I appear under that of Works; my Fears shall die, if I appear
under this of Grace.

For if I am under the Covenant of Works, I am bound unto Duties, whose
Performance is by me Impossible. It requires Obedience perfect and perpetual.
I, and that upon pain of Death, Gal. 3.10, 11. Consequently, if I am under this
Covenant, I am under its Curse too; which is Intolerable, Genesis 2.17. Dying thou
shall Die. It Is Death indefinite, that is, Universal evil; Temporal, Spiritual,
Eternal: Privative, Negative, Positive, etc. Besides, if I am under this
Works-Covenant, I can have no Days-man or Mediator between God and me. I must
to Prison if I pay not, my self, the utmost Farthing. This Covenant admits not
Christ, or any other Advocate, with the offended Father. It Is another Covenant
that Christ is Mediator of, Heb. 8.6. If I am under this Covenant, the least
sin, though I shed a Sea of bloody tears for it, is as unpardonable as the very
sin against the Holy Ghost.

Yea, and my Service, should I keep all the whole Law, save in one point, would
be utterly contemned.

And all this justly too. Because, if under this Covenant I abide, it is of my
Ignorance, my Pride, and Enmity unto God and Christ, that I do abide so, Romans
10.3. I am Taught better: in the Gospel the Righteousness of God is Revealed. I
am offered better: the Gospel invites me from under the Law to Grace. From the
Covenant that works wrath, to that which is all Salvation. And my being under
the deadly Covenant, is by my own very Desire, Gal. 4.21.

The Fruits must show it, if I am under it. And they are plainly these: Bondage
and Fear in ones spirit; a Fear keeping out the Love of God, and the very
desire to Love Him. Outsideness in Religious Duties. Care, abundance, about the
outside of the Platter: none, or next to none, about the purity of the inner
man, and the Intentions of the heart. Vndependency on Jesus Christ, in things
pertaining unto God. For both Assistance by his Spirit, and Acceptance through
his Blood, a fatal Undependency. Servility, souring and embittering all Duty.
Rendering Religion a task and burden; and all God's homage as arrant Brick and
Bondage. Do these grapes of Sodom cover my Tree? The Axe of vengeance is then
near my root.

If on the other hand, I am not under the Law, but Grace. If with me, God has
made the better Covenant: what then? the blessing of Abraham is come upon me,
Gal. 3.14. Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, are my own. I am interested
in all the Blessings of this best Covenant, as well as bound unto all the
Duties. God is then my Reconciled God; and Engaged by Promise, to exert for my
good all his Perfections. I will be unto them a God, Heb. 8.10. Jointly, All;
and distinctly, Every of the three Divine Persons, have thus Engaged. So proves
the form of Baptism into the name of All and Each of them: as also the
Communion, which God's New Covenant Servants do hold, with All and Each Person.
Pardoning Grace and Purifying, are expressly made over to me, Heb. 12.8, 10. So
is the Crown of Glory, 2 Timothy 4.8. So is Food and Raiment, 1 Timothy 4.8. So are
Blessings for my Children, Genesis 17.7. I, and I have this hyperbolically kind
and sweetest Word of God to live on, sc. Luke 15.31. ALL THAT I HAVE IS THINE.
A word, which if I once prove my interest in, let them be poor and sad that
can, I cannot.

But still I remember, they are Fruits that make known Roots. And the fruits of
Souls that have so much for the better changed Covenants, are these. They
Remember their slavery. It runs in their minds, how the Covenant of Works
(since the Fall) made them Vassals. How they were Adam's Children, as soon as
their Souls and Bodies were united in the womb. And no sooner Adam's Children,
but under Adam's Covenant. Nor sooner under his Covenant, but under his Curse
too. They consider much their Translation out of it. Their Eye and their Heart,
is upon the Father, that said to Son and Spirit, Come, let us redeem Man! Upon
the Son, that said, Lo, I come to do thy Will! Upon the Glorious Spirit, that
said unto their most unwilling Souls once, Kiss this Son! Bid them, yea and
Made them willing. Upon the sweet Change also, that followed that willingness
and actual Marriage-Union to Christ. God no more looking on a poor Soul as the
first, but as the second Adam's Child. No more Condemning, however Chastising.
No more Abhorring his Services, notwithstanding millions of unallowed and
lamented Imperfections, etc. They joy in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of
their Salvation. Or, Labor so to do, and Lament that they cannot. If no other,
they sing blessed Gataker's Song.

I Thirst for Thirstiness. I weep for Tears;
Well-pleased I am to be Displeased thus:
The only thing I Fear is want of Fears;
Suspecting I am not suspicious.
I cannot choose but Live, because I Die;
And when I am not Dead, how glad am I?
Yet when I am thus glad, for sense of Pain,
And careful am lest Careless I should be;
Then do I grieve for being glad again,
And fear lest Carelessness take Care from me.
Amidst these restless thoughts this rest I find,
For those that Rest not here, there is Rest behind.
Their highest ambition is to Rejoice in Christ Jesus. To Glory in Him. They
Love God's Law, and Trust his Son. They Love his Law, and have respect to every
Command, and strive after Perfection, and abound in all Duty. But, they Trust
not in any works of their own. Doing all, they cry for Christ's Spirit, for
Strength. Having done all, they cry for Christ's Blood, for making it
Acceptable. They still know themselves Servants unprofitable. Is it thus with
thee, O my Soul? then Return to thy rest, for the Lord has dealt bountifully
with thee! If thou wear any Phylactery, let this be the Scripture, All the
paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth to such as keep his COVENANT, Psalm. 25.

C. 3. Of QUALITIES. Look as where the Spirit is Changed, the Covenant must
needs be Changed; so where the Covenant is Changed, the Qualities of a Man must
also be Changed. These are mysterious things. And by many names men go about to
explain them. But they are most, if not only, made known by their Effects.
Conceive we of them as the Springs, Seeds, and Roots of our Thoughts, Words and
Works. And the things by which we are therefore denominated, Holy or Sinful.
They be the Treasure that is in a Soul. A Treasure for abundance, and for
belovedness. Every man has abundance of Moral Qualities; and all are dear unto
him, precious in his Eyes. And as this Treasure is good or evil, our Savior
denominates the man good of evil, Matthew. 12.35. In our first Creation, the
concreated Qualities were surely good, and entirely so God endued all our
Natural Powers, with all good and towardly Qualifications. Qualities and
Dispositions for prompt and constant Duty, were inlaid in our Mind, Will, yea
and Sensitive part. Our several Powers and Faculties do depend much on each
other for action. The Practick upon the Affective Powers, and they on the
Intellectual ones, or our Understanding Powers. But all were made Upright, that
is, with springs of goodness in them, apt to move as they ought toward each
other within, and toward Objects without, Eccles. 7.29. But the first Sin brake
those Springs, expelled those good Qualities, introduced contrary ones. In a
Subject capable of two contraries (as of Light and Darkness,) there will be
one. Man is capable of holy Qualities and sinful. The Sin that drove out the
first therefore, could not but bring in the latter. And set springs of evil in
us, apt to make motions evil of all kinds. The Holy Scripture testifies that
it did so; and that, not obscurely in the very Text forecited. Plainly in
others, Genesis 6.5. Romans 8.7. Fallen Man is by some compared to a disordered Clock,
that strikes false every minute, and has not one true motion before the Maker
mend it. Now, can a Holy God delight in a Creature thus Qualified? One disposed
to no real good, but to all evil, and that continually? If God ever Recall such
unto Himself, He will new Create them. Make them quite other Creatures.
Instruments, moved with New Springs. Trees of other Roots. The Old Qualities
must away, and all be New. The Evil Treasure must be took out, though it be bound
up in the heart; a Good must be Laid in, and be a-like seated. Holy Qualities
must be Infused.

Accordingly we find every where in the Scripture, God denouncing Wrath against
all men of unrenewed Natures. Not Renewed, that is, and Regenerated in the
Qualities of the same; for the Nature it self abides still the same in
Converted as in Unconverted men, John 3.5.

And on the other hand, God's Reconciled Servants are named such as have Put
off the Old Man. Crucified the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts. Mortified
their Members which are upon Earth; with much like. All which phrases express
their Parting with their inward Roots of Sin; their Dispositions and their
Inclinations unto evil.

They are likewise said, to Put on the New Man. To be born again from Heaven.
To be men of another Heart, and Spirit, and New Creatures, etc. That is to be
now of Dispositions quite contrary unto what they were before. Inclined now to
things that Please God, as before unto things Offending Him. Now to Duty, as
before unto Folly.

Feeling excuses Words. It need not be said, how hard the parting from Old
Qualities is. Things glued together, use not to come asunder without tearing.
Until an Heart be Rent, there is no coming apart from its Lust. But the
Necessity of the separation is open to every Eye. For Gratia non perdit
Naturam. God's hatred of sin, is his very Nature: and even Gospel Grace cannot
destroy his Eternal Nature. It implies the greatest of contradictions, that He
who is Holiness it fell should Cease to hate men of settled aversion from it;
And bent unto Ungodliness. And it were blackest Blasphemy for any to conceit,
that Christ came to save us in our sinful Qualities, and not from them.

A Wise man would therefore know his Qualities, before he made his Judgment of
his Condition toward God. Determining, that as the Qualities are, that be
predominant and reign in him; so is the Judgment of God on him. That this
latter is Absolving or Condemning, according as the former be Holy or the
contrary. It is true, contrary Qualities may possess together the same Heart.
In low degrees they may and do. In high degrees they cannot. Grace and Lust,
are both of 'em in every the best Soul. But they can no more Reign together,
than Water can Boil and Freeze together A Lust Reigns, when it is Yielded unto.
Sin and Satan be Conquered, as long as they are sincerely and industriously
Resisted. Grace does Reign in the Soul, while it is in like manner Warred and
Fought for by the Soul, Romans 7. The Apostle speaks of himself as Regenerated, I
doubt not.
. So that my Enquiry must be, What are those Qualities that have the Throne in
me? That sway my Understanding, my Affections, and my Practick Powers. The
Sinful Qualities that bend all these unto evil, are the Corruption of Nature,
and Original Sin. The Holy Ones that bend all these unto good, are Grace, and
the very New Nature in us. Whether of them do prevail in me, is my great
Question.

Commonly, and I think justly, we count four Properties of a Quality or
Disposition's Prevalency. Namely, its causing to act Readily, and without much
ado. Pleasantly, and without disgust. Universally, without exclusion of any
proper Object. And Constantly, without intermissions. Now if Original Sin,
carry me thus unto Actual Sin, I am far from the Kingdom of God! If Grace thus
carry me unto gracious actions, the Kingdom of God is within me. To be a little
more particular, Holy Qualities, the Principal are three; the Instrumental are
eight. The former are Evangelical, Faith, Hope, and Love. The latter be,
Prudence, Justice, Temperance, Courage, Sincerity, Humility, Zeal, and
Constancy. Methinks, whether these, or the contraries of these, do (as
aforesaid) act me, should be of easy discovery. Inward Feelings, and outward
Fruits, one would think, should not admit it into any doubt at all. But I am
aware, Mixtures do obscure things. And in whom are not Mixtures found? Again,
Moles must not be expected to be as Visible as Mountains. It Is Greatness that
makes conspicuous. And where Grace's Victory is little, which is next to none,
I must not wonder if it be as little discernable. Nor dare I desire God to
change the Nature of things, for me. Rather must I Labor to grow in Grace.
And, that it may be more Visible, blow up my spark to a flame. Heaven and Hell
are unexpressibly different states. And I must believe that God will have them
to be very differently Qualified Creatures whom He places in the one and
other. My Interest carries me in the first place, to see I have the Principle,
and nextly that I have Proficience in Grace. Without the Principle I have no
Qualification for Heaven. And without the Proficience, I shall ever doubt the
truth of my Principle. A strict Eye unto both will I have, before I conclude
the name to Live to be my due.

C. 4. Of CONVERSATION. A good Spirit brings into a good Covenant. And,
according thereto, infuseth good Qualities. But does He then leave them idle
and dormant? No, He does not. All Being is for Action. And the best Nature for
the best Action. Besides, Man is a creature that cannot be out of Action. Grace
only carries him to act well; Corruption, to act ill; but his very Nature it is
to act much. Man Created did exercise his Powers, and exert his holy Qualities,
most amiably no doubt. Formed his behavior, toward God, the Father, the Son,
and the Spirit; toward himself, and the Angels above him, and sublunary
Creatures below him, most congruously, and harmoniously: Fallen Man's
Conversation toward all, is in the World seen, what in the Bible it is read.
What is said of his Thoughts, which are his inward Converses, may be said of
his outward ones also. They are evil, only evil, and continually. Toward God,
Regardless; toward Holy Angels and Spirits above, as Mindless; toward himself,
Idolatrous; toward his Superiors, Envious; toward Inferiors, Contemptuous;
toward Equals, Jealous. Renewed Man, we read and we see it, has another
Carriage toward all foresaid. A Walk, after the Spirit. That is, according to
the will and motion of the Holy Spirit the worker of Grace; and according to
the gracious Quality and Nature of his in-working. Hereof is a necessity of
Precept; their God commands it, on peril of never seeing his Face. A necessity
of Means; viz. for God's Glory, which they cannot spread without it: for the
Church's good, which they cannot edify without it: for their own Walk to
Heaven, which they cannot make without it: For, though it be not the way of
Merit, it is the way of Means. A necessity of Design there is also; for, it is
God's End in Electing, Redeeming, and Calling them. A necessity of Nature: for,
as naturally and necessarily do clean Fountains send forth clean Waters, as
corrupt ones the contrary. Add, a necessity of Covenant likewise: for, as by
Gratitude, so by Covenant all are bound to have their Conversation as becomes
the Gospel.

If these things be so, the resolution of the three former Questions, excuse me
not a third. Woe to the vain men, who would cry up God's Mercy, to the Reproach
of Christ's Merits. Or Christ's Merits to the undervaluing of Holy Faith. Or
Faith, to the justling out of Good Works, and the making holy Conversation
needless. We must give unto each its proper place, or Heaven will never be our
place. He that thinks fit to judge by God's Word; and to believe that God will
not Deny himself, or alter his Decrees, and repeal his Laws, and change his
Gospel, to serve the turn of a sluggard; he must conclude so. And judge an Holy
Life to be as far from Needless, as it is from being Meritorious.

Such a man must tell himself to this purpose: Hope of Reconciliation to to
God, is needful to my Peace in this Life. And will appear so, at Death. But
Holy Conversation, is as necessary unto that Hope. God promises not to give
it, to such as lead any other. Nor know I how He should show grounds for any to
cry peace, while their Life against Him, is an open or a private War against
Him. Eternal thanks be to Him! I know his New Covenant will pass that
Conversation for an Holy one, which is far short of Legal Perfection. Vnallowed
sins, and of mere infirmity, break not peace. Wilful ones, and the most
crimson, do not raise a storm that Christ's Grace cannot Lay for true
Penitents. And such as by their good wills would never offend more. Ready to
give the World if they had it, that they never more might sin. Wherefore
neither will I think my Conversation unholy, for that which God does not so
name it. Nor will I ever expect he should say to me, [Well done, good and
faithful Servant,] if indeed by the Gospel-standard I have not done well. I
verily believe God will say to me hereafter [Depart, thou Cursed] unless I Live
so, that He may say to this effect of me before the World; Behold ye damned
Angels, and Men, whom I have for ever abandoned! No cause have you to think my
ways unequal in setting this poor creature at my right hand. True, his Sins
were not few or small. Nor were his Obediences other than small and few. Had
they been perfect, they could not have satisfied me, for one sin. Much less as
they were short thereof. Satisfaction and Merit I had, from another hand. His
holy Qualities and Works made me none. Yet do I consider his Conversation and
good works as enough to distinguish him from you. And to stop your mouths, By
them you see, he is one that Obeyed my Precepts; Used my appointed Means of
Life; Answered my End in's Creation; Walked according to the New Nature I gave
him; Kept sincerely and perseveringly the Covenant I signed and sealed with him
in my Holy Sacraments.

To him that orders aright his Conversation will I show the salvation of the
Lord, Psalm. 50 ult. If we say that we have fellowship or friendship with Him,
and WALK in darkness, we Lie, and do not the Truth: (i. e. We Lie practically,
and contradict our Professions) 1 John 1.6. God will render to every man
according to his works; To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek
for glory and honor, and immortality, Eternal Life. But to them that are
contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation
and wrath, Romans 2.6, 7, 8. James 3.13. Who is a wise man, and endued with
knowledge among you? let him show out of a good conversation his works with
meekness of wisdom.

C. 5. Of COMPANY. God has made us of a Nature craving Company, as we crave
Being it self. Being alone, is as not Being at all. Our Souls must be with some
Person or Thing continually. And for Things, no man affects any but for the
sake of Persons. Sinless Nature was not thought fit to be Alone. Corrupt
Nature, is amort without corrupt Company. And so is Sanctified Nature without
like Company. Being so very dear unto us, it is no wonder that our Company is so
influential on us. Yea, so formative of us into its likeness, as we see. Good
and Evil Company, are (both of 'em) so, beyond what is duly considered. Worst
men are somewhat bettered by good; Best men are somewhat worsted by evil. True,
while we are in the World, there is a company good and ill that of necessity we
some way have. But there is also a Company of choice that we make. And of this
I chiefly speak. The Efficacy of this, is most wondrous.

So much, that the Holy Spirit makes a Companion of fools, the name of a
hopeless Enemy of God, Prove. 13.20. And intimates it to be enough to call the
best Saint's sincerity in question, if he walk in company (needlessly) with
wicked men, Job 34.7, 8.

Yea, saving in order to do them good, forbids us to let them be in our houses,
or to suffer our selves to be with them any where, Psalm. 101.4, 7. 2 These.
3.14, 15. Neither indeed is Excommunication ought that I know, but a casting
out of our Encouraging Society, such as walk disorderly.

Every where in the Word, we are told, that Love of the Godly is the mark of
the Lovers of God. And they that fear God's Name, be such as are glad to have
for their company God's Children. I, and hate with a perfect hatred the
infectious company of others. They flock together, and to one another speak
often.

And who would not desire to try and know himself, by that mark whereby other
men do know him? And whereby, through a plain light of the Word, he may know
himself? Yea, by the mark, without whose concurrence, fifties and hundreds of
other marks will not be more than Ciphers. For, if my Company of choice be not
changed, my Conversation is justly presumed to be but sorrily changed. And not
from a Walk with men to a Walk with God; but from one way of sin to another. My
Qualities also and inner Temper, be justly thought to be but Covered, not
Changed. My Change of Covenant may be concluded to be but in fancy, and a vain
surmise. And so my Change of Spirit.

Come therefore, my Soul, and let us reason together, says he that is taught
of God to ensure his Calling and Election. For ought I see by the Word of God,
Dying men do change but their Places, not their Company. And what Company I do
of choice hold upon Earth, I must by the Judgment of God hold for ever.
Profane men be open Sepulchers; Hypocrites be painted ones. If I here delight
in Sepulchers, and choose to keep among the dead; it is certain I shall for ever
with them be Buried. Christ is a Tree of Lives. Of the Life of Peace with God,
Holiness toward Him, Hope from Him, Glory with Him. Saints only have Life from
Christ, and be the only men that are truly Alive. If the Spirit that acts me,
and Covenant that binds me, and Qualities that possess me, and Conversation
that employs me, do all of 'em bring me among the Living; and I am their
Companion in Graces-Kingdom, surely I shall be the same in Glories-Kingdom too.

Wherefore, before I shall conclude whither it is I am going, I will get me well
assured what the Company is wherewith I go. I will be fully answered these
Questions: Am I in evil Company, as Lot in Sodom, Vexed? Is Lewd Company and
Light, unto me, which Mesech and Kedar was to David? Makes it me to cry, Woe is
me? Have I no fellowship with God's Enemies, but Reprove I them as called? Do I
make the very wide difference that I ought, between MEN and BRETHREN? Do I fear
to open the doors of my House and Heart to ill men, lest the Prince of darkness
enter in? And to shut them against holy Brethren, lest the Prince of Glory be
shut out? Am I glad when I see the Pure in heart, that see God? Do I salute
each of them as David did Abigail? Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent
thee this day to meet me? Blessed be thy converse, and blessed be thou. I say,
Every of them, viz. Though about Mint and Cummin differently minded. And though by
their Luster, I am eclipsed, etc. Finally, Do I Love them that Love God, and
Loath them that Loath Him, even as I incline to have my friends Love those that
Love me, and the contrary? And do these following words of God dwell in me
richly and powerfully, Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell
in thy Holy Hill? He, in whose Eyes a Vile person is contemned, but he
honors them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.1, 4. They that fear thee (O Lord)
will be glad when they see me (that is, a Godly man,) Psalm. 119.74. He that
walks with wise men shall be wise, but a Companion of fools shall be destroyed,
or broken, Prove. 13.20.

Postscript.
THE Desires of some, and supposed Needs of others, invite me to place here
this shorter Solution of the third Question.

The Change in us, which shows Salvation to be come on us, is twofold;
Intellectual, and Practical. Of our Understandings, and of our Conversations
[We do not Omit that of the Affections, but comprehend it in the other.]

The Intellectual Change is then, and not till then, when four things are
Learned, and are also a Learning better by us.

1. The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. The Doctrines which are the
Foundations. We have shown them, upon the second Question. Who can think him
savingly Built on Christ, that knows not the very first Stones to be laid in
that Spiritual Building?

2. The Conclusions from the Principles foresaid. The Doctrines, that are for
Upbuilding on Christ. These also have been set forth with the forementioned.
Building on, is as necessary as the Laying of the Foundation is. Neither is it
savingly Laid, where the Holy Spirit is not teaching, and a Soul learning to
Build up and Build on. To wit, that it may become a complete Temple for the
Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 15. 2 Pet. 2.4, 5.

3. The Confirmations of the said Principles. The Doctrines Proving, and
Strengthening them. And Warranting our Foundation and Superstructure; Securing
'em against Winds of Opposition. It Is as needful to cover and preserve what we
build, from the injuries of weather, as it is to build, Ephesians. 4.12, 16.

4. The Applications of the mentioned Principles. The Doctrines directing their
Improvement unto Duties, as well Relative, as Personal. What are Means worth,
but for the Ends of them? What good do all Truths in our Minds, if not improved
unto all holy Services in our Lives? Who would Build and Cover a House, but for
Use to themselves and their Friends? Savingly, the Spirit has not Built and
Strengthened us in Christ, if he has not taught us to make our Life a service to
Him. And to make His Will, not our own, our Law and Rule. Our Rule, for
behavior toward God, Our Selves, Neighbors, Friends, Enemies, Superiors,
Inferiors, Equals.

The ignorant, and the listless to know the first of these be Owls and Bats.
Those that be the like, to know the second, be Dwarfs, yea Embryo's. Souls
regardless to know the third, be Sand-builders, and lie at the mercy of the
Weather. And the mindless of the fourth, be barren Heaths. All short of what
they should be: yea contrary to what they must be, if ever they pass from Death
to Life.

The Practical Change is then, when four things can be said of a Man.

1. That he is Changed as far as Felix, Agrippa, and Herod. That he is one that
Trembles at God's Word. Has an Inclination to be a very Christian. Hears the
Word preached gladly. Otherwise he is not so much as a Washed, Swine, or
Painted Sepulcher.

2. That he is Changed farther; and as a Stone into a Flame of Fire. A Stone,
is Dark, Cold, and Inclines downward to its earthy Center. Fire is Bright, Hot
Active, and that Upward. To say a Man is thus Changed, is to say that of
Ignorant, he is made Knowing. Of Listless, he is made Zealous for God in
Christ. Of Industrious for Earth, he is made so for Heaven

3. That he is Changed into the Man of God by Saint Paul 's Character. That is,
a man thoroughly furnished for every good work. I mean every one, from him
required as a Churchmember, e. gr. For Reading and Hearing the Word profitably
^^ for Using of Baptism and the Lord's Supper so; and for submitting unto
Church Discipline, so; Not to say, for Governing his Family holily, etc. which
are imported. By being furnished hereto, I understand prepared with necessary
Skill and Zeal.

4. That he is Changed from a Demas into a Martyr. That is, that of a fearer of
the Cross more than of the Loss of the immortal Crown, he be made in resolution
a Martyr. And become resolved, by God's grace, to die any the worst death
rather than commit any the least sin. To be salted with fiery Trials, rather
than with Hell's fire.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
1. OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow, with an Appendix concerning the
Immoderate Desire of Fore-knowing things to come.

2. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
With an Appendix wherein somewhat is occasionally discoursed concerning the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to Will the Salvation of them that
perish.

3. Of Charity in Reference to other Men's Sins.

4. A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict inquiry whether or no
we truly love God.

5. Two Sermons Preached at Thurlow in Suffolk; on those words, Romans 6.13. --
Yield your selves to God. All Five by J. How. Minister of the Gospel.

1. A Heaven or Hell upon Earth: Or, a Discourse concerning Conscience.

2. (...). The True Touchstone which shows both Grace and Nature. Or, a
Discourse concerning Self-Examination, by which both Saints and Sinners may
come to know themselves. Whereunto are added sundry Meditations relating to the
Lords Supper.

3. The Conversion of the Soul, to which is added, A Warning to Sinners to
prepare for Judgment. All Three by Nath. Vincent Minister of the Gospel.

1. Wadsworth's Remains: Being a Collection of some few Meditations with
respect to the Lords Supper. Three Pious Letters when a young Student at
Cambridge. Two Practical Sermons, much desired by the Hearers. Several Sacred
Poems and private Ejaculations. With a Preface containing several Remarkables
of his Holy Life and Death, from his own Note-book, and those that knew him
best.

2. A Serious Exhortation unto Self-Examination. Delivered in Five Sermons. on
2 Cor. 13.5. These Two by Thomas Wadsworth, M. A. Minister of the Gospel
sometimes at Newington-Butts, Southwark.

A Discourse of Old Age, tending to the Instruction, Caution and Comfort of
Aged Persons.

Baptismal Bonds Renewed, being Meditations upon Psalm 50. ver. 5. By O.
Heywood Minister of the Gospel.

A Discourse of the Saving Grace of God, by David Clarkson Minister of the
Gospel.

The Book of Psalms in Meter; close and proper to the Hebrew; smooth and
pleasant for the Meter: To be sung in usual and known Tunes. Newly Translated,
with Amendments, and Addition of many fresh Metres. Fitted for the ready use,
and understanding of all good Christians. By Will. Barton, M. A. as he left it
finished in his life time.

The difference between the Spots of the Godly and of the Wicked. Preached by
Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs at Cripplegate.

Some Rules how to Use the World, so as not to Abuse either that, or our
selves. By Francis. Fuller, M. A.

Religion our True Interest: Or Practical Notes upon Malachi chapter 3. v. 16, 17,
18. Seasonable for the Times. By Tho. Watson, sometimes Minister of Stephens
Walbrook. London.

The Life and Death of Edmund Staunton D. D. To which is added, I. His Treatise
of Christian Conference. II. His Dialogue betwixt a Minister and a Stranger.
Published by Richard Mayo of Kingston, Minister of the Gospel.

Magna Charta Ecclesiae Universalis: The Grand Charter Issued out and Granted
by Jesus Christ for the Plantation of the Christian Faith in all Nations.
Registered and Enrolled, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Chosen for the Subject of the
ensuing Discourse. By George Lawson, Rector of More in the County of Salep.

An Alarm to Unconverted Sinners: In a serious Treatise; showing, 1. What
Convesion is not, and correcting some Mistakes about it. 2. What Conversion is,
and wherein it consists. 3. The Necessity of Conversion. 4. The Marks of the
Unconverted. 5. The Miseries of the Unconverted. 6. Directions for Conversion.
7. Motives to Conversion. Whereunto are annexed diverse Practical Cases of
Conscience judiciously resolved. By Joseph Alleine late Minister of the Gospel
at Taunton in Somersetshire.

An Essay for the Recording of Illustrious Providence: Wherein, An Account is
given of many Remarkable and very Memorable Events, which have happened in this
last Age; especially in New England. By Increase Mather, Teacher of a Church at
Boston in New England.

A Present to be given to Teeming Women, by their Husbands or Friends;
containing Scripture-Directions for Women with Child, how to prepare for the
hour of Travel. Written first for the private use of a Gentlewoman of Quality
in the West, and now published for the common good. By John Oliver.

The Faith of Dying Jacob. Or God's presence with his Church, notwithstanding
the Death of his Eminent Servants. Being several Sermons from Genesis 48.21.
Occasioned by the Death of Mr. Isaac Hubbard. With the Memorials of his Life
and Death. And Advice to his Young Son. By R. Gouge, Pastor of the Church at
Great Cogshall in Essex.

FINIS.

