Characters OF A Godly Man.

Both, as more and less Grown in Grace.

By DANIEL BVRGESS, Minister of the Gospel.

Here are they that keep the COMMANDMENTS of God, and the FAITH of Jesus, Rev.
14.12.

If ye KNOW these things, happy are ye if ye DO them, Joh. 13.17.

Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; Prove your own selves: Know
ye not your own selves, that JESUS CHRIST IS IN YOU EXCEPT YE BE REPROBATES? 2
Cor. 13.5.

Exceptis PAUCISSIMIS qid est OMNIS coetus Christianorum? Salvian.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
End of Cheapside near Mercers-Chapel, 1691.

To the Right Honorable and the most Eminent Ladies,
That disown their Portion and Good Things in this Life, and being written in
the Earth; -- Jer. 17.13.

That receive the Word of their Blessed Savior from his most unworthy Minister;

And by their religious Zeal do provoke many of Inferior Rank;

Grace and Peace be multiplied from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Ladies,
THis Book is not clothed with soft Raiment. It does not wear Joseph's
colored Coat. But it claims his celebrated Name. Zapnath Paaneah, a Revealer
of Secrets. For it discovers the things which are most Needful and most
Difficult to be known. It displayeth no less things than the STATES and
CONDITIONS of Souls. And presents divine Prescriptions for making both of
them good.

Wherefore I have presumed to make it yours. And to beseech your Honors and
Ladyships to do me the favor, to admit it to be your Minister, a Clerk of your
Closets, and a Servant unto your Soliloquies and Sacred Communings with your
selves therein.

Ladies, This I have done of my Gratitude and Piety, against many
Contradictions of my Modesty. Yet without one blush, for the Plainness
wherewith I array divine Truth. Because, Diamonds suffer loss by Painting; and
Gold needs not to be gilded. New Testament Divinity wants no sound of Sackbut
and Psaltery. Preachers rich Language, holds many Poor: and that which Men
will call Poor, makes many Rich.

The Christians unto whom I do more statedly Minister, do care for no Apes and
Peacocks from Ophir. But prefer wholesome Food, above finest Feathers. And I am
well sure, Your Ladyships are none of those, that take him for the King, who
wears most Lace and Ribband on his Clothes. Or him for the Divine, whose
Periods are most gay with Wit and Elegance.

I dare no more to Flatter, than to Murder. But I must take leave to mention
that great Grace of God in you, which alone can warrant this my Boldness with
you. In my own defense, I do here say it; I have observed you to relish Manna
without Quails. The words of Eternal Life, without the enticing ones of Man's
Wisdom. To reverence the Ark of God, there where it has been covered with
Badgers Skins. To be far from dreaming that your Savior is Divided. Or
confined unto any Dividing Party, that cries, Lo he is HERE or THERE only.

Admirable Grace! And so much the more, by how much bigger you are in this
World. For Greatness and Goodness meet not often. The Obligations of great
Persons unto their Maker's Service, are Superlative. But so are their
Temptations from it, also. And as these latter do always Overtake, they do
almost always Overcome the former. So that, the Supreme Landlord has most of
his Rent from Cottages: Courts, and greatest Houses do pay him least. It is
said that the natural Heavens are more distinctly seen in some low Vaults, than
upon high Mountains. But it is every ones observation, that the Third Heaven is
best seen by People of lower Place. There is no actionable Scandalum Magnatum
in the Holy Bible. But there we read, that, Not many of them are Called. That
it is rare that Camels do (off with their Bunches, and) pass through the
Needles eye. That, as Bees are drowned in Honey, the Rich are choked with their
Prosperity.

They do know, that there is no Armor against Fate. That Peerage is no
Protection against Death's Arrest. And Imperial Crowns exempt not the Heads
that wear them, from the common Golgotha. Their eyes see that earthly Gods die
as other Men do. The Misery is, they put off the day, which, otherwise than in
imagination, they cannot put off. They take serious Remembrancers for mis-timed
Tormentors. Or else make their Answer, with the more audacious madness of
Laughter. And dub them all for Cow-hearts, that tremble at our sound of a World
to come. Especially, if they do any more than Tremble. If they come to argue,
[not, Let us Eat and Drink, but,] Let us Believe, and Repent, for to Morrow we
Die. Notable Pastime among them, makes such Language as that rare Gentleman's;
who, (with Five hundred Pounds for charitable Uses,) sent a Letter to Sir Edwin
Sands, thus Subscribed,

Your Brother in Christ, Dust and Ashes.


It is true, dying hours do change the color and taste of earthly Grandeurs.
Then they receive a little sight, when their Eye-strings are ready to break.
Then they believe the invisible Judge, and his Tribunal, who before were blind
to Sunshine, and deaf to Thunder. And then when they can swallow no other
Cordial, some do call for the Gospel. Then, when, if the blessed Fountain
thereof does give forth his Grace, it can be known only unto himself. We do all
know there is but one, if one instance, in all the holy Scripture, of a Man
receiving his spiritual, and parting with his natural Life, upon the same day.

Ladies,
This is a Lamentation; and I doubt not but it is religiously yours. Yet is
there a relict Honor of our Nation, even as to your high Order in it, which we
have to Congratulate. Namely, that, with the best KING on the earthly Globe, we
have a QUEEN of serious Religion, and of Honorable Women not a few.

In which Constellation may your Honors and Ladyships, long and brightly
shine! And, Living and Dying, be renowned Witnesses of these Eternal Truths;
sc. That this sinful World is not supreamly Eligible; that the Heavenly
Mansions are by no means Contemptible; and that the Passage from hence unto
them is not invincibly Terrible!

So Prays, in the sense of his deep Obligations,

Honorable Ladies, Your most humble Servant in Christ Jesus, Daniel Burgess.


A PRAEMONITION TO THE READER.
IT is not without better Advice than my own, that this Piece goes abroad. Nor
without an humble Confidence that no Wood, Hay or Stubble will be found in it;
though it is Gold and Silver be altogether unpolished.

Nevertheless, I think my self safe from the woe of being well spoken of by all
Men. Being that Light and Darkness will not lay aside their old enmity; nor
Fire and Water kiss, and be Friends, in haste. Those that cannot bear the Name
of supernatural GRACE; and can bear no more than the Name of Moral VIRTUE; may
not be expected to cease from their Hostility against Books and Authors, that
treat them no more smoothly. Natural Historians say, that the sound of Timbrels
kills Tigers; and the scent of Roses is deadly unto Vultures. Theological
ones do know, that Aaron's golden Bells make as mortal a noise, and the Roses
of Sharon send forth as deadly an Odor, unto some Men. (...). But,

I am, with more concernment, aware, that there are of the Excellent of the
Earth, who will be apt to have hard thoughts of the Characters here presented.
Imagining them to wound themselves, and to take away their Veil, though they do
in truth nothing less. These, are weaker Christians; and of them, the most
bruised Reeds. The prevention of whose Self-injurious Mistake, I have
endeavored at the latter end of my Book. And, lest what is there said, should
be read when it is too late, it likes me here to say thus much for the same end.

My Characters are such Evidences as are suited, only, unto the well-grown in
Christianity. They do speak, what, all that are Regenerate of RIGHT, ought to
be. And what they do NECESSARILY Desire and Endeavor to be. They do not speak
what they, all, ACTUALLY Appear to be. Or what they all Are, any otherwise than
in Desire and Endeavor. Nor are they intended, at all, for trial of the Truth
of Grace in weak Christians. But for trial of Growth of Grace in Elder ones,
and stronger. And for teaching Christians of all Ranks, unto what it is that
they must Aspire. And indeed unto Weaklings, they are like to be MEAT or
POISON, as they shall use them, reasonably, or madly. Poison, if they shall
wildly conclude from them their Unsoundness. Arguing, that they have no
Spiritual Life; because, they have it not as yet advanced unto such and such
Strength and Beauty. But Meat, if they shall justly conclude from them their
great Imperfection. Arguing, that surely they have reason to be profoundly
Humble and perpetually Diligent; because some Christians are, and all of them
ought to be, such as are here Characterised, though they are so far short.

This warning I give; wishing it may be taken by every one, that has the marks
which I give of the least and lowest Grace that is true. Their Savior and
mine, is touched with the sense of their Infirmities; and can have Compassion
on them that are most Ignorant among them, and most out of the way! God forbid,
that, I should Preach his Gospel without his Bowels! Unto each Soul I take up
St. Paul's words unto the Jailer; Do thy self no harm! Yea, the words of a
greater Apostle than St. Paul, uttered unto trembling Daniel; O man greatly
Beloved, Fear not! Peace be unto thee! Be strong, yea, be strong!

Be it added also; that concerning the best Readers that I expect, I am not
without some Jealousies. And a Presumption that it may not be Superfluous, to
put them in mind of some plain Truths well known to them.

Solid Meat, when best prepared, requires the Labor of Nature, and the
Blessing of God for its Digestion. All Writings are fruitless, unto those whose
Reading is careless. And to such, whose Eyes are as Swines; that do look all
ways, but upwards. And do every thing for benefit, more than Pray for it. Nor
is it to be doubted, but the best that dare to restrain Prayer, and withold
their Pains, do as often sit down by the loss.

In our Travels toward Heaven we may not loiter at Noon, if we have set out
before others in the Morning; and have really got before them any good way.
Alas! the more has been done BY us, the more has the Grace of God done FOR us.
And where most has been received, there will most be required. The most Holy
Readers and Hearers should be the most Industrious. The strongest should work
hardest. Jointly do Conscience and Interest so bind.

A Sin and Grief, and Shame it is, to so much as SEEM to come short of
Salvation. They do so SEEM who intermit foully, or abate their pursuit of
Evangelical Perfection. And what do they less, all of them, than say in the
language of Practice this hideous thing? To wit, That they are not willing to
go to Heaven, but by the very Gates of Hell. As near by them as may be without
descent within them, and everlasting abode.

It is reported that a Myrtle Rod in a Traveller's hand, keeps him from
weariness. It may be hoped, these Considerations in a Reader's Mind, may have
some like Effect. As for the Flock, unto whom this Writing is a Pastoral
Letter; unto them I have other Opportunities of Communicating what shall be
thought farther necessary. And I will not here add more unto them, or any
others, than that word of our Savior: which, if Phylacteries were in use under
the New Testament, I would wear about my Neck; Blessed are they that Do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the Gates into the City, Regeneration makes us Sons and Heirs. But
makes us not perfectly so, as it makes us not perfectly Holy. We must be Bred
and Qualified, as well as be Begot and Born, before we can Inherit the Kingdom.
Holiness and Obedience are the way unto all right Consolation on Earth, and
full Glorification in Heaven. Though it be the Lord Jesus Christ alone that
MERITS all, and Faith alone (in the sense of St. Paul, nothing contradicted by
St. James,) that INTERESSETH us in the Lord Jesus Christ. See Dr. Manton on
James.


Now, the Lord who delights to magnify his Power in Instruments weakness,
magnify the same in this Essay. Causing it to promote that HOLINESS without
which no man shall see the Lord. Amen.

To the Church of Christ committed unto my especial Care, Grace and Peace be
Multiplied.
And to the Servants of God who Attend the Weekly Lectures, in Bridges-Street,
and at Chelsey, and at Newington-Butts.
Beloved Brethren,
IT is well nigh Four Years, that I have enjoyed the liberty of fishing for
Souls among you. I am not unsensible, with how great weakness I have cast the
Gospel Net. And, I cannot but be much affected with that which God's Grace has
done in this tract of time. For my own part, I cannot Boast that I have been
Toiling; nor can I Complain, that I have taken nothing. Unto the heavenly
Author be all the Praise ascribed, if the Draught be as large as it has indeed
appeared. I remember, that then when Peter, and all that were with him, were
astonished at the draught of fishes which they had taken, he cried out, O Lord,
I am a sinful man! Nor would I, that the divine Goodness should make me to
forget my Sin and Weakness. Few of my Brethren have so many Messengers of Satan
to buffet them: and it may be, that, in Kindness, God so orders it, lest, in
my forgetfulness, I should be exalted above measure.

I make you this Present, without any superstitious respect unto our New Years
Day. For the observation of the Pagan one, ( Gratian says) some Christians
have been Excommunicated. And I have read that the old Catholic Church kept a
Fast, to bewail the vile Idolatries committed upon it. I have taken this time
as the first I could find, or make, for writing these Marks of true Grace. Not
knowing, whether they shall prosper most, as Spoken or Written, or whether they
shall be alike fruitful. For I will acknowledge unto you, that I do humbly
expect fruit from them. Physicians speak of Pills, and Divines of Memorands,
which a Wise Man would not be without. And, be it confessed, these Marks are
such in my thoughts. Wherefore consider what follows, and the Lord give you
Understanding and Possession of all.

He that truly fears the Lord; and of whom God says, that he shall be his,
in the day wherein he makes up his Jewels; he has these five Marks.

Mark 1. GOD is Supreme in his Soul, both by the highest Authority of a KING,
and the dearest Authority of a FATHER. The One only God, who is Father, Son,
and Spirit, does as truly Dwell in his heart, as in Heaven. And as truly Reign,
as Dwell therein; and that by Consent and Choice. Whatever Cherubins,
Seraphins, and Spirits made perfect, be, the very same this Man desires to be;
I mean as to honorable Apprehensions of God and Affections toward him; He
wishes, that his Esteem, and Reverence, Love, and Trust, and Service were of
degree equal to theirs. And tells himself a thousand times, that if they were
so, they would still be infinitely disproportionable unto the divine object of
them. It is against his renewed Mind and Will, that his Life or his very
Salvation should be principally valued but for the glorifying and enjoying of
God. As our Savior refused not to worship the Devil because he was a Devil,
but because he was not God: So this Man argues and concludes, that the
infinite distance of any created Being, from Godhead, is an infinite reason for
denying to prize it for it self. The word God, signifies a Being that is not a
Part, but the Whole, of Excellence. And so well he understands it, that his
Soul is for a Total, not a Partial, Preference of Him. Heathens would say, That
the Sun were worthy of Adoration, though it were so that no benefit descended
from it upon them. Much more says this Man, that, if it were possible we could
Be without God, it would be Folly and Injustice to honor any thing like Him.
God's DOING good, is but a lower and lesser reason for his being adored. His
BEING good, is an infinitely higher one. For all the good He DOES, is but a
Stream from the Fountain of good that He IS. So David; Thou ART good, and DO
good. The impressions of both upon an holy heart, are such as none can know but
those that have them. And of such, every one will tell you, that they thus far
affect him. They fill him with Wonder, Grief, and Shame, that his Thoughts of
God are not, in a sort, Almighty; and able to work no more powerfully upon him.
Able to annihilate all the Worlds grandeurs in his Mind; able to strike dead
the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts; able to embitter sweetest Sins, and
sweeten the most bitter Afflictions; able to set and fix his Soul in Heaven;
even according to his hearts desire. However, he finds these thoughts to be
truly Powerful; and the most Powerful of all the thoughts framed in his heart;
and all the good in his heart and life, he knows to be the issue of these said
thoughts. And, accordingly, of desire of more good in both, he operously
multiplieth thoughts of God. Thoughts of his Essential Perfections; Eternity,
Infiniteness, Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, Truth. Thoughts of
his wonderful Manner of Being in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: the best and
most glorious manner of Being that is Possible. Thoughts of his Relations unto
the Church, and World; unto the latter of which, He is Maker, Owner, Ruler, and
Benefactor; to the former, He is all four; and, over and above, their
reconciled Father, Husband, and Portion. The gracious Man of whom we speak,
has his times, in which he goes aside, and muses of all these, most solemnly.
And efficaciously, to the making him exclaim as the Psalmist, Whom HAVE I in
Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth I DESIRE besides thee, O THREE in
ONE!

Be it observed here; some sincere Souls may have less Light. But more
intelligent Christians do take their times to think, that if God the Father had
been the Father of no more than Men and Angels, He would have been nothing so
glorious as now He is. Now, that He begets a Son, equal to himself, and without
change in himself, in way inconceivable. And that beyond all possible thought
of any Creature, it is the Father's and the Son's honor, to give a subsisting
life to the coequal Spirit, by alike eternal and inconceivable Spiration. And
that it is no dishonor to the Son to be thus Begotten by the Father; or to the
Spirit to proceed thus from the Father and the Son. Being, that the Son is
Equal with the Father, and One, and to be worshipped with one and the same
worship with the Father. And the holy Spirit is Equal with the Father and the
Son, one with them, and to be worshipped with one and the same Worship with
them. By this means, these three, Father, Son and Spirit, do infinitely and
mutually love, and are beloved of each other. And unto this their eternal,
infinite, and mutual delight, the natural perfection of the Godhead did require
this Communication of it self. Nor was it therefore arbitrarily, but naturally,
and necessarily, though voluntarily, that the Father begat the Son, and the
Father and Son breathed forth the Spirit. To conclude: The Child of God looks
on the Son, and admires the Father; looks on the Father and admires the Son;
looks on the Father and Son and admires the holy Spirit; looks on all three as
subsisting in the Unity of the Godhead, as dwelling in one another, mutually
possessing, loving, and glorifying one another from everlasting to everlasting.
He contemplates the Godhead dwelling equally in its fullness in all the three
Persons; in the Father, the Beginner, the Son, the Promoter; the Holy Ghost,
the Perfecter of all good. He Knows, Believes, Acknowledges, Worships, Obeys,
and Trusts, and Lives upon, Three PERSONS and One GOD. He questions not but
Angels and Saints in Heaven, do the same; Holy, Holy, Holy, being their Song.
He is satisfied, that Adam in his Innocence did the same; being that he was
Created by the three Divine Persons, and in the Image of all three. For it was
the Father said to the Son and Spirit, Come let US create Man in OUR Image, and
after OUR likeness. He is certified by the Scriptures of Truth, that, it is the
Will of the Father that every Tongue should confess the Son to be God, and the
holy Ghost to be God, unto the glory of God the Father. He is well informed,
that the Universal Church under the New Testament, has most expressly made
One-God-in-three-Persons the Object of her Faith, Worship, and Obedience;
agreeably to her holy Baptismal Engagement. And, finally, he observes how the
Doctrine of the Trinity, is connected with all the Parts of Christian Religion;
and made the very foundation of it, without which it cannot stand. It is indeed
a Mystery most Superlative; not to be discovered, or proved by bare Reason, in
whose Territories it dwells not. And subtle and audacious Heretics of old, and
at this day, have used many guilty Arts to expel it out of our Faith. But to a
Child of God, a bare Word of God is as good as a Demonstration; and the
Evidence of this Truth from thence received, is Victorious.

And unto him, the three Persons in one God are so great, that he makes no more
of any incroaching Creature, than he that sees the Sun, makes of a Candle. Is
this his God a jealous one? yea, and a jealous heart it is that he himself
has; one that is exceeding watchful against every Idol. Against every Creature
that does fawn and flatter, and would become any part of its Portion. He is as
truly willing to have God for his Master, as his Rewarder. He would have no
Pleasure, but in pleasing God. His highest Ambition in this World, is to have
the favor to receive his God's Commands, and the grace to Obey them. For in
his eyes it is a truth most evident; that neither Men nor Angels are capable of
any higher honor, than to be Objects of God's Love, and Instruments of his
Pleasure. And this Faith is his Victory over the World; and his governing
Principle in the World; and that whereby he, here walks with God. Not indeed
without innumerable and unavoidable Infirmities and Faults; but these break not
off that blessed Walk. For it is still renewed on God's part by Pardon, and on
his part by Repentance. Neither is his holy Walk, without use of those worldly
Comforts that God allows us to take. For he knows God ever made Thanksgiving
Days to be Feast Days; the temperate pleasure of bodily senses, does so much
promote the spiritual pleasure and gratitude of our Minds. And even under the
old Law, God appointed many Feasts for one Fast. He does not dream that Enoch
did not walk with God, because he begat Sons and Daughters: His care is, that
the lean Kine devour not the fat; that sensual Delights be not Thieves, but
Servants unto spiritual. Be it also added; his said Walk with God is but by
Faith, not by full Vision; in frequently interrupted, and never completely
sensed Peace and Triumphant Joy. If he has temporary Raptures of
Third-Heaven-Joys, they are but Temporary; they be his Sweetmeats and
Rarities, not his daily Food. And he knows to his Comfort; that, such Raptures
be his Privilege only, not his Duty. Indeed, if his weak Bottle could bear so
strong Wine, he would wish all his days spent in Ecstasies. He would be glad to
have every word that he speaks of God to be accented with sighs, and every
sentence emphased with tears. But he knows that the Sun of Righteousness does
graciously quicken, many Souls that he does not in this World exuberantly
Comfort. Yea many, that sit in darkness almost all their days, and see but
little light, do nevertheless enjoy his saving Love and his wonderful Support
thereby. We all know, the Sun in the Firmament, does, in the Earths dark
Bowels, make Gold and precious Minerals. Though therein he shows not his
beautiful beams. Nor can it be hard to think, how the true Father of Lights
should enrich unspeakably, those whom He sees not fit to fill with the Joy of
it presently. In a word,

The Soul that He does so enrich, that Soul He does Justify, Sanctify, and
Glorify. And, as truly, that Soul does Justify, Sanctify, and Glorify Him.
Justifies him against all the Cavils raised, at his Decrees, Laws and
Providence. Sanctifies, i. e. sets him as the sole Object of Fear, Trust, and
Worship. And also Glorifies him; or Practically expresses supreme Estimation,
in conforming to his Preceptive Will, in Natural, Civil, and Religious things.
Thus is the first Commandment written in this Soul. Thus is God's Name
hallowed, thus is his Kingdom come, and his Will done in it.

Mark 2. JESUS Christ is God and sits at God's right hand, in his Soul. My
meaning is; Christ, as Mediator, who is next to God in Heaven, and is
continually with God in Heaven; is next to God in his Heart, and continually
with God in his Heart. Qi Deum cogitat sine Christo dimidiat Deum. Calvin.

Our Savior must be considered in respect unto his eternal Essence and Person,
and in respect unto his undertaken Office. In the first respect, he is God
equal with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; and so he has been considered in
the foregoing Mark. In the second respect, he is God and Man by a Personal
Union of both Natures; and the servant of God, by an astonishing Condescension
of grace, 1 Cor. 11.3. The head of Christ is God. It is of Christ thus
considered, that all following is spoken.

Thus considered, Jesus Christ is the Man that is God's fellow; that is, who is
next unto God in point of honor; who has nearest and most intimate
Acquaintance with God; and who in all his Works is his Joint-worker, Zech.
13.7. He is in the word declared to be King of Saints, Head of all
Principalities and Powers, Exalted above every Name that is named in this
World, and in the World to come; the Delight of God's Soul, as Isai. 42.1. Nor
is it any wonder; for, in him all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily.
Unto him is given all Power in Heaven and Earth. And the Keys of Death and Hell
are in his hand. Without his leave, Satan could not enter into very Swine. Him,
the very Angels, and all the Church of God are bound to worship. Let all the
Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. Unto him shall the gathering of the people
be. That is, as the Hebrew word signifies; the bowing, the submission, or the
worship of the People, (Genesis 49.10.) Upon him depends all the Happiness of Men
and of Angels; all, capable of Happiness. For he is the HEAD of all
Principalities and Powers. Head, as to Eminence, and as to Government, and
Influence. Again, intimately he knows God's Ends, Decrees, Works. For, the
Father shows him all things that himself does, Joh. 5.19, 20. And, finally,
God does nothing, but he is his Co-worker in it. God Reveals much to Men and
Angels; but it is by Christ, all of it, ever since the Fall. He the Essential
Image, is the Representative Image of God unto us. We know not the Father; not
his Nature, Will, or way to effect his Will, but by the Son. Angels as well as
Men bless the Lamb for opening of the Book, Rev. 5. God upholds all Creatures;
but it is by Christ Mediator. He is given for a Covenant to the People to
establish the Earth, Isa. 49.8. Heb. 1.3. God governs the world; but it is by
Christ. My Father works hitherto (it is spoken of the Works of Providence;)
and I work; says Christ, Joh. 5.17. And v. 22. The Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment unto the Son. Which is to be understood of the
Administration of all acts of Government at present, and of the final sentence
at the last day. God reconciles Sinners to himself; but it is by Christ. God
was in (or by) Christ, reconciling the world unto himself. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. God
glorifieth reconciled Souls; but it is by Christ that he does so. Lord Jesus,
receive my spirit, says Stephen, Act. 7. Cameron is not the only Man, that
thinks it to be declared in Heb. 2.5. that the World to come, Heaven is
subjected unto Jesus Christ; so that Angels shall have no Authority there, but
Christ have it all.

Now the gracious Soul says of this blessed Mediator, This is my Beloved, and
this is my Friend. God has highly exalted him; and highly do I exalt him. It
is the Father's Will; and (through his Grace) it is as truly my Will; that All
men should honor him, even as they honor the Father. And that they confess
him to be their Lord, unto the honor of the Father. Who is honored in their
honoring of him, and dishonored in their dishonouring of him. Even more
dishonored in being sinned against mediately in Christ, than he could be in
being sinned against, immediately before the Fall. And more honored in being
glorified mediately in Christ, than he could be before the Fall, in being
glorified immediately. Because there is a much more full Manifestation of God,
and a higher Communion with him, through Christ, than was in that our first
estate. More particularly, the gracious Man says, This Mediator is my Lord,
and him will I worship. Even with divine worship; both Natural and Instituted.
The Natural, that arises due from the excellency of his divine Nature; and the
Instituted, that becomes due from the signification of his preceptive Will.
Worship is Duty paid in acknowledgment of Excellency. My Mediator is God, as
well as Man; and to his divine Excellency is due the utmost divine Worship. Him
will I esteem above all; and count all things but loss and dung for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus. In him will I Believe. I do
Believe in God the Father. I will Believe in him no less. Him will I love. I am
content, that grace be unto none but such as love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity. Him will I Reverence and Obey; as charged by God to Beware of him,
Obey his Voice, not provoke him; -- because God's Name is in him. To him will I
Pray; as did Abraham when he Prayed for Sodom. Even so long ago; whereas his
Mediatory glory is much more illustrious now in the New Testament than it was
in the Old. And incomparably more in his state of Exaltation, than it was in
his state of Humiliation. Him will I worship in the house of God, who is the
Builder of that said House; Heb. 3. And in all Ordinances will I draw nigh to
him, who alone has Power to Institute and Abrogate Ordinances. Again, this
Mediator is the Way and Means of all Peace with God. He is our Peace.

The way unto all Access to God, and Acceptance of our Persons and Services. By
him we have Access by Faith, Romans 5.2. He has accepted us in the Beloved, viz.
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.6. By Faith (in Christ) Abel offered a more excellent
Sacrifice than Cain, Heb. 11.4. wherefore never will I dare to Believe on God,
but through Christ. Or to worship God, but in his Name. Or, to utter a word or
any work, but, all, in his Name; I mean, ordering it according to his Command,
and expecting acceptance of it upon his account. I will not allow my self to
say, God be merciful to me; without an Eye to his Satisfaction and Merit;
(though I may not, every time, utter the words with my Mouth.) As God is the
Object to whom I pay worship, this Mediator is the Medium, through whom I pay
it; and he ever shall be so. It is the Angels happiness to need no Mediator; it
is my happiness to have such an one as He.

For alas, alas, it is next to nothing that I see of God, until I look unto him,
his representative Image. His Perfections revealed by Creation and Providence,
do but to very little effect appear to me. I mean his Power, Goodness, Wisdom,
Alsufficience, Patience, Vindictive Justice. And, then, as for his Love to
Sinners, and his Pardoning and saving Grace; never could I believe them to be
in God, if this blessed Mediator did not show them unto me. And, (no marvel
therefore;) never could I overcome my fear or lay down my enmity against God,
till Jesus Christ showed them unto me. Nor am I able, to this moment, to look
toward God, to think of him, to pray to him, to offer any service unto him,
with any boldness or confidence of acceptance, any longer than I look unto,
and think of, Jesus Christ. I do not wonder that Adam fled and hid, when he had
sinned. I do not wonder at the dread of the people about Mount Sinai; at their
imagination, that if they saw God they must Die; at their outcry, Let not God
speak with us, lest we Die. I wonder not that Moses himself, who was the
Typical Mediator, said plainly, I exceedingly fear and quake. My wonder is,
that they are not all distracted with horror, that look to God's Throne, and
overlook the Rainbow about it. That think of God and not of Christ; of their
Judge and not of their Advocate; of their Creditor and not of their Surety. The
dread of God entered by Sin; and it can neither be took off, nor kept off, but
by looking to him that was made sin for us. Besides, what would come of it, if,
casting off fear, I should offer at any time to worship God, immediately? To
honor God as my End, and not honor Christ as my Way. To present any Sacrifice
of Prayer or Praise, without using the hand of the great High Priest. Should I
not be more Bold than Welcome? Would not my slaying of an Ox, be like the
killing of a Man? as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 66.3. Would not God abhor my
Person and my Service? Would he not detest me, as a very Murderer, Idolater,
and Profane Creature? Would he not ask me, to what purpose I went about to
honor God, and not honor him in whom it is his will to be honored? Who
required it at my hands? And who gave me leave to worship but in Christ's Name?
Or how I dared to do that under the New Testament, which none of his Saints
dared to do under the Old; even when the Way into the Holiest was not yet made
near so Manifest? How I presumed to worship, but looking toward the holy
Temple; drawing encouragement so to do from the Mediator, by the Temple
typified? How I presumed to make a Prayer, but for the Lord MEDIATOR's sake? Or
to expect any shade from the burning beams of Sin-revenging Justice, but under
the MEDIATOR; the only Apple Tree among the Trees of the VVood. In short;
Worship cannot be, without Acquaintance, Agreement, Strength, Courage, and
Oneness of Design. But I avow it to all the World; take away Christ out of my
Mind, and God is a very Stranger unto me. Nor know I what to say unto him. Take
Christ out of my Mind, and God is worse in my sight than a Stranger. He is an
Enemy; one that does and cannot but hate me, and one whom I must, and cannot
but hate; Christ is so altogether my RIGHTEOUSNESS and PEACE. Take Christ out
of my Mind, and I, a Creature; that is, a Thing of no strength of my own. And a
sinner also; that is, one that has forfeited all the strength that God first
gave me. I, then have no strength to speak, or sigh it self, graciously. Yea,
and am one whom God will not strengthen; and whom all the Creatures in Heaven
and Earth cannot strengthen; no, not so much as to think one good thought.
(Tell me not, God is merciful, and the way to him is easy. I am sure God's
Mercy, though there be an infinite Ocean of it, descends not, one drop of it,
but through Christ. And in the easiest sweetest way that Almightiness and
Grace, can make, there can be no Motion without Strength no Act without Power.)
Take Christ out of my Mind, and verily if I remember God, I am troubled; horror
and trembling lay hold on me. I can, like Devils, believe and tremble; I cannot
believe and pray. The Divine great Power scares me, and his Wrath against Sin
strikes me in my thoughts unto Hell. Take Christ out of my Mind, and what then?
why, then whatever worship I set to, I cannot possibly drive at God's end and
design in it. Without which, it is plainly as impossible that God should be
pleased with it. The design of God, is to advance his own Glory; and to do it
in the advancement of Christ Mediator, as aforesaid. What a worship then must I
make of it, if I rush into any, without designing both to glorify God, and to
glorify him in Christ. In Christ honored with the honor of his Mediatorship.
What do I do less than overthrow, as far as in me is, the foundation of God's
Government, and Grace to fallen Man?

I love this Mediator, and he is my Meditation every day. I set him always
before me. Old Testament and New, be but Stars leading me to Jesus. The
Promises be precious, because they conveigh Jesus to me. The Precepts are
precious, because they lead me to Jesus; for strength to perform them. The
Threatenings be precious, because they lead me to Jesus; for grace to escape
them. And I bless the Father of Glory, his Father and my Father; that he has
given him so very many Names for the help of my Mind and Memory. So that it is
my own fault, if all things do not suggest thoughts of him to me; if sight of
the Morning call not to my mind him, the Sun of Righteousness. If putting on of
my Clothes, suggest not some thoughts to me of him, the Wedding Garment. If I
wash me, and forget him, the Fountain opened to wash away sin. If I Eat, and
forget him, the Bread of Life. If I Walk, and forget him the Way. If I lie down
to Rest, and forget him who is my Peace. If I see an earthly King, and forget
him, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. If I converse with wise Men,
forgetting him, the Wisdom of God: with Ministers, forgetting him the Apostle,
and High Priest of our Profession, and Bishop of our Souls; with Lawyers, and
forget him, the wonderful Counselor: with Physicians, and forget him the
Healer of all Diseases: with Merchants, and forget him the Pearl of Price. Yea,
or with very Alphabet-Children, and forget him who is the Alpha and Omega. Who
is all, that all the Letters can make words to speak praise for; and much more.
Who is JESUS; that is, a Savior from Sin and all the Curses of Sin. Who is
REDEEMER; that is, as to the manner of his saving, one who saves by the payment
of a price valuable, or rather invaluable. Who is MEDIATOR; that is, a Middle
person, by participation of both Natures; to wit, of God offended, and of Man
offending. A middle Person, thus, by his Natures; and standing in a middle
place betwixt God and Man, whom Sin had set at odds; laboring, in apt and fit
ways, to reconcile them. To reconcile God unto them by a satisfactory price,
and to reconcile them unto God by a victorious Power. Which Power he could not
have had, if he had not been God; and which Price he could not have paid, if he
had not been both God and Man also. Who is our SURETY; that is, a person that
undertakes to see a Debt satisfied, or a Covenant performed. Christ undertook
to satisfy for our Debt to God. On his Father's behalf, he undertook, that he
should Pardon and Save us on the terms of the Gospel Covenant. On our behalf,
he undertook that we should fulfill those terms Who is CHRIST; that is,
anointed, or qualified and consecrated, and commissioned to be such a Surety as
aforesaid. Who is, therefore, the PROPHET to take away our Ignorance; the
PRIEST to take away our Guilt; the KING to take away our Rebellion Who is White
and Ruddy and ALTOGETHER LOVELY. Whose reproaches I esteem greater riches than
the Treasures of Egypt; for whose sake I have forsaken all things, and do
account them but loss, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having
my own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith. O what shall it profit a
man to gain the whole world, and go without this Savior of the World? What can
be said worse of Hell, than that Christ is not there? Or, when is Heaven
praised higher than when it is said to be a Being for ever with the Lord Jesus?
-- Thus does the gracious Heart express it self; and lisp forth its Esteem and
Love of Christ which are unexpressible. The Fool has said in his heart, There
is no God; but the gracious Wise man says in his heart, There is no God but
God in Christ, that he can Enjoy as his Portion, or Serve as his Lord. There is
no God out of Christ, but what is a consuming fire. And their Sorrows shall be
multiplied, who hasten after another Mediator, or Peacemaker with God. With
submission to learned Interpreters, I do so understand the Psalmist.

In a word; the gracious Man is of that Church, which is in God the Father, and
in the Lord Jesus Christ, as it is expressed 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. And it must be said
nextly,

Mark 3. The Holy Ghost, is God and Christ's both Equal and Administrator
General, in his heart. The Scripture calls him, and the gracious Man calls him,
The Spirit of the Father, and the Spirit of the Son. The Father and the Son
breathe forth this blessed Spirit with one and the same Spiration, or
Breathing. This they do Eternally, Inconceivably, Naturally; by the Perfection
of their Nature, not by any Arbitrary Decree. And this said Spirit is a
distinct Person, acting according to the counsel of his own will. He is called
one Spirit, and That one and selfsame Spirit; which are very particularising
terms, 1 Cor. 12. he is a Person declared to be the EQUAL of the Father and
Son, by his equal Titles, and Attributes, equal Works, and Worship. And,
accordingly, the gracious Man that we speak of, does EQUALLY both Honor,
Worship, and Obey him. He is not of them, that have not so much as heard,
whether there be a Holy Ghost or no. He knows there is one; one Proceeding
naturally from the Father and Son, in respect of Substance, as has been said.
And also Proceeding from them dispensatorily, in respect of the work of Grace.
One, that, in the former respect, is their EQUAL; and, in the latter respect,
is their INFERIOR. Vicarius Christi, Tertull.

With reverence and godly fear, be it written and read, that here follows. No
occasion is given; and I hope none will be taken, for any blaspemous thought of
Inequality of Essence between the Father and Son, and their holy Spirit.
Inequality of Office it is, which the Scripture declares; and which the
gracious Man believes. It is a very Maxim, and granted by all, that
Inferiority of Office does very well consist with Equality of Essence. And it
is exemplified in our blessed Savior; who is expressly named God over all, and
the Servant of God. God, EQUAL in Essence; Servant, INFERIOR by Office.

Now be it observed; this eternal Spirit did freely condescend to take an
Authoritative Delegation, or Commission from the Father and Son, unto the work
of Sanctification. (Even as God the Son did condescend to take an authoritative
Delegation from the Father, unto the work of our Redemption.) Joh. 14.26. The
Father will SEND him. And Joh. 15.26. I will SEND him says Christ. And
frequently this glorious Spirit is said to be SENT, GIVEN POURED forth, etc.
Namely, to TEACH his People, to BRING ALL THINGS TO THEIR REMEMBRANCE, to
QUICKEN them, to COMFORT them, to RESTORE them. Ephesians. 2.13. He is named the
Spirit of the Promise; that is, that is promised in the Covenant of grace, unto
all the blessed purposes of Grace aforesaid. And is indeed the grand and
principal Gift of all promised therein, in the New Testament day. The main
thing promised by our Savior unto his Church, at the time of his withdrawing
his bodily Presence from the same. So that it is most evident, this Holy Spirit
does not come unto us, or act within us, only in his own Name; but in the Name
of the Father and of the Son; from whom and by whom, He is Promised and Sent.
Upon which account it is thought (by many excellent Divines) to be, that the
Sin against the Holy Ghost is Unpardonable; which no other Sin is. Even because
Sin against him, is Sin against all the Authority of God; and all the Love of
God; and the uttermost condescension of all the three Divine Persons, to the
work of our Salvation.

And, to come to the Mark that we would give, let this be attended. The
gracious Man is one, that pays unto the Holy Ghost his double Honor; the
honor of his Essence, and the honor of his Office. Considered as in his
Essence, he believes in him, worships him, and obeys him as God EQUAL with the
Father and Son. Considered as in his Office, he Values him; Prays for him;
Grieves him not, but industriously Pleases him; Delights in him; Depends
upon him; Thanketh the Father for giving him, and the Son, for purchasing him;
and the Father and Son for sending him, as the great APPLYER of all the
Benefits by the Father given, and by the Son purchased. As one whose Presence
is incomparably more profitable and serviceable to the application thereof,
than the bodily presence of Christ it self. And is as freely vouchsafed by him
for the Sanctification of the Elect, and for the Consolation of the Sanctified,
as ever Christ's Presence was vouchsafed for the Reconciliation of God unto
them by his Blood. Freely our Redeemer CAME, to do that Will of his Father. And
as freely this our Sanctifyer and Comforter PROCEEDED, to do the Will of the
Father and the Son. For, of his Oeconomical and dispensatory Proceeding unto
it; and not of his personal Proceeding, is that Text to be understood, Joh.
15.26. He PROCEEDS from the Father. Now unto this glorious Spirit, in whom
all the New Testament Promises are fulfilled; as in Christ all the Promises of
the Old Testament were; unto Him, who as Jesus Christ, thought it no robbery to
be EQVAL with God; yet was Promised as Christ was Promised by God; and is said
to Come, to be Sent, and to be Given, as Christ is said to Come, to be Sent and
to be Given; and may not be esteemed a less GIFT of God, than Jesus Christ
himself was; unto this ever-blessed Spirit, descending from the bosom of the
Father and the Son, and residing among the needy Children of Men; unto this
Inspiration of the Almighty, what deferences does the gracious Man make?
Sciunt, qi fiunt. Gracious hearts do very well know what deferences. They know
and feel it; a gracious heart would rather be no heart, than be void of this
Spirit. It accounts every heart that is not his Holy Temple, to be no other
than Satan's hideous Dunghill. In short, it thus testifies concerning that
Spirit, that is the Soul of its Soul; the prime and principal Spring of all its
Motions Heavenward.

The Son of God's Work in Redemption, had been in vain without the Spirit of
God's Work in it is Application. Without this Almighty Work, as well as that
most Merciful one, the Work of the Father in Freation, which Sin spoiled, had
never been repaired, never restored. Without this blessed Spirit, never had I
understood a Truth; or possessed a Grace; or performed a Duty; or enjoyed a
Privilege, in hand or in hope. I was Ignorant, even Darkness it' self; and he
was unto me the spirit of Wisdom and of Understanding. I was Unconvinced of my
Sin and Misery, and in a feavorish Dream of the clean contrary; and he
convinced me, making it plain to me that I was a Child of wrath by Nature, and
of Disobedience by all my Life. I was stupid and senseless of the wrath I
believed coming; and he brought me to my feeling, and made me cry out, I am
grievously tormented with the guilt of my Sins, and with the power of my Lusts.
He brought me into that bondage, without which I had never looked out after
liberty. Under my Conviction and Compunction, I was even totally Despairing one
while, and going about to set up my own Righteousness another while; and he it
was who came and persuaded me, there was a Rock of Salvation for such as I; but
my own Righteousness was very Sand, and by no means to be built on. He
Convinced me of Righteousness; and that of another make, than my own; yea, or
than the Angels. Being beat off from trust in my own Righteousness, and coming
to some knowledge of Christ's, I was like to stick in the place of the breaking
of Children. I was very near to Miscarry in the pangs of the new Birth. And he,
the self-same Spirit brought me forth. He brought Christ to my heart, and my
heart unto Christ; he was to me a Spirit of Faith, of uniting Faith; joining
Christ and my Soul, as Head and Members be joined. Of Justifying Faith, and
such as, through the Law of Grace, makes Christ's Satisfaction for Sin as
beneficial to us, as if we our selves had paid our Debts unto God. Such a
Faith as put me into the City of Refuge, and secured me from the pursuit of the
Avenger: I humbly hope so, at least. When this was done, and I was born of
Water, and of the Spirit, then was I all in haste for a heart much more clean,
and more after God's heart. And he, the same Spirit, was unto me a Spirit of
Burning; as Fire mollifies Iron, he softened my heart more than ever in former
times; and melted my will into God's Will; and united it to fear his Name.
After this it self, still was I a short-sighted Creature, and in pain to know
more of God and Christ, of Sin and Grace, of my Hearts deceits and Satan's
wiles, of Heaven and Hell. And he it was, that, in and by his Ordinances,
anointed my Eyes; and made me, from that time to this, to make some Progress in
Knowledge. To grow in it both Extensively and Intensively. Several times have I
been in danger of being deceived by false Teachers; by the craft of men lying
in wait to deceive. And he, the only unerring Guide, kept my foot; his word it
was that I heard behind me, saying, This is the way, walk in it. Many is the
sad time, that I have back-slidden and foully fallen. And by him has it been
shown me, whence I was fallen; he it was that came and said, Return, thou
backslider. He it was, that let me not to rest till I had gone forth, and wept
bitterly, and laid hold on him that heals backslidings. Full often I have had
fightings without, and fears within, sorrow upon sorrow. And he has been a
Comforter indeed; he has taken of Jesus, and shown me that which has made my
state presently tolerable, and by and by comfortable. It is never very long
together but I am at a loss what to do, for both Life, Motion, and Direction.
And he alone it is who makes me feel any spark of life in me; makes me stir and
move in Willing and Doing; and guides me in Judgment, teaching me his way.
When I am most afflicted, and need most of all to Pray, even then oftentimes do
I least of all know what to pray for. And he it is, this holy Spirit himself,
that makes Intercessions in me; as it is Romans 8.26; and makes me to Pray in
him; as it is Jud. v. 20. More plainly, he enlightneth and he fortifieth my
puzzled and dejected Soul. He Directs my requests; so that I ask Bread, and
not a Stone, Fish and not a Serpent. He Enflameth my Desires; so that by the
Fervence I discern God's Acceptance; as, of old, Sacrifices were manifested to
be acceptable by the firing of them. He emboldens also my Suits unto God; so
that while I adore him as my Sovereign, I trust him as my Father by Adoption.
While I am prostrate before him as a rebellious Subject, with a Rope about my
Neck, I have the humble confidence of a Child of his in my heart; and I do
rejoice fiducially, while I tremble most Self-condemningly. Briefly; until such
time as I got acquainted with him, never could I heartily call God the Father,
my Father; nor call Jesus Christ, my Lord. I am sure, I could do neither
according to the Will of God. Well might my dear Redeemer call this Holy
Spirit, God's good gift, Luke 11.13. Well might the Man after God's own Heart,
exclaim, Take not thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51. And well might the great
Apostle pray for his Ephesian Children, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of Glory, might give unto them the SPIRIT of WISDOM and REVELATION
in the knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. And well will it be for me, and all my
dearest ones, if (as above all things, I Pray) we shall holily walk after this
good Spirit. Not GRIEVING his Divine PERSON dwelling in us; not QUENCHING his
gracious MOTIONS made in us; not RESISTING him in any of his ORDINANCES
instituted for us.

For by his blessed Operation it is, that we have our Communion with the FATHER
in his Love, with the SON in his Grace, and with Himself, the Coessential
SPIRIT in his Consolation. Look as the Son of God is Mediator for us unto the
Father, unto himself as he is God, and unto the Holy Spirit; unto the whole
Trinity; in like manner is the Holy Spirit the one common Operator or Worker
for us, and Comforter of us from the Father, from the Son and from Himself;
from God in Unity. He is named the COMFORTER; and (as I conceive) comparatively
greater than Christ was in the days of his Flesh on Earth. But how does he,
comparatively, so much more comfort the Children of God? This he does, by
acquainting them much more, with the Love of the Father. By giving them to see
more fully, that the Father himself loves them, as our Lord speaks, Joh.
16.27. And by discovering unto them much more, the grace of the Son; the
super-excellency of his Person and of his Purchases. By glorifying of him in
their hearts, so as he never was before, Joh. 14.15. that is the very word
which Christ uses. He shall GLORIFY me. And, lastly, by setting before their
Eyes much more, his own like infinite Love, Grace and Condescension. Admirable
condescension, to be made less in Office than the Father and Son, with whom he
is Equal in eternal Essence. And this most freely and of choice; for our good,
and so great good as has been foreshewn. And that although he well foreknew
what we were; and what cross pieces we should prove; and how we should GRIEVE
him, PROVOKE him, and QUENOH many Millions of his most holy Motions in our
hearts; defile his Dewlling Place, and provoke him for ever to abhor US, so
infinitely needing his Wisdom, Power, and Grace to help us in all Concernments.
Us, who, without his infallible Counsel and his invincible Strength, are sure,
by every Sin to be frightened into Despair of Mercy, or hardened unto a very
disregard of Vindictive Justice. Who are sure by Prosperity to be slain, and to
be made forgetful of God; by Adversity to be brought to horrible Distrust of
God's goodness, or as lewd Disdain of his Government and Discipline; by our
very Duties themselves to be puffed up with Pride, as if we were more than
Angels; or else to be torn with Discontent, as if we thought God's Servants
were no better than Gally-slaves.

To conclude; thus says the gracious Man. I believe in God the Father, and in
the Son, and I believe in the Holy Ghost also. The Father works hitherto, and
the Son works, and (blessed equally be his Name) the Holy Spirit works. By
his ASSISTANCE, through Christ's MEDIATION, is my access unto GOD.

Mark 4. The Covenant of Grace is Spiritually entered, Sacramentally confirmed,
and Practically observed by him. He knows no Religion, but what is Federal, and
by Covenant. He is one fast-bound to all three Persons of the Godhead,
undividedly, and unto each of them, distinctly. And this, by the BOND OF THE
COVENANT; as Ezekiel. 20.37. Even the COVENANT OF GOD'S PEACE; as Isai. 54.10. He
has learned the first Covenant, of Works. He has been Convinced of his breach
of it, in his first Parents, and in his own Person. And of his becoming
thereby, first, a Runnagate from God, and, then, an Exile or Banished Creature:
and one remedilesly miserable, without a NEW and BETTER Covenant. He has been
wounded by this his said breach of the first Covenant; and that unto Death it
self. The death of all his Comforts, in any thing under the Sun; and of all his
Hopes of welfare in the next World. He has cried in the anguish of his Soul, O
that I had never been born! Nor ever could he change his Mind; or desist from
that cry, or come to any life of Peace and Hope, till he had got knowledge of
this Covenant of Grace. By the balm hereof, his Wounds, that stank and were
corrupt, were healed. He Revived, when he heard that God, being by Christ
appeased, had made and offered a NEW Covenant. A new Bond, to bind again unto
himself those that had run from him. To bind himself to bless and save the
Penitent; and that as strongly, and more, than ever he bound himself in the
first Covenant to bless and save the Innocent. He cannot forget the sweet
feelings that he had in his heart, when he first heard what this Covenant was.
What it is Promises, and what it is Demands. Indeed at first, he exclaimed in his
haste; Away, away, this is too good to be true. Indeed if Light and Darkness,
and Fire and Stubble were possible to be made Friends, this were a way to make
them so. If GOD and a SINNER were possible to be united and reconciled, this
New Covenant is one that would unite them. But how CAN this be? Nevertheless,
being by and by brought to himself, and not daring to give the Lie to Him that
CANNOT Lie, he ceased to Doubt, and began to Wonder and Bless. Uttering words
to this purpose; HEAVEN, HEAVEN, HEAVEN; here is HEAVEN on Earth. Here is a
BEATIFICK VISION. Why, here shine all the astonishing Excellencies and
attracting Beauties of God; of the whole Trinity. I never saw before, some of
them. I never before knew the ten thousandth part of the rest of them. Is this
the COVENANT OF GRACE. It Is of GRACE indeed, and of GLORY too, I think. O that
I had known it sooner! That I had asked after it as soon as I could speak! That
I had given my Parents, Ministers, and God himself no rest, till I had been
made to know this Covenant of Grace! This HEAVEN, HEAVEN, HEAVEN upon Earth.

Briefly; he has admired the exquisite suitableness of both the Privileges and
Duties of the Covenant of Grace. Their suitableness to the state wherein he
lay. That was a state of Sin and Misery. He did therein nothing but dishonor
God, and destroy himself. Now comes this Covenant of Grace, and, as to his Sin,
preaches Repentance, and return to Duty; as to his Misery, preaches Remission
and return into God's Favor. It gives, as well as requires, Repentance; and
freely, for the sake of Christ, (not for any Merit in Repentance) gives
Remission. The Promised Privileges of the Covenant of Grace, are such as our
Nature craves for; and all it can desire. To wit, PARDON and SALVATION;
comprehending all Blessings.

In these, God respected our Want. The demanded Duties, (which also are
promised in the use of means,) are such things as our Corrupt Nature does loath
and turn from. To wit, ENTRANCE and PERSEVERANCE in the Obedience of the
Gospel; comprehending all Duties.

In these, God respected his own Honor. And of equal Wisdom and Grace, by the
former, which are craved by our Nature, he allureth us to these latter, which
are averted from by our Corruption. This, the gracious Man has observed much;
and blessed and magnified God in the observation of it. By the former, his
Spirit, Soul and Body have been strongly and sweetly drawn into the latter. He
has a true heart; that is, a heart resolved upon all the Duties of the
Covenant: and that because he has also, full assurance of Faith; that is, a
heart trusting in God for all the Promised Blessings of the Covenant. Thus is
he a Spiritual Covenanter with God. His Heart and Spirit taking truly the
Blessings of the Gospel for his Happiness, and as truly taking the Duties of
the Gospel for his Work and Business.

Be it added; the Man whom we describe, is one that neither, Thinks nor makes
Light, of any Ordinance of his God. He knows that God's Positive Laws do bind
the Conscience, as well as his Moral ones. And he remembers that the effects of
the first Sin, though it were a breach of a Positive Law, were tremendous. He
considers, that under the New Testament, the Number is but Two; the Observation
not difficult; and, if Piously observed, exceedingly Beneficial. And he infers,
that the disuse or abuse of Baptism, or the Lord's Supper, must therefore
greatly incense God, and injure a Soul. He rests not in the foresaid spiritual
Covenanting with God, though good, necessary, and of greatest necessity. The
bare word of the Covenant of Grace, as it is in the Scripture, he highly
prizeth: but the signified, sealed, and engaged word thereof, as it is in the
Holy Sacraments, he most religiously uses, and justly prefers. He Uses it,
because he is Commanded; and he Prefers it, because in it is use, he has the
word of the Covenant with extraordinary Advantages. Among Men any Covenant
made, is first expressed by Words, then by Writings, then by Hands and Seals
mutually added; and this last, is the highest, strongest, and utmost
Confirmation that Men can give to each other. The Covenant between God and Us,
made, is first expressed by his Spirit unto us, and by our Spirits unto him, in
spiritual Language. Nextly, by Words, or Confession with our Mouth; we
alleging God's part of the Covenant, and professing our own restipulation
Lastly, By Sacraments; which are Rites, in their outward appearance
contemptible; but ordained by God for both Signifying, Sealing, and Engaging.
Ordained, to be Signs and Seals on God's part, and to be Bonds and Badges on
our part of the Covenant. And in this last way, is the most noble and most
complete Confirmation that can be given. For, in these said Sacraments; God
does (as appears from his Institution of them,) most sensibly unto our selves,
and most publicly in the face of the Congregation, TESTIFY his Engagement to
fulfill the Promises of the Covenant; expecting our fulfilling of the Demands;
which he had before Testified unto us by his Word and Spirit in our hearts. And
we, in the Sacraments, do (as appears from our very Celebration of them,
besides our verbal Declarations,) most solemnly and openly TESTIFY our
Engagement to fulfill the Demands of the Covenant, expecting God's gracious
fulfillment of the Promises; which we had before testified with our Hearts and
with our Lips. In a word; the good Man learns, that, though it be an amazing
Condescension, of which God disposes his Grace in way of Covenant; yet, it is
a further and vastly greater Condescension, of which he adds Seals, and such
Confirmations. There was on his part no need of them; nor did he add them to
help his own inviolable Faithfulness, but merely to help our weak Faith; and to
give us the more strong Consolation. Particularly; 1. The more to express his
sincere and earnest respect unto our Salvation; as a King expresses his Zeal
for a poor Subjects Satisfaction, when he says; Come, I am not satisfied my
self to give thee my bare word, though it be a royal one; I will unto the same
add my broad Seal. 2. To Apply more particularly and closely unto every
individual Soul, this foresaid Covenant. I say, more particularly than in the
Scripture it is applied. Like a King, who, being desirous more abundantly to
comfort reconciled Rebels, though he has in common declared their Pardon, in
an Act of Oblivion and Indemnity, does further Sign and Seal particularly every
one's Pardon. For, in the Word, God speaks indeed the same things as in the
Sacraments; but, in the Word he speaks unto all, generally, but in the
Sacraments unto every one, particularly. Therein his Language by his Minister
uttered, is, I Baptize THEE: and Take and Eat THOU. 3. To invest Believers
solemnly, and as by formality of Law, into a right to the good things of the
Covenant. As Men use; when, having consented to a Bargain, they have made those
that deal with them a right unto a House or Field, they do make that right more
explicit by the delivery of it to them by some formality of Law; that of a
House, by the delivery of a Key, and that of a Field by delivery of a Turf of
Earth. So Acts 22.14. Arise, and be Baptized for the washing away of thy Sins;
that is, Receive Baptism, as a livery and Seisin of Pardon; and of all other
benefits of the Covenant of Grace which are inseparable from it. 4. To set
Christ and all his benefits before Believers, in the way of greatest force to
Instruct and Comfort them. And that is, by Proposal of them unto our Senses, in
visible Rites and Ceremonies. For, who knows not, that Knowledge comes into our
Souls through our Senses? And, both most powerfully and pleasantly through our
Eyes? Now the gracious Man dares not receive this overflowing of God's Grace in
vain. Holily to God, exemplarily to Men, beneficially unto his Soul, he does,
by the holy Sacraments of the New Testament, 1 Profess his Christian Religion,
2 Testify his Union to Christ and to his Members, 3 Distinguish himself from
Infidels, 4 Encourage and Engage his Soul to the Obedience of the Gospel.

He thinks it worth his while, to contemplate and to praise the wonderful
extent of God's grace, in this signed, sealed Covenant of his. For the most
part, he is one that considers, it is extended, as to the PERSONS, so unto the
SEED of Believers. And that, as God said to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the
God of thy seed; so, upon us Gentiles is that blessing of Abraham come; Gal.
3.13, 14. And we are told that our Children are Holy; (that is, with a
Covenant-holiness, and such as entitles them unto Baptism, the entering Seal of
the Covenant.) 1 Cor. 7.14. They are holy by their Parents Dedication and by
God's Acceptance; for when the Parents dedicated themselves they dedicated
their seed also unto God: and when God Promised to be their God, he Promised to
be the God of their seed also. No Man has yet shown us, where God has said, I
will no longer be the Covenant-God of my Peoples Infant Seed. Or, though I do
admit them into my Covenant, I will not henceforth, as of old, seal my Covenant
unto them. Now, as before Baptism they are Holy by Spiritual Dedication; after
Baptism they are farther Holy, by Sacramental Consecration. And as the
Circumcised of old were debtors to the whole Law to do it; so are they, being
Baptized, by new Obligation debtors to the whole Gospel to obey it. To wit,
when they come unto years of capacity; and cease to be accounted by God as
Parts and Pieces of their Parents, which in their nonage they are accounted. A
blessed Privilege! And such, as, if it were but duly improved by Parents and
Children, we should soon see blessed Effects of it. The gracious Man of whom we
speak, laments much his Parental and his Personal nonimprovement. And is one,
that sets himself to make it appear, he thinks the past time of neglect to have
been too too much. One, that now having received his sight in the Matter,
addicts himself to improve it so much the more unto Faith and Obedience.

He perceives that Baptism is another kind of thing, than the generality of
People take it for. And, of all things to be named, God will not hold him
guiltless that takes his Baptism in vain. Take it in vain they do, who mind
their Covenant with God, never the more for it. Who believe the Pardon of their
Sins, never the more; who confide in God for the bestowal of all the Promised
good things of the Covenant, never the more; who are bent to die unto sin and
live unto righteousness, never the more for their Baptism.

But he conceives of it as a Baptism of Repentance, for the Remission of Sins.
And makes the same use of it, as a Servant does of his Covenant with his
Master; as a Soldier does of his Covenant with his Captain; as a Wife does of
her solemnized Marriage-Covenant with her Husband. He constantly bears it in
Mind, as his true and greatest Encouragement to expect the recompense of reward
without doubting; and as his like Engagement to Serve the Lord Jesus Christ, to
fight under his Banner against Flesh, World, and Devil; and all days of his
Life to Honor, Love, and Obey him. As Warriers are not dressed, but are naked,
till their Swords are girded to their Sides: so is it with him in a Morning; he
thinks not himself up, dressed, and ready to stir, till his Soul has put on
the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Covenant-WORD of GOD as in holy BAPTISM
SIGNED and SEALED. Ubi VERBUM nominatur, SACRAMENTA fere subintelliguntur.
Ames, in Sciagraph. Cateches. It is his perpetual Soliloquy; How shall I that
am dead to sin, that am Baptized, and have solemnly Vowed Death unto all Sin,
how shall I live any longer therein? I, that am, in the import and
signification of my Baptism, Risen with Christ, what shall become of me, if I
do not seek the things that are above? If unbaptized Infidels be damned without
mercy, of how much sorer punishment shall I be thought worthy, if I Forget,
though I do not verbally Renounce, my Baptism? If I become blind, see not far
off, and FORGET that I was washed from my old sins? If I bear my holy Baptism,
but as an empty Formality? If I use it not, as daily Food, for the strength of
my Faith; and as my ordinary Physic, for its Health? If, under Temptations, I
do not advance the Considerations of it for gaining Victory over them; and if,
at other times, I do not advance the same for keeping my Conquest? Better may a
Servant forget that he was Hired; a Soldier, that he was Listed; a Wife that
she was Married; than I forget that I was Baptized. Their Folly would be less,
their Sin would be less, their Loss and Shame incomparably less.

And the rather; because, I consider, my Baptism was Infant Baptism it self.
Other Baptism, is like the Tower of David builded for an Armory, wherein there
hang a thousand Bucklers and Shields against our spiritual Adversaries. But of
Infant Baptism, it must be said, There is none like that. None like it, for
numerous and powerful enforcements unto Faith and Obedience. Being Baptized in
my Infancy, upon the account of God's Covenant with my Ancestors, I am thereby
given to see, that Sin is a Herod that sought my life from the very womb. That
it was In me, before ever it proceeded actually From me. That it is an earlier
Enemy of mine than they dream of, who disown Original Sin. For, what need of
the holy Washing, if I was not then it self Unclean? And, being that I was
surely so, methinks I am the more engaged to contrive and endeavor the death
of so early, as well as deadly, Foe, as my Sin is. Being in Infancy Baptized,
so early entered into league with God against it, and encouraged extremely unto
holiness and righteousness; the date of my Obligation adds weight unto it. I
cannot but think, that, of all Men living, the so early bound had need
exquisitely and entirely to obey. Being in Infancy Baptized; I am thereby
certified, God is not only my God, but he was the God of my Fathers before me.
And I cannot but much the more promptly trust in him; as it is Usual with all
the World, to trust the most readily of any Men, their own Friends and their
Father's before them. For this also have I the Example of God's Saints on
Scripture-Record who often strengthened their Faith on their Father's Covenant.
Exodus 32.13, etc. Yea, good warrant from God I have; being he tells me, he
shows mercy to thousands of them that love him; and Children are beloved for
their Father's sake, Romans 11.28. Being baptized in Infancy, I can and shall
often plead the Covenant therein sealed, with special Advantage. The Object of
my Faith, is not only God in Covenant; but God in Covenant with the Seal of
Baptism administered, to strengthen that my Faith. And this whenever
administered, is a strong Plea. But, as all the World will acknowledge,
Experience and long Acquaintance do make a mighty inducement to Trust, and
Confidence in any one that we Plead with. Now this Inducement I have by the
means aforesaid. And thus do I humbly Plead with my God, both for Spirituals
and for Temporals: "Lord, when I could only Want, and could not Know, Desire,
or Ask for the good things that I wanted; whether Initial Graces, or
After-supplies of Grace; whether Necessaries, or Convenient Comforts of this
Life; then most freely, of Grace visibly and without question free, thou did
Seal a Promise of all of them unto me. Forbid the unbelief in my heart, I
meekly beseech thee! And let me not doubt but thou will faithfully bestow them
all on me, now that I am daily in thy dear Son's Name an earnest Supplicant for
them. Now that, of thy own Grace whereof thou art as constantly the Rewarder as
the Author, I ask, seek, knock, and pray without ceasing. O what will the
People say; the People of the Congregation that saw thee solemnly seal Promise
of all unto me, when I was carried in Arms, if they should see that sealed
Promise fail me now? What will the Minister be tempted to say, he who in
Christ's Name and Place did then solemnize the Covenant betwixt thee and my
soul? What will he say, should he see me now, at these years, coming to thee,
and yet cast out and cast off by thee? O be it far from me to distrust thee;
and especially then to distrust thee, when I consider, 1 that thou art my God
in sealed Covenant, and 2 that thou art my God in sealed Covenant from my
Mother's belly. By thy Grace assisting, I will never forget (or less than
Practically remember) my Infant Baptism; for therewith thou have quickened me.
And therewith, I trust, thou will always quicken me. When, of old, thou did
promise Life to Hezekiah; his query was, What shall be the sign that the Lord
will heal me? But, I am past that doubt; Thou have promised me Life, and all
good things in Christ Jesus; and holy Baptism is the Sign and Witness between
Thee and Me. The sign and seal of the Righteousness which is by Faith; even of
all the Grace promised to me in Christ. Amen, and Amen!

It must be added; the gracious Man is one that does not use to forget, that he
is a creature Weak, and but Imperfectly fanctified, and (during his abode in
this World,) always miserably Tempted. And therefore one that had need, to make
use of all the means of grace by God provided. To have a due respect unto ALL
the Covenant Word of God, and unto BOTH of the Sacraments or Seals thereof. He
forgets not that the Word of God is a Covenant word; and that the Covenant of
God, is a signed sealed Covenant; and that the signed sealed Covenant of God,
for our more abundant Instruction and Consolation, has two distinct Seals
ordained for it. Baptism, the first, for our Initiation; the Lord's Supper, the
other, for our Confirmation. Baptism, once to be administered, for our one
Entrance into Covenant: the Lord's Supper, often to be administered; (I think
always on Lords-Days;) for our Continuance in Covenant; for our Perseverance,
and Progress in grace. Baptism, in which God (constructively) says, Come thou
and obey the Gospel as thus Encouraged and Engaged by the Sign and Seal on my
part, and by the Bond and Badge on thy own part: And the Lord's Supper, in
which God says, Forasmuch as thou have Understood, and Consented unto, and
Professed thy consent unto, the Covenant sealed between me and thee in Baptism;
Come thou, and take another Sign and Seal thereof on my part, and give another
Bond and put on another Badge on thy own part; and as thus anew Encouraged and
Engaged, go Persevere and make Progress in Faith, Hope, Love, and Obedience.
The good Man of whom I am speaking, is neither Ignorant, nor Forgetful, nor
less than practically mindful hereof. He no more dares to Omit what his God
Commands, than to Commit what he Forbids. He as truly dreads to disuse the Cup
of the Lord, as to Drink the Cup of Devils; and to deny to partake of the
Lord's Table, as to comply and partake of the Table of Devils. THIS DO IN
REMEMBRANCE OF ME, says Christ; Yea, Lord, says he, THIS WILL I DO, THIS I
CANNOT BUT DO. I, whose DESIRE and PRAYER is, that, in all things Thy Will be
done. He minds the AUTHOR of that Command; who is his Supreme Caesar, to whom
he grudges no Tribute: and the COMMAND it self; which is as Easy and Pleasant,
as Beneficial and Honorable, as any in the Gospel. All the Pain of it, is but
parting with the Plague of allowed Sin. It binds to the Pleasure of receiving
the greatest ensurance of Salvation. The Benefit, no Man knows but he that has
it; and the Honor is of things unspeakable. Moreover, the gracious Man, when
there is need, does melt his heart with that Argument, wherewith Joseph's
Brethren did melt his: Thy Father did command before he died; or when he was
dying. He reasons with himself thus; How my Soul, will thou look my Savior in
the face at the Resurrection, if thou slightest the very Charge he gave thee at
his Death. Thy Savior did command this the same Night wherein he was betrayed.
Woe unto me, if I less observe my Redeemer, than the Rechabites their Jonadab,
and the Turks their Mahomet. They being under Prohibition, abstained from Wine.
I am a wretch, if at a dying Savior's Command, I do not use holy Wine, for my
Soul's sake and my often infirmities. He likewise awefully thinks of the
Scandal given by a neglect of God's holy Table. Of the contempt it casts upon
the whole Generation of them that have sought God's face therein, in all Ages.
Yea, and found it too, in degrees of light and strength, not communicated
(ordinarily) in other Ordinances. Of the sore reproach which it pours upon
the heads of our Martyrs in Q. Mary's days: who vainly rescued from the Papists
the pure administration of the Lord's Supper, with the Price of their Life
blood; if it be so very indifferent a thing, that we may, without Sin against
God and without harm to our selves, go without it. Nor does he without
trembling consider, what a fearful stumbling block unto raw and weak
Christians, his neglect of the Lord's Table would be. Such a stumbling block,
as would cause the fall of many; and it may be to the Ruin, at least to the
sore Wounding of their Souls in Grace and Peace. In a word; if Doubts and Fears
perplex him, the gracious Man rests not in them. He carries his Evidences to
Men skilful in God's Law, and and takes their Judgment. If his Soul be
Distempered, he will have the advice of a spiritual Physician. And that is,
what God does ordinarily bless unto his relief.

But, being God has given WORD and SACRAMENTS for two Breasts of gracious
Consolation; he cannot make, or endure himself to live an Amazon; or with but
one Breast. The Scythian Women cut off one of their Breasts that they might the
more advantageously draw their Bows in Battle. But the Captain of his Salvation
never taught him so to do. No, but the clean contrary. So that, he dares not
to Pray for spiritual strength and victory over spiritual Enemies, without the
use of this especially strengthening Ordinance. I mean in conjunction with all
others.

Preparing diligently for the Lord's Table; and Repairing frequently unto it;
and Demeaning himself becomingly at it; he conscientiously sets himself to
Answer the ends of it in his daily walk with God and Men. Coming from the
Ordinance, he Reviews the MERCY that he has received, and the DUTY that he
has performed. He quickly finds a time to go and offer unto God PRAISES for
both, and PRAYERS for all supplies of his Spirit for the improvement of both.
He sedulously watches against the excess of worldly PLEASURES and BUSINESS
also; which he knows to chill spiritual Heat, and to raze out holy
Impressions. He commands all that is within him to act the grace received;
against the invasion of DISTRUST and the joint insurrection of DISOBEDIENCE. To
Plead what God did, and what he did, at the holy Table, against all DISCONTENT
under Afflictions, against all SINFUL COMPLIANCE under Temptations, against all
PRIDE and SLOTH in the most Prosperous Condition. So far is he from dreaming
that his Work is ended, when the holy Supper is ended. Or, that the holy Feast
will work like Physic, whether one do sleep or wake. He tells himself, that
now his Encouragements are greater, and now his Engagements to all Duty are
stronger, than before he s^t down at the holy Table. God expects that he should
now fall by Negligence more seldom, and rise by Repentance more soon, than he
used to do before this holy Banquet. He tells himself, his Baptismal Covenant
is not ordained by God to be thus renewed for nothing. No, but that in this
Ordinance seeing how Christ was Hated for sin, Denied for sin, and Crucified
for sin, we might more Hate it, more Deny it, and more Crucify it. Seeing how
Christ loved God and us, we might more love God and Him; and all days of our
lives exclaim, O hateful Sin! O lovely God and Savior! Having in this
Ordinance received from Christ, by the hand of his Minister, another Seal of
our Pardon, and our title to Eternal life; and having given back unto God
another public Protestation of all Gospel-Obedience; we should strive and
strain after another degree of Confidence in God, and another size of
Obedience, than what we have yet attained. And that upon this
Motive-Consideration held in Mind, and kept as the apple of our eye for the
purpose. For this purpose we should indeed be ever telling our selves, we are
God's Servants and Children by REPEATEDLY SIGNED AND SEALED COVENANT. It should
never be out of our thoughts. We should have our first thoughts of it in the
Morning; our last thoughts of it at Night; and as many thoughts of it, as may
be, all day. In our Prayers very many; and under our Conflicts with any
temptation, we should have a special abundance.

St. Austin says, this holy Supper should be received every Lord's Day if he
might advise us; and as to the taking it every day of the Week, that practice
he will neither blame, nor praise. If I err, let the learned teach me better;
this I judge. It would be my Duty to receive it every day of the Week, if I
could not otherwise keep upon my heart the sense of what is aforesaid, from one
Lord's Day to another.

To conclude this Mark of a gracious Man; he thinks of the Lord's Supper as it
was said he thought of Baptism. The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes
the Lord's Supper in vain. And he accounts that they do in great measure so
take it, who do not as is said in the Lines foregoing. He knows, that the
strongest man in Christ does need it, and is not above it: and that the weakest
Babe in Christ is habitually qualified for it; and the Ordinance is not above
him. No, but is even chiefly for such as he is. As Holy as Adam was in his
innocent state, he wanted a Sacrament. And as imperfectly Wise and Holy as
Christ's Disciples were before his Ascension and Mission of the Spirit, they
had this holy Sacrament that I speak of. He is therefore one that valueth the
holy Feast, above his daily Bread. And not without cause. It is said of the
Egyptian Youth, whom his Master left sick in the Field; that, being brought to
David, and having eaten and drank; his spirit came again to him. The gracious
Man can tell you, that he has often been sick and faint in his inner Man; and
being brought unto David's Son and Lord, and having Eaten and Drank at his
Table, his spirit also has come again unto him. If every Lord's Day he has
not resorted unto this Banquet: yet, ordinarily, he has tasted of its twelve
manner of Fruits every Month; if I may allude unto that in Rev. 22.2. And
virtue has come forth from Jesus Christ into his Soul; and done mighty Works
there, even in despite of its Unbelief, and deadly Fears foregoing. Though he
does not think the Lord's Supper a Converting Ordinance, as from a state of
Sin, into a state of Grace; yet he does experience it to be a Converting
Ordinance, as from lower degrees of Grace and Peace, unto higher ones. He
pitieth in his heart every Soul of each sinful Tribe; both those that
profanely keep away from the holy Table, and those that do but come and
profane it. And he spiritually hears God saying to those vilifyers of holy
Bread and Wine, as it is Isai. 65.13, 14. Behold my Servants shall Eat, but ye
shall be Hungry; behold my Servants shall Drink, but ye shall be Thirsty;
behold my Servants shall Rejoice, but ye shall be Ashamed; Behold my Servants
shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for
vexation of spirit.

I will here Publish the words of a Judicious and Pious Author, which have been
useful to me; and may be so unto some of my Readers. Even these, of Mr. Daniel
Rogers, which I find in his Treatise of Sacraments, Part 2. p. 241. I mourn to
speak it; diverse Ministers, neither Unlearned, nor Unpainful, (in their kind,)
nor Ungodly; yet, in Point of the Sacrament do little acquaint either
themselves or the People, with it, almost through the Year, except in a passage
afar off. I dare not boast my self; but if I might draw any to Emulation, I
durst say, that, whereas my poor Labors for TWELVE YEARS were more upon this
than any other Point, I am not ashamed to say, I found the Argument more
FRUITFUL at the end, than all the while. And doubtless many good People there
are, who mourn for the barrenness of their Ministers in this kind. -- So, in
his Preface to his Reader, he harmoniously eenough says; I could not see
wherein I could do greater honor to God, than to enhanse the Knowledge of
CHRIST SACRAMENTAL. And to incite others to do it, whose learned Abilities can
better perform it.

It has been said, who is the good Man's KING and FATHER; who is his ADVOCATE
and FRIEND in the Court of his fatherly King; who is his GUIDE and COMFORTER on
Earth, sent down unto him from that Court. And also, what are the BONDS and
COVENANT TRANSACTIONS, that have passed betwixt them and him. Wherefore our
last Mark is this;

Mark 5. Assurance of Saving Grace, is sweetly possessed, or painfully sought,
by him. By Saving Grace, I mean ELECTION, REDEMPTION, VOCATION, JUSTIFICATION,
and GLORIFICATION. By Assurance, I understand Certainty of Mind; such as is
Proper, though it be Imperfect. No man living is Perfectly Assured of God's Love;
or is so certain, that he cannot be made more certain. But, many a man is
Properly Assured of it, and has more than a guess, or a conjecture, that he is
a Possessor of it. For many a man's Assurance, is built upon proper, rational,
assuring grounds. Many a man's Assurance, has proper, real Victory over his
doubts, and against his fears. Many a man's Assurance, has proper, genuine
Fruits of Assurance; Peace, Patience, Joy etc. Many a man's Assurance, has the
name of Assurance given it by God himself; who always gives things their
proper Names. St. Paul's is called a sure Persuasion, Romans 8.38. St. John's, a
sure Knowledge, 1 John 2.3. The Faith of all, is called an ((...), or) evident
proof of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. In a word; many I say, have and enjoy the
comfort of this proper Assurance of God's Grace. And the good man, that has it
not; that either never attained it, or having attained it, has lost it; he
knows that it is ATTAINABLE, that it is DESIRABLE, and that it is NECESSARY:
And therefore dares not to desist from seeking it, or to be remiss in seeking
it.

He knows it is Attainable. For the H. Scriptures are Revelations of God's
Grace; and that, Free indeed, as to any Merit of ours, but most Engaged, as to
the Promises and Covenant of God. They are a Revelation both Full, and very
Plain and Intelligible; yea, and given of God for this very end, that we through
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. Besides this, he knows
the Nature of Man, and the Power of Conscience, too well, to dream that
Assurance is unattainable. The Scripture is a Lamp to see by; and Conscience is
an Eye to see with; what then should hinder Assurance? Conscience is (we know)
an inner Judge, and justifies or condemns us at its Bar. It is also a Witness
in our selves, as to the matter of Absolution or Condemnation. It is likewise a
Rewarder, or a Punisher of us; a good man is more than a little satisfied from
himself; and a Cain and Judas more than a little tormented in themselves.
Moreover, the good man knows, that what has been full often attained, even
under the Old Testament, it is not to be thought unattainable under the New.
Especially, that thing which under the New Testament very many have attained;
and all are commanded to seek; and consequently have a promise, that (in the
due use of means) they shall find. To conclude; he knows that it is possible to
attain assuring Evidences; and therefore possible to attain Assurance it self.
Those said Evidences, are Demonstrative ARGUMENT, Credible SENSE, and
Infallible TESTIMONY. The inseparable and distinguishing Effects of Grace, do
demonstrate the being of it. Preference of Christ, and his Spirit above all
things, Purification of heart and hands, etc. do so do. And these are
attainable. Inward spiritual Sense and Perception, is not to be discredited. In
proposing of Ends, and in prosecuting them with Means, we have sensations of
our actions; and these sensations are as worthy to be believed as our bodily
Eyes at any time are. There is a seeing Light in God's Light; there is a
Feeling of Divine Power with its exceeding greatness prevailing upon our Wills;
there is a Tasting that the Lord is good, and his Word sweeter than Honey; he
that has these, may safely conclude from them, that he is an Heir of Grace.
And these are attainable also. Lastly; The Testimony of a Person that can
neither be Deceived, nor Deceive us, is worthy of all acceptance. The Holy
Ghost is such a Person, infinitely Wise, and alike Good. He is sent from the
Father and Son, to testify unto the Children of God, that they are his
Children, and his Heirs, and Coheirs with Christ. To Testify it with their
Spirits, that they are so. To be an additional and deciding Witness. The Word
of God lays down sure marks of Grace, and witnesses those marks to be true.
The Conscience of a Believer, or his Spirit, witnesses those marks to be found
in his heart and life. The Spirit of God, supervenient to both, presents
himself, and witnesses by self-evidencing Light, that those marks are true,
and are truly in the Believer, and the Believer truly in the unchangeable Love
of God. And who dares say, this Testimony of the Holy Ghost is unattainable?
or, being attained, will not give true and proper Assurance?

The good man knows well the Desireableness of such Assurance. For, without it,
who can Do God's Will, or Praise his Name? Who can come unto the Throne of
Grace with a becoming boldness? Who can Rejoice, or not Mourn always? Who can
Comfort, or not Sadden others? Who can Live, but very uneasily; or Die, but
very unwillingly? But Assurance is Joy; and Joy is our strength. Our strength
against Corruptions, Temptations, and the Fear of Death. Assured Paul, beat
down his Body, and kept it in subjection. Assured Moses, chose rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, than to be Heir of the Crown of Egypt.
Assured Simeon could say and sing, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in
peace.

But, lastly; The gracious man conceives of this Assurance as a thing most
Necessary. Even upon a nearer consideration Necessary. I mean, upon
consideration of the Command of God laid on him to seek it. God requires
nothing more expressly and plainly in all the Bible, than that we give Diligence
to make our Calling and Election SURE, 2 Pet. 1.10. We desire that EVERY ONE of
you do show the same diligence to the full ASSURANCE of Hope unto the end, Heb.
6.11. Yea, many another duty does God require from us as means of getting and
keeping this said Assurance. Our Ways must be searched; our Hearts must be
searched; the Scriptures must be searched; our H. Baptism must be recognized;
the Lord's Supper must be frequently repeated; Men, to whom is given the Tongue
of the Learned, to speak a word in season, must be often consulted; and for what
less than to get and keep sure that God's Law is written in our Hearts, and our
Names be written in Heaven, in his Book of Life. Many a serious thought of
this, rises, walks, and lies down with the gracious man: Whose settled
Judgment therefore is, that if the bare want of Assurance be no Sin or Loss at
all; yet the neglect of it is such a sin, and argues such a want of all
Spiritual sense, as scarce consists with grace. He is satisfied indeed, that
spring-tydes of Assurance and over flowing Comforts, may be wanted, without
sin. For they are rather Privileges than Duties. But as for Assurance which
Schoolmen call Moderate; and which reaches unto Hope and Peace, though not
unto Dancing for joy and Triumph; this the good man thinks God seldom or never
denies, but upon some sinful Provocation. Upon the contempt of some Ordinance,
neglect of some Duty, unexercisedness of some Grace, indulgence of some Lust.
And therefore inclines to think the want of this sort of Assurance to be his
sin. This, whose want he judges meritoriously procured by sinful Causes; and
he feels to be malignantly full of sinful Effects. Nevertheless, he awefully
concludes, that should he add unto that sinful want the more sinful
carelessness of getting out of it; should he forget or despise God's positive
command to seek Assurance; (though therein the divine goodness makes his
Comfort to be his Duty;) should he together break such a Gospel-Precept, and
slight such a Gospel-Priviledge; he should then contract a much more frightful
Symptom of Reprobation upon his Soul.

In short, our gracious Man is ever busy in Getting, or Preserving and
Promoting his Assurance of grace.

The Holy Ghost must indeed work grace in us, before he can Witness it to be in
us. But it is most certain, that he may and does often work it in a Soul, long
before he does witness unto it that he has wrought it. Nor do I dare to say
that he does not let some Children of God live and die without ever witnessing
it unto them at all in this World. Although we all believe and teach, that
ordinarily he does, first or last, witness the grace he works to be true and
saving. And does either by and by after their Conversion, or, after some good
Proficience in Sanctification, or (at least) a little before their Death,
Assure God's people of his grace in them. There are several Seasons, in which,
above all other times, he is observed to give them the said Assurance; and
there are several Duties, which, above others, he uses graciously to reward
and honor with Assurance.

There are six Seasons which are eminent. The first is, when a Soul has been
extraordinarily bemoaning its sin. Ephraim was heard so doing. And what was the
next news? He was straitways called a dear Son, a pleasant Child, Jer. 31. The
second is, when a Soul has been Praying in Prayer, and that with all Prayer.
When it has been most restless, and denied to give the Lord rest; and been
most importunate for Assurance, in order unto holiness; then frequently comes
an assuring Testimony. As when our Savior had been at Prayer, then came the
voice from Heaven, saying, This is my well beloved Son, Luke 3. The third
Season is, when a Soul has been Waiting for Assurance, and looking for it in
all the Ordinances of God; no one of them excepted. It is in his Ordinances
that he will dispense his Consolations. See what is said of them, that follow
those Ordinances, Psalm. 36. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of thy house, thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasure. In the
Ordinances we see most of Christ's Blood as prevailing to God's satisfaction;
and we feel it most prevailing as to our Consciences Pacification. The fourth
Season is, when a Soul is called to undertake some extraordinary Service for
God. Before Abraham was called to the extremity of Self-denial, in offering up
his Isaac, he was certified that God would be his exceeding great reward.
Before Steven was stoned, he saw the Heavens opened, and his Advocate standing
at God's right hand. Before our Savior himself was Crucified, he was
Transfigured. He did shine in glory before he was clothed with shame. The fifth
Season is, when a Soul has done some eminent service, and extraordinarily held
its integrity. After that Abraham had, in his admirably prompt intention,
offered up his Son, he received that transcendent testimony, Now I know that
thou fear God. And after that Job had made his Patience to be heard of,
(though not without sore fits of Impatience immixed,) the Lord accepted the
face of Job, gave him twice as much as before; and proclaimed it, that none of
his Friends had spoken the thing that was right like unto Job, Job 42. The
sixth Season is, when the Soul is taking leave of the Body. Then when Flesh and
Heart fails, the God of all consolations often pleases, to be most sensibly
the Strength, and the Portion, and the Joy of his Children. Making them then
most sure that they have a building of God, an house made without hands,
Eternal in the Heavens, when the earthly House of their Tabernacle is
dissolving. Thus does he, who is Master of his own Consolations; and may and
does dispose of his own as he pleases, both for the Measure and the Season;
thus does he oftentimes dispose of them. And hereof the gracious Man is no
negligent observer.

Let it still be remembered, that God will use a liberty, and arbitrarily
dispense the sweet Assurance we speak of. And it is not for us to prescribe to
him either Times or Means, in which he shall necessarily give it to us. But as
it has been said of special Seasons, so it must be affirmed of these following
Duties: ordinarily God does in them give the sense of his Love, and the
moderate Assurance of his Eternal Good Will unto Believers. I would make no
such Comparisons between Duties, as should be lessening of the worth and weight
of any. But I may be allowed to say thus much, I suppose. Look, as some Sins do
above ordinary so grieve the holy Spirit, that he refuses to comfort such as
do commit them: so do some Duties above ordinary please and delight Him;
insomuch that he uses not to let it be very long before he does pacify and
comfort the Believers, who do duly perform them. And of this sort are the
Duties which I shall propose.

First, The religious use of our Gospel Sacraments. Unto the scarcity whereof,
I do very much impute the notorious scarcity of Assurance, in these our days.
In which we have many that never in their lives spoke to this purpose unto
themselves. Come, I perceive that without some Assurance, my Religion cannot be
my Delight. And it horribly reproacheth God, to be served without greatest
Delight. And men will unavoidably be prejudiced against all inward and
spiritual service of him, by the sight of my sad and drooping life. My
Children, and Servants, and Neighbors, will be hardened in Irreligion, while
they see my Religion to be for the present not at all Joyous, but Grievous. I
have learned that Baptism and the Lord's Supper, were ordained for the very
purpose to BEGET and PROMOTE assurance of God's grace. Wherefore, by the help
of his grace, this day and hour I will BEGIN and I will PERSEVERE in the use of
them for this blessed benefit. [Beloved Readers, stop here; and, before you
read on, take to task your selves.] The discreet and gracious Man knows, the
Holy Ghost is the Sealer and Comforter of God's Children. But he himself, in
his Scriptures, has named Sacraments by the name of Seals, Romans 4.11. And
testified, that Abraham received his Old Testament Baptism for a greater ground
of Assurance of the righteousness he had by Faith. As also, that the Old
Testament Lord's Supper was for the Church's further Assurance that the
destroying Angel should not smite them. And accordingly we see, that the New
Testament Circumcision, when duly considered and improved, is blessed to ensure
believing Souls of the divine Promises. The Baptized Eunuch found it so, and
went his way rejoicing, Act. 8.39. And the New Testament Passover is sweetly
blessed to remove fear of the destroying Angel. It appears so, Act. 2.46. For
continuing in breaking of holy Bread, the Primitive Christians eat their
(common) meat with gladness of heart, praising God. Not to repeat all that is
foresaid, this remember: In the WORD, God woes us but by his Minister; in the
SACRAMENTS, he woes us also by his Son's very Picture. In the WORD he speaks in
General, He that believes shall be saved; in the SACRAMENTS, he is more
particular; Son, or Daughter, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. And
in the use of these Sacraments it is, that he uses so to speak: not in the
carnal spiritless use of them; but in that use which is declared in our
foregoing Mark. An use, in the neglect whereof, I think it not safe to Pray for
Assurance; but full as wicked, as it would be to Pray that Faith may come in
the resolved neglect of Hearing the Word. In short; who knows not many
Christians, that have come to the study and practical improvement of the
Sacraments, with a Hell of Fears in their Souls; and have e're long received a
Heaven of Joys in the room of those banished Fears. For the most part gracious
Souls be wiser; but some Babes will object, and do so; that it is a sin for
them to come to the Lord's Table until they have Assurance. And a great deal of
pains it costeth, to teach some of them these plain Truths. 1. The Faith that
qualifies for the Lord's Supper, is not higher than that of Acceptance of
Christ on the Gospel-terms, and Reliance upon God's truth for making it good.
When a Soul has this, he is spiritually Alive; and as soon as he is so, he may
and he ought to feed on this spiritual food, for strength and growth. 2. It is
not indispensably necessary to ones right unto the Lord's Table, that he should
have a certain, or assured Knowledge, that this Faith it self in him be true,
and that he is in Christ. It is enough, if God's Word may be believed, if his
heart condemn him not; though it cannot fully absolve him, and rid him of his
scruples. 1 John 3.20. True, he ought to Examine himself; for how else should a
man Condemn or Justify himself? But if, upon Examination, an enlightened heart
finds it self weary of sin; Desirous to be rid of it in Christ's own Method;
Pleased that Christ promises rest and relief unto such burdened Souls as his;
and Resolved to wait in the use of all means, to have that promise made good
unto him; what then? Truly, these things being so, he ought to come to the
Lord's Supper, desiring God to seal unto him the Promise which he lays hold
on; and to promote his cravings for Christ, as a fountain of both Pardoning and
Purifying grace. They that rashly deny this, do audaciously and most
barbarously exclude from the Lord's Table all Christians under desertion, and
doubting; all bruised reeds, which (it may be) are the sit, as well as
neediest, of any Souls, for the holy Banquet.] I will be the shorter in the
remaining Duties, because, in a manner, all are comprehended in this first.

A second Duty, which the Holy Ghost does often make a means of working
Assurance in Believers, is Self-Examination. Not all, that Men will call by the
name hereof; but, that which really is so; that which is strictly managed, and
is as constantly issued. That, wherein a man sets God before him; and having
beseeched his gracious Conduct, and Counsel; falls to compare what he Has
done and Does do, with what the Gospel Requires and he Ought to do. Examineth
his Actions, and especially the sincerity of the same; q. d. Have I Repented or
do I? and is my Repentance sincere? Have I Believed on Jesus Christ, or do I
so? and is my Faith sound and unfeigned? Have I begun, or am I beginning a life
of Repentance, Faith, and New Obedience? and is it in truth and integrity that
I do so? Speak out Conscience; for judge thou must, and conclude one way or
other. And I will not sleep, till thou tellest me what thy Sentence is. At
least what it is, that thou inclinest to believe of my Actions, of the
soundness of them, and of my state thence to be judged of. If thou do say, I
do not Repent, Believe, and Obey the Gospel; or that I do not sincerely so do,
I will not build upon a present rotten title. I will beg for God's Spirit, and
a new Heart by him wrought, and new Acts by him excited; and a new Claim will I
make, e're I stir out of this place. If thou, O Vicegerent of God within me, if
thou say, that, upon thy utmost search, things appear better unto thee; and
that, by the Scriptures judging, thou believe me to be a true Penitent, sound
Believer, sincere Obeyer of the Gospel; I will not give way to importunate
scruples, and refuse all comfort, and be afraid to bid my Soul bless the Lord,
and all that is within me Magnify his Name. I will humbly Hope in his grace,
and loudly Praise him in that hope. Uncertainty, or somewhat worse must be
theirs, who will not thus Examine themselves. But, of Souls well informed about
the Covenant of Grace, and qualified for Self-Examination; and much Exercising
it in this manner; they are few, if any, that do long endure tormenting
uncertainty. Vain are all Trials indeed, that are not brought unto an Issue:
and utterly unqualified they are for trial of their states, who are
unacquainted with the Covenant of Grace, the Law, and rule of Trial.

A third Duty, is Putting our one Talent to use, with Thankfulness for it; and
without murmuring against God for want of Assurance. Repent as much as thou
can, Believe, and Obey so; and it is more than probable, thou shall soon
discern thy self to Repent, Believe, and Obey. Especially, if thou art thankful
for the little light that keeps thee from very Distraction and Horrors as bad
as Francis Spira's; it is very like that God will increase it unto the light of
Noonday.

A fourth Duty, is accumulated diligence in all Ordinances. Fervence in Prayer,
loosed Peter's Bonds; it made Hannah's Countenance to be sad no more, etc.
Accurate Reading and Hearing the Word has done as great things; and so has
holy Conference (of which I have lately Printed much in a little room.)
Spiritual singing of Psalms, is notably commended by devout Ancients and our
Modern Divines, for this purpose.

A fifth Duty, is Abounding in such acts of Obedience as do most singularly
thwart flesh and blood, e. gr. Full often does God hasten to make known his
Mercy, to them, who resist carnal temptations, and exceed in mercy toward men,
Isai. 58.7. to the 11th. To them who run the hazard of their Names and Estates
in reproving Sinners. To them who bring their bodies into most subjection, and
make least of carnal Pleasures, for the sake of God's spiritual Consolations.
To them that unweariedly promote Peace, though ill requited by the Parties
differing, Mat. 5.9. To them that resolutely, and painfully, against the grain
of corrupt Nature, do love their Enemies, and pardon their Injuries, and pray
for their Salvation.

A sixth Duty, is a most peculiar War against that one sin which above any or
all others, causes a Man to doubt of the love of God. Some one such there is.
And when once that capital Makebate, is, with a due specialty of care and
pains, resisted, Assurance may be soon expected. God uses to command a Calm as
soon as such Jonah's be cast overboard.

A seventh Duty, is Bearing in Mind the many Arguments which we may Plead
humbly with God, before we get Assurance of his Love. e. gr. 1 His Names;
Long-suffering, Of great Mercy, Forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. 2
Our own Extremities; these Heman did Plead, and we ought to Plead, Psalm. 88.14,
15. 3 Our Readiness to forgive others their offenses against us. Luke 11.4. 4
Our Ministers and Friends Compassions and Prayers. Alas, shall Men's iron
Bowels yern, and shall the Lords gracious ones be restrained? Psalm. 80.4. 5 The
ill use that ill men, and good ones too, are like to make of our horrors and
tremblings. Psalm. 69.6. 6 Lastly and principally; The universal offer of Grace
by Christ Jesus made; and of all sinners, unto heavy laden ones; and weary of
their sins, and of such lives as sin do make them.

In a word, The gracious Man lays up these things in his heart. Indeed he
finds not in his Bible that God has promised, that every one that is a sound
Believer shall some time or other in this World be made sure that he is so. And
he thinks it possible, that a man may be saved without Assurance. Nevertheless
he cannot be content with the Possession of Godliness, without the Assurance
and certain Persuasion of it. As we see Men use not to be quieted with Bread
and Water, though they be enough to keep Life and Soul together; no, but all do
employ their thoughts for further Provisions. He is one that would be able to
do the things which without Assurance cannot be done. To Despise the World; to
Bear its Reproaches; to Die for Christ's sake; to be Bold at the Throne of
Grace; to have the Word and Sacraments as honey to his Taste; to be enlarged in
Thanksgiving and Praise; to be furthered in Repentance; to be fortified against
Errors, etc. And in order to these, if he has never gained Assurance, he is
seeking it; if he has it, he is diligently maintaining it; if he has lost it,
he is at work to regain it. And one Cordial he has, which does ever, more or
less, support and hearten him. Even this, which (upon the request of a Pious
Brother and Providential Hearer) I will set forth before I conclude. He is
always assured, that whoever has the least true Grace, he has the Promise of
an Increase thereof. He that has any one holy Quality; has all; and he that
has all, though in all he be now a Babe, he shall be a Man; and if he be now a
Man, he shall one day be a Giant in them. Unto his newborn Children, the Lord
God will give Grace, says the Man after his own Heart; Psalm. 84.11. q. d.
where he gives the Principle in Conversion, he will give the Practice of
Godliness in Conversation; and where he gives the Practice, he will give the
Progress; and where he gives the Progress he will give the final Perseverance.
The Scripture makes five grand Privileges of the Children of God. Vocation,
which is as it were the Chariot of Salvation, which has two fore wheels,
Election and Redemption, which precede it; and two hinder wheels, Justification
and Adoption, that follow it. Now, these are inseparable, the Elect are
certainly Redeemed; the Redeemed must be Called; the Called must be Justified;
the Justified must be Glorified. Being Called, we are ascended into the Chariot
foresaid; and as soon as we know where we are, we may look forth and see the
fore wheels, our Election and Redemption, and the hinder wheels our
Justification and Glorification. Or, if we never know it while we breathe, and
never see the wheels that carry us, yet the Foundation of God stands sure,
and he knows who are his. Grace, in Conversion infused, is rather a seed,
than a habit. A very small thing; and small things are hard to be seen. It is
long e're many can discern it in themselves. But it is never so little, but
that God sees it plainly; and never so little worth in God's eye, but that he
preserves it by his Almighty hand. And this of grace, both most Free and most
Engaged. Free, and without all merit or motive in us; but Engaged and bound by
inviolable Promise of his. Even double Promise; Promise made unto Christ, the
dear Redeemer of us; and Promise made unto our selves in and through Christ. I
may also add, it is Engaged by Promises of Jesus Christ himself, repeatedly made
unto us. He is little acquainted with the Gospel, who is a Stranger unto these
Promises, and who imagines that the Doctrine of them is an Enemy, or other
than an extraordinary Friend and Help unto practical Holiness. St. Peter
exhorts Christians to be Sober, to Hope to the End, to be Obedient Children,
not to fashion themselves according to former Lusts, but to be holy even as God
is holy, and that in all manner of Conversation. And, as the mightiest
Engagements and Encouragements hereunto, he advances these Considerations;
namely, that they were Elect according to the foreknowledge of God; that
Electing grace had issued and sparkled forth in their Regeneration; from which
they had a lively hope, (built on the foresaid Promises,) of enjoying the
heavenly Inheritance. And then assures them, they were kept by the Power of
God through Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.2, 3, 5, 13. The gracious Man does
therefore contemn all Cavils against this Doctrine, as one opening a door to
licentiousness. He observes, that the Promise is not to multiply grace unto
him, however he lives and walks. No, but to multiply it so, that he shall live
and walk in the ways of holiness. And thus it is that he argues with himself.
Has God promised that being planted in Christ, I shall be kept still growing
up into him, and nothing shall hinder? This love of God enflames me with desire
of Obedience; and this Assurance of victory over Spiritual Enemies by his
Grace, makes me forward to fight them with all my strength. I should have no
heart to it, but that I remember the five works that the Holy Ghost is sent to
work in Believers; which comprehend all that I do know my need of. First, That
of Teaching and Leading into all Truth. Secondly, That of Bringing all things
unto ones Remembrance. Thirdly, That of Quickening, to perform known and
remembered Duties. Fourthly, That of Comforting and making one perform them with
joy and gladness of heart. Fifthly, That of Restoring ones heart, after that by
any temptation prevailing it is brought out of frame. My heart would die away
in me, if by these blessed Works of his, I could not expect to have sevenfold
Grace derived into me. I mean, (1.) Exciting Grace, to make my lazy Soul stir
up it self, as Isai. 64.7. (2.) Co-working Grace, to make my weak Soul able to
walk in the way of Duty that I choose, as Psalm. 119.35. (3.) Resisting Grace, to
make my timorous Soul dare to stand against the wiles of the Devil, as Ephesians. 6.
(4.) Upholding Grace, to make my burdened Soul bear submissively, both God's
Afflictions, Men's Oppressions, Satan's Buffetings, as it is Phil. 1.29. (5.)
Recovering Grace, to bring back my straying Soul when it wanders like a lost
Sheep, as Psalm. 119. (6.) Preserving Grace, to settle and secure my Soul apt to
stray again when it is recovered; as Jud. v. 1. (7.) Increasing Grace, to make
addition of many Cubits unto my spiritual Stature, as it is Ephesians. 4.16. So that,
though I am a despicable Shrub, I have expectation of the Grace that will make
me a lofty Cedar. Though I am but a bruised Reed, I expect that which will make
me a stately Pillar in Gods Temple. I Live, and I hope to Die, upon that
admirable Word of my Savior, Joh. 6.57. As the living Father has sent me, and
I live by the Father, so he that eats me shall live by me.

My dearest Brethren;
I doubt not but many among you will say, that I have spoken your very hearts
in these Pages. But there are also little Children, whose Sins are forgiven for
Christ's Name sake, will be apt to come and tell me another thing. And almost
clean contrary. Namely, that their hearts cannot utter the one half of what is
said. And that they must go cast away their hopes, if none be Saints but who
have these five Marks.

I must beseech all such to consider; that it is very possible they may HAVE
all the five said Marks, and not DISCERN themselves to have them. But it is
utterly impossible to have any one of them TRULY, and not have all of them
SEMINALLY. I mean, in the Seed-Plot of the Heart; sown therein, though not yet
come up as is desirable. And being I am every Week exercised, with Complaints
occasioned by the ignorance of them; I will here Answer these two Questions.
Whence is it, that gracious Persons are so commonly under Doubts and Fears,
that they have no true Grace of God in them? And, What may we take for the
least and lowest degree of true saving Grace?

To the first, I answer. It must not be said to be from God's withdrawing
Light, or withholding it from his Children, in a way of Sovereignty, or
unprovokedly by their Sin, that they be so often at a loss concerning it. We all
know, that God may, if he please, so withold or withdraw comforting Light.
But none, I think, has proved, or can prove, that God does ever so do.
Generally, and very agreeably unto the Scripture, we determine that Saints
uncertainty of their Grace, is meritoriously, and also efficiently, brought
upon them by their Sin. That they do 1 Permit their Lusts to domineer; 2 Admit
Temptations to egg on those Lusts; 3 Commit Sins which are the issues of them;
4 Intermit the Acts of Grace; and 5 Remit and abate in the Degrees of Grace;
and so, both Deserve and Work their Doubts. So cast themselves down into the
Valleys of Sorrow, and the very Deeps of Despair for a time. But more
distinctly and plainly, be it observed. There are two principal Causes of
gracious Souls uncertainty of the truth of their Grace.

(1.) Some do not seek after Assurance. (2.) Others do seek amiss and not as
they ought to do. Some silly Babes do most absurdly argue, That they may be
saved without it, and therefore they need not take much pains for it. And they
have been wretchedly hardened in their too common conceit, That their want of
Assurance is no Sin at all. As if we were not bound to have peace in our
Consciences, as well as with our God. And hereupon they do most wildly presume,
That all Endeavors to gain Assurance be, at best, but acts of Liberty, and not
of necessary Duty. They are Ignorant or Forgetful of this unquestionable Truth;
that, though a Child of God may be under Uncertainty of his being so, yet he
cannot long sit satisfiedly under that uncertainty. He cannot think it a light
evil, and a burden easily to be endured. He must needs be restless under it.
David's be troubled, when their Evidences be obscured. Psalm. 30.7. But of this,
some are not aware; nor do they therefore spend an hour in a day, or a day in a
week, month, or year, in seeking Assurance. Alas, How many Prayers have I heard
made, without one Petition for Assurance expressly put up? And we need not
wonder that they do not find who do not seek it. But,

Secondly, Many there be who seek Certainty, but very faultily. And though
their faults be too many to be here fully enumerated, I will recite briefly
some special ones. I mistake, if I show not a great World of them in a small
Map. (1.) They seek Assurance that their grace is true, with a sinful content
in its being Small. As though small things were not, and would not always be,
hard to be seen. And as though it were likely, that God would discover the
Truth of grace for their Comfort, while they crave not the Growth of it for his
Honor. (2.) They seek Assurance without due Diligence. As if our Calling and
Election were more easily to be ensured, than the Scriptures of truth have
suggested. (3.) They seek Assurance without sound Judgments, and free from such
mistakes as will naturally cause fear where no fear is. e. g. Mistakes about
the demands of the Covenant of grace. Conceits, that God has made more
necessary unto their acceptance, than he has indeed so made. Mistakes, that
Faith justifying is a Persuasion that one is already Justified. That if one be
Converted, one must needs know when God did Convert us. That if ever we are
Assured that Christ is formed in us, we must have a vocal or immediate
testimony of God from Heaven about it. That if once we be Assured, we must
presently be rid of all fears; and be filled with rapturous Joy, etc. (4.) They
seek Assurance without the help of Spiritual Teachers and Guides, by God
provided for them. As if God would pour contempt upon the Ministry of his own
Institution; and harden them in their Sin, who will not own and honor those,
unto whom he gives the Tongue of the Learned, to speak a word in season unto
weary Souls. And unto whom he has said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose Sins
ye remit they are remitted; and whose soever Sins ye retain they are retained.
Joh. 20. (5.) They seek Assurance over-hastily, and with sinful Impatience; not
submitting unto God the choice of the Time of it and of the Means. As if God
would allow Beggars to be Chusers; or might be expected to give us our own
Wills, until they be subjected unto his Will. (6.) They seek Assurance, without
holy Confidence that God will give it to them in the faithful use of his
appointed means. Yea with a strong and settled persuasion, that their Labor,
whatever it be, shall be in vain. And that they shall live and die upon the
Rack, without any relief by the means they use. (7.) They seek Assurance
without a just and full renouncing of all worthiness in themselves of so
inestimable a favor. They overvalue themselves, even while they most suspect
themselves, (which one would think impossible; and do harbor conceits that the
Labor they take for Assurance does in a manner earn it. (8.) They seek
Assurance, without a due and full respect unto the Merit of Jesus Christ, our
only Propitiation and Advocate. As they do not thoroughly Abase themselves, so
neither do they thoroughly Exalt their Savior. For which cause it is, that they
so long continue to be as the troubled Sea. (9.) They seek Assurance, without a
due fore-acquaintance with the Office of the Spirit toward Believers, and the
Duty of Believers toward the Spirit. And, consequently, without congruous
Honor paid to him, who is the Witnesser as well as Worker of grace. And
without congruous proper Prayer made, for those Operations of his, whereby
alone we can be Assured. And without congruous Trial and Examination of our
selves. (10.) They seek Assurance without any Appearance of Thankfulness, for
other Mercies enjoyed. Over-looking and despising them all, as though all were
but Ciphers, without Assurance to give them virtue and value. (11.) They seek
Assurance without an universal respect maintained unto ALL and EVERY one of
Gods Commandments. Some ORDINANCE or another is slighted; some DUTY or other is
omitted. Reading, is much disused. Or Hearing, is less frequented. Or Prayer,
is restrained. Or Conference, is let down. Or Sacraments, be rarely minded. Or
Psalms, be seldom sung. Again; either Charity to all men is grown cold, or
Brotherly Reproof is unexercised, or true Love of Enemies is expired, or the
work of Mortification is at an end; or that which one would judge should of any
be kept up, Choice of wisest and most holy Company. (12.) They seek Assurance
without due regard to the Rules whereby, and to the Season wherein, they do
examine themselves. To the Rule; for this is the Covenant of grace, and this
they do not understand well, and will not go ask instruction about it. But
concluding rashly, that its terms be higher than ever God made them; they do
accordingly condemn themselves as Hypocrites, for that which God does not so
condemn them. Then as to the Season, it must be said; Times there are in which
Self-examination is by no means our Duty. Times, wherein he that looks into his
Heart and Life, shall have it with him, as he that beholds his Face in troubled
Waters; which represent it in nothing truly, but in all things frightfully.
Such are times of prevalent Melancholy; and of Satan's Temptations, in their
violence and hurry; and of frequently prevailing Corruptions, before that by
frequent acts we have gained some new Experience of our selves. In these times,
a man's present and immediate Duty, is to put forth the first act of Faith; to
cast himself on God in the way of well-doing; which he has a Command to do,
and that with a Promise of losing nothing by it. He is to be advised, as he is
able, to Recall his former evidences and hopes; however to lean on the Lord; and
to Resolve, though he slay him, yet to Trust in him for restoring grace.

The next Question is, What degree of true grace may we take for the Least and
Lowest of all? The God of truth direct my Heart and my Hand, in my answer! I am
sensible of the Question's being as Arduous, as Momentous. Humbly it is, that I
here deliver my Judgment, and (as far as I know) the Judgment of our Protestant
Divines. And as plainly and suitably unto your Apprehensions, as I am able.

The H. Spirit, who well knows his own Grace in all its various Degrees, does
by these Metaphors describe unto us its Lowest degree. He compares it, unto the
Life of a Child new Born, John 3.3. Nay, to the Life of a Child just quickened
in the Womb, Ephesians. 2.5. Agreeably whereto, it is named the Forming of Christ in
a Soul, Gal. 4.19. Now, as Mothers in whom Children are formed, so Souls in
whom Christ is formed, do by and by show it by nauseous Ebullitions from the
Stomach, and new Pulsations in the Bowels. Plainly thus, by Loathings, and by
Longings. To that of the Lowest degree of grace it must be said, it is a Life,
a something that makes a man to differ from what he was before, as much as a
Living Creature differs from a Dead. A Life of which Jesus Christ is so the
Alpha and the Omega, and the All in All, that it bears his very Name, Christ in
us. And a Life notified, by Loathing of all things that are known to be
contrary unto Christ, with (inseparable) Longing after all Mercy from him, and
all Duty unto him. A Life that speaks forth as soon as it breathes; and utters
these words, I count all but Loss and Dung that I may win Christ and be found
in him; and Lord Jesus what would thou have me to do?

Four things does the Spirit of Christ attribute unto this least and Lowest
Life of grace. Which; waving others, I briefly propose. (1.) An Eye, to Look
unto Jesus Christ. Even as the stung Israelites looked unto the Brazen Serpent.
Then, he who was Blind was surely Dead: And now he that sees not Christ cannot
be Alive. If then a man had looked to Aaron, or Moses, or both, that could not
have saved his Life; and now let a man have all possible respect to Ceremonial
Law and Moral, it cannot save his Soul.

(2.) Feet, to Come on unto Christ. Even as the Manslayer came to the City of
refuge, his only place of Safety from the Avenger. The least Grace has Feet,
not to say Wings, of desire to hasten to him, when Christ says, Come unto me.

(3.) Hands also, to receive Christ. Even as a starving man receives Bread; a
fainting man receives a Cordial, a Beggar receives a Bag of Gold, a Wanderer in
the Wilderness receives a Guide, a Blind man receives Eye Salve, a Condemned
man receives a Pardon, a Leper receives a Cure.

(4.) Ears also to Hear Christ. Even as a Servant hears his Master, as a
Child his Father, as a Wife her Husband, as a Subject his King, as a ransomed
Slave his Redeemer. The Father that draws Souls unto Christ, efficaciously
commands all from the greatest to the very least to HEAR his Son.

In short. The Gospel evidently declares, that Graces, as Stars, do differ in
glory. All Stars be in the Heavens; but are of various Magnitudes and Motions.
All Grace is from Heaven, and carries toward Heaven; but some does extremely
differ from other in strength of Parts, and in Acts. Yet of them that are so
much as Newborn, or Spiritually Quickened, and have Christ in the Lowest degree
formed in them, we are taught that all do Look unto, Come unto, Receive, and
Hear Jesus Christ, as he is offered by God. That is, as Prophet, Priest, and
King; to give us the Sight, the Pardon, and the Cure of our Spiritual Diseases,
that we want.

I would be yet more plain, and instructive unto the least Babes, whose help I
do most especially design. And therefore conclude with this assertion. There
are twelve Steps, that men take in Sin, and in Grace; in Evil and Good; toward
Hell and Heaven. The least of Damned Sinners, takes them in Sin; and the Least
of Redeemed Saints, takes them in Grace. He that takes them in Sin, however
he be Painted he is a very Sepulcher; he that takes them in Grace, howsoever
he may be Defiled, Blemished, and Blackned, he is unquestionably a Living
Temple of God. God dwells in him, and he in God. These Steps here follow in
their Natural Order. They are Strangers at home, that ken 'em not.

1. The First is the Admission of Suggestions. Unregenerate Men admit the
Suggestions of Sin, and Satan, and the World; they brook and bear them, as Eve
did the Serpents. But the Suggestions of the Holy Ghost and his Ministers,
concerning Repentance, and Faith, and Holiness, they cannot bear; but turn from
them, as from Offers to their Loss. Even with Scorn, if not Rage. Regenerate
Souls, act quite contrarily. They are impatient most times of sinful Motions;
and answer them, as Joseph answered his Mistress, with Detestation and hasty
Flight. And as for the Heavenly Motions foresaid, they well Endure them; give
them audience; and turn not away from them, as from things stingy and biting.

2. The Second is the Retention of Suggestions admitted. Unregenerate Men hold
their sinful ones in mind, and talk with themselves concerning them in secret
Places. Regenerate men do likewise retain God and his Ministers Suggestions
unto them. And a great deal of Discourse they have with themselves about the
same. They commune with their Hearts upon their Beds, while others sleep.

3. The Third is the Approbation of Suggestions retained, Unregenerate men do
nextly smile upon their sinful ones; inwardly saying, this is an agreeable and
a sweet Suggestion; I would surely follow it if I could. So sweet it is, I
cannot spit it out of my mind. The Regenerate, do in like sort favor, and like
well the holy Suggestions unto them made. Saying in their Hearts, Good is this
Word of the Lord. O that we had Skill, Zeal, and Strength, to follow it. We
Approve it as Excellent, and worthy of all Acceptance.

4. The Fourth is the Immoration of Mind on Suggestions approved. Unregenerate
men being taken with the taste of their sweet Poisons, and pleasant Plagues,
(for so are all sinful motions;) they begin to stay and dwell upon them in
multiplied thoughts. To survey their alluring circumstances, and muse of their
gratifications unto this and that Sense, and of their Services unto one and
another carnal Interest. Regenerate Souls, come not much behind them here. They
also, finding holy Motions sweet unto their Taste, roll them under their
Tongues; chew and meditate on them greatly; and enlarge their considerations of
their goodness and profitableness unto all things. Delighting themselves in the
considerations; and saying of them, It is good to be here, let us stay and
think more of these things.

5. The Fifth is the Revocation of Suggestions whereon the Mind has used much
to insist. Unregenerate men, feed not on sinful Suggestions sparingly; but
nevertheless the morrow is as to day and more abundant. Let Business, Sickness,
Sleep, or what will, interrupt them; they let it not be long, before they recall
their darling Follies. Regenerate men also, though sometimes forced to lay aside
out of mind the holy Subjects they have much entertained therein; yet fail not
to resume them and take them up again, very industriously and cheerfully. No
sooner be their Souls unbent with their necessary Avocations, but they do fly
back again unto them.

6. The Sixth is the Conclusion or Resolution to put the Suggestions into
execution. Unregenerate men court their Souls thus, till they gain their
Consent, and Purpose for actual sin. Which said Consent, and Resolved will, is
no small point; but the grand Movement of the whole Man, Soul and Body. And
carries in it virtually, Act and all. On the other side; Regenerate men, do not
spend their foresaid thoughts, for that which Profits not. Their Consideration
issues in Conclusion. Their Spiritual converses with Holy Suggestions,
impregnate them with lively Resolutions to perform them, as soon as they are
able. All that the Lord has said we WILL do, and WILL be Obedient, is the
Resolution made and uttered.

7. The Seventh is the Perturbation about putting the Suggestions into resolved
execution. Unregenerate men, ordinarily, are put hard to it to bring forth the
sin they have Conceived. Iniquity it self, is painfully and with sorrow brought
forth. And after Resolution to sin, the wicked are observed to be pierced
through with many cares. And it is not much otherwise with the Regenerate;
having Resolved to Repent, and Believe, and Obey the Gospel, to Receive Christ
the Lord, and to walk in him; Flesh, World and Devil, are in arms against them
presently; Herod's, a thousand, seek the Life of this Resolution, to destroy it.
And there is no small Fear and Care, and Anxiety rises in the poor Resolvers.
Save Lord, or we shall yet Perish, is their known cry.

8. The Eighth is the Aggression, or Attempt of the Execution of the
Suggestions, about which the Perturbation has been. The Unregenerate know,
that faint hearts cannot perform the Devil's Commands. Difficulties they meet
with from within, and without; Conscience checks them, Men reprove them, etc.
but they break through all, and (for the pleasure of sin set before them,) they
set to work, and try their strength to see what they can do. If Saul cannot be
the death of David, it shall not be for want of Attempts. The Regenerate know,
that the desire of the slothful slays him, because his hands refuse to
labor. And, though the Desire of a man be his Kindness; and God and good men
will accept, where there is a willing mind; yet a mind of an unactive will, is
an ill mind of no good will. They therefore suffer not fears of Miscarrying,
always to hold them back from Endeavoring. No, but though Afraid, they Trust;
though they Stagger, they Believe; though they Despair, they Hope. And aside they
go, and stir up themselves and make trial what they can do at Repenting, at
Believing, at Obeying the Gospel. Striving to enter in at the strait Gate, and
to walk in the narrow Way, whether they be able or no.

9. The Ninth, is that Execution of the Suggestions, which was Attempted.
Unregenerate men, such as perish, do sooner or later, execute those Suggestions
of Sin, and of Satan the Minister of Sin, after whose Execution, God will never
more strive with them; or treat about their peace; or be found of them.

Reader, Do not mistake this plain passage; as though it did intimate that All
that trod the former steps in Sin, were incapable of Repentance. That horrible
untruth my Soul abhors, and my words favor it not. I do think that No man
is incapable of Repentance till he has so sinned. But I dare not think ANY man
that has so sinned, to be incapable of Repentance. Alas! who shall dare to set
limits unto the Divine Grace? Or who knows not the instances of its admirable
extent unto Manasses, Mary Magdalen, the Penitent Thief on the Cross, etc. This
is said for prevention of thy causless Self-affrightment. But I proceed,

On the other side, Regenerate Souls, do after their Thoughts, Cares, and
Attempts, actually execute those Suggestions of God and of his Ministers; after
whose execution, God will never (totally) leave or forsake them. But binds
himself by Oath, and by signed sealed Covenant to be their God, and to see that
all that he has be theirs. This is done on God's part, when they do first
sincerely RELY on the Promises of the Gospel Covenant, and CONSENT unto the
Demands thereof, when they make the ANSWER of a good Conscience, as St. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 3.21.

10. The tenth, is Reiteration or Repetition of the said Execution of the
Suggestions. Unregenerate Men, do sin over and over those Sins, which they do
adventure to defy God withal. And the Regenerate, do, all their days, keep
doing the things whereby they at first gave glory unto God. Every Day of the
Week, and Hour of the Day, the Unregenerate do bid God depart from them, In the
Language of Practice they do so. And as often does the Regenerate Soul, in the
same Language COMMIT and SUBMIT himself unto God in Jesus Christ. Commit
himself to God's saving Mercy, and submit himself to God's ruling Authority,
both lodged in the hand of Christ, Lord Mediator.

11. The Eleventh, is Propugnation of both Execution, and Reiteration of the
execution of the Suggestions. Sinners Plead violently for Entrance and
Continuance in Sin. They search the Devil's whole Armory, for Weapons to fight
with, for Sin against Holiness. But is it otherwise with the Regenerate? No,
having Committed and Submitted themselves unto God; and doing so anew from day
to day; and that, both as their perfect Duty, and infinite Interest and
Privilege; they do search God's Armory for Arguments and Arms, to propugnate
Holiness; and to Shame, and expel Sin. Holy Wisdom is justified, it is spoke
for, by the least Child it has.

12. The Twelfth, is Valuation of one's self by the Execution, Repetition and
Propugnation of the Suggestions. All Men do glory in somewhat, or other. There
is some one thing or other, by which they do rate and value themselves.
Determining they are more or less blessed in themselves, and to be esteemed by
others, as they have more or less of the same. Unregenerate Men's estimate of
themselves, is by their Executed and Repeated and Propugnated Sin, and what
that Sin has gained them. Even the Profits, Pleasures, or Honors of this
World, which they have compassed by those their Sins. The Regenerate do try
themselves by another Touchstone, and weigh themselves in another Scale. They
count the Idols of this world, very Nothings. And do believe in their hearts,
and confess with their mouths, that in them dwells no other good; and they
are at no further distance from Misery, than the Grace of God in them, and the
Grace of God toward them, does set them. They are Happy and Honorable more or
less, as they Glorify and Enjoy God more or less. Enjoy him according to the
Promises, and Glorify him according to the Demands of the Covenant of Grace.


Brethren,
It shall not repent you, if seriously and frequently you do Examine your
selves in reference unto these twelve Particulars. If these Acts are passed in
your Souls, on the right side, Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your
reward in Heaven, whatever be your Scar-crows and Disquietments on Earth.

Indeed as long as you live, you may be one while in tears of grief; crying,
God be merciful unto me a Sinner. But you will be otherwhiles in tears of joy;
exclaiming, I know that my Redeemer lives. One while combating with fears;
asking, Will the Lord be favorable unto me? But by and by triumphing over your
fears; saying, I am persuaded that nothing shall be able to separate me from
the love of God in Christ Jesus. One while falling down on your Knees; praying,
I believe; Lord, help my Unbelief. But another time, clapping your hands; and
thankfully proclaiming it, Christ has loved me and gave himself for me. One
while as Hester, If I perish, I perish. But another as Mary, My Soul rejoices
in God my Savior. He that does not willingly grieve the Children of Men, will
not let his own Children have nothing but grief, for any long time together, if
they use the diligence he requires for his sweet Consolations. However, I
charge that you do not overvalue Comfort; that you do not forget, that a little
Grace is more worth than much Comfort. And that Comfort is desirable only for
the sake of Holiness. I am wholly of his Mind who has said, Happier a great
deal is that man's case, whose Soul by inward desolation is HUMBLED, than he
whose heart is through abundance of spiritual delight LIFTED up and exalted
ABOVE MEASURE. Better is it sometimes to go down into the Pit with him, who
beholding darkness, and bewailing the loss of inward joy and consolation,
cries from the bottom of the lowest Hell, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? then continually to walk arm in arm with Angels; to sit, as it
were in Abraham 's bosom; and to have no thought, no cogitation, but, I thank
God I am not as other men, it is not with me as with others. Ri. Hooker, page
546. as quoted by Mr. H. Hickman in his very excellent Discourse on Ephesians. 4.30.

I do remember, and still adhere unto what I have written in my Call to
Sinners, Marks, than which I cannot find better. But variety and store, is no
sore. It repents me not, that I have here proposed these. And I will farther
commend unto your use, Six excellent Questions of blessed Mr. Henry Scudder; as
they are contracted by our worthy Mr. Samuel Lee; who, with him, well says
these words: You are in God's favor and in a state of grace, if you can answer
yea, unto ALL or unto ANY, of them.

Q. 1. How stand you affected to Sin? are you afraid to offend God, and dare
not sin wittingly? Is it your Grief and Burden that you cannot abstain from it,
nor get out of it as soon as you would?

Q. 2. How are you affected to Holiness, and the Power of Godliness? to know
God's Will and do it? to fear and please him? Is it your Grief when you fail?
and your Joy when you do well?

Q. 3. How to the Church of God? are you glad when it goes well, and grieved
when it goes ill, and sit trembling with Eli, to hear how it goes with the Ark
of God; however it be with your own Particular?

Q. 4. How toward Men? Do you dislike wicked Men, and love those that fear the
Lord, because they are good?

Q. 5. Can you endure your Soul to be ripped, and your beloved Sin to be smitten
by a searching Minister, and like him the Rather? and can yield an obedient Ear
to such a wise Reproof?

Q. 6. Though you have not Evidence always, or can scarce tell whether you ever
had it; yet resolve and desire, and will as you are able to cleave to God in
Christ for Salvation by Faith, and in no other Person, nor by no other means to
be saved?

But that my Epistle is already swollen beyond my purpose, I would here have
shown you more largely these Particulars.

(1.) Strongest Grace and weakest do agree in many things, e. gr. 1 Both, have
the same Original Giver, God the Father. Both are from his Electing Love. Unto
which are owing the smallest sparks, as well as the brightest flames of
spiritual-life. 2 Both have the same meritorious Purchaser, Jesus Christ. Both
are from his Redeeming Grace. Thereto are we beholden for our very Entrance
into the State of Holiness, as well as for our Proficience and final
Perfection. 3 Both have the same Efficient Worker, the Holy Ghost. Both, are
from his regenerating Work. Thereof it is, that the Babe in Christ is what he
is, as well as that the grown Man in Christ is what he is. 4 Both are wrought
by the same Instrument also; the New Covenant, Word of God, And, in short, 5
Both have the self-same Nature. They have the same Nature and Being, though so
different sizes of Strength and Power of working. A drop of water is as truly
water, as the vast Collection of water in the Sea is so. And the Soul in whom
Christ is formed but this hour, is as truly an holy one, as any of those who
are with him in Paradise.

(2.) Strong Grace and Weak do differ in their Measures, their Strength, and
their Comforts and Troubles. As grown Men do differ from Sucklings. Having no
more Limbs than they, but every one larger, and stronger, and more capacious of
Pain and Pleasure. Weakest Converts have Knowledge of the Gospel Covenant; but
not so Extensive, or so Intensive and clear, as stronger ones have. They have
predominant and practical Consent to it is Demands; but not so free from
Hesitations, nor so victorious over Jealousies, as stronger ones have. They
have Reliance upon it is Promises, but not so Quiet and so little Interrupted as
stronger ones have. They have their Comforts and their Troubles, but not
(ordinarily, at least) so great as stronger Converts have. The Loads of strong
ones, would break their backs; and the sweet Wines that they do drink, would be
too strong for their heads. True it is, least Children in Nature and in Grace,
be more in crying than when more grown. Though God can, he very rarely does,
make little Grace so evident unto us, or so comforting of us, as he makes
greater. But what is said above, is true.

(3.) The huge diversity of Grace has various Causes of it; e. gr. Converts
are of various 1 Ages, and standings in Grace. 2 Their outward Helps are
various; some have Parents, Ministers, and Company, an hundred fold more
helpful than others. 3 Their inward Aids of the Holy Spirit are various; He
helps all, but not all alike. 4 Their Prayers and Pains to improve their
Helps are various. 5 Their Services and Employments, and so their Occasions for
Grace are various. One needs more than another therefore. 6 Their Sins and
Provocations of God to withdraw from them, are various. Some fall into foul and
gross Sins, which others keep far from; and some do more indulge carnal
Affections than others do.

(4.) Special marks of Weakness in true Grace are these. Namely, 1 Wavering and
Desultoriness in our Promises unto God. He that staggers has weak feet; he
that is Up and Down, one while will be the Lord's, and by and by fears to Vow
it, he has weak Grace. 2 Suspiciousness of God's Promises unto us. He has a
weak knowledge of fallible Men, whoever much trusts them; and he has as weak a
knowledge of God, that cannot lie, whoever much doubts him. 3 Easiness to be
scandalized, or turned out of God's way, by any thing we meet with. By God's
darker Providence, as Asaph was. Or, by good Men's failings, as Job's Friends
were. Or, by wicked Men's instigations, as poor Spira was. He stands. but
weakly, who falls easily.

(5.) Special Marks of Truth in weak Grace be these; e. gr. 1 Giving glory unto
God, when we cannot take Comfort from him. We must needs sincerely love him,
with whom we had rather Mourn than Rejoice with the World. And whom we Praise,
while he hides his face from us, or frowns upon us. 2 Combating on against sin,
even while, we think at least, we cannot conquer it. Doing all we can against
it, even while all we do seems to do no good. Blessed be Gospel grace! it is
certain we Conquer, as long as we verily Fight. Sin is never our Master, till
we do Consent to have it so. But happy is the Soul, that even then holds on the
Conflict when he imagines that Sin has got the Mastery. 3 Making up in Root
what we want in Fruit. Growing downward, when we cannot grow upward. I mean,
being exceedingly Humble, when we cannot be so useful to God's Name in the
World; Abasing our selves, when we cannot Exalt God otherwise. 4 Lying at the
Pool as weak Cripples, as long as we are so. Willing to have strength; and
waiting on God for strength; and staying his time at his Gates, if he makes us
wait long for it. Resolving, to Justify him if he never give it, and to Admire
and Bless him if he give it at all. The poor Canaanite was sincere, and came
off with honor; she, whose first Prayer was answered with Silence, and for her
second Prayer, was called a Dog; but, undaunted by both, prayed on that she
might have some of Christ's Kindness, though it were but the share of a Dog.
Though it were but a Crumb, and not Plenty.

(6.) Innumerable are our Motives to seek strength of Grace. Will the weakest
Grace carry to Heaven? what then? Bread and Water will keep you alive on Earth;
but you do desire more a great deal. Life, is Life, and very sweet and
precious. But you desire Health, Strength and Beauty, do you not? Most do
think, that their Glory in Heaven will be more or less, as their Grace on Earth
is more or less. Whether that be so or no, I thus argue. If you love not God,
you have no true Grace. If you do love him, how can you but crave more
Understanding, and more Power, to serve him? This remember; Though you do what
he Accepts of, you do not what he is much honored by, while you are weak. His
infinite Grace accepts and rewards your little one; but your little one does
but sorrily Praise and Serve the Glory of his infinite one; Add hereto; though
weak Saints are equally Elected, Redeemed, Called, Justified, and Adopted, with
the strongest; yea, and have equally all the Promises of the Covenant, that
concern the Essentials of Salvation; so that the least Stars be as firmly fixed
in the Firmament of Bliss, as the greatest Luminaries be; yet this is true:
God's love of Delight is greater to strong Saints than to weak; and, It is then
greater to them when they are strong, than when they are weak. Natural Parents
love all their Children; but although they have most Pity of the Weak, they
have most Pleasure in the Strong. And in the Strong, they then have most
Pleasure when they are Strongest. It is no otherwise with our Heavenly Father.
Abraham was God's Friend, by way of eminency: and then, when, without
staggering, his Gigantick grace bore parting with his Isaac, then, above
ordinary, God looked on him complacentially. Zanchi speaks broader than I do.
God's love of good will is not Equal to all his Saints. He wills more good to
some Saints, than unto others. Which you cannot deny, unless you will say that
his holy Spirit's Graces be lumber, unworthy to be put in the Inventory of his
Goods. In a word; every Believer does wear the Garland of the Supreme King's
Favor: but in that Garland there are special Flowers, which are vouchsafed
only unto strong Believers. Again, If you love not your selves, you have not
true Grace. If you do love your selves, (your true selves; and not only your
earthen Shells,) you cannot but desire to be Men. You cannot be willing to keep
in your Infancy; to live all your days in the Cradle; and in Swaddling clothes;
unable to go upon your feet; stumbling at every straw, even when you are most
carefully led by your spiritual Nurses; and filling the house with your Cries,
while they carry you in their Arms. Plainly, you cannot but be sick of desire,
to have it better with you than it can be until Grace is stronger. To have it
better than now it is; now that you conceit, if you apply a Promise, it is
horrid Presumption; and if you do not, it is fatal Unbelief. That if you Hope,
it is but Self-delusion; and if you do but Doubt, it is straightway
Desperation. That, if you Repent, it is a sorrow but legal; and if you fall
into any Sin, it is no less than that which is Unpardonable. That if you go
unto the Lord's Table, it is blasphemous Intrusion; and if you keep away, it is
profane contempt of the Institution. [Read the rest in your own hearts.] I
will add no more.

(7.) Growth in Grace is not always discerned where it is, but is often falsely
presumed to be where it is not. This Growth, is like the growth of a Plant
which requires three things; Life in the Plant, Watering of it, and God's
Blessing on it. Hearts and Plants must Live ere they Grow? must have heavenly
Dews on that Life, and God's Blessing on those Dews. Where these three do meet,
Grace grows in all Dimensions; height of Knowledge, length of Meditation,
breadth of holy Affection and Action, depth of Humility. That which let and
hindered these is took out of the way. The cursed Suckers, which before stole
away the nourishment of Grace, are now cut off. Their names be Legion, they are
many: but the chief of all are two; Idleness from, and in Duty: and Pride of
Duty. In some Souls, they are cut off, and Grace springs up amain in an
instant. Their Profiting appears unto all men, and themselves too. But these
Souls are extraordinary Examples. The Growth of most Graces is like that of
Oaks; slow and unsensible, though sure and firm. Yea, like the Amendment and
recovering of sick Folk, which begins with Peelings of pain, and Complaints of
being worse and worse. For which, there are Reasons enough to make no very
small Book. Ministers must suggest them, as occasion requires. As certain it is
on the other hand; there be many false appearances of growth in our graces. We
must take heed that we find not Sin to be only exchanged, when we think it is
mortified. Or, only to be Covered, when we fancy it is Killed. That we do not
find our new Reformation, to be the effect of Temptation's removal, and no
more. Wildfire may abide in us, when Fuel for its flames is denied unto us.
And holy Fire may be ready to die, when bitter Zeal and carnal, may represent
us unto our selves as Seraphims. Nevertheless, it is but a Difficulty, not an
Impossibility, to find whether we grow in Grace or not. He that would find
himself so to do, cannot too curiously observe how his FAITH works. Gal. 5.6.
How his HOPE quickneth him. 1 Pet. 1.3. And how his Love constrains him, unto
Diligence in doing God's Will, and Patience in suffering it. 2 Cor. 5.14. To be
sure, it is some or other Sin, that creates our darkness and doubt. And, as one
says well, If we do not know the particular Be that stings us with it, let us
throw down the whole hive; and then our Troubler shall not escape.


Sirs,
I have now made you a small Looking-Glass. Need I entreat that you carry it in
your Pockets always, and use it often? I presume some will so do; and I do
desire all. It is, through the Grace of Christ, a small thing unto me, to be by
many so treated as you know. I am bold to say, If I am besides my self it is
for your sakes. I do therefore reject the Requests of some mistaken Friends,
and despise the Tattles and Scribbles of profane Adversaries; because (as the
Gospel teaches) and Experience demonstrates) the foolishness of God is wiser
than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men. That of God (says Mr.
Baxter) which Men count foolishness and weakness, and deride, does overcom
their pretended Wisdom and Strength, and do that which they cannot do, and
proves them to be but Folly and Weakness. I will promise you to Preach and
Write as Men will call more Learnedly, as soon as I become indifferent whether
I do them Profitably, or no. In the mean time I shall labor to Exercise my
own, and Serve your Faith and Joy, in my Plainness, or (as it must be styled)
Rudeness. Knowing, that he whom we look for from Heaven, will ere long come, as
we are certified by Canonical Scripture. And then, as it is not amiss expressed
in the Apocryphal Writings,

Then shall the Righteous man stand with great Boldness before the face of such
as Afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors. When they shall see it,
they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the
strangeness of his Salvation; so far beyond all they looked for. And they,
repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within themselves; THIS
IS HE whom we had sometimes in Derision, and a Proverb of Reproach. WE FOOLS
accounted his Life madness, and his End to be without honor. But how is he
numbered amongst the Children of God, and his lot is among the Saints? Wisd.
5.4, 5.

Brethren, suffer ye a word of Caution and of Exhortation, and I have done.

The Religion of most Professors seems Dead, the Religion of many seerneth
Dying, the Religion of very few seems Thriving. It is the Exercise of Grace
that strengthens the Habits; and it is the industrious Performance of
universal Duty that maintains that Exercise. Neither is there any Thriving in
Religion without both of them. In these things do our Souls Live, and in them
does their Prosperity consist, and appear. And unto these things have I
endeavored to Direct and Quicken you. I will not tell you, with how careful a
Soul I have so done. Full often I do think, and often I would have you all to
think, of the three Evangelists account of Christ's Reproof of his Disciples.
In Matthew it is thus; Why are ye so fearful, O ye of LITTLE Faith! In Mark it
is thus; How is it that ye have NO Faith! In Luke it is thus; WHERE is your
Faith? Mat. 8.26. Mark 4.40. Luke 8.25. The Difference is exceedingly easy to
be reconciled; and the Doctrine is as exceedingly desirable to be observed and
improved. Weak Faith is Little; Little Faith is next to none; and Faith that is
in its Degree next to none, will, as to its Exercise, often be to seek, as if
it were none. They that have but little Grace, will very often have it to seek,
when they should have it to use. By means whereof, the Comforter, which would
otherwise relieve their Souls, is oftentimes far from them. And long it is ere
he speaks Peace to them, or lets them speak it to themselves, or be comforted
by all that Ministers can speak or write.

Of any Text in the Bible, I beseech you, as on my bended Knees, remember Gal.
5.16. WALK IN THE SPIRIT, AND YE SHALL NOT FULFILL THE LUST OF THE FLESH. 1 You
have opposite Principles in you, Flesh and Spirit. Impurity and Purity.
Original Sin planted Impurity in you, Temptations water it, Satan gives it
increase. Free grace plants Purity in you, free grace waters it, free grace
gives it increase. 2 You have a liberty of walking according to each of the
foresaid Principles. To the Fleshly, and to the Spiritual one; the Pure and the
Impure. If you cannot live sinfully at all, you are perfect in Grace; if you
cannot live holily and acceptably unto God, you are void of Grace. Young Joseph
has ability to repel Temptations; and Older David has ability to comply with
Temptations. Satan cannot force us unto Evil, and the Holy Ghost does not ever
force us unto Good; it is voluntarily that we do all the Evil and the Good done
by us. Grace does find us sinful Men, and free unto Evil; and it makes us
sincere Christians, and free unto Good. It does not, as Glory does, take away
our possibility of sinning; in Mind, Will, or Work. Our state on Earth is one,
and that in Heaven is another: 3 Your Duty of Duties it is (therefore) to make
the best use of your Liberty. To side with the Spiritual Principle, against the
Carnal. To take the part of Purity against Impurity. And strain hard to live
according to the Spirit in every Walk; not allowing the Flesh one step: To keep
the Candle of the Lord, your internal Light shining. And the fire on the Altar
of your hearts, your holy Zeal burning. To see that your Minds be blinded by no
Objections, and your Wills blunted by no Oppositions, and your Lives blackned
by no avoidable Abominations. For why? God rewards Grace with Grace; and your
Obeying the new Nature in you, strengthens it. And the strengthening thereof is
the weakening of Sin, its opposite. It does make, and show it to be weak. But on
the other hand, let it be awefully considered! It is a frightful Sin to receive
in vain the offer of Grace in the Gospel; and far worse it is to make vain, and
not improve, the very Work of Grace in one's Soul. This is no less than going
about to destroy that which is Conceived in us of the Holy Ghost. For the new
Nature in us, like a newborn Child, quickly languisheth if it be not tenderly
cherished. And, besides, the Holy Ghost, who is the Parent of it, will be more
than a little incensed, if it be but little made of, and not by all possible
means nourished; wherefore blessed are they, who set not themselves to
gratify, but to crucify, their Senses, Appetites, and Passions. And content
not themselves to Possess, unless they do also exercise and Increase, their
spiritual Gifts, Graces and Comforts. Going forward in them; and going apace
so; and that sensibly and visibly.

Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle -- I have thus
endeavored that ye may be able after my Decease to have these things always in
remembrance. For if these be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall not
be Barren nor Unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. And an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into his everlasting Kingdom.
Amen, and Amen.

Bishop Wilkins his Character of the best Christians is here added for your
Profit, and for the shame of such as traduce us for Newfangled Opinionists, and
contrary to all the Learned of the Church of England.


THey are Persons of a Moderate and healing Temper, of Catholic and
Comprehensive Charity: They do not Baptize their Religion with the Name of a
Sect, nor Espouse the Interest of a Party, but love all Good men that Fear God
and work Righteousness.

They are not guilty of the Corinthian Vanity, in crying up a Paul, an Apollos,
or a Cephas, but look upon it as the great Design of Christianity to make men
good, and where it has not that Effect, they know it matters not what Church
such a Man is of, because a Bad Man can be saved in none.

They shun the dangerous Extremes, and keep the Regular mean, and in Divine
Worship prefer a reverend Decency before pompous Superstition, or popular
Confusion, neither bowing down to the Altar of Baal, nor Admiring the Calves of
Bethel.

They are true Primitive Christians, and think it lawful to hold Communion with
any true Church of Christ, that is sound in the Substantials of Religion,
notwithstanding some Circumstantial Differences in the External Modes of
Administration: And they suspect it sinful and Schismatical to separate from
any true Christians, who Agree in Apostolical Doctrine, and maintain the
Discipline of the purest Ages.

They prove all Things, and hold fast only that which is Good, and are
persuaded those Christians are most in the Right, who choose out of all
Parties, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, etc. and not they that think every thing to be so that is
maintained by their own party.

They place Religion more in the serious practice of Piety than in the
Observance of Ceremonious Forms; they are neither fond of needless Rituals, nor
yet molested with groundless Scruples, but long for the Philadelphian State of
the Church, wishing that all the World might with one mouth glorify the
Eternal God.

They pay a great Deference to Antiquity, yet they are not so fond of Error as
to fall in love with it merely for its gray Hairs, but make use of their own
Reason to judge of the Reasonings of other men: Though they apply themselves to
spiritual Guides, yet they love to enquire the Way to Sion, and not follow them
in the Dark, except they carry a Lanthorn in their hands.

They refer the Decision of all the Differences amongst good Christians
primarily to the Sense and Meaning of the Holy Scriptures: And they know every
man must Judge for himself, therefore, where they see men do all they can to
find out the Truth, to please God, and to save their own Souls, they give them
a Liberty of Interpreting, as knowing themselves not to be Infallible.

They know there are many Controversies amongst Christians, of that Intricacy,
that the Day of Judgment must determine who are most in the right, therefore
they dare not judge of men's final Estates, or of the Sincerity of their Hearts
by their speculative Opinions, or different Relishes of things, because every
man must believe what he can, and not what he will.

They admire to see some Christians so egregiously mistake in the Notion of
true Catholicism, as to confine Salvation to their particular Communion, and
they think it strange to hear men contend for an Infallible Guide, when Moses
and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, do with one consent declare, that
the way to the Blessedness of the Righteous, is by observing the Rule and
Exercise of Holy Living, from a Principle of Divine Life.

They never charge other men's Doctrines with such odious Consequences as they
never intended, nor Asperse their Persons with such invidious Names, as they
never deserved; but make charitable Allowances for their different Educations,
Constitutions, and Apprehension of things, supposing that other men may differ
from them with the same Sincerity that they differ from others, and sometimes
from themselves.

They are for, a Religious Loyalty, and prefer the Wisdom of Public Authority
before their own private Judgments, in all such Matters as are not Determined
by the Sovereign pleasure of their Maker: And if in any thing they differ from
the Wisdom of their Superiors, they do it with great Modesty and Reservation,
and are always ready to change their Minds when better Information leads them
to it, not thinking they undervalue their Judgments by so doing.

They are afraid of being infected with the Heresy of Bigottism, and have
great cause to fear that if the merciful God should damn us all for such things
for which strait-laced Christians condemn one another, none could be saved.
They think there is no particular human Form of Ecclesiastical Polity so
acceptable to the great God, as the Exercise of Mutual Charity under our
different Forms.

They neither make their Opinions Articles of Faith, nor their Modes Terms of
Communion, but believe those Principles, and practice those Precepts which wise
and good men are all agreed in, well Knowing if they should happen to be
mistaken in those things wherein they differ, they could not lose the Way to
Heaven, whilst they sincerely love God, believe in Christ, and obey the
Motions of the Holy Spirit.

They are of peaceable and Reconciling Dispositions, and neither call for Fire
from Heaven, nor Kindle Fires upon Earth, to destroy all those that follow not
them; as well knowing that Truth cannot be engraven in the Minds of Men with
the Points of Swords, nor can their Understandings be illuminated with flaming
Faggots.

They neither make the Way to Heaven Broader nor Narrower than the Head and
Pillars of the Universal Church have made it: And they walk on soberly,
righteously and godly in that Path, which upon great Consideration they take to
be the Right, without rudely Justling those whom they fear to be in the Wrong.

They think the best way to find out to what Mother the Child of Truth belongs,
is to make use of Solomon's Test, viz. To give up the Cause to them that first
lay down the Sword of Division: When one Party says, Lo here is Christ in this
Church, and another says, Lo he is there; they Believe what Christ himself
has told them, That where Two or Three are met together in his Name, there is
He in the midst of them.

They do not think their Zeal Lukewarm except it burn up their Discretion, but
can join the Prudence of the Serpent with the Innocence of the Dove; and are
grieved to observe men contend so Eagerly about the Pinnacles of the Temple, as
that they threaten to overturn the Foundations of the Church.

They take more pains to make good their Baptismal Covenant, than to dispute
about the Manner of its Administration, as if they were Baptized with the
Waters of Strife; and they are more frequent in a Devout Participation of the
Lord's Supper, than in Metaphysical Contests about the Real Presence. They Know
there is nothing required of Man as Necessary to Salvation, but what is clearly
Revealed and beyond all Dispute.

They choose rather to take up the Cross of Christ, than wrangle about it; and
more sollicitously observe the Complexion of their own Souls, than the Color
of Ministers Garments: Nor do they so contend about the Number of the Elect, as
to Reprobate themselves for want of Charity; but endeavor to perform the Whole
Duty of Man, in so doing they know they are in the Way to the Saints
Everlasting Rest.

FINIS.

