A RELATION OF A JOURNEY OF THE Right Honorable My Lord HENRY HOWARD, From
London to Vienna, and thence to Constantinople; In the Company of his
Excellency Count Lesley, Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece, Counselor
of State to his Imperial Majesty, etc. And Extraordinary Ambassador from
Leopoldus Emperor of Germany to the Grand Signior, Sulton Mahomet Hau the
Fourth.

Written by John Burbury Gent.

London, Printed for T. Collins and I. Ford, at the Middle Temple gate, and S.
Hickman at the Rose in St. Paul's Church yard. 1671.

TO THE Honorable HENRY HOWARD, Eldest Son of the Right Honorable MY LORD
HENRY HOWARD.
SIR,
PIctures, which relate to a Family, are usually exposed in Galleries, that the
Heir by looking on them, may not only see the Features, but read too the
Virtues and generous Exploits of his truly Noble Ancestors. This Picture of my
Lord, your Fathers Journey into Turkey (whom you have so lively coppi'd in your
early Travels abroad) I humbly present at your Feet, being sure it will have a
choice place in the Gallery of your Mind, since the Original it self (which
extracts admiration from all) will doubtless as highly deserve of Posterity, as
any of your greatest Progenitors.

Here without the Wind of Adulation, I might tow down the Stream of my Lord
your Fathers Qualities, and excellent Endowments, but remembering that you two
only differ in time, I shall but say this (least I seem to flatter you) that
you are most happy in your Father, and your Father as happy in you.

May your Happiness like the Danube (which in its long passage through Tyrole,
Bavaria, Austria, and Hungary, receives thirty Navigable Rivers, e're it falls
into the Sea) increase all along in the course of your Life, till it come to be
as great, as to your Noble Self, and your Family, the devotion is of,

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient faithful Servant, John Burbury.

A RELATION OF A JOURNEY OF THE Right Honorable My Lord HENRY HOWARD, From
London to Vienna and Constantinople.
ON Tuesday the twenty one of February, 1664. about one of the Clock in the
Morning, the Right Honorable my Lord Henry Howard, and his Noble Brother Mr.
Edward Howard, together with their Retinue, set forward toward Constantinople,
and that night arrived at Dover.

The invitation to this Journey (besides the curiosity of seeing that Eastern
part of the World) had its rise and beginning, from the Emperor of Germany his
sending an Extraordinary Ambassador to the Grand Signior, in order to the
settling and establishment of that Peace* which not long before, on each side
the Ministers of State, had agreed on and concluded. Besides, Count Lesley, the
Person designed for Ambassador, was so very well known, to my Lord of happy
memory, Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey (while his Lordship was Ambassador
in Germany) that as long as my said Lord of Arundel lived, Letters of
Correspondence past weekly between them. His Grandson could not therefore have
a fairer pretense, to accompany Count Lesley, nor in reason doubt the least of
a favorable reception, which his Lordship always found in the greatest
measure possible.

But to return to Dover, on Wednesday the twenty two, my Lord, with his Brother
aforesaid, took shipping for Calice, sending part of his Train with the baggage
to Dunkirk, where on the twenty three his Lordship met the rest of his Retinue.
That day we went together to Bruges, the following to Gant, and the twenty five
arrived at Bruxels, where we staid but two days, in which little time, to
relate the many Visits, his Lordship received from Persons of the greatest
Condition, as the Prince of Ligne, the Dukes of Arscott and Avry, etc. would
equally weary the Reader, as they did my Noble Lord, who scarce in the mornings
had time to make him ready, and was forced to give out, he was often gone
abroad, to decline that respect, which, though due to his Lordships great
quality, was unseasonable then, since my Lord had many things to do in that
place, where his stay was so short.

I should likewise acquaint the Reader, how nobly and civilly my Lord was
received by Marquis Castle Roderigo, the then Governor of that Country; but
being to leave Bruxels, I must post away to Wavre, a double Post thence, and
the place of our abode for that night. The next day we passed through Gibloix,
Namur, Vive l' aigneau, Entim, and lay at Hoyne, which are all single Posts;
and here began our lodging on Straw, which we were so familiar with afterward.

The first of March we posted to Lignier, through Grand-Champ, Flamizoule and
Michamp, and quartered at Asselborne, the first four being single, and the last
a double Post. Thence we passed to Artsfelt, next to Bickendorf, and afterward
to Binsfelt, all double Posts. Here we rested, if we could take any rest in a
lodging, where there was not the least accommodation for repose. But what could
we expect in so wild a Country, abounding with nothing but Hills, Dales and
Woods, where we scarce met the face of a man, and for those of the feminine
Sex, they well might be compared to bug-bears, which made me think of often,
and as often remember my Countrey-women, whom though I did always highly
value, yet now I cannot estimate enough.

As for our Horses, some of them were constantly taken from the Plough, and
wearied with labor beforehand, so as it is no wonder we had so many falls. But
one that had not plowed that day, and so was more lusty and gamesome, got loose
by an accident, and ran to the next Stage before us, so as two of our Company,
(to help one another) were forced to ride by turns, and by turns to go a foot.
And to mend the matter, our Guide in the night, though the Moon was very clear,
like an Ignis fatuus misled us up and down, he could not tell whither, for
which being rated severely, he was for a while so abominably unsavory, there
was no going near him. But at last, by good fortune, we lighted on a Village,
where the Peasants were so rude, or so fearful at least (hearing so many
Horsemen) that we could not extract a word from them, they putting out their
Candles, and lying like Coneys in their Buroughs, till partly by threats, and
partly by good words, I got in amongst them, and persuaded two of them, to show
us the way to the neighboring Posthouse; which at last taking heart, they
ventured upon; but when we got thither, and they found with what kindness we
used them, they repented themselves they had been so inhospitable to us. There
we met with a Lutheran Parson, as full of Wine as Fat, whose Latin came from
him in clusters, which showed he had doubled his Glasses.

Thence we posted to Lizer, where we passed the Moselle, and because we were
forced to stay there for Horses (which were fetched out of the fields from their
work) we dined at that place, and had excellent Wine, which is all I can
commend, besides the talking Host, who was a jolly fellow, and filled it with a
grace, and drank it off as well.

This our stay there retarded us so much, we could only arrive at Laufferswiler
that night, two double Posts from Binsfelt. But of all the Postilion we had, I
must needs tell the Reader of one, who formally appearing in his Ruff, his
Cloak and highsteepl'd Hat, no sooner got up on his Horse, which was skittish,
and had a Trunk behind him, but the Horse not enduring the rattling and weight
of the Trunk, fell a kicking and dancing in that manner, that down went the
Steeple, and the Cloak, Ruff and man had followed after, but that relief ran
in, and his Wife cried to him, If you have not Hans a care, that Horse will
throw you to the Devil. But Hans boldly venturing again, sat very demurely and
gingerly, while we could do no less, than follow after and laugh, to see in
what posture he sat, and how often his Hat was tossed into the air, and his
gravity disordered.

From Laufferswisel we passed through to Eckerswiler to Walstein, two double
Posts thence, where because we could not find fresh Horses enough, his Lordship
thought it good to separate his Company, he himself making choice of the Road
to Rhinshowsen, and ordering his Brother, with the rest of the Retinue, to pass
the Rhyne at Mentz, and meet all together at Ratisbone.

From Walstein therefore my Lord rode to Hanguisen, which was a Post off, and
lodged at a Village called Boveren, half a mile beyond Worms. On the fifth his
Lordship posted through Frankendale to Mowda, thence to Spire, and so to
Rhinshowsen, where he crossed the Rhyne. The next place was Proussell, then
Nitling, where there is a good Inn. Ensfinde, Canstat and Eberspoch succeeded,
then Alderstat and Westerstet, Elskinger, Lowen and Donawert followed after,
and ushered in Newburgh, where my Lord lay that night, and stayed the next day.

The ninth his Lordship hired a Boat down the Danube to Ratisbone, intending
his arrival there that night, but failing an hour, he lay three leagues short,
and only got thither the next day at noon.

Having brought my Lord to Ratisbone, and left him well there, give me leave to
post back again to Walstein, to conduct his noble Brother to that place.

We that were to road it through Franckford, departed from Walstein the fourth,
and lay that night at Mentz a double Post off. The City is built near the
Rhyne, and the Seat of an Archbishop, and one of the Electors of Germany. Here
we hired a Post-chariot, and passing the Rhyne over a Bridge of Boats (for
which we paid tole) arrived at Franckford, a great and goodly City, renowned
for the Mart, and a double Post from Mentz.

From Frankford we chariotted it again to the City of Hanow, which admits of no
Inhabitants but those of the Calvinist Religion. The place is strong and neat,
but of a short continuance, being built but some fourscore years since, and is
a single Post from Franckford aforesaid.

At Hanow we found another Chariot, which carried us to Tetting, a single Post
thence, where we lodged that night.

The sixth we past Bessenback, a Post and a half, whence to Esselback (which is
a double Post) we met with a Chariot and six Horses, all the rest having only
had three, or four at the most. But here we had three men to attend us, one
riding Postilion, another on a Horse next the Chariot, and the last running
afoot, who changed by turns with the Postilion; and one thing I observed, when
the Horses were weary all the three men would be sure to get up. In this manner
we passed the Spessaert, a vast and thick Wood, full of overgrown Oaks, and
belonging to the Elector of Mentz.

From Esselback we crossed the River of Main, and lodged at Raulinghen, a
single Post thence. Wirtzburgh we posted to next, where we past the Main again,
and on the right hand, saw a regular Fortress and House, appertaining to the
Elector of Mentz aforesaid. This as Kitzinghem, Posthenhem, Launghenfelt and
Emskerken, where we lodged that night, are all single Posts. But before I go
farther, give me leave to look back, and tell the gentle Reader, that my Lord
in his passage to Newburgh, saw a certain race of men, which fasten so their
Breeches to their Doublets with Points, that as others use to put down their
Breeches, they pull off their Doublets, to do the necessities of Nature.
Fornback presented next it self, a single Post from Norimberg, a City of
excellent Houses, and as excellently furnished, whose Town Hall is an admirable
Structure. Thence we passed to Faicht, Postbaw and Finingen all single Posts,
where we took up our quarters.

The ninth we rode through Postberge and Labor, and at noon arrived at
Ratisbone, all single Posts, where we met not with my Lord till the following
day, for his Lordship went about, and out of the Post-road to this place.

Having viewed the City, which is famous for little, but the Diet kept there,
on the one and twentieth (for now I must observe the style of the Country, for
fear of mistakes) we hired a Boat for Vienna, and that night got to Strawbing.
The next day we arrived at Vilshoven, this Town with the other appertaining to
the Duke of Bavaria. Here the Servant attending at Supper, being asked his
name, said nothing, but ran out of the Room, as if he had recourse to his
Godfather, to enquire what it was, so dull and heavy are some of the ordinary
people.

The three and twentieth we lay at Odensham, a Town of the Emperors, where
Otho was born. Here the Canopies of the Beds were so low, we could not sit
upright, and the Beds placed so near one another, as no passing between, but
side-long, and with difficulty. The Beds too and Coverings are alike, being all
soft Feather-beds, to stew in betwixt, but that for a remedy, the head is made
so high, and the feet lie so low, that while your face is in the air, your legs
are on the ground. Their Napkins are likewise extravagant, and no bigger than
Childrens Pinners, or at best but Pocket-handkerchiefs. In one of the Stews
above stairs, you have commonly but one Bed, but the other is hospital-wise,
and has usually six or seven, and to mend the matter, a necessary House, which
needs no Directour to find it.

A little before we came to St. Nicholas (some seven Leagues from Lince an
Imperial Town) the Boat-men desired us to sit still, and we had indeed great
reason so to do, for there between the Rocks, the Danube is contracted in that
manner, that it runs most impetuously, and the water whirles about so in
several places, as if through some Tunnel it emptied it self into a Gulf, and
the Watermen assured us, that part of the Danube ran there under ground,
disburthening it self afterward in Hungary, where it made a great Lake, and
this was confirmed, they said, by sinking a great Pole, with a proportionable
weight fastened to it, which was afterward found again in the Lake aforesaid.

In our passage to Melke, where we lodged that night, we touched several times
on the ground, and twice were constrained to disingage our selves by laboring
hard at the Oars, and one time were so fast, that we were in some hazard of
staying all the night on the water.

The five and twentieth we lay at Tulne, and the next day arrived at Vienna,
the Capital City of Austria, and Residence of the Emperors of Germany, and
during our Journey, from the time we departed from London, till two days after
our arrival at Vienna aforesaid, being three weeks and four days, we had not
any Rain.

That day we repaired to the Golden-Hart, a great and goodly Inn, where my Lord
lodged that night, but the next day Count Lesley, having not leisure to come
himself, for he was to be present at the Emperors Council, sent his Nephew, my
Lord Hay, to complement his Lordship, and carry him to his House; where Count
Lesley highly welcomed my Lord, and after many Ceremonies, and great
demonstrations of kindness and respect, carried his Lordship and his Brother to
the House of the Earl of Trawne who is the Land Marshal where they had a noble
Dinner.

The eight and twentieth my Lord dined with Count Lesley, who by means of my
Lord Hay, provided his Lordship of Lodgings near his House, and the next day
with Count Dietrichstien the Emperors Master of his Horse. The same day my
Lord waited on the Emperor to the Convent of the Capucines, where his Imperial
Majesty dined, the Princes and Lords of the greatest condition (as the custom
is there) waiting on his Majesty, and walking afoot before his Coach.

The thirtieth my Lord waited again on the Emperor, who dined that day with
his Mother in Law the Empress, where his Lordship staying, till his Imperial
Majesty had drunk his first draught (a Ceremony observed by Ambassadors
themselves) retired, and dined with Count Lesley, attending after dinner on the
Emperor, the Empress and Princesses, to a Park about a mile from Vienna, where
his Majesty's Huntsmen enclosing some four acres of ground, with Canvas
extended by Poles above a man's height, and a little way farther, with Canvas
aforesaid, making a lane a breast high, by letting fall the Canvas toward the
East, with Beagles hunted in at a time, some eight or ten Foxes, which coursed
up and down, were by several Gentlemen, who had Nets in their hands for that
purpose, of a foot and half wide, and between three and four yards long, tossed
up into the air, as it were in several Blankets, as they ran up and down
seeking places to escape. In this manner, and with Dogs and Sticks, they
sacrificed seventy Foxes to the Emperors pleasure, and afterward baited and
killed six Badgers.

The one and thirtieth my Lord dined with the Earl of Staremberg the Marshal of
the Court, and waited after dinner on the Emperor, who that day went afoot to
a Church, about a mile from Vienna, where a Sepulcher, in imitation of that of
our Saviors at Jerusalem, is annually visited, and his Majesty kneeled and
prayed by the way at five several stations.

The first of April his Lordship dined with Count Lesley, where he constantly
dined, unless he was invited to any other place, for still about noon, Count
Lesley aforesaid sent his Coach for my Lord, to oblige him with with his
Company at Dinner.

The second of the month the Emperor and his Nobility received the blessed
Sacrament, and his Majesty washed and kissed the feet o^ twelve men, the
youngest o^ which was seventy years old, and the eldest one hundred and four;
and among them all they made up the age of nine hundred and eighty seven years;
to every one of whom he gave a Suit of black Cloth, a pair of Shoes and
Stockings, and a Purse with some Money. At dinner they had each three Courses
of Fish, and four Dishes at each Course, his Imperial Majesty waiting upon
them; and when dinner was done, the youngest made a Speech to the Emperor,
very gratefully acknowledging the honors they had received.

That day our Saviors Passion was represented in Italian, in Music, in the
Church near the Court, and on the third at the Jesuits, where the Emperor was
present, and his Majesty heard five several Sermons that day.

The fourth the Emperor visited afoot the Churches and Sepulchers, in number
thirty seven, at three of which the Passion of our Savior was exhibited in
Music.

On Easter day his Imperial Majesty dined publicly, as he usually does four
times in the year, and at the first Course, only cold and blessed Meats are
served in.

The tenth my Lord, with his Brother, and several other Persons of Quality,
accompanied Count Lesley to the Jesuits College, where they had a noble Dinner.

The eleventh his Lordship dined with Count Roddols. The fourteenth at Earl
Koningsecks, who was formerly Ambassador in England: And the fifteenth at the
Count de Nosticks.

The eighteenth his Lordship saw the Emperor ride the great Horse, and
fourscore Colts backed by the Riders; as also his Majesty's Stables, where there
were many brave and goodly Horses, to the number of one hundred and twelve.

The nineteenth my Lord dined at Prince Portia's, and the twentieth at Count
Altemms.

The two and twentieth the Emperor (as he uses every year) retired to his
Castle of Lauxembourgh, to fly at the Heron.

The eight and twentieth his Lordship dined with Count Wallestein, and the
following day with Count Montecuculo.

The second of May with Marquis Pio, and the third with the Marquis of Baden.

But now the Ambassador, together with his Comrades and their Retinue, being
pompously and nobly apparelled after the Turkish fashion, in Clothes of Gold
and Silver, on the sixth of May, in a very solemn manner, rode along through
the Streets to the Emperors Palace, the Windows of which were thronged with
the Spectators of this sumptuous Cavalcade, which was in this order.

First, Two Grooms of the Emperors.

Secondly, The Quartermaster.

Thirdly, Two Coriers.

Fourthly, The Gentleman of the Horse.

Fifthly, Eight led Horses, with noble and most rich Trappings and Furniture.

Sixthly, Twelve Pages riding two and two together.

Seventhly, Eight Trumpeters riding four and four abreast, and a Kettle-drum in
the middle.

Eighthly, The Ambassadors Steward alone at the head of his Squadron.

Ninthly, His Excellencies own Colors carried by one of his Gentlemen, between
his Physician and Secretary, and followed by the rest of his Gentlemen, and
others belonging to the Comrades of his Excellency, in number thirty and one.

Tenthly, Twelve Footmen.

Eleventhly, The Secretary of the Embassy, and Interpreter of his Imperial
Majesty.

Twelfthly, The Ambassador with four and twenty Halbardiers, twelve of which
preceded, and the like number followed him.

Thirteenthly, The Cavaliers, the Comrades of his Excellency, and the Emperors
Colors of Cloth of Silver embroidered, and carried by Count Sterhaimb, whose
names here ensue.

First, Count Herberstein.

Secondly, My Lord Henry Howard.

Thirdly, The Duke of Holstein incognito, and called the Baron of Binnendorff.

Fourthly, Count Sterhaimb.

Fifthly, Marquis Durazzo, a Genouese.

Sixthly, The Honorable Edward Howard of Norfolk.

Seventhly, Marquis Pecori, a Florentine.

Eighthly, The Baron of Finvekercken.

Ninthly, Marquis Chasteauvieux, a Frenchman.

Tenthly, Francis Hay Baron of Delgate, Nephew to the Ambassador.

Eleventhly, The Baron of Rech, Nephew to the Bishop of Munster.

Twelfthly, Baron Coronini of Friuli.

Thirteenthly, Baron Fin of the same Country.

Fourteenthly, Baron Kornfeil of Austria.

Besides, there were several Gentlemen of several Countries, as Signore
Vincenzo Marchiao of Luca, Signore Casner of Austria, Signore Oversche of
Holland, etc.

Lastly came four Coaches with six Horses a piece, and his Excellencies Litter.
One of the Coaches was nobly guilt and furnished, which his Excellency
presented, with the Horses, to the Grand Signior at Adrianople.

The Cavalcade being over, we continued in Vienna till the five and twentieth
of May, during which time, my Lord was feasted as formerly, for on the twelfth
he dined with Count Sincsindorff, Presidente della Camera, and the fifteenth
with Count d' Iterstein.

The seventeenth my Lord went to Lauxenbourg, and dining* with Prince*
Lobkoviz, waited after dinner on the Emperor, and saw him Hawk at the Heron,
and kill four that day.

The nineteenth his Lordship dined with the Marquis of Baden, and on the two
and twentieth he went in the Company of the Marquisses Durazzo and Pecori, and
his Brother, to see the hot Baths, some four Leagues distant from Vienna,
whither Persons of Quality, as Earls and Countesses, very frequently resort,
who go all together into the same Bath, but with this distinction, that the men
keep on one side, and the women on the other. The men go with Drawers and their
Shirts, wearing black leather Caps, with Buttons on the top, for the easier
saluting of the Ladies and Gentlemen, when they come into the Bath. They have
several Laws, and the forfeitures go to the Poor, and commonly the Women are
very great sticklers, for exacting and leavying of the same.

But since I must soon leave Vienna, for the five and twentieth instant is the
day of our departure, I think it not amiss to give you a little description of
the place.

Vienna, the Metropolis of Inferior Austria, is seated near a branch of the
Danube, the famousest River of Europe. The Geographical latitude is forty eight
degrees and twenty minutes, and the longitude forty. The figure of the City is
not perfectly round, but inclining much to it. The circuit about five thousand
Geometrical paces, which with an easy walk may be compast in an hour and a
half. It Is strong, and well fortified, and if as well provided of men, and all
things appertaining to a Siege, will hardly be taken.

The Houses are goodly and large, and commonly have great Cellars for stowage
of their Wines, which are in that abundance in this City, that vulgarly they
say (and perhaps without vanity) there is more Wine than Water at Vienna,
though the City has many fair Fountains and Wells.

The said Wine is carried into Bohemia, Silesia, Superior Austria and Bavaria,
Saltzburg, and several other places.

By the help of their Stoves, they have fresh and green Sallats in the Winter,
so as in a very strange season of the year, when the Country is covered with
Snow, they have Lettices and Herbs in very great plenty in the Markets.

There are four great Piazzo's in the City, which are beautified and adorned
with Marble Fountains and Statues. In one, called by excellency, The Piazzo,
two Fairs are yearly kept, to which in great throngs, from all parts of
Germany, the Merchants resort. There are many Princes Palaces, many Religious
Houses of both Sexes, together with many Churches, though far more conspicuous
for their neatness, than vastness of fabric. The Cathedral is dedicated to
Saint Stephen, whose Steeple is about four hundred sixty and five foot high,
all consisting of hewn Stone, and carved into various figures of Men, Birds and
Beasts, which are fastened together with Irons.

The Suburbs are bigger than the City, not for the number of the Inhabitants,
which are scarce twenty thousand, and the City has fourscore thousand Souls,
but the largeness of the territory: And though there are many wooden Houses,
where the poorer sort dwell, yet the Monasteries and Churches may well be
compared to those in the City. Besides, there are many fair Buildings of
Princes, and the richer sort of Citizens, with very fine Gardens, where you can
desire nothing, that is either for pleasure or profit. But amongst all the
Gardens, the Empresses, called Favorith, exceeds far the rest, for that in
other Gardens is scattered and dispersed, is here found united and collected.

In one of the Suburbs, seated in an Island of the Danube, the Jews do inhabit,
who with Boards, and a piece of a Wall, are divided from the Christians that
live in the said Suburbs. The said Island is joined to the City with a wooden
Bridge, which commonly every year is broken and thrown down by the Ice; and
there is a Park in it, abounding with tall Trees, and Herds of Deer and Bores,
which wander up and down in a tame and fearless manner; and there is too a Walk
four thousand paces long, with Trees on both sides, which reaches to a place
called Gruen-lusthouse.

Some two or three miles from the City, a Structure, called Naugebeu, was
erected by Rodolphus the Second, which, as you approach it, appears not like a
Garden, but rather a City of Towers, which, together with the Walks, supported
by Arches, is covered with Copperplates, and was built in imitation and memory
of Solomon the Magnificent's Tent, which he picht in that place, when he came
with the design of besieging Vienna. Besides many things that deserve to be
seen, there is a Well of a strange work, out of which they draw Water with three
hundred sixty and five Buckets, as likewise fair Fountains with Alabaster
Statues, together with Lions and Tigers kept there in a place for that purpose.

About the same distance from Vienna is Schoenbrun, encompast with a Wall,
where there is a shady Wood on a pleasant ascent, and a fine Plain below. The
House is beautified with Pictures, and the Garden very curious, whither the
Empress retires, when she goes into the Country. I omit the rest, as
Lauxenburg, Mariabrun, Ebersdorffe, and other sweet places, as remoter from the
City.

The Inhabitants, generally speaking, are courteous and affable, and as well
bred as any in Germany, by reason of the Court, and the concourse of French and
Italians, whose behavior and fashion they happily emulate: And many, besides
their own Tongue, and the Latin (which they speak very fluently) speak Italian
and French.

The University of Vienna, renowned through all Germany, is not the least
Ornament of the City, it having great splendor and power: For besides many
Privileges indulged by the Emperors, and several Archdukes, it has power of
life and death, not only over them that actually study, but a great part of the
City and Neighborhood, for the Doctors in the Town, the Stationers, Engravers,
Bookbinders, Apothecaries, Chirurg^ons, and those too, who attain indirectly to
Learning, are subject to the Academical Tribunal, where the Causes of Pupils
and Widows, and some appertaining to Matrimony, are heard and determined.

The Territory of Vienna is plain, yet rising in some places into easy Hills
planted with Vines. It produces Wheat enough for the Inhabitants, as also Rye,
Barley, Millet-seed and Pease, Chestnuts too and Almonds, Peaches, Quinces and
many sorts of Apples and Pears, and excellent Saffron, but neither Figs,
Olives, or Lemmons, unless extraordinary industry, and diligence be used. And
every thing growing there, smells somewhat of Brimstone, for the Soil is
sulphurous.

The Air is sharp in the Winter, in so much as not only the Waters, which are
standing and immovable, but the Danube it self is frequently frozen, and
serves as it were for a Bridge to the Coaches and Carts. The vigor of that
Season they expel with their Stoves, in which they have the Spring, together
with the Summer and Autumn at their pleasure.

The Summer is temperate, and yet hot enough to ripen their Fruits. They have
frequent Winds, which, if they cease long in the Summer, the Plague ensues
often, so as they have a Proverb, If Austria be not windy, it is subject to
Contagion. The Plague, when it comes there, is commonly in Autumn, and seldom
spreads much, as it does in other places, in regard of the exquisite diligence
they use to prevent it, and the coldness of the Winter approaching, which
quickly suppresseth the force of that Poison.

The things of curiosity, that deserve to be seen in the City, are the
Emperors Treasure, the Archdukes Gallery, the Church and Steeple of Saint
Stephen, the Treasure of the Church, and the Sepulcher of Otho, as likewise the
Arsenals, the College and professed House of the Jesuits, the Church and Convent
of the Benedictines, the Bishops Palace, the Church and Convent of the
Dominicans, with that of the Franciscans, where they show a Hole of Strangers,
through which, as they affirm, the Devil once carried away a sacrilegious
Person, and it never could be closed up again.

In the Suburbs, Favorith is worthy to be seen, as likewise the Garden of the
Bishop, the House and Garden of the Earl of Traun, with those of the Prince of
Aversperg, and others. Nor is the Church and Monastery of the Carmelites, nor
that of the Augustines, with the Hermitage of the Capucines, the little Spanish
Monastery, and the Convent of the Servi, to be unregarded.

In fine, Vienna is little within the Walls, but as beautiful, as strong, and
abounds not with only what Austria and Hungary affords, but that too which
Italy can contribute. The Markets are most plentifully supplied, and there is
great store of Flesh, and fresh water Fish, especially Crawfish, which are in
that abundance, as it is almost incredible. And it is too as strange, to one that
does not know it, how infamous a killer of Dogs is reputed at Vienna, which,
being the Office of the Hangman, or his Deputies (who on Wednesdayes and
Fridayes go seeking for Dogs, and kill all that are not privileged with
Collars) makes the Party so hated and contemned, that none will keep him
company.

BUt to think of our journey into Turkey, on the five and twentieth instant, my
Lord dined with the Prince of Lichtenstein, in the company of his Excellency
Count Lesley, who that day departed from Vienna about three of the Clock, all
the Persons of Quality, that accompanied him in that Embassy, following him to
the Waterside, in Coaches with six Horses apiece, but the throngs of
Spectators were so great (for never the like Embassy was seen in Vienna) they
could scarce get to the Barques, which, though large, and six and thirty in
number, were but sufficient for his Excellency and his Company, which amounted
to two hundred twenty and two.

His Excellencies Barque was bigger, and much handsomer than the rest, and
having eight Trumpetters and a Kettle-drum aboard it, which sounded all the
way* and beautified with variety of Streamers, drew all the eyes thither.

In this manner, and in order (for one Barque followed another, according to
the quality of the Persons within it) we arrived at Vischen, some four leagues
from Vienna, on the right hand of the Danube, whither the Prince of
Dietrichstein, and the Earl of Trauttmansdorff waited on the Ambassador; and
here we all lodged in the Boats, as we did all along to Belgrade, his
Excellency, and the Cavaliers with him, having Beds in the Barques, and all
accommodation very suitable to their quality*

We departed the next morning about seven of the Clock, and passing by
Petronel, Taben and Haimburg, arrived at Presburgh about noon, whither his
Excellency was welcomed by the Canon from the Castle, and received and
complemented at the Waterside, by the Palatine or Viceroy Vesselleni, who,
accompanied by Count Palsi and other Hungarian Lords, had eight Coaches in
readiness for his Excellency, and the Persons of Quality with him, whom he
carried to his Pleasure-house, in a Garden without the Town, and feasted most
magnificently.

Presburg, the Metropolis now of Hungary, is an old and neat Town, and
pleasantly seated. In the Suburbs, on a high Mountain, is a very strong Castle,
where the Regal Crown is kept, and below in the bottom, on both sides the
Danube, most large and happy Pastures are presented to the eye.

The Kingdom of Hungary (to speak a little of it, now we are on the Place) was
formerly extended from the Pontick Sea to Austria, and from Poland to the
Adriatic Gulf, containing within it ten very large Kingdoms, which as
Feudators depended on that Crown, so as the King of Hungary was then an
Arch-King. But from the year of our Lord, one thousand three hundred and ninety
six, to this our present Age, it has been much and often afflicted with
intestine Contentions and Discords, so as the better part is subject to the
Turks, it only retaining a very small figure of the ancient Liberty, Dignity
and Greatness it had, and having scarce now as many strong Cities, as it
formerly had Kingdoms.

On the East it has Transylvania, on the West Austria and Styria, on the North
the Carpathian Mountains, Poland and Moravia, and on the South the River Drove
and Croatia. The Meadows are so luxuriant, that the Grass in many places almost
equals the stature of a man, and they have such store of Cattle, that they send
very many into Italy, Germany, and other remote Countries, and only on the way
to Vienna, it is reported, that fourscore thousand Oxen were driven one year
into Germany.

It abounds with Fowl and wild Beasts, which the Peasants have liberty to kill;
for Fish they have store, which the Rivers of Hungary are full of, especially
the Besch, of which it is commonly said, two parts of it are Water, and the
third Fish.

The Soil is most fruitful, for what in other Countries is produced with labor
and charge, flows here with more ease, and without the Art of dressing and
manuring the Ground. It has several sorts of Vines, and some for the delicacy
not inferior to the Italian.

Of all sorts of Metals it has store, (Tin only excepted) and the Gold they
get out of the Mountains, is compared to, and preferred before the Arabian, and
that of Peru.

But the Hungarians, from the highest to the lowest, are generally as bad as
the Country is good, being treacherous to one, another, and haters of
Strangers.

And this may be enough of the Kingdom of Hungary.

On the seven and twentieth in the morning, we following the course of the
Danube, arrived at a little Island about noon, and dined aboard the Barques;
whence departing after dinner, we passed by Alfenburg, some four by Land, but
by Water ten Leagues distant from ^resburg, by reason of the turnings and
windings of the River. The next place was Wiselburg, which is seated on the
right hand of the Danube, over against the Isle of Schutt.

The next morning early we prosecuted our Journey, and passing by the Villages
of Kymela, St. Paul, Petceier, and Samring, in a Meadow, some half a League
from Raab, we disimbarqued and dined.

After dinner we advanced to the Fortress of Raab aforesaid, where the
Ambassador was saluted in this manner: On the right hand three Troops of the
Hussars, or Hungarian Horse stood ranged in order, together with three
Companies of the Heyducks, or Foot, and three Companies of German Musketeers.
Besides, the Bastions commanding the River, were filled with the Soldiers of
the Garrison, and had all the Guns planted and in readiness, so as when his
Excellencies Barque approached the Fortress, they so regularly gave fire, that
the Bastions all seconded one another in a moment, as the Horse and Foot did,
which discharged three times.

His Excellency was entreated to lodge in the Town, and pressed the more, in
regard the night came on, but he urging, that (besides his Imperial Majesty's
Commands, to pursue with all diligence his Journey) the Turkish Ambassador
impatiently expected him, at the place of the interview and exchange, excused
himself from accepting then that Honor, which he promised to receive at his
return out of Turkey. These Complements ended, the Ambassador went on without
further stay, and passed by Marhoffen, the first Village Tributary to both the
Emperors, and a League from Comorro.

The next day General Souches, the Governor of the place, sent fourteen Boats
to meet and wait on the Ambassador, in eight of which were Heyducks, and
Germans in the rest. These Boats were of the fashion of little Galleys, long
and narrow, and had thirteen Oars on a side: The back-end resembled our Barges,
but was rather hooped up, as our Watermen do their Boats, for two or three to
sit on a side, and they carry before, some two, some three little Fieldpieces,
which shoot at a great distance; and along on either side stand as many Pikes
as Oars, each Pike having a little Flag upon it, which is the Arms for
Horsemen, as well for the Turks as Hungarians. At his Excellencies arrival they
discharged the Fieldpieces and Muskets in the Boats, and six and thirty Canon
from the new Fortress of Comorra. In the mean time General Souches came out of
the Town to the Danube, and going aboard the Ambassadors Boat, first saluted
and complemented him, and the Cavaliers afterward, conducting them all into
the Fortress, at the entrance into which they were welcomed with twenty great
Guns, discharged from the inward Fort, and likewise with the Volleys of three
Companies of Heyducks, one Troop of Hussars, and two Companies of Germans. In
this manner the Ambassador was received into the Governors Residence, out of
which, through a Gallery, he past to the Works, to take a little view of the
Fortifications of the Place, while all things were drepared for his better
entertainment, and his Retinues at dinner, which was splendid and magnificent;
and the Canon of the Fortress, being sixty brass Pieces, all roared like
thunder at the many Healths they drank, for each Health of consequence was
attended by three Cannon. At night General Souches, to show all imaginable
respect to the Ambassador, entertained him with rare Fireworks, not only
disposed on each side of the Danube, but placed too (by the help of some Boats)
in the middle of the River, which succeeded so happily, that generally the
Spectators received all content and satisfaction.

The Fortress of Comorro is of a triangular form, and seated in an Angle of the
Isle of Schutt, between the Rivers Danube and Waage.

The Garrison of the place, in that it is so considerable a Bulwark against the
Mahometans, consists most of Germans, whom the Governor rather trusts than the
Natives.

The next morning about ten of the clock, being embarked, and all ready to
depart, General Souches (who accompanied the Ambassador) ordered fourteen
Barques to tow us to the other side of the River, while five and twenty Cannon
were discharged from the Fortress, and all the small Guns in the boats. Here we
made a halt, a little short of a Village called Sennack, the first of the
Territories of the Turks, where we made a hasty Dinner, and immediately
afterward all landed for the interview. The Turks coming by land, were on
horseback, and many as ill horsed as clad. Their Wagons and Baggage stayed a
little behind them, as our Barques likewise did, which though but thirty six,
made much the better show, especially by the addition of General Souches Boats.

The Turks as we landed lighted off their Horses, their number being less than
two hundred, and ours under three, but they agreed on both sides to meet with a
less number. We saw before us, as the Turks before them, three great Posts
erected for Boundaries and limits of the borders, the middle of which was the
mark of the confines. About twenty paces nearer to each other, we drew up to
our Posts on each side, while the mutual Guards of four Troops of Horse on a
side, stood facing one another. Each Ambassador then departed at the same time
from his Post, and so arrived together at that in the middle, each being
accompanied only with ten of his chiefest Comrades. General Souches was on the
Ambassadors right hand, and Commissary Feichtinger on the left, his
Excellencies Train being born by two Gentlemen of the Country. The Turkish
Ambassador Mahomet Bashaw, though he actually performed not the Office of
Basha, yet being of the Council of War, was held in great esteem with the
Turks, and accompanied with the Basha of Alba Regalis, some Begues an Aga and
Janissaries, which said Basha of Alba Regalis, the Grand Signior sent expressly
to vye with the Emperors pompous Embassy, since no Ambassador had the honor
before, to have an actual Basha for his Commissary.

The two Ambassadors meeting at the Post aforesaid, complemented each other by
an Interpreter, and enquiring of the healths of their Masters, with their
reciprocal wishes of a durable Peace, joined hands, and departed, the Basha of
Alba Regalis conducting his Excellency to his Boat, and General Souches
consigning the Turkish Ambassador to Commissary Feichtinger, and the Hungarian
Convoy. This Ceremony ended, the Christians and Turks began to sound Trumpets,
and beat Kettle-drums in testimony of their joy, we entering again into our
Boats, which were manned by Turks (for the Christian Watermen returned now
back) and the Turkish Ambassador pursuing his journey by Land.

In our passage to Strigonium, called vulgarly Gran, a Garrison of the Turks,
where we arrived that night, and were welcomed by the Cannon, and several
Volleys of Shot; the Mohammedan Watermen, who towed us down the Stream, in
expressions of their gladness, often cried out like madmen, and uttered
uncouth words of Mahomet their Prophet.

The Turkish Soldiers that guarded us (for we lay without the Town) were civil
and courteous, so as we conversed and walked familiarly among them. That night
after Supper, two of our Barques untied from the rest, and driving down the
Stream toward the Bridge (where they who were within apprehended some danger,
in regard of the swiftness of the Current) occasioned great confusion and
horror. But the Storm was soon appeased, for the Soldiers came readily to our
help, and relieved and secured us, e're the Barques arrived the Bridge.

The Governor of Gran, accompanying the Turkish Ambassador a part of his way,
returned back late the same night, in so much that he visited not Count Lesley
till the following morning, and then he came on horseback, and very well
attended his Horses Furniture being noble and rich, with a Bag of Taffaty about
his Neck, wherein were Horses tails, which none but those of quality are
permitted to have. This Begue, (who is said to be the Favorite of the Basha of
Newheusel, who procured him that Government) sent his Excellency a Present of
Wines, four Cows, some Fowl, Fish and other Provisions.

Count Lesley, though he returned not the Governors visit, yet sent him by
Count Herberstein, and the Baron of Finvekercken, some Sweetmeats, a Clock, and
a pair of Pistols, which he courteously received, with the discharge of some
great Guns, in honor of the Ambassador, and when he had treated them with
Coffee and Sherbet, and led them round the Walls of the Castle, he civilly
dismissed them, not without a great sense of the favor done to him. This
morning the Basha of Alba Regalis asked leave of the Ambassador to go wait on
the Vizier of Buda, and inform him of his Excellencies motion and advance, to
the end he might have all things in readiness for his better reception.

The one and thirtieth being Sunday, his Excellency heard Mass in a Tent* in a
very open place before the Turks (having all along before still heard it in his
Barque) and departed after dinner; and while we were traversing the River, to
pass the Bridge of Boats, the Garrison of Gran gave us twenty great Guns.
Between two and three leagues of this place, we passed by Vicegrade, a ruinous
Castle on the top of a Hill, with a Town in the bottom of that name. In our
passage they discharged eight Cannon, which by reason of the turnings and
windings of the Danube among the Rocks and Woods, made a terrible noise. The
River near this place dividing it self, makes a very considerable Island, as
well for the largeness, as fertility of the place.

That night we lay near Vacia, a City much decayed, and formerly the Seat of a
Bishop, which from the time of Solomon the Magnificent, in the space of a
hundred and thirty years, had changed its Master twenty times* and had often
been plundered, and once set on fire.

The first of June in the morning, we arrived at Buda, formerly the Metropolis
and Royal Residence of Hungary, and indeed for the pleasant situation, a place
truly Regal, having on the one side Hills fruitful in Vines, and large and rich
Meadows on the other, with the Danube gliding by them. The place looks as
designed for the Empire of Hungary, and though formerly beautified with many
noble Fabrics, now ruinous and decayed, being inhabited for the most part by
Soldiers, who looking no farther than the date of their lives, make shift for
their time, and so they lie but dry, and secure themselves and Horses from the
injury of the Weather, it is all they regard; and indeed all along as we
traveled, and even at Constantinople it self, the Houses in general are mean.

Here the Ambassador at his landing was ushered into a Royal Tent, most
sumptuously prepared for that purpose by the Kehaia, or Grand Visiers Steward,
a Person of worth and civility, and when he had dined, the Vizier of Buda sent
the next in office under him, to visit and complement his Excellency, who came
with a splendid Retinue. The Ambassador sat in State in a Chair, the Basha*
with his Excellencies Comrades, sitting like Taylers on Carpets, or standing as
they pleased, only my Lord and Count Herberstein had the privilege of sitting
on a great Cushion by the Ambassadors side. They passed near two hours in this
manner, while the Horse and Foot ranged along the Shore* to the number of five
thousand, marched into the City near his Excellencies Tent* and a barbarous
noise of Tabers, Drums, Trumpets and Cymbals, with other warlike Instruments of
joy resounded in all places. In the Emperors special order, that in case Count
Lesley miscarried in the Journey, he might supply his place.

Next to this Gentleman, my Lord had priority, not for the merit of his birth
(though all looked upon him in the quality of a Duke, according to the custom of
Germany) but by reason of his Lordships rare parts and endowments. For though
the Ambassador had of his Retinue, many Persons of eminent condition, of
several Christian Nations, as particularly the Duke of Holstein, who being an
absolute Prince, had right to the precedence of all the Cavaliers, yet still in
all occurrences my Lord was preferred.

These said Lords on Horses, which the Vizier of Buda had sent, rode along to
the Town, accompanied by another Vizier, and several Guards of Janissaries,
together with the Interpreter and Secretary of the Embassy. As soon as they
alighted at the Palace, they were first carried up, and received in the public
place of audience, till the Vizier was advertised of their coming, and then
they were straight ushered in, and placed face to face against him, and sat in
Chairs of Velvet, as he did, such as are used in Christendom, which is an
extraordinary favor and grace among the Turks. All they desired, the Vizier
granted readily, and treating them civilly, and clothing them with Caftans
(which resemble Porters Cloaks, with long sleeves to the ground, and the arms
thrust out of the slits, and are of a Stuff like Italian Brocados, of Thread
and Silk with a mixture of Silver) dismissed them with abundance of ceremony and
kindness.

That evening as the Ambassador was at Supper in his Tent, the Turks stood
gaping and staring extremely, to whom the Gavaliers gave Sweetmeats and
Biskets (for they love Sugar dearly) and some of the Bashas, and the Aga (who
that night commanded the Guard) sat down with his Excellency, and drank Wine
as freely as any at the Table.

The Turks were strangely pleased with the Ambassadors Music, both the vocal
and instrumental, and indeed they had reason, for theirs is the worst in the
World. One of them played on a Cittern, and sang before his Excellency, but it
was like Tom a Bedlam, only a little sweetened with a Portugal like Mimikry. And
the Music most esteemed among the Soldiery, is the shrillest and squeakingest
Trumpet that ever was heard, and a Bagpipe-like Instrument, such as accompanies
the Jackanapes to the Bear-garden, with other ill Pipes and Hoboys, approaching
the nearest to our worst City-Waits.

The third of June his Excellency had audience, and accordingly that morning,
the worst of the Turks, and the meanest of the Ambassadors Retinue, marched
foremost two by two, but the Christians by themselves, only the chiefest
Cavaliers had each to his Companion a Basha, who rode on the left hand, the
best place esteemed for Soldiers by them, as the right among Scholars.

The Prime Colonel of the Janissaries rode before the Ambassador, and alone,
with a huge and flat white Feather, like an old and large Queen Elizabeth's Fan,
but four times as wide, and the corner forward, not flat. There walked too
afoot before his Excellency, a bellows-mouth'd and butcherlike fellow, who made
a hideous noise all along, which called the Boys together, and caused young
and old to repair to the Windows, to be Witnesses and Spectators of the show,
which doubtless the Women (who looked out at Iron-grates, and are kept in great
slavery) were very glad to see, for indeed it was pompous.

In the Gate, where we entered, we saw a strong Guard, and on both sides of the
Streets, all along to the Palace of the Vizier, the Janissaries stood in Arms,
which were excellently good, especially the Gun and Musket: They are short, but
wide bored and heavy, and carry twice the charge of those we have in England,
and many of the Janissaries had Coats of Male down to their Knees.

The Vizier of Buda received the Ambassador, as he had done my Lord and Count
Herberstein before, but with more of the same style and state. His Excellency
and the Vizier only sat, the Cavaliers and Turks standing round, and the Room,
though very large, was so crowded and thronged, there was scarce any stirring
from one place to another.

The Complements ended, and the Vizier receiving the Ambassadors Presents,
gave sixty Caftans to his Excellency and his Followers, which we put on over
the rest of our Clothes, and so rode back as we came, being sixty Horse only,
for the Vizier gave but sixty Caftans, but the Footmen had distributed among
them as many yards of Cloth, of red and purple colors, as served to make
Vests for each.

The four Bashas, with the Aga and Begue, which accompanied the Ambassador to,
and from the Vizier, dined that day with his Excellency, and drinking very
plentifully of the Wine, pocketted up in their Breasts (where they carry
several things as in Pockets) abundance of Sweetmeats and Sugarplums.

Here the poorer sort of People wear no Turbants, but Caps with, or without
Fur, according to their ability, and all the Women generally (those only
excepted that are old or very young) have their Faces muffled with Linen, so
as little is seen but their Eyes, and a part of their Noses.

They have no Clocks, but at certain times of the day, some Persons appointed
for the same, for which they have a Sallary, go up into a kind of Balcone round
the Steeple of the Mosches or Churches, and with a noise, hideous enough to
affright all unacquainted with the sound, cry alowd, how the day does pass away.

Every great Person buys, and has a kind of Standard, which is carried before
him when he rides, or stuck in his Boat, like a small Mast or May pole, when he
goes by Water, for which he pays a thousand Dollars to the Vizier, chief
Basha, or Governor of the place he belongs to, and it is no more than six or
seven Horses tails died of several Colors, and hung round the top of the Pole
aforesaid. The Soldiers too use these kinds of Standards as Cornets.

In the Palace at Buda are several Courts, and in one a fair Fountain of
Marble, with a Basin, or huge Shell of Brass, with the Arms of the Kings of
Hungary, supported with Snails of that Metal. On the right hand are the Stairs,
the upper part of which has Rails and Ballestres of Porphyrie. The Dining Room
is prodigiously great, and the Windows proportionable, with the Jaumes of red
Marble, as the Chimney-piece is, which is curiously carved and rich, and at the
end of the said Dining Room is a noble square Chamber.

About the said Palace many pieces of Brass are enclosed in several places
apart, which the Turks admit not Christians to see, unless by some particular
favor.

The hot Bath here (for which Buda is celebrated) has the Pavement of Marble,
and the Fountain that feeds it is so luxuriant in Water, that what runs in
waste drives two Powdermills, and a Corn-mill. The Pond, where the Spring
rises, is said to have Fish, which if true, may be said to be parboyl'd, but
Frogs I saw in it. The chief Bath is so hot, that it presently causes Sweat,
and is very much frequented. Before your Eye can find it, you enter a square
Room, with Windows on both sides, and light from the top, with places erected
from the ground, and covered with Mats and Carpets, to repose on after bathing,
with a place in the middle for the Clothes of the ordinary People, and round
about the Room hang Clothes in the nature of Aprons, which the Bathers put
before them, and persons there attending do furnish them with, who, while they
are bathing, do wash their Boots or Shoes, the way the Turks use for making
them clean. Having bathed enough, and dressed themselves again, on a Stall, that
is covered with Carpets, the Receiver of the Money sits demanding his due,
which is inconsiderably little.

But to return to the City (for the Bath is without the Town) Buda is at
present in so tattered a condition, that could Solomon the Magnificent return
from the dead, he would change and recant his Opinion, of thinking it the
fairest City in the World. And as for the Library, which the Vizier permitted
to be seen, and formerly was the glory of the World, for it had a thousand
Volumes of rare and choice Books, of excellent Authors of the Eastern Church,
how poor a thing it is now, and how much disagreeing with the fame and ancient
luster it had, since the few Books it has are of little or no use, being
almost consumed by Moths, Dust and Rats.

During our stay here, I visited a Turkish Convent, where some Religious
Persons, called Dervis, inhabited, who live all in common, and have only what
they get, each being of one Trade or other. They live morally well, and do no
wrong to any, and while they live in common, they are not to marry, but if they
take a Wife, they retire and live apart, however they continue still religious,
and meet in their Cloisters on Fridayes and Tuesdayes, the days of their
Devotion and Ceremonies.

They receive and lodge Travelers, and what they have to eat, give them freely
part of it, and usually have a Fountain at the door, with a Wooden-dish
fastened to a Chain, with which they give Water to Passengers, and indeed the
Turks generally are hospitable to Strangers.

There are other Religious men among the Turks, which are known by the name of
Santons, but are Vagabonds and poor, and addicted to all sorts of Vices, and
particularly to Sodomy, yet many of the Turks are so senseless and blind, to
hold them for Saints.

Over against Buda (where a Dutch man, a Painter of our Company, who was sick
of a Fever, leapt into the Danube, and was drowned) is the ruinous City of
Pest, where there is a little Convent of Franciscans, and several poor
Christians, who often are subject to many affronts and insolences of the
Turks, especially when in Wine, which albeit prohibited by their Law, yet many
make bold with, especially the younger sort of people, who indulge themselves
the more, since they are of Opinion, that their punishment after death is the
same, and not greater, if they drink but a little, or much, so as once having
tasted of Wine, they use to drink on, having less restraint afterward upon
them. And it is said, an old Turk in Constantinople, when he had a Cup of Wine
in his hand, and was about to drink it, first cried out alowd, and asked, why he
did so, replied, that he admonished his Soul to retire into some corner of his
Body, or vanish for a time, that it might not be polluted with the Wine he was
drinking.

From Buda we descended to Adam and Tschankurtaran, whither Solomon the
Magnificent, when he raised his Siege from Vienna, made all the haste he could,
not thinking himself out of danger, till he got to that place, which he called,
The refreshing of his Soul.

Thence we came to Basoka, and passing by Pentole and Fodwar, arrived at Tolna.
The next place was Waia, then Mohachz, from whence we saw the Castle of
Zetzchuy, the ancient Seat of the illustrious Family of the Palfi. This Town
was very fatal to Hungary by the loss of King Lodowick, in order to whose death
various things are reported.

The Plain where the Battle was fought is about half a League from the place,
and as large, as free from Wood, and Encumbrances of that sort, but the River
Carassus glides gently between, whose Water moves so slowly, it hardly seems to
stir. Hither the King fled, whom the darkness of the night, and the fear of his
Enemies pursuing, gave not time to explore and sound the miry passage, into
which his Horse rushing, and falling, stifled him with the weight of his
Armor. Many of the Nobility, together with six Bishops, and ten thousand
Horse, and twelve thousand Foot, are said to have perished in that Battle, in
memory of which slaughter, Solomon, who was present at the fight, caused a
Fabric of Wood to be erected, which remains to this day, and now only serves
as a retreat to the Beasts from the heat of the Sun.

The tenth we went to Wilack, and the next day to Erdeod, where the
Annuntiation of our blessed Lady continues in painting.

The twelfth we came to Valkovar, where in the River Valpus (which abounds with
good Fish) a dead Body came swimming down the Stream.

The next place was Illock, where we saw the Sepulcher of a Son of the King of
Bosnia, together with the ruins of a Monastery.

Hence we past by Petrovaradine to Salankemen, a City and Castle very
pleasantly seated, and proud with old Buildings.

Here (where the Tibiseus is joined to the Danube) we staid till the Couriers
(who often went betwixt the said place and Belgrade) had adjusted all the
Ceremonies for the Ambassadors reception. Signore Giovanni Battista Casanova,
the Emperors new Resident for Turkey, came hither after dinner from Belgrade,
to wait on his Excellency, and discourse about all things, in order to his
entrance and stay in that Town, whither the Ambassador was welcomed by the
roaring of the Cannon, the Volleys of the Soldiers, and Showts of the People,
who flockt in that manner to see us come ashore, that the Town was quite
unfurnished of Inhabitants. Two thousand or more were in Arms at our landing
(for not Belgrade alone, but other little Towns, though with less ostentation,
came out to receive us) but not all fit for service, for some were decrepit,
and others too young, whose Fathers the year before had been drowned in the
fatal River of Raab in Hungary. These wearing the Caps of Janissaries, supplied
their Fathers places, and with their Arms across, and Countenances dejected,
stood among the other Soldiers. And though in appearance they might seem born
for no other end, than to eat up the Fruits of the Earth, yet from their tender
age they have a martial Spirit instilled into them, from which the Nerves and
Sinews of the Ottoman Empire derive their force and vigor.

The Camycan or Governor of the Town, the Capigi-Basha, and the Hassan-Aga of
the Bedchamber to the Sultan (whom the Prime Vizier had ordered to attend the
Ambassador) congratulating his arrival, conducted him to his Tents, which were
pitched on the side of a Hill, not far from the River, where his Excellency
rather chose to remain, than to lodge in the City, whose prospect from
Salankemen is most pleasant and delightful, as is the situation, the place
being washed by two great and famous Rivers, the Sava and the Danube, where the
former soon loses its name.

Our passage from Vienna to Belgrade was with very much ease, accommodation and
delight, for we went down the Stream, and when we came to Land, as in the
afternoons we continually did) the Turks, to show how welcome we were, made us
Arbours and Bowers to secure us from the Sun.

After Supper we walked usually on the Shore, and sometimes strayed a little,
invited and transported with the verdure of the place, and the many pleasant
Objects we met with.

The Boats lying one by one, took up much space of ground, and looked like some
Navy at Anchor, while the Passengers going to and from them, appeared a little
Army, and 'twas pretty to hear them inquire of one another for their Vessels,
which when they had lost, they were forced to use a figure to find, for the
Boats were distinguished by numbers.

'Twas likewise not unpleasant to walk among the Turks and the Greeks, and see
them dress their Meat in the Fields, and sleep about the Fires they had made,
which commonly were great, there being much Wood, and do restraint on any that
cut it.

Belgrade (which is seated at the confluence of the Danube and Sava aforesaid,
and on that side, where it is joined to the Land, has the Castle) was first
besieged by Amurath, and afterward by Mahomet, who took Constantinople, but
the Hungarians and other Christians defending it stoutly, the Turks were
repelled with a considerable loss. At length Solomon, in the beginning of his
reign, finding it unprovided of men, and consequently unfit to hold out a
Siege, by the negligence of Lodowick the young King of Hungary, and the
variance and dissentions of the Nobility, and others, reduced it with much ease
into his power.

The Suburbs (where several Nations, as Greeks, Jews and others inhabit) are
spacious and great, and usually in the Confines of Turkey, the Suburbs are
greater than the Cities themselves.

Here while we remained, his Excellency was visited by the Ambassadors of
Ragusa, which commonly go in pairs to the Ottoman Court. They came on horseback
with forty Attendants, all waiting upon them afoot, two only excepted, and were
quartered in the Town, which with Janissaries we had liberty to see, for it is
unsafe for Strangers to go by themselves, and withal we were commanded to the
contrary, as likewise in cases of affronts from the Turks, to support them with
a Christian Magnanimity and patience.

The Christians of Belgrade, not accustomed to see so many persons together, of
the same faith with them, especially of Quality, were transported with joy at
the Ambassadors arrival, and it is not imaginable with what great affection
they received us in their Houses, particularly a Greek Merchant, Signore Marco
Manicato, who showing us all sort of harmless liberty and freedom, made us
excellent Cheer, and producing his best Wines, did put us in mind of the
ancient merry Greeks, for he drinking like a Fish, and beating a Drum betwixt
whiles with his bare Fingers only, and singing to it, was so pleasant and
jocund, that he flung, as we usually say, the House out of the Windows. His
Drum was remarkable, for 'twas only a huge Earthen-bottle in fashion like a
wide-neck Ale-jug, with the bottom out, whose top was only covered and stopped
with thin Velum or Parchment, and on this, with his Fingers, he made a pleasing
noise. In fine, we were so welcomed, that seeming to wonder at the
unsutableness of his poor and mean House, to his rich Mind and Fortune, he
began (with many cursings and inveighings against the Grand Signior, and his
slavish way of treating his Subjects and Vassals) to tell us, that if he, or
any other Christian, did but seem to increase in any sort of plenty and
magnificence, he straightwayes was sure to be squeezed, overtaxed and rifled
accordingly, without any other reason given, or possibility of relief; though
indeed this Treatment does seem the less cruel, since they are forewarned of
it, and have so very little assurance of their Childrens enjoying any thing
long after their deaths. Yet it is not as many write (and we among the rest did
believe, till otherwise informed on the place) that the Grand Signiors Subjects
are all his Slaves, and can bequeath nothing to their Children, he being the
sole Heir and disposer of all, for albeit in some this be true, yet in others
several Customs are predominant, and reign, and are duly enough observed, some
inheriting half, some more, some less, according to their several Tenures,
Capitulations and Agreements; for when the Grand Signior makes any new
Conquest, those which will stay and duly pay their Tribute, their Children and
Money do run the hazard only of feeling now and then his extrajudicial way of
being squeezed, but otherwise may quietly enjoy all their Lands and Revenues,
though willingly the Sultan cares for no Christian Subjects, but poor
distressed Peasants, such as do feed Cattle, and till and cultivate the Lands,
since no native Turk will hardly ever work, but generally they are Soldiers,
and the most of them Horsemen, for the best sort of Foot, especially in Europe,
are the Christians tributary Children, the Janissaries, who know no other home,
nor have other love, then that of their Emperors greatness.

Their best Horse are the Spahyes, and such of them, especially, who for merit
are rewarded with Lands, which are called Timarrs, and are like our old
Knights-services here: As for example, a Horseman has a Village allotted him,
perhaps some a Farm, some more, and some less in proportion, which they hold
during life, and according to the value of the Lands, are bound to find more or
less Horsemen, to serve at all times, when the Grand Signior wars and calls
upon them. Some have but one, others more, to the number of twenty, and few
above, and a Revenue of twenty or thirty Pound^ Sterling, is reckoned for ^
Timarre. These Tenures are still disposed of from hand to hand, on the deaths
or respective behaviors of his Subjects, not only throughout the greatest part
of his ancientest Dominions, but practiced so likewise where he conquers any
Land on the Christians, or others, where his usual style is, to seize first on
all the Domains of the conquered Prince, and of what belongs to such as are
killed or fled, as also of the Churches Revenues and Royalties, which they in
this manner divide into Timarrs, and the residue, which belongs to such
Christians as will stay, they suffer them to enjoy, and inherit, as I said,
some all, some half, on such several Conditions, as they promised and granted
to them. But their tyrannous Government, together with the laziness and pride
of the Natives, is the reason all their Countries lie desert in a manner, so as
scarce in a days march we met with a Village, and all along the Danube, as we
went to Belgrade, and so in all our Journey to Adrianople, we saw vast Woods
and Fields, with very rich Campagnias, all desolate as it were, or for Pasture
at best, and here and there a little and inconsiderable patch of Corn, since,
as I said before, all the culture is from Christians, who though for the most
part of the Greek Church, yet they, as well as Catholics, in most great Towns
have their Chapels and Churches, and every where free liberty of their
Religion. Jews also, though inferior in number, have the like, which joined to
the Christians, exceed far the number of the Turks, to whom, though many Wives
are allowed, and Concubines not forbidden by their Law, yet few but Grandees
have more than one or two, and likewise few Children, which when the Parent
dies are left to Gods mercy and the Great Turks unmercifulness, since of the
greatest Persons, who are born Turks among them, the Child seldom inherits, the
Wives inconsiderably little, and the Concubines nothing, unless some ready
Money, which is likewise done with privacy.

But to leave as well this Subject at present, as the Town of Belgrade, where I
fear, I have detained the Reader too long, I shall only acquaint him, that as
our coming thither was of great joy to many, so our going away was to many as
sad* especially to the Captives of Austria, who deploring their slavish
condition, could not hope for any liberty and redemption, till at the
Ambassadors return from Constantinople, which by his mediation, and the great
liberality of the Province of Austria* was afterward very happily effected.
But on Midsummer-day, the Feast of Saint John Baptist, the Turks on the
contrary side, in memory of the Sacrifice of Abraham, expressed extraordinary
joy, by the discharge of the Guns from the Castle, which were answered by the
Volleys of the Soldiers.

In the mean time the Ambassador had advice from Adrianople, that the Grand
Vizier made extraordinary preparations for his Excellencies entertainment, so
as if he made too much haste, he could not have so splendid a reception. The
Ambassador therefore was to make easy Journeys, which easily was granted and
consented unto.

The six and twentieth of June, with above two hundred Wagons, each Wagon
having three, and four Horses some, besides Saddlehorses for many, we departed
from Belgrade to Isarchich, where we lost the pleasant sight of the Danube. The
Ambassador had four Coaches with six Horses apiece, one of which he rode in
himself, with my Lord and Count Herberstein. In the second and third was his
Excellencies Nephew my Lord Hay, with his Chaplain and others, and the fourth,
which was the richest, and carried no body in it, was presented at Adrianople
to the Emperor of Turkey.

The rest of the Ambassadors Comrades and Retinue had generally Wagons for
themselves, their Beds and their Baggage, and usually in the mornings about one
of the Clock, the Trumpets gave us notice to be stirring, which commonly
sounded twice, but the first time was preparatory, and only in order to the
fitting of the Wagons, and packing up of things against the second sounding,
at what time we marched by Torch-light, to decline the great heats, and in case
any Wagons chanced to break on the way, or the Horses did tire, the
Commissaries appointed for that purpose, supplied all defects in that kind, so
as sooner or later we all met together at the general Rendezvous, which was
still before noon, but earlier or later, as the Conacks or Journeys were longer
or shorter.

We had not our Quarters in Villages or Towns, but usually in the Fields, in
some Plain, and always near Fountains or Brooks, where before we arrived the
Tents were still pitched, and the Cooks very busy in getting Dinner ready, who
had elbow-room enough, for the Campagnia was their Kitchen.

In the afternoon the Clerk of the Kitchen, with the Quartermaster and part of
the Cooks (for some staid behind to get Supper ready) departed before, to have
all things in order against the next day, so that as we advanced, we still were
provided of what the place afforded. And indeed for us that traveled in
Wagons, we had the greatest ease, and the best accommodation imaginable such a
Journey could administer, for we went into our Beds after Supper, and marched
in that posture till we came to our Quarters the following day, and then only
rose and made our selves ready.

After dinner some reposed in their Tents, while others played at Tables or
Cards, and many in the evenings would walk up and down, and visit the Turks,
and particularly our Commissary, who was a civil Person.

On the eight and twentieth we came to Colar, from whence we saw Samandria,
once the famous Metropolis of Servia, and a Colony of the Romans, but now very
ruinous. Some remains are yet there of a little Chapel dedicated to our Lady,
and the Catholics the Inhabitants are as celebrated for their poverty and
constancy in Religion, as the place was renowned heretofore for its Riches and
Glory. Here we staid the next day, and his Excellency entertained at dinner
Hassan-Aga the Commissary.

The next place was Hassan-Basha-Palanka, a Fortress, or rather a retreat from
the incursions of Horse, which consists of tall Poles only lathed and mudded,
the Houses within being nothing but Smoke and Cow Dung without.

The first of July (for the last of June was spent in repose, and the
Commissary gave his Excellency a Dinner dressed after the fashion of the Turks)
we came to Bodauzin, and the next day to Jogada, a place naturally pleasant and
fit for delights, for it abounded with Fountains, which in that hot season of
the year were of great refreshment to us. Allured with this sweetness, we
tarried here two days, and withal because 'twas said to be the half way
between Vienna and Constantinople. During our stay here, the Commissary invited
the Ambassador, and the Cavaliers with him, to a House very pleasantly seated,
where he gave them a Collation, and while they were at Table, his Excellencies
Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, transported the Turks; but one of them, a
Cook of the Commissaries, was handled more roughly for running away, for he was
drubb'd most severely, and on his bare feet received two hundred strokes with a
Stick, as big and shaped like that we play at Goff with, in so much that he was
black in the Face, and lolling out his Tongue, expired in a manner, but
afterward recovered.

From Jogada, on a fine and strong wooden Bridge, we passed the River Morava,
which separates Servia from Bulgaria.

The next place was Baraizin, then Pellacderesi, and afterward Aleschinti,
where in a little Brook, and on the Grass thereabout, we saw many Tortoises,
and caught about a hundred.

At Nissa (which was once an Episcopal, but is now a small Town) we arrived on
the seventh, and staid the next day. Here the Courier of Vienna overtook us,
and brought joyful Letters out of Christendom, which not only refreshed us with
the memory of our Friends and Alliances there, but renewed too our desires of
returning to them.

Coitina, a place three Leagues distant from Nissa, received us next, wherein
excellent Baths a little out of the Road, many washed themselves, as the Turks
often do, who, most of all the Elements, are lovers of Water, which serves, as
they imagine, as well for the purifying and cleansing of the Soul as the Body,
so as they wash often, and have Fountains in their Mosches, which as frequently
they repair to as they pray.

On the tenth Musan-Basha-Palanka was our Station, where after a new fashion
the Bulgarian Women welcomed us, who meeting us, strewn little bits of Butter
and Salt on the way, presaging and wishing thereby, a prosperity to our Journey
and Affairs.

On the eleventh we came to Sackerkoi, where we staid the next day. Here by
reason of the Heats, the change of Diet and Air, above forty were sick, and
several strangely recovering, some six and twenty died, among whom was the
Baron of Kornpsiel.

Here the Governor of the place invited the Ambassador, together with the
Cavaliers, and Hassan-Basha the Commissary to dinner. The Dukes of Villack had
their residence here, where yet three Christian Churches remain; in one of
which, (appertaining heretofore to the Dominicans) over the Tomb of the said
Dukes, the Statue of a Man at full length, is yet to be seen, and at the Foot
of the Duke, a Wheel with a Crescent, where is written as follows,

Hic est Sepultus Illustris Dominus Laurentius Dux de Villack, Filius olim
Serenissimi Domini Nicolai Regis Bosniae cum Consorte sua Catharina, Anno 1500.
On the fifteenth we got to Sophia, the Capital City of Bulgaria, where the
Beglerbeg, or Viceroy of Greece most ordinarily resides, by reason whereof
it is most of all inhabited by Turks. The Town has no Walls, yet a thousand
Horsemen met us on the way, and when we entered into the place, the Townsmen
stood in Ranks in their Arms, distinguished by their Trades in the Streets, as
we passed along, but they had no great Guns, for Towns unwalled have none.

During our stay here, while a Courier was dispatched to Vienna, the Bishop of
the place changing his Habit, waited on his Excellency, and showed us the
Church, which was without the Town, which is said to have been built above
fourteen hundred years.

After two days repose we departed, and quitting the Plain of Sophia,
discovered Mount Rodope, where Antiquity will have it, that Orpheus played so
sweetly on his Harp. On the top of this Mountain seven Springs issue forth,
which those of the Country, do call to this day, the seven Fountains of
Orpheus, they imagining that the Tears which he shed for Eurydice his Wife gave
beginning to those Sources. This said Mountain and Mount Haemus, which are
joined together, separate Bulgaria from Romania, called anciently Thrace, and
one of the six Provinces, which in the Romans time was comprised under the
common name of Dacia. The other five are Moldavia, Transylvania, Raslia,
Walachia and Servia. These Daci, or Davi, for so they are called, gave (...)
that Proverb, Da^us sum non Aedipus.

The People of Bulgaria have had many Revolutions, and almost beyond the
Example of any other Country. The Triballi were the first, who worsted King
Philip of Macedon, and made him surrender the Mares he had plundered out of
Scythia, for a breed for his Thessalian Horses. Secondly the Maesi, Thirdly the
Daci. Fourthly the Romans. The Goths were the fifth. The Slavonians the sixth.
The Bulgarians the seventh. The Grecians the eighth, and the Turks the ninth:
Yet still it retains the name of Bulgaria, from the Volgarians, who came from
the River Volga, and by the change of V into B are called Bulgarians, whose
Metropolis, called formerly Tibiscum, is known now, as I intimated before, by
the name of Sophia, from a Church, which Justinian the Emperor did here
dedicate to Sancta Sophia.

As for Thrace in general, before the Greeks possessed and planted it, the
Nation was as barbarous as any in the World. They lamented the Births of their
Children, and sang at their Deaths, yet were always a fighting People, and
never fully subdued till the Romans undertook them.

On the eighteenth we came to Kupra-Basha, the next day to Ictiman, and the
twentieth to Kisterfent by a very stony way.

Sakurambeg was next, in an open and fertile Country, whence passing the day
following through Dartarbastek, we arrived at Philippopolis.

This City, called formerly Peneropolis, and afterward Philippopolis by Philip
of Macedon that repaired it, is seated near a Plain of a very great extent, and
washed by the celebrated River of Hebrus, now called Marissa, into which the
Taponiza and Caludris do empty themselves. The said Hebrus is famous for the
very frequent mentions the Poets make of it, particularly for Orpheus, who
discontented in that manner, for the loss of Eurydice his Wife, against the
whole Sex, introduced the practice of Masculine Venery, for which the Ciconian
Matrons tore him in pieces, and threw his Limbs into the River.

Among other things at Philippopolis, they showed us a little Church on a hill,
which was dedicated to Saint Paul, and it is very memorable, that but three
Leagues from hence many thousands of People are spread up and down in the
Villages and Towns, which are called Paulini.

This place has an old Tower, and in it a Clock, which seemed the stranger to
us, since in this vast and barbarous Country we saw none before.

Not far from the City, on an eminent Mountain, is a very great Convent of
Monks of the Grecian Religion, in whose Church, called Saint George, our
Mohammedan Commissary caused the Body of Baron Kornpfeil to be buried, which the
Lord Hay, and the Secretary of the Embassy attended to the Grave, but the rest
of the dead were interred near the Banks of the River.

The Wine of Philippopolis is as cheap as it is excellent, for it is in great
abundance thereabouts, and preserved in Vessels of an extraordinary greatness,
which as I admired, so I wondered at the low and little Doors of their Houses,
till they told me, that they had them so on purpose, to hinder the Turks from
bringing in their Horses, and turning their Dwellings into Stables. And I
likewise observed, when we knocked at any Door, to taste and buy Wines, the
People within were still very shy to admit us, till they first had explored
what Company we were in, so fearful they are of the Turks, from whom they are
subject to many affronts, especially when in Wine.

From Philippopolis we went to Papasli, whose Moschee and Caravansaria (the Inn
in Turkey as well for Beasts as Men, for Men and their Horses are under the same
Roof) was built by the Progenitour of the present Grand Vizier.

The next day we came to Kiral, and the third to a great Plain, where, because
we wanted Water, we went out of the way, till we came to a Fountain. Here
malignant Fevers, bloody Fluxes, and other dire Diseases began to reign again,
which some of the Retinue had caught and contracted, by visiting infectious
Cottages, as also by eating much Fruit, and drinking Wine cooled excessively in
Snow, which the Turks had procured, but one only dyed.

Here likewise, while the Priest was at Mass, three Bulgarians brought two
Bears and a Cub, which were taught to dance and wrestle at the sound of a
Cymball, which while some unadvisedly minded more than their Prayers, the
Basha, that observed it, was displeased in that manner, that he commanded them
to be beaten away.

On the seven and twentieth we arrived at Ormandli, where we saw a Moschee, a
Caravansaria, and a handsome Stone Bridge.

The next place was Mustapha-Basha-Cupri, where there is a Royal Hau, or
Caravansaria, which I thought to describe in my return from Constantinople, for
in our passage thither we say without the Towns, in the open Fields in Tents,
or in Wagons. But this Structure being Regal, and the best I have seen, I
think it now best to acquaint the Reader with it, who may easily fancy a
spacious Oval Court, and opposite to the Gate that leads in, a high and stately
Porch, on both sides of which, a Building as vast, as magnificently covered
with Lead, is presented to the eye. It Is supported by four and twenty Pillars
of Marble, which are of that bigness, they cannot be fathomed, and resembles
two huge Barns joined together, as aforesaid. Within on each hand, besides the
main Wall (where the light comes in at several little Slits) is a Wall two
Cubits high, and as broad, and about some ten foot distance from each other,
several Chimneys are erected for the service of Passengers, as well to dress
their Meat, as to warm them in the Winter. The said Wall serves for Bedsteads,
for Tables, Stools and other Conveniences, which the common Inns in
Christendom afford. There are no Partitions, but all things clear and obvious
to others* when you eat or lie down; and the same Roof is for Camels and
Horses, as I said said before, which are tied to Rings fastened to Posts.

It Is easily to be imagined what sleep and repose the weary Traveller may
expect, and what smells and what noises he must be subject to.

At the Gate, Hay and Barley (for I saw no Oats in Turkey) and Wood too are
commonly sold, but the provision for the Horses is ordinarily the best, for
besides ill Bread, and Wine (which is usually good) if the Travelers meet with
any Flesh or Fish, they must dress it themselves, if they have no Servants with
them.

These are the Inns in Turkey, and the place takes the name from Caravana, which
is a Company that travel together, for it is not safe in Turkey to travel alone.

This place is likewise famous for an excellent Bridge of white Stones, which
resembles that of Ratisbone, or Prague, as well for the breadth as the length.
Hither Cavalier Simon A Rheningen, who had been the Emperors Resident
seventeen years in Constantinople, came to wait on the Ambassador, who
received him with all kindness and respect, by whom, when his Excellency had
gladly been informed, the Grand Signior was at Adrianople, preparation was made
for our departure; but before we went hence, Hassan-Basha, our Commissaries Son
(a Youth of good mien, and of a comely Countenance) came to wait on his Father,
who sent him after dinner to kiss his Excellencies Hands, who treated him
courteously, and gave him a Watch of good value.

In the morning betimes we marched away, and the same day arrived in a
Campagnia, within two hours of Adrianople, where the Ambassador continued two
days in his Tents, which were pitched near the Banks of the River Hebrus
aforesaid.

On the first of August, the glorious and anniversary day of the Battle of
Saint Gotard, where the pride of the Ottoman Scepter was depressed in some
measure, by the slaughter of above twelve thousand Men of the Flower of the
Army, the Ambassador, in a very solemn manner, past through the Turkish Camp
(the Army, to the number of thirty thousand, lying then near the City in Tents)
toward Adrianople in the following order.

The Quartermaster, with two of the Turkish Attendants, preceded, and was
followed by the Gentleman of the Horse to the Ambassador, with his
Excellencies led Horses. The Pages were next, and after them eight
Trumpetters, with their Trumpets of Silver, but they were not to sound them,
and the Kettle-drum was as silent. Signore Lelio de Luca, the Ambassadors
Steward, with the Squadron of his Excellencies Servants, and those of the
Cavaliers his Comrades followed next, to whom two hundred Chiauses were added,
and among them many Sons of the better sort of Turks. Several Persons of Honor
of several Nations went next, as Baron Fin, Baron Coronini, the Baron de Rech,
the Lord Hay, Marquis Chasteauvieux, the Baron of Funffkerken, the Marquis
Pecori, Marquis Durazzo, the Duke of Holstein incognito, and the Honorable
Edward Howard of Norfolk. Then the Banner of the Embassy very richly
embroidered, was carried by Count Sterhaimb, which (though rouled up, the
arrogance of that Monarchy permitting no Potentates Colors to be displayed
before the Sultan) yet on one side our Lady trampling on the Head of the
Dragon, and on the other the Imperial Eagle were sufficiently discovered. On
Count Sterhaimbs right hand my Lord rode, and the Earl of Herberstein on his
left. The Emperors Resident was next with a Train of his Servants, then the
Ambassadors Guard, and his Excellency himself, whose venerable Beard joined to
his tall Stature, together with his very rich Habit, and Cap, where he wore a
rare Feather of Herons beset with noble Diamonds, allured the Spectators, and
drew their Eyes upon him. On the right hand of his Excellency rode the
Chiaus-Basha, the Marshal of the Court, and the Aga of the Spahyes on the left.
Signore Panniotti a Grecian, and Interpreter to both the Emperors, came behind
with the Secretary of the Embassy, John Frederick Metzger, Doctor of the Civil
Law, and Signore Wachina the Ambassadors private Interpreter. On both sides
his Excellency, a hundred Janissaries attended, to keep off the People. Two
hundred Spahys with their Coats of Mail, Quivers and Lances followed in the
Rear, and behind them the Ambassadors Litter, with four Coaches with six
Horses apiece: And lastly, a hundred and ninety Wagons with the Baggage.

In this manner we passed to the City of Adrianople, through the midst of the
Ottoman Camp, by the Grand Visiers Tent, and near the Serraglio, while the
Grandees of the Court stood admiring and gazing on the pomp of this Embassy,
which rather represented the Glory and Triumph of the Emperor of the West,
then a Salutation and an Address to the Monarch of the East. And afterward we
heard, that the Sultan himself, who, together with his Mother, his Wife, and
two Brothers, sat behind a thin Curtain, and with joy and admiration was a
Spectator like others, and observed all things curiously, said, That in all
kinds he had never seen the like.

It was noon e're we came to our Quarters, which were in the Suburbs on the
other side of the Town, and how gladly we got thither, the Reader may imagine,
since the Heats were so excessive, we could hardly endure them.

The next day the Grand Vizier sent his Excellency a Present, of several sorts
of Fruits, to the number of thirty Baskets; to the bringers of which, the
Ambassador commanded thirty Crowns to be given. Some other few days were
spent in receiving and giving reciprocal Complements.

The City of Adrianople (called anciently Oreste) is partly seated on the top,
and partly on the descent of a Hill, on that side, where the Rivers Tunza and
Harda loose their names in the Marissa. It Is the best, and most considerable
Town between Strigonium and Constantinople, the Buildings whereof are as good
as any other in Turkey, and the Air more sweet and temperate than any in Romania.

On the sixth his Excellency was conducted by the Chiaus-Basha to the Grand
Visiers Tent, where after the Ceremonies performed on each side, the
Ambassador delivered him the Emperors Letters, which had this Address:
Strenuo and magnifico viro, Achmet Bassa Serenissimi Turcarum Imperatoris
supremo Vezirio sincere nobis dilecto. His Excellency likewise presented him
from the Emperor, with Gifts of a very great value, and the Grand Vizier gave
him a Caftan lined with Sables, to the worth of a thousand Dollars, as also the
Horse and Furniture he had lent him, when his Excellency made his entrance into
Adrianople. A hundred Caftans were likewise then distributed among the
Ambassadors Comrades, and others of the Retinue.

Here we had the news, that part of the Serraglio at Constantinople was burnt,
and above two hundred Houses consumed, in so much that a little before the
Queen Mother and the Sultana returned in haste thither. And now since the
season of the year put the Sultan in mind of visiting his Maritine Castles (a
thing he had designed before) the Ambassadors Audience was hastened.

On the eleventh a hundred Chiauses and two hundred Janissaries, very early in
the morning, came to wait on the Ambassador, and conduct him to the Serraglio,
and the Grand Vizier, as formerly, sent Horses accordingly, so as we marched
thither in a very solemn manner. In the inward Court his Excellency alighting,
was ushered into the Divan (the place where the Visiers meet three times a week
to do justice) here six of them (the Arbiters and disposers of all things in
Asia and Europe) expected his arrival, and the Grand Vizier met him, and
courteously receiving him, made him sit in a rich Chair. Then that the pomp and
ostentation of the Ottoman Greatness might more visibly appear, he caused the
sum of three hundred and seventy five thousand Dollars, to be distributed
before us, among the Soldiers and Officers of the Court, (the Pay for three
months) which they usually receive on the days the Grand Signior gives
Audience to Ambassadors.

The Janissaries stood unarmed in a row, with their Arms across and their Faces
downward, but toward the Divan, and over against them fifteen little
Fieldpieces of Brass. On the other side were the Spahys; and as the several
Captains were called by a List, some of that Troop or Company followed them, to
receive their Pay in red Leather-purses (each Purse containing five hundred
Dollars) which they threw on their Shoulders, and carried away in that manner.

This lasted near two hours, and then Dinner followed.

At the first Table was the Ambassador, with the Resident, the Grand Vizier,
and another of great Quality. The Cavaliers were disposed here and there at
other Tables, with the other Visiers. The rest of the Retinue sat like Taylers
on the Ground, where Skins of red Leather were spread in the nature of Carpets,
where the Meat was set thick. The greatest pomp of the Dishes, besides Flesh
and Fish, were things made of Sugar, of Musk and Ambergreece, and the Drink was
only Water and Sherbett, but the Attendants finely clad, and very numerous.

While we were at dinner, the Presents from the Emperor (which were in great
abundance, and inestimable in a manner) were carried by the Turks through the
Court, that the People might see them, and all Curiosities be satisfied, as
well with the number as the variety of the Gifts.

Dinner being ended, and forty Caftans distributed, (without which no access to
the Sultan, who gave fewer than the Grand* Vizier his Minister) the
Capigi-Basha informed the Visiers, the Grand Signior was ready for the
Audience, who immediately waited on him, and after their low reverences stood
about him in their places* Then the Ambassador was led and ushered in, and the
Cavaliers soon after introduced in order, between two of the Turks of good
Quality; and no sooner were admitted, and had made their Obeissances, but
dismissed as soon.

The Persons that had admittance, were the Residents, the Cavaliers A
Renninghen, and Casanova, my Lord, Count Herberstein, the Marquisses Durazzo,
and Pecori, the Honorable Edward Howard of Norfolk, Count Sterhaimb, the
Barons of Binnendorff, Funffkercken, Hay, Coro^ini, Fin, Vernavel, and Ree^,
together with the S^cre^ and Interpreter of the Embassy.

All being retired and gone, but the Ambassador, the Resident, and the
Interpreter, this last presented the Emperors Letters to the Ambassador, and
he to the Sultan, who resplendent and glittering with his Gold and his Gems
(which no where are fixed, but carried by Camels wheresoever he goes) looked
rather like one from a Bed than a Throne. After the Complements on the part of
the Emperor, the public and private Causes of the Embassy were briefly
recited. The Sultan replied, he was glad to hear of the Emperors Health, and
bad the Ambassador welcome. As to what might conduce to the happiness of both
Empires, he said very little, but bad the Ambassador go to Constantinople,
whence he would not long be absent, his Maritime Expedition being over, after
which the Ambassador (who alone kissed the Hem of his Garment) repeating his
Obeissances, returned to his Quarters.

On the thirteenth his Excellency sent the Gentleman of his Horse, to present
the Grand Signior with a Noble and Rich Coach, together with seven Neopolitan
Horses, and four Irish Greyhounds.

On the sixteenth the Grand Vizier entertained the Ambassador, and the
Cavaliers with him, at a Dinner, in a Palace without the City, belonging to the
Mufti, who is as a Pope, or High Priest to the Turks* and was also there.

When they had dined, a hundred Turks well mounted and clad, for the
divertisement of his Excellency, showed rare Feats of Horsemanship, darting
Staves at one another, with such vigor and agility, that 'twas a kind of
wonder, how they possibly could decline them, though two or three were
dangerously hurt, if not killed.

On the three and twentieth the Grand Signior came out of the Serraglio with
great pomp and state, and passed through the City to his Tent in the Camp, in
order to his motion toward Gallipolis, but staid there some days, by reason
of the Heats, not returning into the Serraglio, unless by disguize, or in the
night, as the fashion is there, when he publicly comes forth, in order to any
Progress or Journey.

During our stay at Adrianople, which was near a month, I had the opportunity
of conversing with an Italian Renegado, who acted there the part of a
Physician. By his and others help on the place, I had the information of some
things, which usually to Strangers are not so clear and obvious*

And having now some leisure, I shall prosecute the Relation I left off at
Belgrade.

And first of the Rigor of the Turks.

The Mahometans are severe in their Punishments, and for the least Fault beat
commonly the Offenders on the Soles of their Feet, sometimes on the Belly, and
Buttocks, and other parts of the Body, which is used most to Janissaries, from
which the best and greatest amongst them are hardly exempt, but when they pay
the forfeiture with their Heads.

For at Mahomet Agas Tent, who was our Conductor, at a small Town between Buda
and Belgrade, because the Captain of the Castle, who commanded in chief in that
and many other petty Places adjacent, came not early enough to pay him his
Respects, as soon as he arrived, he was by our Conductor aforesaid, as he sat
cross-legg'd, after a little rubbing in Turkish, kicked down with a Foot on his
Breast, and so lying on his Back, his Legs (as the custom is there, which I
wrote of before) were straightwayes held up, till our Aga, in six or seven
Blows, broak the biggest end of a great and strong Stick on his Feet, which was
done in a trice, e're my Lord (who was in the Tent with the choleric Aga)
could rise up, and catch him by the Arm, to hinder him from striking any more;
for his Lordship was struck with compassion, to behold a reverend old Man of
seventy years of age, with a long and milk white Beard to his Girdle, so
treated and used; and had not my Lord tugged hard, and been of some credit with
the Aga, he swore he would have given him at least threescore Blows, and bad
the poor old Governor thank only my Lord for his Clemency. Yet as soon as e're
'twas over, he sat down again with the rest in the Tent, and had Coffee given
to him, which by reason of his smarting, he seeming not so readily to drink,
and muttering only, that in almost sixty years, that he had served the Grand
Signior, he had not been beaten before; had not my Lord, with others there
present, entreated for him, he had been put in Chains, and sent away that
evening to the Vizier of Buda, who, as they affirmed, would have caused his
Head to be quickly stricken off, without hearing him speak, or examining the
matter.

The like or worse treatment was intended to the Cadis of the Place, for
having, like the Captain aforesaid, deferred his duty; but he hearing, it
seems, of the others rude fate, fled away, and lay concealed all night in the
Vineyards, not returning to his Station till after our departure. This Cadis is
a Judge in all respective places, as well of civil Persons as Affairs, and has
as great a Power in all legal matters, as the Governor in military, they two
being the Sharers and Arbiters of all things within their Jurisdiction and
Verge, and only accountable to the next Vizier or Basha, whose Government it
lies under; and yet notwithstanding our Commissary aforesaid, so deputed by the
Vizier of Buda, bore all along the journey such absolute authority, as I said,
over all such Persons in every place we passed.

Another Example occurs to my Memory, while we actually resided at Adrianople.

It Is the fashion in the Ottoman Serraglio, when the Sultan goes publicly
abroad, to give a gracious Nod to the Officers of his Court, for which the
Chiaus-Basha, in the name of the rest, gives thanks to his Majesty, and cries
out alowd, Long live our Emperor, the King, etc. The said Chiaus-Basha, when
the Sultan went into the Camp near the City of Adrianople, forgetting his duty,
or employed about some business, neglected or omitted the usual Ceremonies, his
Princes gracious Nod obliged him to. The Emperor dissembled it then, but
arriving at the Camp, informed the Grand Vizier of the fault, who hastening to
his Tent, caused the Instruments to be brought, where the Feet of Offenders are
put in and beaten. While all the great Officers, which standing round about,
beheld one another (for none was yet designed for the punishment) were guessing
at the Nocent: The Chiaus-Basha was commanded to lie down, and had a hundred
Blows on the Soles of his Feet, which no sooner were over, and he recovering
his Legs, but he fell down at the Grand Visiers Feet, endeavoring to kiss his
Vest, and be restored to his Favor. But the Grand Vizier raging, turned his
Back upon him, and calling him Villain, bad him ever for the future to be
carefuller of his duty, for otherwise he would order him to be strangled. The
Wretch endured this usage with patience, and the next day they were both again
at Court, each one in his Office, as if nothing the day before had at all
intervened.

For the Government of their Provinces, it is always triennial, and ordinarily
the Grand Signior sends Persons from the Court, who have seen no other light
than that of the Serraglio, and yet when the Emperor bestows a charge on any,
they say, at the same time, God gives him understanding and conduct to exercise
and manage the same.

The Grandees, when out of the Field, lead luxurious and lazy lives, passing
most their time in eating and debauchery, the worst of which Sodomy is so
frequent among them, as when it is not forced, it is hardly looked upon as a Vice.

For their Military Discipline in general, it is a mere confusion, and supplied
alone by force. And as for their Forts, they are naked and pitiful Works, for
they repair nothing, except peradventure some frontier Town or Castle, and
those but poorly neither, for unless by the help of Renegadoes (of which,
though they have of all Nations, yet (...) of any note, or consi(...)) they
know not how well to go about to do it.

The like want of care is observed in their Houses, and Gardens, and all sorts
of Buildings (except the public Works) which we may the less wonder to see go
to ruin, in regard, as I told you before, almost all look no farther, then for
their own Lives, which depend upon the Malice or Caprise of the respective
Governors; nay, should they make the least ostentation and pomp of being rich
(as I intimated before) straight that is Crime enough to cut off their Heads,
and confiscate their Estates, as it often arrives to some wealthy Basha or
Vizier, whose Head is cut off by a couple of Chiauses, or Messengers, in his
own House or Tent, though he have a hundred Servants about him, nay, perhaps
many thousands of Soldiers in his view, and under his command.

Many of their Villages are built like Soldiers Huts, few or none of the
Houses being covered with Tile, and the Cow-houses commonly in England much
sweeter and cleanlier. The Village Walls resemble those in Hungary, but are
something worse, being only long Stakes thrust into the Ground, and crossed
through like Basket-work, and so dawbed all over on both sides with Mud and
Dirt.

But their public Buildings, as Garavansarias or Hanes, as also their Baths,
Bridges, Causies and Fountains, which almost all the way, in every days
journey we met with, are very stately things, their Religion directs them to
make, and the more easily great Persons persuade themselves to, in regard they
know not sometimes which way to dispose of their Riches when they dye, having
little assurance, that other dispositions will stand good and take place.

Wherefore to eternize their Memories here, they make often vast expenses of
this kind, and endow them with perpetual Revenues, for the public good of
Passengers. Nay, some out of particular Devotion and Charity, give Meat to Dogs
and Birds, causing holes to be made on their Grave-stones and Monuments, as
Receptacles of Water for the Fowls of the Air, some of which, as particularly
Turtles, are so tame and so foolish (being seldom shot at, or molested by the
Turks) as I have seen in the Journey, when some of the Company had shot and
killed several from a Tree, the others would sit still unconcerned, and the
same Bird, if missed at first, would commonly sit still to be afterward killed.

This privilege and liberty of shooting on the way was not indulged to us,
because we were Strangers, and of another Faith, but as being of the
Ambassadors Train, whose Errand and Business, in that it related to Peace and
Commerce, which then was very grateful to the Turks, gave us all sort of
harmless conversation and freedom, and generally made them civil and obliging
to us, since never any Embassy was so pompous and glorious, nor any Ambassador
so welcome, as the ensuing Relation will instance to the Reader.

The Hungarians averse to the Peace with the Turks, in regard his Imperial
Majesty (of whom they had desired, that one of their own Nation might be joined
with Count Lesley in the Embassy into Turkey) had denied their request, the
Hussars of Filleck, with several of the neighboring Inhabitants, uniting
themselves to the number of six hundred, made an Incursion thirty Leagues into
the Country, and plundering all the Villages about Waia, the very day before
the Ambassador arrived there, returned with a considerable Booty.

This insolency of the Hungarians, in a time of Peace and amity, and so near
the Ambassador (whom they had a design to involve in some Labyrinth of trouble
and affront) was as highly resented by his Excellency as the Turks, who
(considering the enormity of the Fact) as they made very just, and very
grievous Complaints to the Ambassador, so they might by requiring
satisfaction, in all probability, have lessened their Civilities to his Person;
yet they ceased not to treat him with all respect and honor, and the Governor
of the Place sent his Excellency a Present of several sorts of Provision. But
many of the Commonalty were as clownish and ignorant, as the better sort were
courteous; for when on the Road we asked by an Interpreter, how far, or how many
hours journey it was to such a place, they knew not what an Hour or Mile meant.
It Is true, that near the Confines of Hungary they have some great Clocks, else
generally they measure the day by their several times of praying and eating,
which is sooner or later, as the Days and Nights lengthen or decrease.

At dinner time often, as we traveled along, they would come and stand round
about the Table, and wonder at our Hats (which many carried with them) our
Fans, Gloves, etc. and some among them bolder than the rest, with civil mien
enough, would take them up into their hands, when laid aside by us, to feel and
put them on. The ordinary sort also, when we played at Cards or Tables, would
gaze, and stand so near about the Table, that often we were forced to becken to
the Janissaries, to make them stand off, who, on the least sign of displeasure,
would baste them like Dogs, as they served an Arabian, who being a Bravo
amongst them, and marching with a Spear, thrust through his naked Body on
purpose, with several Arrows pierced through the flesh of both Arms, for not
making haste enough out of the way, as we passed along, was cruelly cudgelled
and banged by a Janizary, sometimes on the Back, and sometimes on his Sides,
and even the Arrows or Spear as it lighted, without the least regard to the
posture he was in, which to us, unacquainted with Spectacles of that nature,
was pitiful and compassionate, as others were bizarre and extravagant,
particularly those of the Horsemen, some having huge Wings on their Backs, and
others odd* and various kinds of Feathers on their Heads, with fantastical
Caps, and other strange marks, to show how many Christians they had killed.

The Foot too, to demonstrate their Actions in the Wars, are distinguished from
the rest, by their several sorts of Dresses and Caps, of many shapes and
colors, which they animate one another to deserve, by persuading themselves,
that he, who dies fighting in the Field against the Christians, gains Paradise
presently, a place (as they describe it) most suitable to their sensual delights.

We met with very few that are literate, and those which are so, reap little
satisfaction by their reading, since they have no printed Books.

But I cannot omit the cleanliness of the Turks, who, as they had occasion to*
urine, still kneeled with one Knee at the least on the Ground, and afterward
washed their Hands, as they do still before and after their eating, which with
them is as often as their Prayers, four or five times a day, for though at
several hours they do eat, yet the chief time with them is about ten of the
Clock in the Morning, when they they usually feast best; as when our Conductor
entertained and treated the Ambassador, which was in this manner.

First, He rose up when his Excellency came into the Tent, and bidding him
welcome, and the Cavaliers with him, sat down again with them, who had each a
Cushion on the Ground, the Ambassador alone having two, to raise him a little
higher, for his Legs were not so pliable in sitting Tayler-wise like the rest,
yet he would not use a Chair, though they offered him one, he being then
incognito, and that no time of ceremony.

When they were thus set a little, two Pages of the Commissary (tall Fellows,
and forty years old) came to each of the Guests, and covering their Heads and
Faces with a fine striped Taffaty, which they held over them, continued it so,
till another with a Silver Incense had perfumed and smoked their Faces and
Heads.

That done, and the Incense removed, another Silk Cloth was laid cross the Lap
and the Knees of the Guests, whom another great Page brought Rose Water to,
with which they washed their Faces and Beards.

When that was taken away, a Linnen-cloath was laid, as the other, on their
Knees, and Coffee given to them.

After this they brought Sherbett, which is pleasant enough, when perfumed with
Ambergris, and made of several Juyces of Fruits, according to the Season,
which is mixed and dissolved in Water, and then brought to drink.

And lastly, Tobacco (unless in or near the Court, where it is prohibited) is
offered those that like it, when commonly the Discourse does begin.

When Dinner time approached, they all first washed as they sat, then they
spread in the middle, about the upper end of the Tent, a round
Leather-table-cloath on the Ground, the Floor being almost all over (especially
at the head of the Tent, and round the sides of it) ever covered with Carpets.

To this Table they removed, and sat round as many as could, which is seldom
above ten, on the middle of which is set first a Foot, and then a round Table,
which is commonly of Pewter or Tin (for the Grand Signior only uses Gold,
though forbidden by their Law) and raised about two handfuls high, in shape
(though much bigger) like our Assiets or Stands. In the middle of this Table is
set (and never but one at once) a great round Basin of the same Metal, filled
full of Meat, the first being ever of tender roasted Mutton, or the like, cut
all in joints and bits, which often on great Days, and Feasts, is smoaked with
Perfumes e're it comes to the Table.

The boiled Meats are also so tender, as with ease they may be pulled in
pieces, since Knives are never used at Meals.

Many Soops of Milks and Spoon-meats are served in afterward, which with long
Wooden-spoons, or Ovalladles rather, they reach.

Brown Bread is cut beforehand, and in long Slices thrown on the Table, both to
eat and serve for Trenchers, on which they gave and put away their Bones, as
they pleased, or flung them on the Table, as the Turks used to do, and fresh
Bread was as frequently given as demanded, though the Turks eat commonly their
Trenchers.

Sherbetts are also given as often as called for, and not as some write, only
once at the end of the Dinner, which being now over, it is fit I should rise and
be gone.

On the seven and twentieth of August, very early in the morning, we departed
from Adrianople, and passing the River Hebrus, over a great and long Bridge,
marched by the Turkish Camp, the Trumpets all sounding, and the Kettledrum
beating by his Excellencies command.

About noon we arrived a Hapsa, and the next day a Baba, a pretty little Town.

The next place was Borgas, and afterward Caristeran, near which in a
Campagnia, by a fine little Stream, we took up our Quarters.

On the last of the Month we came to Chiurlu, and the first of September to
Simenly, a very poor Village.

The next day betimes we got to Selivrea, called formerly Selymbria, or the
City of Selys, for Eria in the old Thracian Language does signify a City,
other Cities of Thrace having the like termination, as Olymbria and Mesembria.

The Town is very pleasant, being seated on a Hill, and by the Seaside, where
usually (when the Wind is propitious) Boats are hired ^or Constantinople.

From hence we removed to Ponte grande, where we passed four stone-bridges,
with^n a little distance of each other, which crossed an arm of the Sea.

Ponte Picciolo received us ^ext, where we met with fresh occasions of joy, for
^ere the long-look'd for Rodolphus, the Courier from Vienna overtook us, and
brought welcome Letters out of Christendom.

Our last Station but one was within two hours journey of Constantinople, where
we staid two days in Tents, while all things were prepared for our advance to
that City; in order to which, the same day we removed, my Lord of Winchelsea,
his Majesty's then Ambassador sent his Secretary and Train, together with the
English Merchants, to complement and accompany his Excellency, whose entrance
into Constantinople was pompous and solemn, and with all the usual Ceremonies
of greatness.

My Lord, (though he had a fair Quarter assigned him near his Excellency) yet
invited before to my Lord of Winchelseas House, directly went thither, with his
Brother and Retinue, and was very nobly received and entertained. I, who for a
while had been sick (even to death) in the Journey, soon found my recovery
there, by my noble Lord of Winchelseas favor, and my Ladies greatest charity
and goodness, whose incomparable Virtues surpassing all expression, I can only
with gratitude commemorate, and with silence admire.

Byzantium, the ancient name of the City, was reputed little bigger than the
Serraglio is now. The principal Trade for fishing, especially for Tunny, which
in very great quantities the Bosphorus yielded yearly, and over against the
point of the Serraglio (which was called the Golden Horn from the gains of the
Fishermen) vast numbers were taken, being driven and frighted thither from the
Chalcedonian shore, by a white Stone appearing in the bottom of the shallow and
transparent Water. Constantine the Great, and first Christian Emperor,
enlarging and beautifying it with very fair Buildings, and walling it round,
established there his Seat, and named it New Rome, but after his death, his
Successor, in honor of his memory and name, caused it to be called
Constantinople.

It has since been the Seat of the Emperors of the East, but not without
great changes of Fortune, for instead of Christian Emperors, it is under the
Power and Domination of a Mohammedan Prince, Mahomet the Second having taken it
by assault, and sacrificed it to the fury of his Soldiers. This great disaster
to Christendom arrived in the year of our Lord, one thousand four hundred fifty
three, on the nine and twentieth of May, and the second day of Whitsuntide, the
Feast of the Holy Ghost, against whom the Greeks so often had sinned, God
punishing them that day with the loss of their capital City, to show them the
enormity of their sin.

This City, by its apt and advantageous situation, may seem to be built to
command all the World, for it is in the extremity of Europe, and separated only
from Asia by an Arm of the Sea, some half a League broad. The Haven is so deep,
and so safe, that Ships of the greatest burden may ride near the Shore with
the greatest security.

The City is in general ill built, and the Streets very narrow, so as in many
places neither Chariots nor Wagons can pass. There is only one fair Street,
and that is but indifferently large, which traverses the Town to the
Adrianople-gate. But the Moschees built by several Emperors are very noble
Structures, and all in imitation of Sancta Sophia, which is the only Church
preserved from ruin at the taking of Constantinople, and which for the beauty
of the Edifice, the Turks were contented to profane, by converting it into a
Mosque.

This Church was built by Justinian the Emperor, who for the building of it
employed the Revenue of Egypt, which continued seventeen years, and when he had
finished it, and saw the beauty of it, he bragged he had surpassed King Solomon
in the structure of his Temple.

Near it he erected a very fair Monastery, where the Serraglio is now, and
endowed it with a Revenue of eight hundred thousand Crowns, maintaining nine
hundred Priests there for the service of the Temple.

Near Sancta Sophia, the Serraglio (divided from the City by a Wall, and washed
on two sides by the Sea) contains three miles in circuit, which, the goodly
Groves of Cypresses considered, the Gardens and Fountains, with the Plains, and
other Objects of delight, is a place of variety of pleasure.

I speak very sparingly of the Serraglio, because several others have said
enough of it, and more than is usually discovered to Strangers.

In the great Piazza (which the Greeks called the Hippodrome, and the Emperors
designed for the Races of Horses) we saw two antic Pyramids, three brazen
Serpents so wreathed and twined together, that nothing is free but the Head.

Near the end of the Town, toward the North, the ruins of the ancient Palace
of Constantine remain, where so many Christian Emperors had formerly their
residence, and near the said ruins, is the Church and Habitation of the
Patriarch of Constantinople.

There are several great places in the City, which are called Besestines, which
resemble our Exchanges, where all sorts of things may be bought, and there is
too a Market of Slaves, where they sell Men and Women, in the last of which the
Jews traffic much, and gain extremely by, for they buy them young and
handsome, and teaching them to work with the Needle, to dance, sing and play on
several Instruments, put them off with great advantage, which they do too out
of policy, as well as for lucre, for the Women thus preferred to the Court, out
of gratitude to the Jews, do them many good offices.

In the middle of the City is the old Serraglio, which Mahomet the Second
built, as well for his own, as his Successors residence, but they liking the
new better, as being more healthful and pleasanter, abandoned it to the service
of the Grand Signiors Women when he dies, where they languish out the residue
of their days.

The Armenians have a great space enclosed in the City, where the Patriarch
inhabits, whose Church is poor and little, and there are yet the remains of a
Hall, where a Council was held.

There are two great Enclosures, where the Janissaries are lodged, when the Army
is out of the Field, where they live in great order and discipline.

In an Angle of the City is the Castle of the seven Towers, where the Sultan
keeps the Prisoners of note he puts not to death, and here Sultan Osman was
strangled by his Subjects.

The Borough of Galata, which is separated by the Haven, has much better
Houses than the City, for it belonging to the Genoueses was surrendered on
composition, and so kept from ruin, and this is the reason the Churches of the
Catholics were preserved and entire. Here and at Pera the Christians for the
most part inhabit, where they have the free exercise of their Churches and
Religion.

Over against the Serraglio, on the Asian Shore, is the Borough of Scutary,
where the Caravanes meet together, which go into Persia, to Aleppo, and
Damascus, and other Eastern parts. On the side of the said Scutary, are the
Fragments and remains of the ancient City Chalcedon, so celebrated for the
general Council in the time of the Emperor Martianus.

The Shore of the Thracian Bosphorus* (which discharges its Waters into the
Mediterranean) is full of pleasant Villages and Houses of delight, and at the
mouth of it (some eighteen miles distant from Constantinople) on a Rock which
advances into the Sea, in the form of near an Island, is a Pillar of white
Marble, which is called Pompey's Pillar, erected, as reported, when he defeated
Mithridates.

About two or three Leagues from the Town, where the Channel is most narrow,
two Castles well provided of Artillery are built, to hinder the passage of
Vessels they are willing to stop.

Round about the Town there are nothing but Gravestones and Monuments of the
dead, which no sooner we had past, but the Country was as fertile as pleasant,
the Valleys and Hills being variously beautified with Objects of pleasure.

Three Leagues from the City there is a vast confluence of Waters, conserved in
a Cistern of a very great circuit and magnitude, not far from which place, to
join and bring two Mountains together, three Arches are erected, the one above
the other, from whence the Water runs in that plenty to the City, that besides
the public Fountains, and those in the Houses of Bashas, eight hundred are
supplied in the Moschees.

As for the Provisions of Constantinople, there is no want of any thing, Wheat,
Wine and Flesh of all sorts, being there in great abundance and cheapness, and
as for the Fish, there are always great quantities of the same, and those very
good, as Turbuts, Soles, Mullets and the like, as during our stay there, which
was above three months, we found by experience.

But to return to the Ambassador, the Camacan of Constantinople sent two
Galleys to his Excellency (each Galley, having four hundred and eighty six
Oars, and five Men at an Oar, all Christians, but most of them Russians and
Polanders) to carry him with his Comrades* and Retinue, to a pleasant
Gardenhouse on the Bosphorus, where he feasted us nobly, and for the
Ambassadors divertisement, caused dancings* and tricks to be showed after
dinner, but on our way thither, the Galley his Excellency was in, ran foul on
another, and was in some danger.

On the third of October the Sultan returned from his Maritime Expedition, and
the Grand Vizier feasted the Ambassador at his Garden.

On the tenth of November his Excellency had his second and last Audience of
the Sultan (no Ambassador having oftener than twice, to wit, at his coming and
going away) in order to which, the Grand Vizier sent him Horses and Furniture
for himself and his Retinue. He entered into the Serraglio at the principal
Gate near Sancta Sophia, which was guarded by five and twenty Capigis, or
Porters, where we saw a spacious Court, and a Fabric on the left hand, which
anciently was the Sacristy to Sancta Sophia, but the Turks keep the Arms there
at present which they took from the Christians, as well as the taking of
Constantinople, as in other Rencounters. On the right hand is a Structure,
which serves for an Infirmary for the sick of the Serraglio. This Court we rode
into, but alighted at the second, which was guarded as the former, and his
Excellency was received with the same state and ceremony, as before at
Adrianople.

On the eighteenth the Ambassador and Resident dined with the Grand Vizier,
who gave them Caftanns, which were lined with Sables.

On the third of December the Grand Signior hunted, a sport he loves much, and
is in this manner. Several thousands of Peasants beat and drive a whole Wood,
while the Sultan and his Followers stand in an open place with the Dogs, which
run at any Game, sparing nothing that comes forth, though unfit to be killed.

When the Sultan had done, the Grand Vizier presented him with five Purses of
Dollars, as also with two Vests, the two Vests he disliked, and four of the
Purses he gave to his Pages, and the other among the Peasants, who frequently,
when the Grand Signior hunts, through extremity of Cold, are frozen to death in
the Woods.

On the seventh the Ambassador had audience of the Grand Vizier, and on the
tenth of the Testardar, or Treasurer general, both of which gave Caftanns.

But the day of our departure being come (which was on the one and twentieth
instant) the Ambassador full of glory (though many of his Train had been swept
away by death) went away with a greater Retinue, by the addition of the
Captives, which he carried with him. O how the poor Christians, which he left
sad behind, regretted the loss and the absence of that Guest, from whom they
had received such abundance of comfort, and now were apprehensive, they should
never see again.

We went not away in the order and manner we came, for the Ambassador being
gone, all that were in Wagons, afraid to be hindmost, made all the haste they
could, and some made more haste than good speed, for between Constantinople and
Ponte Picciolo (the place of our abode for that night) many Wagons were
unserviceable by their jostling one another, till refitted and amended, and
here lay a Wheel, and there a broken Axeltree.

The next morning we departed, and continuing our journey toward Belgrade,
returned the same way by which we came thence, nothing intervening of moment,
only at Sackarcoi, an Arabian with his Torch in his hand (who led us in the
dark) and some others with their Bufali, were frozen to death, while they slept
on the ground. Doctor Metzger likewise, the Secretary of the Embassy, as also
of the Council of War to the Emperor, who fell mad at Constantinople, expired
at Nissa, and was buried near the Town in the Sepulcher of the Raguseans.

At Belgrade (where we staid till the thirteenth of February, the day of our
departure) I wanting some Gloves, desired a Jew to help me to a pair, which he
readily undertook, and brought several to me, but all for one hand, for the
Turks were but one.

Two days being spent in ferrying the Horses, the Coaches and Wagons over the
River of Sava, (where the Turks with their Whips forced all idle gazers to lend
a helping hand) on the fourteenth we came to Colombitza, a Village under
ground, the Houses of which we were glad to creep into on our Knees.

Nitrovitz was next, where we staid the following day, and then came to
Valkovar and Esseck, the latter of which is a walled Town, where we saw a great
Gun, which was nineteen foot long, and several Heads of Christians, which were
set up on Poles. The Streets were plank'd with Timber, and we past a
Wooden-bridge three or four miles in length, which was over the Drava, and the
many Moorish places we met with.

Without the Town was a Gaunch, or double Gallows, full of Hooks, on which
Malefactors were thrown headlong down, and as they were caught, had either a
quicker, or a lingering death.

The next place was Bernovar, then Mohachz, and afterward Battaseck.

Secksar, a place finely seated (where we saw the remains of an old Christian
Church, and the ruins of a large Building) was our Station for two days, and
Pax received us next. Footvar, Tschankurtaran and Erchin, all Towns on the
Danube, we passed through afterward, and arrived at Buda, some two miles from
whence we were met by the Spahyes, and marched through the Janissaries, which on
both sides the way stood expecting us in their Arms, while many great Guns
were discharged from the Castle and City. Here we staid thirteen days, and
sixty Slaves, Hungarians and Germans, were released; the Vizier showing the
Ambassador all imaginable civility, and causing the like Skirmish on
horseback, to be done and perfomed at Buda, as was before at Adrianople for his
Excellencies divertisement. While we staid in this Town, the Turks had their
Ramasan or Lent, which continues a whole Moon, and changes every year, during
which time, they neither eat nor drink till the Stars do appear, and then they
eat and drink what they will, and all the night too if they please, at what
time burning Lamps are set round all the Steeples of the Moschees, which make a
fine show. The Ramasan being over, they feast three days together and rejoice,
that being their Biram or Easter.

On the fourteenth of March we departed from Buda, two hundred Horse
conducting, and the Turkish Trumpets sounding as we marched, for at least a
League together.

That day we came to Veruwar, and the next to Strigonium or Gran, the Begue of
which place in his Coat of Male, met us out of the Town with five hundred
Horse, and two Companies of Foot.

The Castle is on a Hill, and the prospect from thence toward the Danube most
pleasing and alluring, the eye being boundless and wearied, as it were, with
Objects of delight; but the Town looks like a Carcass, no care being taken for
repairing of the Walls.

The Seat of an Archbishop is turned into a Cottage, and of sacred become
profane. The Chapel of Saint Adalbert is employed in Mohammedan uses, yet still
on the Wall the Annunciation of our Lady remains, and escaped the fury of the
Soldiers, which destroyed all things else.

In the Suburbs there is a Pond which continually smoaks, where Frogs croak all
the Winter, which is caused by the much sulphurous matter in the bottom. And
not far from the City a sad Spectacle was seen, to wit, many Heads of poor
Christians pil'd up on a heap, which exceeded a thousand. They were taken at
Barchan, and killed in cold blood by the Visiers command, who to satiate his
unquenchable thirst of humane slaughter, had them picked out one by one, and
killed before his face, as he lay in his Tent.

After three days stay at Gran, we advanced to Nemeth, and the next day
arrived at Hatch, the place of exchange, and our much desired Haven. But we met
even here with some difficulties and stops* The Turkish Ambassador returning
from Vienna to Comorra, and minding more his interest then the honor of his
Master, hovered there up and down, on one pretense or other, but would not quit
the place, unless he first received an arrear of some Pay of the Emperors
Allowance. In the mean time Count Lesley, who on a great Plain (where no Meat
could be had, nor any the least shelter from the Wind and the Cold, which were
very piercing and great) stood expecting his arrival, and had continued there
some six or seven hours, grew impatient at his stay.

The five hundred Horse, which convoyed us from Gran, and were ignorant of the
cause, were amazed, and so unsatisfied, that they drew up together, and began
to look about them: The motion and agitation of our Bodies, was the only means
we had of resisting the Weather, while the Messengers went between, but still
without success.

The Obstacle was discovered at last, and 'twas publicly divulged, that the
Ottoman Ambassadors pretensions to Money, which had been made good, and
otherwise allowed him, occasioned that disorder.

This no sooner was known, but resented by his Excellency, with the greatest
indignation, who in so long a Journey had not made the least scruple in any
thing of that nature, but still preferred the glory of the Emperor his Master,
and the public advantage, before his own private concerns. When he therefore
saw with whom he was to deal, he resolved to go back with all his Retinue to
Buda, and acquaint the Vizier there with the Turkish Ambassadors sordid nature
and avarice; in order to which he caused his Coachman to turn about his Horses,
and bad him go on. But the Basha of Funfkircken and the Begue of Strigonium
(more sensible of the Grand Signiors honor than the Turkish Ambassador)
besought him to desist from that purpose, and promised their Ambassador should
quickly leave Comorra, and if he should be refractory, they with their own
hands would force him from the Town.

The Turkish Ambassador was summoned accordingly, and durst not disobey, but
came toward the evening, and the Ambassadors soon after, with the same state
and ceremony as before, arrived at the middle Post, and made the exchange.

Passing by Comorra (which welcomed our return into Christendom with the
discharge of many Cannon) we came very late to a Village; which was Tributary
to the Turks.

The next day about noon we arrived at Raab, where Count Montecuculi the
Governor met us out of the Town, to which as we approached, the great Guns
proclaimed our arrival and welcome, and not only the Soldiers drawn out of the
Garrison, but those too on the Works gave us several Volleys.

The next day was dedicated to feasting and mirth, the Cannon in the Garrison
amounting to one hundred and sixty, being all discharged for joy.

The Mahometans (when Masters of the Town) made under the Marketplace, a deep
and dismal Prison, which has no other light, but that which goes in at the top
through great Iron Bars. Thither several poor Turks (fallen into the Pit designed
for others) came up to breath fresh Air, and beg some relief, which was readily
given them.

We lodged the three and twentieth at Altemburg, and dining the next day at
Pruk, came to Swehet that evening.

Hither the Emperor sent Horses for our entrance into Vienna, which when we
came near, we made a halt a while, and put into order, marched two and two
abreast to the Emperors Palace; all the Streets we past through, and the
Windows on both sides being thronged with Spectactors.

The Ambassador alightting at the Palace aforesaid, went up the great Stairs,
and passing through the Rooms came to the Presence Chamber, all the Cavaliers,
and those of his Retinue of fashion attending his Excellency.

Then the Emperor withdrew with the Ambassador alone, and when they had be^n
private a while, the Cavaliers were called in, who likewise for some time were
together with his Majesty; after which we were admitted, and all had the honor
to kiss the Emperors Hand. The like order was observed in our waiting on the
Empress, whose Hand we likewise kissed.

I should now relate, with what joy and feasting Count Lesley was received by
his Friends and Alliances, but the Embassy ending here, I shall end too my
Relation, and give no further trouble to the Reader.

FINIS.
Books Printed and are to be sold by Tho. Collins and John Ford at the
Middle Temple gate, and Spencer Hickman at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Folio's.
THe History of the Civil Wars of France, written in Italian by Henrico
Caterino D'Avila, the whole fifteen Books translated into English, by Sir
Charles Cotterel, and William Alesbury.

The Continuation, being in ten Books.

A complete Chronicle of England, began by John Stowe, and continued by Edmond
Hews. Gent. with an Appendix of the Universities in England.

Cabula sive S^rinia Sacra, Mysteries of State and Government, in Letters of
Illustrious Persons and great Ministers of State, as well Foreign as
Domestic, in the Reigns of King Henry the eighth, Queen Elizabeth, King James
and K. Charles I. in one Volume.

The complete Ambassador, containing the Letters and Negotiations of Sir H.
Walsingham, the Lord Bunleigh, and other Eminent Persons, being a perfect
Series of the most remarkable Passages of State, both at home and abroad, in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, collected by Sir Dudley Diggs.

The History of the Reign of King Henry the seventh, written by the Right
Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban.

Plutarch's Morals, written by the Learned Philosopher, translated out of Greek
into English, and conferred with the Latin and French Translation, by Philemon
Holland Doctor of Physic.

The Roman History, written by T. Livius of Padua: Also the Breviaries of L.
Florus; with a Chronology to the whole History, and the Topography of Rome in
all time, translated out of Latin into English, by Philemon Holland Doctor of
Physic.

The Annals of the World, deduced from the Origin of Time, and continued to the
beginning of the Emperor Vespasian's Reign, and the total destruction and
abolition of the Temple and Commonwealth of the Jews, containing the History
of the old and new Testament, with that of the Maccabees. Also all the most
memorable Affairs of Asia and Egypt, and the Rise of the Empire of the Roman
Cesars, under C. Julius and Octavianus, collected from all History, as well
Sacred as Profane, and methodically digested, by the most Reverend James
Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland.

A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the Books of the Psalms, briefly explaining
the difficulties thereof, by H. Hammond, D. D.

An Historical Account of the Romish State, Court, Interest and Policy, and the
mighty Influences of the Jesuits in that Church, and many other Christian
States, not hitherto extant, being a full Discovery of all the Transactions
both in France and at Rome, concerning the five famous Propositions,
controverted* between the Jansenists and the Molinists, from the beginning of
that Affair till the Popes decision; written in French by Monsieur de Sanct.
Amor, Doctor of Sorbonne, and englished by G. Havers Gent.

Ninety six Sermons, by the Right Honorable and Reverend Father in God,
Lancelot Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester; published by his Majesty's
special Command; the fifth Edition: Whereunto is added, a Sermon preached
before two Kings on the fifth of August, 1606.

Flora, Ceres, and Pomona, by John Rea Gent.

The History of the Wars of Italy, from the year 1612. to 1644. in eighteen
Books, written in Italian by Pietro Giovani Capriata, Doctor at Law; rendered
into English by Henry Earl of Monmouth.

Reports of Edward Bulstrode, of the Inner Temple, Esquire, of diverse
Resolutions and Judgments given, with great advice and mature deliberation, by
the Grave, Reverend and Learned Judges and Sages of the Law, of Cases and
Matters of the Law, with the Reasons of their said Resolutions and Judgments,
given in the Court of Kings Bench, in the time of the late Reign of King James,
and the beginning of King Charles the first, in three parts.

Maxims of Reason, or the Reason of the Common Law of England, by Edmond,
Wingate, of Gray's Inn, Esquire.

The Practical Counselor of the Law, touching Fines, common Recoveries,
Judgments, and the execution thereof, Statutes, Recognizances and Bargain and
Sale, collected out of the great Volumes of the Law, with an Alphabetical
Table, for the ready finding out the chief things therein contained, by William
Shepherd Esquire.

The Reports of Sir George Croke Knight, in three Volumes in English, allowed
of by all the Judges; the second Edition, carefully corrected by the Original.

The second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, containing the
Exposition of Magna Charta, and many ancient and other Statutes; written by the
Lord Chief Justice Coke; the third Edition; with an Alphabetical Table added.

The third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning
High Treason, and other Pleas of the Crown, and criminal Causes; the fourth
Edition; written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke.

The fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the
Jurisdiction of Courts; written by the Lord Chief Justice Coke; the fourth
Edition; with an Alphabetical Table, not hitherto printed.

Regestrum Omnium Brevium tam Originalium, quam Judicialium, correctat. and
emendatum ad vetus exemplar manuscriptum, cujus beneficio, a Multis erroribus
purgatum, ad usus quibus Inservit, redd^ium accomodatius.

The eleven Reports of Sir Edward Coke translated into English: To which is
added, the Declarations* and Pleadings.

The Reports of the Learned Edmond Anderson Knight, late Chief Justice of the
Common Bench, of many principal Cases argued and adjudged in the time of the
late Queen Elizabeth, as well in the Commons Bench, as before all the Judges of
this Realm; in two parts.

Narrationes Modernae, or Modern Reports, begun in the new Upper Bench Court at
Westminster, in the beginning of Hillary Term 21 Caroli, and continued to the
end of Michaelmas Term, 1655. by Will. Style of the Inner Temple Esquire.

Reports in the Courts of Exchequer, Beginning in the third, and ending in the
ninth year of the late King James, by the Honorable Richard Lane of the
Middle Temple; being the first Collection in that Court hitherto extant.

Quarto's
THe Christian Man, or the Reparation of Nature by Grace; written in French by
that Elegant and Pious Author, John Francis Serault; Englished by H. G.
sometime Student of Christ-Church Oxford.

Potters Interpretation of the number 666. or number of the Beast.

Man become Guilty, or the Corruption of Nature by Sin, according to Saint
Augustines sense; written in French, and Englished by the Right Honorable
Henry Earl of Monmouth.

Scrinia Caeciliana, Mysteries of State Government in Letters of the late
famous Lord Burleigh, and other Grand Ministers of State, in the Reigns of
Queen Elizabeth and King James.

A Treatise of the Forest Laws, by John Manwood; the third Edition corrected
and much enlarged.

Miscellania Spiritualia, or devout Essays; the second Part; composed by the
Honorable Walter Mountague Esquire.

The History of the Imperial Estate of the Grand Signiors, their Habitations,
Lives, Titles, Qualities, Exercises, Works, Revenues, Habits, Descent,
Ceremonies, Magnificence, Judgments, Officers, Favorites, Religion, Power,
Government and Tyranny: To which is added the History of the Court of the King
of China.

The Touchstone of Commons Assurances, or a plain familiar Treatise, opening
the Learning of the Common Assurances or Conveyances of the Kingdom, by Will.
Sheppard Esquire.

Reports of certain Cases arising in the several Courts in Westminster, in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and the late King Charles, with the
Resolutions of the Judges of the said Courts; collected by good hands, and
approved by the Learned Justice Godbolt.

The History of England, from the first traditional beginning to the Norman
Conquest; collected out of the ancientest and best Authors, by John Milton.

A Letter to a Friend, concerning some of Doctor Owen's Principles and
Practices; to which is added an Independent Catechism.

Plays.
Just General, by Cosmo. Manuch.

The Faithful Shepherdess, by John Fletcher.

Michaelmas Term.

The Phoenix.

The Combat of Love and Friendship, by Doctor Mead. Polyeuctes, or the Martyr.

Horatius, a Tragedy.

The Cheats, a Comedy, by John Wilson Gent.

Octavo's Large.
THe Memoires of the Duke of Rohan, or a faithful Relation of the most
remarkable Occurrences in France, especially concerning those of the reformed
Churches there, from the death of Henry the Great, until the Peace made with
them in June 1629. Together with diverse politic Discourses upon several
Occasions; written in French by the Duke of Rohan, Englished by George Bridges
of Lincoln's Inn Esquire.

The Poems of Horace, consisting of Odes, Satyrs and Epistles, rendered in
English, and paraphrased by several Persons, the second Edition.

A humble Apology for Learning and Learned Men, by Edmond Waterhouse Esquire.

A Discourse and Defense of Arms and Armory, showing the Nature and Rises of
Arms and Honor in England, from the Camp, to the Court, the City, under the
two latter of which are contained Universities and Inns of Court; by Edward
Waterhouse Esquire.

Lasida Pastora Comoedia Pastoralis.

Two excellent Plays; The Wits, a Comedy: The Platonic Lovers, Tragi-Comedy;
both presented at the private House in Blackfriars by his Majesty's Servants;
by Sir William Davenant.

An Essay on the first Book of T. Lucretius Carus de Rerum* Natura; interpreted
and made English Verse, by J. Evelyn Esquire.

Instructions concerning erecting of a Library, presented to my Lord the
President de Mesme, by J. Evelyn Esquire.

The Justice of Peace his Clerks Cabinet, or a Book of Presidents or Warrants,
fitted and made ready to his hand, for every case that may happen within the
compass of his Masters Office, for the ease of the Justice of Peace, and more
speedy dispatch of Justice* by Will. Shepherd.

Court-keepers Guide, or a plain and familiar Treatise, needful and useful for
the help of many that are employed in the keeping of Law-dayes or Court-Barons,
wherein is largely and plainly opened the Jurisdiction of those Courts, with
the learning of Manors, Copyholds, Rents, Harriots, and other Services and
Advantages belonging unto Manors, to the great profit belonging unto Manors
and Owners of these Courts; the fifth Edition; by William Shepherd Esquire.

The Office of a Justice of Peace, together with Instructions how and in what
manner Statutes shall be expounded; by W. Fleetwood Esquire, sometime Recorder
of London.

Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York; held before several Judges in that
Circuit* with some Presidents useful for Pleaders at the Assizes*

The Young Clerks Tutor, being a most useful Collection of the best Presidents,
of Recognizances, Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of Sale,
Warrants of Attorney, etc. as also all the names of Men and Women in Latin,
with the day and date, the several sums of Money, and the addition of the
several Trades of Employments, in their proper Cases, as they stand in the
Obligations, with directions of Writs of Habeas Corpus* Writs of Error, etc.
to the Inferior Courts in Cities and Towns; the whole work newly corrected and
augmented.

Reports or Causes in Chancery, collected by Sir George Carry one of the Masters
of the Chancery in Anno 1601. out of the Labors of Mr. William Lambert;
whereunto is annexed, the Kings Order and Decree in Chancery, for a Rule to be
observed by the Chancellor in that Court, exemplified and enrolled for a
perpetual Record there, Anno 1616.

Of Corporations, Fraternities and Guilds, or a Discourse, wherein the learning
of the Language touching Bodies Politic is unfolded, showing the use and
necessity of that Invention, the Antiquity, various Kinds, Order and Government
of the same; by William Sheppard Esquire.

The Golden Book of Saint John Chrysostom, concerning the education of
Children, translated out of Greek.

Common Notions and Advice of Mr. A Thevenear, Advocate in Parliament,
dedicated to his Lord the Dauphin, translated out of the French Copy, by Will.
Barten Esquire.

A brief Discourse concerning Bodily Worship, proving it to be Gods due to be
given unto him with acceptance on his part, and not to be denied without sin*
by Simon Gunton, one of the Prebendaries of the Cathedral Church of
Peterborough.

Parsons Guide of the Law Tithes, wherein is showed who must pay Tithes, and to
whom and of what things, when and how they must be paid, and how they may be
received at this day, and how a man may be discharged of payment thereof; the
second Edition* much enlarged throughout the whole Book; by Will. Sheppard
Esquire.

Steps of Ascension unto God, or a Ladder to Heaven, containing Prayers and
Meditations for every day of the week, and for all other times and occasions.

Three excellent Tragedies, viz. The raging Turk, or Bajazet the second: The
Courageous Turk, or Amureth the first: The Tragedy of Orestes; written by Tho.
Gosse, M. A.


