The Way to Peace.

A FUNERAL SERMON On Job 22.21.

Preached upon the Decease Of the Right Honorable ELIZABETH, Countess of
Ranalagh.

By DANIEL BURGESS.

London, Printed by J. D. for Jonathan Robinson, in St. Paul's Churchyard, and
Brab. Ailmer in Cornhill, 1695.

To the Right Honorable RICHARD Earl of Ranalagh, And to his most Virtuous
Daughters, ELIZABETH Countess of Kildare, Lady FRANCEL, and Lady KATHERINE
Jones.
My Lord, and Ladies,
I Have performed this small Service, to the Memory of one deserving to be had
in everlasting Remembrance!

The Part of it which concerns her Heavenly Virtues, claims as its undoubted
Right, and is sure to have, your most honorable Testimony. Although the whole
be so blemished with the Author's Imperfections, that it deserves his Blush,
and needs your Pardon!

A Pardon, whereof he despairs not; because, through your overflowing Affection
unto the Deceased, You have pleased to honor me with many great Favors. And
because, as every one sees, the Greatest and the Best Persons be not the
hardest to please!

My Gratitude shall ever keep my Prayer ascending to the Almighty, for your
noble Family! Whereof, so renowned Relatives, as your Lordship's incomparable
Mother, the Illustrious Roger Earl of Orrery, and the immortal Mr. Robert Boil,
have long ago obliged me to be a true Votary!

May your Redeemer's Grace hold you safe upon the Precipices of your
Prosperity! And make your secular Grandeurs to become Testimonies of his
present Favor, and Pledges of your future Felicity!

May your Persons and Offspring be Blessings to this World! And when you are
Translated to the next, May you carry the Peace of God with you, and leave the
Praise of Men behind you.

Thus prays Your Honors most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, DANIEL
BURGESS.

A SERMON preached upon the Decease of the right Honorable ELIZABETH, Countess
of Ranalagh.
Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with Him, and be at Peace, thereby Good shall
come unto thee.
THE Lion has rored, who will not Fear? Death has, this Year, bin indeed the
King of Terrors. And, we are deaf unto Thunder, if, yet, we do not Hear and
Fear. The Excellent of the Earth, it has taken from this Earth! Yea, the
Mighty Instruments and glorious Ornaments of our Weal. Open your Volumes, O ye
ancient Records! and name us, if ye can, such a MARY as this Kingdom and World
has lost in this Year; Such a Cedar, such an Olive, such a Vine, such a
Guardian-Angel! Blessed be the Father of Mercies; he has continued to us the
nursing Father of our Country! But of what a Mother has he bereaved it? You
have heard, and joined (I hope) in the National Groans, such as spoke Church
and State to be half-expiring. You have seen the whole Realm turned into a
House of Mourning! And now,

I need not tell you, the Lion still rores! Our offended God has not yet done
with us. No, but is still Writing bitter things against us; and has stained
the Glory of this Month with additional Darkness. Removed another burning and
shining Light of our World; another rare Exemplar of Christian Piety. You do
know what a Princess thereof is fallen; for, you know the Lady RANALAGH is
deceased.

My business hereon, is not to sound an Encomium, but preach a Sermon. For, we
need to be Instructed, she needs not be Praised. It is well enough known, how
nearly Diamonds do imitate the Stars of Heaven; how far the Moon out-shineth
the Lamps which surround her; and how vastly this Elect Lady did excel the
Commoners of the Household of Faith!

It is true, an utter Silence of her Sanctity, would be Sacrilege. To bury so
much of Heaven in dark Oblivion, would together rob God of Praise, and his
Church of Profit. Yea, the World of a due Debt. For, Saints Examples be their
Legacies to the whole World; and, when they are by any means detained, it is no
less a Number that is defrauded of so rich a Treasure. Wherefore, (as a more
complete Memorial of this Lady, From Mr. J. J. her Reverend Pastor.
is expected from the fittest Hand) there shall not be wanting what will be of
some import in this Sermon.

This, whose Theme is the Text, which she bound about her Neck, wrote on the
Table of her Heart; held fast, and kept as her Life. As that, which, when she
Walked, did Lead her: when she Slept, did Keep her; when she Awaked, did Talk
with her. The Text, which she thought eminently-apt to give Subtility to the
most Simple; and, to the most Indocile, both Knowledge and Discretion. The Text,
which I have hoped (through the inspiration of the Holy Ghost) to find such at
this time.

Inasmuch as it presents, both the Whole Counsel of God unto us; and, our Whole
Encouragement from God to follow it!

The Counsel, is One and All; to Acquaint our selves with God. And the
Encouragement is no less; Peace and all Good from Him. Familiarly, the Hebrews
do speak Imperatively, when they mean Futurely; Be at Peace, is as much as,
Thou shall be at Peace. And, an Indefinit (in re necessaria) is an Universal;
Good shall come unto thee, is plainly, All Good shall come unto thee!

These Particulars, run, without more ado, into this Position: Acquaintance
with God is the way to Peace and all Good.

The Inclination unto Peace and Good, is as universal as our Nature. And, so is
the Capacity of it; for, unto All that will accept it on his Terms, it is
offered by God's Grace. His Offer is unquestionably sincere; and no Man is
Miserable, but by the Fault of his own Will. Never perished any Adult
Reprobate, but by being Obstinate. And, as to Man's Desire, it is most
apparently Eager; witness, its Pursuits of all imaginary Good; and its Flights
from all apprehended Opposites. It is not, as the Sand of Africa, Sol^ Feritas
calet: Tertullian.
Cold and Barren; but, as it is said of Scythia, tho all things, beside, be
frozen to Death; yet the Barbarity therein, is hot as Fire. So must we say of
Lapsed and unrenewed Man: his Lust after Happiness is still most Flagrant,
though all right Understanding of its Nature, and of the way to attain it, and
of the Necessity of attending to the Divine Oracles to learn both, be utterly
Extinct.

By means hereof, the many (and, next to All) do seek Peace where it is not to
be found. Grope for it in the furrows of the Field, hunt for it in Parks, trade
for it in Ships, flatter for it in Courts, fight for it in Battles. Not averted
from the Folly of their Toils, by the Frustration of their Hopes; while the
Earth says of Happiness, It is not in me; the Sea says, It is not in me; and
imperial Crowns do say as demonstratively, We have not the Gem you look for!
But, as more silly Birds than the Historians, they continue to flock unto the
Painted Grapes. And, as under Enchantment, keep flying at Impossibilities,
without shame of Disappointment.

The Truth I have proposed, is Divine Eye Salve. Which, if the good Spirit do
set in with it, will enlighten our Minds; and give us to see better things.
Even with a Sight which shall ravish our Hearts, into a full, free, and firm
Choice, and Pursuit of them. In order to this, be it attentively considered
what is the Acquaintance of God, and what the Peace and Good which infallibly
follows it.

. 1. Of Acquaintance with God.
A comprehensive Duty, the whole Continent of Religion! A short Map whereof,
follows in these Positions.

Acquaintance with God consists in these Particulars, viz. (1.) Knowledge of
Him; of Him and of his Will, as revealed in his Word. As many as are acquainted
with Him, must know him from the least to the greatest, Jer. 31.33. Ignorance,
perfectly alienates; for, both in Nature and Grace, the Mind goes before the
Will; neither can this Choose, more than that Knows. Qi non Sentit, non
Consentit, Jeti. Hence is, the Inchoation of this Acquaintance said to be made,
by the opening of our Eyes or Understandings, Acts 26.18. The Increase of it,
to be made by Knowledge, 2 Pet. 3.18. And the Perfection of it in Heaven, to be
made by seeing God as He is, 1 John 3.2. Such an ingredient of Acquaintance, is
Knowledge. I mean, Natural Knowledge, corrected and enlarged by Scriptural; and
both refined and raised by Spiritual. Bats, are not Saints; and Moles, are none
of God's Friends. But, without the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation giving
clearness and sweetness unto their Knowledge, the greatest Doctors and Sophi's
are no more; Knowing nothing as they ought to know.

(2.) Reverence of Him, is also in this Acquaintance. By this Reverence, I
understand not that Fear, which is the Bastard of Error; and springs from a
conceit that the supreme King is a Tyrant. Void of Goodness, tho full of Power;
Almighty, but not most Merciful. A Fear, which blasphemes God, and tormenteth
Man; draws God in the frightful Picture, and puts Man into the distracting
Terror, of the Devil. Reverence, is the mixed Affection of Love and Fear; rising
from persuasion of Goodness and Power. Maintained by this Tenet, that its
Object is as gracious as great. One which together magnifies the Lord, and
regulates his Servants. Shows his Majesty to be Serene, as well as Dread; and
makes his Subjects both Confident and Humble: That is, as Holy Angels be, most
governable, and not at all servile. For, their Fullness of Joy is not abated, by
the Reverence which composes them for Adoration. The Covering of their Faces,
does not in the least prejudice their Beatific Vision. Now so essential is this
Reverence unto Acquaintance with God, that Pagan Moralists could not but see it
in their Darkness. With them, all Religion was styled Reverence; and all who
followed it, (...), etc.
were named Men of Reverence. The divinely inspired Writers are in nothing more
express. The God of Israel, is called the Fear or Reverence of Israel, Genesis
31.42. And, He that ought to be feared, Psalm. 75.11. His Fear and Reverence, is
also said to be our Wisdom, Job 28.28. The Beginning, or (as that Text rather
speaks) the Principal Part of it, Castal. Ainsw. Hammond, in Loc.
Psalm. 111.10. Insomuch that it is beyond all peradventure; they who know not
the Divine Goodness, so as to fear its Forfeiture; and know not his Greatness,
so as to fear the Frowns of his Displeasure; they are alienated, and Enemies in
their Minds!

(3.) Love of Him. Love that consists of Estimation and Choice. Our Valuation
of his Excellencies, and our Option of him for them. Then we love God, when our
Judgments determine Him to be the proper Object of our Happiness; and our
Hearts, renouncing all Competitors, do embrace Him as such. Constancy is to be
ununderstood in both; and so is Transcendency. Constancy; because, a transient
Passion of Love, without the firm and fixed Virtue of it, is unworthy of the
Name of Love. Should a Man, for a Fit, equal the most passionate Love of the
Holy Martyrs; if, by and by, his Esteem and Choice of God do expire, he is to
be numbered among those who have not the true Love of God in them. Again,
Transcendency; because (there being no compare between Finite and Infinite;) if
the constant Torrent of our Love toward God should rise no higher than it does
toward Creatures; it might be truly said, that our Love were Hatred: and no
Honor, but high Contempt of Him. For, among the Worms of this Earth, he is
held to hate his Father, who loves him but as much as he loves his Hawk, or his
Hound. And, extremely to despise his King, who makes him but equal to his
Footman. In short; there is no Medium betwixt so loving God, and hating of Him.
He that is not thus transcendently and constantly for God, he is against Him,
Luke 11.23. And, he that is against Him, is surely unacquainted with Him.
Because, it is a Natural Principle, as well as a Moral Duty, to love God when we
know Him. Nor can we do otherwise, if we take him for the true and sole Object
of our Rational Appetite! No; but we must as necessarily reject Idols, and love
God, as a sensible hungry Man casts away Stones, and eats Bread. The beloved
Disciple says as much as this; He that loves not, knows not God! has not
seen Him, neither known Him.

(4.) Converse with Him, is likewise included in this Acquaintance. Can two
walk together, except they be agreed? or will they be agreed, and not walk
together? Who did ever conceive of Acquaintance, without Fellowship and
Communion? Indeed, profane Wits laugh to scorn the Phrase of Communion with
God; concluding, that, all who profess to enjoy it, do embrace but a Shadow,
and hug no more than an empty Cloud. And more than a few, who are blessed with
the Fruition of it, are not well able to express or form distinct Conceptions
of it. But it must be said, that to question whether there be such a thing or
no, is to question whether there be any such thing as Acquaintance with God, or
any Religion? Yet it may not be denied, but that there have been Brainsick
Creatures, who by their swelling Words of Vanity and of Blasphemy, have rendered
this Phrase obnoxious to Scorn and Calumny. I shall here endeavor to give such
a Notion of it, as shall not fear Obloquy, or give Occasion for it. By Converse
with God, and Communion, I understand Sacred Discourse. Holy Dialogues, between
God and the Enochs, who humbly walk with Him. God speaking to them, by
Excitations of Grace and Injections of Heavenly Thoughts; they speaking unto
God, by gracious Desires and solemn Addresses. God speaking unto them, Words of
Instruction directing them unto Duty; Words of Reproof, breaking them off from
Sin; Words of Comfort, raising them up from under Sorrow. They speaking unto
God Words of Confession, bewailing Sin; Words of Petition, deprecating
Vengeance, and imploring pardoning and healing Grace; Words of Praise and
Thanksgiving, celebrative of his Greatness and his Goodness. Not to quote the
Psalms, the Canticles, and other Portions of Holy Scripture for Instances; I
ask, what Christian, of any Sense, knows not this by his Experience?
Experience, which makes all things more manifest than Speech the most
Excellent can do; as the least Beam of the Sun better shows its Glory, than the
richest Painting of it can do. Briefly then; the Deaf and the Dumb, be
Demoniacks. They are Strangers to God, who hear not often from Him, and speak not
often to Him. Who hear him not saying, Seek ye my Face! And whom he hears not
answering, Thy Face, Lord, we will seek!

(5.) Ambition to please Him, is imported in Acquaintance with him. His Service
is perfect Freedom, and his Friend's highest Ambition. Let me not love thee, if
I love thee not, says our English Psalmist. Let me not serve thee, if I serve
thee not, says every true Israelite. Pleasing God, is by doing his Will, and
bearing it promptly and patiently. Doing his Will of Precept, after sound
Knowledge of it, and full Consent unto it. Both, Universally, as to Times, and
as to the Precepts themselves; and regularly, making it our greatest Employment
to keep the first and greatest Commandments. Preferring Mercy and Obedience,
before Sacrifice; the weighty Things of the Law, before Mint and Cummin;
Righteousness and Peace, before disputed Meat and Drink. Submitting to his Will
of Providence, is no less necessary. Submitting, without contemning of its
Chastisements, or fainting under them. Stupidity and Despondency, are both Sins
and Judgments. Sense of our Sufferings, and a proportionate Sorrow is the Grace
of God both in us, and unto us. Our Duty toward him, and his Mercy to us.
Grief, and its Expressions, are no Offenses, but when they are unqualified with
their due Circumstances. When they are Disproportionate to an inflicted stroke;
and our Complaint is great, for a Cross that is little, like Jonah's anger to
the Death, for no heavier loss than that of a Gourd. When they are Indecent,
and invective against second Causes; expressing Fury, and not Humility. Like
those of Job, and of Jeremy, who, in their Calentures, cursed their Birth-days,
and the Messengers of them. When they are Immoderate, and such as argue us to
be Men without Hope; as David in his ejulation for his lost Absalom. And, when
they are Profane; taxing the Divine Justice, and reviling Providence. In short;
this Passive Obedience, as truly as Active, is in all true Acquaintance with
God. And, as Difficult as they seem, and repugnant to human Nature; they are
more than Facilitated, both of them; they are even Necessitated, by a good
understanding of God's Power and Dominion, his Knowledge and Wisdom, his
Goodness and Truth. Yea, they are Commended unto us as our Principality, and
the Crown of our Glory. Accordingly, we find this to be the Language of Men
Acquainted with God; I will Walk at Liberty, for I seek thy Precepts! It is
Good for me that I have bin Afflicted. Here I am, Let the Lord do to me as
seems him good.

(6.) Dependence on Him, is also essential unto Acquaintance with God. The
three known branches of Dependence, are so; to wit, Trust, Faith, and Hope.
Trust in his Goodness, when we sit in greatest Darkness; Faith, and Assent unto
whatsoever He says; and Hope, or sweet Expectation of all He Promises. For,
there is a real Foundation in Him, for all the Affections which He requires
from Us. It were not beseeming his Majesty to demand them, if there were not
that in his Nature, and that in his Works that did deserve them. Consequently,
their state in this World requiring that they should have somewhat to lean on;
and to keep them from being overwhelmed with outward Troubles and inward
Passions; they must necessarily Lean on the Lord, and stay themselves on the
God of their Salvation. As promptly therefore, as Seamen use their Anchor, or
Soldiers their Breastplate and Shield and Helmet; Saints do exercise these
Virtues, which the Scripture represents by those Names; Heb. 6.19. 1 Thessalonians.
5.8. Ephesians. 6.17. Their Life is spent in Contemplation of the Divine Perfections,
which make a proper Object of Confidence; and in practical Exaltation of them:
Namely, of the unerring Wisdom, which infallibly knows all our Wants, and
understands what are the best Supplies. Of the unspotted Goodness, which is
surely concerned for us; and takes care for Creatures less than our selves,
for Ravens, for Sparrows, for the Grass of the Field. Of the unquestionable
Power, to which all things are possible; and nothing is difficult, tho by us
much is unintelligible. Power, that can do more than we can know; and is worthy
to be trusted further than we can see. The Holy Prophet says all in a Word,
They that know thy Name, will put their Trust in thee!

(7.) Humility before Him, is in all Acquaintance with God. His Acquaintance is
a Holy Familiarity, that does not breed Contempt, nor brook it. Tho the Majesty
of Heaven condescends to acquaint it self with Worms, it makes them to know
their Distance. The Proud, whose Souls are lifted up, are opposed to Believers
who walk with God, Hab. 2.11. And, it is certain, that exiled Devils are the
proudest, and glorious Angels the most humble Creatures. These latter would be
Nothing, that God may be All; these Fiends would be All, and have God to be
Nothing. Whomsoever he adopts into his Favor, God always qualifieth with a
suitable Nature. And, we know, that great Honors do melt down ingenuous
Spirits. The Grace which sets Crowns upon their Heads, does make them fall
on their Knees. And the more they are magnified, the farther they be from
magnifying of themselves. Mephibosheth, being invited to eat the King's Bread,
debasingly styles himself a dead Dog. Abigail, when honored with a Call to be
the King's Wife, professes it too high a Preferment for her, to be his
Servant; Let thy Handmaid be a Servant, to wash the Feet of the Servants of my
Lord! In a Word; David is told, that God would build him an House, and
establish his Sons on the Throne after him; and does it not swell him up? No,
we find not that ever his Lips dropped more self-denying Words; Who am I, O
Lord God, and what is my House? So, unto Job, God appears in excelling Glory
and Majesty; and what is the Effect? I abhor my self, says that excellent
Saint. Lord, I am Hell, said the Martyr Hooper, as he was ascending to Heaven!
Pride, is the Sin which is least of all consistent with God's Friendship. It is
as much against his Laws as any; and more against his Being and Sovereignty.
It Is also the grossest Defiance of his Providence; receiving its Crosses with
no less than Rage, and its Blessings with no better than Disdain! It Is the Sin
that God is not content to ruin, but delights also to shame. Not sending
Lions, but Lice, to eat up an Herod; not Wolves and Bears, but Goats and Flies,
to assault a Pharaoh; not an Anakim, but a very Stripling, to fell a Goliath. I
shall suggest no more to prove so plain a Truth, that, an unhumbled Man is
unacquainted with God, as surely as with himself. The God that casts down his
choicest Favorites, when they lift up themselves. Smites an Vzzias, with a
Plague of Leprosy. Makes the Tumor of a David cost seventy thousand Lives. And
lets loose the Devil, to prevent the swelling of an Apostle. The God who
judges all, who do not judge themselves; and humbles all, who do not humble
themselves, both as Creatures, and as Guilty Ones. Who, where he finds not an
humble Heart of ours, fails not to show a mighty Hand of his own! One, that
never fails to break the Heart, or the Bones. Whose Oracles do proclaim nothing
more loudly, than that before Honor is Humility! And do thus answer to such as
ask for his Livery; Be ye clothed with Humility! But with fear and trembling,
it must be nextly said,

Acquaintance with God was lost in Adam the first Man. We were created in God's
Likeness; and, being qualified, were then possessed of his Friendship. But,
that State being Natural, was Mutable. With a Power of standing in it, there
was a Possibility of falling from it. For, invincible Perseverance, is the
Privilege of supernatural Grace. Wherefore, being seduced, Adam soon rebelled;
as, without any Temptation offered, Satan the Tempter revolted. Tempted Man,
tho placed so near unto God; tho he was a bright Representative both of his
Purity, and of his Felicity, was corrupted by a simple Suasion; was vanquished
by a single Temptation, and the very first. Notwithstanding that he was
furnished with sufficient Strength to have repelled a thousand, he fell by one.
He sinned; and, by violating God's Law, deprived himself of God's Image; in the
Place whereof succeeded the Pourtraiture of Satan. By his Infidelity, he became
an Accuser of God; and that, both of Unkindness and Untruth. By his Pride, he
turns an Usurper of Divine Prerogatives; and incurs the Arrogance that made
Devils of the Angels. By his Ingratitude, he made himself as disingenuous as
they; who had not greater Bands of Love to break than himself. By his Contempt
of the Divine Majesty and Justice, he no less insolently and audaciously defied
his Creator. By his unaccountable Folly, in parting with God's Favor and Image
for so despicable a Thing as that which was his Lure, he as much reproached his
Understanding. And, to name no more; by his Cruelty to himself, and to his vast
Progeny, he became a Murderer full like to his Tempter. For, he being the
Natural and Moral Principle of all Men; his Rebellion was of Universal Guilt
and Stain to all his Generation. Nor was it hard, that, being in the Covenant
with him, and having a Title to the Benefits promised to his Obedience, we
should also be liable to the Curse threatened upon his Disobedience. In short;
thus were the Fountain and Streams, the Root and the Offspring corrupted. With
a Corruption so Universal, that, of all (descending by ordinary Generation) it
misseth no Individual; so Subtle, that it pierces into all the Powers of the
Soul; so Contagious, Dr. Bates's Harmony, p. 40.
that it infects all the Actions; and so Obstinate, that only Omnipotence can
heal it!

And till such time as it does heal it, what Acquaintance has Man with God?
What Communion has our Darkness with his Light? By Nature we are Children of
Wrath, actively and passively; Hating, and hated of God. God's Wrath abides on
us, Joh. 3.33. and our Carnal Mind is Enmity against God, Romans 8.7. So far is
unrenewed Man from Acquaintance with God, that the Scripture declares him to be
without God in the World; and a very hater of God! Nevertheless, it must be
added, with Joy and Gladness of Heart,

Acquaintance with God is purchased for us again, by Christ the second Adam.
The impossibility of our recovering it by ought of our own, needs little
Demonstration. Fallen Angels, could not regain theirs; and Dead Men had not
more Wisdom or Strength to raise themselves. Our Minds being depraved with
Ignorance and Error; and our Wills with Contrariety to God; those Principles of
our Action being corrupted, what could we do toward a second Rectitude?
Besides, the Acquaintance of God is the Happiness of Man. The Happiness that he
forfeited by Sin; and, whose Forfeiture the Law exacted. Not admitting the
Sinner to enjoy God's Favor, but requiring that his Crime should be punished
according to its Quality; that is, to Extremity and to Eternity. Insomuch, that
the Divine Goodness was a sealed Spring; and all its kind Effects were
restrained by our Guilt, till our Sin was expiated by a valuable, or rather,
invaluable Sacrifice. By that blessed Obedience of his Son, which more pleased
God, than the Rebellion of Men and Devils provoked Him!

Herewith, as an Offering and Sacrifice of sweet smelling Savor, the incensed
Wrath of God was appeased, the Handwriting of the Law which was against us was
blotted out, and Peace was made. Herewith, as a Price most precious and
honorable to God, all that by Sin we had forfeited, was redeemed; a New
Testament, which is all our Salvation and all our Desire, is sealed and made
sure; a new and living Way of return into God's Acquaintance is opened. This is
God's Gift, but through Jesus Christ our Lord. Blessing and Honor, and Glory and
Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever
and ever. Amen.

Acquaintance with God is now offered to Men. To Men, both, without Strength,
and unable to help themselves, (any more than a disordered Clock to mend it
self:) and Ungodly, and unworthy that God should help them, (any more than the
lost Angels.) Moses, and the Prophets, Angels, John Baptist, Christ himself,
and his Apostles, all proclaim this Good will to Men. The Heavens are not so
thick set with Stars, as the Holy Scriptures with Invitations, to return unto
Acquaintance with God. With Counsels, with Commands, with Directions, with very
Obsecrations and Entreaties to us, to hasten into it. All of them manifesting,
that we are not, as Devils, in a State remediless. That every one of us is
called to Repentance, tho not one of them is so! And that, although God gives not
unto all Men, that Grace which eventually saves them, yet, he gives them what
leads to that which is saving; and, all who go without his special Gifts, do
meritoriously procure the loss of 'em, by their not improving his common Ones,
which they do receive. God mocks not any Man, till he be finally rejected by
him; and he finally rejects not any, till, unto his natural hardness of Heart,
he adds what is voluntary. Insomuch, that Men's Cannot, is their Will-not; tho
they are under perfect Impotence, ^he true Reason that they acquaint not
themselves with God, is their malignant Wilfulness. And, every Sinner's
Damna^ion is verily his Option. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self! Be it
awfully and di^tinctly considered in the next place;

Acquaintance with God is farther broken by every presumptuous Actual Sin.
Original Sin first brake it, and Actual Sin increases the Breach. This it
does, Judicially; for as it deserves, God makes it to be, its own Punishment.
He Forsakes such as Forsake him; and punishes Strangeness with Estrangement.
Withholding those his Communications, without which Acquaintance dies. Saying
of them who Perversely will not, that Penally they shall not, be Acquainted
with him! Likewise, Naturally it does it; for, what is Sinning but a kind of
going out from the Presence of the Lord? A turning away of the Simple; a
Departing from the Living God; a saying to God, Depart from us! As often as we
Sin, we act the part of corrupt Nature; and thereby, an Unregenerate Man makes
himself more a Child of Wrath, than he was by Nature. And, a Regenerate one
brings himself back, in some Degree, to what he was by Nature; even a stranger
unto God. Indeed there are Degrees of Sinning; the lowest, is that of
Infirmity; the highest is sinning Wilfully and with pure Delight: From this
latter, every Regenerate Man is freed; but from the former, no one is. Now, in
the Language of the Gospel, he lives without Sin, who lives without wilful
Sin, and does not Fall into Gross Sin. Who so-acts-up to his Light and Grace
received, that though he has his daily Infirmities, yet he is bright and clean
from scandalous Sins. Which be they, that do principally create a distance, and
separate between God and his Servants. In short; One Sin destroys much good.
And the exclamation is as just in this case as in any; Behold how great a
Matter a little fire kindles?

Acquaintance with God is Entered by Repentance and Faith. These, though they
are not the Causes of God's exalting us unto his Acquaintance, they are
necessary Qualifications in all whom He will exalt unto it. Repentance includes
Heartbreaking Sorrow for Sin, and sincere Resolution to forsake it. Necessary
this is, by virtue of the Divine Command, and by the Condecency and fitness
which it is of, both unto God, and unto our selves. Unto God; for, neither
would it become his Wisdom, to make us a second time his Friends, without our
Grief and Shame for having made our selves his Enemies: nor could it consist
with his Holiness, to Forgive and Advance us, while so Sinful and Senseless.
Unto our selves also; for if Unrelenting and Unreformed, what so much as
Inclination is in us to Acquaintance with God? Prodigals never list to return
to their Father, till their Hearts are broken for Running away from him. Again,
Faith in our Redeemer is no less Commanded, or less Congruous. A Faith seated
in Mind and Heart; and receiving Christ in all parts of his Office, which are
inseparably connexed. Unto this Grace, Justification is specially attributed;
and it is certain, that none but the Justified are Acquainted with God.
Eminently this Grace contains the Seed of Evangelical Obedience. And is that
which Crucifies our Lusts, Overcomes the World, Quenches the Darts of the
Devil, and Works by the Love of God. Without which, what Acquaintance with God?
The God who is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil: and consequently, Without
this Faith is not to be pleased. To be pleased with us, or to be pleased and
served by us. Briefly then, the Impenitent and the Unbelieving are Swine, to
whom the Pearl of God's Acquaintance neither is, or can be vouchsafed. He that
Repents not, must Perish! He that Believes not, the Wrath of God abides on
him!

Acquaintance with God, is preserved by the Use of his Ordinances and the
Exercise of our Graces. Ordinances, or God's ordained Means, must be used.
Without these, we are not Brought into his Acquaintance, nor Kept in it. It is
an Acquaintance, which in this Life is but Imperfect; and, not as in Heaven,
Immediate. The holy Word, is the Seed of which it is Begot; and the Food by
which it is Maintained. Wherefore, as all the Ordinances are propounded by God,
with a Promise and a Threat; so, they are followed by the Friends of God with
Hope and with Fear. Experience of Benefit by them, edgeth their Appetites unto
them. O God, early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts, my Flesh longs, to
see thy Power and thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary, Psalm.
61.1, 2. Necessity also compels them; the Hunger of their Souls, like that of
Bodies, makes them to break through Stone Walls, to get unto Ordinances. For they
feel Decays; and much lacking unto all their Graces; and much ground lost in
many of their Combats, between Flesh and Spirit. And they know, that there is
no Help without Watching at God's Gates, waiting at the Posts of his Doors; and
it is there they must find Life and Favor of the Lord, Prove. 8.34, 35. Besides,
there is in them a Nature and an Instinct, which, without such Argument,
carries them unto Ordinances. As it carries newborn Children to the Dugs; and
Chickens, as soon as they are out of the Shell, to the shroud of the Hen's
Wing. A Native inbred Desire, carries the one and the other. 1 Pet. 2.2. As
Newborn Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word that ye may Grow: i. e. Let
internal Appetite draw you! Babes, are not urged to the Breast with Syllogisms.
In short; the same thing that makes Fishes to keep in the Waters that breed
them, makes the Friends of God to keep to the Ordinances which convert them.
And to prefer a Threshold in them, before a Throne without them.

It deserves our best Consideration, as plain a Truth as it is; that, in the
Ordinances we speak of, [in Reading, Hearing the Word, Celebrating the Lords
Supper, Meditation, Prayer, and holy Conference;] God draws near unto Us, and
We draw near unto God. God draws near unto us; the Ordinances are called the
very Face of God, Genesis 4.16. Cain went out from the presence of the Lord; that
is, he forsook the Ordinances of his Worship. The Ordinances, wherein his
Promise is to COME unto us, Ex. 20.24. to MEET with us, and COMMVNE with us,
Ex. 25.22. Though God be every where Present, and fills Heaven and Earth with
his Presence, it is said of old, that his Glory filled the Temple, the Place of
his Worship; signifying his particular special Presence of Love, and Grace, and
Influence upon Souls, to be in his Ordinances. These therefore are the great
King's Presence-Chambers! Again, We draw near unto God in Ordinances, also. Our
Worshipping in them, is named our Coming and Appearing before God, Psalm. 42.2.
Worshippers, are styled a People NEAR unto Him; and Men Idolatrous or Profane,
are said to be FAR from Him. It Is true, the Worst of Men are at no Local
distance from God; nor is it a Local nearness that we affirm God's Servants to
enjoy in Ordinances, but a Spiritual one. He is not Far from any one of us; in
Him we Live, Move, and have our Being. He is Over all by his Power, Through all
the World by his Providence, In all his Saints by his Spirit. The Spirit, by
whom they are Brought and Kept nigh Him, and are excited with frequence to Draw
most near to Him in his Ordinances. Which, as Jacob's Ladder, have their Top in
Heaven, though their Foot on Earth. And whereon, as God descends to us, we do
Ascend to God. The Lord is nigh to all that Call upon Him.

Howbeit, without the Exercise of Graces, vain is the Use of Ordinances. Such
Use, is very Profaness; and no Mean, but the Bane of Acquaintance with God.
For, what is such Worship, but Lies and Deceit? Hos. 11. ult. Think we, that we
can Come to God, a Spirit, upon Bodily Feet? Or, that there is any beneficial
Approach to Him, but with the Heart? Or, with any thing of the Heart, but the
Holy Virtues of it? Briefly, thus; in every Ordinance, we must set forward
Repentance; It is unto his Mourners, that in Ordinances God comes down with
Comforts; Isa. 57.15. We must act Faith; what we Feel our selves to Want, we
must Believe God able and willing to Give. To wit, for the sake of Christ, who
has paid for it on Earth, and pleads for it in Heaven. The Scripture bids him
not think to Receive any thing, who in Ordinances asks without Faith and
Wavering; Jam. 1.6, 7. We must act Hope; this is the Waiting Grace. It is an
Expectation, that is Certain, because built on the Rock of Divine Promises; and
Quickening both Desire and Action, because of its Objects attractive excellency;
and Quieting also, till God's time of bestowing it does come; because Hope is
it self a very Foretaste of its Object's sweetness! And there is a Rejoicing in
Hope, as well as in Possession. No wonder therefore, that there is a Patience
of Hope, without the Exercise whereof in an Ordinance, our Hearts be either
Frozen and Negligent, or Furious and Impatient. When we Hope for God's
Salvation, then we do his Commandments, Psalm. 119.166. We must also put forth
Love; for, this is the Uniting Grace. By its Desire we run to an Object, by its
Delight we rest in it. Desire, the first act of Love, is as Thirst; Delight,
which is its other Act, is Satisfaction. An Ordinance without these is as a
Feast where there is no Appetite, or Eating. But, what says our Savior? If a
Man Love me he shall be Beloved of my Father, and I will Love him, and will
Manifest my self unto him. We will Come unto him and make our Abode with him,
Joh. 14.21, 23. We must likewise express Humility; because of our Natural
distance from God, which is never to be reduced, and our Moral distance, which
is but in part removed. Who can measure the Distance between Infinite and
Finite? Between a God, and a Creature? Or, the Distance that is between Perfect
Holiness, and little beside Guilt and Filth? Between Him in whose sight Angels
are not clean, and Creatures that proclaim themselves to be Sinks of Sin; and
to need no less than a Fountain of Grace! The Man unto whom God will look in
any Ordinance, is the Poor and Contrite in Spirit that trembles at his Word,
Isa. 66.2. Then only we Worship, when our Souls bow down, and our Spirits
Kneel, before God our Maker.

Thus, is Acquaintance with God maintained. By his Communications unto us, and
our Exercising Graces and Performing Duties toward Him. A blessed
Reciprocation, wherein He descending to us in a way of Bounty, we ascend up
unto him in a way of Duty! Happy is the People that is in such a Case! Happy is
the People whose God is the Lord! Wherefore, lastly,

Acquaintance with God is Interrupted, and broken by these particulars. These,
into which we easily Fall; and under which we must deeply Suffer as often as we
do so. Namely,

1. Presumptuous Sins. Sins committed, not by the Error of the Understanding,
and named Sins of Ignorance or Incogitancy; nor by the rashness and
precipitance of the Affections, and named Sins of Infirmity; but, committed by
the rebellious Will; which notwithstanding the Dictate of the Mind offered to
it, is swayed by the Lust of brutish Affection, and rushes into the abominable
thing that God hates! These, bear the name of Presumptuous Sins. And, such is
their Malignity, that they alienate God from the Soul, and the Soul from God.
They are said to Separate, Isa. 59.2. And, know we not their Effect, upon the
Man of God's own Heart? His own words do argue, that, they made him fear
himself to be a Cast-a-way. Cast me not away from thy Presence, and take not
thy Holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11. In short; where wilful Sins do not die,
no Acquaintance with God can Live. It must lay us in a Swoon, till their
Mortification.

2. Rejected Duties. Known Duties, declined, as to Frequence, or as to Fervence
in them. As slow as the Lord is unto Wrath, he will bear no such Slights of his
Love. For, what a Contempt is weariness of the Supreme King's Service, and
Benefactor's Acquaintance? What a Blasphemy is it, in practice to say, We are
Lords, and will come no more unto thee! Jer. 2.31. What a senseless Iniquity is
it, as well as a Contumelious? For never could any answer to God's Query, What
have I done unto thee, and wherein have I wearied thee? Mic. 6.3. If we have
full Stomachs, and loath God's Honeycombs, we shall not go long without feeling
his Rods and Scorpions. The Vials of his Anger shall be poured out, and the
wonted Aids and Comforts of his grieved Spirit be suspended. It Is more than
probable, that till we stir up our selves, and fill our Life with Duties, and
our Duties with Graces, we shall find our selves emptied of our Hopes of
Heaven, and filled with the Fears of Hell. My seldom-praying has made me so
often-despairing, says one; My long Fasts from Duty, have taken away all my
Appetite unto it. And, what says another? For my sake, let all Christians
beware of Coldness in Ordinances; it has been the Death of my Hopes, and
gives me a Life of nothing but Fears. It is said of some Sovereign Potions,
that if taken cold, their Virtue is Malignant; they rather kill than heal. I am
much more certain, that the Ordinances, which, being attended with Zeal, lift
up toward Heaven; when Lukewarmness obtains, they do throw us clean contrary.
As many as desire a flourishing Acquaintance with him, let them seek the Lord
continually, and with all their Heart and their Soul. Knowing, that all drawing
back tends to its Perdition! Lastly,

3. Pursued Vanities. By Vanities, I intend this World's Idols. Sensual
Pleasures, which are but Swines Delights. Riches, of Gold, that is but Dust;
and of Pearl, which is no more than the Sea's Froth. Honor and Praise of Men,
which is but their unseen Conceit, and their favorable Breath. Of these, the
condemned Pursuit is such as is Absolute and Vltimate, neither Submissive nor
Moderate. When we prosecute them, as resolved any manner of way to gain them.
Making them our highest Ambition. Impatient of their being withheld from us, by
the undoubted Proprietor. And flagrant in the desire of them; so panting after
them, as the Heart after the Waterbrooks. The Apostle's Assertion is thus to be
taken; If any Man (thus) love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him,
1 John 2.15. The Throne, and the Bed admit but one. To subject us to the World,
is to depose God. To take the World into our Hearts, is to put him far from
them. How much less, says another Apostle? The Friendship of the World, is
Enmity with God; whosoever will be a Friend of the World, is an Enemy of God!
Jam. 4.4. When the Earth is interposed between the Sun and us, it must needs be
Night; and when earthly things get between God and our Hearts, there as
necessarily follows an Estrangement and Darkness. The Psalmist's Word speaks it
in short; The Covetous the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10.3. Be it added, lastly;

They err, not knowing the Scriptures and the Grace of God; who, imagine Sins
of unavoidable Infirmity, inconsistent with his Acquaintance and Amity. The
Penitent, who resists them, is not alienated by them. And, as the innumerable
Moats in the Air, hinder not the descent of the Sun's bright and benign Beams
upon us; neither do the numberless Failings of good Men, deprive them of the
rich Consolations of God. Sins of mere Weakness, do rather excite Pity, than
kindle Wrath; so far they be from interrupting Acquaintance!

Which is not broken, neither, by the moderate Employments, or Comforts of this
Life. The Shop, and the Plow, are not only lawful, but necessary. Let there be
just Care, that the lean Kine eat not up the Fat; that, the Kingdom of Heaven
be sought, and first sought; then, do civil Callings subserve and not prejudice
our higher Sacred One. So, for the Comforts foresaid, they are more than
Innocent, when Temperate. If we take them by the Rules of God's Word, we shall
find them both harmless, and useful to his Frindship. We do so take them, when
we choose none but what are of good Report; (for, he that breaks the Hedge
thereof, a Serpent shall bite him;) and when we use not any, to the wounding of
Piety, Charity, and Chastity; (for, by marrying of a Wife, as well as by
dallying with a Harlot, a Man breaks the Peace of God; if his Use of Liberty
degenerates into Licentiousness; and if he suffers it to make him break the
Precepts of God.) Pleasure regularly chosen and used, is Health to the Navel,
and Marrow to the Bones; a Servant to Life and Godliness. The Heart of the
Wise, is, therefore, in the House of such Mirth. And, may I not say it? Look as
God first created Man, in a Garden of Delight; He mostly new creates him also,
where the Voice of Joy and Gladness, Sensual as well as Spiritual, is heard.
The innocent Mirth of a Christian, casts a Luster on his Religion, and makes
it attractive. Removes from it the Reproach of Sowrness and Asperity.
Forth-shews its Sweetness and Alacrity; whereof, Men that try it not, think it
to be destitute. Yea, and as Cyprian and Justin of old, because they think it
to be destitute, they are unpersuadable to try it. Insomuch, that Stoical and
Monkish Austerity, gives Occasion of Reproach, and makes the Way of God to be
blasphemed. So far it is from adorning the Gospel, from making it appear
Amiable, and from winning Men to the Love of it. It was then when they that
believed did eat their Meat with Gladness, that the Lord added daily to the
Church such as should be saved! Morosity was never other than a back Friend to
Christianity!

The Scruples of some others, do require that this be added; sc. that,
Acquaintance with God is not inconsistent with Darkness and Doubts of his Love.
The Life of it, consists not in Raptures and Extacies of Joy; which God gives,
as, in absolute Sovereignty and infinite Wisdom, he sees fit and pleases. How
often do Children of Light sit in Darkness and see no Light? Clouds of
Witnesses, are every where to be found; yea, the whole Sky of the Church, is
full of them. Wherefore, in a word; the natural Sun makes Gold and Silver,
where it does not shine with any Luster. And the Sun of Righteousness rises on
many with Healing in his Wings, to whom he does not, of a long time, give
rapturous Sensations of the same. Neither know they well what Spirit they are
of, who think the holy One to be no Sanctifier, where He is not (at the same
time) a Comforter!

. 2. Of the Peace and Good, following Acquaintance with God.
The Hebrew Dialect takes Peace, for the whole Element of Goodness. For no less
than all that is desirable. Nor can the Gain of God's Acquaintance be supposed
to be less. Omnia habet qi habet habentem omnia. To enjoy Him who is all Good,
is to enjoy no less than all of it. Uncreated Goodness giving us its
Acquaintance, how shall it not with the same freely give us all things? All
that is necessary of created Goodness. God is Faithful, and his Acquaintance is
thus Gainful. His Friends are Kings, as well as Priests; and richer than the
Persian Kings, who went a begging to Projectors to invent them more Pleasures.
These are blessed, with more than they can ask or think. But (because Particulars
are most affective) that we may be provoked, in the Faith and Love hereof, to
pursue it with becoming Zeal and Vigor, attend we but these two Positions. Yet
sufficient, one would think, to reform the most Obstinate in evil VVays, and to
encourage the least Resolute in good Ones. The Lord clothe them with a Power
which none may be able to resist!

The Properties which commend this Peace are many. e. gr. 1. It is Universal;
One, which contains all; sc. Peace with God, with Conscience, with Creatures,
and with Death.

Peace with God; with God, whose Wrath is Hell, and whose Peace is Heaven. A
Peace, which the Apostle says, passes all Understanding, Phil. 4.7. This
follows Acquaintance with God. When Adam sinned, Enmity was made; Enmity, that
is a Reciprocation of Hatred. Christ Jesus makes Friendship, which is a
Reciprocation of Love! And, how? Partly, by his Blood, satisfying God's
Justice, and meriting his Mercy for us. Partly by his Spirit, mortifying our
Malice, and reviving all Grace in us. Propitiating God to us, and qualifying us
for God's Love and Acquaintance! Without the first, God would be a consuming
Fire to us; and without the other, we should never conquer our Fear, or quench
our Malice against him. But, by means of both, there is mutual Peace. The Peace
whence do spring the sweet Ones following;

Peace with Conscience; one less known by the most accurate Description, than
by the least Fruition. It can be but darkly shadowed forth, by the liveliest
Colors of Language; but faintly represented by Metaphors. What Calmness is to
the Sea, what Serenity is to a Day, what Health is to a Body, that Peace of
Conscience is unto a Man! That, and much more. But, to such as have felt the
Terrors of Conscience, this Peace will little need Letters of Recommendation.
For, as those do make a real Tophet, and give us Fire and Brimstone to drink;
this Peace makes a very Paradise, and gives us of the Wine which is drank in
the Kingdom of God. Wine, that makes merry indeed, and in nothing terrified.
Because, as no Winds, save those in its own Bowels, can ever move the Earth; no
Troubles, but those within a Man's own Heart, can ever break it. Now, it is the
Royalty of God as King, to make War and Peace; and of God as Judge, to speak
either Trouble or Comfort. Wherefore, Conscience as a Subject, and as an
Officer, must hear what God says; and speak Peace, when he does. And, Blessed
are they who hear its joyful sound! Unto them is given also,

Peace with Creatures. When Man rebelliously took up Arms against God, the
Creatures loyally turned to fight against Man. It became them as Subjects, to
espouse the Quarrel of their Sovereign. And, as his Host or Army to fight his
Battles; all of them in their Courses. This they did accordingly, from the
first; and this they still do. From the highest Cherubin to the poorest Worm,
and very inanimate Particle of the Creation, all stand in Battel-array against
us, till we lay down our Arms against their Lord and ours. But upon our
Reconciliation to God, their War is ended; Angels Love us, all the rest do some
way serve us, none do Hurt us. The Stones of the Field, and the Beasts, are
Friends again with us; and that confirmed by a League, Job 5.23. The Sucking
Child may play on the Hole of the Asp; and the Weaned Child put his Hand on the
Cockatrice Den; Isa. 11.8. True; the Tamest of them may Wound us, by accident;
and the Wildest be our Death, by their natural Fierceness; but, neither of them
shall ever break their League, and Hurt us. The King who commissioneth them,
engages, that they shall do nothing but what shall turn to our Good, Romans
8.28. Insomuch, that a Man Acquainted with God, dwells safe from fear of Evil,
while he lives in the Place of Dragons, Prove. 1. ult. Nor is this all; there
remains,

Peace with Death; which, considered in a natural Respect, is a Rending asunder
Soul and Body; the things whose Union, is the nearest and dearest in all the
Creation. And considered in a Penal respect, is Casting into the Fire prepared
for the Devil and his Angels; for, what less is Sin's Wages, which is Death's
common Name? In both respects, it will be acknowledged to be a King of Terrors.
A Dread Sovereign, to all over whom it does Reign. But, the King-on-Zion-Hill
is He who alone does great Wonders; and, for his Favorites, Binds this King
of Terrors in Chains, this cruel Prince in Fetters of Iron. Saying, Touch not
mine anonited, and do my People no harm! Yea, not content to foil this
Apolluon, and destroyer, as an Enemy; He changes its Nature, and makes it a
very Friend unto his Friends. Death is Yours, says the Apostle to such; that
is, your Friend and Servant. Thus Catholic, is the blessed Peace that we speak
of; with God above, with Conscience within, with all the Creatures in this
World, and with Death our Exodus, or going out of the World. Another Property
of it is this;

2. It is a Fruitful Peace. All manner of Fruit it bears. Fruit of Praise unto
God, and of Profit unto Men, and of Pleasure unto God, Men, and Angels. Hence,
is that Joy in Heaven made, over one Creature who, acquainting his Soul with
God, Enters into this Peace, Luke 15. Yea, hence it was, that, Jesus Christ
grudged not the Blood of his Cross, to purchase this Peace. Blood which he
would not have shed, but for one of such Benefit as passes all Understanding;
so the Apostle speaks of this Peace, and, so by the foregoing Property this
appears to be. Wherefore, I proceed;

3. It is a Durable Peace. If any thing, Immortality must enhanse Value;
Everlastingness must make things of Value to be Invaluable. And as for this
Peace, it is Eternal, if Divine Truth be Inviolable. Hear it speaking in Isa.
54.10. The Mountains shall depart and the Hills be removed, but my Kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed,
says the Lord that has Mercy on thee. And in Jer. 32.40. I will make an
Everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good; and I will put my Fear in their Hearts, that they shall not depart from
me. Astonishing Grace! I willnot, and They shall-not! This Peace is as much
stronger than Adam's, as God with us in our Nature is stronger than that
earthly Father.

4. It Is an Incomparable Peace. Rarity, adds Sweetness to Honey; and the good
things which are not to be Matched, are hard to be Rated. But, is this Peace to
be paralleled? What, did God spare one of the Angels that sinned? Did He excuse
one from the Chains of Darkness, and restore him to Peace? Was ever our God,
the God of a Second Peace, before? The Angels Peace did not Cost the Price
wherewith ours was Bought. It was not by the Blood of Jesus, that they were
made nigh to God. It was their Happiness not to want a Peacemaker, it is our
Happiness to have one, and one no less than Immanuel. Wherefore, consequently,

5. It is an Admirable Peace. Our Savior himself, does express his great
Wonder; Joh. 3.16. God So Loved the World. The holy Angels pry into it, (...).
with very Astonishment, 1 Pet. 1.12. Astonished at the Peace, which God's
blessed Son died to make for rebellions Servants. The Supreme Judge died to make
for Malefactors. Never was Love like this Love; it passes all Understanding.
And never was Peace like to this Peace, the Knowledge whereof is high, we cannot
attain it. In the Day of Judgment, wherein it shall be fully Manifested, God
will be admired in his Saints. i. e. Admired by Joying-Angels, by
Envying-Devils and Reprobates, and by Praising-Saints themselves, for the Glory
of the Peace to which He advances them. Nevertheless, mistake not this, as
though, before that Day, we were to have little Peace; but know that, in Truth,

6. It is a Present Peace also. You are no sooner Acquainted with God, but it
is Yours. You have the sure Grant of it, tho you have not so soon the sweet
Sense of it. There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ, though their
Fear be that there is nothing else to them! Nor is it unworthy of notice; that,
this is never questioned by them in their Extremities; but, that, if they do
Believe in Jesus Christ, they are Justified by the Faith of Christ. And, if
their suspected Faith be sound, their Joy ought to be Unspeakable and Full of
Glory. Moreover, as paradoxal as it may seem, I add concerning it, as it is in
this Life;

7. It is a Joyful Peace, and a Glorious. So the Possessors (than whom the
Earth has not more credible Witnesses) do proclaim. We have Peace with God;
And what then? We Rejoice, and not only so, but we Glory, Romans 6.1, 2, 3. We
Rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. They know that
they Ought, and they Chide themselves for the Delinquency, when they do not;
Why art thou Cast down O my Soul? why art thou Disquieted? Psalm. 42. ult. q. d.
Why does not the Wine of God's Peace, Cheer thy Heart? Why does not its Oil,
make thy Face to shine? Are Guilts thy Trouble? God pardons the Penitent. Are
Lusts thy Plagues? God subdues them in those that seek to Him. Infirmities
remain; but God is Healing them. Enemies remain; but God is Conquering them.
Temptations remain; but God is Rebuking them. Sufferings remain; but, God is
Sweetning them. Not suffering them to be useless; or to be unto other than very
good Purpose; as, of Instructing my Mind, Humbling my Heart; Checking my Sin;
Exciting my Grace; Making me more ready for Glory. Let them be miserable that
can be Miserable, says Luther; my Peace is made with God, and I cannot be
Miserable. In short; Joy, is a Tree of Life; and God's Peace, is Joy; his Peace
on Earth is so. If any Temporal Good be Denied us, this takes off the Desire of
it. If any be Delayed, this makes to wait the Time of it. And whatever is
Granted, this Sweetens the Use of it. No such Anodyne is to be found, no such
Medicine as the Peace of God. This Peace He gives to such as Acquaint
themselves with Him, in the House of their Pilgrimage. As to what more He
gives of his Royal Bounty, when He takes them up into his own House above,
this only shall be said for their Consolation; It vastly transcends our
Comprehension, and, the one half cannot be told.

The Gift of this Peace to all that are Acquainted with God, is unquestionable.
Even self-evident; and needing no Proof. Heathens knew, and taught the most
certain Welfare of Men acquainted with God. Plutarch and Seneca do blazon it.
Account God the supreme Rewarder, and Reverence him accordingly; then shall
thou have all Good, and fear no Evil, says the first. He is sure to be a
Freeman, that kindly submits himself to God his Sovereign, says the other.
Deo parere est Libertas. Senec. de Yet. Beat. Yea, the Devil, of old, did
acknowledge it; Job 1.9. Does Job Fear God for naught? Have thou not made an
Hedge about him? The Father of Lies spoke this truth, though for his own Ends;
q. d. All the Powers of Hell cannot break his Peace, that is a Friend of the
God of Peace. As many as do know God, they proclaim Him to be thus Good; and no
small part of the Scriptures consists of their Proclamations! Besides, how
does the Nature of God certify it? God is Love, and Goodness is his Delight.
And is it possible, that infinite Bounty should less richly feast it self with
its Redeemed? How sure does the Divine Word make it? How fast does the Oath of
God bind it? Heb. 6.17. How solemnly does He in Baptism, and the Lord's Sapper
confirm it? Unbelief would be almost as impossible, as it is unrighteous, if
all this were duly weighed by us! I therefore hasten to my principal Business;
which is,

Exhortation.
But, after all that has been said, needs any Man to be pressed, to acquaint
himself with God? What, is there any Man that believes not this Report? Or,
believing it, will dare to deny or delay seeking his Peace with God? Jacob
hears that Esau is coming against him, and he straitway sends Presents, and
makes humble submission. Adonijah fears the Effects of King Solomon's Wrath,
and flies to the Horns of the Altar. The King of Assyria no sooner falls under
King Ahab's Power, but Messengers are sent with Ropes about their Necks, to beg
his Peace. In our Savior's Parable, a King that has ten thousand Men, hears
of one who has twenty thousand, coming forth against him; and was so wise,
that while he was yet far off, he sent and treated for Peace. The Men of Tire
and Sidon displease Herod; and they delay not to find an Advocate, and make a
Suit for Reconciliation. What! shall the Peace of breathing Dust be so hastily
sought, and may any Man be supposed to be yet averse, or so much as unresolved
to seek God's Peace? Yes, surely; and (of Faithfulness unto God and your
selves) I must say thus much: The Visible Church, as well as the World, exercet
Histrioniam, does disguise and act Parts. Two sorts of Men comprehend all the
Living; such as are wholly averse from God's Acquaintance, and such as are
culpably defective in their Affections and Actions for it. I except not such as
sit under Ordinances of greatest Light and Power; wherein they have most of
Sunshine and of Thunder. He who looks down from Heaven on us, to see if we
understand and do seek God: He sees that all are gone aside, and gone off from
him, either totally, or in such part as I have said. And, with both he has a
just Quarrel, and a Fearful. With both therefore, is the Business of every
Ambassador; and to each of them I direct my Exhortation.

The Lord convince both, of the Matter of Fact, that it is thus with them; and
of the penal Evil of it; that it is their horrid Sin, and deepest Misery to
have it so. The Lord so prepare, and incline the Hearts of both, to take his
Counsels; which are not more truly, or more evidently, to our Duty than to our
Interest, Temporal and Eternal. In short; The Lord's Voice thus cries unto
both, and the Man of Wisdom shall hear and do; and thereby hear and live!

Awake; get out of the Bed of your Sloth; pull aside the Curtains you have
drawn about you, to keep out the inviting Light. The foolish Virgins sleep, and
the Wise do slumber. Both, in different Degrees, do bind up their spiritual
Senses. So that, by the former, nothing of God is Heard, Seen, or Felt, from
Morning to Night; and, by the latter, very little! Dream, they do both of them;
but Reason and Argue, in this Temper they cannot. And, as from sleeping
Sampson, the holy Spirit departs from them! But, Sirs, Sleep not you, as do
others! Be not of them, of whom God does complain, that they do not stir up
themselves; but, even as a Madman in a Storm, do sleep on the top of a Mast!
Live not thoughtless and careless of God, as one with whom you have not to do!
nor desire to have to do. Say not to Him in practice, Depart from us! Be gone
out of our Minds and Hearts! But, as the Spouse, Now will I arise! As the
Prodigal, when come to himself, I will arise. As the poor perishing Lepers, Why
sit we here till we die? The Ease of spiritual Sleep, is short; the
Midnight-Cry soon breaks it. The Venom of it is mortal; nothing more deadly
than Sleep in a Lethargy. In a word; Nothing slays Sinners, or wounds
Saints, more than Sloth. In sacred Things, he who is not doing, is undoing;
whoever is not busy, is not holy. And of them who are so, every slothful
Servant is more a Thief than a Servant. The slothful in Business, is Brother to
the slothful out of it. God's Acquaintance is both entered and exercised by
Diligence. Memorable is the Royal Psalmist's word, Thou have commanded us to
keep thy Precepts diligently.

Think; strain your Minds in the Thoughts; Commune with your Hearts frequently
and seriously, concerning the Excellency and Necessity of God's Acquaintance.
Being come to Thinking, beware of mispending your Thoughts; by whose waste, not
a few Souls are lost. The Number being great, who mind little of Religion more
than the Husks. The Formalities, which swallow up many Men's Care, are, in
Reality, no more. And in fiery Contentions about them, the most do seem rather
to disgorge their Malice, than to discharge their Conscience. For, what
Conscience can dream, either, that any Way of Religion can please God, without
Acquaintance with Him? Or, that Difference in those Notions and Practices,
which consist with his Acquaintance, is not very tolerable without Strife and
Variance? Wherefore, shake this Viper off from your Hands; away with the
Serpent and take Fish, away with the Stone and take Bread. Look to the End of
the Commandment, which is Charity out of a pure Heart, and a good Conscience,
and Faith unfeigned. Mind you the Soul and Body of Religion; be less intent
upon the Garb and Dress. Be a thousand times more careful to excel in
Acquaintance with God, which all do agree to be Saving-Religion; than to
promote this or that Opinion, about which Men of unquestionable Integrity
cannot agree, whether it be from Heaven, or of Men! Of these Things put your
selves in remembrance; You were created to be acquainted with your Creator!
Your Conscience, his Envoy in your Hearts, tells you this. Your Minds were
given you to know Him; and your Wills and Affections, to Choose and Love Him.
The Son of God was sent to die for you, and his Spirit is sent down from Heaven
to live in you, that ye might be acquainted with God! And, if you refuse to be
so, you vex God the Holy Ghost, and put God the Son to open shame. The Helps
vouchsafed in the Gospel for God's Acquaintance, are incomparably greater than
those afforded under the Law. So that if you improve not your Advantages, you
receive greater Damnation than Old Testament Sinners. Your Sin is aggravated,
and your Sentence will be so. God's Acquaintance, is great Gain; and all the
World without it, is Vanity and Vexation. If you enjoy not God, the most
despicable Insect enjoys as much as you; and if you do enjoy Him, the highest
Cherub enjoys no more than you. In God's Acquaintance there is great Reward,
even upon Earth, where there is least of it. If acquainted with Him, you can
have no Wants, but he will supply them; no Losses, but he will repair them; no
Combats, but he will be Second, yea Principal in them; and make the Victory as
sure as the Fight. In short; Without God's Acquaintance, no Sin will die in
you, and no Divine Grace will live. Without this Acquaintance, Enmity to God
will be bewrayed; or, if buried, buried alive. Heavenly Virtue, and Love of
God, will not be seen in you; or, if it be, it will be seen to be but painted,
not engraved. He must be a Man of such Thought, that is ever acquainted with
God. With such Thought, his Heart must stir him up, and his Spirit must make
him willing! Exodus 35.21.

Resolve; purpose; let a Vote pass in your Souls; and deliberately Design, to
get and increase Acquaintance with God. Resolution is the only generous Issue
of Thought. Which, has never been rightly fixed upon our Objects, or into our
Hearts, when it is barren, and bears it not. Determine now, therefore; and
fully engage to pursue Acquaintance with God. Always to consult, is as bad as
never to consult at all. For, what is Consultation without Action? And what can
be either acted before it is attempted, or be attempted before it be resolved?
In vain I speak, and in vain you hear any further, if this Resolution be not
first settled! If your Wills remain still in suspense, and you halt between
two; between God's Friendship, and the World's; it were more expedient that I
should sit down and weep over you, than preach on, and direct you to what you
intend not. The Ark of God, and the Idol of Philisthia, could not stand upon
the same Altar. Neither can a Choice of God's Acquaintance and the World's,
consist in the same Heart. Heaven and Earth be not such Equals, as that they
should compound, and agree to take equal Shares in our Affections. So that if
any thing be done to purpose, to this Effect must be your Language: What have I
to do any more with Idols? I do renounce them; with full purpose applying my
self to seek God's Acquaintance. I am on and off no longer now, but fixed. I
see the Necessity, and cease from the Impertinence of pleading Difficulty. Let
it cost me right Hand, and right Eye; they shall go, if need be! I will not
give over seeking this Acquaintance, though I die. No Man comes into God's
Acquaintance and Favor, till he is made thus willing in the Day of his Power!

Hope the best; if your spiritual Hands hang down, and Knees be feeble, yet
lift them up; Hope even against Hope, that, as much as you have provoked Him to
Vengeance, God will, now, bring you to his Acquaintance. That, now he has given
you to Will, he will also strengthen you to Do, all that is necessary. Humble
you much, with the afflictive Thoughts of your long Enmity unto Him. But, join
not with the Tempter, against your self and your so gracious Father. Do not
tell your selves, that you shall never see any Good come of your good Purposes.
That, they are in vain; and it is not likely, that the Majesty so Holy, should
ever be propitiated to you, or you be made suitable or acceptable to Him. But,
that, as when He was willing, you would not be reconciled; so, now that you are
willing, he will not incline to Friendship. Give him not so insolently the Lie,
with your Mouth or Hearts; and abhor the thought of his being unreconcilably
angered, or, your being unalterably wicked. Tell your selves the truth; He is
not implacable by the Oblation of his Son, nor are you unreformable by the
Power of his Spirit. A Spirit, which he has promised to give unto them that
ask; as you are now resolved to do, and that without ceasing. No Man came ever
into God's Acquaintance, without this Hope and Confidence; that, There is
Forgiveness with him!

Seek as for Silver; search as for hid Treasure, for the sound Knowledge of your
Righteousness, your Strength, and your Steps. Hope, is a Spring of Motion; and
unto nothing more concerning than this, can it move you.

Your Righteousness, is Jesus Christ. His Righteousness, is the true and only,
that satisfies for Iniquity, and meriteth Mercy. The great Apostle protests,
against Trust in any beside. Though, after his Conversion, he was a sort of
incarnate Angel, he dared to plead no other Righteousness at God's Tribunal.
Knowing all other Garments to have both Defects and Defilement, he declares
the Righteousness of God's Son, to be the Robe of his Salvation, Phil. 3.7, 8,
9. Natural Conscience, as soon as it is awake, cries out, What shall I do to be
saved? But, as soon as its Eyes are touched with the Eye Salve of the Gospel,
it sees, that, It can never be saved by what it will ever be able to do! When
we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants.

Your Strength is the Holy Ghost. We have no more Justifying Righteousness than
we receive from Christ; nor any more sanctifying Righteousness than we receive
from the Holy Ghost. The Spirit helps our Infirmities. Look over the Gospel,
you will find him entitled to all. To all Grates, as the Worker of them; to
all Duties, as the Assister in them. He it is, that works all Good in us; and
by whom we are acted when we do what is Good. The Body is not more dead and
unactive without the Soul, than the best Soul is without the Holy Spirit.
Without him we can do nothing. No Man can call Jesus Lord but by the Spirit.

Your Steps (through Christ, and by the Holy Ghost) to God's Acquaintance, are
these. e.gr. Painful Sense of your want of it; for, Blessed are they that
mourn. Longing desire after it; for, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst.
Humble Acknowledgment of your Weakness, and disability to raise your selves to
it; for, Blessed are the poor in Spirit. Like acknowledgment of your being
unworthy that God should raise you up; for, we are Ungodly, as well as without
Strength, and less than the least of God's Mercies. Faith of God's Power and
Readiness, in his Gospel-way, to raise you up to it; for, He that comes to
God, must believe that he is, and is a Rewarder of them that seek him. Faith of
his Willingness, with his Acquaintance, freely to give you all things; for, so
is his Promise, No good Thing will he withhold from the Upright. Lastly, Humble
Boldness in the Faith aforesaid, to trust and serve Him; for, so is the Divine
Prescription, Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace. When you are come
boldly thither, you must lay down the Body before you can get higher: For, it
is so high, that the next Step is Glory, says one of Note in the Church. These
things, Bind on your Fingers, write on the Table of your Hearts! Praying
incessantly, that by the Holy Spirit's strengthening Power, you may ever take
these Steps; and through Christ's meritory Righteousness, be accepted in them.
For this, keep you praying with all Prayer.

Sanctify a Fast; some Time set apart, and go Vow unto the Lord to be his;
solemnly give your selves unto him; present your selves living Sacrifices. With
what solemnity is the Nuptial Bond entered, every where in the World? With what
Solemnity is a Coronation Oath taken? Yet, what is the Pleasure of the one, or
the Honor of the other, to that of the Covenant of Grace? The Covenant, by
which our Maker becomes our Husband? And, we are made Princes! How congruous is
it, that the Day of our entering it, should be kept with greatest Solemnity, and
signalized as a Day never to be forgotten! That, every one joined to God
therein, should all Days of his Life most joyfully commemorate it; saying, This
is the Day whereon I renewed my Baptismal Covenant! Was married to my God, was
crowned with the Honor of his near Acquaintance, and enriched with all Peace
and Good! Thanks be to God on every Remembrance!

That this Renewal of our Baptismal Vow is needful; and the Repetition of it,
upon all proper Occasions, none can question. The Examples that commend it, and
the Reasons that enforce it, are well known. I say but this; God, though no
Debtor at all to us, pleases by Promises of Free Grace, in effect, to become
one. Men love to have their Favors free; are impatient of being fettered by
Promises unto their Alms-fokls; and do reserve to themselves a Power of
revoking their Charity at Pleasure. But, God is Love; and such, that, tho all
his Blessings be Gifts, he condescends to be engaged for the conferring of
them; and allows them in a Sense to have the Quality of Debts. In short; tho
his Word is established in Heaven; and with Him is no shadow of turning; yet
his Mercy is secured by Covenant, and his Covenant secured by Oath. Even, the
highest Oath, by his Life, and by his Holiness. What then? Shall we, who are
Debtors, the deepest; we, whose Gifts unto Him, all are Debts, and ten thousand
times less than our Debts; We, whose Hearts are false, and need be fixed and
fastened; sluggish also, and need to be quickened; shall we think much to be
bound in Vows? Or, shall we dare to trust our Treacherous Spirits without them?
What Bands and Cords can be too many for us! Surely it stands us upon, by these
Vows, as so many Girdles of Truth, to bind on us the whole Armor of God; if,
breaking off our old Agreement with Hell, we would enter and maintain
Acquaintance with God! And thus does every Penitent, who attends the Overture
made by his Redeemer; Let him take hold of my Strength; that he may make Peace
with me, and he shall make Peace with me, Isa. 27.5.

Pay your Vows; prove what is the good, and acceptable, and perfect Will of
God; be not content to keep you from presumptuous Sins, unless the Words of
your Mouth, and the Meditations of your Heart be acceptable in the sight of
God! Vows turn to a sad Account, unless, being bound, you do thus Obey. Taking
heed of Gnats, as well as of Camels; of Moats, as well as of Beams. Ambitious
to please, to well-please, yea and to best-please God. Your Minds proving what
does do so, by studying it out; your Wills, by embracing it; and your active
Powers, by practicing it. Practicing it to the best of your Light, and to the
utmost of your Strength; with all your Mind, and with all your Soul. For, as
fair as the Tree of Knowledge is to look on, the Tree of Life is the best to
feed on. And if practical Holiness be not the Life of our Religion, our Judge
will abominate our Heads of Gold upon Feet of Clay. Follow you therefore the
Apostle's Rule, (too hot for Hypocrites to hold;) Whatsoever things are True,
are Honest, are Just, are Pure, are Lovely, are of good Report; if there be any
Virtue, (i. e. any more virtuous than others) if there be any Praise, (i. e.
more praiseworthy than others) Think on these things, these things do! It is
true, and a most comforting Truth; that, in our weak and tempted State. God
will not reckon every Sin a Revolt! That which we disallow and deplore, He will
not vindictively remember. As Amity between Princes is not broken by what is
done by Pirates, if they are not countenanced by supreme Commanders; so, our
Acquaintance with God is not broke, by every inordinacy of the inferior
Appetite, if it be not indulged by the superior Faculties. If the Will does the
mean time consent that the Law is Holy, Just, and Good, and calls to the
Understanding for Arguments against the breach of it; if the Mind and the Heart
do defy the Sin, the Sin does not then break our Acquaintance. But otherwise;
it works in our Souls a Dread and a Dislike of God. It makes that we neither
dare, nor desire to approach him. And, causes, on God's Part, a sad Restraint,
and suspension of Grace and Peace, as to the usual degree of Communication. Who
knows not what David's Bones felt, for his Sin of this sort? And, who is he,
that has not himself dearly smarted for it? Or, who, that knows God, wonders
at it? He will be Just as well as Merciful in his dealing with his own
Children. And will make them to know, that he can endure no Sin in them, that
they are able to endure in themselves! Sin against Knowledge, being Death to
Acquaintance! Which, if we would maintain effectually to our Peace, we must
walk as we are taught by Divine Grace; denying Ungodliness and worldly Lusts;
i. e. refusing assent to their lying Suggestions of Pleasure and Profit; and
refusing Consent unto their importunate Solicitations. Behaving our selves
soberly, in the Duties of our personal Capacity; Righteously, in relative
Duties to Men; and Godly, in the Duties of immediate Intercourse with God. Then
may we, in Peace, Look for the blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Savior, Jesus Christ!

Thus Lived, and for this looked the rare Christian, whose Decease has
occasioned this Discourse. A Christian much more in Truth than in Appearance.
One of an acquaintance with God, that bare few Leaves with much Fruit.
Sovereign Grace most richly adorned her Person; but my Skill shall not be
strained to garnish her Tomb. Only, as in the Place of a last Exhortation, I
add thus much, not as Panegyric, but as Sermon. Of the Honor of her
Parentage, of the Beauty of her Person, and other common Gifts, which do not
make known God's Love or Hatred; I say not any thing. Ecclesia, haec, tanquam
supervacanea, dimittit; says an Ancient Bishop. Though, in the World these do
make great Figures, the Church takes them for no more than Ciphers. This only I
exhort; The things which some of you have seen in her, more of you have Heard,
and all of you shall Now-Hear, these things Seek, and these Do, and the God of
Peace shall be with you. A summary of them, as for some Years I have both Heard
and Seen them, I give in few words; and in no more than these particulars.

Spiritual Understanding. Extensive Knowledge of Revealed as well as of Natural
Religion; Intensive, of Clear as well as of true Light; and Applicative, taking
all that God says as spoken to ones self, as well as to others. This is what
is wrought by the Unction, which God's Children have from the Holy One. This is
the Wisdom that is unto Salvation. This was eminently in Her of whom we speak,
a Guide unto Duty, and a Keeper therein; a Judge condemning for Neglect of Duty,
and a Lictor, punishing for all done amiss. Other Light, is but Ignis fatuus;
other Knowledge, but Learned Ignorance.

Holy Affections. Holily Directed, by the Dictates of an informed Judgment;
holily Set upon deserving Objects; and holily Proportionated, according to
their various Degrees of Goodness, and Deserts. These Affections, are our Souls
Feet, and Wings; in Actions Natural, Civil, and Religious, these are the things
that move us. Insomuch, that while these are Naught, we cannot do the least
Good. But, when these are Rectified, in the Gospel Sense we are Perfect, and
thoroughly Furnished unto every good Work. The Father and the Fashioner of
Spirits, so regulated the Affections of this his Servant's Spirit; that,
Enemies, if she had any, would confess them to have bin set upon the One thing
necessary! and so set, as has been said!

True Diligence. Such as stirs Promptly, as Flames do Ascend; Earnestly, as for
Life, with all Violence and with both Hands; and Incessantly, as Waters flow
from Fountains. Such was her Industry in Sacred Affairs. Unto them, her
Inclination prevented Human Persuasion; and in them she appeared to be none of
that sad Multitude who so Pray as though they cared not whether they sped; and
so Hear God's Word, as though they desired nothing less than to Profit. Who
ever saw her in Prayer, but most Fervent? in Hearing, but most fixedly Intent?
A most useful Pattern to the Congregation wherein she Worshipped. Her
Perseverance in this, was unfainting to the last; her Spirit was Willing, when
her Flesh was Weak. The very Day before her Ascension, how eagerly did she
Point, when she could not speak; and make Signs when she could utter no Words,
to have Holy Prayer put up? There was no extinction of the Fire upon her Altar;
it Ascended with Her.

Exemplary Patience. A Silently-submitting one, as that of David, who was Dumb,
because it was God who smote him; a Thankfully-Accepting one, as that of Job,
who Blessed God Taking away good things, as well as Giving of them; and a
Chearfully-Receiving one, as that of the Apostle's, who Gloried, or Rejoiced in
Tribulations! In all her Moanings, throughout her long Sickness, I heard no
Murmuring! But a perpetual Acknowledgment of the Divine Goodness, in Mitigating
her Pains, and Moderating her Sorrows!

Profound Thankfulness. Cordial, when the Heart is by Gifts made an Oblation to
the Giver; Oral, when the Mouth is made a Trumpet of his Goodness; Practical,
when it is made the Business of our whole Life, to give him the Glory of his
Bounty. This, which is the Soul of all Religion, was conspicuosly the Exercise
and Delight of her Religious Soul.

Universal Godliness. The highest and most solemn Respects toward God, as the
First Cause, ascribing all Good unto Him, and Trusting Him for all; as the
Chiefest Good, Reverencing of Him and Delighting in Him; as the Supreme Power,
subjecting us to his Authority, and yielding Obedience to his Laws; as the Last
End, Glorifying Him in all Things, and above all Things! O happy Days, when
there shall be found many such manner of Persons, for all holy Conversation and
Godliness!

Christian Charity. Of Pity, toward God's Enemies; of Pardon, toward our own
Enemies; of Complacence in good Men; of Benevolence to all Men. This was her
Sweet and Gentle Temper, her Kind and Meek Spirit! A Temper most Delightful to
her self, most Beneficial to all about her, most Like unto God, and most
Acceptable to Him!

Excellent and regular Moderation. Such Government of the Affections, as
keeps from being brought under the Power of any; either in the Pursuit or Use
of things Temporal. That, wherein the desiring Appetite, is, with Sobriety and
Temperance, restrained from inordinate Pleasure; and the angry Appetite, is,
with Fortitude and Patience bridled from unrighteous Wrath. That, whereby we
are enfranchised from Captivity unto Sense, and have Spiritual Dominion
established over our Brutish part. That, whereby we are Crucified to the World,
and the World is Crucified to us, as the Sacred Writer speaks; q. d. the Love
and Fear of the World is regulated in us; so that it can no more seduce or
Terrify us. That, through which Christian Soldiers, get the Mastery over the
bloody Conspirators; this World (their Tempter) and the Body (their Traitor.)
Surrounded with Riches and Honors, and in a Prosperity, full of Temptations,
as Nilus of Crocodiles, this Moderation of here is, was well known! In our lower
stations, of fewer Blandishments and Provocations, may our like Moderation be
known unto all Men!

Hope to the End. Assent to the Truth of the Gospel of Christ; Reliance upon
the Goodness of God reconciled by Him; Expectation of the promised
incorruptible Inheritance; and all three maintained unto Death. Of the many
Months, whereof I was not absent from her Chamber many Days, never could I
discern her Hope to be departed. Nor ever heard her complain, that it was
Departed. Indeed, the best Hope sometime lies Prostrate; Abraham, was not
always Abraham. When it was worst with her, it was no worse than with Job, in
whose words she expressed it; Tho He Slay me, I will Trust in Him! He knows the
Way that I have Chosen! It Is not every dark-Cloud, that makes Night; nor every
sad-Doubt and Fear, that is to be named Despair. This therefore I testify; I
have often seen her Troubled, but not once Distressed; often Perplexed, but not
once in Despair! May all that hear this, have so wellbuilt Hope in their Death!
Then, how terribly soever the old Serpent may Hiss, mortally it shall not
Sting! Whereof, I am much the more confident, because of that wherein she
peculiarly excelled,

Conspicuous Humility. A Mind, of low thoughts of her Self; a Will, of no
desire to be thought more highly of than is meet; a Language and Behavior
convincingly showing both. No, Observation, or Reading of mine, has given me
to know the Saint, wherein Humility had its more perfect Work. But, hereof so
much is known, that no more shall be told. This only is suggested; it is nothing
but Acquaintance with God, that can truly Humble or Comfort Men and Augels.
This it is that makes Seraphims to cover their Wings, Feet, and Faces; and to
feel a fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore in so doing. Which, it is most
reasonable to believe, she is now enjoying with them. Insomuch, that I am bold
thus to conclude; I would to God that not only I, but also all that hear me
this Day, were both almost and altogether such, as it is meet to believe this
great Lover of her God was; except but her Infirmities, which she ever
bewailed, and Tribulations, through which she Passed into the Heavenly Kingdom!
Amen.

FINIS.

