AN ESSAY TO Revive the Necessity OF THE Ancient Charity and Piety. WHEREIN
God's Right in our Estates, and our Obligations to maintain his Service,
Religion, and Charity, is demonstrated and defended, against the Pretenses of
Covetousness and Appropriation.

In Two Discourses.

Written to a Person of Honor and Virtue.

By George Burghope, Rector of Little Gaddesden, Com. Hertford, and Chaplain to
the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Bridgwater.

Luke 16. 9. And I say unto you, Make you friends, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1695.

Imprimatur.

Humf. Hody, R. in Chapter P. ac D. D. Johanni Div. Prove. Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
Sept. 26. 1694.
To the most Reverend Father in God THOMAS Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
TO pardon the Presumption of one of the Clergy of Your late Diocese, and of
Your present Province, in this Address; one who had never the honor to see
your Person, but in your Episcopal Visitation, where he observed, with a
mixture of Contentment and Admiration, the Humility, Condescension, and
Paternal Tenderness to your Clergy; when you might have come with a Rod, you
chose to visit us in Love, and the Spirit of Meekness; by which you subdued
every Heart to Obedience, and commanded all our Acknowledgments. But, my Lord,
you have a more especial Title to these Papers from your Piety and Charity,
which are their Argument: Of both which (even then when you were but a private
Presbyter in the Church) you gave so large a Specimen in your own Parish, and
in dangerous Times, that it remains as a lasting Monument, and a sufficient
Testimony of what you durst then, and what you will do still for the Support of
that Church of which you are deservedly now the Chief Member. And we have all
the reason in the World to congratulate your Advancement to the Archiepiscopal
Throne, (as the Ancients use to call it) not so much for your Happiness as our
own. And so much the more, when we remember that we are under the Care of such
a Leader, who is an Example to us all, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Faith, and in Purity. One, who (having regularly past through all the Degrees
of the Clergy to the highest Place in the Church) knows the Nature and
Circumstances of all its Members, and consequently will take all occasions to
encourage the Inferior as well as Superior Parts of that August Body: The poor
Curates (that do the whole Religious Duties sometimes of great Parishes for
small Stipends) and the poorest Vicars, (dis-spirited and dispossessed of the
ancient Demesns of their Churches, and forced with their Families to live upon
the Tithes of Mint, Anise, and Cummin, etc,) as well as the Reverend
Dignitaries, or others of larger Revenues.

And, in a word, when we remember that You are not only a prudent and careful
Governor, but a skilful Pilot, who will omit no Diligence or Opportunities to
Steer the late tossed Ship of our Church amongst so many Rocks and Waves,
private and public Enemies, into the Haven of Prosperity and Peace. To which
the Author, in his present Circumstances, can only contribute these his Papers
and his Prayers; who is,

My LORD, Your Graces Most dutiful Son, and Humble Servant, Geo. Burghope.
From Little Gaddesden in the County of Hertf. March 12. 1695.
A PREMONITION TO THE READER.
WHen the Author had been persuaded to make these Discourses public, he
thought it necessary also to say something in defense of such Publication, and
maintain, that even in these bad Times they are not unsuitable, nor possibly
unfruitful.

For the first Part, it will make shift for it self, and carry its own Apology,
even with the most Selfish and Covetous. For those that will not be persuaded
by it themselves, will yet be willing that others should, if it be but to spare
their own Pockets; for the more is done in that part of Charity which consists
in relieving of the Poor, the less is left to be done. And seeing the Poor we
must have always with us, and they must be always maintained by us, the Miser
is eased and gratified by another's Bounty.

But then for the latter Part, which is a Persuasive to Works of Piety, the
very Attempt seems to be ridiculous, and the Author expects he shall be loudly
laughed at as a silly Fellow, that, in such an Age as this is, should think to
persuade Men to part with their beloved Mammon to such Uses. And though he has
considered the Objections of this Nature toward the latter end of the
Discourse it self, yet it well be proper here to prevent those that he has not
there spoken to sufficiently, or not at all. And those are these Three: First,
The universal decay of Religion it self. Secondly, That of the particular
Church yet by Law established. Thirdly, The general Aversion there is almost in
all Men to Works of this Nature: Of which in their order.

For the first, We are told that Religion (which he would in this Discourse
embellish and adorn by such Accessions) is in it self sick and decaying, and
its very Foundations much weakened; and therefore it would be more serviceable
to endeavor to secure them, than adorn its Frontispiece. And, indeed, if we
consider the many Apostates from its Doctrines and Government, and the more
from the Practice of those Duties it enjoins, we shall have but a melancholy
Prospect of the present State of Religion. Custom and the Charity of the Church
has indeed brought us into its Bosom in our Infancy, and we still retain the
Name of Christianity, as most Creditable and in Fashion; but the generality
proceed but little further. The Baptismal Vow is undertaken, as it ought, but
by few; and those that are Confirmed are looked upon with an odd Aspect by the
Vulgar, and thought more than ordinary Scrupulous. The Worship of God is
generally neglected by some, and superficially performed by others, and Men
think they have little Obligation to it beyond Decency, Custom, and Example.
Most of these nominal Christians live in a wilful Neglect, or rather Contempt
of those dear Pledges of our Salvation in the Lord's Supper, and some abstain
from it (as they pretend) out of a preposterous fear of Damnation. There is an
universal Indifferency as to our Duty, and a Coldness and Unconcernedness as to
our future State. Religion has little or no Power over the Souls of Mankind, to
oblige them to part with the least unlawful Pleasure for God's sake, though the
praise of Men, and other secular Advantages, sometimes may. And no wonder, when
the very Being of their Maker is impiously questioned by some, and Providence,
that supports them, daily by others. Deism is breaking in upon revealed
Religion; and, if that can prevail, Atheism will follow after: So that the
Author's Effort may be like his that would beautify a falling House, or dress
up a dying Body: To all which he answers,

1. That Religion (which was at first quick and active) naturally decays, like
the Course of a Stone or Bullet, the further it is removed from the first
Principle that gave it Motion: And our Lord and his Apostles have foretold this
decrease of Zeal, and a falling of many in the latter Days, and yet he
remembers the Promise for the Perpetuity of the Church, and that the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it; that is, that God by his mighty Power will
preserve its Being amongst even those many Adversaries raised against it, by
the Devil and the animal Life; so that there will still be a competent Number
of true and sincere Worshippers. That there will and must be a Ministry, with
whom he has promised to continue till the end of all Things, to direct and
assist his Service. 2. That there will be always Propriety and Inequality of
Estates, and consequently opportunities of administering to his Service. And,
that the Support of those dedicated to it, is, and ever will be (as it has
been) necessary to the continuance of it throughout all Times. That Gratitude
and suitable Returns of Praises will be still a Duty incumbent upon all his
Servants, and that God does and will expect it: From all which it follows, that
the Subject of these Papers are now, and will continue, seasonable, even in the
worst of Times to come, (as well as in those past) and are necessary to the
Being of the Service of God, while the Church is Militant here on Earth.

2. But (Secondly) if the whole Church shall not, (cannot fail) nor revealed
Religion be thrust out of the World, as the Atheist would have it, yet it is the
Opinion of many Persons of different Interests, and the Desires of some, That
the Church in its present Constitution cannot continue long, and then who would
build a Piety upon such a Foundation which is apt (through the Iniquity or
Changeableness of the Times) to fail? For then his pious Gift shall be either
devoured by Covetousness, (as we see many have) or else be diverted to the
support of a false Worship. The Author has taken notice of this Objection, and
answered it as far as 'twas necessary to his Design: To which he has thus much
to add; That it is confessed, that this National Church has been long the Envy of
some, as well as the Joy of others. That she has Multitudes of secret Enemies
within her own Pale, as well as public ones from without; yet hitherto the
Hopes of her Adversaries have not prevailed; but her Foundations, laid in the
Blood of her Martyrs, have stood immovable. And, indeed, if we consider the
Purity of her Doctrines, the Reasonableness of her Discipline, the Beauty of
her Government, and the Conformity of all to the Primitive State of God's
Church in its Virgin Purity; yea, and to the universal Church of God, dispersed
over the whole World, (some few reformed Churhces excepted, whose present
unhappy Circumstances will not admit of such a Constitution; I say, if we
consider these things) it will be hard to conceive that this Church should be
totally overthrown as long as either Reason or Religion continues amongst us;
unless we suffer our selves to be overrun with Enthusiasm, or conquered by the
French, which I find we do not so dread, but that we dare still purchase
Estates, build, and plant here. And if any of our. Churches Ceremonies could be
changed for others of more Antiquity, Significancy, and Decency, she would yet
be as much the same, as the same Woman in a different Dress. However, in this
and all other Bequests to the Church, and to our own Families, we must referr
our selves to that Providence that oversees and purvades all things, and no Man
can undertake for Futurity.

3. But, Lastly, it will be said that these Papers cannot expect any success in
an Age wholly averse to such Doctrines. Men are generally prejudiced against
any thing of this Nature. They have more love for themselves than to part with
any thing to the Holy Church in their Livestime, and more kindness to their
Relations than to deprive them of that which they account their due at their
Deaths. These Doctrines (will they say) might have been harkned unto in the
former Times of Superstition and Ignorance, when the Priesthood carried all
before it, and the Church had almost swallowed up the State. When Men bartered
for Heaven with Earth, and thought to purchase an Estate there with a religious
House here. But to hope to prevail with any Man at this time of the Day, to
part with any thing upon the account of Religion, is to expect to cleave a Rock
with a Word, and produce thence Rivers of Water. To this the Author's Answer
is, That he could well wish that every Man had a clear Notion of the Value and
Necessity of good Works, that he might not fall into the Extremes of
Superstition on the one side, or Profaneness on the other. For, as the first
played the Tyrant in former Days, so, it is too plain, that the second does in
the latter. That there should be an equal poise betwixt Church and State, as
there ought to be between Prerogative and Liberty, and neither should be
exorbitant. That though the Church heretofore were once too rich (which yet was
not so much the Church as an Excrescency adhering to it) so as to make the
Members of it too fat and idle, yet in many Places it is now so poor, that it is
not able to attend upon Divine Service. And, finally, though some are prejudiced
against these Doctrines, yet they have no reason to be so, and there is great
need of showing them their Error; to which, he hopes, these Papers may
contribute. And even in these last and worst Days (to our Comfort, and the
Glory of God be it spoken) Virtue and Piety are not without their Votaries.
There be still many devout conscientious Christians, who can distinguish
betwixt the right Use and Abuse of Things, and see a necessity for the
Continuance of the Worship of God, and the Maintenance of those that attend it;
to which they think that they are bound to contribute, and not wholly depend
upon the Devotion of their ancient (without making up the Breaches and
Satisfaction for the Sacrilege of their more immediate) Predecessors. That the
Number of these may increase, so that God may continue to be daily worshipped,
and his Ministers encouraged, supported, and maintained; and that every Parish
or Congregation may not want an able and learned Pastor to feed and instruct
them, to pray for them, and conduct them in their way toward Heaven, is the
Design of the Author in these Papers; and having contributed what he could to
this End, he leaves the Issue to him who only can give the Increase.

I have only this to add, That whereas these Papers, in their private
capacities, were only intended for the Service of a Person of Honor and
Virtue, he is willing to relinquish this his Right in them, and give them to
the Public, so that now every Intelligent Reader may claim a Title to them, as
though they were his own, by a particular Direction. And the Author's Prayer is,
That they may go forth and prosper, to the moderating that covetous,
engrossing, and appropriating Humor, that seems to prevail amongst us, both in
our Lives and at our Deaths; that so God may be duly worshipped, and Mankind
mutually bless one another, under the auspicious Influences of Charity, etc.

ERRATA.
PAge 12. l. 14. for Professors read Possessors. p. 33. l. 12. for part r. put.
ib. l. 13. dele it. p. 49. l. 24. for Justice r. Injustice. p. 77. l. 6. del.
i^. p. 99. l. 19. for the r. them. p. 118. l. 11. for Care r. Cure.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Discourse.
OF the difference of Estates, and the End of Providence therein,. I. The Use
of Estates, and how commonly employed; with the best Account Men can commonly
give of the same,. II. The End of these Papers, with the Author's Design and
Apology,. III. That we have no Title or Propriety in our Estates, in respect of
God the Supreme Donor, etc.. IV. The Ends for which God gives Men Estates, and
what he expects from them,. V. These Ends must be good, and are threefold. I.
Self-preservation, what and wherein it consists, with Cautions thereupon,. VI.
II. Good Works, Charity and Mercy,. VII. This proved, 1. By the Law of Nature,
and mutual dependence, ib. 2. By the Law of God in the Holy Scriptures,. VIII.
Objections answered, 1. The pretense of Want, and not having any thing to
spare,. IX. 2. The Law's Provision for the Poor: This proved to be no
hinderance of Charity,. X. Several Instances of Methods of Charity; as
Almshouses, Schools, etc. Of the Colleges, and the two Universities, etc. 3.
That God has not defined the Quota of Charity, considered and answered,. XI.
How much is necessary to be employed in Works of Charity, ib. The Sum of the
Duty of Charity,. XII. The Encouragements or Motives to Charity,. XIII. 1. God
designs it when he gives us Estates, ib. That Charity is a Complication of many
excellent Graces. 2. That Charity does not impoverish any Man, but tends to
Riches and Increase,. XIV. This proved, 1. By Scripture. 2. Reason. 3.
Experience. III. That Charity is a generous and honorable Virtue,. XV. 4. That
Charity is rewarded with Heaven as well as Earth,. XVI. The increase of its
reward, noted, ib. The Conclusion: Showing the difference betwixt the Desert
and Reward of the ordinary and charitable Disposals,. XVII. 1. The ordinary
disposal of our Estates to our Heirs considered, as to Happiness, Desert and
Reward of the Testator, ib. 2. That of the charitable Persons: Instances in
that of Founders and Benefactors of Colleges, Schools, etc. The preference in
three respects,. XVIII. 1. He does good to others as well as himself. 2. He
does the best good in respect of the Body. 3. His Works and Reward increases
till the end of the World,. XIX, XX.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Discourse.
Why the Author treats of Works of Piety in the last place,. 1. The Assertion
of this Discourse; which is this, That every Man is bound, to the utmost of his
Power, to promote the Honor of God, and maintain his Service. And (for the
sake of that) those that officiate in the same, and that he that is able, and
does it not, mis-imploys his Talent, and so must give an Account of that
Neglect at the last Day, etc.. II. What is meant by the Glory and Honor of
God, or Divine Service. This exhibited, 1. By mediate Acts that tend to his
Honor; as Moral and Natural Philosophy. The Founders of Schools of Learning;
and how their Societies tend to the Divine Service. 2. By immediate Acts of
Divine Worship, and what they be, and the Mistakes of Men about it noted. That
Works of Piety, and the Divine Service, ought to be promoted by our Estates.
This proved in five Propositions,. III. Prop. 1. That God is to be worshipped,
and his Service promoted. Of outward and inward Acts of Divine Worship, and
that both are required. This proved from the Obligations we have to, 1. Truth.
2. Gratitude. And, 3. Indemnity or Pardon of Sin. Prop. 2. That God is daily
to be worshipped. Of public and private Worship: And that one of these is to
be offered up daily,. IV. Prop. 3. That there is a necessity for a public
Ministry to perform the same,. V. Prop. 4. That this Ministry ought to have a
Competency, or sufficient Maintenance,. VI. What God himself heretofore
assigned for such a Competency, 1. Amongst the Patriarchs. 2. Amongst the Jews;
and the large Provisions he made for them. 3. Amongst the Primitive Christians:
And how the Churches came to be endowed,. VII. How the Revenues of the Church
came to be alienated,. VIII. The Pretenses and Methods of the same,. IX. The
miserable Effects of such Alienations,. X. Such as, 1. The Poverty of the
Clergy. 2. Their Contempt, and loss of Authority,. XI. 3. Their Depression, and
Dejection of Mind, and Conversation,. XII. 4. The increase of the Poor,. XIII.
5. The neglect and intermission of the Service of God, and the Opinion of its
Indifferency and Vselessness,. XIV. 6. Pluralities, and the Inconveniences
thereof,. XV. The usual Pleas for impoverishing of the Clergy, and the
Objections against the Fourth Proposition answered,. XVI. What must be judged a
Sufficiency for every Parish Priest, ib. Prop. 5. That it is the Duty of every
Christian to provide such a Competency, as far as he is able, for the
Settlement and Continuance of the Service of God,. XVII. This demonstrated
from, 1. Scripture. 2. Example of God's People in all Ages. 3. The Equity of
the Thing, natural Reason, and Men of all Religions. The several Pleas and
Objections against the Fifth Proposition considered and answered,. XVIII. A
general and particular Application and Address,. XIX. 1. To the Noble, Rich,
and Wealthy. 2. To the Impropriators,. XX. 3. To those that have no Children,
etc. to provide for,. XXI. 4. To the Bishops, Dignitaries, and others of the
Clergy,. XXII. 5. To all Christians in general: Wherein is showed, 1. The best
Account that can be commonly made to God at the last Day, and its
Insufficiency,. XXIII. 2. A better way of accounting with God proposed; and the
Conclusion of the whole.
AN ESSAY TO Revive the Necessity OF THE Ancient Charity and Piety.
Honored SIR,
. I. Of the difference of Estates, and the End of Providence therein.
WHat our blessed Lord observed long ago concerning the difference God makes in
the distribution of his heavenly Talents, giving to some five, to others two,
and to some one; is found true also of those that are Earthly. Estates are now
(and ever have) been different in this World, and the Levelling Principle has
been found as impracticable as it is unreasonable. God gave at first (and since
by his Providence continues) to some more, to others less, but to every one in
some measure a sufficiency. Riches and Abundance (like other good Gifts) are
from above, and so is the Improvement too; and though we ought to use a studious
Care, yet the Issue must be left to the Author. For our Experience will affirm
the truth of Solomon's Adage; There is that Prove. 11. 24.
scatters and yet increases; and there is that withholdeth more than is
meet, but it tends to poverty. As also that of the Apostle in a temporal
Sense; That it is not of him that planteth, nor of him that waters, but of
God to give the increase. Thus Families and Estates have their (sometimes
unaccountable) rise, continuance, and decrease. From mean Beginnings they arise
to Greatness, and for a few Ages shine like a Meteor and are admired, and then
sink like the same into their former obscurity, and become extinct and
unobserved amongst the Crowd.

This (worthy Sir) is a Consideration useful in its kind, to put you in mind of
your House's Mortality as well as your own; to depend upon and be thankful to
that Power that has raised you up so far above others: Not to be proud and
disdain at those that are passed by, whilst you are chosen to Honor and
Estate, but rather to fear, because as your Estate is greater, so is your
Charge and Duty, and so will your Account be. For to whomsoever much is given,
of him much shall be required; and to whom Men have committed much, of him they
will ask the more. That you be kind, loving, and communicative to those below
you especially (for Interest will oblige you to those above) and like the Sun,
warm and enliven every one within the Sphere of your Activity, and that you
would live up to the End for which Providence designed your Station; that is,
that as you are raised up to a higher Capacity than others, so you would do
more good than others. To apprehend truly what, and how much that Good is, it
becomes you to consider two Things. First, The Use that Men commonly put their
Estates to in this Age: And then, Secondly, The Use that God has required them
to put them to, and the Account that he expects of them accordingly.

. II. The Use of Estates, and how commonly employed, with the best Account they
can give of the same.
If you, in the first place, take a view of the World, you will find that when
a young Man begins to understand his Quality, and that he is born or designed
to an Estate above others, he begins to shake off his former Acquaintance, and
those that the state of Childhood and Ignorance had rendered his Familiars, and
to seek the Society of his Equals in Birth and Fortune, and the Exercises that
are proper to his Rank. He overlooks his old Companions, and will seldom (and
that in private only) own that he knows them, and that which we below think to
be a spice of Pride, is but necessary to his Place in the World, to conciliate
to himself the Honor and Reverence due to him. When he has found out a
Companion of his Joys and his Griefs, their great Care is to live up to the
Character of their Houses, and maintain the Honor of their Predecessors. This
is the Center to which all the Lines of the Circumference, their Tables,
Attendants, Equipage, Houses, Gardens, and other Appendages of Nobleness and
Gentility do, and indeed should tend. And this is true down from the Nobleman
to the Farmer, and each Man in his several Degree aims at the Support and
Credit of his House and Family. For their Estates; the Riotous waste and
consume them; the Covetous do what they can to hook in whatsoever comes within
their reach; and the provident and good Husband, by his prudent management of
what is left him, increases what he has, and finds an increase of Esteem and
Respect proportionably. In fine, when every Man has acted his different Part
upon the Stage of this World, he settles it (or the Law for him) upon his Son
or his Daughter, or his nearest Relation. This is the Sum of the Life of Man;
and the Account that he can give to his Maker in the other World must be
accordingly. And the best that can be given, according to the usual management,
is this: That they have husbanded their Charge to the best Advantage without
fraud or oppression, or wronging of any Man; and with the yearly Product
thereof they have fed and clothed themselves, their Children, and their
Servants. And besides that, have maintained their State according to their
Degree, and have at seasonable Times gratified their Appetites with suitable
Pleasures. This during their Lives; and that when they died they left their
paternal Estate with Additions to their eldest Sons, the presumptive Heirs of
their Dignities, together with sufficient Provisions for their other Sons and
Daughters. And in defect of such Children, then to their Nephews, or Nieces, or
nearest Relations; or, in defect of these also (which is rare) to some of their
Names, or whom they best fancy. This (to pass by the Extorsion and unjust
Methods of Covetousness, and those profuse and extravagant ones of Sensuality,
not here to be named) is the best Account that usually the best of Mankind can
bring of what they have done here. But for any eminent Act of Piety, especially
for the Glory of God and the Advancement of his Service, either in their
livestime or at their death, it is very rare and extraordinary, and a Work of
wonder, not imitation. It Is true, natural Compassion, Custom and Credit obliges
Men to give something at their Gates; but then it is usually the Superfluities
of Life, and the Refuse of their Tables, which otherwise would stink and be
corrupt; and at their deaths some will commend a small Sum to the Poor to be
distributed by their Executors, which is no sooner received but spent: But, in
these degenerate Times, how few standing Acts of Piety and Charity do we find
as Monuments of our Love to God and our Neighbor? I would not be thought to
lessen any Man's Charity when I say, that sometimes a merciful and generous
Nature, and (possibly Glory) may wring out of the Hands of our Heirs and
Executors some good Remain. But then as it is rare, so it is thought a Work of
Supererrogation, not Duty; that which is laudable, but yet may be left undone
without danger. And where is the Man that thinks such Works necessary to
Salvation? or, that God requires them, and they will be advantageous to us in
another World? 'Twas otherwise in Times of yore, and not only Works of Charity
but Piety were thought to be absolutely required of God, and therefore they
could not go out of the World without making a kind of Retaliation and
Acknowledgment to God as well as Man; which possibly was the Original of
Deodands, Mortuaries, etc. And a Will could not be made without bequeathing God
and his Church some Legacy. Hence it is they left us so many Monuments of both;
but we their unworthy Posterity have destroyed many, and think much to support
those that remain. In a word, all that we can do is but to say, that we have
served the Necessities and Pleasures of our selves, and them that are next to
us in Relation; and, as for others we have done them no good. And this we think
sufficient to justify us before God and Man. But then may not a Scribe or
Pharisee, or did not many of the good Heathen more than this? Or, is not this
the Effect of the Law of Nature, which teaches me to love my self, and do good
only to my Friends and Relations, and is competible to the wickedest of
Mankind? Is this the living up to the more perfect Law of Jesus, which will
sometime try you with the sorrowful Command of sell all and give to the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in Heaven? And which does always oblige us to love
even our very Enemy, and much more a poor peaceable Neighbor, and to watch
opportunities to do good to all Men? Or, is Heaven a Reward for loving our
selves, and for doing that which we cannot omit without violating our natural
Inclinations? No, surely, The Christian Religion is a super-addition of Duty as
well as Promises and Rewards, and therefore the ordinary Accounts of Mankind,
concerning the distribution of their Estates, will not be allowed.

. III. The End of these Papers, with the Author's Design and Apology.
To convince you of this great Truth, and to direct you to the due management
of your Estate, so that you may be acquitted, and receive the Reward of an euge
bone Serve, etc. is the Design of these Papers. And the rather, because God
has given me (for Reasons best known to himself) but a very short Allowance;
so that I can neither be Exemplary nor Serviceable, as I desire, in Works of
Piety and Mercy, and mine own tyrannous Necessities would fain engross all. I
think it therefore my Duty to do what I can, though I cannot what I would, and
seek the Comfort of exciting others to do that which I am incapacitated to do
my self. And if God accepts the Will for the Deed, this will be a sufficient
Consolation. And this will the better appear if you consider the other Thing,
which is to show what God does expect at our Hands in this Particular. And in
order to this I will beg your Patience to discourse of these two Things in
their order.

1. Of the Propriety and Title that every Man has to his Estate, in respect of
God the Supreme Donor. 2. Of the End for which God has given Estates, and
consequently what he expects from the present Professors.
. IV. That we have no Titles or Property to Estates, in respect of God the
Supreme Donor, etc.
1. First then if we look for any Property or Title to our Estates, in respect
of God, we shall find none. It Is true, every Man has a Property in what he
possesses, in respect of his fellow-subject; and the Laws of God and Man, have
declared a meum and tuum, and fenced them from mutual encroachments. That is
mine (in respect of my Neighbor) which I lawfully possess, whether by
Inheritance, Gift, or Purchase. And this another Man ought not either to invade
or covet. But it is otherwise in respect of God, our great Benefactor; who as he
gives every one his Quota, so he saves to himself a Power of taking it away; of
transferring and changing, of raising and throwing down Men and Families. For
the most high rules in the kingdom of Dan. 4. 32.
Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will; for his is the World and the fullness
thereof. In him we live, move, and have our being, and he gives Life and
Estate, and takes it away at his Pleasure. When he actually interposes and
declares his Will, all humane Laws are superceded. In that Case even killing is
no murder, nor taking away Goods theft; as appears by the People of Israel's
dealings with the Seven Nations in the Land of Canaan, and with the Egyptians
at their departure out of Egypt. Thus in the Gospel he strips the foolish
Projector of all, when he takes his Soul away. Thou Fool, this night shall thy
Soul be required of thee, and then whose shall those things be which thou have
provided? And as Job is the most celebrated Instance of Patience, so he is of
the Instability of our Fortunes, and of God's disposal of them. To day a Man
the greatest in Substance of all the Men in the East, and to morrow by an
unlucky Conspiracy of designed Misfortunes meeting, or rather following one
another, reduced to the State of a Lazarus, and the want of all things, Life
only excepted: And, yet, after a time of Trial and patient Sufferance, restored
by an extraordinary Providence, and endowed with double to what he lost. An
Instance, not of the Caprice of Fortune, but the designed Intrigue of
Providence, and the Right God has to give and take away; and so he made it in
his self-denying Hymn of Thankfulness. Naked came I out of Mother's womb, and
naked shall I return: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be
the Name of the Lord. This is an Evidence that God is the Supreme Lord, and may
make a Seizure of his own when he pleases, and that we are Tenants at Will, and
no further.

It Is true, we call what we have, our own; and we transferr our Rights to
others; but then it is only ( quantum in nobis est) as far as we may. We give
them a lawful Possession against our selves, and all that claim under us, but
this is all but a humane and temporary Title; and can give no future Security
against the former Right of Providence. And when we die we divide our Acquests
and bequeath them to our Children and Relations, and use the greatest
Securities to entail it upon our Heirs, etc. But all this (when the Supreme
Owner pleases) in vain. For in a small time Strangers shall feed in our
Dining-Rooms, stretch themselves on our Couches, enjoy the Fruits of our
Labors, and the Pleasures of our Buildings, Plantations, and Contrivances. All
this daily Experience confirms to every considering Man, nor is it denied by
any that acknowledges a God and Providence. And I have used the more Words, not
for the Doctrine but the Application's sake; which is, That rich Men would,
First, Be humble, and not carry themselves with that extravagant Pride, as though
they had not received it, or were to render no Account for it. That they would,
Secondly, Be grateful to Almighty God, and own him as their and our common
Benefactor. Thirdly, Be careful to manage their Trust to the Intents and
Purposes for which they were given: And what they are comes next to be
discoursed of. And therefore,

. V. The Ends for which God gives Men Estates, and what he expects from them.
These Ends must be Good, and are threefold.
Secondly, As to the Intents of God in bestowing Estates, you are to consider:
If God gives to some what he denies to others, or continues to them and their
Heirs what they call their own, it must be for some End, and that End must be
the performance of some Good. For God does nothing in vain, or for no End, and
he proposes no End but what is Good. Now all Good is such in respect of three
Objects; our Selves, our Neighbor, and God, the chief Lord of all. There is no
question but God intends the Good of that particular Person whom he makes
Overseer of his Talent: And thence arises self-preservation. And because he
cannot manage it himself without assistance, from Self-preservation arises also
that of our Family and Dependants. But then God being an universal Father, and
taking Care for all Mankind (which are his Family) equally, (tho he has not
endowed all equally) thence arises a second Good to our Neighbor, and
especially to those that want any thing that he has denied him and given us:
That we may thereby exercise our Love and Charity, those God-like Virtues which
are in him originally, and which he has derived to us, and expects we should
use toward one another. But then, Thirdly, Though he is in himself so perfectly
Happy, as to be incapable to receive any repletion from the Works of his Hands,
yet to try our Gratitude, and renew in us a remembrance of his Benefits, he has
reserved to himself a certain kind of Quit-Rent; and that is, that we should
not only acknowledge his Bounty to us publicly and privately, but also
contribute out of our Estates what is necessary, that others should do so
likewise: That his Supremacy and Goodness might be daily acknowledged by all,
as it is daily received by all. From all which it follows, That no Man is a
sole, absolute, and free Proprietor of his Estate, but that he is bound to
Conditions of doing Good to himself and his Neighbor, and the making of due
returns of Gratitude to his God. That these are the Conditions of his Tenure,
which (as it is at the Will of the Lord as to time, and may be ejected when he
pleases, so) he ought during the space of his possession to perform the
Conditions thereof, viz. pay his Quit-Rents, and do his Homage, upon the
Penalties that will ensue thereon on the day of Enquiry and taking Accounts,
when every Man shall receive according to his Works. Thus much of the Ends in
general; but I must consider these three Uses more particularly and separately.

. VI. Of Selfpreservation, which is the first End.
1. And first of Self-preservation, the first End. That our Duty is to preserve
our Selves, our second Selves, our Offspring, which are our selves propagated
and continued, and our Servants, which are kept for our Selves sake, will not
require many Words; for Nature has imprinted it upon our Minds in Characters
that be indelible: And this Principle is so fixed and operative, that the only
fear is, lest it should grow too fast, to the stifling of the other. Experience
teaches us, that Self-preservation is, like Moses's Rod-Serpent, ready to
swallow up the other two. Selfishness has engrossed all, and Men look so much
on themselves, and their own Profits and Pleasures, that they mind not their
Neighbor, nor (what is more) their God. And therefore on this Head I must hold
back the Hand, by considering what is due to our Selves and what not, lest we
should cheat God and our Neighbor of theirs. There is no question but there is
due to our selves Necessaries, but what that is, is not defined, but allows of
a Latitude according to our several Circumstances in the World. First, There be
Necessaries in respect of Life, such as Food and Raiment: This is certainly
allowed us and our Dependents. It Is all the reason in the World, that in the
sweat of our Brows we should eat our Bread, and wear those Cloths that should
defend us in our Labor. Secondly, There be things necessary ad been esse, to
our wellbeing, as times and ways of Joy and Pleasure: And therefore it is all
the reason in the World, that God's Tenent reap the Comforts as well as the
Troubles that he lays upon him under the Sun. That he eats his Bread with Joy,
and drinks his Wine with a merry Heart then, when he has Testimonies that God
has accepted his Labors; that then his Garments be white, and his Head lack
no ointment. My meaning is, That at times of Feasting he relax his Cares, and
use such Superfluities that are agreeable to his Condition and the general
Rules of Sobriety and Charity. Thirdly, There be Necessaries ratione personae
and conditionis unius cujusque, things that are necessary to great Persons and
not to all. It Is all the reason in the World, that great Officers should have
great Attendants, and that high Stewards should have a State answerable to
their Places and Cares. The distinction betwixt Men cannot be well manifested
but by great Buildings, plentiful Tables, many Servants, and a Grandeur
becoming the Nobility and Gentry. Fourthly, There is a necessity ratione
posterum, a necessity of Education, and a moderate Provision for their Children
and Relations. The first sort of Necessity is absolute, and must be allowed;
the three other are capable of degrees, and must be used so far as agrees with
Prudence and Sobriety, and the other two Ends that I am yet to speak of. God
nor Man will deny, but the Estate shall bear them all, if it can without
Prejudice to God, our chief Lord, or our Neighbor. But he that spends all on
himself and Family, so that he can allow God and Charity nothing, is like (nay
is) a Tenant that wastes all on his Luxury, and so can pay no Rent. If Estates
will not maintain us as we would, they must as they can; and we must cut off
some of our vain Expenses to secure the main Point. We make it a Rule, that
when Taxes run high, and our Crop is but small, Expenses are to be retrenched,
that we may pay our Rents: And why in a greater Concern should we not abate
something from our extraordinaries for God and Charity's sake? Necessaries we
all must have, (but they are but a few) but the Appendages of Honor and
Greatness may be increased or diminished according to the Circumstances of Time
and Place, without sinning against either. This will not seem hard to him that
considers how much may be pared off from Vanity without diminution of Honor,
and that if our unnecessary (not to say sinful) Expenses were saved, and put
into the Box of Charity, it would be filled and run over. For I have observed
amongst all sorts of Men, high or low, rich or poor, they will spend liberally
upon the score of Friendship and Company at home or abroad, and are ashamed to
show any reluctance at it; but when a small piece of Charity is to be done, or
but a Brief to be given to, how many Difficulties are objected, and what
Complaints for want of Money! And yet at the same time if an useless Piece of
Vanity is proposed to sale, or some little thing to gratify Ostentation, how
eager they are, and how will they incommode themselves to procure Money to
purchase it! And yet, when procured, it shall be laid up in a Box, and there
sleep (it may be) whole Years together, and never see the Sun. How happy would
it be if those Jewels were employed to adorn the Soul withal, and if those
precious Stones were turned into Bread for the Poor! If those Pearls were
dissolved into Drink for them! But this must not be hoped for; yet I must say
again, That many of these chargeable Trifles may be spared without the least
dishonor. And here I will not be so impudent as to ransack the Ladies Closets,
and search their Boxes, and note their Extravagances in Dressings and outward
Ornament; nor will I compute the Charge of their Lordship's supernumerary
Hawks, Hounds, Horses, Attendants; and the Instruments of State and Pleasure of
both Sexes. They are able to judge of that best; as also what may be spared
without detriment to Life or Honor; for something must be, if the Estate will
not bear it otherwise: For both God and Man will expect Works of Charity and
Mercy to be done while we are here, and that in proportion to what we possess.
And this I name in the Second Place, as an End for which God has given us our
Earthly Portion, and which is next to be considered.

. VII. The second End, Works of Charity and Mercy.
2. That no Man's Estate is so much his own, that he may spend it as he
pleases, and that our dear Country, our Neighbor, our Friend, yea and our
Enemy (if in want) claims a part of it; and that God will expect an Account of
these Things at the great Audit, appears by the Book of Nature, as well as by
the Holy Scriptures, and has the united Suffrage of Reason and Religion.

In Nature we find that as every This proved first, By the Law of Nature.
thing depends, so every thing is subservient to each other; and the Universe
preserves it self by mutual Helps and Assistances. The Heavens roll about
incessantly for the Benefit of those things within their Vortex; and the Sun,
the greater Luminary, rejoycerh as a Giant refreshed with Wine, to run his
Course, (as David expresses himself, according to Vulgar apprehension;) or,
rather, (according to the Modern Sages in Nature) stands still in the Center,
and contents himself to send out his Emanations of Light and Heat to gild the
Globes that wheel round about him, and enliven the Creatures that inhabit them.
The Earth, our common Mother, feeds and supports her Offspring; and they, in
return, enrich her Superficies. The sensible Creatures, notwithstanding the
mutual enmity of some, become Food one to another, and submit to the Law of
Nature, and serve and feed Man, the Lord of the visible Creation. And God has
convinced Man by the Wants that he is sensible of, and the Help he expects from
others, to supply theirs also. To give, as well as ask, and to be a blessing to
those from whom he expects a blessing: For no Man can live without the
assistance of another; and the King is beholden to the Charity of Women in his
Childhood, and the Labors of the Field throughout his whole life. To which I
add, That the End of the Existence of Things is founded in Community; and we
live not for our selves, but for some Being without us. The Sun shines not to
it self, but to us; and the Earth feeds and nourishes not her self, but the
Creatures that live upon her. The Birds, Beasts, and Fishes continue their
Species, but it is for the delight and service of Man. And Man was not made to
eat and drink, and propagate his like, but to be serviceable to his God, and
his Fellow Creatures. Is not this then the Lesson of Nature, and do not we read
it in all the Works of God; That Self-preservation is not the sole End of the
created Beings, but the Good of the Community, as the Glory of God is that of
the whole Creation?

. VIII. And, 2dly, By the Law of God in the Holy Scripture.
But if the Book of Nature be sealed up to those that will not open or read it,
yet the Holy Scriptures are not so; that Book lies open, and is read and
expounded daily in our Ears, and (if we do not stop them) we cannot be ignorant
of our Duty; and this whether we consider God's Commands about Works of Charity
in the Old Testament or the New. In the Old he was pleased to settle an Estate
by a positive Law on the Poor, viz. A Second Tenth (after that of the Levites
was paid) every Third Year; which was the Third Part of every Man's Nine Parts,
(the Tenth being paid before to the Levites;) and besides this, the
extraordinary Gleanings of the scattered Corn; the restoring of the Pledge; and
lending without Interest, and other occasional Charities. Add to these, those
general acts of Love, which we are taught to bear even to our Enemy, whose Oxen
or Asses (and consequently any other of his Goods) we should not suffer to fall
into any hazard, and much less his Person: So that here is a manifest Charge
entailed for ever upon every Jews Estate for the good of the Public. And this
is greater to the Christians, if you consider that our blessed Lord not only
filled up the Vacuities, but strained up the Obligations of their Law higher
than it was before. Give, says our Lord, to every one Matthew. 5. 42.
that asks thee; and from him that would borrow, turn thee not away. Love
your very Enemies, and do good to them that hate you. Thus he for all: And then
for our Friends, Nature will teach us enough for them. So that the Law of
Christ subjects our Estates to a boundless and universal Charity, even to the
worst as well as best of Men; and no Man that wants must be excepted or
neglected. And the Apostle St. Paul accordingly orders his Gal. 6. 10.
Galatians to watch opportunities to do good to all Men; and to the Household of
Faith especially. And lest this doing Good should be interpreted of a verbal
Benefaction, of wishing them well, and praying Jam. 2. 20.
for them only, St. James, another of his Apostles, vehemently declaims against
such Charity, and calls it a dead work, and the Man vain that trusts to it. And
this was no more than what he had learned from his Master in the instructive
Parable he made in answer to the Question of the Lawyer, T stn mou pleson Luke
10.
who is my Neighbor? Where he shows by the sequel, that it is our Duty to
engage our Time, Beast, Purse, and Credit, for the sake of a wounded and
wanting Enemy, Stranger, or Unbeliever. For so did the Charitable Samaritan to
the wounded Jew, he bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine; he set him on
his own Beast, brought him to his Inn; paid for his past Charge, and engaged
for his future. Who could do more for his Friend and nearest Relation? This
Nature and Gratitude teaches us, but the Christian Religion extends it to the
most hated of Men. For so ended our Savior that Parable; I tu, and fac
similiter; Go thou and do likewise. And finally, to show the necessity of Works
of Charity, our Lord has declared in his Description of the last Judgment, That
no less than Heaven is the Reward (and no less than Hell the Punishment of the
Neglect) of Charity.

Thus if we consider what God has declared, either under the Law or under the
Gospel, we cannot question but that God, the rightful Proprietor of all Things,
has conveyed our Estates to us, clogged with the Encumbrance, or rather Duty,
of giving Part to charitable Uses; and that every Man is no more than a Trustee
for what he possesses, for several Uses directed and limited by the general
Rules of Charity: And finally, that a strict Account will be exacted of us
about the same at the last Day, and that under the highest Obligations of
Rewards and Punishments. This being so, what I have more to say upon this Head,
shall be divided in answering the Objections that Men make to excuse themselves
from Works of Charity, and in showing how great Encouragements and Obligations
there are to this Duty.

. IX. Objections answered.
1. First therefore for the Excuses they would appear extreme foolish and
light, did not Selfishness part it it self in the Scale. Such is this which
follows; and that is,

Obj. 1. The pretense of Want answered.
1. The pretense of Want. There is not enough for our selves and the
Necessities of our Dependants, and therefore Charity must begin at home; where
she shall find too much Work ever to go abroad. But this Plea is generally
false, and the effect of an evil Eye. We look upon our Estates through false
Optics, and it is worth our Observation to see how our several Vices delude us.
Pride and Ostentation presents them to us through a Magnifying Glass, and makes
us boast of more than we have. But when any good Work desires entertainment,
Covetousness and ill Nature presently turns the other end of the Glass, and
represents our Estate small, and far off, and so furnishes us with a Plea of
Inability; which yet we would scorn any Body else should make for us. Here Is
nothing for you, (say those within Doors,) but if those without should say so
much, 'twou'd be taken as no mean Affront. But Selfishness is impudent, as well
as insatiable, and, like the Daughters of the Horse-Leach, always cries Give,
give. And to Agar's four Things I may add a fifth that never has enough; and
that is, Covetousness. And yet, perhaps, this Plea may sometimes be admitted as
true, but never as conclusive. We have seldom enough, in comparison of what we
would have. We have not enough to satisfy our Lusts and Appetites, our Pride
and vain Glory. We ask Counsel of our Fears and Desires, our Pleasure and
Delights, and then it is no wonder that we are answered, That there is not
enough. We take false Measures in our Allowances; and our Misery and Folly is,
that we cannot be satisfied without much more than we really need. We consult
either Covetousness or Prodigality in stating our Wants, which are Counselors
both clamorous and insatiable. Our Stables and Tables are commonly too large
for our Houses; and our Houses for our Estates; and all of 'em not large enough
for our Minds; and when we have obtained one Accomplishment, we presently want
another; and our Wants increase the more they are repaired, and still as one
thing is done another starts up and pleads to be rectified: And thus poor (or
rather noble) Mortals are amused and abused all their Life long; flattered with
Expectations, and deceived by Fruition, and all this to keep off the Complaints
of Piety and Charity, and hinder themselves of Happiness! And besides our
selves (which as things are managed take up our whole time) there be Sons and
Daughters, Nephews and Nicces, Grandchildren, and (sometimes) a numerous
Posterity to be provided for, that they (too) may live in Affluence and Vanity,
when we have acted our Parts on the Stage, and are gone off. Why if all this,
and whatsoever Fancy or Luxury can propose, be first done before you can
bethink your self of doing any thing upon the Score of Virtue and Religion, the
Wealth of Croesus would be insufficient, and the Age of Methusalem too short
for you. Pride and Vanity are Vices both chargeable and importunate! But if we
would but once bound our Desires, and limit our Wishes; if we would but pare
off our Excrescencies, and learn to deny our selves some things which we must,
and other things which we ought to want here, we then might find something to
spare for other Uses than what serves our selves. Let our unreasonable Gaiety
and Ornaments be less studied, and vain Expenses at Gaming, Riot, and Luxury be
saved, and what is laid up as useless be produced, and there would be a Stock
sufficient for the Exercise of Charity. God will be contented with that which
we sacrifice to our Lusts and Appetites. Deal ingenuously with him, and let not
the deceitful Heart cheat him of that, and perhaps it will be enough. This may
serve to baffle this Pretense, which might be sufficiently answered by saying
only this; As Self-preservation is necessary, so are Works of Piety and
Charity; and if the Soul is more excellent than the Body, and the Life to come
more to be valued than that which is present; if Eternity is to be preferred
before Time, and a never-ending Reign in the Regions of Light and Bliss be more
desirable than this short and uncertain abode in a Vale of Darkness and
Sorrows; then without Controversy, the Duties of Piety and Charity are more
necessary even than Self-preservation: For this prolongs a miserable Life, but
Charity and Piety ensures a Happiness without mixture of Alloy or fear of
Change. And therefore tell me no more that you have not enough. You may (nay
you must) find sufficiency for all three. Nor is this directed only to the
Nobility and Gentry, to the Great, Rich, and Fortunate, but to all; for Charity
is in every Man's Power more or less, and the meanest may find opportunities to
exercise it. Even the poorest may meet Offices in which he may be serviceable
to the richest, as the Mouse (in the Fable) was to the Lion.

. X. Obj. 2. The Laws Provision for the Poor answered.
2. But it will be further objected; That the Law has plentifully provided for
the Poor; that they are ready to be our Masters, having a sufficient Part of
our Estates settled upon them; and that upon Complaint they may have possession
of whit is their due without delay or charge; so that no Men need to want but
such as are idle, and that it is even a Sin to relieve these. And further, That
it is very difficult to give any Charity but what will ease the Rich, and that
they (not the Poor) will have the Benefit of it. That Gifts are commonly
abused; that the Intentions of the Donor are soon perverted, and that such
Donations are usually an Injury to the Public. And that finally, the Object of
Charity being taken away, the Duty cease. To all which I answer in their
order.

1. For the hardness of our Hearts these Laws were made, and it is no great
Commendation to us that there was a necessity for them. It shows at least that
this is the Iron Age, wherein all the Bonds of Religion were broken, and Heaven
and Hell laid aside; so that our Legislators were forced to make use of the
more powerful Secular Penalties to prevent the miserable perishing in our
Streets.

2. But, Secondly, This Objection stands upon a false Supposition, that only
the old and decrepit, and such as come within the compass of the Law, are
Objects of Charity; and whereas there be as many (or more) that receive no
Collection, are such then those that do? There are many poor laborious
Housekeepers, that hunger and thirst in secret, and are ashamed to make their
Wants known, and yet help to maintain those that want less than themselves:
These may well exercise our Consideration and Mercy. Our Savior's Prediction
has been hitherto verified, and we have (and ever shall have) those with us
whose Wants will keep alive the Fire of Charity, besides those that the Laws
have provided for. There be several occasional Acts of Mercy that meet us every
Day; such are the Relief of the distressed, the Comfort of the afflicted, the
Vindication of those that are wronged and slandered, the strengthening of the
weak Hands, and the confirming the feeble Knees. Besides those of durable
Effects, such are, the erection, endowing, or augmenting of Habitations for
poor Widows and the Fatherless; a Virtue contrary to the Pharesaick way of
devouring them. The Education of Youth, and placing out of poor Children unto
fit Trades and Callings. Children are the presumptive Supports of the
Commonwealth when we are gone: And therefore to take Care of the forming their
Manners, and the mending and perfecting of their Natures, is an inestimable
Good to Posterity, and a probable Way of bringing many Souls to Heaven. And,
that I may not mention any more, look but upon the many Charities in London and
elsewhere, and you will find more ways to exercise this Christian Virtue than I
fear will be used.

And here I cannot choose but remember, and at the same time congratulate
Mankind for all the Nurseries of Learning and Religion, and especially for the
glorious Foundations in the two Universities of our Land, founded and augmented
by Men and Women famous in their Generations. For, if we consider their lofty
Buildings, regular Walks, pleasant Gardens; their Chapels, Halls, and
Libraries; the Gravity and Learning of their Superiors, and the Civility and
Obedience of the Inferiors, and (in a word) the Decency and Symmetrical
Proportion of their Edifices, or Virtues of those that now are so happy as to
inhabit them, we must say, That hardly all the World can equal the one, and all
Ages the other. Here Pleasure and Profit, Wit and Ingenuity, all the Graces,
and all the Muses have their peaceful and innocent Habitation. And though some
(overcloy'd with the best things) leave these Seats for a noisie World; yet
none did ever so, but (as he had cause enough) repented him of it afterward.
Wonder not that I mention these amongst the Instances of Charity. So they are,
and so they were at first intended; and not (without offense be it spoken) for
those that are Rich, Great, and have sufficient Estates to maintain their
Relations there, (and who yet basely covet and procure the Founders Charity)
but for the meaner sort; such I mean, to whom Nature has been liberal in the
Gifts of the Mind, but scanty in those of Fortune: That these as well as others
might find means to emerge out of their obscurities, and grow up into
Greatness; that they might exercise and improve their Talents to the Glory of
God, the Honor of his Church, and the Good of the Commonweal. All these were
the Effects of a pious Charity, or a charitable Piety; or, rather, of Piety and
Charity united; and, if no where else, yet there you may find opportunities of
adding to both. But this more naturally falls under the Third End; of which
hereafter. And therefore to return.

Thirdly, It Is not the Poor alone, but every Man that may be the occasional
Object of Liberality. The wounded Jew was not poor before he was robbed,
otherwise he might have passed on safely; and the Samaritan that assisted him
in his Extremity might have been in the same Condition himself: Time and Chance
happens to every Man, and none are free from the Misfortunes of this unconstant
World. It Is our Duty to be in a readiness to assist the afflicted, and God only
knows whose turn shall be next so. Those into whose Minds God has put good
Desires, shall have some opportunities to bring the same to good Effect. We
cannot be without Objects of Charity, if we have sincere Intentions to it.

. XI. Obj. 3. That God has not defined the Quota of Charity, answered.
3. Lastly, it is said, That if Liberality must have a share of our Estates,
over and above what the Law obliges us to, it shall yet have little enough. For
God nor Man has defined the Quota of this redundant Charity. I may give what I
please, and where. And I know my own Wants, and do not those of others, and
therefore I think it best to administer to mine own Necessities, (which ought
to be first served) and then to those of others (if I have ought to spare) and
not otherwise: For if God has not appointed what Part of my Estate I should
bestow upon Works of Charity, then it is left to my self; and if so, Self must
be first satisfied, and then there will be but little left: So that this is the
way to constitute a partial Judge, who will shrink up the Portion of Charity to
a very small quantity. To which I answer:

1. It Is confessed, That neither the particular Modes, nor the proportion of
doing Good, are (or indeed can be) defined, prescribed, and enforced under a
Penalty; because they depend upon future Contingencies, and God deals with Man
as with an ingenuous Creature. He loves a free will Offering, and therefore has
left us a Latitude. He has not set the Bounds and Limits, because we might
advance it according as we find opportunity. But then if any Man from thence
takes occasion to shrink it up to that minuteness that it is next to nothing;
let him know, that he does but cheat himself of his Reward, as well as God and
his Neighbor of their Due. For the general Rules of loving ( viz. effectively,
and to all the purposes of Good) our Neighbor as our selves, will oblige us to
employ a proportional Part of our Estates in that Duty. The Rule of doing Good
to all Men will oblige us to act as far as we are able; and how far that is,
God knows better than we do our selves, nor can we think to deceive him. He
sees the true extents of Self-preservation, and what that does require, what we
may spare, together with the Thoughts of our Hearts and the Sincerity or
Hypocrisy of our Intentions, and will reward us accordingly.

2. Though God has not defined what Proportion he expects for the Uses of Piety
and Charity, yet we may well take an estimate of that by what he appointed to
the Jews, his old People; for the hardness of whose Hearts he thought it best
to prescribe particulars. And that was, every third Years second Tithe, which
was the thirtieth Part yearly; The gleanings, the restoring of the pledge, and
borrowing without use, etc. This was the settled Proportion of Charity, and it
was a Jews Righteousness, ( Deuteronomy. 24. 13.) That Duty which he was bound to do
in Righteousness or Justice; and without the doing of which he could not be
accounted a just or righteous Person. For this was the Poors due, which they
might demand by Law, and which it was Injustice to deny them. But besides this,
there was a higher Degree of Charity; which was, to assist them on all
Occasions, and doing all manner of acts of Kindness to them over and above what
the Law prescribed. And this was the natural Effects of loving their Neighbors
as their selves. The assisting and providing for a wounded Man on the Way, as
the Samaritan did for the Jew he found betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho, Luke 10.
The extraordinary and occasional Acts of Pity were called Mercy or Goodness,
and the Man that used them was called a good Man. Thus a righteous Man and a
good Man seemed to be distinguished. The latter of more desert Romans 5. 7.
than the former. Scarcely for a righteous Man (one that is just and gives
every Man his legal due and no more) will one die; though peradventure for a good
Man (the charitable Person, who obliges Mankind by all manner of extraordinary
Kindness) some would even dare to die. Possibly there may be found some Person
that out of Gratitude, and the desire of continuing such a common Blessing to
Mankind, would lay down his Life for to redeem his. Thus in Micah 6. 8. God
requires us first (as the lowest Duty) to do justly; and then, secondly, (as a
higher Perfection) to love Mercy; and then, thirdly, (as the highest) to walk
humbly with our God. And Nebuchadnezzar is exhorted by Daniel to break off his
Sins (of Justice, Pride, etc.) by righteousness, (by doing justly, and making
restitution, etc.) and his iniquities, (of Cruelty and Tyranny) by showing
Mercy to the Poor, etc. This being set last, as a higher Perfection than the
first. Finally, where we read eleemosne, Alms, in our Savior's Sermon Matthew.
6. 1.
on the Mount, some ancient Copies have it dikaiosne, Righteousness. And so the
Vulgar Latin at this Day reads it; Attendite ne justitiam vestram faciatis
coram hominibus; See that ye do not your Justice or Righteousness before Men.
So that a Jewish Righteousness (which was the paying of the settled Maintenance
to the Poor) was, as to Degrees descending, limited; below which they might
not sink: But the Jewish Mercy or Charity exceeded that, and was not limited
as to Degrees ascending. It was something above Righteousness, and exceeding
it; but how much, was left to Zeal joined with Prudence to determine. Now all
this is only to give Light to the Place of our Savior, Matthew. 5. 20. Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall in no case enter into the kingdom of God. Which thus understood teaches
us, That Christ expects, that we should at least excel the Scribes and
Pharisees in our Liberality to the Poor, and that our Works of Mercy ought to
exceed theirs; that God expects a higher Quota from the Christian than he did
from the Jew, in proportion to the greater Grace and Encouragements that he
has received under the Gospel. This being laid down for a Principle, the rest
is left to every Man's Circumstances, and to the Rules of Prudence, only with
the Apostle's Caution, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly.

. XII. The Sum of this Duty of Charity.
And now having, I think, fully silenced these importunate Prejudices, give me
leave (Sir) out of the Premises to conclude our Duty to be this; That all Men
watch all opportunities of mutual Assistance and Kindness, but the Rich
especially, as having more Convenience and Power to do Good, and from whom God
will without doubt expect an Account accordingly. Spend not therefore all upon
your Self and Attendants, nor let your Follies and Appetites engross all.
Charge your self every Year with some public or private Good, more or less
according to your Ability, and when the Year is ended, be able to give God and
your own Conscience an Account of it. Put not off Charity till your death, and
then think it enough if your Executors give something at your Funeral; which
usually turns to little Account. It Is a sign of an earthly and sensual Mind to
part with nothing while you are able to keep it; and it is no Thanks to give
what we can keep no longer. While we live our Charity cannot be perverted, but
when we are gone it may. Though, by the way, it is no loss to us, for God rewards
according to our good Intentions, not according to the Effects they may
accidentally produce; and it is not the Iniquity of Mankind in abusing Gifts of
Piety, that shall rob the Donor of his Crown. Let us do Good, and trust God
with the Issue. This I note here, having forgot to answer the latter part of
the second Objection in its place Page 39.
. But although I would have every Man's Charity begin in his lifetime, yet I
would not have it end with it. The more durable it is, the more glorious and
beneficial; it the longer preserves the Fame of the Founder, and is an increase
of his Happiness, by how much his Gift continues to do Good to Mankind. It
gathers Strength and Virtue by its Age. It is the best Tomb and Epitaph, and
therefore, Conde tibi tumulum, nec fide haeredis amori, etc. Build up your
Pillar your self, and see (if possible) your Work finished; for there is no
Work, nor Device, nor Wisdom in the Grave, whither we are all posting.

. XIII. The Encouragements to Charity.
Having said thus much in settling the Duty I plead for, and directing it,
there remains that I should speak of the Encouragements we have to it, of which
I have made (Sir) my self your Debtor: And, among the many that may offer
themselves to your view, let these Three have a particular Consideration.

1. Then it is very probable that 1. God designs Works of Charity when he gives
Estates.
God Almighty designed this End when he fitted you for the management of an
Estate, and gave you an Estate to manage. Some End he had in joining you
together, (and may it be long before this Tie is dissolved) and that was Good.
This Good must be either the preservation of your Self and Dependants in
particular, or the wellbeing of your Fellow-Mortals also. The first is a good
thing, but the second added to it makes it more excellent. And God, without all
doubt, aimed at that End which was most Noble: And that this Second is such,
will appear if you consider that the exercise of Liberality is the exercise of
many divine and precious Graces together, in one and the same Act. First, That
Charity is a Complication of many excellent Graces.
It Is an Act of self-denial, in which I take away something from my self to
give to another: For Nature would engross all to it self if it could receive
it; and has an Appetite to all the good Things we possess, though we are
convinced we cannot use them. He that parts then with some good Thing to his
Neighbor denies himself the same; and, consequently, acts upon a higher
Principle than that of Nature. Secondly, It Is a present submission to the Will
of God that has commanded me so to do, and consequently, a preference of his
Will to my own. Thirdly, It Is an Act of Faith and Trust in him, that he is able
to preserve me without this I part with, or to provide it for me when I want
it. Fourthly, It Is an Earnest, That I shall part with all, if he commands it,
as willingly as I do this for his sake. Fifthly, It Is a free will Offering to
the Poor for his sake, and an acknowledgment that I receive all from him.
Sixthly, And lastly, It Is an Antidote to that Depraver of the Mind and Body
both, that unreasonable, poor, slavish, and distrustful Root of all Evil,
Covetousness. And now consider and judge (Sir) how vast a difference there is
betwixt Charity to your self and to others, Selfpreservation and doing Good to
other Men. The first is from Nature, the second from Grace. That Is Self-love,
this is the Effect of the love of God. That complies with the Root (and
consequently Branches) of all Evil, this opposes it. That may be the Act of the
greatest Epicure and wickedest Man in the World; this (if conscientiously
performed for God's sake) must be that of a Child of God. And finally, That is
rewarded by the present enjoyments of this Life only, (which God knows are very
few and inconsiderable) but this brings forth some present Fruit, and that not
to be despised, (as I shall presently observe) and after tends to a joyful
Eternity. Besides, Selfpreservation may be attained with Necessaries only, and
best by them. Superfluities usually tend to the subversion of Nature. And God
would never have bestowed these upon you for the End, for which they are
neither adapted themselves, neither are either useful or used. They are more
than is necessary to you, but others want them, and therefore they were given
for their Use, and not for your own. I mean, for the exercise of Charity and
other good Graces that God delights to see us perform; With such Sacrifices God
is well pleased. From all which it is evident, That Works of Charity and Mercy
are one End why God has bestowed his Largess upon Mankind: And he that is wise
will consider these things, and understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Now
if this was one of God's Ends, (as it needs must be) you rob God of his due,
when you deny Charity hers; you live beside the End to which Providence has
directed you; you misimploy your Estate, and will be called to an Account for
the contempt of God, and misusing his Creatures: So that as good Works are your
End, they are your Interest.

. XIV. That Charity does not impoverish us, but tends to increase.
2. A second Encouragement is this, That Works of Charity is your temporal
Advantage. And here I shall endeavor to advance a Notion in contradiction to
the usual Complaints of Covetousness, That Charity is so far from impoverishing
us, that it tends to the blessing of God and the increase of our Estates. If
this could be but believed, it would gratify the Covetous and Ambitious at
once; and stop the Mouth of a considerable Objection (which I have not before
mentioned) as well as settle an important Truth: Which I shall endeavor to do
by Arguments drawn from Scripture, Reason, and Experience.

From Scripture I have this to say; That proved by, first, Holy Scripture.
That what God has promised must be performed, if our Ignorance or Infidelity
does not hinder it. But there is nothing plainer than a Promise of a full
retribution (and that with advantage) of those Temporals we lay out upon the
Account of Charity; and that not only in the next but in this Life. Thus
Solomon; The liberal Soul shall be made fat: and he that waters, shall be
watered himself, Prove. 11. 25. agreeable to what he affirms in other places: He
that gives to the Poor shall not lack, Prove. 28. 27. And, He that gives to
the poor, lends to the Lord; and that which he has given, will he repay him
again, Chapter 19. 17. Foenerator Deo, (says the Vulgar) he puts his Money to
use to the Lord; and vicissitudinem suam reddet ei, he will restore him his
turn or share. Thus David his Father; Blessed is he that considers the poor
and needy: the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord will
preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth, Psalm.
41. 1, 2, etc. St. Paul compares Alms-deeds to Seed sown; and God's returns,
to the Harvest; and promises thereupon, that he that sows bountifully shall
reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6. The Original and Vulgar has it, He that sows
in blessings, shall reap of blessings, meaning temporal Blessings. And though
some of these Promises may be interpreted of the Life to come, (which yet makes
the Encouragement the more considerable) yet others must be applied to this
Life. But why should we doubt this Truth, and what better Security can we have
than our Savior's Promise? Luke 6. 38. Give, and it shall be given you; good
measure, shaken down, and running over, shall men give into your bosoms: for
with the same measure you meet withal, it shall be measured to you again.

From Reason. And if, after such 2dly, By Reason.
plain and pregnant Places of Scripture, it were proper for a Christian to
consult this more fallible Oracle, when the Matter is concluded by that which
is infallible, we might receive further satisfaction from Arguments drawn from
God's Veracity, Justice, and Goodness; all which seem to be engaged to make the
charitable Man a present as well as future Recompense: And that so much the
more for Encouragement and Examples sake. For, it is the most probable way to
engage the Divine Benediction upon all we have. And although Men may be either
forgetful or unjust, yet God cannot be untrue to his Word, when he has
promised that the Righteous shall be recompensed on Earth; or so unrighteous,
as to neglect our work and labor of love, which we have showed to his Name, in
the ministering to the Saints, Heb. 6. 10.

From Experience. David long 3dly, By Experience.
since professed, that in all the Observation of his Life, he never saw the
righteous forsaken, or his seed begging, Psalm. 37. 25. That the righteous is
ever merciful, and lends; and thereupon his seed is blessed. And it is noted
as an Aphorism by Solomon, That a good Man leaves an Inheritance to his
Childrens Children. And even in these dark Times of Sin and Ignorance, I shall
challenge Mankind to show me one Instance, that ever prudent Charity made any
Man poor; (and it is no longer Charity than it is Prudent and Religious; nor can
I think him Prudent or Religious, that neglects his Family and foolishly gives
all away, for I have and ever shall allow Selfpreservation the first share.)
Indeed, other things may reduce the liberal Person to Poverty, as Idleness,
Suretiship, and other wastful Crimes, that may possibly outweigh his Charity,
and make Poverty necessary for him; but for Charity alone, it must be followed
with the Favors of Heaven, and the grateful Acknowledgments and Retributions
of Earth. And this is sufficient to silence the usual Fears of Covetousness,
and beget in the liberal Breast a lively Hope of present, as well as future
Recompenses. For, who can desire a more beneficial Bank than God's? Or, why may
we not venture, when we have God's Promises, his Veracity, Justice, and
Goodness; yea, and our own Experience, that we shall have a fortunate Lot?

. XV.
But you ( Sir) and those of your Character, with whom I presume to deal in
this Paper, are above Avarice, and its Fears and Jealousies. Honor moves you
more, and therefore let me use that as a Third Motive to Charity: I mean,

Thirdly, The honourableness of 3. Charity a generous and honorable Virtue.
that Action. I know very well how much the World generally is mistaken in the
Notion of Honor; as though 'twas to be only found in Wars, Ruins, Murders,
Desolation; in sacking, burning, and destroying Cities, and Countries; and,
finally, in doing all the Mischiefs one to another, that Revenge can invent, or
Pride and Cruelty execute. But these are false Notions, that make Men Tyrants
instead of Hero's, and feared and hated instead of honored. True Greatness of
Mind consists in dispensing Benefits to Mankind; in giving and forgiving; in
loosing the Bonds of wickedness, and the heavy Burdens, and letting the
oppressed go free; in dealing our Bread to the hungry, and bringing the Poor
that are cast out into our Houses; in covering the naked, and not hiding our
selves from our own Flesh. For then our Light shall break forth, as the morning
out of the bosom of obscurity, and our Darkness become as the Noonday. Our
Righteousness shall go before us, and the Glory of the Lord shall be our
Rere-ward. A generous Nature will rather enliven with genial Heat, than burn
and destroy. God has produced this beautiful World, and by his wonderful
Providence hitherto has preserved it. It Is the Devil that would first disorder
and then destroy it, and has therefore the Name of Abaddon and Apollyon.
Charity comes from God, and all the Actions it produces are Divine and
God-like. It Is a great and generous Grace, and what is common to us with the
Deity. We cannot reach the Power of his Creation; but we may in some measure
the Goodness of his Preservation. An Action so full of Honor, and so deserving
it, that our blessed Lord, when he was to refine and sublimate it in his Sermon
from the Mount, gave us no new Rules about it, but only a Caution not to be too
proud of it. And though it would injure the radical and self-denying Graces to
make Glory the chief End of Charity, yet I know not why I may not use it among
others as an Encouragement to it, for it naturally follows it. For his Horn (to
use the Hebrew Phrase) shall be exalted with honor, and his Righteousness
endures for ever.

. XVI. That Charity is rewarded with Heaven, as well as Earth.
4. Lastly, That I may mention no more: It is the part of every wise Man to
consult his future Good, and take care for a wellbeing when he is turned out of
this his present Stewardship. Our Lord from the wicked Policy of the unjust
Steward in the Gospel, deduces a Lesson both of Piety and Polity; And, I say
unto you, make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Which I shall need but to
render plain by this Paraphrase: Whereas by the abuse of Riches Men usually
render them Snares of the Devil, and Fuel to heat their Hell seven times
hotter; learn ye from me the divine Chimistry, to extract Good out of Evil, and
Spiritual Advantages out of that which accidentally ruins so many. Use your
Riches in Works of Piety and Charity; by which means you may make you Friends
in the Court of Heaven, (as well as on Earth) that when ye fail and die, and so
must leave this World, those Friends that ye have made there, may cause you to
be received into everlasting Habitations. By these Friends I mean good Works;
which, by the Mercies of God, and his gracious Acceptance, are crowned with an
eternal Reward, far above their intrinsic value. And this is (I conceive) the
true import of the Words, and free from the affrightful Doctrines of Merit,
whether of Condignity or Congruity. And we may in all Humility have respect to
the recompense of the Reward. For our Lord to this purpose describes the
Circumstances of the last Judgment, Matthew. 25. as though he would encourage Men
to Works of Charity when he tells us, That the Pious should have their Heaven
and the Kingdom prepared for them, from the beginning of the World, for or in
consideration of their Works of Mercy, viz. For feeding, clothing, and
visiting Christ's poor Members; and the Cursed their sentence of Condemnation
for their neglecting of them. And if there be (as we are sure there are)
Degrees of Glory, and they may be increased every Day to the World's end, then
judge to what an immense Sum the merciful Man's Stock of Glory may amount to
by the consummation of all Things; while his Acts of prudent Charity every Year
bring many Souls to Heaven, whose good Deeds and Reward must in all Equity
redound to him that was the occasion of 'em. And such must be the happy
Condition of the Founders and Benefactors of Colleges, Halls, Hospitals, and
other religious and charitable Foundations, whose Reward shall not only
continue, but be increased daily, in proportion to the Good it does and shall
do daily, till the consummation of all Things.

. XVII. The Conclusion; showing the difference betwixt the Desert and Reward of
the ordinary and charitable Disposals.
And here give me leave to observe to you, the difference betwixt Self-serving
on the one Hand, and Liberality and Charity on the other, and desire you to
consider the different Methods of Distribution, and the different Deserts and
Rewards; by which you may judge which is the more prudent way, of Disposal in
our lives-time, or Settlement at our death. And for once let us suppose, That
every rich Man has a Son to be Heir of his Estate and Fourtunes; yet even in
that Case there is this to be said.

1. We think our selves happy That of the Ordinary considered.
when we can beget our like, and transmit our Nature to another, and so
preserve it from the common fate of Mortality. And yet, indeed, it is no more
ours when we die than another; for then all Relations cease, and Kindred is at
an end. And even while we live here (considering the constant Flux of Matter)
there is very little of us in our Children, unless the Soul also could be proved
to be ex traduce. However, we call them ours, we give them an Original and
Nature by Nutrition and Increase: But then we communicate to them our evil and
corrupt Nature and Disposition, and (commonly) our Customs and Habits. If there
be any Imperfection it is usually propagated, and we may view our sinful selves
in them: An Object of Grief more than Joy. And so much the more, when by the
want of Education, or a depraved one, when by Fondness and Lenity we make him
twofold more the Child of Wrath than our selves. But if we could be secure of
his happy and prosperous Life, in respect of all his Capacities, yet this like
wise must be taken into Consideration, That Families as well as single Men have
their period; and two or three Generations usually put an end to our Place and
Name; and then where is the effect of all our Cares, Projects, Designs, Joys,
and Griefs, when Strangers shall inherit our Labors? Well, but what is the
present or future Reward for all our Cares and Troubles, in providing Estates
for our Heirs, or Heirs for our Estates? Verily, nothing at all. We have here
but our Labor for our Pains, and the thin aerie Pleasure of thinking we shall
leave an Estate to our Children; or, rather, to we know not whom: Sometimes we
have the mortification to foresee that all shall be spent and wasted in a short
time; as it is said of an eminent Person in a former Reign to have made this
sorrowful Bequest; Scelera omnia Edoardo Primogenito meo dissipanda (neque
unquam melius speravi) religo, etc. And, if Souls departed have any Account of
the Affairs of their Successors here on Earth, it must be most commonly a very
sorrowful one; but, if they have none at all, it will not concern us who they
are, and what they do. Thus for our present, and then for our future Reward, we
can expect nothing. For this is the Effect only of self-love, to support our
selves first, and then our second selves, our Heirs, and Assigns when we can
hold it no longer; and so do the Heathens; and then what Reward can we expect
more than they? Or, rather, what Punishment may we not expect above them, who
have a greater Light, Promises, and Encouragements, and yet manage our earthly
Talent mostly worse than they? And this is, in short, the Account of our
ordinary Disposals of the Goods of Fortune, (as they are commonly called) and
Deserts and Rewards consequent thereunto.

. XVIII. That of the Charitable Persons, etc.
2. Let us now, in the second place, consider those of the Charible Person;
and, for Instance sake, that of the Founder of a College or School in
particular. He cannot be supposed to be Childless, but has a numerous Family,
and that selected out of the best Wits and Humors in the Nation, and the
greatest Persons are glad to part with the most ingenious of their Sons to
become his, and serve under his Rules. He prescribes Laws, which they willingly
bind themselves by Oath to observe, with a greater Reverence and Care than the
Commands of their natural Parents; and they leave their Fathers and Mothers to
become his Children. Their continual Practice is that of Virtue, Learning, and
Religion: And thus the worst Natures are rectified, and the best improved, and
all are mended, And when this Work is perfected, some go out into the World and
are fitted to serve God in his Church, the King, and their Country; and others
succeed in their Places and Advantages: So that his Family is a Seminary of
Religion and Learning; and there is a succession of it as long as the Sun and
Moon endures. And when these have finished their Courses, and the end of all
Things is come, he may present himself and them to his Maker, with the Words of
the Prophet; Behold, Lord, I and the Children that thou have given me.

. XIX.
In Sum: Charity has the preference of any other Disposal of Estate; and that
in these Three Respects following: First, The Charitable Person does Good to
others, and not to his own Family only, (and I would not be so understood, as
if I pleaded for the neglect of them) but the Good of others also; and
therefore his Work is more Heroic, Diffusive, and removed from private Good,
and so is more excellent. And he may say out of the Mouth of Wisdom; Behold, I
have not labored Ecclus. 24. 34.
for my self only, but for all them that seek Wisdom. Secondly, He does the
best Good, not only in supporting the Bodies, but dressing up the Souls, and
cultivating of the Minds of Men for Religion and Virtue. And so the End of his
Endeavors is the acquisition of the greatest present and future Happiness of
Mind and Body here on Earth, and afterward in Heaven. Thirdly, Others Labors
cease and rest, (as well as they from their Labors) but his continue,
increase, and produce new Advantages daily; and so will continue to do till the
end of the World, unless the Supreme Providence suffers them to be invaded and
diverted. And even in that Case the Pious Donor may reasonably expect from the
just God Rewards in proportion to the presumptive Effects of his Work, and the
Intention of the Benefactor. So that let things happen how they will, he cannot
miss of his Reward. If his Charity remains, his Reward increases with its
Fruits; but, if it be obstructed by Fraud or Violence, yet it will be
remunerated according to the uprightness of his Intention.

. XX.
In a word: Every Action of Charity we do here is recorded above, and has its
Reward apportion'd there, even to Interest upon Interest, and all the possible
Degrees of Improvement; which the Divine Prescience can easily foresee, and
will adjust according to the Measures of his Mercies. And this Reward is as far
above the inherent Worth of the Work as Heaven is above the Earth, or the
Regions of Bliss above this Vale of Tears. Whatsoever we do for our selves, or
our Relations, we leave behind us, as Duties we owe to Nature, for which she
pays us here. But what we do for God, and his Servants for his sake, follow us
into the state of the dead, and into the Tribunal of our Judge, and plead for
us; where they cannot but have a benign Audience, from him who is the Father of
the Fatherless, and who pleads the Cause of Orphans and Widows; even God in his
Holy Habitation. And with this I will conclude the second Head of this
Discourse, and prepare to speak of the Third in that which follows.

AN ESSAY TO Revive the Necessity OF Ancient Piety.
Honored SIR,
. I. Why the Author treats of Works of Piety in the last place.
THE Subject of this Second Address, is the Third End for which it pleases the
Divine Bounty to entrust us with an Earthly Portion; and that is the Promotion
of the Honor of God, and the making his Perfections, and particularly his
Goodness known to Mankind, that they may with us be induced to render him the
Honor due to his Name, and the Tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving. And this by
the order of Nature and Reason ought to have claimed the first Place in these
Discourses; as his Dues were to be first offered up, and separated amongst his
own People, before they were to make use of the remainder. Besides, this is the
End of the Enjoyment of our own Part, and the End of our Distribution to
others; of Self-preservation and Charity, both ought to aim at his Glory, and
therefore it ought first to be treated of. But in this ungrateful Age, in which
we take (like the Beast of the Field) what is bestowed upon us, without ever
looking up to Heaven and acknowledging the Hand that distributes it; in this
profane Age, in which our Pleasures and Profits are only considered, and God's
Honor not at all, or not often; in this bigoted, and yet irreligious Age, in
which it is thought Superstition and Priestcraft, to plead for any thing
toward the continuance of God's Service, (because they are to be his
Receivers) wherein such Doctrines as these are quite out-dated, and strange to
our Ears, and Men think their Estates not concerned at all to maintain the
Worship of God: In an Age wherein it is thought that Churchmen have too much
still, and a covetous Eye is cast upon the large Revenues of Bishops, Deans and
Chapters; wherein all chargeable Worship is thought needless, and so many
inspired Ignorants set up for Ministers, and tender a cheap Worship, or such as
will cost nothing: I say, in such an Age as this is, I must be content that
God's Cause should come on last, and that he have the least share in our
Estates rather than none at all. And yet though it comes last, yet it shall not
be least treated of, but be the Subject of the following Papers; in which I
shall endeavor to maintain this Assertion.

. II. That every Man is bound, to the utmost of his Power, to promote the
Honor of his Master, and maintain his Service, and (for the sake of that, and
to that purpose) those that are to officiate in the same, and that with his
Estate and Fortunes. And, that he that is able to do it (which is the Case of
most Men more or less) and does it not, mis-imploys his Talent, answers not the
End for which it was committed to his Charge, and must give an Account of that
Neglect at the last Day.
That this Truth may appear, I must first define what I mean by the Object of
our Piety, the Glory of God, and then distinguish concerning the Ways of
promoting of it.

The Glory and Honor of God, What is meant by the Glory of God, or Divine
Worship.
or Divine Worship, is the humble and reverential Agnition of his Being, and of
all his Glorious Attributes; his Supremacy, Power, Goodness, and other infinite
Perfections: And the Acknowledgment that we are his Creatures, depend upon him
for Life and Motion, and receive all the good things necessary thereunto at his
Bounty; which is the subject matter of our Prayers and Praises.

The act of exhibiting those Acknowledgments, How this is exhibited.
is either mediate, or immediate.

We glorify God mediately, 1. Mediately: By mediate, as that tends to his
Honor.
when we do any thing that naturally tends to these Acknowledgments. Thus the
doing of every good Work is for his Glory, because it may and does naturally
tend to set it forth. Thus all the Works of Nature and Art, the Knowledge of
the great System of the World, and Natural Philosophy teach his Praises. Thus
all Moral As Moral and Matural Philosophy.
Works of Virtue (as Equity, or Justice, Comity, Urbanity, Liberality,
Fortitude, Temperance, and such like) tend to his Glory in their exercise for
the Good of Mankind, and in the Subject where they are found, because of his
planting there. Even Polity (the well-institution of Kingdoms, and Reciprocal
Duties of Governors and Subjects) leads us to the Providential Care of God for
our Good, and consequently to his Praises. In a word, whatsoever does naturally
incline us to think upon God, and reflect upon his Power or Goodness, is a
mediate Act of glorifying him. And thus the Psalmist, having considered the
several Acts of Providence over the several sorts of Men in the varieties of
their Lives, reflects very naturally upon his Goodness, and thence takes
occasion to exhort Men to praise him; O that men Psalm. 107.
would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his wonderful Works
to the Children of Men.

And, as natural and moral Philosophy tend in their consequences and mediately
to the Divine Service which we owe our Maker, so do all Foundations, Societies,
and The Founders of Schools of Learning, and the Universities, how they tend to
the advancing Divine Service, etc.
Seminaries of Learning and Religion, designed for the same uses. And here I
cannot but remember, and at the same time celebrate those Nurseries of every
thing that is Good and Commendable, The two flourishing Universities of our
Land, and that with all Thankfulness to God, and Acknowledgments of the
Munificence of the Founders and Benefactors of each Society, that compose those
August and Illustrious Bodies: That God was pleased to incline the Hearts of
those good Men to employ their Riches to such Advantages of Religion, and
preserve such Foundations to the Good of Mankind, amongst the Dissolutions of
so many pretended Houses of Religion in these three Kingdoms. Places founded at
first, without all question, with sincere Intentions of extraordinary Piety and
Devotion, but degenerated in latter Times into Idleness, Gluttony, and all
manner of Sensuality, and so from Houses of Prayer becoming Dens of Thieves. In
the desolution of these, those remained untouched, (nay, augmented and
established) because free from their Crimes; and may they continue and flourish
whilst this Machine of Heaven and Earth continues, and not determine but in its
Desolution.

How naturally, and how much these tend to the Service of God, is obvious to
every one that considers, That the End of their Erection, and the daily
exercise of their Members, is, First, To smooth over the Asperities, mend the
Deformities, and finish the Imperfections of humane Nature; to introduce
Civility and Urbanity, Bowels of Mercies, humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering, Forbearance, and Forgiveness, and, indeed, an universal
Charity. These Graces are required in Christians by the great Apostle of the
Gentiles, and are introduced by the University-Education; which softens our
harsh Natures, and melts them down into a Temper to receive such Impressions.
And, besides, by the continual practice of Virtue, and sweetness of
Conversation, and by the Admonitions and Examples of their Superiors, the
Inclinations to our native Vices are weakened and destroyed, and contrary
Dispositions and Habits super-induc'd, necessary all the remaining parts of our
lives to our Politic, as well as Religious, Capacities. Secondly, Their
Exercise is the Improvement of their rational Faculties, whereby we differ from
the Beasts, and this helps them not only for Discourse and Conversation, but
for the discovery of Truth and Falsehood when it is dressed up in its shape and
likeness. Thirdly, Natural Philosophy and the inquisition into the state of
Nature, the System of the World, and the Works of God, and thereby they are
taught to see things with other Eyes than the Vulgar, and discover the
Greatness and Goodness of our Creator, and fear and honor him accordingly.
Thirdly, The heavenly Doctrine of the Knowledge of our selves, Autarchy, or the
Government of Lusts, Appetites, and Passions: To live as rational Creatures,
that are not inebriated with present Enjoyments, but foresee and provide for
Futurity and another Life. These are all excellent Preparations and Approaches
to the highest of all Sciencies, (which is likewise taught and practiced within
those Walls) the Knowledge of God, and our Duty thereupon, according to both
natural and revealed Religion. And therefore from these Nurseries, those that
are fit are transplanted into the Church (as well as State) as workmen that
need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, thoroughly furnished
with all good Works, and fitted to exhibit the Wants of their several Flocks to
God, as well as their own, by those Prostrations of Mind and Body in the
immediate Acts of his Worship, commonly called Divine Service, which I am next
to speak of.

For there is a more immediate 2dly, Immediately.
act of exhibiting this Worship; and that is, the actual homage of the agnition
the agnition of God, and his Attributes, and our dependence on him: And this is
done only in Prayers and Praises. And in this strict Sense, neither reading,
hearing, preaching the Word, nor frequenting of Sermons, is Divine Service, or
the immediate act of Worship. And though they have an immediate Aspect that way,
and tend to it, yet they are not the thing it self: Wherein (by the way) we may
note the great mistake of the Zealots of this Age, who place Religion in
nothing but Sermonizing and Hearing, and slight all the ancient and holy
Methods of approaching the Deity. And, instead of these, gratify their itching
Ears with long canting Harangues, and the Froth of Fancy, which they admire
because they know not what to make of it. Whereas Religion consists in the
Application of the Mind to the Deity, with all manner of Submission and
grateful Acknowledgments: And these passing from a pure and sanctified Mind in
Thoughts or Words proper, suitable, and thoroughly examined, that we may offer
unto God a reasonable Service, or the Service becoming reasonable Creatures.
This is the true and essential Worship of God, the highest Duty Man is capable
of, and the End of the Creation: It Is our great Duty upon Earth, and the
Employment of Heaven, which shall continue to all Eternity. There the four
(strange, but) glorious living Creatures, and the four and twenty Elders,
together with all the heavenly Host, rest not Night nor Day, but join
altogether in perpetual Hymns of Praises and Thanksgivings, casting down their
Crowns before the Throne, and saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
Glory, and Honor, and Power; for thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are and were created.

. III. That Works of Piety, or the Service of God, ought to be promoted by our
Estates, proved by Five Propositions.
This is that which we are bound to do our selves in the several Pauses and
Intervals we enjoy from the noise of this World: And this we are bound to
promote to the utmost of our Power, and with our Lives and Fortunes. And that
you may know how your Estate may be serviceable, and is liable to contribute to
this immortal Work, (the continuance of Divine Service) I shall make a gradual
Advance in these Five Propositions following.

Prop. 1. God is to be worshipped Prop. 1. That God is to be worshipped, and
his Service promoted.
by Mankind. And here, to distinguish a little further (which falls properly in
the aforegoing Section, but was forgot there) about the mediate Acts of Divine
Worship. They are either inward Of inward and outward acts of Worship, and that
both are required.
or outward. The inward is the act of the Mind, and consists in humble and
grateful Acknowledgments of his infinite Goodness, etc. The outward act is the
external Expression of this inward Acknowledgment. And this Expression is made
by sensible Signs; such are, First, The articulate Words of Prayers and
Praises. And then, Secondly, The inarticulate Signs made by the Genuflexions
and Prostrations of the Body. By these outward acts we make our Bodies Parties
in the Worship, and give sensible Indications to others what we are doing,
thereby instructing and encouraging them to do the like: And therefore this is
proper for the public Service of God; because it is the only visible and
sensible act of which our Fellow Creatures, Men and Angels can take cognizance.
And from these outward Signs of inward Humility have the Greeks taken occasion
to call Divine Service, or Adoration, in their Language, prosknesi, a bowing
down, or Prostration of the Body; according to the devout Psalmist; O, come let
us worship, and bow down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. I will not make
comparison betwixt these two acts, the inward and the outward, (each have their
several use and excellency) because they must not be separated, especially in
public Prayer. For, as the Body and Soul make the Man, so the external and
internal Service of God do make Divine Service.

To come to the Proposition then. The Proposition proved from the Obligations
we have to Truth, Gratitude, and Indemnity.
It Is absolutely necessary that every Man should worship his Maker, with the
inward and (if he be not incapacitated) with outward Homage. And this will
appear from the Obligations we have to, first, Truth; secondly, Gratitude;
thirdly, Indemnity or Pardon of Sin.

1. We are bound to acknowledge every Truth. But, that God is an infinite Being
in himself, and infinitely Good to us, is a great and eternal Truth, and
therefore ought to be recognized and acknowledged, else we are injurious to
Truth it self. 2. We are bound to Gratitude, and that obliges us to acknowledge
God's Bounty. And, as Tenants swear Fealty, and do their Homage, (as an
acknowledgment of the Lord's original Right upon these Terms derived to them)
so Gratitude obliges us to a declaration of God's Right over all things, and
his gracious Dispensations of what is useful to us. But then we have a Third
Obligation; which is, the want we have of Indemnity. For we must be sensible
of the depravation of our Nature, and our neglect of Duty; and, consequently,
that we are obnoxious to the Divine Justice, if it be not atoned and reconciled
to us: And the way to obtain that, is by humble Confessions and
Acknowledgments, to which God in his Holy Word has annexed a full Remission, 1 John 1. 9.
and has pawned his Faithfulness and Justice for the same: And this is a Third
Obligation to Divine Worship.

Behold ( Sir) the triple Foundation of all Religion, and especially of Divine
Worship. And here I cannot but tremble to make the Application to those many
(to almost all) in these lukewarm Times. To those (I mean) that are become so
indifferent as to God's Service, that they prefer the meanest of their
Pleasures, as well as the greatest of their Profits, to it. That serve God when
they have nothing else to do, and go to their Prayers when they have neither
Friends nor occasions to interrupt them. That lay aside their Duty to God to go
to a Feast, or Meeting, and leave the Chapel for a Huntingmatch. These (and
who are not such in this degenerate Age?) do in effect, and for that turn at
least, deny God, and sin against Truth, Gratitude, and the Pardon they stand in
need of. They use that daily Bread which they are not at leisure to ask at
God's Hand, and take his Liberality, and cannot stay to thank him, but put him
off till some other time. They disown their Creator and Benefactor for that
time, and will make him stay till they can a while to make their
Acknowledgments. And how great a Crime this is, do but judge ( Sir) by the like
in any of your Servants, whom for less than this you would discard for ever. I
cannot stay to prosecute this seasonable Reflection, (you may improve it by
running up the Parallel as far as it will go, and making Application to your
own Conscience) because I must pass on to the next Proposition; which is this.

. IV. Prop. 2. That God is daily to be worshipped. Of public and private
Worship.
Prop. 2. This Divine Service must be performed publicly or privately,
solemnly or occasionally every Day. The public and solemn way of serving God
is as far beyond that which is private, as the Light of the Sun is beyond that
of a Candle, and must be so much the more acceptable, as your Servants ready
performance of your public Command would be beyond his denying of it before
all the Company, and then performing of it in secret. Not to confess God (when
we are enjoined) is to deny him: And our Savior has declared, That he that
denies him before Men, shall be denied by him before his Father and the Holy
Angels. For this and other Reasons, I say, it is our Duty to worship God
publicly and solemnly. But because Men's Circumstances may vary, public
Prayers cannot be always had, and there may be emergencies which may prevent
them, and sometimes the necessaries to Self-preservation hinders them,
especially in the meaner sort, (who literally undergo the consequent of Adam's
Sin; In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread.) I add therefore, in
defect of the public Worship, that which is private or occasional; For, where
the public is intermitted, the private must supply that neglect; and, where
the settled Hour of Prayer cannot be attended, the occasional must atone for
the omission. The first, and (in defect of that) the second must be our daily
Exercise. And he that cannot wait upon God in his Temple, must yet meet him in
his Closet; and if even that cannot be (which is seldom known) he must yet send
some short Ejaculation up wards, as Envoys to excuse his necessary Neglect.

But however this is done (for That one of these is to be offered up daily.
God is ready to allow us what we can reasonably demand) it ought to be done
daily. Life is called our Day, and each Day is a new Life. Night is a true
Image of the Days of Darkness, which are many, and Sleep of Death. We cease to
be our own, and have no signs of Life but Respiration; which is only a Pledge
that we shall wake again; we know no Body, and are dead to the World, and all
its Concerns. The Morning of the Day following is our daily Resurrection, when
we receive a new Life, and rise up from our Grave-Clothes, and dress us again
for the Businesses of the Day. Seeing then we receive every Day a new Life, and
begin a new Work, can it be thought unreasonable that we should be bound to
desire a Blessing on the same? Or, that being a wakned from the Regions of
Darkness and Shadow of Death, we should make our Acknowledgments for that new
Mercy? We salute our Friends every Morning, as restored to the de novo, but
shall we pass by God unsaluted? Besides, it is the dictate of Nature to begin
the Day with God, a procuration of his Assistance, and a Blessing upon our
Undertakings. The Persians used to adore the rising Sun, the Image and
Representation (as they thought) of the Supreme Deity. And the Jews had their
Morning and Evening times of Sacrifice and solemn Prayers: And the Apostles
thought it their duty to frequent them, Act. 2. 46. and c. 3. 1. The religious
and devout Christians of the Primitive Times had several settled Hours of
Prayer every day. It would be thought too much Superstition to imitate, or
strictness to enjoin the like to this Licentious Age: Yet our blessed Lord
(below whose Commands we cannot go) has ordered us all to ask day by day our
daily Bread. And suppose God should say Amen to our silence, (I mean) should
not give us what we are not at leisure to ask; suppose he should put us out of
his Protection for but one day, what would follow? Why, no less than a seizure
of the evil Angels upon Body and Soul, while ungarded. Or, if he should
withdraw his assisting Hand, what would be the Effect? Why, nothing less than
death and the desolution of the Man. Besides, it is an omission that can proceed
from nothing but a disingenious and base Ingratitude, unworthy of a rational
Being, or of the Nature of Man: And I beseech God to lay it home to all our
Hearts for an universal Reformation.

. V. Prop. 3. That there is a necessity for a settled Ministry, in order to
perform the same.
Prop. 3. To assist us in our religious Addresses, as well as to invite us to
them, there is a necessity that there should be a sort of Men selected from
others, and ordained for that purpose.

These we call usually the Ministry, the more proper Instruments of Divine
Worship. And the necessity of these appears from hence: Man is generally
immersed in Cares and the Affairs of this World; and the Business of this Life
is apt to take up all his Thoughts, and bank his Resolutions of Duty. Besides,
he is blinded by Self-love, and apt to flatter himself, so that he cannot make
a true judgment of his Spiritual Estate; and wants upon both Accounts a daily
Monitor, as to the things of God. Add to this, he is carried headlong with the
fury of his Passions beyond all moderation, and loves and hates without
measure. His Appetites cheat and delude him, and the Devil is ready to improve
them to evil Acts; and the Admonitions of his Conscience cannot be harkned to.
And all these unite to make him not capable at all times to exhibit a due and
seasonable worship to his Maker: And therefore God by the Law of Nature, as
well as by his revealed Will, has taught Men to have standing Ministers of
Religion, who at once should be Monitors and Assistants in our religious
Applications, who should at the same time call upon us to pray, and pray with
us and for us; who should exhort and rebuke with all Authority, and keep us (as
far as those means can prevail with us) in our way to Heaven. Hence it is that
in all Nations, where there was any Notion of a God and Religion, (and that was
every where) there was also a separate sort of Men called Priests, to assist
them as to the things of God and their well-in tended (though mistaken)
Devotions. Thus it has been from the beginning, and so it continues to this
day, even amongst the Heathens, Pagans, and Indians, who have no other Law but
that of Nature to guide them. So it was amongst the Patriarchs before the
giving of the Jewish Law, where the chief of each Family did this Office, as
having in all probability the most Wisdom as well as the most Authority. During
the Jewish Economy in that Nation, this Office was annexed to one Tribe, (but
this was but a National and Temporal Constitution) and under that of the
Christian; these are usually called the Clergy. A sort of Men begun by Christ
himself, (the chief Cornerstone) continued from him to the Apostles, and from
them to others down to us: These receive a derivative Power to intercede for
their several Flocks, instruct and build them up in the most Holy Faith, and
administer to them the Pledges of Grace and Salvation. These things cannot be
denied as to matters of Fact, or the reason of the Thing; and he that shall
have the forehead to do it, will at the same time impeach the Wisdom of God in
the Holy Scriptures, as well as in the Law of Nature, and is no better than a
proud conceited Atheist or Enthusiast: And so I leave him to proceed to the
Fourth Proposition, which follows.

. VI. Prop 4. That the Ministry ought to have a competent and sufficient
Maintenance.
Prop. 4. This sort of Men thus set apart for the Purposes of Religion, and the
Service of God, are to be maintained with a Competency sufficient for that
Purpose.

And here I desire not to be mistaken, for I dream not of Greatness and worldly
Pomp. And what an envious sort of People amongst us have to object, shall be
taken into Consideration in its due place. I shall only plead for a Competency
that may enable them to attend upon their Office without distraction or worldly
Avocations: And if that were allowed it were sufficient, and under such a
Sufficiency it cannot he performed. The only Question will be, what ought to be
accounted such a Sufficiency. And here let me not be thought impertinent if I
enquire into two Things. First, What the Supreme Wisdom did heretofore think
so, and show how plentifully they were then provided for, both under Judaism
and Christianity, how the Church came to be impoverished, and what were the
Consequences of the same. Secondly, What by Parity of Reason may be thought
such a Sufficiency now.

1. If we enquire of former Times What God himself heretofore assigned for a
Competency. What amongst the Patriarchs.
and the Days that are now long past, we shall easily perceive what the Wisdom
of God thought necessary for the Support of so holy and abstracted an Office.
From the beginning of the World till the giving of the Jewish Law from Mount
Sinai, which was above 2400 Years, the Priesthood was executed by the Head of
each Family, and the Princes were also Priests, the Sacred and Secular Powers
being united. But after God had entailed the Priesthood on the Family of Aaron
(instead of the Firstborn, Exodus 13.
which were always accounted his) he chose the Tribe of Levi, (of which Aaron
was a Branch) to Numb. 3.
attend the Priests and the Service of the Tabernacle. So that the Ministry of
that Nation was divided into Priests and Levites: Those the Principals, these
the Assistants: Those to perform the most solemn Acts of Worship, these to
attend them, and to perform the inferior; and they were answerable to our
Priests and Deacons. And amongst the Priests there were then (as there be now)
several Degrees (as the Highpriests, the Chief of the several What amongst the
Jews; and God's large Provision for them.
Courses and ordinary Priests) each dignified and distinguished, and endowed
with Estates equal to their several Stations. The lowest of that Ministry were
the Levites. And, as to them, if we consider their Number, they were not the
fortieth part of the whole Congregation, and yet it is observed by learned Men
(that have computed it) that their Portion (what by Cities, and the Glebe round
about to One thousand Cubits every way, according to the Cubit of the
Sanctuary, which was as big again as the ordinary Cubit, and what by the Tithes
of all Israel) was four times as much as that of any other the greater Tribes.
So liberal was God in those Days to the Inferior Clergy, that though their Number
was far smaller, yet their Portion was far greater than the rest of the
Peoples, and they lost nothing, but got much by having God to be their
Play Master, who allowed them Estates seven or eight times as much as he did to
those of other Tribes. Then for the Priests (of the particular Family of Aaron)
they had the First Fruits of all things the Earth produced; as Corn, Wine, and
Oil, (and he was a Man of an evil Eye, that offered under the sixtieth part:)
They had also the First Fruits of Cattle, clean and unclean; the first in kind,
the other to be redeemed at a Price. They had the Firstborn of Man to be
redeemed at five Shekels a piece, being likewise the Shekel of the Sanctuary:
They had all the Vows, Gifts, and Offerings, and all Males were to appear
before God thrice every Year, and none to appear emptyhanded. And besides all
this, they had thirteen Cities with their Suburbs of the same Dimensions with
the former. So that every Priest, considering the smalness of their Number,
could not choose but live (if he would himself) in a plentiful Condition, far
above Want, and nearer to that of great Men than the common People. What
Provision was made for the Chief of every Course, I remember not, but the
High Priest had the Tenth of the Levites Portion, and a Revenue equal to many
(some say three or four thousand*) Levites, suitable to that of the Princes,
amongst whom he was accounted the chiefest. Now let any Man tell me why God
should thus provide for those that performed his Worship, after such an
extraordinary manner, above others under the Law; was it not to free 'em from
Wants, and consequently from Contempt? And if so, (as none can deny) if we have
a Specimen of the Divine Allotment in those Days of the largest Measures, why
should we think that he is not of the same Mind now? Or, that he would have his
Priests under the Gospel live upon Alms as Beggars? Especially seeing there is
the same reason in the thing it self, and he has declared nothing to the
contrary. But this will be better cleared by taking a view of that Competency
which his Providence ordered his Ministers under the Gospel.

. VII. The large Provision God made for the Ministry, under the Gospel, in the
Primitive Times.
Though our Lord chose Poverty as a state of Life best suiting his Design of
redeeming Mankind; and his Apostles were of mean Concerns, and forced to leave
what they had, as unportable Matter, which they could not (nor indeed needed)
carry with them about the World, whither they were sent to publish the Gospel;
yet, no sooner was the Holy Ghost given, and those their mighty Powers
confirmed to them, (the least of which was of more worth than a Crown and
Scepter) but we find that they commanded all that their Converts had. And, in
recompense of their own Losses, received their Proselytes whole Estates in
Money at their Feet and Disposal. The right of Tithes and Offerings (which was
appropriated during the Levitical Law to that Tribe and Priesthood) reverted
now to its old Channel: And that Priesthood being at an end, they returned to
God's Ministers of what Nation or Family soever they were. This our Lord
himself intimated in the Sentence of giving to Caesar the things that are
Caesar' s, and unto God the things that are God's; by which last the Primitive
Fathers (who must best know his Mind) say he meant the restoration of God's due
(his Tithes and Offerings) to his Servants they now properly belonged to; and
thereby laying down a Maxim or Foundation for the right of the Christian
Priesthood. And St. Paul alludes to this, or some other Ordination of our
Savior, when he maintains the Priests Right under the Gospel to the Dues of
the Altar upon our Lord's Order. Even so (as the Ministers of the Temple and
the Altar were partakers of the Things of the Temple and Altar, which were
Tithes and Offerings) has the Lord ordained that they that preach the Gospel,
should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 14. But those Times would not bear that
Truth, and therefore it was not seasonable to declare it in plain Terms, or
press it upon the Churches; lest the Jews should be scandalized at it, and cry
out Sacrilege, and the Devil should have an Objection of pretended Covetousness
and Self-Interest, against the Propagators of the Gospel. It was therefore
abundantly sufficient to assert the Ministers Rights in general Words, and in
such Terms that they knew the future Christians would interpret to the Churches
Settlement. Besides, Tithes could neither be demanded without Offense, nor
paid, nor received in those Times; and therefore Providence ordered Things so
that they needed them not: For the Believers with themselves made the Apostles
a Present of all that they had; and left them to be Stewards and Distributers
of it, as they should think fit. Offerings supplied the Place of Tithes, which
were so considerable during those Times of Trouble and Persecution, that not
only the succeeding Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, but the Poor also were
plentifully maintained, and that in all Places whither Christianity extended it
self: And this till the Times of Constantine, who settled Peace and its Rights
to the Church, and Tithes amongst the rest; which could not be regularly and
universally paid before; though they might and were privately and in some Places,
(where suffered) and therefore we read of some Churches endowed before. But be
that as it will: After the time of this Christian Emperor, Churches were built
and endowed by Pious Men, who gave to them Portions of Glebe, and the Bishop of
the Diocese allotted and appropriated Portions of Tithes to the new-built
Churches, such as was sufficient to maintain the Minister of Religion
plentifully, and enable him to be hospitable, and to give to the Poor. This was
the Original of Parochial Rights; and by these means, these Portions of Tithes,
by little and little, were derived from the Bishop (who was at first the Grand
Proprietor and Receiver of them in his Diocese) to the Parish Priest; to whom
likewise, with the Profits, he derived also part of his Charge and Care (the
Curam animarum) of those in such and such Precincts: And this last is done to
every new Incumbent to this Day, and it is called the Bishops Institution to
the Benefice. The rest of the Tithes, Offerings, and Endowments, were reserved
to the Cathedral Church of the Bishops Sea, and the Priests there resident, who
lived longer together in common, till Abuses made it necessary to separate
likewise their Allowances, which we call at this Day Prebends. This was the
Work of several hundred Years more or less, and sooner or later in the Nations
wherein Christianity was settled; during which time God stirred up the Hearts
of Pious Men, both Ecclesiastical and others, to endow and settle the Revenues
of the several Churches, that the Pastors or (as they are now called) Rectors
of them lived above Contempt, kept Hospitality, maintained the Poor, (for then
there needed no Laws for their Sustenance by Collection, as now) and so waited
comfortably on their Office. Their Gifts were great, and Offerings many. No Man
came to the Christian Altar empty-handed, and none died but he gave something
in his Will to his Parish Church, (if not to that of the Diocese) besides other
Legacies and Mortuaries. Their Conveyances were made to God and such a Church,
and that by the surest ways, and under the severest Curses in case of
Alienations imaginable; by which they thought to ensure and perpetuate their
several Pieties beyond the Power of Sacrilegious Alienations. They gave to God,
because they thought no Man durst rob him, not remembering that the Israelites
were Mal. 3. 6.
long ago charged with that Crime. They hedged about their Donations with
Denunciations of Hell and Damnation to those that should be so bold as to
pervert them to other Uses. But all in vain. There is nothing durable in this
World. The wild Boar out of the Wood first threw down the Hedges, and so the
little Foxes of the Hills were let in to devour the Grapes. An Atheistical
Covetousness is able to overthrow all Fences, and when the Fear of God is
departed from a Place, nothing can secure the Gifts of Piety or Property but
humane Laws, and they too, were drawn into the Conspiracy. And yet even this
could not be done quickly and directly, nor had Iniquity the forehead to invade
God's Possessions, but under the disguise of Zeal and Religion; which was thus
effected.

. VIII. How the Revenues of the Church came to be alienated.
There has been in the Church very anciently some severe melancholy
Christians, who separated themselves from the World, and its Temptations, and
Follies, to serve God in Solitude and Wildernesses; and some in Times of
Persecution were forced to it, such were the Eremits and Anchorites: These
afterward were reduced to Companies and Societies under several Rules, and
Orders; and were called Monks and Friars. These in time engrossed to themselves
all the Credit of Christianity, and were called (by way of Eminency) the
Religious. Their Rules were severe, their Diet very poor, their Hours of
Devotion long, often and exact; their Discipline most mortifying, and their
Holiness so great, that their very Habit in those Times of Superstition was
thought effectual to save the Sinner that was buried in it. By this means the
ordinary Secular Clergy (as they were called for distinction sake) were
slighted, and the Pastors of Parishes that had care of Souls were disrespected;
and a severer Religion than Christ ordained was pressed upon Men as necessary.
And hence the Patrons of Livings, (which usually were the first Endowers of the
Churches and their Heirs) the Bishops of Diocesses, and Popes of Rome ran
altogether upon building of Monasteries and Religious Houses, and endowing of
them; and to this purpose fell to appropriating the Tithes of most of the
considerable Parish-Churches, and left some little Gleanings, the small Tithe,
(the halt, blind and lame) to the Church for the continuance of the Service of
God there, (which was now counted but cold and dull in respect of the more
ardent and lasting Devotion of the Regular) and the maintenance of the Vicars.
By that Name was the Parish Priest called, who was left to perform the Service,
and he was to live of these and the Offerings of the People, which were then
considerable. The rest of the Church-Revenues (which consisted in the great
Tithes) were carried all away to these Fraternities. And then for to supply the
want of Hospitality, some Feathers were left, a Church-House, some small Gift
at Easter, or such like were continued for ever. In a word, the Zeal toward
this sort of life was so great, from the time of the Conquest for about 150
Years, that the State was in danger to be swallowed up of the Church; and most
of the Land of England, as well as the Revenues of the Church, turned all over
to the Propriety of Monasteries; so that they were forced to make the Statute
of Mortmain in the Reign of Henry the Third to prevent it.

. IX. The Pretenses and Methods of the same.
The Pretenses for these Alienations were plausible, which were the advancing
the Service of God in a more Religious sort of way, and the Salvation of Souls.
The Tithes seemed to be still within the Church, though alienated from the first
Place they were annexed to: And the Portion which was still left was thought
sufficient (together with the Offerings and other Obventions) to maintain a
single Person to officiate in the said Church, for such were the Clergy of
those Times. And yet this was a great Evil, and the cause of greater, as you
shall hear presently. For Time that depraves all things, made at last the very
Monasteries and Religious Orders public Nuisances. Those holy Brothers and
Sisters degenerated wholly from their Primitive strictness, and became
abominable for Pride, Idleness, and Luxury. They were dissolved in Ease,
Riches, and Abundance. The cry of their Sins filled the Earth, and reached
Heaven, and importuned a final Dissolution; which accordingly came upon them in
the fifteenth Century, and the Reign of Henry VIII. their final Suppressor. God
nor Man could endure their Wickedness no longer, but a pretended Visitation
proved their Desolution. Some, as ashamed of themselves, were persuaded to give
up their Seals and Charters; others were tricked out of them through Promises
of Preferment, or Fears of Punishment; and those that were obstinate were
dissolved by Act of Parliament. And thus a multitude of goodly Buildings became
ruinous Heaps, and a Place for wild Beasts and unclean Birds. A Work perhaps
not altogether so bad as it is represented; if they had promoted the high
Pleasure of God, and Works of Piety and Charity, with the Riches they found
there, as they pretended, and the Acts of Parliament for their Dissolution seem
to intend: If also in their Dissolution, each of their Acquests had returned to
their first Principle, the Lay-Gifts to them of the Laity, and the
Church-Possessions to the several Churches from whence they had been taken. But
that King and his Favorites (the Instruments of his Covetousness and
Oppression) divided the Spoils amongst them; which (though so infinite) soon
wasted away and came to nothing, and left the first Alienators as poor and as
hungry as ever. Their Families are (most of them) dissolved as the Religious
Houses were; and, like them, become a Heap and a Ruin. Thus the Tithes of so
many Churches became lost to all Purposes of Religion; and were (amongst the
other Spoils) carried away captive to serve Luxury and Pleasure: Whence they
must now never return again, but, like the ten Tribes, be lost for evermore.

Behold ( Sir) the Effects of three contrary Principles, Devotion,
Superstition, and Covetousness. Devotion built us up Churches, which stand
still as its Monuments; nor has biting Time been able to devour them. She
endowed as well as built them, and settled Persons there to perform Divine
Service to the Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind. Superstition would needs
be meddling too, till she had found ways to transferr them from the several
Houses of God to those (commonly called Houses) of Religion; and this under
pretense of serving God more perfectly. But Covetousness discovered the Sham
and Abuse, and took thence occasion to seize upon them to its own Use, and that
of Pleasures. Thus Avarice was too hard for all the Devotion of our
Forefathers, and God is robbed of his Tithes, and (in some Places) of his very
Offerings. And the Curse annexed to the Alienation has in some measure operated
upon the Alienators, and I pray God that neither that nor his (mentioned Mal.
3. 9.) may descend to the present Proprietors, or rather, Impropriators.

. X. The miserable Effects of such Alienations.
And now ( Sir) before I part with this sorrowful Instance of humane Frailty,
give me leave to lay before you the dismal Consequence of these Alienations,
whereby the best Livings in England are impropriated, and God's Portion become
a Lay-Fee: Some of which are visible at this Day, and are these that follow.

First, The extreme Poverty of 1. The Poverty of the Clergy.
such of the Clergy who succeeded to those remains of Benefices. The Gleanings
were only left, a few small Tithes, both troublesome, vexatious, and invidious,
to be collected, paid with regret and murmurings. The Lees that are to be
squeezed out with some Violence, and oftentimes with the loss of Charity: And
the Law of them is so defective, that it is better to lose all than remedy it.
The Poor paying nothing, and the Rich what they please; and the Minister of God
(their Spiritual Father) forced to stand by, see himself wronged by his
Children, and dare not own it. The Tithe of Mint, Anise, and Cummin is reserved
still, instead of that of the Staff of Life; and even this not to be enjoyed
without deductions. And, indeed, there were two or three Things that in those
Days conspired together to promote the Poverty and Misery of many of the
Clergy. First, Their being dispossessed of their great Tithes that should have
supported them. Secondly, Of the Offerings since. At the Appropriations of the
Tithes to Monasteries the Offerings were great and many. No Man (as I noted
before) approached God's Altar but he offered liberally; and none made a Will
but he gave something to God and the Holy Church. And this was the reason why
Vicaridges were left so bare in Tithes, because of the Plenty of Offerings. But
even these since the Reformation of our Religion, (which was a Blessing
acknowledged with all due Thankfulness, and is no way guilty of these Evils)
which supported the Church for 300 Years, are now vanished into Air, and sunk
almost to nothing, and by some counted Superstitious, and by most unnecessary.
It Is true, the Law has taken notice of them amongst other Dues, and commanded
their payment, (which by the way has changed the very Nature of the Thing) but
then the Law refers to Custom, which has melted them down to almost the
smallest Sum payable; and that not to be recovered without great Charge and
Trouble; so that in some Places they are forced to be wholly laid aside.
Thirdly, The Abrogation of the Vow of Celebacy, and the License to Marry filled
the Vicaridges full of small Children, and that augmented their Cares and
Poverty, and still continues them. And indeed, if ever the Clergy had need of
their Corn-Tythes to find them Bread, it was then when they had so Many Mouths
to eat it. But the Churchmen were ('it is like) then grown too proud and
encroaching, and Providence suffered a complication of Causes to meet and work
their Humiliation; and so they did effectually, and have done ever since. Nor
should I grudge if this were all or the worst Effect of Impropriations. But
there be worse that follow. And therefore,

. XI. 2. Their loss of Authority and Contempt.
Secondly, From hence proceeds their loss of Authority, and the Contempt they
labor under. Our Enemies I know assign other Causes of the Contempt of the
Clergy; but yet they cannot say but this is one, and no mean one too; and the
natural Effect of the smallness of their Estate. It Is true, St. Paul commands
Titus not only to exhort but rebuke with all Authority; but those were Times in
which the Apostolic Men were endued with the Power of Miracles, and inflicting
Diseases and Judgments upon those that slighted their Authority. They were
delivered over to Satan for the chastising or destruction of the Body, that
they might learn what it is to blaspheme. But these miraculous Effects have
long since left the Church, I presume, since the time that the temporal
Authority took upon her its defense: And what we do of this nature must be
ordered according to the Methods of Prudence. For who dare in this irreligious
Age undertake to reprove sharply his Benefactor, which is the way to lose him
for ever. I know very well, the Scripture-Precepts do not consider the outward
Condition of Pastors, but oblige their Flocks to give them double Honor, and
to know, i. e. acknowledge them and esteem highly of them for their Work's
sake. But these Precepts may perhaps make some impression upon the meek,
humble, and conscientious sort of Christians; and yet the Minister of God may
fall under the Contempt and Derision of most of those that yet profess
themselves to be so. And what a precarious Authority he can exercise over those
that feed and cloth him, is apparent by those that do the Sacred Offices in
many great Men's Families, where they seem to be retained mostly (I fear) for
State rather than Religion, and are more like Servants than Spiritual Fathers.
And, in imitation of these, our Gentry likewise admit them to bless the Meat,
and then (unless they are Dignitaries, rich and considerable) to sit at the
lower end of their Tables, and prefer every Lawyer, Physician, Tradesman, yea,
and sufficient Mechanic, to them. And then what can Vicars and Curates, with a
great many poor Children, expect from the wealthier sort of Yeomen, who want
the Education, and Learning, and, consequently, the Civility of the other? It Is
true, the inferior Priests have a large Spiritual Authority; but what are
Titles without Estates to support their Credit? The Clergy have Titles, by
Divine Right, great enough to make them envied, did not the meanness of many of
their Fortunes make 'em despised. And should a heavenly Angel descend down and
dwell among Men, he must expect the same usage. And therefore it is hard
measure, first to take away their Estates, and then to object it to them.

. XII. 3. Their Depression and Dejection in Mind and Conversation.
Thirdly, From hence it is that so many of them are (the faeces Populi) the
lowest of the People; that they descend low in their Conversation, and are
content to be thought so: For Poverty emasculates the Person, and makes him
dis-spirited and dejected. It brings him down into the Company, and
consequently into the Vices, of the Vulgar. It invites him into the Society of
Sots and Fools; and into a Copartnership of their Habits of Riot and Drinking.
And hence it was that perhaps a memorable Person had his Maxim, That scandalous
Places makes scandalous Ministers. For Man is a sociable Creature, and must
associate with some or other; and, if his Circumstances will not permit him to
choose that of the best, he is apt to take up with the worser: And by this means
many an ingenious Man in his Youth loses his good Parts in his Age, and
outlives all his Learning. And even the most innocent and unspotted being
confined to a rustical sort of Life, and wanting the Conversation of the
Learned, shall contract a kind of Assimulation to his Company; he shall become
rude and diffident, and not able to carry himself amongst his Betters; and
depressed with Cares and Wants, must sink down into the lower Orb of Ignorance
and Stupidity.

XIII. 4. The increase of the Poor, etc.
Fourthly, From hence I may (I hope without Vanity or Falsehood) assign one
Cause of that Inhospitality, which produced a necessity of making Laws for the
maintenance of the Poor. For the Tithes being divided from the Churches, to
which they did of Right belong, and conferred on Monasteries, and they
dissolved, there must necessarily follow an increase of the Poor, who were wont
to be relieved at their Gates. And accordingly we find few or no Laws made for
the Relief of the Poor, or Repair of the Churches, while they were Proprietors
of that which enabled them for Hospitality. St. Paul tells his 1 Timothy 3. 2.
Timothy, That a Bishop or Presbyter (for the word pskopo in that place may
signify both) should amongst other things, be given to Hospitality. And
therefore he did presume, that the Offerings of that Age, and the Tithes,
Offerings, and Endowments of those succeeding, would enable him to be so. And
such I believe the Clergy then were till Covetousness broke in upon them; and
such also I dare say the generality of those few, that escaped the fangs of
Covetousness, now are. As for others, they are forced to retrench Housekeeping
and Expenses, live meanly, and give little; because they can spare but little
from their own Necessities.

. XIV. 5. The neglect and intermission of God's Service.
5. But the greatest Evil of all is this, That hence it is that the Service of
God becomes neglected, and the grateful Homage that we should pay him daily is
laid aside. His Mercies are not kept in remembrance, and our Obligations are
forgotten, because so seldom acknowledged. Amongst God's own People the Jews,
there was the daily Administration, the Morning and Evening Sacrifice; and
every Priest Rub. In the End of the Service of the Church.
and Deacon is by the Rubric of our Church enjoined to use the Public
Prayers, Morning and Evening, publicly or privately (not being let by
Sickness or other urgent Cause.) And accordingly there is a Course of Service
provided for every Day of the Year, both for Mattins and Evening Song. So it
was anciently in the Church, and so it should continue to this Day: That the
Minister, the Mouth of the People, might supply their Defects, offer up their
Prayers, and give a fit opportunity to those that are devout and could spare
time, to join with him. But this pious Custom is now quite laid aside. Men post
over this Duty to the next Lord's Day, or the next Holy Day (where they are
kept) and think it sufficient to make their Acknowledgments when they have
nothing else to do. God is defrauded of his daily Sacrifice of Praise, and the
Church stands empty and useless all the Week. And indeed the Clergy for the
most part cannot attend the daily Service for worldly Cares, and the necessary
Provision for their Families; and they that can, have learned of the
necessitous to be idle. They cannot ( vacare Deo) wait upon God at his House,
but must divide their Service six parts to the Thoughts of this Life, and the
seventh only to him. Such a daily Service must suppose a Man of sufficient
Estate, able in times of necessary Avocations to keep an Assistant, free from
Cares, and having those about him who shall provide the daily Bread he asks at
God's Hand, and who is the Master of such a Family, who may attend him to the
House of Prayer, and give others a good Example: Whereas (as things stand now)
we had need to Fast as well as Pray continually; and, if we go to God's House
it must be by our selves without any Company. For, since the Wages have fallen
so low, a part of the Duty proportional to it, has been omitted; and God is
robbed of his Tithes and Offerings, and of his Honor also. I do not say, that
this deduction of Wages will justify the neglect of Duty; but something must
be allowed to humane Frailty, and the want of Encouragement, and the
necessities of Life. Who goes a Warfare at his own Charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not the Fruit thereof? Or, who feeds a Flock, and eats
not of the Milk of the same? It Is hard to muzzle the Ox that treads out the
Corn; or, expect that a sort of Men should plow and thresh without any
expectation to be partakers of the Product. When the Reward was duly brought to
the Altar, there could not but be an Attendance there; but when there is
nothing but Hunger and Nakedness to be found there, how many (or, rather, how
few) will attend it? The Church puts us in mind of our Duty by commanding it,
and yet thinks it not seasonable to make any enquiry into the performance of
it, lest she should find too many Omissions and too many Reasons for them.

But further, from this disuse of Whence proceeded the Opinion of the
Indifference, or rather, Vselessness of Divine Service.
the daily Service proceeds an indifference as to its Necessity, the neglect
and slighting of it; yea, and a misapprehension of the true Nature of it. For
heretofore the Worship of God was thought to consist in Prayers and Praises;
and the Liturgy was looked upon as the Standard and Magazine of both. But now
this Notion of Worship is lost or changed into Enthusiastic Harangues, made up
of canting Terms and Tones, to tickle the Ears and move the Passions of the
Ignorant, who are apt to admire what they understand not, and be taken with a
noisie Zeal for God: Hence it is Preaching has supplanted Prayer, and taken
away all its Credit, and all its Necessity; yea, and has fermented it self
away to little else but Froth and Vapor. The truth is, Enthusiasm has got
into the Church, and is ready to justle out sober Reason; extraordinary Gifts
the ordinary; and the pretended Spirit-speaking in particular Men, the Spirit
which speaks in the Church. The ancient Methods of Religion will not now
maintain its Ministers; and therefore Credit and Estate must After the Example
of the Sectaries, etc.
be gotten by pious Frauds, and pretenses to extraordinary Gifts and
Illuminations: All which, and many more evil Consequences As the increase of
Fanaticism and Nonconformity.
(that I must not now take notice of) may be reduced to this Head, the neglect
of the old rational way of Worship, and proceed from the same Cause, the
depauperating of the Church by Impropriations.

. XV. 6. Pluralities and their Inconveniences.
Sixthly, And lastly, that I mention no more: If all these Evils be not enough,
I have one more to add, which makes a greater noise than all, and is thought of
worse Consequence, and that is Pluralities, which cannot be well remedied in
reason without making every Place a competency. But so it is at present, (and
have been ever since the times that the Church was robbed of her Dues) that
some two or three Cures of Souls cannot make one Competency for the support of
the Minister. So that there has been a necessity of dispensing with the ancient
Canons, not only to reward Merit, but to provide some laborious Priest to
travel from one to another, and officiate in them. And if these Indulgencies
were not granted, the Service of God must cease for altogether in those widowed
Churches, as it does now for some time, more or less. And though Pluralities may
not be utterly unlawful in themselves, yet they are always inconvenient if they
could be remedied. The Curates never officiating so well, as for themselves,
and not having that Authority as if they were Principals. But from this Cause
is it, that Cures are so small that they lie vacant without any Incumbent, and
so are sequestered to some Minister of the Vicaridge, by whom the Service is
performed by halves; I mean, as often as he can attend it, from that of his own
Church; whilst some are totally delapidated and dead of the Wounds they
received in the Impropriation. Whereas, if there was a Sufficiency in every
Parish, (and if the great Tithes had not been separated, there would have been
in most) there would be little riding from Church to Church on Sundays, and
very few Spiritual Polygamists. The Praises of God would have been not only
decently, but frequently, and daily performed and offered up to God; and every
Church would be a House of Prayer.

. XVI. The usual Pleas for Impoverishing the Clergy, and Objections against
Works of Piety answered.
I know very well, that notwithstanding these great Evils, it will be objected
by the Adversaries of the Clergy, That Christ and his Apostles were poor, and
so was the Church for the first 300 Years; during which time they preserved
Union and Communion; and, being at Unity with themselves, kept out Heresies and
Schisms from amongst them. That when the Churches became endowed and rich, the
Churchmen became so Proud and Factious that they were soon hated. That their
Luxury became great, and their Insolence intolerable; and that the taking away
these Superfluities was necessary for their Humiliation. That Piety consists in
Humility, and that is much advanced by Poverty: Whereas it has been observed
even to a Proverb, Make the Priest rich, and you spoil him for ever: To all
which I answer in their order.

First, Christ voluntarily chose Poverty, as suitable to his Design of being
crucified for the Sins of the World. And as for the Apostles, if they were
Heirs of any Estates, they could not have enjoyed them, because of their
continual Travels and Preaching. But then they were endowed with that which was
far better, and that was the Gifts of extraordinary Holiness, and extraordinary
Power. These supplied all Wants, and drew to them the Love, Wonder, and
Veneration of all Mankind, and made them Masters of their Affections and
Estates together. They were received as Angels of God, and, if it had been
possible and necessary, the Converts would have plucked out their very Fyes to
serve them. And then for the Primitive Church of the three first Centuries,
they abounded in Gifts, Offerings, and occasional Kindness; so that the
Ministry lived as plentifully as their Circumstances required.

Secondly, It Is granted, that great Endowments make some Men Proud, Insolent,
and Factious, and so it did some of them. It Is too apparent, that every Man
cannot manage Riches to the right uses God intends it, yet I do not find that
any Man is willing to part with it on that score. And yet I could be willing
that every proud, insolent Clergy Man's Estate should be confiscated to the
Laity during his life, upon condition that the same should be observed on the
other side. And yet I deny that this Charge is universally true; it is with the
Clergy (and so has been) as with others. There have been many that have possessed
much, and yet have been Just, Liberal, Humble, and Merciful, and who did not
trust in uncertain Riches. And, if we may judge of the former Clergy in better
Times, by those we know in these worse, we shall find that for the most part
they were an obliging, humble, and hospitable sort of Men. However, the abuse
of Things do not take away the right use of them; otherwise both Clergy and
Laity should have been long ago stripped of all. And, as for the Proverb, Of
spoiling a Priest, etc. it may or it may not be true, according to the
different Nature or Inclination of the Recipient.

Thirdly, Though Christianity is founded upon Humility, yet Humility is not
always the concomitant of Poverty. For I know as many Poor that are proud and
insolent as Rich. And though the Disciples of our Lord were (for several Reasons)
most of 'em chosen out of the ordinary sort of Men, yet some were Rich and
Honorable; as Joseph of Arimathea, Nicodemus, Nathanael, Zaccheus, and others.
But this is according to the Measure of the Virtue of the Person; for otherwise
Poverty in it self is not desirable. Give me neither Poverty nor Riches, says
the wise Agur. Food convenient is best for all Men: And so much I would have
every Parish Church endowed with, and no more, that the Servant of God that
dwells there may be satisfied, and not called out by his Wants into other
Places. And this may answer the Thing that I promised to inquire into, viz.
What Page 105.
may by Parity of Reason be thought a Sufficiency. That which enables What must
be judged a Sufficiency for every Parish Priest.
God's Minister to perform the several Parts of his Duty without worldly
Avocations, by which he is made capable to keep Hospitality, relieve the Poor,
the Fatherless, and Widow; visit the Sick, attend the public and private
Worship of God, instruct the Ignorant, comfort the Afflicted, charge the Rich
to do his Duty as well as others, and rebuke with all Authority even the
boldest vicious Person; (I say) that which enables him to perform those Parts
of his Duty with assurance and confidence of Mind, is that Competency that I
contend for: That which may neither make him insult over the Poor or be afraid
of the Rich, and live (in a word) above Contempt, and below Envy, is a
Sufficiency. And so much I thought fit to say to this invidious Pretense, which
looks more like a Prejudice than an Objection; and whose Authors would fain be
wiser than God, and take new Measures for the Humiliation of the Clergy; but
are, indeed, neither Friends to the Honor of God or Religion it self.

And now, to return to you after this long digression (which was yet necessary
to discover the Methods of Superstition and Avarice, to defraud God of his
Worship, and his Ministers of their Livelihood, and then to appropriate the
Tithes by such Laws as should eternally bar their return: The Consequence of
which is the ceasing of the Christian daily Sacrifice of Praise altogether in
some Places, and performing it by the halves in most: I say, to return to you)
and to the Proposition which I have, I hope sufficiently confirmed, by showing
that God himself has thought fit by his own Alotments to provide plentifully
for his Ministers under both Dispensations; and consequently, That those that
attend the Service of God ought to be provided for with a Competency sufficient
for that purpose. And now I proceed to the Fifth and last; which is this.

XVII. Prop. 5. That it is the Duty of every Christian to provide such a
Competency for the Settlement of the Service of God.
Prop. 5. That it is the Duty of every Man, as far as he is able, to promote
and settle the Worship of God; and to that End apply what he can of his earthly
Talent to the providing such a Competency for the Ministers of Religion, and
obliging them to their Duty.

This was that Principle that built those goodly Structures the Cathedrals, and
other Parochial Houses of Prayer, some of which remain to this Day, and that
endowed them with such ample Possessions for the maintenance of the Service of
God, and those that were devoted to it: This is that Principle which stood in
opposition against Atheism, Covetousness, and Sacrilege, and defended the
Church as long as it was entertained; but is now laid aside as an obsolete and
unseasonable Doctrine, long since antiquated; and which (if revived) might
disquiet the peaceable Possession of those that have purchased God's
Inheritance, and raise up anew those Scruples that have been now long since
laid a sleep, dead and buried. And finally, this Principle would restore the
Service of God, together with the Tithes, or other Maintenance, unto all
Churches, and provide fit Persons to perform the one and receive the other; and
therefore I shall endeavor to settle it from several Heads of Argument.

First, From the Testimony of This demonstrated. 1. From the Holy Scriptures.
Holy Scripture, both in the Old and New Testament. And amongst those that
offer themselves, I shall accept only of one from either. The first is that of
Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits
of thine increase; so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty, and thy Presses
shall burst out with new Wine. This is (not a Judicial or Ceremonial, but) a
Moral Precept, and the Dictate of the Law of Nature, which taught the Heathens
to dedicate Things to God, and pay their Tithes and First Fruits to him under
mistaken Names, and to uphold a false Worship. It is as natural and reasonable
as Gratitude it self, and therefore it reaches all Men and Times. Such are the
Proverbs of Solomon, and such is this Text. From whence we may observe: First,
That God may be honored by our Substance, and by the First Fruits of our
Increase: Which is done by applying it to the continuance of his Honor and
Service. As was particularly appointed the Jews, and by the same Deuteronomy. 26.
Equity reaches all other Nations. Secondly, We learn from these Words, That it
is our Duty to promote the Honor of God with our Substance and Estates; as one
of the Ends and Uses for which he has put it into our Hands, and entrusted it
with us. Thirdly, That a great and extraordinary Blessing is promised
thereupon, and that we shall lose nothing by such Deodands. For our Barns shall
be filled with Plenty, and our Presses even burst with Wine. God will make a
plentiful return, and restore with Advantage what we bestow upon him. All this
is contained in these Words, without the least stretching them, and is the
natural result of this Text, than which nothing can be more plain and evident,
to establish the preceding Proposition. The second Place is that of Gal. 6. 6.
Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches in all
good things; or, rather, (n psin gatho) in all his Goods. Where we are
commanded, that he that is taught (or, as we now call him, the Lay-Person, the
Catechumen, according to the Original) is bound to communicate, (not
contribute, for it is not an Alms, but a Due,) or, to exchange for the
Spirituals his Temporals, even his best Things; to give him a sufficient
recompense of all that he possesses. It being but reasonable that the Sower of
Spiritual Things, in recompense of his Labor, should reap the Temporal. 1 Cor.
9. 11.
And if occasional Recompenses are due and acceptable, the settlement of our
dedicated Things to the Support and Encouragement of Teachers for following
Generations must be more necessary, and more acceptable. And, having named
these two Texts, I need not descent upon our Lord's Maxim, Render to God the
things that are God's; nor St. Paul's Argumentations for to establish the Truth
I plead for, 1 Cor. 9. nor need I stretch his uto ka Krio, etc. Even so, or
after the same manner, (that the Priests lived upon the Things and Endowments
of the Temple and the Altar) has Christ ordained, that those that preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. I say, I need not, because the former Texts
are plain, cogent, and not to be evaded; and so are the latter.

Secondly, From the Examples of 2. From the Example of God's People in all Ages.
God's People in all Ages: The Tabernacle, the moveable Place of God's Worship,
was made by the Offerings of the whole Congregation, and that of their most
precious Things; which they brought in so abundantly, that Moses was forced to
restrain 'em by Proclamation, Exodus 36. 5. And the great and glorious Temple at
Jerusalem, the Joy, Envy and Wonder of the whole Earth, the settled Place of
God's Service, and the Type and Resemblance of the Holy Temple above: This
wondrous and magnificent Building was the sole Munificence of David and
Solomon, Kings of Israel: It was repaired by the freewill Offerings of the
People, and the poor Widow that threw in her whole Estate is recorded and
commemorated for the same, though it was but two Mites. And it was the Prince and
People that maintained the daily Sacrifice, and their Offerings, Tithes, etc.
the Priests and Levites that officiated there, and in the Synagogues and
Oratories of the whole Nation.

In the New Testament the Christian Priest's Portion is not so particularly
commanded, but only the general Rules laid down, and the particulars left to
prudent Piety. And if we look upon what they did, we shall find, that in some
Places they offered up all to Works of Piety and Charity, as at Jerusalem, Acts
4. 35. Their Charity was so great that they seemed to give away even their own
selves to the Lord and his Apostles, as the Church of Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8. 5.
And, indeed, in all Places in those times of Zeal and Devotion, they were so
abundantly Pious in respect of God, and so Charitable to the Poor, and took
such effectual Care for the Worship of God and his Worshippers, that there
needed no Decrees of Councils, or Laws of the Church or State, to force Men to
build Churches or endow them, Lib. de dispensatione contra sacrilegos, p. 176.
( Nulla enim compulit necessitas, fervente ubique religiosa Devotione, and
amore illustrandi Ecclesias ultro aestuante, says Agobardus,) while the Flame
of religious Devotion lasted, and the earnest Desire of building and endowing
of Churches burned of its own accord: There needed no Laws or Canons to enjoin
Men to pay their Tithes and Offerings, and to give to God's Treasury: They did
it of their own accord as far, and beyond what they were able. All the stately
and magnificent Structures throughout the Christian World, that have escaped
the Ruins of Time and Sacrilege, and their ample Revenues: The decent
Parish-Churches, and the Portions of Glebe and Tithe allotted to them by pious
Benefactors (whose Names are recorded in Heaven, though lost some of them on
Earth) are sufficient Evidences of this Truth.

Thirdly, From the Equity of the 3. From the Equity of the Thing, and natural
Reason, and from Men of all Religions.
Thing, and a Parity of natural Reason. It cannot be imagined but that God
should take Care of his Honor; and we are told in several places that he is
jealous of it, and that he will not give it to another. Nor can it be thought
but he has the same Design in preserving the World, and every Man's Estate and
Properties, that he had in making it at first, which was for nothing but for
the manifesting his Glory and Goodness to created Beings; so that it must be
concluded that he is well pleased that Men should praise him for his Goodness,
and declare the Wonders that he does for the Children of Men. And consequently,
that there should be an Order of Men for that purpose, and Places where they
might officiate and declare his Praises. Besides, it is no reason we should
hold Estates of God, and yet not acknowledge the same by Word and Deed. Homage
and Fealty are but rational Returns amongst our selves, the Foundation of our
Titles and Right, and the Conditions upon which we possess what we have; and
it is no less than Injustice and Ingratitude to deny them. And can we expect to
possess his Gold and his Silver, and all the precious Products of his Earth,
and yet allow him no Acknowledgments? Or, shall we imagine that he was careful
of his Honor heretofore under the Jewish Law, and yet has wholly forgot it
amongst us? No, certainly, the contrary seems to be written in every Man's
Heart, and to be part of the Law of Nature. Hence it is, that even the Heathens
(as well as the Jews and Christians had ever, and) have still their Temples,
Oratories, Oracles, Priests, and the Places and Ministers of Religion, and
these endowed plentifully, and, in some Places, magnificently provided for. And
though they mistook the Object, the true God, yet they agreed with all others,
that he was to be worshipped. The Christians in all Ages, since our Lord's
Ascension, had their Oratories, Places of Divine Service, and (as soon as they
could for Persecution) their Churches and Houses of Prayer; yea, and those
beautified, enriched, and endowed with plentiful Revenues: Thus they continued
for many Centuries, till the Devil found out the way to impoverish them, under
pretense of Religion. And (what ought to be taken likewise into Consideration,
and shame the lukewarm and covetous Members of the Church of England, who are
content to serve God with a cheap Religion, and that which cost them nothing)
the Dissenters themselves, of whatsoever Denomination they are, or by what Sect
or Name distinguished, think themselves obliged to build Meeting Houses,
(seeing they must not, nor can take possession of our Churches;) nor can I
blame them, it being the natural Consequence of their Principles, which cannot,
it seems, join with ours in our worship of God. And without doubt (if Times and
Circumstances would allow) they would do what was necessary to the maintaining
and settling their Service in the said Places. And, in the mean time, they
raise voluntary Contributions for the Support of their Teachers, in proportions
(as it is said) superior to what we of the Church of England enjoy by Law of the
Estates that are still left us. And while those of our Communion leave the
Ministers to make shift with the present Settlements, though never so small,
(which are the Remains of our Ancestors Piety, and no thank to us, for it has
been demonstrated, that we pay nothing of our own to the Parish Priest, but our
Offerings, etc.) whilst they, I say, seldom will be persuaded to add any thing
to their small Stipends, unless they increase their Duties with an additional
Sermon, or the like, the Dissenters (all but the Quakers) pay Scot and Lot, and
their Tithes, and yet can find Money to pay their Teachers, and discharge the
particular super-numerary Expenses of their Communion. And this I note to the
shame of those of our own Communion, that are bred up under the best Church in
the World, and yet are most unworthy of that Privilege.

The Sum of all is this; and The Con* clusion from the Premises.
from the Premises I would infer this Conclusion: Every Man ought, to the
utmost of his Ability, contribute to the maintenance and continuance of the
Worship of God, which, by reason of the smalness of the settled Revenue, is in
some Places quite intermitted, and in others performed by halves; so that the
Administrator of God's Service, and his Dependents, might live plentifully, and
be able to attend the Duties of his Calling without necessitous Avocations.
Then God would be duly served, his Minister be revered, his Authority be
preserved, Hospitality and Charity maintained, the Poor relieved, and Public
Prayers would be made daily for himself and them, while the Devout would have
the opportunity of the Hours of Prayer. Then every Bishop and Presbyter would
be the Husband of one Church as well as one Wife, nor would there be more need
of Pluralities of Parsonages than of Wives: And whether these are not Blessings
considerable, and worth the desire and striving after, I leave you and all the
World to judge.

. XVIII.
And now I have done, when I have answered the Pleas that Avarice and
Selfishness may put in against the Duty I plead for, and made some fit
Applicatory Conclusion. And,

First, It will be said, That this The several Pleas against Works of Piety
considered and answered.
is a Project too large for Practice, and a burden too heavy to carry on. It
would require the Additional of 100 l. per Annum in some Places, and in most
Vicaridges some. And this is impracticable at any time, and unseasonable
(because impossible) in this time of scarcity of Money, and great Taxes. That
such Additions would render the Clergy proud and idle, and might in any
Revolution of Government be changed to advance Superstition, and perhaps Popery
it self; at least be diverted from the Intentition of the Benefactor. To all
which I shall answer in their order.

First, For the greatness of this Work, let it take up what time it will, so it
were begun, and though a Sufficiency cannot be provided in an Age or two, yet
this can be no Excuse to a Man of good Estate for not contributing something
toward it. Who knows how prevalent and effectual a good Example may be, and
whose Hearts God will raise up to repair the Breaches of his House upon so good
a Precedent? But, if no Body follows you, yet your Reward shall not be denied
you; and if they do, it will be augmented by their Additions, while yours was
the cause. But I cannot see the impossibility of such a Work, if Men were but
willing and in Earnest. For we see many Places contribute for Sermons, besides
their Dues to the Minister and Impropriator. The Reformed in France (till this
late Persecution) gladly paid their Tithe to the Curate of their Parish, and
yet maintained their own Pastors. And the Dissenters (whether willingly or no)
do the same, and yet they are the thriving part of the Nation; and who knows
but God may bless their well-intended (tho indeed needless) Piety? Now what is
done from Year to Year may be settled for Futurity, and were the Members of our
Church as Industrious and Zealous to support it, as the dissenting Party are to
pull it down; and as good Husbands to save, as they are, I do not see but
Additions may be made to many small Places, and a Settlement of the same for
future Generations. It Is but to abate something from our Pride, Sensuality,
Luxury, Riot, Drunkenness, and other chargeable and expensive Crimes, and mind
our own Business and God's Glory, and the Difficulty would be soon removed; and
if the Thing could not be effected in one Age, yet there might be a Foundation
laid for the finishing it in another.

Secondly, But it is further said, That such an Address is at this time
unseasonable, for, that War seems to be entailed upon us, etc. But I may answer
in St. James's Words; From whence come Wars? Come they not from our Lusts? And
shall these hinder the payment of our Quit-Rent to God, our Chief Lord, or our
Homage to our Maker? But this may be done, and the other left not undone. And
the present State of all the dissenting Christians in the World evinces so
much, who bear their part of all ordinary and extraordinary Taxes, support
their Families, and contribute plentifully to their Teachers besides. An
Example (be sure) of the feasibility of the Thing, and a Pattern to all the
Professors of the Church of England.

Thirdly, The Presumption of the Pride and Insolence of Churchmen has been
considered already. Alas, there is no danger of that in these Times, and when
that is like to be, let the Benefactors stay their Hands, or impose such
Conditions that may bridle them. But then,

Fourthly, For the supposed Possibility of the alteration of Religion; as it is
but a bare Possibility, so the piously inclined may well leave that to God, and
trust him with the Event. Give then with an upright Heart and a right
Intention, and leave the Issue to Providence, who will take Care for his own
Glory. And if the Gift should chance to be mis-imploy'd, yet that, being not
our Fault, cannot in the least lessen the Reward. But this Objection would
hinder all good Works, and rob the Church and Poor of what is left 'em, and
therefore I dismiss it as impertinent, and of mischievous consequence, both to
Religion and Charity.

. XIX. A general and particular Application, and Address.
And now ( Sir) because the World shall not know your Name, Condition,
Character, or Person, give me leave to make the Application in general to all
sorts of Men, and to those especially whom God has made capable of Works of
Piety and Charity: Wherein, though I may seem to leave you, yet I may perhaps
meet you incognito, and speak to you still under one Denomination or another.
And,

First, Let me address my self of 1. To the Noble, Rich, and Wealthy.
all the Rich and Wealthy, amongst whom many are dignified and distinguished
with great Names and Titles. Our blessed Lord seems to pass a hard Sentence
upon rich Men, when he makes their Salvation as difficult as for a Camel to
pass through the Eye of a Needle, which one would think was impossible. The
reason is, the great Disposition that is in humane Nature to become proud and
fastidious by the flattery and false measures of Grandeur. They that will be
rich (says his Apostle) usually fall into temptation and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful Lusts, that drown men in distraction and perdition.
They are put in a dangerous Post, and have a great Duty upon them, and must
make a greater Account than other Men. And yet amongst all these loved and
courted Dangers, they have this great Advantage, that they are capable of doing
more Good, and serving God to more and better Purposes than other Men. These
Men are possessors of the earthly Mammon, and with that which is usually an
Instrument of Unrighteousness may procure everlasting Habitations. But then
this is not to be done but by Works of Piety and Mercy; by giving God and the
indigent Part of Mankind their due; by loving of Mercy, and walking humbly with
(that is worshipping) God. For there is a way of making Returns to Heaven, of
paying in worldly Goods and receiving Glory, of laying in Bank and Fund here
such a Stock of good Works that shall produce a Reward infinite both in
Duration and Quantity. And this is the true, best, and prudentest way of
Merchandising. I will not say, that a Man may purchase Heaven, and barter for a
Crown of Glory; for that seems to be the exchange of an equivalent, but so it
is, God has made (by a free Promise) Heaven and its Joys the Reward of good
Works, and of those that we do, which are hardly our own. So that there is a
way opened for Man to advance himself in the World to come, as well as in this.
And as Riches is the Footstool to Honor (for who ever heard Poverty courted or
honored) in this World, so it may be in the next, and (if used as it ought)
will be certainly. Every transient Act of Piety and Mercy is recorded above,
and has a Reward assigned for it there. But those that are fixed for a
continuance, and that benefit succeeding Subjects, continually operating for
the good of Mankind: Those, I say, (that I may borrow and enforce the Instance
in the Conclusion of the former Letter) bring after them an increase of Glory
every Day, answerable to the Good they do. Thus a Founder of a College or
Hospital must needs receive Accessions of Reward, agreeable to the mighty Good
of Education and Edification of those bred up and maintained in it. And the
Founder of a Church to the Honor of God, (as he was the Cause, so he) must
receive the Reward of that Honor that is exhibited there during the time of
its standing. And who knows but that this was one cause of the Dissolution of
the Monasteries and Abbeys, because by their Wickedness they were become Dens
of Thieves instead of Religious Houses, and ceased to yield any more Glory to
God, or Reward to their Founders and Benefactors. You have then ( Sirs) an
opportunity that courts you to make your selves Happy, and convey a Blessing
with the main of your Estate to your Posterity. And here I cannot but admire,
and at the same time upbraid your unaccountable and extravagant Love to your
Sons and Daughters; to your Nephews or Nieces; to your Heirs, be they of your
own Family or no; for whom you ingross all, and with that Application, that you
cannot spare any thing for God and Charity, nay (some of you, I fear) for your
own sake; and so you run up an infinite Score, and an apparent hazard of being
shut out of Heaven for your Posterity's sake. And your Care of these is so
great, that you fear not to make your selves miserable to all Eternity
hereafter, (and some of you here also) to make them, as you conceive, Happy:
For so does the Proverb pronounce that Son whose Father goes to the Devil for
him. Consider ( Sirs) that you were not sent hither to eat and to drink, and to
beget your like, and provide for them, that they also may do so after your
decease; but to glorify God here, and to be glorified by him (or else to be
miserable) to Eternity. The time of Discrimination and Account is coming on
apace. And though you at present put from you the evil Day, while you despise and
tread upon all but your selves and those of your own Degree; yet know, that it
comes, and that swiftly, and every Minute of Pleasure and Jollity, of Cares,
Fears, of Fraud or Violence, every Day of Feasting and Night of Mirth, brings
the fatal time on; wherein you must be stripped of your Titles and Acquests of
Honor, and leave all these your goodly Buildings, Gardens, Parks, and Ridings,
your Friends and Flatterers, and the Partners of your Loves and Lusts, and be
carried all alone into the unknown State of Eternity, whither your good and
evil Works will follow; those to justify, these to accuse, and what shall
become then of him who has whole Multitudes of the latter and none of the
former? Remember then the Counsel of the wise King; Withhold not Good from them
to whom it is due, when it is in the Prove. 3. 27.
Power of thy Hand to do it: Or, that of the Apostle; To do Good Heb. 13. 16.
and to Communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

. XX. 2. To the Impropriators.
Secondly, But amongst the Great and Rich there are not a few that have a more
particular Obligation to the restoring and perpetuating the Service of God,
because their Predecessors were the Instruments of the intermission of it; I
mean the Impropriators. These are most of them Men of considerable Estates, and
many of great Virtue and Piety in all other things but this; and in this the
Lord Pardon thy Servants, etc. Any thing but parting with their Freeholds for
God's sake, tho they anciently belonged to him, and he never yet quitted his
Title to them. To these may I be so bold with all Humility as to address them
to consider, that they are mightily concerned in the clearing two or three
Questions. First, Whether Tithes are due to God, and to those that execute his
Service ( jure Divino) by a Divine Right? That they are so is the common
Opinion of Divines, Canonists, Civilians; yea, and the Common Lawyers too. Only
Doct. and Stud. l. 2. c. 55. p. 164.
these latter distinguish of Tithes, which they say may be considered quoad
decimam partem, or quoad sustentationem sufficientem Cleri vel 19 Eliz. in B. R.
Ministrorum Dei, etc. That the exact Tenth Part, is not due of Divine Right,
but so much as is sufficient to maintain the Minister of God. Now, though this
Distinction be little less than a Contradiction, (for if Tithes are due Jure
Divino, the Tenth Part must be so, being both the same;) yet from these
Determinations of the Judges we gain this Point, That a Competency of Tithes
ought to be left to every Church for the necessary Sustentation of the Priest
that officiates there; and this Part is due Jure Divino, and consequently
cannot be separated by any humane Law. And if so, those that quite beggared the
Church (by carrying away all, or the best Part) were by the Common Law no less
than Church-Robbers, and guilty of Sacrilege; and the present Possessor of
Tithes is bound to restore so much as is necessary to maintain the Worship of
God in that Church, from whence they were taken, or else he is guilty of the
same Crime, and becomes answerable for the intermission of the Service of God
during his time; which is no less than robbing of God of his Honor, and is the
worst kind of Robbery.

Secondly, Whether things consecrated to God's Service with the greatest
Solemnities, and the strictest Ties imaginable, may (upon a presumed Abuse) be
alienated and converted to common Uses, and that by any humane Authority?

Thirdly, Wherein consisted Belshazzar's Crime, and why might he not eat and
drink out of the Vessels once consecrated, (but now long since carried out of
the Temple by his Grandfather) when the Temple it self was destroyed, and the
Service thereof at at end?

Fourthly, Supposing the lawfulness of all this; yet, whether in common Equity
it can be thought pleasing to God to serve our Lusts and Pleasures with that
which was once dedicated to his Service only? And yet at the same time know
that his Worship ceases for want of it in some Places altogether, and in others
it is performed but once in a Week, Fortnight, or Month, as in many Places in
this Kingdom; and in some not at all: And all this for want of a sufficient
Settlement for one to perform it. And whether those that eat and drink those
once Holy (because dedicated) Things, and those that are capable of making such
Provisions de novo (and do it not) are not the occasions of these Omissions,
and so lovers of their Pleasures more than lovers of God?

Fifthly, Whether these Gentlemen might not only promote the Honor of God, but
reform many Abuses and Neglects in his Service, by returning back some of the
Churches ancient Demesns, or dedicating some Equivalent, under such Conditions
and Limitations, that might oblige the Minister to frequency and fervency of
Duty, over and above what the Law can compel him to, upon peril and loss of
such Endowments, and so become new Founders of Religion, and Restorers of God's
Glory? And, if this may be done, then whether they are not bound in Conscience
to do it? These are weighty Considerations, which nearly concern all (
Impropriators especially) of what Degree soever they be; and I pray God to set
it home to their Hearts, that they may make some sort of Satisfaction for the
Sacrilege of the first Alienators, and that the Curse of the wronged Donors may
never reach them.

. XXI. To those that have no Children to provide for.
Third, Let me next address my self to certain Persons of Estate and Quality in
this Nation, who are qualified and (as it were) marked out for such a Work.
Such are they to whom God never gave any Children, (the necessary Provision for
whom we make our continual Plea for our Selfishness,) or from whom he has
taken most or all, (and so consequently the Charge appropriated to them,) Men
that have plentiful Estates, but want Heirs of their Bodies, and so are forced
to seek for them amongst the other Branches of their Family; or, adopt some one
of their Name amongst those that are no Relations; and oftentimes bestow all
upon one that wants it not; or, that shall waste all when they are dead, and
wish them so, while living. Fond Men! that refuse God for their Heir, and his
Service, to bestow their Estates upon, even then when they can hold it no
longer! What might not such a Man do? Why, he might buy Heaven with Earth, and
a Crown of Glory with this worldly Trash: He might purchase an everlasting
Habitation with the Mammon of Unrighteousness, even then when he must use it no
longer: He might raise to himself an everlasting Monument, and a Name more
durable than that engraven in Brass or Marble! And yet lose all those precious
Advantages, and throw away all he has upon some Kinsman afar off, or some
Nieces Husband, or some Body less deserving, though nearer in Relation; one who
shall use it to the Satisfaction of his Lusts and Appetites, and the dishonor
of himself and his Maker. Does not such a Man seem to be designed by Heaven to
promote the Honor of his Maker? his way is prepared, all Obstacles are
removed, and himself adapted to so great and glorious a Work. And shall a vain
Name, a pompous Retinue, a great Table, and a company of debauched Servants,
eat him up living? And some politic Relation sweep all away when he dies, and
so defeat himself of the Product of all the Good that he might do, or Example
that he might give to others? Or, does such a Man expect that God should give
him a plainer Indication of his Will, than to take away all Objections, and
enable him to do some considerable Good? He acts with Man by such Methods as
are consistent with his freedom of Will; he gives us opportunities, and then
leaves us to make our Election. I would not here (nor any where else) be
misunderstood. I think the Principles upon which these Discourses are built,
will make no Man unkind to his Relations, or himself; but this is all I say,
That if every Man that is Childless (or otherwise enabled) would but leave God
a Legacy worthy of him when he dies, and lay up the Tenths of his increase
while he lived for his Use, it would soon make every Living a Competency, and
every Church a House of Praise.

. XXII. 4. To the Bishops, Dignitaries, and others of the Clergy.
Fourthly, Nor must I pass by my Lords the Bishops, the Dignitaries, and other
the richer Part of the Clergy, but humbly represent to them the Repairing of
the House of God, the proping up of a declining Church, and that Service that
must uphold them. They are fed, nourished, and sometimes advanced by the
Devotion of others to God's Altar: To that many owe their Living and the Riches
that they have gotten; and it is all the reason in the World, that their
Relations should not sweep away all, but that something should be returned back
again to increase that Treasury from whence they have received all. The Policy
of the Church of Rome forbids the Marriage of their Clergy, and (if I am not
mistaken) makes the Church their Heir. Our Church obliges us to neither. Not to
the first, because contrary to the Holy Scriptures and Reason; not to the
latter, because it is contrary to Nature for Men to pass by their own Children
and leave them Beggars. But though the Church obliges to neither, yet she cannot
but commend both, or either, to those to whom this Gift is given. Happy is that
Man that is therefore unmarried, that he may care for the things of the Lord
whilst he lives, and provide for them when he dies. But, woe is me! Can there
be any such Men amongst us, whose desires of Pluralities and Riches are
insatiable, who take no other Care but to shear their Flocks, and gather the
good Things of the Altar, and lay them up in store, as if against an
approaching Famine? That leave the Cares of their Flocks to their poor Curates,
whose Faces they grind amongst the rest, and will not allow them to live, though
they bear the Burden of the Day? That leave them the Care of great Parishes,
to attend the daily Service, and themselves live at Ease, reap all the Profit,
and allow them not the twentieth Part? I am ashamed to say that there is such a
Man. For, next to the Sot, the Sensualist, the Drunkard, and the Debauched, the
covetous and cruel Clergyman is the most unseemly and unbecoming Object, and
the very Contradiction of his Calling. And let me humbly propose one thing:
Would every Bishop once in his whole Life do some eminent Work of Piety, it
would not only be Exemplary to stir up others, but would have been considerable
by this time; and if every rich Clergyman (who has either no Children, or whose
Charge is moderately provided for) would but return to the Church some Part of
those Alms that he has received at her Hands, (and it is all the reason in the
World it should be so,) it would be the like. And as for those of this Order
that are utterly incapable to add any thing but their Prayers to so good a
Work, I shall entreat them that they do not hinder it. I mean, that by the
strictness of their Lives, and the conscientious Discharge of their Duty, they
would walk worthy of such a Blessing, encourage Piety and Charity, and show
that that which remains still to the Church, is not perverted or thrown away
upon it.

XXIII. 5. To all in general.
Lastly, Let me apply my self to all Men in general, that they would take that
Account of their Stewardship (that they must make at the last Day) into
Consideration, and weigh well the best that can commonly and generally be made,
even by the best of Men, (which, The best Account that can be made generally at
the last Day, and its insufficiency.
as I noted in the beginning of the first Letter) is this; That they have been
good Husbands, and carefully advanced (or, at least, preserved) their Talent,
and that without Fraud or Violence. That these have supported themselves and
their Dependants with the Rents and Issues of the same, during their Lives,
and, when they died, conveyed them carefully to their Heirs and Assigns; but
whether they were left to wise Men or Fools they knew not; or, whether they are
like to be employed to the Service of God or the Devil, they have made no
Provision. But to what purpose they have lived, or wherein God or Man has been
benefitted by their Lives they cannot show, no more than they can one Acre or
Legacy for the Uses of Piety and Charity. That as they have wronged, so they
have done good to no Man: They have only possessed their own, and only
themselves, and their second selves and nearest Relations have reaped the
Benefits of it, etc. This is the best Account that most Men can give, (and how
few are there that can give so good?) and yet I leave it even to the Judgments
of these Accountants themselves, Whether an honest and wise Heathen may not
give up a better? Or, whether the unprofitable Servant in the Gospel did not
give up the same? And yet we read its Reward was no less than utter Darkness,
where there is weeping and gnashing of Teeth; from which good Lord deliver us.

But how much better and more A better way of Accounting with God, and the
conclusion of the whole.
comfortable would it be when we come to die, if we could say to God as the
religious Israelite was taught to say, (in the end of the third Year, usually
called the Year of Tything, when he had given the Levite, the Stranger, the
Fatherless, and the Widows, their Portions,) Deuteronomy. 26. 13. I have brought away
the hallowed things, [viz. That which I set apart, and dedicated to thy
Service,] out of mine own house, [to thine, and there according to my Vows] I
have distributed them, [some] to the Levite, [for the maintenance of thy
Service; some to Works of Charity,] to the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the
Widow, according to thy Commandments, which thou (O Lord) have commanded me: I
have not transgressed thy Commandments, nor forgotten them, etc. And [I cannot
but expect thy Blessing upon what I have left, to descend with it down to my
Heirs, etc.] Look down therefore from thy Holy Habitation, and bless thy
People, and the Land which thou have given me, etc. When we can testify before
our Judge, that we have not altogether served our Pleasures, nor our Appetites,
with that which was committed to our Charge, but to the utmost of our Powers
have advanced the Honor of our God, and the Good of our Neighbor with it
during our Lives, and when we were to leave the World, that we likewise secured
something for the Service of Piety and Charity, so that it shall not be in the
Power of our Heirs to alienate it.

This and only this can Comfort and Support the timorous Soul when it is
brought before its Judge, and assure it of a welcome. It would not only ensure
us of Heaven, but of a proportional increase of its Joys, according to the
Effects of our good Works. It would likewise ascertain an everlasting Name upon
Earth, and build us up a Monument more durable than that of the dead deceitful
Brass or Marble; or, those living, but perishing ones, of Sons and Daughters;
whilst we receive the Applauses of future as well as present Ages, and those
now unborn shall hereafter rise up and call us blessed.

And may you ( Sir) be partaker of this Blessedness which is the Reward of
Piety and Charity, both on Earth here, and in Heaven hereafter. And so I return
to take my Leave of you, and to beg your candid Interpretation of any
Expression in either Letter, and your Pardon for any Mistake in both, seeing I
intended them for your Service, and they were written for your Use, and at your
Command. For I am,

Honored Sir, Yours, etc.

FINIS.
Books printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
1. INstitutiones Grammaticae Anglo-Saxonicae, and Meso-Gothicae. Auctore
Georgio Hicksio, Ecclesiae Anglicanae Presbytero, 4to.

2. Christ. Wasii Senarius, sive de Legibus and Licentia veterum Poetarum, 4to.

3. Misna, Pars Ordinis primi Jeraim titul. Septem. Latin vertit and
Commentario illustravit Gulielmus Guisinus: Accedit Mosis Maimonidis Praefatio,
Edvardo Pocockio Interpret, 4to.

4. Joannis Antiocheni Cognomento Mallala Hist. Chronica, e M. S. Bibliothecae
Bodleianae. Praemittitur Dissertatio de Authore. Per Humph. Hodium, D. D. 8vo.

5. Bishop Overal's Convocation Book 1606, concerning the Government of God's
Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4to.

6. True Conduct of Persons of Quality. Translated out of French. 8vo.

7. A Treatise relating to the Worship of God, divided into Six Sections:
Concerning, First, The Nature of Divine Worship. Secondly, The peculiar Object
of Worship. Thirdly, The true Worshippers of God. Fourthly, Assistance
requisite to Worship. Fifthly, The Place of Worship. Sixthly, The solemn Time
of Worship. By John Templer, D. D. 8vo.

8. A Defense of revealed Religion, in six Sermons, upon Romans 1. 16. wherein
it is clearly and plainly shown, That no Man can possibly have any real Ground
or Reason to be ashamed of Christianity. By Henry Halliwell, M. A. and Vicar of
Cowfold in Sussex, 80.

9. Miscellanies, in five Essays. 1. Upon the Office of a Chaplain. 2. Upon
Pride. 3. Upon Clothes. 4. Upon Dealing. 5. Upon General Kindness. The four
last by way of Dialogue. By Jeremy Collier, A. M. 8vo.

10. Mysteries in Religion vindicated: Or, the Filiation, Duty and Satisfaction
of our Savior asserted, against Socinians and others: With occasional
Reflections on several late Pamphlets. By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the
Church of England. 8vo.

11. A Discourse concerning the Nature of Man, both in his natural and
political Capacity, both as he is a rational Creature and Member of a Civil
Society: With an Examination of some of Mr. Hobbs's Opinions relating
thereunto. By James Loud, Rector of Settrington in Yorkshire, sometime Fellow
of Clare-Hall in Cambridge. 8vo.

12. Apparatus ad Theologiam in usum Academiarum. 1. Generaiis. 2. Specialis.
Auctore Stephano Penton, Rectore de Glympton, Oxon. 8vo.

13. Guardians Instruction: Or, the Gentleman's Romance. Written for the
Diversion and Service of the Gentry. 12o.

14. New Instructions to the Guardian: Showing that the last Remedy to prevent
the Ruin, advance the Interest, and recover the Honor of this Nation, is, 1.
A more serious and strict Education of the Nobility and Gentry. 2. To breed up
all their younger Sons to some Calling and Employment. 3. More of them to Holy
Orders: With a Method of Institution, from three Years of Age to twenty one.
12o.

15. The Doctrine of the Glorious Trinity, not explained, but asserted by
several Texts, as they are expounded by the ancient Fathers and later Divines.
For the Satisfaction of such as doubt, the Conviction of such as deny, and the
Confirmation of such as believe this Mysterious Article of the Christian Faith.
By Francis Gregory, D. D. and Rector of Hambleden in the County of Bucks. 8vo.

16. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Dr. John Scot. By Z.
Isham, Rector of St. Botolph's Bishop's-gate. 4to.


