Seasonable Words FOR English Protestants.

A SERMON, From Jer. 51.5. Setting forth, 1. When a Land is filled with Sin? 2.
What Evidences we have that England is not forsaken yet by God? And 3. What is
required of us, that we may not be given up to Destruction.


The Watchman said, The Morning comes, and also the Night. If ye will Enquire,
Enquire ye; Return, Come, Isa. 21.12. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at
the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
1690.

Seasonable Words FOR English Protestants.

TO THE READER.
UPon the desire of some interested in the publication of this Sermon, I have
perused it, and do communicate these my Thoughts concerning it.

There appears unto me in it, those two things, which do, above all others,
commend any Sermon, or any other Book; namely, most weighty and seasonable
Argument, with very judicious and methodical Management.

If I am able to judge; the Management speaks Arma Virumque, the Man and his
Furniture: And it is like its great Author, (well known to this Age, and like
to be so unto future ones, by his Writings in more than one Language.) There is
a favor due unto all Posthumous Pieces, of which sort this is; but there is
little need that this Piece seems to have of it.

As for its Argument, it is very Salvation; and that not merely Personal, or
Domestical, but National. This, if any thing, will be acknowledged Momentous;
and now, if ever, it must be acknowledged seasonable. Now in this our Day,
known only to the Lord. Nay now, that it is neither Day nor Night, as the
Prophet speaks. Now that City and Country are crying, Watchman, what of the
night? Watchman, what of the night? Now that the three frightful signs of
approaching Night are so upon us: I mean Shadows growing long, Laborers going
apace home, and Wild Beasts going boldly abroad. Quis talia fando Temperet a
Lachrymis?

In a word, here is that which will sufficiently recommend it self to all
serious Readers. It is the complaint of many, that our Booksellers Shops are
become heaps of dry Sand, in which many a rich Stone is lost. But it is known
to all, that Diamonds will be found out by their own Luster. And I make no
great question but so this Sermon will be. That it may be so, and may go much
abroad, and do good wherever it comes, is the prayer of

From my house in Bridges-street in Covent Garden, August 7. 1690. Thy Servant
in Christ Jesus, Daniel Burgess.

Jeremiah 51.5. For Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the
Lord of Hosts, though their Land was filled with sin against the Holy one of
Israel.


THIS Chapter, and the foregogoing, are an eminent Prophecy and Prediction of
the Destruction of Babylon, and of the Land of the Chaldeans, of the
Metropolitical City of the Empire and of the Nation it self. There is a double
occasion for the inserting of these Words. The first is to declare the Grounds
and Reasons why God would bring that Destruction upon Babylon, and upon the
Land of the Chaldeans. The words of the 4th verse are, The slain shall fall in
the Land of the Chaldeans, and they that are thrust through in her streets. Why
so? For, says he, Israel has not been forsaken. The reason why God will
destroy the Empire of Babylon, is, because he will remember Israel, and what
they have done against him. This lies in store for another Babylon in God's
appointed time. The second Reason is that it may be for the comfort, for the
supportment of Israel and Judah under that distress which was then befalling
them upon the entrance of this Babylon in the Land of the Chaldeans.
Notwithstanding all, says he, yet Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah of his God.

We are called this day to join our Cries with the Nation in the behalf of the
Land of our Nativity. And though it has been, as most of you know, my constant
course on such solemn Days as these are, to treat in particular about our own
sins, our own decays, our own means of Recovery; yet upon this occasion I
shall, as God shall help me, from these words, represent unto you the State of
the Nation wherein we live, and the only way and means of our Deliverance from
Universal Destruction. To declare our Interest herein, some things must be
observed concerning this Babylon, whose Destruction is so solemnly prophesied
of in this and the foregoing Chapter, And I must observe three things
concerning it.

First; That Babylon was the Original of Apostasy from the Natural Worship of
God unto Idolatry in the whole World. There was great Iniquity before the
Flood, but no mention of any Idolatry. There was a Natural Worship of God
throughout the World, that was not corrupted with Idolatry: There is no mention
of it until the building of Babel. There it began. The Tower which they built,
they turned into a Temple of Belus, whom they had made a God, and laid his
Image in the top of it. There was the Original. You shall see immediately how
we are concerned. There was the Original of Apostasy from Natural Worship unto
Idolatry.

Secondly; Their Idolatry; the Idolatry that there began consisted in
Image Worship, in the worshipping of Graven Images, which was their Idolatry,
that they set up with respect unto men departed, whom they worshipped by them.
Four times in this Prophecy does God say, he will take vengeance on their
Graven Images. And from the 40th of Isaiah, to the end of the 46th, you have a
description of the Idolatry of Babylon, that it all consisted in making Carved
Idols, and Graven Images. The rest of the World, especially of the Eastern
Nations, fell into the worshipping of the Sun, which they called Baal, and
Moloch, and Kemosh, all names of the Sun; and the Worship of the Moon, which
they called Ashtaroth, and the Queen of Heaven; but the Idolatry of Babylon was
by Graven Images and Idols.

Thirdly; Observe, They were so far, as appears upon Record, the first State in
the World that ever persecuted for Religion; that oppressed the true
Worshippers of God as such, as being mad upon their Idols, as the Prophet says
they were; they were enflamed upon them. They were the first that oppressed the
Church, because of its worshipping of God, and destroyed that Worship among
them. Hence the Church prays in this Chapter, The vengeance of the Lord, and of
his Temple be upon Babylon: Not only the vengeance of the Lord for destroying
of his People; but the vengeance of his Temple, for destroying of his Worship,
be upon Babylon, shall Zion say. Others have afflicted me, says he in the same
Chapter, but this Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon has broken my bones. They
were the great Oppressors of the Church.

Upon these three accounts which is that I would observe, the name of Babylon,
and all that is spoken of it in the Old Testament, is transferred to the
Apostate Church of Rome in the New, and all applied unto it in the Book of the
Revelation, and that upon this great Analogy, which I shall now briefly show.

Why does God call the Apostate State of the Church under the New Testament
Babylon, Babylon the Mystery? For these three Reasons.

First; As Old Babylon was the Rise and Spring of Apostasy from Natural Worship
in the World unto Idolatry; so this New Babylon was the Rise and Spring of
Apostasy from Evangelical Worship in the World unto Idolatry. Mark the Analogy.
Hence she is called the Mother of Harlots, that is, she that had brought forth
all the Idolatrous Churches and Worship that were in the World. Did Babylon
begin to Apostatize into Idolatry from Natural Worship? so Rome began to
Apostatize into Idolatry from Spiritual Evangelical Worship. Therefore the Holy
Ghost calls her Babylon.

Secondly, The peculiar Idolatry of Babylon con^^^^ed in Image Worship, the
worshipping of men departed under Images made to their likeness. And the
peculiar Idolatry of Rome consists in Image Worship, their worshipping Saints
departed, which is a great part of their Idolatry. And therein they are Babylon
also.

Thirdly and lastly; As Babylon was the Spring of all Persecution against, and
Oppression of the Church of God under the Old Testament; so Rome has been the
Spring of all Persecution and Oppression of the Church of God since the
Apostasy under the New Testament.

On these accounts has the Holy Ghost in infinite Wisdom transferred over the
name, and state, and other things spoken of Babylon from the Old unto the New.

I have mentioned this, that you may see the Interest of England in this Text
of Scripture. So far as the Truth of Religion is owned in this Nation; so far
as there is a Testimony given against Idolatry, we are to God as Israel and
Judah, though the Land be filled with sin. At the time of this Prophecy Israel
and Judah were in danger of present Destruction and Desolation from the Old
Babylon; and if we do not mock God in all we do, we are under Apprehensions
that England, and the Church of God in England is under danger of the same
Desolation and ^struction from New Babylon upon the same account and principle.
If we do not mock God, this is that we profess at this day. Wherefore the
parallel runs thus far equal. Such as was Babylon of Old, such is that at
present: Such as was the danger of Israel and Judah from them at that day, such
is the danger of England from the New at this present. This is spoken in
general.

For the opening of the words observe these three things.

1. That there is in them a Reduplication of the Names or Titles of God. He is
in this verse called by the name of the Lord of Hosts; and by, the name of the
Holy One of Israel; where there are such Reduplications of the Name of God, or
any of his Titles, the Holy Ghost would have us take notice that it is a matter
of great importance whereof he speaks.

2. There is a Distribution and Application of these Names of God unto distinct
occasions suitable unto them.

(1.) There is in it mentioned an intimation of a Surprizal with some
Protection or Deliverance. Who shall it be done by? The Lord of Hosts, says
he; The Lord his God. And he does not in vain add immediately, The Lord of
Hosts, that Title of God. He who has the Host above, and the Host below in his
Sovereign disposal. God's Host above, are all the holy Angels, and all the
Heavenly Bodies in their influences. The Stars in their courses fought against
Sisera. And he has lately hung forth among us a Flag or Ensign of his Host
above, intimating that he is arising in his Indignation, as the Lord of Hosts,
and has hung forth an Ensign before his coming, full of dread and terror. And
he is the Lord of Hosts here below, of all men, and of all creatures, disposing
of them as seems good unto him. The Prophet adds this name of God, because of
the unspeakable greatness of the thing he mentions, namely, that Israel should
not be forsaken, nor Judah, while the Land was so filled with sin, and the
whole Interest of Babylon so coming upon them.

(2.) The other Title of God is, The Holy One of Israel. This is applied
peculiarly unto their sin. The Land is filled with sin against the Holy One of
Israel. It is the greatest, it is the highest aggravation of sin, that it is
against the Holiness of God, who is a God of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity. So has the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost applied these two distinct
Titles of God unto the two distinct considerations of the People; first, of
their Protection, that he is the Lord of Hosts; secondly, as of their sin, that
he is the Holy One of Israel.

3. The third thing is this, That in this woeful State there is yet an
intimation made of a Covenant Interest of Judah in God, and that God did yet
own them as his in Covenant. Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his
God. Brethren, no man, I think, has less of Faith than I; no man does more
despond: But if I could see these two things in concurrence, His God, and The
Lord of Hosts, that is, Sovereign Grace, according to his Covenant, and
Sovereign Power, according to his Providence, there is ground for any man's
Faith to build upon. His God, The Lord of Hosts. Nothing but Sovereign Grace
and Sovereign Power can preserve a People when their Land is full of sin
against the Holy One of Israel; and Destruction seems to encompass them from
the Interest of Babylon.

I shall speak yet a little more particularly: You may consider in the words,

1. That which is mentioned in the last place, The State of the People at this
time; Their Land was fill^^ with sin against the Holy One of Israel.

2. An intimation of approaching deserved Destruction on that account: Though
the Land. It is in that condition that it ought to look for nothing but
Destruction.

3. A strange and wonderful Surprisal, notwithstanding this, in Sovereign Grace
and Power; Israel has not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, the Lord of
Hosts.

What I shall speak to is this;

That when a Land is filled with sin against the Lord, let men's Hopes and
Expectations be what they will, they are in danger of utter Destruction, and
cannot be saved, but by the actings of Sovereign Grace and Power.

I shall, for the handling hereof, at least I design to do these three things.

1. Show when a Land is filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel.

2. Gather up what Evidences we have that England is not yet utterly forsaken
of God.

3. Manifest what is indispensably required of us, that we may not be given up
unto that utter Desolation and Destruction that lies at the door.

I do believe that I am not in my thoughts far from your case; far from the
case of the Nation. I do not search for things to speak to; I shall speak only
those that are compliant with the common Reason and Understanding of all sober
Persons.

There are three ways whereby a Land may be said to be filled with sin.

1. When the sins of a Land or Nation are come to the full, to the utmost
measure that God has allotted to them in his Patience. There is such an
allotment of Patience to every Nation under Heaven, and when it comes to its
appointed Issue, no means under Heaven can defer or delay their Destruction one
day. Thus says God before the Flood, The Land is filled with sin, the whole
Earth with violence; a Flood shall take them away. The Cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah came up to God; they had filled up their measure; God sent Fire and
Brimstone to destroy them. You shall not yet go into Canaan: Why? The Iniquity
of the Amorites is not yet full. There is a time appointed wherein the Iniquity
of the Amorites shall come up to its full measure, beyond which their
Destruction shall not be delayed. This was not now the case of Israel and
Judah. It proved afterward to be their case, as the Apostle describes it, 1
These. 2.15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary unto all men:
Forbidding us to preach to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always. For the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. How come?
They have filled their measure, reached to their bounds; Wrath is come upon them
to the uttermost. I hope, I pray that this is not, that this may not be the
State of England; that our Land is not so filled with sin, as that God's Decree
of Absolute and Universal Desolation should be gone forth against us.

2. A Land may be said to be filled with sin, when it is come to that degree
and measure, as that God will not pass it by without some severe desolating
Judgment. He will not utterly forsake it, he will not utterly destroy it; but
let all mankind do what they will, he will not pass it by without some severe
desolating Judgment. Such was their case even at this time. You may see in 2 Chronicles. 36.16. But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his People,
till there was no Remedy. It was impossible that the Judgment of God should be
turned away from them. In this State God says, Pray not for this people; my
heart shall not be toward them, until he had brought his Judgment upon them.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, I will not hear them. Ay, but what if
Reformation come in? Nay, nay, says he, It is determined against them.
Reformation shall not save them. See 2 Kings c. 23: v. 25, 26. where there is
an account given of the greatest Reformation that ever was wrought, in Judah,
by Josiah. So it is said, Like unto him there was no King before him, that
turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his
might, according to all the Law of Moses; neither after him arose there any
like him; having Reformed the whole Nation. Then sure all will be well. See the
next words; Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his
great wrath wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah; and the Lord said, I
will remove Judah also out of my sight. There is a time and season when God,
although he will not utterly destroy and forsake a Nation for ever, yet he will
not pass them by; let who will intercede, he will not pass them by, until he
has brought a severe destructive scourge upon them. Whether this be the State
of England at this day, or no, God only knows, and of Mankind not one. Whether
we are come to that State wherein there is no Remedy, wherein nothing we do
shall prevent desolating Judgments, I say, God only knows, and of men not one.

3. A Land is filled with sin, when it is come to such a degree and measure, as
that there is no Rule of the Word, nor any Prognostic from Providence, nor any
Conjecture from the state of things that can give any determination what will
be the Issue. Judgment is deserved, and there is nothing remains but to look
upon the Balance as it is held in the hand of Sovereignty; which way it will
turn, God only knows. The Decree is not yet gone forth. In this your State God
does not say, Pray not for this People: God does not say, Though you reform, I
will not turn from the fierceness of my wrath. But God says, Who knows if God
will return and leave a Blessing? Who knows if God will be entreated and have
mercy? He leaves it upon the absolute pleasure of Sovereignty to give us
encouragement to wait upon him. Because I take this, yea and I take it in the
best of my hopes to be that wherein we are concerned; pray, take these two
things along with you, before I go to show it in particular. The first is, That
in this State, if God gives time and space, there is encouragement enough left
to make our Applications to him for the Removal of Impending Judgments.
Methinks sometimes I see by Faith the Lord high lift up upon his Throne, and
his Train filling the Temple with his Glory, and holding the Balance of this
Nation in his hand, and can turn it to Mercy or Judgment as seems good unto
him. While it is so; while though the Woman be put into the Epha, yet the
Talent of Lead is not laid upon her, there is time for Intercession, yet time
for the interposition of God. And secondly, I say, and do you take it as you
see good; but I will tell you my persuasion, that if there be not a compliance
with the Calls of God unto this Nation, upon this Suspension and Arrest of
Judgment that we are under, we shall as certainly perish as if we were in
either of the two former conditions. If the Chaldeans were all wounded men, if
there was no Hope, no Strength, no Relief in the Papal Cause, they shall rise
up and smite as in the day wherein Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel, and the Mother
was dashed in pieces upon her Children, Hos. 10.14.
unless there be a compliance with the Calls of God in the days wherein we live.

Let us then a little, as God will give strength, enquire when a Nation is so
filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel, as certainly to put the
Balance into the hands of Sovereignty, and to take off all Rules and
Prognostics (which with great grief I have heard sometimes insisted upon) and
reduce us merely to the hand of Sovereignty. When is it that a Land is so
filled with sin?

1. A Land is so filled with sin, when all sorts of provoking sins do abound in
it; when there is no Exception to be put in into the Indictment; when there is
no provoking sin that can be thought on that is not in the Nation. For if there
be but one provoking sin absolutely excluded, there is room for mercy to dwell.
Who now shall plead for England? Who shall put in an Exception for England into
this Indictment? Oh poor England! among all thy Lovers, thou have not one to
plead for thee this day. From the Height of Profaneness and Atheism through the
filthiness of Sensuality and Uncleanness, down to the lowest Oppression and
Cheating, the Land is filled with all sorts of sin. If there be any that can
put in an Exception as to any provoking sin that is not among us, let them
stand forth and plead the Cause of this Nation. I profess my mouth is stopped.
The Land is filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel. It is to no purpose
to enumerate our sins; the Roll is too long to be read at this time; and I am
sorry it has been cut and thrown into the fire; when it has been spoken of,
contemned and despised, as Jeremiahs was by Jehojakim. But so it is.

2. A Land is so filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel, when all sorts
of persons in a Land are guilty of provoking sins. Pray mistake me not; I do
not say all persons of all sorts; God forbid; If it had been so, we had long
since been like unto Sodom and Gomorrah. Isa. 1.9.
If the Lord of Hosts had not left us a small Remnant, we should have been as
Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. But whereas there are many
sorts of Persons, Rulers, and them that are ruled; high and low, rich and poor;
in Court, in City, in Country; I say, all sorts of persons have been guilty of
these provoking sins: We and our Princes, as Daniel speaks, and our Rulers, and
the People, the Inhabitants of the Land of all sorts. Who shall plead here for
England? Who shall bring forth a sort of persons? Nay, it is not so in the
Throne; nay, it is not so at Court; nay, it is not so among the Clergy; nay, it
is not so in the City; nay, it is not so in the Country; it is not so with the
Rich, it is not so with the Poor. Let any one that can bring in a Plea for this
poor Nation, that we may not conclude the Land is filled with sin against the
Holy One of Israel.

But you will say; Here lies an Exception: There are many Persons, many
Churches free from these flagitious and provoking sins. There is a sort of
Persons, Churches and Professors, who walk in the fear of God, and are free
from all these sins; and therefore it does not extend to all sorts.

Brethren! you know my mind full well in this matter. I have been for these
three last years upon all occasions inculcating it upon you. I acknowledge the
Churches in this Nation are not Guilty of those sins whereby God is provoked
against the Nation to bring on National Judgments: But I do say, that Churches
and Professors in this Nation are Guilty of those sins for which Christ will
bring correcting Judgments upon Churches and Professors; so that we are all in
the same way and bottom, though not all upon the same account. The Land is
filled with sin. How are your Thoughts concerned in these things, Brethren? I
confess to you, I speak my Heart, my Conscience, as in the presence of God, and
as that which you are concerned to consider.

I have given you two Evidences that this Land is so filled with sin against
the Holy One of Israel. I will give you two more.

3. When the sins of a Land have upon them the greatest Aggravations that
National sins are capable of. What are they? They are plain. They are against
Warnings, and against Mercies. All sorts of sins in all sorts of persons,
against all sorts of Warnings, and against all sorts of Mercies. God has not
left this Land without Warnings in Heaven above, and in Earth beneath. Was
there no Warning given us in the wasting, desolating Plague? No Warning in the
consuming, raging Fire? No Warning in the bloody War that ensued thereon? No
Warning in all the prodigious Appearances in Heaven above that we have had?
None in that which at present hangs over us as an Ensign of God's supernal
Host? I acknowledge there has been, I fear, a weakness in one kind of Warning
by the Public Dispensation of the Word. But God has not left himself without
witness: He has multiplied Warnings, and they have not been complied withal.
Have they, Brethren? Were they at all afraid, says Jeremiah, Jer. 36.24.
when the Roll was read? or, did they rent their clothes? No, not at all. Have
these Warnings of God been complied withal? Has the Voice of God in them been
heard? Has the Nation been afraid? Have they rent their clothes and returned
to the Lord? They have not. We yet continue, God help us, in a state of sin
against Warnings.

And as for Mercies; The Mercies of Peace and Plenty, they have been the food
of Lust, of Covetousness and Sensuality, and have pampered us in wantonness, to
the rending and tearing one another.

4. When in the secret workings of God's Providence there is an Inclination in
a sinful People unto a compliance with them from whom their Destruction is like
to proceed; it is a sign that God is withdrawn from them, and that the Land is
so filled with sin. When Israel was to be destroyed by the Assyrian, when
Israel saw, Hos. 5.13.
his sickness, he sent to the King of Assyria, applied himself to the King of
Assyria, by whom he was to be destroyed. When Judah saw his sickness, all his
Inclinations and Applications were unto the Babylonians and Chaldeans, by whom
he was to be destroyed. Ezekiel. 23.
The Prophet Ezekiel has a whole Chapter, to tell you of the fondness of that
People upon the Babylonians before their Destruction. They were all like
Princes and Mighty men, and thou wast in love with them, and committed Adultery
with them; that is, partook and complied with their Idolatry. When it is so, it
is evident that God is greatly withdrawn from such a People, and that they are
nigh unto their Desolation.

What shall we plead for England in this matter? Is it not known what wretched
and vile compliances we have had with a Neighbor Nation, the French, following
their Manners, imitating their Customs, promoting their Interest, advancing
their Reputation, when every man almost among us talked of nothing but that we
should be destroyed by the French: An eminent token of the hand of God upon us,
and that the Land is so filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel. Nay, go
farther; Whence is it (for we bear our selves herein not only upon the Truth of
the thing it self, but also upon the Proclamation inviting us upon this day)
whence is it that we fear the Judgments of God? Whence do we fear Desolation,
Confusion, Destruction upon this Nation, to our Religion, to our Liberties, to
our Lives? Is it not from the Papal Interest? There is it stated by our Rulers,
and in the thoughts of all sober persons. And, had we been wise, we might have
seen it many years ago. But what have we been doing for some Ages? deserting
our Principles, forsaking the Foundation we stood upon against the Papacy,
foregoing those avowed Principles of the first Reformers, pleading for
compliance, pleading for a possibility of Reconciliation, avowing them to be a
true Church. And in one word, if the Power of the Protestant Religion had not
been preserved in the Body of the People, it had by some been long ago given up
to the Papal Interest, and this at a time working effectually among us when we
were in dread, all that were wise and considerative, that there would from
thence arise the Desolation and Destruction of this Church.

I have given you these Evidences, that this Land of ours is so filled with sin
against the Holy One of Israel. And if any can answer it, and disprove it, no
man shall more rejoice in it than my self.

I should in the next place show the danger that Land is in, when things lie in
this equal Balance. For I pray observe, I have not given these things to prove
the Land has filled up its measure of Iniquity, and must certainly be
destroyed: I have not given them to prove absolutely that there is a Decreed
Judgment that cannot be diverted, that there is no Remedy, that notwithstanding
Reformation, God will say, I will not turn away the fierceness of mine Anger:
But I have given them only to prove that we are in that state and condition
wherein there is no certain Rule of the Word, no Indication of Providence, no
rational consideration of the state of things, that can give us any Security,
of Protection, or Deliverance; but that we are absolutely resolved upon
Sovereign Grace and Mercy; and without Relief from thence, I shall only say as
to the proof of the Proposition, what the Prophet says, Isa. 34.16. Seek ye
out of the Book of the Lord and read, not one of these things shall fail.

To omit all the considerations, and all the proof I intended, That Sovereign
Grace and Mercy must be our Relief, if ever we be relieved; I proceed unto the

Second thing; which is, to give in Evidences, That England is not yet utterly
forsaken of the Lord his God, the Lord of Hosts, though the Land be thus filled
with sin. So that there is ground of Encouragement yet remaining to apply our
selves to God. And in truth I will tell you the best I can think of.

1. The large and wonderful Discovery of the horrible Plot, of the horrible
Popish Plot, laid for the Ruin, Destruction and Desolation of this Nation, is
an Evidence that England is not yet, I say, utterly forsaken of the Lord its
God. It was not discovered by our Rulers, from whom it was hid: It was not
discovered by the severe Indagation and Watchfulness of Ministers of State from
Foreign Intelligence, the usual way of discovering such Plots. It was not
discovered by Persons of Authority and Interest, to warrant the Discovery. It
was not so in a time when the Nation was awake, and looked about them, and were
jealous of such things; but in the deepest Security. It has admitted, it has
met with all the endeavors of Hell and Men for the covering of it; yet through
the Conduct of the holy Providence of God it has broke forth to that
Discovery, as that it is publicly proclaimed to all the Nation. I say with the
Wife of Manoah, If God would have destroyed us, he would not have showed us
this thing. If he had utterly forsaken us, he would have left us to have been
swallowed up, when we should not have had leisure to have cried, Alas! To me I
say it is an Evidence that England is not yet utterly forsaken.

2. That God has stirred up some, at least, of the Nobles and our Rulers, to
follow on this Discovery, to bring it forth to Light, and to pursue them to
Condign Punishment, who were the Contrivers, Authors, Abetters, and Carriers on
of that Bloody Design. I will not speak one word or syllable to their dishonor
or disrespect, who deserve both honor and respect from us: But this I will
say, that if I know them, or any thing of them, this is not from themselves;
this is from the clothing of the Spirit of God, and anointing to this very
work, and is not from themselves, nor their own Principles, nor their own
Inclinations, but the hand of God in them and upon them. Add here unto the
strange and wonderful quiet disposure of the Magistracy of this City into the
hands of Persons prudent, diligent and watchful, whom we have reason to pray
for, and bless God for. And it is strengthened by the stirring up of a Spirit
in the common People unto an unheard of Heat and earnestness in bearing Witness
and Testimony against Popery and all their Abominations in such a manner as
has not fallen out in any Nation under Heaven; and this acted above and beyond
their Spirits and Principles. These things to me are some Evidences that
England is not yet utterly forsaken of the Lord its God, though the Land be
full of sin.

3. I could instance in the Embroilments of Foreign Nations abroad. At this
time they are all quiet, but who is there that does not know that they all
stand as it were upon the tip-toe, looking who shall first begin to cut Throats
and kill men. Even all the Nations in Europe are in this posture at this day.
Though they are quiet this cold Weather, yet who shall begin first, who shall
make the Attack, and who shall defend, is the talk of all Europe, whereby some
of them may have been hindered from a public contributing to the Ruin of this
poor Nation.

4. It is an Evidence that England is not yet forsaken, in that a secret
efficacious Influence of Divine Providence has preserved the Body Politic of
the Nation in its Being and Union, when all the Ligaments of Law and Mutual
Trust have been broken. There has been such a Dissolution of Mutual Trust, and
all ordinary Ligaments of the Politic Union of a Nation; that if God had not
powerfully grasped the whole in his hand, we had long since been in confusion,
and every man's Sword had been in the side of his Brother and his Neighbor.
But to this day we are preserved in Peace by a secret Influential Power of
Divine Wisdom and Providence, whose Footsteps I would adore more and more;
which is so much the more excellent, in that it is not visible, and by outward
force, but merely upon the minds of men. It is to me another Evidence that
England is not yet forsaken of its God, the Lord of Hosts.

5. My last is this; That after God has by so many ways, and so many means
declared unto us his Displeasure against our sin, having declared the Sentence
in his Word, yet he has visibly granted an Arrest of Judgment. The Sentence
shall not be put in Execution (says God) while I give this People a time and
space, and season of Repentance and Reformation. Alas! If God had utterly
forsaken us, he would have taken us off in the midst of our Security; Evil
would have risen, and we should not have known the morning of it. Destruction
would presently have overtaken us. But now God has given us various Calls,
various Warnings, and leaves us a space as yet to see what we will do, and what
will become of us. I will give them a Trial, says God; the Decree shall not
yet go forth; Judgment shall not yet come forth to Execution: I will give them
a space for Repentance. And this consideration has a double corroboration of
this blessed space and season God has given us for to apply our selves so far
to his Call, as to remove his Judgments that are impending over us.

The first is, That he has reserved a Remnant among us that do make use of
this space and season to apply themselves unto the Throne of Grace, and to cry
mightily for mercy. God has not taken his Holy Spirit from us. God has not
said by any open Work, or secret Intimation of Providence, Pray no more for
this People; my heart shall not be toward them: He has not said so: And
therefore there are yet among us precious Souls, who do lift up prayers to God
night and day, not only for themselves and Families; not only for the Church of
God, but for this poor Land of our Nativity, that if it were the will of God we
may not see it soaked in Blood, that God would not come forth to destroy it
with a Curse; that God would pity, and spare, and have mercy upon it; that he
would not make it an Aceldama, a Field of Blood. There are many Cries to God to
this purpose. So that there are some by whom this space and season God has
given us, is made use of.

Secondly; It has strength from this, That there is an Invitation and
Encouragement given to the whole Nation to join together in their Cries to God
this day for the same end and purpose. I confess to you give me leave to speak
it) I am afraid the Body of the Nation, considering their Conduct in this sort
of Duty, will make no great work of it, toward the averting of Judgments in
such a day as this is. And I am afraid also that the approaching Carnival or
time of Feasting, will quickly blot out all Impressions that ought to be in the
minds of men, from such a day as this is. This is all I can say, God is
publicly acknowledged, and what Influence that may have into a further
suspension of Judgment till the Nation be better prepared to seek unto him, I
know not.

Methinks these are Evidences (to me they are) that England is not yet utterly
forsaken of the Lord its God: The miraculous Discovery of the Plot for our
Destruction: The pursuit of it by some of our Rulers and the Body of the
Nation: The Embroilment of Foreign Nations in their own concerns: The
prefervation of the Political Interest and Body, when all the Ligaments of Law,
and Love, and Trust, were dissolved: The space and season that God gives us,
that we are not immediately hurried into Blood and Confusion, attended with a
Spirit of Prayer in some of God's own People: And with a public Acknowledgment
of God in this day in the Nation.

I should now proceed to my last thing, to show you that in this State wherein
a Land is so filled with sin, as absolutely to put the determination of all
things into the hand of Sovereignty: And where yet there remains some Evidences
that God has not utterly forsaken us: What is required of us: What is expected
from us, that may be a means to turn away the Wrath and Displeasure of God from
this poor Land and Nation. I should have spoken to three things.

1. That whatsoever be the Language of God's Calls, unless there be a general
Compliance with them, this Land cannot be saved.

2. I should have shown you, That all the Diligence, and the Courage, and the
Watchfulness of the Rulers, shall not be able to preserve us from that
Destruction which we have deserved; unless something else be done e're long,
their hearts will faint, and their hands fail, and their thoughts be divided.
For that alone will not do.

3. Prayer will not do it in this case, though that be necessary and required;
it will not do it.

God does not cry to us merely that we should cry to him. Why cryest thou? said
God to Joshua, there is an accursed thing. Why do thou lie upon thy face, and
cry, and pray, when Judgment is coming upon you? There is an accursed thing got
among you. It is so with us.

4. To speak very plain in a plain case, The State of this Nation is such, let
our Expectations and our Hopes be what they will, and Prognostics be
multiplied; God can multiply upon another hand: The case of this Nation is
such, that without Repentance evidenced, and universal Reformation sincerely
endeavored, England cannot be saved, will not be saved; God will forsake it;
Destruction from the Lord will overtake us.

I should have told you also what I judge indispensably necessary that any such
Reformation may be obtained in this Nation. As,

First; That there be through the Providence of God provided another manner of
Administration of the Word throughout the Nation than at present there is,
which is the only means of Conviction and Conversion unto God. Signs, and
Wonders, and Judgments, they terrify; it is the Word that must reform and turn
to God. And if the State of things continue so, that some who are able and wise
for the work are forbid, and others that engross all to themselves, are either
unable ornegligent in it, I have no great hopes of seeing Reformation in this
Land.

Secondly; Unless the generality of Magistrates be better principled for, and
better instructed in their Office than as yet they seem to be, a Reformation
will not be carried through this Nation. And,

Thirdly; Which is the principal; That those who have been examples in sinning,
and in drawing others to sin, become examples in Repenting, and Reforming, and
Turning to God.

Fourthly, and lastly; That the whole Nation be stirred up, and do not faint in
the pursuit of it.

I have scarce been able to speak the Heads of these things unto you. I wish I
had strength to speak all that is in my thoughts and heart upon this matter,
unto this whole Nation; for hereon, and not on any thing else depends the
Deliverance and Safety of it.

A Catalogue of Books newly Printed, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible
and Three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheapside.
ATreatise of Knowledge and Love compared. In two Parts: 1. Of Falsely Pretended
Knowledge. 2. Of True Saving Knowledge and Love. First, Against Hasty Judging,
and False Conceits of Knowledge, and for necessary Suspension. Secondly, The
Excellency of Divine Love, and the Happiness of being Known and Loved of God.

The English Nonconformity, as under King Charles II. and K. James II. truly
Stated and Argued.

The Scripture Gospel defended, and Christ, Grace and Free Justification
vindicated against the Libertines, who use the Names of Christ, Free Grace and
Justification, to subvert the Gospel, and Christianity, and that Christ, Grace
and Justification, which they in zealous Ignorance think they plead for, to the
injury of Christ, the danger of Souls and the scandalizing of the weak, the
insulting of Adversaries, and the dividing of the Churches.

Cain and Abel Malignity, that is Enmity to Serious Godliness, that is, To an
Holy and Heavenly State of Heart and Life: Lamented, Described, Detected, and
unanswerably proved, to be the Devilish Nature, and the Militia of the Devil
against God, and Christ, and the Church and Kingdoms, and the surest sign of a
state of Damnation. All four by Richard Baxter.

Man's whole Duty, and God's wonderful Entreaty of him thereunto. Set forth
from 2 Cor. 5.20. and published at the Request of some Hearers.

Advice to Parents and Children, The sum of a few Sermons, contracted, and
published at the Request of many Pious Hearers. Both by Daniel Burgess.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wise of H^ Sampson, Dr. of
Physic, who Died November. 24. 1689. By John How Minister of the Gospel.

Two Funeral Sermons of the Use and Happiness of Humane Bodies Preached on 1
Cor. 6.13. By Edward Lawrence.

Meetness for Heaven, promoted in some brief Meditations upon (...) 1.12.
Discovering the Nature and Necessity of Habitual and Act^ Meetness for Heaven
here, in all that hope for Heaven hereafter. Designed for a Funeral Legacy. By
O. H. an unworthy Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

The Believers's Daily Exercise: Or, The Scripture Precept of being in the Fear
of the Lord all the day long, Explained and urged, in fo^^ Sermons. By John
Billingsley, Minister of the Gospel.

A Brief Enquiry into the True Nature of Schism: Or, A Perswasi^ to Christian
Love and Charity.

A Seasonable Question, in a Sermon on Josh. 5.13. -- Art thou for (...) or for
our Adversaries? Preached on the 18th of June at Kingsnoth, bei^^ the Public
Fast: And on the 27th of July at St. Peter's Cornhill, Lond^^ By Timothy Wilson,
M.A. and Rector of Kingsnoth in Kent.

A Call to Humiliation for the Grievous Sin of Persecution, in (...) Sermons,
Preached at the Public Fasts in Lemster, in the County of H^reford Wednesday
May 21. and June 18. 1690. By William Woodw^ Minister of the Gospel.

FINIS.

