Sighs from Hell: OR, THE Groans of a Damned Soul. Discovering From the 16th of
Luke, The Lamentable State of the Damned. And may fitly serve, As a
Warning-Word to SINNERS, both Old and Young, by Faith in JESUS CHRIST, to avoid
the same Place of Torment. With a Discovery of the Usefulness of the
SCRIPTURES, as our Safe Conduct for avoiding the Torments of HELL.

By John Bunyan.

The Second Edition

London, Printed for F. Smith at the Elephant and Castle without Temple Bar.
At 1s. Bound.

The AUTHOR to the READER.
FRiend, because it is a dangerous thing to be walking toward the place of
darkness and anguish: and again, because it is (notwithstanding) the Journey
that most of the poor Souls in the World are taking, and that with delight and
gladness, as if there was the only happiness to be found; I have therefore
thought it my duty (being made sensible of the danger that will befall those
that walk therein) for the preventing of thee, (O thou poor Man or Woman) to
tell thee, by opening this Parable, what sad success those Souls have had, and
are also like to have, that have been, or shall be, found persevering therein.

We use to count him a friend that will forewarn his Neighbor of the danger,
when he knows thereof, and does also see, that the way his Neighbor is
walking in, does lead right thereto; especially when we think that our
neighbor may be either ignorant, or careless of his way. Why Friend, it may
be, nay twenty to one but thou have been, ever since thou did come into the
World, with thy back toward Heaven, and thy face toward Hell; and thou,
either through ignorance, or carelessness (which is as bad, if not worse) have
been running full hastily that way ever since. Why? I beseech thee put a little
stop to thy earnest race, and take a view of what entertainment thou art like
to have, if thou do indeed and in truth persist in this thy course. Thy way
leads down to death, and thy steps take hold on hell, Prove. 5. 5. It may be the
path indeed is pleasant to the flesh, but the end thereof will be bitter to thy
Soul. Hark, do thou not hear the bitter Cries of them that are but newly gone
before? saying, Let him dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue,
that is so tormented in this flame: Luke 16. Do thou not hear them say, Send
one from the dead to prevent my father, my brother, and my fathers house from
coming into this place of torment? Shall not then these mournful groans pierce
thy flinty heart? Will thou stop thine ears, and shut thy eyes? and will thou
not regard? Take warning, and stop thy journey before it be too late. Will thou
be like the silly fly, that is not quiet, unless she be either entangled in
the spiders web, or burned in the Candle? Will thou be like the Bird that
hastes to the snare of the Fowler? Will thou be like that simple one named in
the 7. of Proverbs, That will be drawn to the slaughter by the cord of a silly
lust? O sinner, sinner, there is better things than Hell to be had, and at a
cheaper rate by the thousand part than that! (O there is no comparison) there
is Heaven, there is God, there is Christ, there is Communion with an
innumerable company of Saints and Angels: Hearthe Message then that God does
send, that Christ does send, that Saints do bring; nay, that the Dead do send
unto thee; I pray thee therefore that thou would send him to my fathers
house, if one went to them from the dead, they would repent. How long ye simple
ones, will you love simplicity? and ye scorners delight in scorning, and ye
fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof, and behold, says God, I will po^r
out my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you. I say, ^ear this
voice, O silly one, and turn and live thou sinful ^^ul, lest be make thee hear
that other saying: But, because I have called, and you have refused, I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, I also will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear comes.

O poor Soul, if God and Christ did wis^ thee for thine harm, it would be
another matter; then if thou did refuse, thou might have some excuse to
make* or fault to find, and ground to make delays: But this is for thy profit,
for thy advantage; for the pardoning of thy si^s, the salvation of thy Soul,
the delivering of thee from Hell fire, from the wrath to come, from everlasting
burnings, into favor with God, Christ, and Communion with all happiness, (that
is so indeed.)

But it may be thou will say, All that has been spoken to in this discourse,
is but a Parable, and Parables are no realities.

I could put thee off with this Answer, That though it be a Parable, yet it is
a truth, and not a lie, and thou shall find it so too, to thy cost, if thou
shall be found a slighter of God, Christ, and the salvation of thy own Soul.

But secondly, know for certain, That the things signified by Parables, are
wonderful realities. O what a glorious reality was there signified by that
Parable! The Kingdom of heaven is like to a net that is cast into the Sea, etc.
Signifying, that sinners of all sorts, of all Nations, should be brought into
Gods Kingdom, by the net of the Gospel. And O how real a thing shall the other
part thereof be, when it is fulfilled! which says, And when it was full, they
drew it to shore, and put the good into vessels, but threw the bad away, Matthew.
13. 47, 48. signifying the mansions of glory that the Saints should have, and
also the rejection that God will give to the ungodly, and to sinners. And also
that Parable, what a glorious reality is there in it! which says, Except a
corn of wheat fall to the ground and die, it abides alone; but if it die, it
does bring forth much fruit, Joh. 12. 24. To signify, That unless Jesus Christ
did indeed spill his blood, and die the cursed death, he should abide alone;
that is, have never a Soul into glory with him; but if he died, he should bring
forth much fruit, that is, save many sinners. And also how real a truth there
was in that Parable, concerning the Jews putting Christ to death! which the
poor dispersed Jews can best experience to their cost; for they have been
almost ever since a banished people, and such as have had Gods sore displeasure
wonderfully manifested against them, according to the truth of the Parable,
Matthew. 21. v. 33. to 41. O therefore, for Jesus Christ's s^ke, do not slight
the truth, because it is discovered in a Parable; for by this argument thou
may also, nay thou will slight almost all the things that our Lord Jesus
Christ did speak; for (...) spoke them for the most part (if not all) in
Parable. Why should it be said of thee, as it is said of some, These things are
spoken to them that are without in Parables, that seeing they might not see,
and that hearing they might not understand, Luke 8. 10. I say, take heed of
being a quarreller against Christ's Parables, lest Christ also objecteth
against the salvation of thy Soul at the Judgment Day.

Friend, I have no more to say to thee now, if thou do love me, pray for me,
that my God would not forsake me, nor take his holy Spirit from me; and that
God would fit me to do and suffer, what shall be from the World or Devil
inflicted upon me. I must tell thee, the World rages, they stamp and shake
their heads, and fain they would be doing: the Lord help me to take all they
shall do with patience, and when they smite the one cheek, to turn the other to
them, that I may do as Christ has bidden me; for then the Spirit of God, and
of glory shall rest upon me. Farewell.

I am thine, to serve in the Lord Jesus, John Bunyan,

Sighs from Hell: OR, The Groans of a damned Soul.
Luke the 16th. Verse 19. etc.


Lazirus which was laid at his gate full of sores;



Abraham's Bosom: the rich man also dyed, and was buried.

Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom:

Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his
finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.

Abraham said Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou
art tormented.







Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

Abraham; but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.

Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from
the dead.

Verse 19.
THis Scripture was not spoken by our Lord Jesus Christ, to show you the state
of two single persons only, (as some through their ignorance of the drift of
Christ in his Parables, do dream) but to show you the state of the godly and
ungodly to the Worlds end; as is clear to him that is of an understanding
heart. For he spoke them to the end, that after Generations should take notice
thereof, and fear, lest they also fell into the same condition.

Now, in my discourse upon these words, I shall not be tedious, but as briefly
as I may, I shall pass through the several Verses, and lay you down some of the
several truths contained therein: and the Lord grant that they may be
profitable, and of great advantage to those that read them, or hear them read.

The 19 and 20 Verse also, I shall not spend much time upon, onel^ give you
three or four short hints, and so pass to the next Verses; for they are the
words I do intend most especially to insist upon.

The 19* 20, and 2^, Verses ^un thus, There was a (...) rich man* which was
clothed in Purple and s^^e (...) and fared delici^^sly (...) sumptuously
everyday. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his
Gate full of force, etc.

1. If these Verses had been spoken by Jesus Christ, and no more all the World
would have gone (...) to have cast a wrong interpretation on (...), if Jesus
had said only thus much, There was a certain rich man that fared sumptuously
daily and a certain beggar laid at his Gate full of sores. The World would have
made this conclusion of them, the rich man was the happy man. For at the first
view, it does represent such a thing. But take all together, (that is) read the
whole Parable, and you shall find, that there is no man in a worse condition
then he, as I shall clearly hold forth afterward.

2. Again, if a man would judge of men according to outward appearance, he
shall oft^^^^^ take his mark ^miss. Here is a man to outward appearance,
appears the only blessed man; bet^e^ by half then the beggar, in as much as he
is rich, the beggar poor; he is well clothed, but peradventure the beggar is
naked; he has good food, but the beggar would be glad of Dogs meat ( And he
desired to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's Table;) the rich
man fares well every day, but the beggar must be glad of a bit when he can get
it. Oh! who would not be in the rich man's state? A wealthy man, sorts of new
Suits, and dainty dishes every day: enough to make one, who minds nothing but
his belly, and his back, and his lusts, to say, Oh that I were in that man's
condition! Oh that I had about me, as that man had! Then I should live a life
indeed; then should I have hearts ease good store; then I should live
pleasantly, and might say to my soul, Soul, be of good cheer, eat, drink and be
merry, Luke 12. 19. thou have every thing plenty, and art in a most blessed
condition.

I say this might be, I, and is the conclusion with them that judge according
to outward appearance. But if the whole Parable be well considered, you will
see, Luke 16. 15. That that which is had in high estimation with men, is an
abomination in the sight of God. And again, Joh. 16. 20, 21, 22. that condition
that is the saddest condition, according to outward appearance, is often times
the most excellent; for the beggar had ten thousand degrees the best of it,
though to outward appearance, his state was the saddest; from whence we shall
observe thus much.

1. That those who judge according to outward appearance, do for the most part
judge amiss. Joh. 7. 24.

2. That they who look upon their outward enjoyments to be tokens of Gods
special grace unto them, are also deceived, Rev. 3. 17. For as it is here in
the Parable, a man of wealth, and a child of the Devil may make but one person;
or a man may have abundance of outward enjoyments, and yet be carried by the
devils into eternal burnings, Luke 12. 20. But this is the trap in which the
Devil has caught many thousands of poor souls, namely, by getting them to judge
according to outward appearance, or according to Gods outward blessings.

Do but ask a poor carnal covetous wretch, how we should know a man to be in a
happy estate; and he will answer, Those that God blesses, and gives abundance
of this world unto; when for the most part they are they that are the cursed
men. Alas, poor men! they are so ignorant, as to think, that because a man is
increased in outward things, and that by a small stock, therefore God does love
that man with a special love, or else he would never do so much for him, never
bless him so, and prosper the work of his hands. Ah poor soul! it is the rich
man that goes to hell. And the rich man dyed, and in hell, mark, in hell, he
lift up his eyes, etc.

Methinks to see how the great ones of the world will go st^n^^ing up and down
the streets sometimes, it makes me wonder. Surely they look upon themselves to
be the only happy men, but it is because they judge according to outward
appearance; they look upon themselves to be the only blessed men, when the Lord
knows, the generality are left out of that blessed condition. Not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Ah!
did they that do now so br^g, that no body dare scarce look on them, but
believe this, it would make them hang down their heads, and cry, O give me a
Lazarus's portion.

I might here enlarge very much, but I shall not; only thus much I shall say to
you that have much of this World; Have a care that you have not your portion in
this world; take heed that it be not said to you hereafter, when you would very
willingly have heaven. Remember in your life time you had your good things, in
your life time you had your portion, Psalm 17. 14.

And Friend, thou that seek after this world, and desire riches, let me
ask this question, would thou be content that God should put thee off with a
portion in this life? Would thou be glad to be kept out of heaven with a
back well clothed, and a belly well filled with the dainties of this world?
Would thou be glad to have all thy good things in thy life time, to have thy
heaven to last no longer then while thou do live in this world? Would thou
be willing to be deprived of eternal happiness and felicity? If you say no,
then have a care of the world and thy sins; have a care of desiring to be a
rich man, lest thy Table be made a snare unto thee, Psalm. 69. 22. lest the
wealth in this world do bar thee out of glory. For as the Apostle says, They
that will be rich do fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish
and hurtful lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
Thus much in general, but now more particularly.

These two men here spoken of (as I said) do hold forth to us the state of the
godly and ungodly: the beggar holds forth the godly, and the rich man the
ungodly. There was a certain rich man, etc.

But why are the ungodly held forth under the notion of a rich man?

1. Because Christ would not have them look too high, as I said before, but
that those who have riches should have a care, that they be not all their
portion, Jam. 1. 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 6. 17.

2. Because rich men are mostly able to the Devils temptations; are most ready
to be puffed up with pride, stoutness, cares of this world, in which things they
spend most of their time, in lusts, drunkenness, wantonness, idleness, together
with the other works of the flesh, For which things sake, the wrath of God
comes upon the children of disobedience, Col. 3. 6.

3. Because he would comfort the hearts of his own, which are most commonly of
the poorer sort, But God has chosen the poor, despised and base things of this
world, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Should God have set the rich man in the blessed state, his
children would have concluded, being poor, that they had no share in the life
to come.

And again, had not God given such a discovery of the sad condition of those
that are for the most part rich men; we should have had men conclude
absolutely, that the rich are the blessed men. Nay, albeit the Lord himself
does so evidently declare, that the rich ones of the world are for the most
part in the saddest condition, yet they through unbelief, or else presumption,
do harden themselves, and seek for the glory of this world, as though the Lord
Jesus Christ did not means as he said: or else that he will say more than shall
assuredly come to pass: but let them know, that the Lord has a time to fulfill
that he had a time to declare, for the Scripture cannot be broken, Joh. 10. 35.

But again, the Lord by this word does not mean those are ungodly, who are rich
in the world, and no other, for then must all those that are poor, yet
graceless and vain men be saved, and delivered from eternal vengeance; which
would be contrary to the word of God, which says, That together with the Kings
of the earth, and the great men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men,
there are bondmen or servants, and slaves, that cry out at the appearance of
the Almighty God, and his Son Jesus Christ to Judgment, Rev. 6. 15.

So that though Christ does say, There was a certain rich man, yet you must
understand he means all the ungodly, rich or poor. Nay, if you will not
understand it so now, you shall be made to understand it to be so meant at the
day of Christ's second coming, when all that are ungodly shall stand at the
left hand of Christ with pale faces, and guilty Consciences, with the vials of
the Almighties wrath ready to be powered out upon them. Thus much in brief
touching the 19th verse. I might have observed other things from it, but now I
forbear, having other things to speak of at this time.

Verse 20. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his
gate full of sores.
THis verse does chiefly hold forth these things. 1. That the Saints of God are
a poor contemptible people. There was a certain beggar. If you understand the
word beggar, to hold forth outward poverty, or scarcity in outward things, the
Saints of the Lord, for they are for the most part, a poor, despised,
contemptible people. But if you allegorize it, and interpret it thus, They are
such as beg earnestly for heavenly food; this is also the spirit of the
Children of God, and it may be, and is a truth in this sense, though not so
naturally gathered from this Scripture.

2. That he was laid at his gate full of sores.] These words hold forth the
distempers of believers, saying, He was full of sores; which may signify the
many troubles, temptations, persecutions, and afflictions in body and spirit
which they meet withal while they are in the world; but also the entertainment
they find at the hands of those ungodly ones, who live upon the earth. Whereas
it is said, He was laid at his gate full of sores. Mark, He was laid at his
gate, not in his house, that was thought too good for him, But he was laid at
his gate full of sores. From whence observe, That the ungodly world do not
desire to entertain and receive the poor Saints of God into their houses. If
they must needs be somewhere near unto them, yet they shall not come into their
houses: shut them out of doors, if they will needs be near us, let them be at
the gate. And he was laid at the gate full of sores. 2. Observe, that the world
are not at all touched with the afflictions of Gods children, for all they are
full of sores; a despised, afflicted, tempted, persecuted people, the world
does not pity; no, but rather labor to aggravate their trouble, by shutting
them out of doors; sink, or swim, what cares the world, they are resolved to
disown them, they will give them no entertainment; if the lying in the streets
will do them any good; if hard usage will do them any good; if to be disowned,
rejected, and shut out of doors by the World will do them any good, they shall
have enough of that, but otherwise no refreshment, no comfort from the World.
And he was laid at his Gate full of sores.

Verse 21. And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's
Table: the Dogs came also, and licked his Sores.
BY these words our Lord Jesus does show us the frame of a Christians heart,
and also the heart and carriage of worldly men toward the Saints of the Lord:
The Christians heart is held forth by this, that any thing will content him
while he is on this side glory. And he desired to be fed with the Crumbs, the
Dogs meat, any thing. I say, a Christian will be content with any thing, if he
have but to keep Life and Soul together, (as we use to say.) He is content, he
is satisfied, he has learned, if he has learned to be a Christian, to be
content with any thing, as Paul says, I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content. He learns in all conditions to study to love God, to
walk with God, to give up himself to God; and if the Crumbs that fall from a
Rich-man's Table will but satisfy Nature, and give him bodily strength, that
thereby he may be the more able to walk in the way of God; he is contented. And
he desired to be fed with the Crumbs that fell from the rich man's Table. But
mark, he had them not, you do not find that he had so much as a Crumb or a
Scrap allowed unto him. No, then the Dogs will be beguiled, that must be
preserved for the Dogs. From whence observe, that the ungodly World do love
their Dogs better then the Children of God. You will say that is strange. It is
so indeed, yet it is true, as will be clearly manifested; as for instance. How
many pounds do some men spend in a year on their Dogs, when, in the mean while,
the poor Saints of God may starve for hunger. They will build Houses for their
Dogs, when the Saints must be glad to wander, and lodge in Dens, and Caves of
the Earth, Heb. 11. 38. And if they be in any of their houses for the hire
thereof, they will warn them out, or eject them, or pull down the house over
their heads, rather then not rid themselves of such Tenants. Again, some men
cannot go half a mile from home, but they must have Dogs at their heels; but
they can very willingly go half a score miles, without the society of a
Christian. Nay, if when they are busy with their Dogs, they should chance to
meet a Christian, they would willingly shift him if they could. They will go on
the other s^^e of the hedge or the way, rather than they will have any society
with him; and if at any time a Child of GOD should come into an house where
there are but two or three ungodly Wretches, they do commonly wish either
themselves, or the Saint, out of doors; and why so? Because they cannot down
with the society of a Christian: Though if there come in at the same time a
Dog, or a drunken swearing Wretch, which is worse than a Dog, they will make
him welcome, he shall sit down with them, and partake of their dainties. And
now tell me, you that love your sins and your pleasures; had you not rather
keep company with a Drunkard, a Swearer, a Strumpet, a Thief; nay, a Dog, than
with an honest-hearted Christian? If you say, No: What means your sour carriage
to the People of God? Why do you look on them, as if you would eat them up? Yet
at the very same time, if you can but meet your Dog, or a drunken Companion,
you can fawn upon them, take acquaintance with them, to the Tavern or Alehouse
with them, if it be two or three times in a Week: But if the Saints of God meet
together, pray together, and labor to edify one another, you will stay till
Doomsday, before you will look into the house where they are. Ah Friends, when
all comes to all, you will be found to love Drunkards, Strumpets, Dogs, any
thing; nay, to serve the Devil, rather than to have loving and friendly society
with the Saints of God.

Moreover, The Dogs came and licked his Sores.] Here again you may see, not
only the afflicted state of the Saints of God in this World, but also, that
even Dogs themselves, according to their kind, are more favorable to the
Saints, than the sinful World; though the ungodly will have no mercy on the
Saints, yet it is ordered so that these Creatures, Dogs, Lions, etc. will.
Though the rich man would not entertain him into his house, yet his Dogs will
come, and do him the best good they can, even to lick his running Sores. It was
thus with Daniel, when the World was mad against him, and would have him thrown
to the Lions to be devoured, the Lions shut their mouths at him, (or rather the
Lord did shut them up) so that there was not that hurt befell to him, as was
desired by the Adversaries, Dan. 6. And this I am persuaded of, that would the
Creatures do as some men would have them, the Saints of God should not walk so
quietly up and down the streets, and other places, as they do. And as I said
before, so I say again, I am persuaded, that at the Day of Judgment many men's
Conditions and Carriages will be so laid open, that it will evidently appear,
they have been very merciless, and mad against the Children of God; insomuch,
that when the Providence of God did fall out so, ^s to cross their
expectations, they have been very much offended thereat, as is very evidently
seen in them who set themselves to study, Psalm. 31, 13. how to bring the Saints
into bondage, and to thrust them into Corners, as in these late Years. And
because God has in his goodness ordered Things otherwise, they have gnashed
their Teeth thereat. Hence then let the Saints learn, not to commit themselves
to their Enemies, beware of men, Matthew. 10. 17. They are very merciless men,
and will not so much favor you, (if they can help it) as you may suppose they
may. Nay, unless the overruling Hand of God, in goodness, do order Things
contrary to their natural inclination, they will not favor you so much as a
Dog.

Verse. 22. And it came to pass, that the Beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's Bosom: the rich man also died and was buried.
THe former Verses do briefly hold forth the carriage of the ungodly in this
Life toward the Saints. Now this Verse does hold forth the departure both of
the godly and the ungodly out of this Life.

Where he says, And it came to pass, that the Beggar died, and was carried
into Abraham's Bosom* and the rich man died also.] The Beggar dyed, that
represents the godly: and the rich man died, that represents the ungodly: From
whence observe; Neither godly nor ungodly must live always without a change
either by Death or Judgment; the good man died, and the bad man died; That
Scripture does also back this Truth, that good and bad must die, mavelous
well, where it is said, And it is appointed to men once to die, and after that
the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27.

Mark, he does not say it is so, that men by chance may die, which might beget
in the hearts of the ungodly, especially some hope to escape the bitterness of
it: But he says, It is a thing most certain, it is appointed. Mark, it is
appointed for men once to die, and after that the Judgment. God has decreed
it, that since men have fallen from that happy estate that God at the first did
set them in, they shall die, Romans 6. 23. Now when it is said the Beggar died,
and the rich man died; part of the meaning is, they ceased to be any more in
this World; I say* partly the meaning, but not altogether. Though it be
altogether the meaning when some of the Creatures die, yet it is but in part
the meaning, when it is said, that Men, Women, or Children die; for there is to
them something else to be said more than barely a going out of the World: For
if when unregenerate men and women die, there were an end of them, not only in
this World, but also in the World to come, they would be happy over they will
be now; for when ungodly men and women die, there is that to come after death,
that will be very terrible to them; namely, to be carried by the Angels of
Darkness from their Deathbeds to Hell, there to be reserved to the Judgment of
the Great Day, when both Body and Soul shall meet, and be united together
again, and made capable to undergo the uttermost Vengeance of the Almighty to
all Eternity. This is that I say, which does follow a man (that is not born
again) after Death; as is clear from that in 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. Where before
speaking of Christ, being raised again by the power of his Eternal Spirit, he
says By which, that is, by that Spirit he went and preached to the Spirits in
Prison: But what is the meaning of this? Why thus much; that those Souls who
were once alive in the World, in the time, or days in which Noah lived, being
disobedient in their Times to the Calls of God, by his Spirit in Noah, for so I
understand it, was according to that which was foretold by that Preacher
deprived of Life, and overcome by the Flou^, and are now in Prison. Mark, he
preached to the Spirits in Prison; he does not say, who were in Prison, but to
them ( in) that is, now in Prison, under Chains of Darkness, reserved, or kept
there, in that Prison, in which now they are, (ready, like Villains in the
Jayl, to be brought before the Judgment Seat of Christ at the Great Day): But
of this I shall speak further by and by. Now if this one Truth, that men must
die and depart this World, and either enter into Joy, or else into Prison, to
be reserved to the Day of Judgment, were believed, we should not have so many
Wantons walk up and down the streets as there do; at least it would put a
mighty check to their filthy Carriages, so that they would not, could not walk
so basely and sinfully as they do. Belshazzer, notwithstanding he was so far
from the fear of God as he was, yet when be did but see that God was offended,
and threatened him for his wickedness, it made him hang down his head, and knock
his knees together, Dan. 5. 5, 6. If you read the verses before, you will find
he was careless, and satisfying his Lusts in Drinking, and playing the wanton
with his Concubines. But so soon as he did perceive the finger of an Hand,
writing, then (says the Scripture) the King's Countenance was changed and his
Thoughts troubled him; so that the Joints of his Loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another. And when Paul told Felix of Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come, it made him tremble. And let me tell thee
(Soul) whosoever thou art, that if thou did but verily believe that thou must
die, and come into the Judgment, it would make thee turn over a new leaf. But
this is the misery, the Devil does labor by all means, as to keep out other
Things that are good, so to keep out of the heart as much as in him lies, the
Thoughts of passing from this Life into another World; for he knows, if he can
but keep them from the serious Thoughts of Death, he shall the more easily keep
them in their sins, and so from closing with Jesus Christ, as Job says, Their
houses are safe from fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them. Which makes
them say to God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways,
verse. 14. Because there is no fear of Death, and Judgment to come, therefore
they do put off God and his ways, and spend their days in their sins; and in a
moment, that is, before they are aware, go down to the Grave, ver. 17. And thus
it fared also with the man spoken of in Luke 12. 20. the man, instead of
thinking of Death, he thought how he might make his Barns bigger: But in the
midst of his business in the World, he lost his Soul before he was aware:
supposing that Death had been many Years off. But God said unto him, Thou Fool,
thou troublest thy self about Things of this Life, thou put off the
Thoughts of departing this World, when this Night thy Soul shall be taken from
thee. O^, this Night, they, that is, the Devil will fetch away thy Soul from
thee. And here it comes to pass, men's not being exercised with the Thoughts of
departing this Life, that they are so unexpected to themselves and their
Neighbors, taken away from the pleasures and profits; yea, all the Enjoyments
they busy themselves withal while they live in this World. And hence it is
again, that you have some in your Towns and Cities, that are so suddenly taken
away, some from haunting the Alehouse, others from haunting the Where-houses,
others from playing and gaming, others from the cares and covetous desires
after this World, unlooked for as by themselves, or their Companions. Hence it
is also, that men do so wonder at such Tidings as this, There is such an one
dead, such an one is departed; it is because they do so little consider, both
the transitoriness of themselves and their Neighbors: for had they but their
Thoughts well exercised about the shortness of this Life, and the danger that
will befall such as do miss of the Lord Jesus Christ, it would make them more
wary and sober, and spend more time in the service of God, and be more
delighted and diligent in enquiring after the Lord Jesus, who is the Deliverer
from wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10. For, as I said before, it is evident, that
they who live after the flesh in the Lusts thereof, do not really and seriously
think on Death, and the Judgment that does follow after, neither do they indeed
endeavor so to do; for did they, it would make them say with Holy Job, All the
days of my appointed time will I wait till my Change come, Job 14. 14. And, as
I said before, that not only the Wicked, but also the Godly have their time to
depart this Life. And the Beggar died. The Saints of the Lord, they must be
deprived of this Life also, they must yield up the Ghost into the hands of the
Lord their God; they must also be separated from their Wives, Children,
Husbands, Friends, Goods, and all that they have in the World. For God has
decreed it: It is appointed, namely, by the Lord, for men once to die, and we
must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. As it is 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.

But it may be objected, if the godly do die as well as the wicked, and if the
Saints must appear before the Judgment Seat as well as the sinners; then what
advantage have the godly more then the ungodly, and how can the Saints be in a
better condition then the wicked?

Answ. Read the 22th Verse over again, and you shall find a mavelous
difference between them, as much as is between Heaven and Hell, everlasting
joy, and everlasting torment; for you find, that when the beggar died, which
represents the godly, He was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, or into
everlasting joy; Psalm. 1. but the ungodly are not so, but are hurried by the
Devils into the bottomless pit, drawn away in their wickedness: Prove. 14. 32.
for he says, And in Hell he lift up his eyes. When the ungodly do die, their
misery begins; for then appear the Devils, like so many Lions, waiting every
moment till the Soul depart from the Body. Sometimes they are very visible to
the dying party, but sometimes more invisible; but always this is certain, they
never miss of the Soul, if it do die out of the Lord Jesus Christ, but do hale
it away to the prison, as I said before, there to be tormented, and reserved
until that great and general day of Judgment, at which day they must Body and
Soul, receive a final sentence from the Righteous Judge, and from that time be
shut out from the presence of God, into everlasting woe and distress. But the
godly, when the time of their departure is at hand, then also are the Angels of
the Lord at hand; yea, they are ready waiting upon the Soul to conduct it
safely into Abraham's Bosom. I do not say, but the Devils are often times very
busy doubtless, and attending the Saints in their sickness; I, and no question
but they would willingly deprive the Soul of Glory. But here is the comfort, as
the Devils come from Hell to devour the Soul, (if it be possible* at its
departure) so the Angels of the Lord come from Heaven, to watch over and
conduct the Soul (in spite of the Devil) safe into Abraham's Bosom.

David had the comfort of this, and speaks it forth for the comfort of his
Brethren. Psalm 34. 7. saying, The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and delivers them. Mark, the Angel of the Lord encampeth round
about his Children, to deliver them. From what? From their enemies, of which
the Devil is not the least. This is an excellent comfort at any time, to have
the holy Angels of God to attend a poor man, or woman; but especially, it is
comfortable in the time of distress* at the time of death, when the Devils
beset the Soul with all the power that Hell can afford them. But now it may be,
that the glorious Angels of God do not appear at the first, to the view of the
Soul; nay, rather Hell stands before it, and the Devils ready, as if they would
carry it thither. But this is the comfort, the Angels ^o always appear at the
last, and will not fa^l the Soul, but will carry it safe into Abraham's Bosom.
Ah Friend^* consider, here is an ungodly manupon his deathbed, and he has
none to speak for him, none to speak comfort unto him; but it is not so with
the Children of God, for they have the Spirit to comfort them. Here is the
ungodly, and they have no Christ to pray for their safe conduct to glory, but
the Saints have an Intercessor. John 17. 9. Here is the World, when they die,
they have none of the Angels of God to attend upon them; but the Saints have
their company. In a word, the unconverted person when he dies, he sinks into
the bottomless pit. But the Saints, when they die, do ascend with, and by the
Angels, into Abraham's Bosom, or into unto unspeakable glory. Luke 23. 43.

Again, it is said, that the rich man when he died, was buried, or put into the
Earth; but when the beggar died, he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's
Bosom. The one is a very excellent style, where he says, he was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's Bosom; it denotes he excellent condition of the
Saints of God, as I said before; and not only so, but also the preciousness of
the death of the Saints in the eyes of the Lord, Psalm. 116. 15. that after,
Generations may see how precious in the sight of the Lord, the death of his
Saints is, when he says, they are carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom.

Thus many times, the Lord adorneth the death and departure of his Saints, to
hold forth unto after Generations, how excellent they are in his eyes. It is
said of Enoch, that God took him; of Abraham, that he died in a good old age;
of Moses, that the Lord buried him; of Elijah, that he was taken up into
Heaven; that the Saints sleep in Jesus; that they die in the Lord; that they
rest from their labor; that their works follow them; that they are under the
Altar; that they are with Christ; that they are in light; that they are to come
with the Lord Jesus, to judge the World. All which sayings signify thus much,
That to die a Saint, is very great Honor and Dignity. But the ungodly are not
so. The rich or ungodly die, and are buried, he is carried from his dwelling to
the Grave, and there he is buried, hid in the dust; and his Body does not so
fast molder and come to naught there, but his name does stink as fast in the
World: as says the holy Scripture, The name of the wicked shall rot. And
indeed, the names of the godly are not in so much honor after their departure,
but the wicked and their names, do as much rot. What a dishonor to Posterity,
was the death of Balaam, Agag, Achitophel, Haman, Judas, Herod, with the rest
of their companions.

Thus the wicked have their names written in the Earth, and they do perish and
rot, and the name of the Saints do cast forth a dainty savor to following
Generations: and that the Lord Jesus does signify where he says, The godly
are carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom. And that the wicked are nothing
worth; where he says, The ungodly die and are buried.

Verse 23. And in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in torment, and sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosom.
THE form^^ Verse speaks only of the departure of the ungodly out of this
life, together, with the glorious conduct that the godly have into the Kingdom
of their Father. Now our Lord does show in this Verses partly, what does, and
shall befall to the Reprobate after this life is ended, where he says, And in
Hell he lift up his eyes.] That is, the ungodly after they depart this life, do
lift up their eyes in Hell. From these words, may be observed these things.

1. That there is an Hell for Souls to be tormented in, when this life is
ended. Mark, after he was dead and buried. In Hell he lift up his eyes. 2. That
all that are ungodly, and do live and die in their sins, so soon as ever they
die, they go into Hell: he died, and was buried. And in Hell he lift up his
eyes. 3. That some are so fast asleep, and secure in their sins, that they
scarce know well where they are, till they come into Hell, and that I gather
from these words, In Hell he lift up his eyes. He was asleep before, but Hell
makes him lift up his eyes.
As I said before, it is evident, that there is an Hell for Souls; yea, and
Bodies too, to be tormented in after they depart this life, as is clear. First,
because the Lord Jesus Christ that cannot lie, did say, that after the sinner
was dead and buried, In Hell he lift up his eyes.

Now if it be objected, that Hell is here meant the Grave, that I plainly deny.

First, Because there the Body is not sensible of torment or ease; but in that
Hell, into which the spirits of the damned depart, they are sensible of
torment, and would be very willingly freed from it, to enjoy ease, which they
are sensible of the want of; as is clearly discovered in this Parable. Send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, to cool my tongue.

Secondly, It is not meant the Grave, but some other place, because the Bodies,
so long as they lie there, are not capable of lifting up their eyes, to see the
glorious condition of the Children of God, as the souls of the damned do. In
Hell he lift up his eyes.

Thirdly, It cannot be the Grave, for then it must follow, that the Soul was
buried there with the Body, which cannot stand with such a dead state as is
here mentioned; for he says, The rich man died; that is, his soul was
separated from his body. And in Hell he lift up his eyes.

If it be again objected, that there is no Hell but in this life, that I do
also deny, as I said before; after he was dead and buried, In Hell he lift up
his eyes. And let me tell thee, O soul, whoever thou art, that if thou close
not in savingly with the Lord Jesus Christ, and lay hold on what he has done,
and is doing in his own person for sinners, thou will find such an hell after
this life is ended, that thou will not get out of again for ever and ever. And
thou that art wanton, and do make but a mock at the Servants of the Lord,
when they tell thee of the torments of hell, thou will find, that when thou
departest out of this life, that Hell, even the hell which is after this life,
will meet thee in thy Journey thither, and will with its hellish crew give thee
such a sad salutation, that thou will not forget it to all eternity, when that
Scripture comes to be fulfilled on thy soul, in Isa. 14. 9. Hell from beneath
is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: it stirs up the dead for
thee, even all the chief ones of the earth: it has raised from their Thrones
all the Kings of the Nations. All they, that is, that are in hell shall say,
Art thou become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us? O sometimes when I
have had but thoughts of going to hell, and considered the everlastingness of
their ruin that fall in thither; it has stirred me up rather to seek to the
Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver me from thence, than to slight it, and make a
mock at it.

And in hell he lift up his eyes.] The second thing I told you, was this, That
all the ungodly that live and die in their sins, so soon as ever they depart
this life, do descend into Hell. This is also verified by the words in this
Parable, where Christ says, He died and was buried, and in hell he lift up his
eyes. As the Tree falls, so it shall lie, wh^^^er it be to Heaven or Hell,
Eccl. 11. 3. And as Christ said to the Thief on the Cross, This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. Even so the Devil in the like manner may say unto thy
Soul, Tomorrow shall thou be with me in hell. See then what a miserable case he
that dies in an unregenerate state is in; he departs from a long sickness to a
longer hell; from the gripings of death to the everlasting torments of hell.
And in hell he lift up his eyes. Ah Friends! if you were but your selves, you
would have a care of your Souls; if you did but regard, you would see how mad
they are that slight the salvation of their souls. O what will it profit thy
soul to have pleasure in this life, and torments in hell, Mark 8. 36. Thou
had better part with all thy sins and pleasures, and companions, or
whatsoever thou delightest in, than to have Soul and Body to be cast into hell.
O then, do not now neglect our Lord Jesus Christ, lest thou drop down to hell,
Heb. 2. 3. Consider, would it not wound thee to thine heart, to come upon thy
deathbed, and instead of having the comfort of a well-spent life, and the
merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, together with the comforts of his glorious
Spirit: to have, first, the sight of (...) ill-spent life, thy sins flying in
thy face, thy conscience uttering it self with Thunderclaps against thee, the
thoughts of God terrifying of thee, death with his merciless paw seizing upon
thee, the devils standing ready to scramble for thy soul, and hell enlarging
her self, and ready to swallow th^e up; and eternity of misery and torment
attending upon thee, from which there will be no release. For mark, death does
not come alone to an unconverted soul, but with such company, as were thou but
sensible of, it would make thee tremble. I pray consider that Scripture, Rev.
6. 8. And I looked, and beheld a pale horse, and his name that sat on him was
Death, and hell followed with him. Mark, death does not come alone to the
ungodly; no, but hell goes with him. O miserable Comforters! O miserable
Society! here comes death and hell unto thee. Death goes into thy body, and
separates body and soul asunder; hell stands without (as I may say) to embrace,
or rather to crush thy soul between its everlasting grinders. Then thy mirth,
thy joy, thy sinful delights will be eased when this comes to pass; so, it will
come. Blessed are all those, that through Christ Jesus his merits, by says, do
escape these soul-murthering companions. And in hell he lift up his eyes.

The third thing you know that we did observe from these words, was this, That
some are so fast asleep, and secure in their sins, that they scarce know where
they are, until they come into hell. And that I told you I gather by these
words, In hell he life up his eyes. Mark, it was in hell that he lift up his
eyes. Now some do understand by these words, that he came to himself, or began
to consider with himself* or to think with himself in what an estate he was*
and what he was deprived of; which is still a confirmation of the thing laid
down by me. There it is that they come to themselves, that is, there they are
sensible where they are indeed; Thus it fares with some men, that they scarce
know where they are, till they lift up their eyes in hell. It is with these
people, as with those that fall down in a swoun; you know if a man do fall down
in a swoun in one room though you take him up, and carry him into another, yet
he is not sensible where he is, till he comes unto himself, and lifts up his
eyes.

Truly thus it is to be feared, it is with many poor souls, they are so
senseless, so hard, so feared in their Conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2. that they are
very ignorant of their state; and when death comes, i^ strikes them, as it
were, into a swoun, (especially if they dye suddenly) and so they are hurried
away, and scarce know where they are, till in hell they lift up their eyes;
this is he who ^ye^h in his full strength, fully at ease and quiet, Job 21. 23.

Of this sort are they spoken of in Psalm 73. where he says. There are no
bonds in their death but their strength is firm. They are not troubled as other
folk neither are they plagued like other men. And again, they spend their days
in wealth, and in a moment, mark, in a moment, before they are aware, they go
down to the grave, Job 21. 17.

Indeed this is too much known by woeful and daily experience, sometimes when we
go to visit them that are sick in the Towns and places where we live, Oh how
senseless, how feared in their Consciences are they? they are neither sensible
of heaven, not of hell* of sin, nor a Savior: speak to them of their
condition, and the state of their souls, and you shall find them as ignorant as
if they had no souls to regard. Others, though they lie ready to dye, yet they
are busying themselves about their outward affairs, as though they should
certainly live here, even to live and enjoy the same for ever. Again, come to
others, speak to them about the state of their souls, though they have no more
experience of the new birth then a beast, yet will they speak as confidently of
their eternal state, and the welfare of their souls, as if they had the most
excellent experience of any man or woman in the world, saying, I shall have
Peace, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. When as I said even now, the Lord knows they are as
ignorant of the new birth, of the nature and operation of Faith, of the witness
of the Spirit: as if there were no new birth, no faith, no witness of the
Spirit of Christ in any of the Saints in the world. Nay, thus many of them are,
even an hour or less before their departure. Ah poor souls, though they may go
away here like a lamb, as the world says, yet if you could but follow them a
little, to stand and listen, soon after their departure; it is to be feared,
you should hear them roa^ like a Lion at their first entrance into Hell, far
worse then ever did Corah, etc. when they went down quick into the ground,
Numb. 16. 31, 32, 33, 34* 35.

Now by this one thing does the devil take great advantage on the hearts of the
ignorant, suggesting unto them, that because the party deceased, departed so
quietly, without all doubt they are gone to rest and joy; when alas, it is to
be feared, the reason why they went away so quietly, was rather because they
were senseless and hardened in their Consciences; yea, dead before in sins and
trespasses. For had they had but some awakenings on their death beds, as some
have had, they would have made all the Town to ring of their doleful condition:
But because they are seared and ignorant, and so depart quietly, therefore the
world takes heart at grass, (as we use to say) and make no great matter of
living and dying they cannot tell how, therefore pride compasses them as a
chain, Psalm. 73. 5, 6. But let them look to themselves, for if they have not an
interest in the Lord Jesus, now while they live in the world, they will,
whether they dye raging or still goun^o the same place, and lift up their eyes
in hell.

O my friends, did you but know what a miserable condition they are in, that go
out of this world without an interest in the Son of God, it would make you
smite upon your thigh, and in the bitterness of your souls cry out, Acts 16.
29, 30, 31. Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? And not only so,
but thou would not be comforted, until thou did find a rest for thy soul
in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse 23. And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees
Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
Something in brief I have observed from the first part of this verse, namely
from these words, And in hell he lift up his eyes. And indeed I have observed
but something, for they are very full of matter, and many things might be taken
notice of in them. There is one thing more that I might touch upon, as touched
in this saying, and that is this, Methink the Lord Jesus Christ does hereby
signify, that men are naturally unwilling to see or take notice of their sad
state, I say by nature; but though now they are willingly ignorant, yet in hell
they shall lift up their eyes. That is, in hell they shall see and understand
their miserable condition; and therefore to these words, In hell he lift up his
eyes, he added, being in torment. As if he had said, Though once they shut
their eyes, though once they were 2 Pet. 3. 5. willingly ignorant, yet when
they depart into hell, they shall be so miserably handled and tormented, that
they shall be forced to lift up their eyes. While men live in this world, and
are in a natural state, they will have a good conceit of themselves, and of
their condition; they will conclude that they are Christians, that Abraham is
their father, Matthew. 3. 7, 8. and their state to be as good as the best; they
will conclude they have faith, the Spirit, good hope, and an interest in the
Lord Jesus Christ: but then, when they drop into hell, and lift up their eyes
there, and behold, first their soul to be in extreme torments; their dwelling
to be the bottomless pit; their company thousands of damned souls; also the
innumerable company of devils; and the hot scalding vengeance of God, not only
to drop, but to fall very violently upon them; then they will begin to be
awakened, who all their life time were in a dead sleep. I say, when this comes
to pass, Lo it will, then in hell they shall lift up their eyes, in the midst
of torments they shall lift up their eyes.

Again, you may observe from these words, And in hell he lift up his eyes being
in torment. That the time of the ungodly men's smarting for their sins, will be
in the torments of hell. Now here I am put to a stand, when I consider the
torments of hell, into which the damned do fall. O unspeakable torments! O
endless torments! Now that thy soul might be made to slay from these
intolerable torments, into which the damned do go. I shall show you briefly
what are the torments of hell. First, by the names of it. Secondly, by the sad
state thou will be in, if thou come there. First, the names: It is called a
never dying worm, Mark 9. It is called an oven, fire hot, Malach. 4. 1. It is
called a furnace, a fiery furnace, Mat. 13. It is called the bottomless pit,
the unquenchable fire, fire and brimstone, hell fire, the lake of fire,
devouring fire, everlasting fire, eternal fire, a stream of fire. Rev. 21.

First, one part of thy torments will be this, thou shall have a full fight of
all thy ill spent life from first to last, though here thou can sin to day,
and forget it by to morrow; yet there thou shall be made to remember how thou
did sin against God at such a time, and in such a place, for such a thing,
and with such an one, which will be an hell unto thee. Psalm. 50. 21. God will
set them in order before thine eyes.

2. Thou shall have the guilt of them all lie heavy on thy soul, not only the
guilt of one or two, but the guilt of them altogether, and there they shall lie
in thy soul, as if thy belly were full of pitch, and set on a light fire. Here
men can sometimes think on their sins with delight, but there with unspeakable
torment; for that I understand to be the fire that Christ speaks of, which
shall never be quenched, Mark 8. 43, 44, 45, 46. While men live here, O how
does the guilt of one sin sometimes crush the soul, it makes a man in such
plight, that he is weary of his life, so that he can neither rest at home nor
abroad, neither up nor in bed. Nay, I do know, that they have been so tormented
with the guilt of one sinful thought, that they have been even at their wits
end, and have hanged themselves. But now when thou come into hell, and have
not only one or two, or an hundred sins with the guilt of them all on thy soul
and body; but all the sins that ever thou did commit since thou came into
the world, altogether clapped on thy conscience at one time, as one should clap a
red hot iron to thy breasts, and there to continue to all eternity, this is
miserable.

3. Again, then thou shall have brought into thy remembrance, the slighting of
the Gospel of Christ; here thou shall consider how willing Christ was to come
into the world to save sinners, and for what a trifle thou did reject him.
This is plainly held forth in Esaias 28. where speaking of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the foundation of salvation, ver. 16. he says of them that reject the Gospel,
that when the overflowing scourge does pass through the earth, (which I
understand to be at the end of the world) then says he, It shall take you
morning by morning, by day and by night shall it pass over you; that is,
continually without any intermission. And it shall be a vexation only to hear
the report. A vexation, that is, a torment, or a great part of hell only to
understand the report, to understand the good tidings that came into the world
by Christ's death for poor sinners, and you will find this to be verily the mind
of the Spirit, if you compare it with Chap. 53. of Esaias verse 1. where he
speaks of men's turning their backs upon the tenders of Gods grace in the
Gospel, he says, Who has believed our report, or the Gospel declared by us?
Now this will be a mighty torment to the ungodly, when they shall understand
the goodness of God was so great, that he even sent his Son out of his bosom
to dye for sinners, and yet that they should be so foolish, as to put him off
from one time to another; that they should be so foolish, as to lose heaven,
and Christ, and eternal life in glory, for the society of a company of
drunkards; that they should lose their souls for a little sport, for this
world, for a strumpet, for that which is lighter then vanity and nothing. I
say, this will be a very great torment unto thee.

4. Another part of thy torment will be this, Thou shall see thy friends, thy
acquaintance, thy neighbors; nay, it may be thy Father, thy mother, thy wife,
thy husband, thy children, thy brother, thy sister, with others, in the
Kingdom of heaven, and thy self thrust out. Luke 13. 28. There shall be
weeping, etc. when you shall see Abraham, (your father) and Isaac, and Jacob,
(together with your brethren) the Prophets in the Kingdom of heaven, and your
selves thrust out. Nay, says he, There shall come from the East, and from the
West, that is, th^se that thou did never see in all thy life before, and they
shall sit down with thy friends, and thy neighbors, thy wife and thy children,
in the Kingdom of Heaven, and thou for thy sins and disobedience sh^l^ be
shut, nay, thrust out. O wonderful ^o^ment!

5. Again, thou shall have none but a company of damned souls, with an
innumerable company of devils to keep company with thee. While thou art in this
World, the very thoughts of the devils appearing to thee makes thy flesh to
tremble, and thine hair ready to stand upright on thy head. But O what will thou do, when not only the supposition of the devils appearing, but the real
society of all the devils in hell be with thee howling and roaring, screeching
and roaring in such a hideous manner, that thou will be even at thy wits end,
and be ready to run stark mad again for anguish and torment.

6. Again, that thou might be tormented to purpose, the mighty God of heaven
will lay as great wrath and vengeance upon thee, as ever he can, by the might
of his glorious power. As I said before, Thou shall have his wrath, not by
drops, but by whole showers shall it come thunder, thunder upon thy body and
soul so fast, and so thick, that thou shall be tormented out of measure. And so
says the Scripture, 2 These. 1. 9. speaking of the wicked, Who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, when the Saints shall be admiring his goodness and
glory.

Again, this thou shall have, as I said before, without any intermission, thou
shall not have any ease so long as while a man may turn himself round: thou
shall have it always every hour, day and night: for their worth never dies,
but always gnaws, and their fire is never quenched. As it is written in Mark 9.

7. Again, in this condition thou must be for ever, and that is as sad as all
the rest. For if a man were to have all his sins laid to his charge, and
communion with the devils, and as much wrath as the great God of heaven can
inflict upon them. I say, if it were but for a time, even ten thousand years,
and so end, there would be ground of comfort, and hopes of deliverance; but
here is thy misery, this is thy state for ever, here thou must be for ever:
when thou look about thee, and see what an innumerable company of howling
devils thou art amongst, thou shall think this again, this is my portion for
ever. When thou have been in hell so many thousand years as there are stars in
the firmament, or drops in the Sea, or sands on the seashore, yet thou have to
lie there for ever. O this one word ever, how will it torment thy Soul.

Friends, I have only given a very short touch of the torments of Hell. O! I am
set, I am set, and am not able to u^ter what my mind conceives of the torments
of Hell. Yet this let me say to thee* accept of Gods mercy through our Lord
Jesus Christ, lest thou feel that with thy Conscience, which I cannot express
with my Tongue, and say, I am sorely tormented in this flame.

And sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosome]

When the damned are in this pitiful state, surrounded with fears, with
terrors, with torment and vengeance; one thing they shall have, which is this,
they shall see the happy and blessed state of Gods Children: he sees Abraham
afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosom, which as I said before, is the happy state
of the Saints, when this life is ended. This now shall be so far from being an
ease unto them, that it shall most wonderfully aggravate or heighten their
torment, as I said before. There shall be weeping, or cause of lamentation,
when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven,
and themselves thrust out.

2. Observe, those that die in their sins, are far from going to Heaven; He
sees Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his Bosom. And indeed, it is just with
God, to deal with them that die in their sins, according to what they have
done; and to make them who are far from Righteousness now, to stand far from
Heaven to all Eternity. Hearken to this ye stout-hearted, that are far from
Righteousness, and that are resolved to go on in your sins; when you die, you
will be far from Heaven; you will see Lazarus, but it will be afar off. Again,
he sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his Bosom.

These are some of the things that the damned do behold, so soon as they come
into torment. Mark, And he sees Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom. Lazarus, Who was
he? Why, even he that was so slighted, so disregarded, so undervalued by this
ungodly one, while he was in the World; he sees Lazarus in his Bosom.

From whence observe, That those who live and die the enemies of the Saints of
God; let them be never so great or stout; let them bear never so much sway
while they are in the World; let them ^rag and boast never so much while they
are here, they shall in spite of their teeths see the Saints, yea, the poor
Saints, even the Lazarus's, or the ragged ones that belong to Jesus, to be in a
better condition then themselves. O who do you think, was in the best
condition, or who do you think, saw themselves in the best condition, he that
was in Hell, or he that was in Heaven? He that was in darkness, or he that was
in light? He that was in everlasting joy, or he that was in everlasting
torments? The one with God, Christ, Saints, Angels: the other in tormenting
flames, under the curse of Gods eternal hatred, with the Devils and their
Angels, together with an innumerable company of howling, roaring, cursing, ever
burning Reprobates. Certainly, this observation will be easily proved to be
true here in this World, by him that looks upon it with an understanding heart,
and will clear it self to be true in the World to come, by such as shall go
either to Heaven or to Hell.

2. The second Observation from these words. And sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his Bosom, is this, They that are the persecutors of the Saints of
the Lord now in this World, shall see the Lords persecuted ones, to be they
that are so highly esteemed by the Lord, as to sit, or to be in Abraham's bosom
(in everlasting glory) though the enemies to the Children of God, did so
lightly esteem them, that they scorn to let them gather up the Dogs meat that
falls under their Table: this is also verified, and held forth plainly by this
Parable. And therefore be not grieved, O you that are the tempted, persecuted,
afflicted, sighing, praying Saints of the Lord, though your adversaries look
upon you now with a disdainful, surly, rugged, proud, and haughty countenance,
yet the time shall come, when they shall spy you in Abraham's Bosom.

I might enlarge upon these things, but shall leave them to the Spirit of the
Lord, which can better by ten thousand degrees, enlarge them on thy heart and
conscience, then I can upon a piece of paper. Therefore leaving these to the
blessing of the Lord, I shall come to the next Verse, and shall be brief in
speaking to that also, and so pass to the rest.

Verse 24. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, to cool my tongue, for
I am tormented in this flame.
YOu know I told you the 22th Verse, is a discovery of the departure of the
godly, and the ungodly out of this life; where he says, The beggar died, and
the rich man also died. The 23. Verse, is a discovery of the proper places,
both of the godly, and the ungodly after death; one being in Abraham's Bosom, or
in glory, the other in Hell. Now this 24 Verse, is a discovery of part of the
too late repentance of the ungodly, when they are dropped down into Hell. And he
cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me.]

From these words, And he cried, we may observe, first, What a change the
ungodly will have, when they come into Hell. He cried; it is like he was
laughing, jesting, jearing, drinking, mocking, swearing, cursing, prating,
pers^cuting of the godly in his prosperity, among his filthy companions; but
now the case is otherwise, now he is in another frame, now his proud, flout,
currish carriage is come down. And he cried. The laughter of the ungodly will
not last always, but will be sure to end in a cry, The tryumphing of the
wicked is short, Job 20 5. Consider, you must have a change, either here or in
Hell. If you be not new creatures, regenerate persons, newborn Babes in this
World before you go hence, your note will be changed, your conditions will be
changed* for if you come into Hell, you must cry. O did but the singing
drunkards, when they are making merry on the Ale-bench, think on this, it
would make them change their note, and cry, What shall I do? whither shall I go
when I die? But as I said before, the Devil, as he labors to get poor souls to
follow their sins, so he labors also to keep the thoughts of eternal damnation
out of their minds; and indeed* these two things are so nearly linked
together, that the Devil cannot well get the Soul to go on in sin with delight,
unless he can keep the Thoughts of that terrible after-clap out of their minds.

But let them know, that it shall not always be thus with them; for if when
they depart, they drop down into Eternal Destruction, they shall have such a
sense of their sins, and the punishment due to the same, that it shall make
them to cry. And he cried. O what an alteration will there be among the
ungodly, when they go out of this World! it may be a Fortnight or a Month
before their departure, they were light, stour, surly, drinking themselves
drunk, slighting God's People, mocking at goodness, and delighting in sin;
following the World, seeking after Riches, faring deliciously, keeping company
with the bravest; but now they are dropped down into Hell, they cry. A little
while ago they were painting their Faces, feeding their Lusts, following their
Whores, robbing their Neighbors, telling of Lies, following of Plays, and
Sports, to pass away the time; but now they are in Hell, they do cry. It may be
last Year they heard some good Sermons, was invited to receive Heaven, was told
their sins should be pardoned, if they closed in with Jesus; but refusing his
profers, and slighting the Grace that was once tendered, they are now in Hell,
and do cry.

Before they had so much time (they thought) that they could not tell how to
spend it, unless it were in Hunting, and Whoring, in dancing and playing, and
spending whole hours; yea, days, nay weeks, in the Lusts of the Flesh, but when
they depart into another place, and begin to lift up their Eyes in Hell, and
consider their miserable, and irrecoverable condition, they will cry.

O what a condition will thou fall into, when thou do depart this World, if
thou depart unconverted, and not born again, thou had better have been
smothered the first hour thou wast born; thou had better have been plucked
one Limb from another; thou had better have been made a Dog, a To^d, a
Serpent; nay, any other Creature in the visible World, than to die unconverted;
and this thou will find to be true, when in Hell thou do life up thine Eyes,
and do cry.

Here then before we go any further, you may see, that it is not without good
ground, that these words are here spoken by our Lord, That when any of the
ungodly do depart into Hell, they will cry. Cry, why so?

1. They will cry to think, that they should be cut off from the Land of the
Living, never more to have any footing therein. 2. They will cry to think, that
the Gospel of Christ should be so often proffered them, and yet they are not
profited by it. 3. They will cry to think, that now, though they would never so
willingly repent and be saved, yet they are past all Recovery. 4. They will cry
to think, that they should be so foolish as to follow their pleasures, when
others were following of Christ, Luke 13. 28. 5. They will cry to think, that
they must be separated from God, Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven, and that
for ever. 6. To think, that their crying will now do them no good. 7. To think,
that at the Day of Judgment, they must stand at the left hand of Christ, among
an innumerable Company of the Damned Ones. 8. They will cry to think, that
Lazarus, whom once they slighted, must be of them that must sit with Christ to
judge, or together with Christ, to pass a Sentence of Condemnation on their
Souls for ever and ever, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. 9. Cry to think, that when the
Judgment is over, and others are taken into the everlasting Kingdom of Glory,
then thou must depart back again into that Dungeon of Darkness, from whence
thou came out, (^o appear before that terrible Tribunal) where thou shall be
tormented so long as Eternity lasts, without the least intermission or ease.
How say thou, O thou wanton proud, swearing, lying, ungodly Wretch, whether
this be to be slighted, and made a mock at. And again, tell me now, if it be
not better to leave sin, and to close in with Christ Jesus, notwithstanding
that Reproach thou shall meet with for so doing, than to live a little while in
this World in pleasures, and feeding thy Lu^^s, in neglecting the welfare of
thy Soul and refusing to be justified by Jesus, and in a moment to drop down to
Hell, and to cry? O consider, I say consider bet^^es, and put not off the
Tenders of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, lest you lift up your Eyes in
Hell, and cry for anguish of Spirit.

And he cried and said, Father Abraham have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus,
etc.

These words do not o^^^^ ^old forth the lamentable Condition of the Damned,
and their lamentable howling and crying one under their anguish of spirit, but
also they do signify to us (as I said before) their too late Repentance; and
also, that they would very willingly, if they might, be set at liberty from
that everlasting ^^^ery, that by their sins they have plunged themselves into.
I say, these words do hold forth a desire that the Damned have, to be delivered
from those Torments that they now are in: O Father Abraham, says he, have
mercy upon me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in
water, and cool my Tongue, for I am tor^^^ted in this flame. These words,
Father Abraham may have some difficulty in them. It is possible, that some may
think them to be meant of Abraham, and those; or him that ctieth out here, to
be the Jews. Or it may be some may understand it to be GOD, or Jesus Christ his
Son, which I rather suppose it may be, that is here cried out unto, because you
find the same Cry to him, as it were uttered by the ungodly in other places of
the Scripture; as in Luke 13. verse. 25, 26. Then shall they say, Lord, Lord, we
have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets. Nay
more, In thy Name have we cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful
Works. This was just at their rejection. And again in Matthew. 25. 11. They cry
again to him, even to Jesus, Lord, Lord, open to us. And he there again gives
them a Repulse, as also in this Parable. But however, or whosoever Abraham is,
yet these Truths may be observed from the words.

1. That the Damned, when in an irrecoverable estate, will seek for, or desire
deliverance from the Wrath that they are, and shall be in for Eternity, Surely,
in the Flood of great Waters, they shall not come nigh unto him.

2. That they will pray (if I may so call it) earnestly for deliverance from
their miserable estate. These two Things are clear from the words. For mark, He
not only said, Father Abraham, have mercy upon me. But he cried, and said,
Father Abraham have mercy on me. From whence, take a third observation, and
that is, There is a time coming, wherein though men shall both cry and pray,
yet they are like to have no mercy at the Hands of God; for so was this man
served, as I shall further show by and by when I come to it.

Some People are so deluded by the Devil, as to think that God is so merciful,
as to own or regard any thing for prayer; They think any thing will go for
current and good satisfaction, while they are here in this World, through
ignorance of the true nature of the Mercy of GOD, and the knowledge in what way
God is satisfied for Sinners. Now I say, through ignorance they think, that if
they do but mutter over some form of prayers, though they know not what they
say, not what they request, yet God is satisfied, yea, very well satisfied with
their doings; when alas! there is nothing less. O Friends, I beseech you to
look about you, and seek in good earnest for the Spirit of Christ, so to help
you now, ^o strive and pray, and to enable you to lay hold of Christ, that your
Souls may be saved, lest the time come, that though you cry and p^ay, and wish
also that you ^ad ^^^d hold on the Lord Jesus, yet you must, and shall be
damned.

Then (...)* th^^ though God be willing to save Sinners at some time, yet this
time does not always l^st. No, he that can find in his (...) to turn hi^ back
upon Jesus Christ now, (...) (...) the (...) (...) upon him hereafter, when he
may cry and pray for mercy, and yet go without it. God will have a time to meet
with them, that now do not seek after him: They shall have a time, yea, time
enough hereafter to repent their Folly, and to befool themselves, for turning
their backs upon the Lord Jesus Christ. I will laugh at their Calamities, says
he, and mock when their fear comes, Prove. 1. 26, 27.

Again, this should admonish us to take time while it is proffered, le^t we
repent us of our unbelief and Rebellion, when we are deprived of it. Ah
Friends! Time is precious, an hours time to hear a Sermon is precious: I have
sometimes thought thus with my self, Set the case the Lord should send two or
three of his Servants, the Ministers of the Gospel, to Hell among the Damned
with this Commission; Go ye to Hell, and preach my Grace to those that are
there: Let your Sermon be an hour long, and hold forth the Merits of my Sons
Birth, Righteousness Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession with all
my Love in him, and proffer it to them; telling them* that now once more, and
but once, do I proffer the means of Reconciliation to them. They who are now
roaring, being past hope, would then leap at the least proffer of Mercy: Oh
they that could spend whole Days, Weeks, nay Years, in rejecting the Son of
God, would now be glad of one Tender of that Mercy. Father, says he, have
mercy on me.

Again, from these words you may observe, that Mercy will be welcome, when
Souls are under Judgment: Now his Soul is in the fire, now he is under the
Wrath of God, now he is in Hell, there to be tormented; now he is with the
Devils and damned Spirits, now he feels the Vengeance of God: Now, oh now, have
mercy on me. Here you may see, that Mercy is prized by them that are in Hell,
they would be glad if they could have it. Father have Mercy on me; For my poor
Souls sake send me a little Mercy.

And send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
Tongue.

These words do not only hold forth, that the ungodly have a desire of Mercy,
but what those Mercies are, that these poor Creatures would be glad of.

As first, To have the company of a Lazarus, granted to them, Father Abraham
have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus. Now Lazarus was he that was beloved of
God, and also he that was hated of them. Therefore,

2. Observe, That those Saints that the World in their Lifetime could not
in^ure, now they are departed, they would be glad to have society with them. O
now send Lazarus, though the time was when I cared not for him, yet now let me
have some Society with him.

Though the world disregard the society of Gods children now, yet there is a
time coming in which they would be glad to have the least company with them.
Nay, do but observe, those of the Saints that are now most rejected by them,
even from them shall they be glad of comfort, if it might be. Send Lazarus; he
that I slighted more than my dogs, he that I could not endure should come into
my house, but must lie at my gate, send him: Now Lazarus shall be welcome to
me, now do I desire some comfort from him; but he shall go without it.

From whence again observe, That there is a time coming, O ye surly dogged
persecutors of the Saints, that they shall slight you as much as ever you
slighted them. You have given them many an hard word, told many a lie of them,
given them many a blow: And now in your greatest need and extremity they shall
not pity you. The Righteous shall rather rejoice when he sees the vengeance of
God upon thee, Psalm. 58. 10.

Again, Send Lazarus. From whence observe, That any of the Saints shall then be
owned by you to be Saints. Now ye look upon them to be of the Sect with
Hymeneus and Philetus, but then you shall see them to be the Lazarus's of God,
even Gods dear Children. Though now the Saints of the Lord will not be owned by
you, because they are beggarly, poor, low, contemptible among you, yet the day
is coming that you shall own them, desire their company, and wish for the least
courtesy from them.

Send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.

Thus shall the souls that abide in their sins, cry out in the bitterness of
their spirits, with wonderful anguish and torment of conscience, without
intermission* that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue. That he, namely, the man who before I scorned should eat with the dogs
of my flock, that before I slighted and had no regard of, that I shut out of
door, send him, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue.

Now these words, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, etc. do hold
forth the least friendship, or favor; As if he should have said, Now I would
be glad of the least mercy, now I would be glad of the least comfort, though it
be but one drop of cold water on the tip of his finger. One would have thought
that this had been a small request, a small courtesy, one drop of water, what
is that? Take a pail full of it, if that will do thee any good. But mark, he is
not permitted to have so much as one drop, not so much as a man may hold upon
the tip of his finger. This signifies, That they that fall short of Christ,
shall be tormented even as long as eternity lasts, and shall not have so much
as the least ease, no not so long as while a man may turn himself round, not so
much leave as to swallow his spittle, not a drop of cold water.

O that these things did take place in your hearts, how would it make you to
seek after rest for your souls before it be too late, before the Sun of the
Gospel be set upon you.

Consider, I say, the misery of the ungodly that they shall be in, and avoid
their vices by closing in with the tenders of mercy, lest you partake of the
same portion with them, and cry out in the bitterness of your souls, One drop
of cool water and cool my tongue.

For I am tormented in this flame.

Indeed the reason why the poor world do not so earnestly desire for mercy is,
partly because they do not so seriously consider the torment that they must
certainly fall into if they die out of Christ. For let me tell you, did but
poor souls indeed consider that wrath that does by right fall to their shares
because of their sins against God, they would make more haste to God through
Christ for mercy then they do. Then we should have them say, it is good closing
with Christ to day before we fall into such distress.

But why is it said, Let him dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue? Because that as the several members in the body have heir share in sin,
and committing of that, so the several members of the body, shall at that time
be punished for the same. Therefore when Christ is admonishing his disciples,
that they should not turn aside from him; and that they should rather fear and
dread the power of their God than any other power, he says, Fear him
therefore, that can cast both [body] and soul into hell, Luke 12. 4. And again,
Fear him that can destroy both soul and body in hell. Here is not one member
only, but all the body, the whole body, of which the hands, feet; eyes, ears,
and tongue are members. And I am persuaded, that though this may be judged
carnal by some now, yet it will appear to be a truth then to the greater misery
of those who shall be forced to undergo, that which God in his just Judgment
shall inflict upon them. O then they will cry, one dram of ease for my cursing,
swearing, lying, jearing tongue. Some ease for my b^agging, braving,
flattering, threatening, dissembling tongue: Now men can let their tongues run
at random* as we use to say, now they will be apt to say, Our tongues are our
own, who shall control them? Psalm. 12. 4. But then they will be in another
mind. Then O that I might have a little ease for my deceitful tongue.

Methinks sometimes to consider how some men do let their tongues run at
random, it makes me marvel. Surely, they do not think they shall be made to
give an account for their offending with their tongue. Did they but think they
shall be made to give an account to him who is ready to judge the quick and the
dead, surely they would be more wary of, and have more regard unto their tongue.

The tongue, says James, is an unruly member full of deadly poison, it sets
on fire the whole frame of nature, and is set on fire of hell, Jam. 2. The
tongue, how much mischief will it stir up (...) a very little time? How many
blows and wounds does it cause? How many times does it (as James says) curse
man? How often is the tongue made the conveyer of that hellish poison that is in
the heart, both to the dishonor of God, the hurt of its neighbors, and the
utter ruin of its own soul? And do you think the Lord will sit still (as I may
say) and let thy Tongue run as it lists, and yet never bring you to an account
for the same? No, stay; The Lord will not always keep silence, but will
reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thine eyes, O sinner. Yea, and
thy Tongue, together with the rest of thy members, shall be tormented for
sinning. And I say, I am very confident* that though this be made light of now,
yet the time is coming, when many poor souls will rue the day that ever they
did speak with a tongue: O, will one say, that I should so disregard my tongue.
O that I, when I said so and so, had before bitten off my tongue! that I had
been born without a tongue! my tongue, my tongue, a little water to cool my
tongue, for I am tormented in this flame; even that flame that my tongue,
together with the rest of my members, by sinning have brought me to. Poor Souls
now will let their tongues say any thing for a little profit, for two pence or
three pence gain. But, O what a grief will this be at that day, when they
together with their tongue must smart for that which they by their tongues have
done while they were in this world. Then you that love your souls, look to your
tongues, lest you bind your selves down so fast to hell with the sins of your
tongues, that you will never be able to get loose again to all eternity. For by
thy words thou shall be condemned, if thou have not a care of thy tongu. For I
say unto you, that for every idle word that men shall speak, he shall give an
account thereof in the day of judgment, Matthew. 1^. 36.

Verse 25. But Abraham said, Son, remember, that thou in thy lifetime had
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.
THese words are the answer to the request of the damned. The Verse before (as
I told you) is a discovery of the desires they have after they depart this
world. Here is the answer, Son, Remember, etc.

The answer signifies thus much, That instead of having any relief or ease,
they are hereby the more tormented, and that by fresh recollections, or by
bringing afresh their former ill-spent life, while in the world, into their
remembrance: Son, Remember, thou had good things in thy lifetime; As much as
if he had said, Thou art now sensible what it is to lose thy Soul, thou art now
sensible what it is to put off repentance; thou art now sensible that thou have
befooled thy self in that thou did spend that time in seeking after outward,
momentary, earthly things, which thou should have spent in seeking to make
Jesus Christ sure to thy soul; and now through thy anguish of spirit, in the
pains of hell thou would enjoy that which in former time thou did make
light of; but alas, thou art here beguiled and altogether disappointed, thy
crying will now avail thee nothing at all, This is not the acceptable time. 2
Cor. 6. 2. This is not a time to answer the desires of damned Reprobates; If
thou had cried out in good earnest while grace was offered, much might have
been, but then thou were careless, and did turn the forbearance and goodness
of God into wantonness: were thou not told, that these who would not hear the
Lord when he did call, should not be heard (if they turned away from him) when
they did call, Prove. 1. 24. to 28. But contrariwise he would lough at their
calamity, and mock when their fear did come.

Now therefore instead of expecting the least drop of mercy and favor, call
into thy mind how thou did spend those days which God did permit thee to
live; I say, remember, that in thy lifetime thou did behave thy self
rebelliously against the Lord, in that thou were careless of his Word and
Ordinances, yea, and of the welfare of thine own soul also: therefore, now I
say, instead of expecting or hoping for any relief, thou must be forced to call
to remembrance thy filthy ways, and feed upon them to thine everlasting
astonishment and confusion.

From these words therefore which say, Remember that thou in thy life time
had thy good things. There are these things to be taken notice of.

1. They that by putting off repentance, and living in their sins, lose their
souls, shall instead of having the least measure of comfort, when they come
into hell, have their ill-spent life always very fresh in their remembrance.
While they live here, they can sin and forget it, but when they depart they
shall have it before them, they shall have a remembrance, or their memory
notably enlightened, and a clearer, and a continual sight of all their wicked
practices, that they wrought and did while they were in the World. Son,
remember, says he, then you will be made to remember. 1. How you were born in
sin, and brought up in the same.

2. Remember how thou had many a time the Gospel preached to thee for taking
away of the same, by him whom the Gospel does hold forth.

3. Remember that out of love to thy sins and lusts, thou did turn thy back
on the tenders of the same Gospel of good tidings and peace.

4. Remember that the reason why thou did lose thy Soul was, because thou
did not close in with free grace, and the tenders of a loving and freehearted
Jesus Christ.

5. Remember how near thou wast to turning at such and such a time, only thou
wast willing to give way to thy lusts when they wrought, to drunkards when they
called, to pleasures when they proffered themselves, to the cares and
encumbrances of the world, which like so many thorns did choke that or those
convictions that were set on thy heart.

6. Remember how willing thou wast to satisfy thy self with an Hypocrites hope,
and with a notion of the things of God without the real power and life of the
same.

7. Remember how thou, when thou were admonished to turn, did put off turning
and repe^^ng till another time.

8. Remember how thou did dissemble at such ^ time ^^e at such a time, cheat
thy neighbor at such a time, mock, slout, scoff, taunt, hate, persecute the
people of God at such a time, in such a place, among such company.

9. Remember that while others were met together in the fear of the Lord to
seek him, thou wast met with a company of vain companions to sin against him;
while the Saints were a praying, thou were a cursing; while they were speaking
good of the name of God, thou were speaking evil of the Saints of God. O then
thou shall have a scalding hot remembrance of all thy sinful thoughts words and
actions, from the very first to the last of them that ever thou did commit in
all thy life time: Then thou will find that Scripture to be a truth, ( Deuteronomy.
28. 65, 66, 67.) The Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, and failing
of eyes, and sorrow of mind. And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and
thou shall fear day and night, and shall have none assurance of thy life. In
the morning, thou shall say, would God it were even: and at even thou shall
say, would God it were morning; for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou
shall fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see. Nay, thou will find worse things to thy woe then this Scripture does manifest. For indeed
there is no tongue able to express the horror, terror, torment, and eternal
misery, that those poor souls shall undergo, without the least mitigation or
ease and a very great part of it shall come from that quick, full, and
continual remembrance of their sins that they shall have. And therefore there
is much weight in these words, Son, remember that thou in thy life time had
thy good things.

From these words you see this is to be observed, that the ungodly shall
remember, or have in remembrance the mispending their lives, Remember that in
thy life time thou had thy good things. You may take these words good things
either simply, for the things of this world, which in themselves are called,
and may be called good things, or else with these words, namely, (the things of
this life) all the pleasures, delights, profits, and vanities, which the
ignorant people of the world do count their good things, and do very much cheer
themselves therewith. Soul, soul, eat, drink and be merry* for thou have much
goods laid up for many years, Luke 12. 20. Now I say, God, according to his
glorious Power and Wisdom, will make poor Creatures have always in their
minds a fresh and clear remembrance of their ill-spent life; he will say unto
them, Remember, remember, that in thy lifetime, it was thus and thus with
thee, and in thy lifetime thy carriage was so and so.

If Sinners might have their choice, they would not have their sins and
transgressions so much in remembrance; as is evident by their carriages here in
this Would: for they will not endure to entertain a serious thought of their
filthy life, they put far away the evil day, Amos 6. 3. Ezekiel. 12. 27. but will
labor by all means to put the thought of it out of their mind: but there they
shall be made to remember to purpose, and to think continually of their ungodly
deeds. And therefore it is said, that when our Lord Jesus comes to Judgment, it
will be to convince the ungodly world of their wickel and ungodly deeds. Mark,
To convince them, Jude 14, 15. They will not willingly take notice of them now:
But then they shall hereafter in spite of their teeth. And also between this
and then, these that die out of Christ shall be made to see, acknowledge, and
confess, do what they can, when they lift up their eyes in hell, and remember
their transgressions. God will be a swift witness against them, Mal. 3. 5. and
will say, Remember what thou did in thy lifetime, how thou did live in thy
life time. Ha Friend! If thou do not in these days of light remember the days
of darkness, Eccles. 11. 8. (the days of Death, Hell, and Judgment) thou shall
be made in the days of Darkness, Death, Hell, and at the Judgment too, to
remember the days of the Gospel, and how thou did disregard them too, to thy
own destruction, and everlasting misery. This is intimated in that 25. of
Matthew.

Remember that in thy lifetime thou had thy good things.]

The great God, instead of giving the ungodly any ease will even aggravate
their Torments, first, by slighting their perplexities, and by telling of them
what they must be thinking of: Remember, says he, O ye lost Souls, that you
had your joy in your lifetime, your peace in your lifetime, your comforts,
delights, ease, wealth health, your Heaven, your Happiness, and your Portion in
your lifetime.

O miserable state! Thou will then be in a sad condition indeed, when thou
shall see that thou have had thy good Things, thy best Things, thy pleasant
Things; for that is clearly signified by these words, Remember that thou in thy
lifetime had thy good things, or all the good things thou art like to have.
From whence take notice of another Truth (though it be a dreadful one) which is
this; There are many poor Creatures, who have all their good, sweet, and
comfortable Things in this Life, or while they are alive in this World:
Remember, says h^^ that in thy lifetime thou had thy good things, Psalm. 17.
14.

The Wickeds good Things will shortly have an end; They will last no longer
with them than this Life, or their Life-^^ne. That Scripture was not written in
vain, It is like the crackling of Thorns under a Pot, make a little blaze for a
sudden, a little heat for a while, but come and consider them by and by, and
instead of a comfortable heat, you will find nothing but a few dead Ashes; and
instead of a flaming fire, nothing but a smell of smoke.

There is a time coming, that the ungodly would be glad of a better portion,
when they shall see the vanity of this; that is, when they shall see what a
poor thing it is, for a man to have his portion in this World. It Is true, while
they are here on this side Hell, they think there is nothing to be compared
with Riches, Honors, and Pleasures in this World; which makes them cry out,
Who will show us any good, Psalm. 4. 6. that is comparable to the pleasures,
profits, and glory of this World? But then they will see there is another thing
that is better, and of more value then Ten Thousand Worlds. And seriously
Friends, will it not grieve you, trouble, perplex, and torment you, when you
shall see that you lost Heaven for a little pleasure and profits in your
Lifetime; certainly, it will grieve you and perplex you exceedingly to see
what a blessed Heaven you left for a *Dunghill World* Oh! that you did but
believe this, that you did but consider this, and say within your selves, What,
shall I be contented with my portion in this World? What, shall I lose Heaven
for this World? I say, consider it while you have Daylight, and Gospel Light,
while the Son of God does hold out Terms of Reconciliation to you, least you be
made to hear such a voice as this is, Son, remember, that in thy lifetime thou
had thy good things: Thy comforts, thy joys, thy ease, thy peace, and all the
Heaven thou art like to have: O poor Heaven! O short pleasures! what a pitiful
thing it is to be left in such a case. Soul consider, is it not miserable to
lose Heaven for 20, 30, or 40 Years sinning against God? When thy Life is done,
thy Heaven is also done; when Death comes to separate thy Soul and Body, in
that day also thou must have thy Heaven and Happiness separated from Thee, and
Thou from That. Consider these Things betimes, lest Thou have thy portion in
thy Lifetime. For if in this life only we have our portion, we are of all
people the most miserable, ^ Cor. 15. 19. Again consider, that when other men
(the Saints) are to receive their good things, then thou have had thine: When
others are to enter into joy, then thou art to leave and depart from thy joy:
When others are to go to God, thou must go to the Devil. Oh miserable! thou
had better thou had never been born, than to be an Heir of such a portion;
Therefore, I say, have a care it be not thy condition.

Remember, that thou had thy good things, and Lazarus evil things.

These words do not only hold forth the misery of the Wicked in this Life, but
also great consolation to the Saints, where he says, And Lazarus evil things;
That is, Lazarus had his Evil Things in his Lifetime, or when he was in the
World.

From whence observe,

1. That the Life of the Saints, so long as they are in this World, is attended
with many Evils or Afflictions, which may be discovered to be of diverse
Natures, as says the Scripture. Many are the troubles of the Righteous, but
the Lord delivers him out of all.

2. Take notice, that the Afflictions or Evils, that accompany the Saints, may
continue with them their Lifetime, so long as they live in this Vale of Tears;
Yea, and they may be diverse, that is, of several sorts; some outward, some
inward, and that as long as they shall continue here below, as has been the
Experience of all Saints in all Ages; and this might be proved at large, but I
only hint in these Things, although I might enlarge much upon them.

3. The Evils that do accompany the Saints will continue with them no longer
than their Lifetime: and here indeed lies the comfort of Believers, the
Lazarus's, the Saints, they must have all their bitter Cup wrung out to them in
their Lifetime: Here must be all their Trouble, here must be all their Grief.
Behold, says Christ the World shall rejoice, but you shall lament; but your
mourning shall, mark, it shall be turned into joy, Joh. 16. 2. You shall
lament, you shall be sorrowful, you shall weep in your Lifetime, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy, and your joy no man (let him be what he will,
no man) shall take away from you. Now if you think, when I say the Saints have
all their Evil Things in their Lifetime, that, I mean, they have nothing else
but Trouble in this their Lifetime, this is your mistake: For let me test you,
That though the Saints have all their Evil Things in their Lifetime, yet even
in their Lifetime they have also joy unspeakable, and full of glory, while
they look not at the things that are seen, but at the things which are not
seen. The joy that the Saints have sometimes in their hearts, by a believing
consideration of the good Things to come when this Life is ended, does fill
them fuller of joy, than all the Crosses, Troubles, Temptations, and Evils,
that accompany them in this Life, can fill them with grief, 2 Cor. 4.

But some Saint may say, My troubles are such as are ready to overcome me.
Answ. Yet be of good comfort, they shall last no longer than thy Lifetime.

But my Trouble is, I am perplexed with an heart full of corruption and sin, so
that I am much hindered in walking with God.

Answ. It Is like so, but thou shall have these Troubles no longer than thy
Lifetime. But I have a cross Husband, and that is a great grief to me.

Well, but thou shall be troubled with him no longer than thy Lifetime, and
therefore be not dismayed, be not discomforted, thou shall have no Trouble
longer than this Lifetime.

Art thou troubled with cross Children, cross Relations, cross Neighbors? They
shall trouble thee no longer than this Lifetime.

Art thou troubled with a cunning Devil, with unbelief; yea, let it be what it
will, thou shall take thy farewell of them all (if thou be a Believer) after thy
Lifetime is ended. O excellent! Then God shall wipe away all Tears from your
Eyes; There shall be no more Death, nor Sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain;
for the former Things are passed away.

But now, on the contrary, if thou be not a right and sound Believer; Then
though thou should live a Thousand Years in this World, and meet with sore
Afflictions every day; Yet these Afflictions, be they never so great and
grievous, they are nothing to that Torment that will come upon thee, both in
Soul and in Body, after this Life is ended.

I say, be what thou will, if thou be found in unbelief, or under the first
Covenant, thou art sure to smart for it at the time when thou do depart this
World? But the Thing to be lamented is, For all this is so sad a condition to
be fallen into, yet poor Souls are for the most part senseless of it; yea, so
senseless (at sometimes) as though there was no such misery to come hereafter.
Because the Lord does no immediately strike with his Sword, but does bear long
with his Creature, waiting that he might be gracious: Therefore, I say, the
Hearts of some of the Sons of Men, are wholly set upon it to do mischief,
Eccles. 8. 11. And that forbearance and goodness of God, that one would think
should lead them to Repentance; the Devil hardening of them by their continuing
in sin, and by blinding their Eyes, as to the end of God's forbearance toward
them, they are led away with a very hardened and senseless heart, even until they
drop into Eternal Destruction.

But poor hearts, they must have a time in which they must be made sensible of
their former Behaviors, when the just Judgments of the Lord shall flame about
their Ears, insomuch that they shall be made to cry out again with anguish, I
am sorely tormented in this flame.

But now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

As if he should say, Now has God recompensed both Lazarus and you, according
to what you sought after, while you were in this World: As for your part, you
did neglect the precious Mercy and goodness of God, you did turn your Back on
the Son of God, that came into the World to save sinners: You made a Mock of
preaching the Gospel; You was admonished over and over, to close in with the
loving kindness of the Lord in his Son Jesus Christ. The Lord let you live 20,
30, 40, 50, 60, Years; all which time, you, instead of spending it, to make
your Calling and Election sure, Job 21. 29, 30. did spend it in making of
Eternal Damnation sure to thy Soul. And also Lazarus, he in his Lifetime did
make it his business to accept of my Grace and Salvation in the Lord Jesus
Christ. When thou wast in the Alehouse, he frequented the Word preached; when
thou were jearing at goodness, he was sighing for the sins of the times,
Eccles. 9. 4. While thou were swearing, he was praying: In a word, while thou
were making sure of Eternal Ruin, he, by Faith in the Blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ, was making sure of Eternal Salvation. Therefore, Now he is comforted,
and thou art tormented.

Here then you may see, that as the Righteous shall not be always void of
comfort and blessedness; so neither shall the ungodly go always without their
punishment. As sure as God is in Heaven, it will be thus: They must have their
several portions. And therefore, you that are the Saints of the Lord follow on,
be not dismayed, For as much as you know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15. last Verse. Your portion is Eternal Glory. And you that are so
loath now to close in with Jesus Christ, and to leave your sins, to follow him,
Your day is coming, Psalm. 37. 13. in which you shall know, that your sweet
morsels of sin, that you do so easily take down, Job 20. 12, 13, 14. and it
scarce troubles you, will have a time so to work within you to your Eternal
Ruin, that you will be in a worse condition, than if you had ten thousand
Devils tormenting of you: Nay, you had better have been plucked Limb from Limb
a thousand times (if it could be) than to be partakers of this Torment, that
will assuredly, without Mercy, lie upon you.

Verse. 26. And besides all this, between us and you, there is a great Gulf
fixed, so that they which would go from hence to you cannot, neither can they
come to us, that would come from thence.
THese words are still part of that Answer, that the Souls in Hell shall have
for all their Sobbings, Sighing ^grievous Cries, Tears and Desires, that they
have, to be released out of those intolerable pains they feel, and are
perplexed with. And O, methinks the words at the first view, if rightly
considered, are enough to make any hard-hearted sinner in the World to fall
down dead. The verse I last spoke to was, and is a very terrible one, and
aggravates the Torments of poor sinners wonderfully. Where he says, Remember,
that thou in thy life time had thy good things, and Lazarus his Evil things,
etc. I say, these words are very terrible to those poor Souls that die out of
Christ. But these latter words do much more hold out their sorrow. They were
spoken, as to the present condition then upon the sinner: These do not only
back the former, but do yet further aggravate their misery, holding forth that
which will be more intolerable: The former Verse is enough to smite any sinner
into a swound, but this to make him fall down dead. Where he says, And besides
all this: There is still something to aggravate thy misery yet far more
abundantly; I shall briefly speak to the words, as they have relation to the
Terror spoken of in the verses before. As if he had said, Thou think thy
present state unsupportable, it makes thee sob and sigh, it makes thee to rue
the time that ever thou were born: Now thou find the want of Mercy; now thou
would leap at the least dram of it; now thou feel what it is to slight the
Tenders of the Grace of God; now it makes thee to sob, sigh, and roar
exceedingly, for the anguish that thou art in. But besides all this, I have
other Things to tell thee of, that will break thine heart indeed. Thou art now
deprived of a Being in the World; Thou art deprived of hearing the Gospel, the
Devil has been too hard for thee, and has made thee miss of Heaven: Thou art
now in Hell among an innumerable Company of Devils, and all thy sins beset thee
round; Thou art all over wrapped in flames, and can not have one drop of
water to give thee any ease; Thou cryest in vain, for nothing will be granted;
Thou see the Saints in Heaven, which is no small trouble to thy Damned Soul;
Thou see, that neither God nor Christ takes any care to ease thee, or to
speak any comfort unto thee. But besides all this, There thou art, and there
thou art like to lie, never think of any ease, never look for any comfort;
Repentance now will do thee no good, the Time is past, and can never be called
again; look what thou have now, thou must have for ever.

It Is true, I speak enough before to break thine heart asunder, But besides all
this, there lie and swim in flame for ever: these words, Besides all this, are
terrible words indeed. I will give you the scope of them in a similitude. Set
case you should take a man, and tie him to a stake, and with red hot pincers,
pinch off his flesh by little pieces for two or three years together, and at
last, when the poor man cries out for ease and help, the tormentors answer,
Nay, but besides all this, you must be handled worse.

We will serve you thus these 20. years together, and after that we will fill
your mangled body full of scalding lead, or run you through with a red hot
spit, would not this be lamentable? yet this is but a flea-biting to the
sorrows of these that go to hell; for if a man were served so, there would ere
it were long be an end of him. But he that goes to Hell shall suffer ten
thousand times worse torments then these, and yet shall never be quite dead
under them. There they shall be ever whining, pining, weeping, mourning, ever
tormented without ease, and yet never dissolved into nothing; if the biggest
devil in hell might pull thee all to pieces, and rend thee small as dust, and
dissolve thee into nothing, thou would count this a mercy. But here thou
may lie and fry, scorch and broil, and burn for ever. For ever, that is a
long while, and yet it must be so long. Depart from me, says Christ, into
everlasting fire, into the fire that burns for ever, prepared for the devils
and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Oh, thou that were loath to foul thy foot if it
were but dirty, or did but rain; thou that were loath to come out of the
Chimney corner if the wind did but blow a little cold; and were loath to go
half a mile, yea, half a furlong to hear the Word of God, if it were but a
little dark; thou that were loath to leave a few vain companions to edify thy
Soul; thou shall have fire enough, thou shall have night enough, and evil
company enough, thy belly full if thou miss of Jesus Christ; and besides all
this, thou shall have them for ever and for ever.

O thou that do spend whole nights in carding and dicing, in rio^ing and
wantonness, thou that countest it a brave thing to swear as fast as the
bravest, to spend with the greatest spend-thrift in the Country: thou that
love to sin in a corner when no body sees thee! O thou that for by-ends do
carry on an hypocrites profession, because thou would be counted some body
among the children of God, but art an enemy to the things of Christ in thine
heart; thou that do satisfy thy self, either with sins, or a bare profession
of godliness; thy soul will fall into extreme torment, and anguish, so soon as
ever thou do depart this world, and there thou shall be weeping and gnawing
thy teeth. Matthew. 8. 11, 12. And besides all this, thou art like never to have
any ease or remedy, never look for any deliverance, thou shall dye in thy sins,
and be tormented as many years as there are stars in the firmament, or sands on
the seashore; and besides all this, thou must abide it for ever.

And besides all this, Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that
they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they come to us
that would come from thence. There is a great gulf fixed.] You will say, what
is that? Answ. It is a nice question, therefore, first seek thou, rather to
enter in at the straight gate, than curiously to enquire what this gulf is.

But 2dly, If thou would needs know, if thou do fall short of heaven, thou will find it this: namely, The everlasting Decree of God; that is, There is a
Decree gone forth from God, That those who fall short of heaven in this world,
God is resolved they shall never enjoy it in the world to come. And thou will
find this gulf so deep, that thou shall never be able to wade through it as
long as eternity lasts. As Christ says, Agree with thine adversary quickly,
while thou art in the way with him, lest he hale thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison* I tell thee, thou
shall in no wise come out thence (there is the gulf) the Decree; thou shall not
depart thence, till thou have paid the uttermost farthing, or very last mite,
Luke 12. 58, 59. These words therefore, there is a great gulf fixed, I do
understand to be the everlasting Decree of God: God has Decreed, That those
who go to Heaven, shall never go from thence again into a worse place; and also
those that go to hell, and would come out, they shall not come out thence
again. And friend, this is such a gulf, so fixed by him that cannot lie, that
thou will find it so which way soever thou go, whether it be to Heaven or
Hell. Here therefore thou see how secure God will make those who dye in the
Faith; God will keep them in Heaven, but those that dye in their sins, God will
throw them to Hell, and keep them there; so that they that would go from Heaven
to Hell, cannot, neither can they come from Hell, that would go to Heaven.
Mark, he does not say, they would not; for oh how fain would these who have
lost their souls for a lust, for two pence, for a jug of Ale, for a Strumpet,
for this World; come out of that hot scolding fiery Furnace of Gods eternal
vengeance, if they might; but here is their misery, they that would come from
you to us, that is, from Hell to Heaven, cannot. They must not, they shall not,
they cannot, God has Decreed it, and is resolved the contrary, here therefore
lies the misery not so much that they are in Hell, but there they must lie for
ever and ever. Therefore if thy heart would at any time tempt thee to fin
against God, cry out, no, for then I must go to Hell, and lie there for ever.
If the Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, and Hypocrites did but take this Doctrine
soundly down, it would make them tremble when they think of sinning. But poor
Souls, Now they will make a mock at sin, Prove. 14. 9. and play with it as a
child does play with a rattle; but the time is coming, that these rattles that
now they play with, will make such a noise in their ears and Consciences, that
they shall find, that if all the Devils in Hell were yelling at their heels,
the noise would not be comparable to i^. Numb. 32. 23. Friend, Thy sins, as so
many Bloodhounds, will first hunt thee out, and then take thee, and bind thee,
and hold thee down for ever, Prove. 5. 22. They will gripe thee and gnaw thee as
if thou had a nest of poisonous Serpents in thy bowels, Job 20. 14. and this
will not be for a time, but as I have said, for ever, for ever, for ever.

Verse 27. Then he said, I pray thee therefore father, that thou would send
him to my fathers house.
THE Verses before, I told you, were spoken partly to hold forth a desire that
the damned have to be freed of their endless misery. Now this Verse still holds
forth the Cries of those poor souls very vehement, they would very fain have
something granted to them, but it will not be; as will more clearly appear
afterward.

Then he said, I pray thee therefore Father, etc.] As if he should say, Seeing
I have brought my self into such a miserable condition, that God will not
regard me, that my exceeding loud and bitter cries will not be heard for my
self, seeing I must not be admitted to have so much as one drop of cold water,
nor the least help from the poorest Saint.

And seeing, besides all this, here my Soul must lie to all Eternity broyling
and frying; Seeing I must, whether I will or no, undergo the hand of eternal
vengeance, and the rebukes of devouring fi^e; seeing my state is such, that I
would not wish a dog in my condition, Send him to my fathers house. It is
worthy to be taken notice of, (again) who it is he desired should be sent,
namely Lazaru^. O friend, see here how the stout hearts and stomachs of poor
Creatures will be humbled, (as I said before) they will be so brought down,
that those things that they disdained and made light of in this world, they
would be glad of in the life to come: He who by this man was so slighted, as
that he thought it a dishonor that he should eat with the dogs of his slock.
What, shall I regard Lazarus? sc^ubbed, beggarly Lazarus? What, shall I so far
dishonor my fair sumptuous and gay house, with such a scabbed creep-hedg as
he? No, I scorn he should be entertained under my roof. Thus in his lifetime,
while he was in his bravery: but now he is come into another world, now he is
parted from his pleasures, now he sees his fine house, his dainty dishes, his
rich neighbors and companions and he are parted asunder, now he finds instead
of pleasures, torments; instead of joy, heaviness; instead of heaven, hell;
instead of the pleasures of (...), ^he horror and guilt of sin: O now send
Lazarus.

Lazarus it may be, might have done him some good, (...) he might have been
entertained in time past, (...) might have persuaded him at least not to have
gone on so grievously wicked, but he slights him, he will not regard him, he is
resolved to disown him, though he lose his Soul for so doing. I, but now send
Lazarus, if not to me, yet to my fathers house, and let him tell them from me,
That if they run on in sin, as I have done, they must and shall receive the
same wages that I have received.

Take notice of this, you that are despisers of the least of the Lazarus's of
our Lord Jesus Christ: it may be now you are loath to receive these little ones
of his, because they are not Gentlemen, because they cannot with Pontius Pilate
speak Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Nay, they must not, shall not speak to them,
to admonish them, and all because of this.

Though now the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ may be preached to them freely,
and for nothing; nay, they are now desired to hear and receive it. Though now
they will not own, regard, or embrace these Christian profers of the glorious
truth of Jesus, because they come out of some of the basest earthen vessels, 1
Cor. 1. 26. yet the time is coming when they will both sigh and cry, Send him
to my fathers house. I say, remember this, ye that despise the day of small
things: the time is coming, when you would be glad, if you might enjoy from
God, from Christ, or his Saints, one small drop of cold water: though now you
are unwilling to receive the glorious distilling drops of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus.

Again, see here the lamentable state they are in, that go to hell from their
Fathers, Mothers, Sisters, Brothers, etc. While they are in this World, men
delight to set their children ill examples; and also children love to follow
the wicked steps of their ungodly parents, but when they depart this life, and
drop down into hell, and find themselves in irrecoverable misery, then they
cry, Send some body to my Fathers house, to my Brothers house. Tell them my
state is miserable, tell them I am undone for ever; and tell them also, that if
they will be walking in these ungodly steps wherein I left them, they will
assuredly fall into this place of torments.

I pray thee send him to my Fathers House.] Ah friends and neighbors, it is
like you little think of this, that some of your friends and relations are
crying out in hell, Lord send some body to my Fathers House, to preach the
Gospel to them, lest they also come into these torments.

Here, men while they live, can willingly walk together in the way of sin, and
when they are parted by death, they that are living, seldom or never consider
of the sad condition, that they that are dead are descended into.

But ye ungodly fathers, how are your ungodly children, roaring now in hell?
and you ungodly children, how are your ungodly parents that lived and died
ungodly, now in the pains of hell also; and one drunkard is singing on the
Alebench, and another roaring under the wrath of God, saying, O that I was with
him, how would I rebuke him, and persuade him by all means, to leave off these
evil courses. O that they did but consider what I now suffer for pride,
covetousness, drunkenness, lying, swearing, stealing, wh^^^ng, and the like.
Oh! did they but feel the tho^^^ndth part thereof, it would make them look
about them, and not buy sin at so dear a rate as I have done; even with the
loss of my precious soul.

Send him to my Fathers house.] Not to my Father, but to my Fathers House. It
may be, there is ungodly children, there is ungodly servants, wallowing in their
ungodliness, send him therefore to my Fathers house. It is like, they are still
the same that I left them; I left them wicked, and they are wicked still, I
left them slighters of the Gospel, Saints, and ways of God, and they do it
still; send him to my Fathers house, it is like there is but a little between
them and the place where I am; send him to day, before tomorrow, lest they come
into the same place of torment. I pray thee that thou would send him.] I beg
it on my bended knee, with crying and with tears, in the Agony of my soul. It
may be, they will not consider, if thou do not send him; I left them so^tish
enough, hardened as well as I, they have the same Devil to tempt them, the same
lusts and world to overcome them, I pray thee therefore, that thou would
send him to my fathers house; make no delay lest they lose their souls, lest
they come hither, if they do, they are like never to return again. O! little do
they think, how easily they may lose their souls, they are apt to think their
condition to be as ^ood as the best, as I once through ignorance did* But send
him, send him without delay, lest they ^^me into this place of torment. O that
thou would give him commission, do thou send him thy self; the time was,
when I, together with them slighted those that were sent of God, though we
could not deny but he spoke the word of God, and was sent of him as our
consciences told us; yet we preferred the calls of men, before the calls of
God; for though they had the one, yet because they had not the other in that
Antichristian way which we thought meet, we could not, would not, either hear
him our selves, nor yet give consent that others should. But now a call from
God is worth all. Do ( thou) therefore send him to my Fathers house.

The time was, when we did not like it, except it might be preached in the
Synagogue, we though it a low thing to preach and pray together in houses: we
were too high spirited, too superstitious, the Gospel would not down with us,
unless we had it in such a place, by such a man; no, nor then neither
effectually: But now, Oh! that I was to live in the world again; and might have
that privilege, to have some acquaintance with blessed Lazarus, some
familiarity with that holy man; what attendance would I give unto his wholesome
words? how would I affect his Doctrine, and close in with it? how would I
square my life thereby? now (therefore) it is better to hear the Gospel under
an hedge, then to sit roaring in a Tavern: it is better to welcome Gods begging
Lazarus's, then the wicked companions of this world. It is better to receive a
Saint in the name of a Saint, a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, Luke 10.
16. then to do as I have done. Oh! it is better to receive a child of God, that
can by experience deliver the things of God, his free love, his tender grace,
his rich forbearance; and also the misery of man, if without it, then to be
daubed up with untempered mortar. Ezekiel. 13. Oh! I may curse the day that ever I
gave way to the flatteries, and fawning of a company of carnal Clergymen, but
this my repentance is too late; I should have looked about me sooner, if I
would have been saved from this woeful place. Therefore send him, not only to
the Town I lived in, and unto some of my acquaintance, but to my Fathers house.

In my life time, I did not care to hear that word that cut me most, and showed
me mine estate aright.

I was vexed to hear my sins mentioned, and laid to my charge; I loved him best
that deceived me most, that said, peace, peace, when there was no such thing.
Jer. 5. 30, 31. But now, Oh that I had been soundly told of it! Oh that it had
pierced both mine ears and heart, and had stuck so fast, that nothing could
have cured me, saving the blood of Christ! It is better to be dealt plainly
with, then that we should be deceived: they had better see their lost condition
in the World, then stay while they be damned, as I have done: therefore send
Lazarus, send him to my Fathers house. Let him go and say, I saw your son, your
brother, in hell weeping and wailing, and gnashing his teeth: Let him beat them
down in it, and te^l them plainly, it is so, and that they shall see to their
everlasting misery, if they have not a special care, Send him to my Fathers
house.

Verse 28. For I have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest they
also come into this place of torment.
THese words are [if I may so say] a reason given by those in hell, why they
are so restless, and do cry so loud, it is that their companions might be
delivered from those intolerable torments, which they must and shall undergo,
if they fall short of everlasting life by Jesus Christ. Send him to my Fathers
house, for I have five brethren, etc. Though while they lived among them in the
world, they were not so sensible of their ruin, yet now they are passed out of
the world, and do partake of that which before they were warned of, they can I
say, then cry out, now I find that to be true indeed, which was once and again
told, and declared to me, that it would certainly come to pass.

For I have five brethren] Here you may see, that there may be, and are, whole
households in a damnable state and condition, as our Lord Jesus does by this
signify. Send him to my Fathers house, for they are all in one state, I left
all my brethren in a pitiful case. People while they live here, cannot endure
to hear that they should be all in a miserable condition; but when they are
under the wrath of God, they see it, they know it, and are very sure of it; for
they themselves, when they were in the world, lived as they do, but they fell
short of Heaven, and therefore if they go on, so shall they. Oh therefore send
him quickly to my Fathers house, for all the house is in an undone condition,
and must be damned if they continue so.

The thing observable is this, namely, that those that are in hell, do not
desire that their companions should come thither; nay, rather says he, send
him to my Fathers house, and let him testify to them that are therein, lest
they also come, etc

Quest. But some may say, what should be the reason, that the damned should
desire not to have their companions come into the same condition that they are
fallen into, but rather, that they might be kept from it, and escape that
dreadful state.

Answ. I do believe there is scarce so much love in any of the damned in hell,
as really to desire the salvation of any. But in that there is any desire in
them that are damned, that their friends and relations should not come into
that place of torment* It appears to me, to be rather for their own ease, then
for their neighbors good; for let me tell you, this I do believe, that it will
aggravate the grief and horror of them, to see their ungodly neighbors in the
like destruction with them: For where the ungodlie do live, and die, and
descend into the pit together, the one is rather a vexation to the other, than
any thing else. And it must needs be so, because there are no ungodlie people,
that do live ungodlie together; but they do learn ill examples one of another,
as thus. If there live one in the Town that is very expert and cunning for the
World, why now the rest that are of the same mind with him, they will labor to
imitate and follow his steps: this is commonly seen.

Again, If there be one given to drunkenness, others of the Town through his
means, ^un the more into that sin with him, and do accustom themselves the more
unto it, because of his enticing them, and also by setting such an ill example
before them. And so if there be any addicted to pride, and must needs be in all
the newest fashions, how do their example provoke others to love and follow the
same vanity; spending that upon their lusts, which should relieve their own
and others wants. Also if there be any given to jesting, scoffing, lying,
whoring, backbiting, junketting, wantonness, or any other sin; they that are
most expert in these things, do oft-times entangle others, that peradventure
would not have been so vile as now they are, had they not had such an example,
and hence they are called corruptors. Isa. 1. 4.

Now these will by their doings, exceedingly aggravate the condemnation of one
another. He that did set his Neighbor an ill example, and thereby caused him
to walk in sin: He will be found one cause of his friends destruction,
insomuch, that he will have to answer for his own sins, and for a great part of
his Neighbors too, which will still add to his destruction: as that Scripture
in Ezekiel, shows, where speaking of the watchman, that should give the
people warning, if he did not, though the man did die in his sins, yet his
blood should be required at the Watchmans hand, Ezekiel 33.

So here let me tell thee, that if thou should be such an one, as by thy
conversation and practices, shall be a trap and a stumbling block, to cause thy
neighbor to fall into eternal ruin, though he be damned for his own sin; yet
God may, nay, he will charge thee, as being guilty of his blood, in that thou
did not content thy self to keep from Heaven thy self, but did also by thy
filthy conversation, keep away others, and cause them to fall with thee. O
therefore, will not this aggravate thy torment? Yea, if thou should die, and
go to Hell before thy neighbor, or companions, besides the guilt of thine own
sins, thou would be so ^oaden with the fear of the damnation of others to be
laid to thy charge, that thou would cry cut; O send one from the dead, to
this companion, and that companion, with whom I had society in my lifetime,
for I see my cursed carriage will be one cause of his condemnation, if he fall
short of glory.

I left him living in foul and heinous offenses: But I was one of the first
instruments to bring him to them. Oh, I shall be guilty both of mine own, and
his damnation too! O that he might be kept out hence, lest my torment be
aggravated by his coming ^ither.

For where ungodly people do dwell together, they being a snare and stumbling
Block one to another by their practices, they must needs be a Torment one to
another, and an aggravation of each others damnation. O cursed be thy Face,
says one, that ever I set mine Eyes on thee: It was long of thee; I may thank
thee: It was thee that did entice me and ensnare me: It was your filthy
conversation that was as a stumbling block to me: It was your Covetousness, it
was your Pride, your haunting the Alehouse, your Gaming and Whoring: It was
long of you, that I fell short of life; if you had set me a good Example, as
you did set me an ill one, it may be I might have done better then now I do:
But I learned of you, I followed your steps, I took counsel of you. O that I
had never seen thy face! O that thou had never bin born, to do my Soul this
wrong as you have done: O says the other, And I may as much blame you; for do
not you remember how at such a time, and at such a time, you drew me out, and
drew me away, and asked me if I would go with you, when I was going about other
business, about my Calling, but you called me away, you sent for me, you are as
much in the fault as I; though I were covetous you were proud; and if you
learned Covetousness of me, I learned Pride and Drunkenness of you: Though I
learned you to cheat, you learned me to where to lie, to scoff at goodness.
Though I base Wretch did stumble you in some things, yet you did as much
stumble me in others. I can blame you, as you blame me* and if I have to answer
for some of your most (...) (...), you have to answer for some of mine. I would
you had not come hither, the very looks of you does wou^d my Soul, by bringing
my sins afresh into my mind, the time when, the manner how, the place where,
the persons with whom: It was with you, you! grief to my Soul! since I could
not shun thy company there, Oh! that I had been without thy company here.

I say therefore, for these that have sinned together, to go to Hell together,
it will very much perplex and torment them both. Therefore I judge this is one
Reason, why they that are in Hell do desire, that their Friends, or Companions,
do not come thither into the same place of Torment that they are in. And
therefore, where Christ says, that these Damned Souls cry out, Send to our
Companions, that they may be warned and commanded to look to themselves. O send
to my five Brethren: It is because they would not have their own Torments
heigh^ned by their Company; and a sense, yea, a continual sense of their sins,
which they did cause them to commit, when they were in the World with them. For
I do believe, that the very looks of those that have been beguiled by their
Fellows, I say, their very looks will be a Torment to them: For thereby will
the Remembrance of their own sins be kept (if possible) the fresher on their
Consciences, which they committed with them; and also they will wonderfully
have the guilt of the others sins upon them, in that they were partly the cause
of his committing them, being Instruments in the Hands of the Devil to draw
them into. And therefore, lest this come to pass, I pray thee send him to my
Fathers house. For if they might not come hither, peradventure my Torment might
have some mitigation; that is, If they might be saved, then their sins will be
pardoned, and not so heavily charged on my Soul. But if they do fall into the
same place where I am, the sins that I have caused them to commit will lie so
heavy, not only on their Souls, but also on mine, that they will sink me into
Eternal Misery, deeper and deeper. O therefore send him to my Fathers house, to
my five Brethren, and let him testify to them, lest they come into this place
of torment.

These words being thus understood: What a condition does it show them to be in
then, that now so much delight in being the very Ringleaders of their
Companions, into sins of all sorts whatsoever.

While men live here, if they can be counted the cunningest in Cheating, the
boldest for Lying, the archest for Whoring, the subtillest for Covering, and
getting the World: If they can but cunningly defraud undermine, cross, and
anger their Neighbors; y^a, and hinder them from the means of Grace, the
Gospel of Christ; They glory in it, take a pride in it, and think themselves
pretty well at ease, and their Minds are somewhat quiet, being beguiled with
sin.

But Friend, when thou have lost this life, and do begin to lift up thine
Eyes in Hell, and see what thy sins have brought thee to; and not only so,
but that thou by thy filthy sins did cause others, (Devil-like) to fall
into the same condemnation with thee: And that one of the Reasons of their
Damnation was this, that thou did lead them to the Commission of those wicked
practices of this World, and the Lusts thereof. Then, Oh! that some body would
stop them from coming, lest they also come into this place of Torment, and be
damned as I am: How will it torment me? Balaam could not be contented to be
damned himself, but also he must by his wickedness cause others to stumble and
fall. The Scribes and Pharisees could not be content to keep out of Heaven
themselves, but they must labor to keep out others too. Therefore, theirs is
the greater Damnation.

The Deceived cannot be content to be deceived himself, but he must labor to
deceive others also. The Drunkard cannot be content to go to Hell for his own
sins, but he must labor to cause others to fall into the same Furnace with
him. But look to your selves, for here will be Damnation upon Damnation, damned
for thy own sins, and damned for thy being a partaker with others in their
sins; and damned for being guilty of the damnation of others. O how will the
Drunkard cry, for leading their Neighbors into drunkenness? How will the
covetous person howl for setting his Neighbor, his Friend, his Brother; his
Children and Relations, so wicked an Example; by which he has not only
wronged his own soul, but also the souls of others. The Liar, by lying, learned
others to lie; The Swearer learned others to swear; The Whore-Monger learned
others to whore.

Now all these, with others of the like sort, will be guilty, not only of
their own damnation, but also of the damnation of others. I tell you, that some
men have so much been the Authors of the damnation of others, that I am ready
to think, that the damnation of them will trouble them, as much as their own
damnation. Some Men (it is to be feared) at the Day of Judgment, will be found
to be the Author of destroying whole Nations. How many Souls do you think
Balaam, with his deceit, will have to answer for? How many, Mahomet? How many,
the Pharisees, That hired the Soldiers to say the Disciples stole away Jesus?
Mat. 28. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And by that means stumbled their Brethren to this
day; and was one means of hindering them from believing the Things of God and
Jesus Christ; and so the cause of the damnation of their Brethren to this very
day.

How many poor Souls has Bonner to answer for think you? and several filthy
blind Priests? How many Souls have they been the means of destroying, by their
Ignorance, and corrupt Doctrine? Preaching, that was no better to their Souls,
than Rats-bane to the Body, for filthy Lucres sake. They shall see, that they,
many of them, it is to be feared, will have whole Towns to answer for; whole
Cities to answer for. Ah Friend, I tell thee, thou that have taken in hand to
preach to the People, it may be thou have taken in hand thou can not tell
what: Will it not grieve thee, to see thy whole Parish come bellowing after
thee to Hell, crying out, This we may thank thee for, this is long of thee,
thou did^^ not teach us the Truth; Thou did l^^d us away with Fables, thou
wast afraid to tell us of our sin* lest we should not put Meat fast enough in
thy Mouth. O cu^sed wretch, that ever thou should beguile us thus! deceive
us thus! flatter us thus! We would have gone out to hear the Word abroad, but
that thou did reprove us; and also tell us, That that which we see now is the
way of God* was Heresy, and a deceivable Doctrine* and wast no^ contented
(blind Guide as thou were) to f^ll into the Ditch thy self, but have also led
us thither with thee.

I say, look to thy self, lest thou cry out when it is too late: Send Lazarus
to my people, my friends, my Children, my Congregation to whom I Preached, and
beguiled through my folly. Send him to the Town in which I did Preach last,
lest I be the cause of their damnation. Send him to my friends from whence I
came, lest I be made to answer for their Soul and mine own too, Ezekiel. 33. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.

O send him therefore, and let him tell them, and testify unto them, lest they
also come into this place of torment. Consider this ye that live in the world,
while you are in the land of the living, lest you fall into this condition. Set
case thou should by thy carriage destroy but a soul, but one poor soul, by
one of thy carriages, or actions, by thy sinful works; consider it now, I say,
lest thou be forced to cry, I pray thee therefore that thou would send him
to my fathers house, for I have five brethren, that he may testify unto them,
lest they also come into this place of torment.

If so, then I shall not only say to the blind guides, look you to your selves,
and shut out others: no, but this does reach in all those that do not only keep
souls from heaven by preaching, and the like, but speaks forth the doom of
those that shall any ways be instrument^^ to hinder others for closing in with
Jesus Christ. O what red lines will those be against all these rich ungodly
Landlords, that so keep under their poor Tenants, that they dare not go out to
hear the word, for fear their Rent should be raised, or they turned out of
their houses. What say thou, Landlord, will it not cut thy soul, when thou
shall see that thou could not be content to miss of heaven thy self, but
thou must labor to hinder others also? Will it not give thee an eternal wound
in thy heart, both at death and judgment, to be accused of the ruin of thy
neighbors soul, thy servants soul, thy wives soul, together with the ruin of
thy own. Think on this you drunken, proud, rich, and scornful Landlords, think
on this you mad-brain'd blasphemous Husbands, that are against the godly and
chaste conversation of your Wives; also you that hold your Servants so hard to
it, that you will not spare them time to hear the word, unless it be where, and
when your lusts will let you. If you love your own souls, your Tenants souls,
your Wives souls, your Servants souls, your Childrens souls: if you would not
cry, if you would not howl, if you would not bear the burden of the ruin of
others for ever; then I beseech you to consider this doleful story, and labor
to avoid the soul-killing torment that this poor wretch groaneth under, when he
says, I pray thee therefore that thou would send him to my fathers house.

For I have five brethren, that he may testify. Mark, that he may testify unto
them, lest they also come into this place of torment.

These words have still something more in them then I have yet observed from
them; there are one or two things more that I shall briefly touch upon, and
therefore, Mark, he says, That he may testify unto them, etc. Mark I pray you,
and take notice of the word, Testify. He does not say, and let him go unto
them, or speak with, or tell them such and such things. No, but let him
testify, or affirm it constantly, in case any should oppose it. Let him testify
to them. It is the same word the Scripture uses to set forth the vehemence of
Christ his telling of his Disciples of him that should betray him. And he
testified, saying, One of you shall betray me. And he testified, that is, he
spoke it so, as to dash, or overcome any that should have said, It shall not
be. It is a word that signifies, That in case any should oppose the things
spoken of, yet that the party speaking should still continue constant in his
saying. And he commanded them to preach, and to testify, that it is he which
was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To testify, Mark, that
is, to be constant, irresistible, undaunted, in case it should be opposed and
objected against. So here, let him testify to them, lest they come into this
place of torment.

From whence observe, That it is not an easy matter to persuade them who are in
their sins alive in this world, that they must and shall be damned if they turn
not, and be converted to God. Let him testify to them, let him speak
confidently, though they frown upon him, or dislike his way of speaking. And
how is this truth verified and cleared by the carriages of almost all men now
in the World, toward them that do Preach the Gospel; and show their own
miserable state plainly to them if they close not with it. If a man do but
indeed labor to convince sinners of their sins, and lost condition by nature,
though they ^ust be damned if they live and dye in that condition; Oh how angry
are they at it. Look how he judges, say they; hark how he condemns us; he tells
us we must be damned if we live and dye in this state; we are offended at him,
we cannot abide to hear him, or any such as he; we will believe none of them
all, but go on in the way we are a going; forbear, why should thou be
smitten, said the ungodly* King to the Prophet, when he told him of his sins, 2 Chronicles. 25. 15, 16.

I say, tell the drunkard he must be damned if he leaves not his drunkenness,
the swearer, liar, cheater, thief, covet^us, railers, or any ungodly persons,
they must and shall lie in Hell for it, if they dye in this condition; they
will not believe you, nor credit you.

Again, tell others that there are many in Hell, that have lived and dyed in
their conditions, and so are they like to be if they convert not to Jesus
Christ, and be found in him; or that there are others that are more civil and
sober men, who, (although we know that their civili^y will not save them) if we
do but tell them plainly of the emptiness, and unprofitableness of that, as to
the saving of their souls, and that God will not accept them, nor love them,
notwithstanding these things, and that if they intend to be saved, they must be
better provided than with such a righteousness as this; they will either fling
away, and come to hear no more, or else if they do come, they will bring such
prejudice with them in their hearts, That the Word Preached shall not profit
them, it being mixed, not with Faith, but with prejudice in them that hear it,
Heb. 4. 1, 2. Nay, they will some of them be so full of anger, that they will
break out and call, even those that speak the truth, Heretics; yea, and kill
them, Luke 4. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. And why so? Because they tell them, That if
they live in their sins, that will damn them, yet if they turn and live a
righteous life, according to the holy and just, and good Law of God, that will
not save them. Yea, because we tell them plainly, that unless they leave their
sins and righteousness too, and close in with a naked Jesus Christ, his blood
and merits, and what he has done, and is now doing for sinners, they cannot be
saved; and unless they do eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood,
they have no life abiding in them: they gravel presently, and are offended at
it (as the Jews were with Christ for speaking of the same thing to them, Joh.
6. 53, 60.) and fling away themselves, their souls and all, by quarrelling
against the doctrine of the Son of God, as indeed they do, though they will not
believe they do; and therefore he that is a Preacher of the Wo^^, had need, not
only tell them, but testify to them, again, and again, that their sins, if they
continue in them, will damn them, and damn them again. And tell them again,
their living honestly according to the Law, their paying every one their own,
their living quietly with their neighbors, their giving to the poor, their
notion of the Gospel, and saying, they do believe in Christ, will do them no
good at the general day of Judgment. Ha friends! how many of you are there at
this very day, that have been told once and again of your lost undone
condition, because you want the right, real, and saving work of God upon your
souls? I say, has not this been told you, yea, testified unto you from time to
time, that your state is miserable, that yet you are never the better, but do
still stand where you did; some in an open ungodly life, and some drowned in a
self-conceited holiness of Christianity? Therefore for Gods sake, if you love
your souls, consider, and beg of God for Jesus Christ's sake, that he would work
such a work of Grace in your hearts, and give you such a Faith in his Son Jesus
Christ, that you may not only have rest here, as you think, not only think your
state safe while you live here; but that you may be safe indeed, not only here,
but also when you are gone, lest you do cry in the anguish and perplexity of
your Souls, Send one to my companions that have been beguiled by Satan, as I
have been; and so by going on, come into this place of torment, as I have done.

Again, one thing more is to be observed from these words, Let him testify to
them, lest they come into this place of torment.

Mark, lest they come in, as if he had said, or else they will come into this
place of torment, as sure as I am here. From whence observe, That though some
Souls for sin do fall into the bottomless pit of Hell before their fellows,
because they depart this World before them; yet the other abiding in the same
course, are as sure to go to the same place as if they were there already. How
so? Because they are all condemned together, they have all fallen under the
same Law* and have all offended the same Justice; and must for certain, if they
dye in that condition, drink as deep, if not deeper, of the same destruction.
Mark, I pray you what the Scriptures say, He that believes not, is condemned
already, John 3. 18.

He is condemned as well as they, having broken the same Law with them: if so,
then what hinders, but they will partake of the same destruction with them?
only the one has not the Law yet so executed upon them, because they are here;
the other have had the Law executed upon them, they are gone to drink that
which they have been brewing, and thou art brewing that in this life, which
thou must certainly drink. The same Law, I say, is in force against you both,
only he is executed, and thou art not. Just as if there were a company of
Prisoners at the Bar, and all condemned to dye; what, because they are not all
executed in one day, therefore shall they not be executed at all? Yes, the same
Law that executed its severity upon the parties now deceased, will for certain
be executed on them that are alive, in its appointed time. Even so it is here,
we are all condemned by nature, if we close not in with the Grace of God by
Jesus Christ, we must and shall be destroyed with the same destruction; and
therefore, send him (says he) lest, Mark, lest they come into this place of
torment.

Again, Send him to my Fathers house and let him testify to them, lest they
come into this place of torment. As if he had said, I^ may be he may prevail
with them; It may be he may win upon them, and so they may be kept from hence,
from coming into this grievous place of torment. Observe again, That there is a
possibility of obtaining mercy, if now, I say, now in this day of Grace we turn
from our sins to Jesus Christ; yea, it is more then possible. And therefore for
thy encouragement, do thou know for certain, that if thou shall in this thy day
accept of mercy upon Gods own Terms, and close with him effectually, God has
promised, yea, made many Promises, that thy Soul shall be conducted safe to
glory, and shall for certain escape all the evils that I have told thee of; I,
and many more then I can imagine. Do but search the Scriptures, and see how
full of consolation they are to a poor Soul that is minded to close in with
Jesus Christ. He that comes to me (says Christ) I will in no wise cast out.
Though he be an old sinner, I will in no wise cast him out. Mark, in no wise,
though he be a great sinner, I will in no wise cast him out, if he come to me.
Though he have slighted me never so many times, and not regarded the welfare of
his own Soul, yet let him now come to me, and notwithstanding this, I will in
no wise cast him out, nor throw away his Soul, John 6. 37. Again, says the
Apostle. Now (Mark now) is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation. Now
here is mercy good store, now Gods heart is open to sinners; now he will make
you welcome; now he will receive any body if they do but come to Christ. He
that comes to me (says Christ) I will in no wise cast out. And why? Because
now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2, 3. As if
the Apostle had said, If you will have mercy, have it now, receive it now,
close in with it now.

God has a certain day to hold out his grace to sinners; Now is the time, now
is the day. It Is true, there is a day of damnation, but this is a day of
Salvation. There is a day coming, wherein sinners must cry to the Mountains to
fall on them, to the Hills to cover them from the wrath of God; but now, now,
is the day in which he does hold out his grace. There is a day a coming, in
which you will not be admitted to have the privilege of one drop of water to
cool your tongue; if now, I say, if now you slight his grace and goodness which
he holds out to you. Ah friends, consider there is now hopes of mercy, but then
there will not; now Christ holds forth mercy unto you, but then he will not.
Mat. 7. 23. Now there are his Servants that do beseech you to accept of his
grace; but if thou lose the opportunity that is put into thine hand, thou thy
self may beseech hereafter, and no mercy be given thee. And he cried and
said, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the
tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue. And there was none given.
Therefore, let it never be said of thee, as it will be said of some; Why is
there a price put into the hand of a fool, seeing he has no heart to it:
Seeing he has no heart to make a good use of it, ( Prove. 17. 16.) consider
therefore with thy self, and say, It is better going to Heaven then Hell; it is
better to be saved than damned; it is better to be with Saints, than with
damned souls; and to go to God, is better than to go to the Devil.

Therefore, seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is
near. Isa. 55. 6. Lest in thy trouble he leave thee to thy self, and say unto
thee plainly, Where I am, thither ye cannot come. Joh. 8. 21.

O if they that are in Hell might but now again have one such invitation as
this, how would they leap for joy. I have thought sometimes, should God send
but one of his Ministers to the damned in Hell, and give him Commission to
preach the free love of God in Christ extended to them, and held out to them,
if now while it is proffered to them they will accept of his kindness; O how
welcome would they make this news, and close in with it on any terms!

Certainly they would say, we will accept of grace on any terms in the World,
and thank you too, though it cost life and limbs to boot, we will spare no
cost, nor charge, if mercy may be had. But poor souls, while they live here
they will not part from sin, with hell-bred, devilish sin: No, they will rather
lose their souls, then lose their filthy sins.

But friend, thou will change thy note before it be long, and cry, O simple
wretch that I am that I should damn my soul by sin!

It Is true, I have had the Gospel preached to me, and have been invited in: I
have been preached to, and have been warned of this; but how have I hated
instruction, and mine heart despised reproof? I have not ob^yed the voice of my
teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me. Prove. 5. 10, 11. O
therefore, I say, poor soul! I^ there hope? then lay thine hand upon thy mouth,
and kiss the dust, and close in with the Lord Jesus Christ, and make much of
his glorious mercy, and invite also thy companions to close in with the same
Lord Jesus Christ, ^est one of you do go to Hell beforehand, and expect with
grief of heart, your companions to come after: And in the mean time, with
anguish of heart do si^h and say,

O send him to my companions, and let him testify to them, lest they also come
into this place of torment!

Now then from what has been said there, might many things be spoken by way of
Use and Application: But I shall be very brief, and but touch some things, and
so wind up.

And first, I shall begin with the sad condition of those that die out of
Christ, and speak something to that.

Secondly, to the latter end of the Parable, which more evidently concerns the
Scripture, and speak somewhat to that.

1. Therefore you see, that the former part of the Parable contains a sad
declaration of the state of one living and dying out of Christ; how that they
lose Heaven for Hell, God for the Devil, light for darkness, joy for sorrow. 2.
How that they have not so much as the least comfort from God, who in the time
they live here below, neglect coming to him for mercy; not so much as one drop
of cold water. 3. That such souls will repent of their folly, when repentance
will do them no good, or when they shall be past recovery. 4. That all the
comfort such souls are like to have, they have i^ in this world. 5. That all
their groanings and sighs, will not move God to mitigate in the least, his
heavy hand of vengeance, that is upon them, for the transgressions they have
committed against him. 6. That their sad state is irrecoverable; or they must
never, (mark) never come out of that condition. 7. There, desires will not be
heard for their ungodly neighbors.
From these things then, I pray you consider the state of those that ^ie out of
Christ Jesus, yea I say, consider their miserable state; and think thus with
thy self. Well, if I neglect coming to Christ, I must go to the devil, and he
will not neglect to fetch me away into those in^olerable torments.

Think thus with thy self; What* shall I lose a long Heaven for short pleasure?
shall I buy the pleasures of this world at so dear a rate, as to lose my soul
for the obtaining of that? Shall I content my self with a Heaven, that will
last no longer than my life*time? What advantage will these be to me, when the
Lord shall separate soul and body asunder, and send one to the grave, the other
to hell, and at the Judgement-day, the final Sentence of eternal ruin must be
past upon me?

6. Consider, that the profits, pleasures, and vanities of this world, will not
last ever, but the time is coming, yea just at the doors, when they will give
thee the slip, and leave thee in the suds, and in the brambles of all that thou
have done.

And therefore to prevent this thy dismal state, think thus with thy self. *It Is
true, I do love my sins, my lusts, and pleasures; but what good will they do me
at the day of death, and of judgment? Will my sins do me good then? will they
be able to help me when I come to fetch my last breath? What good will my
profits do me? and what good will my vanities do, when death says he will have
no nay? What good will all my companions, fellow jesters, jeerers, liars,
drunkards, and all my wantons do me? will they help to ease the pains of hell?
will these help to turn the hand of God from inflicting his fierce anger upon
me? Nay, will not they rather cause God to show me no mercy, to give me no
comfort; but rather to thrust me down into the hottest place of hell, where I
may swim in fire and Brimstone.

3. Consider thus with thy self; Would I be glad to have all, every one of my
sins to come in against me to inflame the justice of God against me? would I be
glad to be bound up in them, as the three Children were bound in their clothes,
and to be as really thrown into the fiery Furnace of the wrath of Almighty God,
as they were into Nebuchadnezzars fiery Furnace.

4. Consider thus. Would I be glad to have all, and every one of the Ten
Commandments, to discharge themselves against my soul? The first saying damn
him, for he has broken me. The second saying damn him, for he has broken me,
etc.

Consider how terrible this will be, yea more terrible, then if thou should
have ten of the biggest Pieces of Ordnance in England, to be discharged against
thy body; thunder, thunder, one after another. Nay, this would not be
comparable to the reports that the law (for the breach thereof) will give
against thy soul: For those can but kill the body; but these will kill both
body and soul; and that, not for an hour, a day, a month, or a year, but they
will condemn thee for ever.

Mark, it is for ever, for ever. It is into everlasting damnation, eternal
destruction, eternal wrath and displeasure from God, eternal gnawings of
conscience, eternal continuance with devils.

O consider, it may be the thought of seeing the devil does now make thine hair
to stand right up on thy head. O but this to be damned, to be among all the
devils, and that not only for a time, as I said before, but for ever to all
eternity.

This is wonderfully miserable, ever miserable; that no tongue of man, no nor
of Angels, is able to express it.

5. Consider much with thy self, not only my sins against the law will be laid
to my charge; but also the sins I have committed in slighting the Gospel, the
glorious Gospel: these also must come with a voice against me. As thus, Nay, he
is worthy to be damned, for he rejected the Gospel, he slighted the free grace
of God tendered in the Gospel. How many times wast thou (damned wretch)
invited, entreated, beseeched to come to Christ, to accept of mercy, that thou
might have Heaven, thy sins pardoned, thy soul saved, and body and soul
glorified, and all this for nothing but the acceptance, and through faith
forsaking those imps of Satan, which by their embracements have drawn thee
downward toward the gulf of Gods eternal displeasure?

How often did thou read the promises, yea, the free promises of the common
salvation? How often did thou read the sweet counsels and admonitions of the
Gospel, to accept of the grace of God? but thou would not, thou regardest it
not, thou did slight all?

2. As I would have thee to consider the sad and woeful state of those tha^ die
out of Christ, and are past all recovery; so would I have thee consider the
many mercies and privileges thou enjoyest above some (peradventure) of thy
companions that are departed to their proper place.

As first, Consider, thou have still the thread of thy life lengthned, which
for thy sins, might seven years ago, or more, have been cut asunder, and thou
have dropped down among the flames.

2. Consider, the terms of reconciliation by faith in Christ, is still
proffered unto thee, and thou invited, yea entreated to accept of it.

3. Consider, the terms of reconciliation are but (bear with me though I say
but) only to believe in Jesus Christ, with that faith that purifies the heart,
and enables thy soul to feed on him effectually, and be saved from this sad
state.

4. Consider, the time of thy departure is at hand, and the time is uncertain,
and also that for ought thou knowe^^, the day of grace may be past to thee
before thou die, not lasting so long as thy uncertain life in this world. And
if so, then know for certain, that thou art as sure to be damned, as if thou
were in hell already, if thou convert not in the mean while.

5. Consider, it may be some of thy friends are giving all diligence to make
their Calling and Election sure, being resolved for Heaven, and thou thy self
endeavourest as fast to make sure of hell, as if resolved to have it: and
together with this, consider how it will grieve thee, that while thou were
making sure of hell, thy friends were making sure of Heaven; but more of this
by and by.

6. Consider, what a sad reflection this will have on thy soul, to see thy
friends in Heaven, and thy self in hell; thy Father in Heaven, and thou in
hell; thy Mother in Heaven, and thou in hell; thy Brother, thy Sister, thy
Children in Heaven, and thou in hell. As Christ said to the Jews of their
relations, according to the flesh, so may I say to thee concerning thy friends,
There shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
your Fathers and Mothers, Brethren and Sisters, Husbands and Wives, Children
and Kinsfolk, with your friends and neighbors, in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
thou thy self thrust out, Luke 13. 27, 28, 29.

But again, because I would not only tell thee of the damnable state of those
that die out of Christ, but also persuade thee to take hold of Life, and go to
Heaven, take notice of these following Things.

1. Consider, that whatever thou can do, as to thy acceptance with God, is
not worth the dirt of thy shoes, but is all as menstruous Rags, Isa. 64. 6. 2.
Consider, that all the Conditions of the New Covenant (as to Salvation) are and
have bin completely fulfilled by the Lord Jesus Christ, and that for sinners.
3. Consider, That the Lord calls to thee, for to receive whatsoever Christ has
done, and that on free-cost, Rev. 22. 17. 4. Consider, That thou can not
honor God, more than to close in with his proffers of Grace, Mercy, and Pardon
of sin, Romans 4.
Again, That which will add to all the rest, Thou shall have the very Mercy of
GOD, the Blood of Christ, the Preachers of the Word, together with every
Sermon; all the Promises, Invitations, Exhortations, and all the Counsels and
Threatenings of the Blessed Word of God: Thou shall have all thy Thoughts,
Words, and Actions, together with all thy Food, thy Raiment, thy sleep* thy
Goods, and also all hours, days, weeks, Months, and Years, together with
whatsoever else God has given thee; I say, thy abuse of all these shall come
up in Judgment against thy Soul. For God will reckon with thee for every thing,
whether it be good or bad, Eccles. 12. 14.

5. Nay farther, it is so unreasonable a thing for a sinner to refuse the
Gospel, that the very Devils themselves will come in against thee, as well as
Sodom that Damned Crew: May not they, I say, come in against thee, and say, O
thou simple man! O vile Wretch! that had not so much care of thy Soul, thy
precious Soul, as the Beast has of his Young, or the Dog of the very Bone that
lies before him. Was thy Soul worth so much, and did thou so little regard
it? Were the Thunderclaps of the Law so terrible, and did thou so slight
them? Besides, was the Gospel so freely, so frequently, so fully tendered to
thee, and yet have thou rejected all these Things?

Have thou valued sin at a higher rate than thy soul? than God, Christ, Angels,
Saints, and Communion with them in Eternal Blessedness and Glory? Wast thou not
told of Hellfire, those intolerable flames? Did thou never hear of the
intolerable Roarings of the Damned Ones that are therein? Did thou never
hear or read that ^oleful saying in the 16. of Luke, how the sinful man cries
out among the flames, One drop of water to cool my tongue. Thus I say may the
very Devils, being ready to go with thee into the Burning Furnace of Fire and
Brimstone, though not for sins of so high a nature as thine, trembling say, Oh
that Christ had died for Devils, as he died for Man! And, Oh that the Gospel
had bin preached to us, as it has bin to thee! How would we have labored to
have closed in with it? But woe be to us, for we might never have it proffered:
no, nor in the least, though we would have been glad of it. But you, you have
had it proffered, preached, and proclaimed unto you, Prove. 8. 4. Besides, you
have been entreated, and beseeched to accept of it, but you would not. O simple
Fools! that might have escaped Wrath, Vengeance, Hellfire, and that to all
Eternity, and had no heart at all to do it.

6. May not the Messengers of Jesus Christ also come in with a shrill and
terrible Note against thy Soul, when thou stand at the Bar of God's Justice,
saying, Nay, Thou ungodly one, how often have thou been forewarned of this day?
Did we not found an Alarm in thine Ears, by the Trumpet of God's Word day
after day? How often did thou hear us tell thee of these Things? Did we not
tell thee sin would damn thy Soul? Did we not tell thee, that without
Conversion, there was no Salvation? Did we not tell thee, that they who loved
their sins, should be damned at this dark and gloomy day, (as thou art like
to be.) Yet did we not tell thee, that God, out of his love to sinners, sent
Christ to die for them, that they might (by coming to him) be saved? Did we not
tell thee of these Things? Did we not run, ride, labor, and strive abundantly
(if it might have been) for the good of thy Soul, (though now a damned Soul?
Did we not venture our Goods, our Names, our Lives? Yea, did we not even kill
our selves, with our earnest intreatings of thee to consider of thine Estate,
and by Christ to escape this dreadful day? O sad doom! when thou shall be
forced full sore against thy will, to fall under the Truth of this Judgment,
saying, O how have I hated Instruction, and how has my heart despised Reproof?
(for indeed) I have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear
to them that instructed me, Prove 5. 11, 12, 13.

7. May not thy Father, thy Mother, thy Brother, thy Sister, thy Friend. etc.
appear with gladness against thee at the terrible day? Saying, Oh thou silly
Wretch! How rightly has God met with thee? O how righteously does his Sentence
pass upon thee? Remember, thou would not be ruled, nor persuaded in thy
Lifetime: As thou did not care for us, and our Admonitions then* so neither
do we care for thy Ruin, Terror, and Damnation now. No, but we will stand on
God's side in sentencing of thee to that portion, which the Devils must be
partakers of. The Righteous shall rejoice when he sees the Vengeance, he shall
wash his foot in the blood of the wicked, Psalm. 58. 10. O sad! it is enough to
make Mountains tremble, and the Rocks to rend in pieces, to hear this doleful
sound. Consider these Things, and if thou would be loath to be in this
condition, then have a care of living in sin now. How loath will thou be, to be
thrust away from the Gates of Heaven, and how loath will thou be to be deprived
of the Mercy of God?

How willingly will thou set foot forward toward the Lake of Fire? Never did
Malefactor so unwillingly turn off the Ladder, when the Halter was about his
Neck, as thou will turn from God to the Devil, from Heaven to Hell, when the
Sentence is passed upon thy Soul.

Oh how will thou sigh and groan! How willingly would thou hide thy self,
and run away from Justice: But alas! as it is with them that are on the Ladder
ready to be executed, so it will be with thee: They would fain run away, but
there are many Halberd-men to stay them: And so the Angels of God will beset
thee round, I say, round on every side; so that thou may indeed look, but
run thou can not: Thou may wish thy self under some great Rock or Mountain,
Rev. 6. 15, 16. but how to get under, thou know not.

Oh how unwilling will thou be, to let thy Father go to Heaven without thee,
thy Mother or Friends, etc. go to Heaven without thee? How willingly would
thou hang on them, and not let them go? O Father, cannot you help me? Mother,
cannot you do me some good? O how loath am I to burn and fry in Hell, while you
are singing in Heaven! But alas, the Father, Mother, or Friends reject them,
slights them, and turn their Backs upon them, saying, You would have none of
Heaven in your lifetime, therefore you shall have none of it now: You slighted
our Counsels then, and we slight your tears, cries, and condition now. What
say thou sinner, will not this persuade thine heart, nor make thee bethink
thy self? This is now before thou fall into that dreadful place, that fiery
Furnace. But O consider how dreadful the place it self, the Devils themselves,
the fire it self will be. And this at the end of all, here thou must lie for
ever, here thou must fry for ever, and for ever. This will be more to thee,
than any man with Tongue can express, or with Pen can write: There is none that
can, I say, by the Ten Thousand part discover the state and condition of such a
Soul.

I shall conclude this then with a few Considerations of Encouragement.

1. Consider, (for I would fain have thee come in sinner) that there is way
made by Jesus Christ for them that are under the Curse of God, to come to this
comfortable and blessed state of Lazarus, I was speaking of. See Ephesians. 2.

2. Consider, what pains Christ Jesus took for the Ransoming of thy Soul from
all the Curses, Thunderclaps, and Tempests of the Law; from all the
intolerable flames of Hell; from that Soulsinking appearance of thy person (on
the left hand) before the Judgment Seat of Christ Jesus, from everlasting
fellowship, with innumerable Companies of yelling, and Soul-amazing Devils. I
say, consider what pains the Lord Jesus Christ took, in bringing in Redemption
for sinners, from these Things.

1. In that, Though he were rich, yet he became poor, that thou, through his
poverty, might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8, 9. He laid aside his glory, Joh. 17. and
became a servant, Phil. 2. He left the company of Angels, and incountred with
the Devil, Luke 4. Mat. 4. He left Heavens ease for a time, to lie upon hard
Mountains, Joh. 8. In a word, he became poorer, than they that go with flail
and rake; yea, then the very Birds or Foxes, and all to do thee good. Besides,
consider a little of these unspeakable and intolerable slightings, and
rejections, and the manifold abuses that came from Man upon him. How he was
falsely accused, being a sweet, harmless, and undefiled Lamb. How he was
undervalued, so that a Murderer was counted less worthy of condemnation than
he. Besides, how they mocked him, spa^ on him, beat him over the head with
staves, had the hair plucked from his cheeks. I gave my Back to the Smiters,
(says he) and my Cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my Face
from shame and spitting. His Head crowned with Thorns, his Hands pierced with
Nails, and his Side with a Spear; together, with how they used him, scourging
him, and so miserably misusing him, that they had even spent him in a great
measure before they did crucify him. Insomuch, that there was another fain to
carry his Cross.

Again, not only this, but lay to heart a little what he received from GOD his
dear Father, though he were his dear and tender Son. First, in that he did
reckon him the greatest Sinner and Rebel in the World: For he laid the sins of
Thousands, and Ten Thousands, and Thousands of Thousands of Sinners to his
charge, Esaias 53. And caused him to drink the terrible Cup that was due to them
all: and not only so, but did delight in so doing; For it pleased the Lord to
bruise him. God dealt indeed with his Son, as Abraham would have dealt with
Isaac, I, and more terribly by Ten Thousand parts: For he did not only tear his
Body like a Lion, but made his Soul an Offering for Sin. And this was not done
fainedly, but really (for Justice called for it, he standing in the room of
Sinners) witness that horrible and unspeakable Agony that fell on him suddenly
in the Garden, as if all the Vials of God's unspeakable scalding Vengeance had
been cast upon him all at once, and all the Devils in Hell had been broken
loose from thence at once to destroy him, and that for ever; insomuch, that the
very pangs of Death seized upon him in the same hour. For, says he, My Soul is
exceeding sorrowful and amazed, even unto death, Mark 14. 33, 34.

Witness also that strange kind of sweat, that trickled down his most blessed
F^ce, where it is said. And he sweat, as it were, great drops or clodders of
blood trickling down to the ground. O Lord Jesus, what a Load did thou carry?
What a Burden did thou bear of the sins of the World, and the Wrath of God!
O thou did not only bleed at Nose and Mouth, with the pressure that lay upon
thee, but thou wast so pressed, so laden, that the pure blood gushed through
the flesh and skin, and so ran trickling down to the ground. And his sweat was
as it were, great drops of blood, trickling or falling down to the ground, Luke
22. 44. Can thou read this, O thou wicked sinner, and yet go in sin? Can
thou think of this, and defer Repentance one hour longer? O heart of flint!
yea, harder. O miserable Wretch! what place in Hell will be hot enough for thee
to have thy Soul put into, if thou shall persist, or go on still to add
Iniquity to Iniquity?

Besides his Soul went down to Hell, Psalm ^6. 10. Act. 2. 31. and his Body to
the bars of the Grave. And ^ad (...), D^^th, o^ the Grave been strong enough ^o
hol^ him, then he had suffe^'d the Vengeance of Eternal Fire to all Eternity.
But O blessed Jesus! how did thou discover thy Love to Man in thy thus
suffering? And O God the Father! how did thou also declare thy purity and
exactness of thy Justice, in that, though it was thine only, holy, innocent,
harmless, and undefiled Son Jesus, that did take on him our Nature, and
represen^ our persons, answering for our sins, instead of our selves: Thou
did so wonderfully pour out thy Wrath upon him, to the making of him cry out,
My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? And O Lord Jesus! what a glorious
Conquest have thou made over the Enemies of our Souls, even Wrath, Sin, Death,
Hell, and Devils, in that thou did wring thy self from under the power of
them all? And not only so, but have led them Captive, which would have led us
Captive; and also have received for us that glorious and unspeakable
Inheritance, That Eye has not seen, n^r Ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of Man to conceive. And also have given thine some discovery thereof
through thy Spirit.

And now Sinner, together with this, consider,

Fourthly, That though Jesus Christ has done all these Things for Sinners, yet
the Devils make it their whole work, and continual study, how they may keep
thee and others from enjoying of these blessed Privileges, that have been thus
obtained for Sinners by this sweet Jesus. He labors, I say,

First, To keep thee ignorant of thy state by Nature. Secondly, To harden thy
Heart against the ways of God. Thirdly, To inflame thy Heart with love to sin,
and the ways of darkness.
And fourthly, To get thee to continue herein. For that is the way, he knows,
to get thee to be a partaker with him of the flaming Hellfire, even the same
that he himself is fallen into; together with the rest of the wicked World by
reason of sin. Look to it therefore.

But now, in the next place, a word of encouragement to you that are the Saints
of the Lord.

1. Consider, what an happy state thou art in, that have gotten the Faith of
the Lord Jesus into thy Soul. (But be sure thou have it) I say, how safe, how
sure, how happy art thou. For when others go to Hell, thou must go to Heaven;
when others go to the Devil, thou must go to God; when as others go to Prison,
thou must be set at Liberty, at Ease, and at Freedom; when others must roar for
sorrow of heart, then thou shall also sing for the joy of heart.

Secondly, consider thou must have all thy well spent Life to follow thee,
instead of all thy sins: and the glorious blessings of the Gospel, instead of
the dreadful Curses and Condemnations of the Law. The blessing of the Father,
instead of a fiery Sentence from the Judge.

Thirdly, Let dissolution come when it will, it can do thee no harm; for it
will be but only a passage out of a Prison, into a Palace; out of a Sea of
Troubles, into an Haven of Rest; out of a Crowd of Enemies, to an innumerable
Company of true, loving, and faithful Friends; out of shame, Reproach, and
Contempt, into exceeding great and Eternal Glory. For Death shall not hurt thee
with his sting, nor bite thee with his Soul-murmuring Teeth, but shall be a
welcome Guest to thee, even to thy Soul, in that it is sent to free thee from
thy Troubles which thou art in whiles here, in this World, dwelling in the
Tabernacle of Clay.

Fourthly, consider, however it goes with Friends and Relations, yet it will go
well with thee, Eccl. 8. 12.

However it goes with the Wicked, yet I know, Mark, yet I know (says he) that
it shall go well with them that fear the Lord, that fear before him.

And therefore let this, in the first place, cause thee cheerfully to exercise
thy patience, under all the Calamities, Crosses, Troubles, and Afflictions,
that may come upon thee: and by patient continuance in well-doing, to commit
both thy self, and thine Affairs, and Actions, into the Hands of God, through
Jesus Christ, as to a faithful Creator, who is true in his Word, and loves to
give unto thee, whatsoever he has promised to thee.

And therefore to encourage thee, while thou art here with comfort, to hold on
for all thy Crosses in this thy Journey, be much in considering the place that
thou must go into, so soon as dissolution comes.

It must be into Heaven, to God the Judge of all, to an innumerable Company of
Angels, to the Spirits of just men made perfect, to the General Assembly, and
Church of the firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven, and to Jesus (too
the Redeemer) who is the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood of
sprinkling that speaks better Things for thee, than Abels did for Cain, Heb.
12, 22, 23, 24.

3. Consider, That when the time of the dead that they shall be raised is come,
then shall thy body be raised out of the grave, and be glorified, and be made
like to Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 21. O excellent condition.

4. When Jesus Christ shall sit on the throne of his glory, you also shall sit
with him, even when he shall sit on the throne of his glory. O will not this be
glorious, that when thousands, and thousands of thousands shall be arraigned
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, then for them to sit with him upon the
throne, together with him to pass the sentence upon the ungodly, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
3. Will it not be glorious to enjoy those things that eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to conceive.

Will it not be glorious to have this sentence, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the Foundation of the World. Will
it not be glorious to enter then with the Angels and Saints into that glorious
Kingdom? Will it not be glorious for thee to be in glory with them, while
others are in unu^terable torments? O then! how will it comfort thee to sea
thou have not lost that glory; to think that the devil has not got thy soul,
that thy soul should be saved, and that not from a little, but from an
exceeding danger; not with a little, but a great salvation. O therefore let the
Saints be joyful in glory, let them triumph over all their enemies. Let them
begin to sing heaven upon earth, triumph before they come to glory, salvation,
even when they are in the midst of their Enemies; For this honor shall all his
Saints have, Psalm. 149. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Ver. 29. Abraham said unto him, they have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them.
IN the Verses foregoing, you see there is a discovery of the lamentable state
of the poor soul that dies out of Christ, and the special favor of God. And
also how little the glorious God of Heaven does regard and take notice of their
most miserable condition.

Now in this verse, he does magnify the word which was spoken to the People by
the Prophets and Apostles, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them. As if he should say, thou ask me that I should send Lazarus back again
into the World, to Preach to them that live there, that they might escape that
doleful place that thou art in: what needs that? have they not Moses and the
Prophets? have they not had my Ministers and Servants sent unto them, and
coming as from me? I sent Enoch, and Noah, Moses, and Samuel. I sent David,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, and the rest of the Prophets,
together with Peter, Paul, John, Matthew, James, Jude, with the rest; Let them
hear them. What they have spoken by Divine inspiration, I will own, whether it
be for the damnation of those that reject, or the saving of them that receive
their Doctrine: And therefore what need have they that one should be sent unto
them in another way? They have Moses, and the Prophets, Let them hear them; let
them receive their word, close in with the Doctrine declared by them. I shall
not at this time speak any thing to that word ( Abraham) having touched upon it
already; but shall tell you what is to be understood by these words, They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. The things that I shall observe
from hence, are these, 1. That the Scriptures spoken by the Holy Men of God,
are a sufficient rule to instruct to Salvation, them that do assuredly believe
and close in with what they hold forth. They have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them. That is, if they would escape that doleful place, and be saved
indeed from the intolerable pains of Hell fire, as they desire, they have that
which is sufficient to counsel them, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
be instructed by them, Let them hear them, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. For all Scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in Righteousness; why, that the man of God may
be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work.

Do but mark the words, All Scripture is profitable: All, take it where you
will, and in what place you will; All is profitable, for what? That the man of
God, or he that is bound for Heaven, and would instruct others in their
progress thither.

It is profitable to instruct him, in case he be ignorant; to reprove him, in
case he transgress; to correct him, if he has need of it; to confirm him, if
he be wavering. It is profitable for doctrine, and all this in a very righteous
way, that the poor soul may not only be helped, but thoroughly furnished, nor
only to some, but to all good works. And when Paul would counsel Timothy, to
stick close to the things that are sound and sure, presently he puts him upon
the Scriptures, saving, Thou have from a Child known the Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.
The Scripture holds forth Gods mind and will of his love and mercy toward man,
and also the creatures carriage toward him from first to last: so if thou
would know the love of God in Christ to sinners, Then search the Scriptures,
for they are they that testify of him.

Would thou know what thou art, and what is in thy heart, then search the
Scriptures, and see what is written in them, Romans 3. from 9. 10 18. Romans 1. 19.
30, 31, 32. Jer. 17. 9. Genesis 6. 5. chap. 8. 21. Ephesians 4. 18. with many others.
The Scriptures I say, they are able to give a man perfect instruction into any
of the things of God necessary to Faith and Godliness, if he have but an honest
heart, seriously to weigh and ponder the several things contained in them. As
to instance in things more particular for the further clearing up of this; And
first, if we come to the Creation of the World.

Would thou know somewhat concerning that, then read Genesis 1, and 2.
chapters, and compare them with Psalm. 33. at the 6. Also Isaiah, 66. 2. Prove.
8. toward the end.

Would thou know whether he made them of something or nothing, read Heb. 11.
3.

Would thou know whether he put forth any labor in making them, as we do in
making things, read Psalm. 33. 9.

If thou would know whether man was made by God, corrupt or upright, read
Eccles. 7. 26. Genesis 1. 10, 18, 25, 31.

Would thou know where God did place man after he had made him, read Genesis 2.
15.

Would thou know whether that man did live there all his time or not, then
read Genesis 3. 23, 24.

If thou would know whether man be still in that state by nature, that God
did place him in, then read Eccl. 7. 26. and compare it with Romans 5. 16. and
Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. God made man upright, but he has sought out many inventions.

If thou would know whether the man were first beguiled, or the woman that
God made an help meet for him, read Genesis 3. 6. and compare it with 1 Timothy 2. 14.

Would thou know whether God looked upon Adams eating of the forbidden Tree,
to be sin, or no, read Romans 5. 12, 13, 14, 15. and compare it with Genesis 3. 17.

Would thou know whether it were the Devil who beguiled them, or whether it
was a natural Serpent, such as do haunt the desolate places, read Genesis 3. 12.
with Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3.

Would thou know whether that sin be imputed to us, read Romans 5. 12, 13, 14,
15. and compare it with Ephesians. 2. 2.

Would thou know whether man was cursed for his sin, read Gal. 3. 10. Romans
5. 15.

Would thou know whether the curse did fall on man, or on the whole creation
with him, compare Genesis 3. 17. with Romans 8. 20, 21, 22.

Would thou know whether man be defiled in every part of him by the sin he
has committed, then read Isa. 1. 6.

Would thou know man's inclination so soon as he is born, read Psalm. 58. 3.
The wicked are estranged from the Womb, they go astray so soon as they be born.

Would thou know whether man once fallen from God by transgression, can
recover himself by all he can do, then read Romans 3. 20, 23.

Would thou know whether it be the desire of the heart of man by nature, to
follow God in his own way, or no^-compare Genesis 6. 5. and Genesis 8. 21 with Hos.
11. 7.

Would thou know how Gods heart stood affected toward man before the World
began, compare Ephesians. 1. 4. with 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Would thou know whether sin were sufficient to draw Gods love from his
Creatures, compare Jer^m. 3. 7. and Micah. 7. 18. with Romans 5. 6, 7, 8.

Would thou know whether Gods love did still abide toward his Creatures for
any thing they could do to make him amends, then read Deuteronomy. 11. 5, 6, 7, 8.

Would thou know how God could still love his Creature, and do his Justice
no wrong, read Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. Being justified freely by his Grace* through
the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation for sin, through Faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To
declare, I say, at this tim^ his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. That is, God having his Justice
satisfied, in the blood, and righteousness, and death of his own Son Jesus
Christ, for the sins of poor sinners, he can now save them that come to him,
though never so great sinners, and do his Justice no wrong, because it has had
a full and complete satisfaction given it by that blood, 1 John 1. 7, 8.

Would thou know who he was, and what he was, that did out of his love die
for sinners, then compare Joh. 3. 16, 17. Romans 5. 8. with Isa. 9. 6.

Would thou know whether this Savior had a body of flesh and bones, before
the World was, or took it from the Virgin Mary, then read Gal. 4. 4.

Would thou know, whether he did in that body bear all our sins, and where,
then read 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who bare our sins in his own body on the tree.

Would thou know, whether he did rise again after he was crucified with the
very same body, then read Luke 24. at ver. 38, 39. 40, 41.

Would thou know whether he did eat or drink with his Disciples after he
arose out of the Grave, then read Luke 24. 42. and Acts 10. 41.

If thou would be persuaded of the truth of this, that that very body is now
above the Clouds and Stars, read Acts 1. 9, 10, 11, and Luke 24. toward the end.

If thou would know, that the Quakers hold an error, that say the body of
Christ is within them; consider the same Scripture.

Would thou know what that Christ that died for sinners, is doing in that
place whether he is gone, then read Heb. 7. 24.

Would thou know, who shall have life by him, read 1 Timothy 1. 14. 15. and
Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. which say, Christ died for sinners, for the ungodly.

Would thou know, whether they that live and die in their sins, shall go to
Heaven, or not, then read 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Rev. 21. 8, 27. which says, They
shall have their part in the like, that burns with fire and Brimstone.

Would thou know whether man's obedience will obtain that Christ should die
for them, or save them, then read Mark 2. 17. Romans 5. 7.

Would thou know whether Righteousness, Justification, and Sanctification,
does come through the virtue of Christ's blood, compare Romans 5. 9. with Heb. 12.
12.

Would thou know whether natural man can abstain from the outward act of sin
against the Law, merely by a principal of nature, then compare well Romans 2. 14.
with Phil. 3. 6.

Would thou know whether a man by nature may know something of the invisible
things of God, compare seriously, Romans 1. 20. 21. with Romans 2. 14. 5.

Would thou know how far a man may go on in a profession of the Gospel, and
yet fall away, then read, Heb. 6. 4* 5, 6. They may taste the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come. They may taste the Heavenly gift, and be
partakers of the Holy Ghost, and yet so fall as never to be recovered, or
renewed again unto repentance: see also Luke 13.

Would thou know how hard it is to go to Heaven, read Mat. 7. 13, 14. Luke
13. 24.

Would thou know, whether a man by nature be a friend to God, or an enemy,
then read Romans 5. 11. Col. 1. 21.

Would thou know what, or who they are that shall go to Heaven; then read
John 3. 3. 5. 7. and 2 Cor. 5. 17. Also would thou know what a sad thing it
is for any to turn their backs upon the Gospel of Jesus Christ, then read Heb.
10. 28, 29. and Mark 16* 16.

Would thou know what is the wages of sin, then read, Romans 6. 23.

Would thou know whither those do go, that die unconverted to the faith of
Christ, then read Psalm. 9. 17. and Isa. 14. 9.

Reader, here might I spend many sheets of paper, yea, I might upon this
subject, write a very great Book, but I shall now forhear, desiring thee to be
very conversant in the Scriptures, for they are they that will testify of
Jesus Christ, Joh. 5. 39. The Bereans were counted noble upon this account;
These were more noble then those of Thessalonica in that they received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, etc. Acts 17.
11. But here let me give thee one caution, that is, have a care that thou do
not satisfy thy self with a bare search of them, without a real application of
him whom they testify of, to thy soul, lest instead of faring the better for
thy doing this work, thou do fare a great deal the worse and thy condemnation
be very much heightened, in that, though thou did read so often the sad state
of those that die in sin, and the glorious estate of them that close in with
Christ, yet thou thy self should be such a fool as to lose Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding thy hearing, and reading so plentifully of him.

They have Moses and the Prophets, let them (...) them.]

As if he should say, What need have they that one should be sent to them from
the dead? Have they not Moses and the Prophets? has not Moses told them the
danger of living in sin. Deuteronomy. 27. from ver. 15. to ver. 26. And chap. 28. 15.
16, 17, 18, 19. 20. etc. to the end of the Chapter: also chap. 29. 18, 19, 20,
21. has he not there told them, what a sad state these persons are in, that
deceive themselves with the deceit of their hearts, saying, They shall have
peace, though they follow their sins in these words. And when he hears the
words of this curse, he bless himself in his heart saying I shall have peace,
though I go on or walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to
thirst. The Lord will not spare that man, but then the anger of the Lord, and
his jealousy shall smoke against him, and all the curses that are written in
this Book, shall lie upon him: and the Lord shall blot out his name from under
Heaven.

Again, did not Moses write of the Savior that was to come afterward into the
World. Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Nay, have not all the Prophets from Samuel, with all those
that follow after, prophesied, and foretold these things: therefore what need
have they that I should work such a miracle, as to send one from the dead unto
them? They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

From whence observe again, That God does honor the writings of Moses and the
Prophets, as much, nay more, than if one should rise from the dead: Should not
a People seek unto their God? what, seek for the living among the dead? To the
Law, and to the Testimonies, (says God) if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. Isa. 8. 19 20. And let me tell
you plainly, I do believe that the Devil knows this full well, which makes him
labor to beget in the hearts of his Disciples and followers, light thoughts of
them; and does persuade them, that even a motion from their own beguiled
conscience, or from his own wicked Spirit, is to be observed, and obeyed before
them: when the very Apostle of Jesus Christ, though he heard a voice from the
excellent glory, saying, This is my beloved Son, etc.

Yet writing to the Churches, he commends the writings of the Prophets before
it, saying, We have also a more sure word of the Prophets, unto which ye do
well to take heed, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19. Now if thou doubtest, whether
that place be meant the Scriptures, the words of the Prophets, or no, read but
the next Verse, where he adds for a certain confirmation there of these
words. Knowing this first, that there is no Prophecy of the Scriptures, of any
private interpretation* for Prophecy came not in old time^y the will of man,
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

And therefore, what a sad thing is it with those that go about to disown the
Scriptures. I tell you, however they may slight them n^w, yet when they come
into h^ll, they will see their folly, They have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them.]

Further, who are they that are so tossed to and fro, with the several winds of
doctrine, that have been bro^ched in these days, but such, for the most part,
as have had a light esteem of the Scriptures; for the ground of error (as
Christ says) is because they know not them, Mark 12. 24. And indeed, it is
just with God, to give them over to follow their own dark blinded consciences,
to be led into errors, that they might be damned into hell, who did not
believe that the things contained in the Scripture were the truth, that they
might be saved and go to Heaven. It cannot well tell how to have done speaking
for, and on the Scriptures side, only this I consider, A word is enough to the
wise; and therefore I shall commit these things into the hands of them that are
of God: and as for the rest, I shall say to them, rather than God will save
them from h^ll with the breach of his holy word, if they had a thousand souls a
piece, God would destroy them all; for the Scriptures cannot be broken. John
10* 35.

Verse 30. And he said, nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the
dead, they would repent.
THe Verse before, you know, as I told you, it was part of an answer to such as
lose their souls, so it is a vindication of the Scriptures of Moses and the
Prophets* They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

Now this Verse is an answer to what was said in the former, and such an one as
has in it a rejection of the former answer. Nay Father Abraham. Nay says he,
do not say so, do not put them off with this; send one from the dead, and then
there will be some hopes. It Is true, thou speak of the Scriptures of Moses
and the Prophets and say, let them hear them; but these things are not so
well as I could wish, I had rather thou woulest send one from the dead. In
these words therefore, Nay, Father Abraham, there is a repulse given. Nay, let
it not be so. Nay, I do not like of that answer; Hear Moses and the Prophets?
nay. The same expression is used by Christ, Luke 13. 2, 3. Think you* that they
upon whom the ^^ower of Siloe fell, were sinn^rs above others? I tell you nay,
for except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. So here, Nay Father
Abraham, etc.

By this word Nay, therefore is signified, a rejecting the first answer.

Now observe, I pray you, the reason why he says nay, is, because God does put
over all those that will be saved, to observe and receive the truth contained
in Scripture, and believe that. To have a high esteem of them, and to love and
search them, as Christ says, Search the Scriptures, -- for they are they which
testify of me, Joh. 5. 39. But the damned say, Nay; as if he had said, This is
the thing to be short, my brethren are unbelievers, and do not regard the Word
of God, I know it by my self* for when I was in the World, it was so with me;
Many a good Sermon did I hear, many a time was I admonished, desired,
entreated, beseeched, threatened, forewarned of what I now suffer: But alas, I
was ignorant, self-conceited, surly, obstinate, and rebellious. Many a time the
Preacher told me, hell would be my portion, the devil would wreck his malice on
me, God would pour on me his sore displeasure, but he had as good have preached
to the stock, to the post, to the stones I trod on; his words rang in mine
ears, but I kept them from my heart. I remember he alleged many a Scripture,
but those I valued not; the Scriptures, thought I, what are they? a de^d
letter, a little Ink and Paper, of three or four shillings price. Alas, what is
the Scripture, give me a Ballad, a News-book, George on Horsback, or Bevis of
Southamp^on; give me some book that teaches curious Arts, that tells of old
Fables; but for the Holy Scriptures I cared not. And as it was with me then, so
it is with my brethren now; we were all of one spirit, loved all the same sins
slighted all the same counsels, promises, encouragements, and threatenings of
the Scriptures; and they are still as I left them, still in unbelief, still
provoking God, and rejecting good counsel, so hardened in their ways, so bent
to follow sin, that let the Scriptures be showed to them daily, let the
Messengers of Christ preach till their hearts ache, till they fall down dead
with preaching, they will rather trample it under-foot, and swine-like rent
them, than close in with those gentle and blessed proffers of the Gospel.

Nay Father Abraham, but if one should rise from the dead, they would repent.
Though they have Moses and the Prophets, (the Scriptures) they will not repent
and close in with Jesus Christ, though the Scriptures do witness against them.
If therefore there be any good done to them, they must have it another way. I
think, says he, it would work much on them, if one should rise from the dead.
And this truth indeed is so evident, that ungodly ones have a light esteem of
the Scriptures, that it needs not many strong Arguments to prove it, being so
evidently manifested by their every days practice, both in words and actions,
almost in all things they say and do. Yet for the satisfaction to he Reader, I
shall show you by a Scripture o^ two, (though I might show many) that this was,
and is true with the generality of the world. See the words of Nehemiah in his
9th Chapter, concerning the Children of Israel, who though the Lord afforded
them mercy upon mercy, as it is from ver. 19* to ver. 25. yet ver. 26. says
he, Nevertheless they were disobedient for all thy goodness toward them, and
rebelled against thee, (but how?) and cast thy Law behind their back: Slew the
Prophets which testified against them, to turn them to thee; and they wrought
great provocations. Observe, 1. They sinned against mercy. And then 2. They
slighted the Law, or Word of God. 3. They slew the Prophets that declared it
unto them. 4. The Lord coun^s it a great provocation. See Heb. 3. from ver. 10.
ver. 19. And see Zach. 7. 11, 12. But they refused to hearken, (says he there
of the Wicked) and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they
should not hear the Law. Yea, they made their hearts hard as an adamant stone,
lest they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of Hosts sent unto
them by his Spirit in the former Prophets, etc. Mark I pray you, her is also,
First, a refusing to hearken to the word of the Prophets.

2. That they might so do, they stopped their ears.

3. If any thing was to be done, they pulled away their shoulder.

4. To effect this, they labor to make their hearts hard as an Adamant stone.

5. And all this, lest they should hear and close in with Jesus and live, and
be delivered from the wrath to come, all which things do hold out an
unwillingness to submit to, and embrace the words of God; and so Jesus Christ
which is restified of by them. Many other Scripture I might bring in for
confirmation of the thing, as that in Amos 7. 12, 13. also 2 Samuel 2. 24, 25* 2 Chronicles. 25. 15, 16. Jer. 7. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. and that 16. 12. Read also
seriously that saying, in 2* Chron. 36. 15. where he says, And the Lord God of
their Fathers sent unto them by his Messengersrising up betimes because he had
compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place. And did they make them
welcome? No, But mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his words: And was
that all? No, they misused his Prophets. How long? until the wrath of the Lord
arose against them: Till there was no remedy. See also Jer. 29. 19. chap. 25.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Luke 11. 49.

And besides the Conversation of almost all men does bear witness to the same,
both Religious, and profane persons; in that they daily neglect, reject, and
turn their backs upon the plain testimony of the Scriptures.

As, 1. Take the threatenings laid down in holy Writ, and how are they
disregarded; there are but a few places in the Bible, but there are threatenings
against one sinner or other; against drunkards, swearers, liars, proud persons,
strumpets, whoremongers, covetous railers, extortioners, thieves, lazy persons;
In a word, all manner of sins are reproved, and without Faith in the Lord
Jesus, there is a ^ore punishment to be executed on the committers of them; and
all this made mention of in the Scriptures.

But for all this, how thick, and by heaps, do these wretches walk up and down
our streets? Do but go into the Alehouses, and you shall see almost every room
besprinkled with them, so foming out their own shame, that it is enough to make
the heart of a Saint to tremble, insomuch that they would not be bound to have
society with them any long while for all the world. For as the ways of the
godly are not liked of by the wicked, even so the ways of the wicked are an
abomination to the just, Prove. 29. 27. Psalm. 120. 5, 6.

The Scriptures say, Cursed is the man that trusts in man, that makes flesh
his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord, Jer. 17. 5.

And yet how many poor souls are there in the world, that stand in so much aw,
and dread of men, and do so highly esteem their favor, that they will rather
venture their souls in the hands of the devil with their favor, then they will
^^y to Jesus Christ for the salvation of their soul. Nay, though they be
convinced in their souls, that the way is the way of God; yet how do they
labor to stifle convictions, and turn their ears away from the truth, and all
because they will not lose the favor of an opposite neighbor. Oh! I dare not
for my Master, my Brother, my Landlord, I shall lose his favor, his house of
work, and so decay my calling. O says another, I would willingly go in this
way, but for my Father, he chides and tells me, he will not stand my friend
when I come to want* I shall never enjoy a penyworth of his goods, he will
disinherit me; And I dare not, says another, for my Husband, for he will be a
railing, and tells me, he will turn me out of doors, he will beat me, and cut
off my legs. But I tell you, if any of these, or any other things be ^o
prevalent with thee now, as to keep thee from seeking after Christ in his
ways; they will also be so prevalent with God against thee, as to make him
cast off thy soul, because thou did rather trust man than God; and delight in
the embracing of man rather than in the favor of the Lord.

2. Again, the Scripture says, He that being often reproved, hardneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29. 1. Yet
many are so far from turning, though they have been convinced of their wretched
state an hundred times; that when convictions or trouble for sin comes on their
Consciences, they go on still in the same manner, resisting and choking the
same, though remediless destruction be hard at their heels.

3. Again, thou have heard say, Unless a man be born again, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3. 3, 5, 7. And yet thou go on in a
natural state; an unregenerate condition, nay, thou do resolve never to turn
not be changed, though hell be appointed on purpose to swallow up such, Isa.
14. 9. Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations
that forget God.

4. Again, the Scripture says plainly, That he that loves and makes a lie,
shall have his part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.
8, 27. And yet thou art so far from dreading it, that it is thy delight to jest
and jeer, and lie for a penny or two pence, or ^ix pence gain. And also if thou
can make the rest of thy companions merry, by telling things that are false
of them that are better then thy self, thou do not care a straw. Or if thou
hear a lie from, or of another, thou will tell it, and swear to the truth of
it. O miserable!

5. Thou have heard and read, That he that believes not, shall be damned, Mark
16. 16. And that all men have not Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. and yet thou do so
much disregard these things, that it is like thou did scarce ever so much as
examine seriously whether thou were in the faith or no; but do content thy
self with the Hypocrites hope, which at the last God will cut off, and count it
no better then the spiders web, Job 8. 13, 14. or the house that is builded on
the sands, Luke 6. 49. Nay, thou peradventure do flatter thy self, and
think that thy Faith is as good as the best of them all, when alas poor
soul, thou may have no saving faith at all; which thou have not, if thou be
not born again and made a new Creature, 2. Cor. 2* 17.

6. Thou have heard, That he that neglects Gods great salvation, shall never
escape his great damnation, Heb. 2. 3. compared with Luke 14. 24. and Rev. 14.
19, 20. And yet when thou art invited, entreated, and beseeched to come in, (
Luke 14. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Romans 12. 1.) thou will make any excuse to
serve the turn. Nay, thou will be so wicked, as to put off Christ time after
time, notwithstanding he is so freely proffered to thee: a little ground, a few
Oxen, a Farm, a Wife, a two penny matter, a Play; nay, the fear of a mock, a
scoff, or a jeer, is of greater weight to draw thee back, than the Salvation of
thy Soul to draw thee forward.

7. And thou have heard that, Whosoever will be a friend of the World, is the
enemy of God, Jam. 4. 4. But thou regardest not these things, but contrariwise,
rather then thou will be out of the friendship and favor of this world, thou will sin against thine own Conscience, and get thy self in^o favor by fawning,
and flattering of the world. Yea, rather then thou will go without it, thou will dissemble, lie, backbite thy Neighbor, and an hundred other tricks thou will have.

8. You have heard that the day of Judgment is near, in which you and I all of
us must appear before the Tribunal of Jesus Christ, and there be made to give
an account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead; even of all
that ever we did, yea, of all our sins in thought, word, and deed, and shall
certainly be damned for them too, if we close not in with our Lord Jesus
Christ, and what he has done and suffered for eternal life, and that not
notionally or traditionally, but really and savingly, in the power, and by the
operation of the spirit, through faith ( Eccles. 11. 9. 12. 14. Heb. 9. 27.
Acts 10. 42, Acts 17. 30, 31. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Rev. 20. 12.) And I saw the dead
small and great, stand before God, and the Books were opened, and another Book
was opened, which is the Book of Life; and the dead were judged out of those
things that were written in the Books. There is the Book of the Creatures, the
Book of Conscience, the Book of the Lords Remembrance the Book of the Law, the
Book of the Gospel* ( Romans 1. 20. compared with Romans 2. 12. 15. Rev. 6. ver.
19. Joh. 12. 48.) Then shall he separate them one from another, as a Shepherd
divides his Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left. ( Mat. 25. 30,
31, 32.) And shall say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed, verse. 34.
But to the other go or depart ye cursed, ver. 41. Yet notwithstanding, the
Scriptures do so plainly and plentifully speak of these things, alas! who is
there that is weaned from the world, and from their si^s and pleasures, to fly
from the wrath to come, Mat. 3. 7. notwithstanding, the Scripture says also,
That Heaven and Earth shall pass away, rather than one jot or one tittle of the
word shall shall fail, till all be fulfilled, they are so certain, Luke 21. 37.

But leaving the threatenings, let us come to the promises, and speak somewhat
of them, and you may see how light men make of them, and how little they set by
them, notwithstanding the mouth of the Lord has spoken them.

As first, Turn ye fools, ye scorners, ye simple ones, at my reproof; and
beh^ld I will pour out my spirit unto you. Prove. 1. 24. And yet persons had
rather be in their foolishness and scorning still, and had rather embrace some
filthy lust, then the holy, undesiled, and blessed Spirit of Christ, through the
promise, though by it, as many as receive it, are sealed unto the day of
redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. And although he that lives and dies without it, is none
of Christ's, Romans 8. 9.

2. God has said, If thou do but come to him in Christ, though your sins be as
red as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow: and he will by no means cast
thee away, (compare Isa. 1. 18. with Joh. 6. ^7.) yet poor souls will not come
to Christ that they might have life. (Joh. 5. 41.) but rather, after their
hardness and impenitent heart, treasure up unto themselves wrath, against the
day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Romans 2. 4, 5, 6.

3. Christ Jesus has said in the word of truth, That if any man will serve and
follow him, Where he is, there shall also his servant be. Joh. 12. 26. but yet
poor souls choose rather to follow sin, Satan, and the world, though their
companions be the devils, and damned souls for ever. Mat. 25. 41.

4. He has also said, Seek first the Kingdom of God, and all other things
shall be added. But let who so will seek after the Kingdom of Heaven, first for
them; For they will take the first time, while time serves to get the things of
this life. And if it be so, that they must needs seek after Heaven, or else be
damned, they will stay till they have more leisure, or till they can better
attend to it; or till they have other things handsome about them; or till they
are older; when they have little else to do; or when they come to be sick, and
to die. Then Lord have mercy upon them; though it be ten thousand to one, but
they perish for ever.

For commonly, the Lord has this way to deal with such sinners, who put him
off when he is stri^^^^ with them, either to laugh at their calamity, and m^^k
when their fear comes. (Prove. 1. 26. 28.) (...) (...) send them to the gods
they have served, which are the devils, Judge. 10. 13. 14. ( Go to the gods you
have served, and let them deliver you, says he) compare this with Joh. 8. 44.

5. He has said, There is no man that forsakes Father or Mother, Wife or
Children, or Lands for his sake, and the Gospels, but shall have an hundred
f^l^ in this world, with persecution, and in the world to come, life
everlasting. Mark 10. 29, 30.

But men for the most part, are so far off from believing the certainty of
this, that they will scarce lose the earning of a penny to hear the word of
God, the Gospel of salvation. Nay, they will neither go themselves, nor suffer
others to go, (if they can help it) without threatening to do them a mischief,
if it lie in their way: Nay further, many are so far from parting from any
worldly gun, for Christ's sake and the Gospels, that they are still striving, by
hook and by crook, as we say, by swearing, lying, cousening, stealing,
covetousness, extortion, oppression, forgery, bribery, fl^ttery, or any other
way, to get more, though they get together with these, death, wrath, damnation,
hell, the devil, and all the plagues that God can pour upon them. And if any do
not run with them to the same excess of riot, but rather for all their threats,
will be so bold, and careless (as they call it) as to follow the ways of God;
if they can do no more, yet they will whet their tongues like a Sword to wound
them, and do them the greatest mischief they can, both in speaking against them
to neighbors, to Wives, to Husbands, to Landlords, and raising false Reports
of them. But let such take heed, lost they be in such a state and woeful
condition, as he was in, who said in vexation and anguish of soul, One drop of
cold water to cool my tongue.

Thus might I add many things out of the holy W^it, both threatening, and
promises, besides those heavenly Counsels, loving Reproofs, free invitations to
all sorts of sinners, both old and young, rich and poor, bond and free, wise
and unwise. All which have been, now are, and it is to be feared, as long as
this World lasts, will be trampled under the feet of those Swine, (I call them
not men) who will continue in the same. But take a review of some of them.

1. Counsel.
What heavenly counsel is that, where Christ says, Buy of me gold tried in the
fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may b^ clothed,
that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear Rev. 3. 17* 18. Also that, Ho
every one that thirsts, come to the waters: Yea come buy wine and mi^^
without money, and without price, Isa. 55. 1. Hear and your souls shall live.
Ve^se 3. Lay hold of (...) strength, that you may make peace with me, and y^^
shall make peace with me. Isa. 27. 5.

2. Instruction.
What Instruction is here.
Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it not* Blessed is the man that
hears me, (says Christ) watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of
my doors: For who so finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the
Lord. Prove. 8. 32, 33, 34, 35. Take heed that no man deceive you by any means.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures unto
everlasting life. Jo^. 6. 27. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.
24. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. Act. 16. 31. Believe
not every spirit, but try the spirits. Quench not the spirit. Lay hold on
eternal life. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works* and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Mat. 5. 16. Take heed and
beware of hypocrisy; watch and be sober. Learn of me (says Christ.) Come unto
me.

3. Forewarning.
What forewarning is here.
Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his stroke, then a
great ransom cannot deliver thee, Job 36. 18. Be ye not mockers, lest your
bands be made strong for I have heard from the Lord God of Hosts, a Consumption
even determined on the whole Earth. Isa. 28. 22. Beware therefore, lest that
come upon you that is written: Behold ye dispisers, and wonder and perish. For
behold I work a work in your days, which ye shall in no wise believe, though a
man declare it unto you, Act. 13. 40. 41. Let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Watch and pray, lest you enter into
temptation. Luke 22. 40. Let us fear therefore, lest a promise being made, or
left us, of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
Heb. 4. 1. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though you once knew this,
how that the Lord having saved the people out of Egypt, afterward destroyed
them that believed not. Jude 5. Hold fast that thou have, let no man take thy
Crown. Rev. 3. 11.

4. Comfort.
What comfort is here.
He that comes unto me, I will in no wise east out* Joh. 6. Verse. 37. Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Mat.
11. 28. Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee, (for) I have loved thee with an everlasting love. Jer. 31. 3.
I lay down my life for my sheep; I lay down my life, that they might have life.
I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation
have I succored thee. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Though their sins be as Scarlet, they*
shall be as white as Snow; though they be as Crimson, they shall be as Wool.
For I have blotted out as a thick Cloud, thy transgressions, and as a Cloud thy
sins; return unto me, for I have redeemed thee, Isa. 44. 22.

5. Grief to those that fall short.
O sad grief.
How have I hated instruction, and mine heart despised reproof, and have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me, Prove. 7. 11, 12, 13. They shall curse their King and their God, and look
upwards. And they shall look to the Earth, and behold trouble and darkness, and
dimness of anguish: and they shall be driven into darkness. Isa. 8. verse. 21,
22. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his Righteousness
endures for ever. -- The wicked shall see it, and be grieved, he shall gnash
with his teeth, and m^^t away; the desire of the wicked shall perish. Psalm.
112. 9, 10.

There shall be weeping when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the Prophets in the Kingdom of Heaven, and your selves thrust out. Luke 13. 26,
27, 28. all which things are slighted by the world.

Thus much in short touching this; that ungodly men undervalue the Scriptures,
and give no credit to them, when the truth that is contained in them, is held
forth in simplicity unto them, but rather cry out, nay, but if one should rise
from the dead, then they think something might be done: when alas, though signs
and wonders were wrought by the hands of those that preach the Gospel, these
poor creatures would never the sooner convert, though they suppose they should,
as is evident by the carriages of their forerunners, who, albeit the Lord
Jesus Christ himself did confirm his Doctrine by miracles, as opening blind
eyes, casting out of Devils, and raising the dead, they were so far from
receiving either him, or his Doctrine, that they put him to death for his
pains, though he had done so many Miracles among them* yet they believed not in
him. John* 12. 37. But to pass this, I shall lay down some of the grounds of
their rejecting, and underval^ing the Scriptures, and so pass on.

1. Because they do not believe that they are the Word of God, but rather
suppose them to be the inventions of men, written by some Politicians, on
purpose to make poor ignorant people to submit to some Religion and Government.
Though they do not say this, yet their practices testify the same; as he that
when he hears the words of the curse, yet blesses himself in his heart, and
says, he shall have peace, though God says he shall have none. Deuteronomy. 29. 18,
19, 20. And this must needs be, for did but men believe this, that it is the
Word of God, then they must believe, that he that spoke it is true, therefore
shall every word and tittle be fulfilled. And if they come once to this, unless
they be stark mad, they will have a care how they do throw themselves under the
lash of eternal vengeance. For the Reason why the Thessalonians received the
word, was, because they believed it was the Word of God, and not the word of
man, which did effectually work in them by their thus believing. 1 These. 2, 13,
14.

When ye received the word which ye heard of us, (says he) ye received it, not
as the word of man, but as it is indeed the Word of God; which effectually
works in you that believe. So that did a man but receive it in hearing, or
reading, or meditating, as it is the Word of God, they would be converted. But
the Word preached does not profit, not being mixed with faith in them that hear
it. Heb. 4. 1, 2.

2. Because they do not indeed see themselves by nature, heirs of that
exceeding wrath and vengeance that the Scriptures testify of. For did they but
consider what God intends to do with those that live and die in a natural
state, it would either sink them into despair, or make them fly for refuge to
the hope that is set before them. But if there be never such sins committed,
and never so great wrath denounced, and the time of execution be never so near;
yet if the party that is guilty be senseless, and altogether ignorant thereof,
he will be careless, and regard it nothing at all. And that man by nature is in
this condition it is evident. For take the same man that is senseless, and
ignorant of that misery he is in by nature, I say, take him at another time,
when he is a little awakened, and then you shall hear him roar, and cry out so
long as trouble is upon him, and a sense of the wrath of God hanging over his
head: Good sirs, what must I do to be saved?

Though the same man at another time (when his conscience is fallen asleep, and
grown hard) will lie like the Smiths Dog, at the foot of the Anvil, though the
fire-sparks fly in his face. But as I said before, when any one is a little
awakened, O^ what work will one verse, one line, nay one word of holy
Scriptures make in his heart, he cannot eat, sleep, work, keep company with his
former companions; and all because he is afraid that the damnation spoken of in
Scripture, will fall to his share, Like Balaam, who said, I cannot go beyond
the word of the Lord, Numb. 22. 18. so long as he had something of the word of
the Lord with authority, severity, and power on his heart: but at another time
he could teach Balak to cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israel.
Rev. 2. 14.

3. Because the carnal Priests do tickle the ears of their hearers with vain
Philosophy and deceit, and thereby harden their hearts against the simplicity
of the Gospel, and word of God, which things, the Apostle admonished those that
have a mind to close in with Christ, to avoid, Col. 2. 8. saying, Beware lest
any man (be he what h^ will) spoil you, through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the traditions of men, and rudiments of the world, and not after Christ.
And you who muzzle up your people in ignorance with Aristotle, Plato* and the
rest of the heathenish Philosophers, and preach little, if any thing of Christ
rightly. I say unto you, that you will find you have sinned against God, and
beguiled your hearers, when God shall in the Judgement-day, lay the cause of
the damnation of many thousands of souls to your charge, and say, He will
require their blood a^ your hands, Ezekiel. 33. 6.

4. Another reason why the carnal unbelieving world do so slight the
Scriptures, and Word of God, is, because the judgment spoken of in the
Scripture, is not presently executed on the transgressors. Because sentence
against an evil act, is not speedily executed, therefore the hearts of the sons
of men, are wholly set in the^^ to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11. Because God does not
presently strike the poor wretch as soon as he sins, but waits, and forbears*
and is patient: Therefore the world judging God to be unfaithful, go to it
again, and again, and every time grow harder and harder, till at last, God is
forced either to stretch out his mighty power to turn them, or else send death
with the Devil and Hell to fetch them. Thou thoughtest (says God) that I was
altogether such an one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thy face. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Psalm. 50. 20. 21.

5. Another Reason why the blind world do slight the authority of Scripture,
is, because they give ^ar to the Devil, who through his subtilty casts false
evasions, and corrupt interpretations on them, ^end^ing them not so point blank
the mind of God, and a rule for direction to poor souls, persuading them, that
they must give ear and way to something else besides, and beyond that: or else
he labors to render it vile and contemptible, by persuading them that it is a
dead letter, when indeed they know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm.
For the Scripture is not so dead, but that the knowledge of it is able to make
any man wise unto salvation through faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. 2 Timothy 3. 15. And is profitable for instruction, reproof, and correction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be thoroughly furnished to all good
works, verse 17.

And where it is said the letter kills, he means the Law, as it is the
ministration of damnation, or a Covenant of works, and so indeed it does kill,
and must do so, because it is just: forasmuch as the party that is under the
same, is not able to yield to it a complete and continual obedience. But yet I
will call Paul and Peter to witness, that the Scriptures are of a very glorious
concernment, in as much as in them is held forth to us the way of life; and
also, in that they do administer good ground of hope to us, Romans 15. 4. For
whatsoever things were written a foretime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scripture, mig^^ have hope. And again,
Romans 16. 25, 26. Now to him that is of power to stablish you according to my
Gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the Revelation of the
mystery which was kept hid since the World began, but now is made manifest, and
by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the
everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of faith. And
therefore whosoever they be that slight the Scriptures, they slight that which
is no less then the word of God; and they who slight that, slight him that
spoke it; and they that do so, let them look to themselves, for God will be
reve^ged on such. Much more might be said to this thing, but I would not be
tedious.

A word or two more, and so I have done with this. Consider the dangers of
slighting the words of the Prophets or Apostles, whether they be, correction,
reproof, admonition, forewarning, or the blessed invitations and promises
contained in them.

1. Such souls do provoke God to anger, and to execute his vengeance on them.
They refused to hearken* they pulled away their shoulder, they stopped their
ears, lest they should hear the Law, and they made their hearts Adamant stone,
that they might not hear the Law, and the words that were spoken to them by his
spirit in the former Prophets: Therefore came a great wrath upon them. Zach. 7.
11, 12.

2. God will not regard in their calamity. Because I called, and ye refused, I
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but set at naught all my counsels,
and would have none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your calamities and
mock when your fear comes. When their fear comes as desolation, and their
destruction, like a Whirlwind. Then shall they call, but I will not answer;
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, Prove. 1. 25, 26, 27.

3. God does commonly give up such men to delusions to believe lies. Because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved, therefore
God shall send them strong delusiens, that they should believe a lie. That they
all might be damned. 2 These. 2. 11, 12.

4. In a word, they that do continue to reject and slight the word of God, they
are such, for the most part, as are ordained to be damned. Old Eli his sons not
hearkening to the voice of their father, reproving them for their sins, but
disobeying his voice, it is sai^, It was because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2. 15. Again, see in 2 Chronicles. 25. 15, 16. Amaziah having sinned against
the Lord, he sends to him a Prophet to reprove him: But Amaziah says, ^orbear,
wherefore should thou be smitten? (he ^id not hearken to the word of God)
Then the Prophet forbear, saying, I know that God has determined to destroy
thee, because thou have not hearkened to my counsel. Read therefore, and the
Lord give thee understanding. For a miserable end will those have that go on in
sinning against God, rejecting his word.

Other things might have been observed from this verse, which at this time I
shall pass by; partly, because the sum of them has been touched already, and
may be more clearly hinted at in the following verse, and therefore I shall
speak a few words to the next verse, and so draw toward a conclusion.

Ver. 31. And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses, and the Prophets
neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the Dead.
ANd he said] That is, and God made answer to the words spoken in the verse
before, And he said unto him If they hear not Moses, etc. As if he had said,
Moses was a man of great Renown, a man of worthy note, a man that talked with
God face to face, as a man speaks to his Friend: The words that Moses spoke,
were such as I commanded him to speak: Let who will question them, I will own
them, credit them, bless them that close in with them, and curse those that
reject them.

I my self sent the Prophets, they did not run of their own heads; I gave them
Commission; I thrust them our, and told them what they should say. In a word,
They have told the World what my mind is to do, both to Sinners and to Saints.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Therefore, he that shall
reject and turn his back either upon the Threatenings, Counsels, Admonitions,
Invita ions, Promises, or whatsoever else I have commanded them to speak, as to
Salvation and Life, and to Directions therein, shall be sure to have a share in
the many Curses, that they have spoken, and the Destruction that is pronounced
by them. Again, If they hear not Moses, and the Prophets, etc. As if he had
said, Thou would have me send one from the Dead unto them, what needs that?
They have my Mind already, I have declared unto them what I intend to stand to,
both for saving them that believe, and damning them that do not. That therefore
which I have said, I will make good, whether they hear, or forbear. And as for
this desire of yours, you had as good desire me to make a new Bible, and so to
revoke my first Sayings, by the Mouth of my Prophets. But I am God, and not
Man, and my Word is immutable, unchangable, and shall stand as fast as my
Decre^s can make it; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one jot or tittle of
my Word shall not pass. If thou had Ten Thousand Brethren, and every one in
danger of losing his Soul, if they did not close in with what is contained and
recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, they must even every one of them perish,
and be for ever damned in Hell; for the Scriptures cannot be broken. I did not
send them so unadvisedly, to recall it again by another consideration. No, For
I speak in Righteousness and Judgment, Isa. 63. 1, 2, 3. and in much Wisdom and
Counsel. It being therefore gone out of my Mouth in this manner, It shall not
return in vain, until it has accomplished the thing whereto I have sent it.

But again, Thou supposest that Miracles and Wonders will work more on them,
which makes thee say, Send one from the Dead. But herein thou art mistaken, for
I have proved them with that once and again, by more than one, or two, or three
of my Servants. How many Miracles did my Servant Moses work by Commandment from
me in the Land of Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness; yet they of
that Generation were never the sooner converted for that, but notwithstanding
rebelled and lusted, and in their hearts turned back into Egypt, Act. 7. How
many Miracles did Samuel, David, Elias, Elisha, Daniel, and the Prophets,
together with my Son, who raised the Dead, cast out Devils, made them to see
that were born blind, gave and restored Limbs, yet for all this (as I said
before) they hated him, they crucified him. I raised him again from the Dead,
and he appeared to his Disciples who were called, and chosen, and faithful, and
he gave them Commandment and Commission, to go and testify the Truth of this
to the World; and to confirm the same, he enabled them to speak with diverse
Tongues, and to w^^k M^^acles most plentifully; yet there was great persecution
raised against them, insomuch that but a few of them died in their beds. And
therefore, though thou think that a Miracle will do so much with the World,
yet I say, No: For if they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded, though one should rise from the Dead.

From these words therefore take notice of this Truth; namely, that those who
reject, and believe not Moses and the Prophets, are a very hardhearted people,
that will not be persuaded, though one rise from the Dead.

They that regard not the Holy Scriptures, to turn to God, finding them to
restifie of his goodness and mercy, there is but little hopes of their
Salvation; For they will not, mark, they will not be persuaded, though one
should rise from the Dead. This Truth is confirmed by Jesus Christ himself: If
you read Joh. 5. where the Lord is speaking of himself, that he is the very
Christ; he brings in four or five Witnesses to back what he said. First, John
Baptist. 2. The Works that his Father gave him to do. 3. His Father speaking
from Heaven. 4. The Testimony of the Scriptures; when all this was done, seeing
yet they would not believe, he lays the fault upon one of these two Things.

1. Their regarding an esteem among Men.

2. Their not believing of the Prophets Writings, even Moses and the rest. For
had ye believed Moses (says he) ye would have believed me? For he wrote of me.
But if ye believe not his Writings how can ye believe my Words. Now, I say, he
that shall slight the Scriptures, and the Testimony of the Prophets in them
concerning Jesus Christ, must needs be in great danger of losing his Soul, if
he abide in this condition; because he that slights the Testimony, does also
slight the Thing testified of, let him say the contrary never so often. For as
Jesus Christ has here laid down the Reason of Men's not receiving him; so the
Apostle, in another place, lays down the Reason again with an high and mighty
aggravation. 1 John 5. 10. saying, He that believes on the Son of God, has
the witness in himself: he that believes not God has made him a Liar; because
he believes not the Record, Mark, the Record that God gave of his S^n. The
Record, you will say, what is that? Why, even the Testimony that God gave of
him by the Mouth of all the Holy Prophets since the World began, Act. 3. 20.
That is, God sending his Holy Spirit into the hearts of his Servants the
Prophets and Apostles, He, by his Spirit in them, did bear Witness or Record,
to the Truth of Salvation by his Son Jesus, both before, and after his
coming. And thus is that place also to be understood, which says; There are
three that bear Record in Earth, the Spirit and the Water, and the Blood. That
is, the Spirit in the Apostle^, which preached him to the World, as is clear,
if you read seriously, 1 These. 4. 8. The Apostle speaking of Jesus Christ, and
obedience to God through him, says thus: Now he that despises, despises not
us, but God: But it is you that speak. True, but it is by and through the
Spirit, He therefore that despises, despises not Man, but God, who also has
given us of his Holy Spirit. This is therefore a mighty confirmation of this
Truth, that he that slights the Record or Testimony that God by his Spirit, in
his Prophets and Apostles, has testified unto us, slights the Testimony of the
Spirit, who moved them to speak these Things; and if so, then I would fain
know, how any man can be saved by Jesus Christ, that slights the Testimony
concerning Christ; yea, the Testimony of his own Spirit, concerning his own
Self. It Is true, men may pretend to have the Testimony of the Spirit, and from
that Conceit, set a low Esteem on the Holy Scriptures: But that Spirit that
dwells in them, and reaches them so to do, it is no better than the Spirit
of Satan, though it calls it self by the Name of the Spirit of Christ. To the
Law therefore, and to the Testimony Try them by that: If they speak not
according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.

The Apostle Peter, when he speaks of the glorious Voice that he had from the
Excellent Majesty, saying of Christ, This is my beloved Son, hear him, says
thus to him whom he wrote unto; You have also a more sure Word of Prophecy,
(or of the Prophets, for so you may read it) unto which you do well that you
take heed. That is, Though we tell you that we had his excellent Testimony from
his own Mouth, evidently, yet you have the Prophets: We tell you this, and you
need not doubt of the Truth of it; but if you should, yet you may not, must
not, ought not, to question them: Search therefore unto them, until the Day
dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts. That is, until by the same Spirit
that gave forth the Scripture, you find the Truth confirmed to your Souls,
which you have recorded in the Scriptures. That this Word of Prophecy, or of
the Prophets, is the Scriptures, read on. For (says he) knowing this first,
that no Prophecy of the Scriptures, is of any private interpretation, etc. 2
Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. But you will say, What needs all this ado, and why is all
this time and pains spent in speaking to this, that is surely believed already?
This is a Thing received by all, that they believe the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, that sure Word of Prophecy, and therefore you need not spend your
time in proving these Things, and the Truth of them, seeing we grant and
confess the Truth of it, before you begin to speak your judgment of them.

Answ. The Truths of God cannot be born witness unto too often; you may as well
say, You need not preach Jesus Christ so much, seeing he has been, and is
received for the True Messiah already.

2. Though many may suppose, that they do believe the Scriptures, yet if they
were but well examined, you would find them either by word of mouth, or else by
conversation, to deny, reject, and slight the Holy Scriptures. It Is true, there
is a notional, and historical Assent in the Head, I say, In the Head of many,
or most, to the Truth contained in Scripture: But try them, I say, and you
shall find but a little, if any, of the Faith of the operation of God in the
hearts of poor men, to believe the Scriptures, and Things contained in them.
Many, yea most men believe the Scriptures, as they believe a Fable, a Story, a
Tale, of which there is no certainty; but alas! there are but few do in Deed,
and in Truth, believe the Scriptures to be the very Word of God.

Obj. But you will say, This seems strange to me.

Answ. And it seems as true to me; and I doubt not but to make it manifest,
that there are but few, yea very few, that do effectually (for that I aim at)
believe the Scriptures, and the Truths contained in, and spoken of by them. But
to make this appear, and that to purpose (if God will) I shall lay you down the
several Operations that the Scriptures have on them, who do effectually believe
the Things contained in them.

1. He that does effectually believe the Scriptures, has in the first place
been killed, I say killed by the Authority of the Holy Scriptures; struck stark
dead* in a Spiritual sense, by the Holy Scripture, being set home by that
Spirit, which gave them forth upon the Soul. The Letter kills; the Letter
strikes men dead, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and this Paul witnessed, and found, before he
could say, I believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Where he says, I was
alive without the Law once; That is, in my natural state, before the Law was
set on my heart with power: But when the Commandment came, sin revived and I
died, Romans 7. 9. And that Law that was ordained to life, I found to be unto
death: For sin taking occasion by the Commandment deceived me, and thereby
slew me, ver. 10. Now that which is called the Letter in Cor. is called the Law
in Romans 7. which by its power and operation, as it is wielded by the Spirit of
God, does in the first place kill and slay all those that are enabled to
believe the Scriptures. I kill, says God; That is, with my Law. I pierce, I
wound, I prick men into the very heart, by showing them their sins against my
Law, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. Act. 2. 36, 37. And he that is ignorant of this, is also
ignorant of, and does not really and effectually believe the Scripture.

But you will say, How does the Law kill and strike dead the poor Creature?

Answ. First, The Letter or Law, do kill thus: It is set home upon the Soul,
and discovers to the Soul its Transgressions against the Law; and shows the
Soul also, that it cannot completely satisfy the Justice of GOD, for the
breach of his Law, therefore it is condemned, Joh. 3. 19. Mark, He that
believes not is condemned already; To wit, by the Law, that is, the Law does
condemn him; yea, it has condemned him already for his sins against it, as it
is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. Now all men, as they
come into the World, are in this condition, that is, condemned by the Law. Yet
not believing their Condemnation by the Law really, they do not also believe
really and effectually the Law that does condemn them. For as men have but a
notion of the one, that is, their condemnation, because of sins against the
Law; so they have but a notion of the condemning, killing, and destroying power
of the Law; for as the one is, so in these Things, always is the other: There
is no man that does really believe the Law or Gospel further, than they do feel
the power and authority of them in their hearts: Ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. Now this Letter, or Law, is not to be taken
in the largest sense, but is strictly to be tied to the Ten Commandments, whose
proper Work is only by showing the Soul its sins against this Law, to kill,
and there leaves him stark dead, not giving him the least life, or support, or
comfort, but leaves the Soul in an helpless and hopeless condition, as from it
self, or any other mee^ Creature.

It Is true, the Law has laid all men for dead, as they come into the World;
but all men do not see themselves dead, until they see that Law that struck
them dead, sticking in their Souls, and having struck them that fatal blow: As
a man that is fast asleep in an house, and that on fire about his Ears, and he
not knowing of it, because he is asleep; even so, because poor Souls are asleep
in sin, though the Wrath of God, the Curse of his Law, and the flames of
Hell, have beset them round about, yet they do not believe it, because they are
asleep in sin. Now, as he that is awakened, and sees this, sees, that through
this he is a dead man: Even so they that do see their state by nature, being
such a sad condition, do also see themselves by that Law to be dead men
naturally.

But now, when did thou feel the power of this first part of the Scripture,
the Law, so mighty as to strike thee dead? If not, thou do not so much as
verily believe that part of Scripture that does contain the Law in it, to be
the truth of God. Yet if thou should have felt something, I say something of
the killing power of the Law of God in thine heart, this is not an Argument to
prove, that thou believe all the Things contained in Scripture; for there is
Gospel as well as Law, and therefore I shall speak to that also; that is,
whether thou have felt the power of the Gospel, as well as something of the
power of the Law.

2. Then, thou have found the power of the Gospel, and so believed it; thou
have found it thus with thy soul.

1. Thou have been showed by the word or truth of the Gospel, in the light of
the Spirit of Christ, that by nature thou were without the true faith of the
Son of God in thy soul: For when He, the Spirit is come, he shall show men that
they believe not in me, says Christ. Joh. 16. 9. Mark, though thou have, as I
said before, felt somewhat of the power of the Law, Letter, or ten
Commandments, yet if thou have not been brought to this, to see by the spirit
in the Gospel, that thou art without faith by nature, thou have not yet tasted,
much less believed any part of the Gospel. For the Gospel and the Law are two
distinct Covenants. And they that are under the Law, may be convinced by it,
and so believe the Law or first Covenant, and yet in the mean time, to be a
stranger to the Covenant of promise; that is, the Gospel, and so have no hope
in them, ( Ephesians. 2. 12.) There is not any promise that can be savingly
believed, until the soul be by the Gospel converted to Jesus Christ. For though
men do think never so much that they believe the things, or the word of the
Gospel of our salvation, yet* unless they have the work of grace in their
souls, they do no^ cannot rightly believe the things contained in the
Scriptures.

Again, as the Law kills those that believe it, even so the promises
contained in the Gospel, do, through faith, administer comfort to those that
believe i^ a^ig^t. My words (says Christ) my words, they are spirit, and they
are life. Joh. 6. 63. As if he had said, the words contained in the law as a
Covenant of works, they wound, they kill, they strike dead those that are under
them. But as for me, the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they
are life. That is, whosoever does receive them believingly, shall find them
full of operation to comfort, quicken, and revive their soul. For as I did not
come into the world to destroy men's lives, so the words that I speak, (as I am
sent to preach the Gospel) they have no such tendency unto those that believe
them. The promises that are in the Gospel, Oh, how do they comfort them? such a
promise, and such a promise, O how sweet is it? how comfortable to those that
believe them? Alas, there are many poor souls that think they believe the
Scriptures, to be the word of God, and yet they never enjoyed any thing of the
life and promises; they come in upon the heart to quicken, to revive thee, to
raise th^e from the sentence of death that is passed (...) thee by the Law. And
through the faith that is wrought in thy soul, by the operation of Gods holy
Spirit (though once killed by the Law or Letter) thou art made alive in the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is presented to thy soul in the promises.

3. Do thou indeed and in truth* believe the Scriptures to be the word of
God* then ^he things contained in them, especially the things of the Gospel are
very excellent to thy soul, as the birth of Christ, the death, resurrection,
intercession, and second coming, O! how precious and excellent are they to thy
soul, insomuch, that thou regardest nothing in comparison of them! O! it is
Christ's birth, death, blood, resurrection, etc. according to the Scriptures,
that thou do rejoice in exceedingly, and abundantly desire after! whom having
not seen, ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing the mercy
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. compare
with Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

4. Do thou believe the Scriptures to be the word of God? Then thou stand
in aw^of, and do much reverence them. Why, they are the word of God, the true
sayings of God; they are the counsel of God; they are his promises, and his
threatenings. Poor souls are apt to think, If I could hear God speak to me from
Heaven with an audible voice, then sure, I should be serious, and believe it.
But truly, if God should speak to thee from Heaven, except thou were converted,
thou would not regard, not really believe him. But if thou do believe the
Scriptures, thou see that they are the truth, as really believe him. But if
thou do believe the Scriptures, thou see that they are the truth, as really
as if God should speak to thee from Heaven through the Clouds, and therefore
never flatter thy self, foolishly thinking, that if it were so, and so, then
thou could believe. I tell thee, says Christ, If they believe not Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they believe though one should rise from the dead.
But*

5. Do thou believe the Scripture to be the word of God? Then through faith
in Christ, thou endeavourest to have thy life squared according to the
Scriptures, both in word and practice. Nay, this I say, thou may have, though
thou do not believe them all. My meaning is, that if thou believe none but the
ten Commandments, thy life may be according to them, a legal holy life; and if
thou do believe the Gospel too, then thy life will be the faith of the Lord
Jesus Christ; that is, either thou will live in the blessed and holy enjoyment
of what is testified in the Scripture concerning the glorious things of the
Lord Jesus Christ, or else, thou will be exceedingly panting after them. For
the Scriptures carry such a blessed beauty in them to that soul that has faith
in the things contained in them, that they do take the heart, and captivate the
soul of him that believes them, into the love and liking of them, believing
all things that are written in the Law, and the Prophets, and have hope toward
God, that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just and
unjust; and herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of
offense, both toward God, and toward man. Acts 24. 14, 15, 16.

6. He that believes the Scriptures to be the word of God, if he do but suppose
that any one place of Scripture does exclude him, and shut him out of, and from
a share in the promises contained in them: O it will trouble him, grieve him,
perplex him, yea he will not be satisfied until he be resolved, and the
contrary sealed to his soul, for he knows that the Scriptures are the word of
God, all truth; and therefore he knows, that if any one sentence does exclude,
or bar out him, for want of this, or the other qualification; he knows also,
that not the word alone shuts him out, but he that speaks it, even God himself;
and ^^herefore he cannot, will not, dare not be conented until he find his soul
and Scripture together (with the things contained therein) to embrace each
other, and a sweet correspondency and agreement between them. For you must
know, that to him that believes the Scriptures aright, the promises, or
threatenings, are of more power to comfort or cast down, then all the promises
or threatenings of all the men in the world. And this was the cause why the
Marryrs of Jesus, did so slight both the promises of their adversaries, when
they would have overcome them with pr^fering the great things of this world
unto them, and also their (...) them they would rack them, ha^g them (...) Acts
20. 24. No^^ of these things c^^l^ pr^vail upon them or against them; because
they did most really believe the Scriptures, and the things contained in them;
as is clearly found and to be seen in Heb. 11. and also in Mr. Fox's Records of
their Brethren.

7. He that believes the Scriptures to be the word of God* believes that men
must be born again, and also be partakers of that faith which is of the
operation of God (according as he has read and believes) he must and shall be
damned. And he that believes this aright, will not be contented until
(according as it is written) he do partake of, and enjoy the n^w birth, and
until he do find through grace, that faith that is wrought by the operation of
God in his soul. For this is the cause why men do satisf^^ themselves with so
slender a conceited hope that their state is good (when it is nothing so)
namely, because they do not credit the Scripture; for did they, they would look
into their own hearts, and examine seriously, whether that faith, that hope,
that grace, which they think they have, be of that nature, and wrought by that
spirit and power, that the Scripture speaks of. I speak this of an effectual
believing, without which all other is nothing unto salvation. Now then, because
I would not be too tedious, I shall at this time lay down no more discoveries
of such an one as does savingly believe the Scriptures, and the things
contained in them, but shall speak a few words of examination containing the
things already mentioned. As,

1. Thou say thou do indeed and in truth effectually believe the
Scriptures: I ask therefore, wast thou ever killed stark dead by the Law of
works contained in the Scriptures? killed by the Law or letter, and made to see
thy sins against it, and left in an helpless condition by that Law* For as I
said, the proper work of the Law is to slay the Soul, and to leave it dead in a
helpless state. For it does neither give the Soul any comfort it self when it
comes, nor does it show the soul where comfort is to be had; and therefore it
is called the ministration of condemnation, as in 2 Cor. 3. 9. the ministration
of death, 2 Cor. 3. 7. For though men may have a notion of the blessed Word of
God as the children had, yet before they be converted, it may truly be said of
to them, Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mark 12. 24.

2. You say you do believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God. I say again,
examine, wast thou ever quickened from a dead state by the power of the Spirit
of Christ through the other part of the Scripture; That is to say, by the power
of God in his Son Jesus Christ, through the Covenant of Promise. I tell thee
from the Lord, If thou have, thou have f^lt such a quickening power in the words
of Christ, ( Joh. 6.) that thou have been lifted out of that dead condition
that thou before wast in, and that when thou wast under the guilt of sin, the
curse of the Law, and the power of the devil, and the justice of the great God,
thou have been enabled by the power of God in Christ revealed to thee by the
Spirit, through, and by the Scripture, to look sin, death, hell, the devil, and
the Law, and all things that are a^ enmi^y with thee, with boldness and comfort
in the face, through the blood, death, righteousness, resurrection, and
intercession of Christ, made mention of in the Scriptures.

And thirdly, on this account, O how excellent are the Scriptures to thy soul!
O how much virtue do thou ^ee in such a Promise, in such an invitation! they
are so large, as to say Christ will in no wise cast me ^ut* My crimson sins
shall be white as Snow. I ^ell thee friend, there are some Promises that the
Lord has helped me to lay hold of Jesus Christ th^^ugh, and by, that I would
not have out of the Bible, for as much Gold and Silver as can lie between York
and London piled up to the stars; because through them, Christ is pleased by
his Spirit, to convey comfort to my soul! I say, when the Law curses, when the
devil tempes, when hellfire flames in my Conscience, my sins with the guilt of
them tearing of me, then is Christ revealed so swe^^ly to my poor soul through
the Promises; that all is forced to fly and leave off to accuse my soul. So
also, when the World frowns, when the Enemies rage and threa^en to kill me,
then also the precious, the exceeding great and precious Promises, do weight
down all, and comfort the soul against all. This is the effect of believing the
Scriptures savingly; for they that do so, have by, and through the Scriptures
good comfort, and also ground of hope, Romans 15. 4. believing those things to be
its own which the Scriptures hold forth.

4. Examine, do thou stand in awe of sinning against God, because he has in
the Scriptures commanded thee to abstain from it? Do thou give diligence to
make thy Calling and Election sure, because God commands it in Scripture?
Do thou examine thy self whether thou be in the Faith or no, having a command
in Scripture so to do? Or do thou (notwithstanding what thou read in the
Scripture, follow the world, delight in sin, neglect coming to Jesus Christ,
speak evil of the Saints, slight and make a mock at the Ordinances of God,
delight in wicked company, and the like. Then know, that it is because thou
do not indeed and in truth believe the Scriptures effectually. For, as I said
before, if a man do believe them, and that savingly, then he stands in ^w, he
looks to his steps, he turns his feet from evil, and endeavors to follow that
which is good, which God has commanded in the Scriptures of truth; yet not
from a legal or natural principle; that is to seek for life by doing that good
thing, but knowing that Salvation is already obtained for him, by the blood of
that man Christ Jesus on the Cross, because he believes the Scriptures;
therefore (mark I pray) therefore I say, he labors to walk with his God, in
all well pleasing and godliness, because he sweet power of the loves of Christ
which he feels in his soul by the Spirit, according to the Scriptures,
constrain him so to do, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

5. Examine again Do thou labor after those qualifications that the
Scriptures do describe a child of God by? that is says, yea the right faith,
the most holy faith, the faith of the operation of God. And also do thou
examine whether there is a real growth of Grace in thy soul, as love, zeal,
self-denial, and a seeking by all means to attain (if possible) to the
Resurrection of the dead; that is, not to satisfy thy self, until thou be
dissolved and rid of this body of death, and be transformed into that glory
that the Saints shall be in after the Resurrection day; and in the mean time
do labor, and take all opportunities to walk as near as may be to the pitch,
though thou know thou can not attain it perfectly, yet I say, thou do aim
at it, seek after it, press toward it, and to hold on in thy race, thou
^hunnest that which may any way hinder thee, and also close in with what may
any way further the same; knowing, that that must be, or desiring that it
should be thine eternal frame, and therefore out of love and liking to it, thou
do desire and long after it, as being the thing that does most please thy
soul.

Or how is it with thy soul? Art thou such an one as regards not these things?
but rather busy thy thoughts about the things here below, following those
things that have no scent of divine glory upon them; If so, look to thy self,
thou art an unbeliever, and so under the wrath of God, and wilt for certain
fall into the same place of torment that thy fellows have fallen into before
thee, to the grief of thy own soul, and thy everlasting destruction.

Consider and regard these things, and lay them to thy heart before it be too
late to recover thy self, by repen^ing of the one, and desiring to close in
with the other. O I say, regard, regard, for hell is hot, Gods hand is up, the
Law is resolved to discharge against thy soul; the Judgment day is at hand; the
graves are ready to fly open, the (...) is nea^ (...) ^ounding, the sentence
will ^re long be p^st, and then you and I cannot call ^im^ again.

But again, seeing they are so certain, so sure, so irre^^^^ble and firm; and
seeing the saving faith of the things contained therein is to reform the soul,
and bring i^ over into the things of God, really conforming to the things
contained therein, both to the point of Justification, and also an impractical
walking, and giving up the soul and body to a conformity to all the commands,
counsels, instructions, and exhortations contained therein. This then will
learn us how to judge of those who give up themselves to walk in the
imaginations of their own hearts, who slight and lay aside the Scriptures,
counting them but empty and uncertain things, and will live every day in open
contradiction to what is contained, commanded, and forbidden therein.

As first, this will show us that all your Drunkards, Whoremasters, Liars,
Thieves, Swearers, Back-biters, Slanderers, Sc^ffers at goodness, etc. I say,
we may see by this, that they tha^ live in such things, have not the faith of
these things contained in their hearts; seeing they delight to practice those
things that are forbidden by, and in them. And so they continuing living and
dying in this state, we may conclude without fear, that these portions of holy
Scripture belong unto them, and shall for certain be fulfilled upon them* He
that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. The unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Co^. 6. 9, 10. But the abominable, the
unbelieving, the whoremongers, and all liars shall have their part in the Lake
that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21. 8. Depart ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. 41. Depart,
Depart from me, for I will not save you. Depart, for my blood shall not at all
wash you. Depart, for you shall not set one foot into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Depart ye cursed, ye are cursed of God, cursed of his Law, cursed of me,
cursed by the Saints, and cursed by the Angels, cursed all over, nothing but
cursed, and therefore depart from me; and whither? Into everlasting fire, fire
that will scald, scorch, burn, and flame to purpose; fire that never shall be
quenched, Mark 9. fire that will last to all eternity. And must we be all
alone? No, you shall have company, store of company with you. Namely, all the
raging, roaring devils, together with an innumerable company of fellow damned
sinners, men, women, and children. And if the Scriptures be true, (as they will
one day wonderfully appear to be) then this must, and shall be thy portion, if
thou live and dye in this state, and of all them who continue in sinning
against the truths com^ined in Scriptures.

As first, Do thou delight to sin against plain commands? thou art gone.

Secondly, Do thou slight and scorn the counsels contained in Scriptures, and
continue in so doing? then thou art gone.

Thirdly Do thou continually neglect to come to Christ, and usest arguments
in thine own heart to satisfy thy soul with so doing, then thou art gone. Luke
14. 17, 18. compared with verse 24. and Hebrews 2. 3. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation? How shall we escape, (...) there is no way to
escape.

First* because God has said we shall not, Heb. 10. 25. See that ye refuse not
him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth
(that was Moses), much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that
speaks from Heaven.

2. Because he has not only said, they shall not, but also has bound it with
an oath, saying, So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest,
Heb. 3. 11. To whom did he swear that they should not enter into his rest?
Answer, To them that believed not, So we see, they could not enter in, because
of unbelief, verse 18, 19.

Secondly, this will teach us what to think and conclude of such, who though
they do not so openly discover their folly by open and gross sins against the
Law, yet will give more heed to their own spirits, and the movings thereof,
though they be neither commanded, nor commended for the same in Scripture; nay,
though the Scripture command and commend the contrary, Isaiah 8. 20. then they
will to the holy and revealed will of God. I say, such men are in as bad a
state as the other to the full, being disobedient to Gods will revealed in his
Word, as well as they, though in a different manner; the one openly
transgressing against the plain and well known truths revealed in it; the
other, though more close and hidden, yet secretly rejecting and slighting them,
giving more heed to their own spirits, and the motion thereof, although not
warranted by the Scriptures.

A few words more, and so I shall conclude.

And first, take heed that you content not your self with a bare notion of the
Scriptures in your heads, by which you may go far, even so far, as to be able
to dispute for the truth, to Preach the Gospel, and labor to vindicate it in
opposition to gainsayers, and yet be found at the left hand of Christ at the
Judgment-day, forasmuch as thou did content thy self with a notion or a
traditional knowledge of them.

2. Have a care, that thou own the whole Scripture, and not own one part, and
neglect another, or slight it, is th^^: To own the Law, and slight the Gospel;
or to think that thou must be saved by thy good doing and works, for that is
all one, as if thou did thrust Christ away from thee, or else so to own the
Gospel, as if by it thou were exempted from all obedience to the ten
Commandments, and conformity to the Law in life and conversation; for in so
doing, thou will for certain make sure of eternal vengeance.

Thirdly, have a care that thou put not wrong names on the things contained in
the Scriptures, as to call the Law, Christ, and Christ, the Law. For some
having done so (in my knowledge), have so darkened to themselves the glorious
truths of the Gospel, that in a very little time they have been resolved to
thwart and oppose them, and so have made room in their own souls for the devil
to inhabit, and obtained a place in hell for their own souls, to be tormented
for ever and ever.

Against this danger therefore in reading and receiving the testimony of
Scripture, learn to distinguish between the Law and the Gospel, and to keep
them clear asunder, as to the salvation of thy soul, and that thou may so
do: In the first place, beg of God, that he would show thee the nature of the
Gospel, and set it home effectually with life and power upon thy soul by Faith.
Which is this, That God would show thee, that as thou being man, have sinned
against God; so Christ being God Man, has ^^ought thee again, and with his
most precious blood set thee free from the bondage thou wast fallen into by thy
sins; and that not upon condition, that thou will do thus and thus, this and
the other good work; but rather, that thou being first justified freely by mere
grace, through the blood of Jesus, should also receive thy strength from him
who has bought thee, to walk before him in all well pleasing, being enabled
thereto by virtue of his Spirit, which has revealed to thy soul, that thou art
delivered already from wrath to come, by the obedience, not of thee, but of
another man, ( viz.) Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Then if the Law thou read of, tell thee in thy Conscience, thou
must do this and the other good work of the Law, if ever thou will be saved.
Answer plainly, that for thy part thou art resolved now not to work for life,
but to believe in the virtue of that blood shed upon the Cross, upon Mount
Calvary, for the remission of sins; and yet, because Christ has justified thee
freely by his Grace, thou will se^ve him in Holiness and Righteousness all the
days of thy life, yet not in a legal Spirit, or in a Covenant of Works, but
mine obedience (say thou) I will endeavor to have it free, and cheerful, out
of love to my Lord Jesus.

Thirdly, Have a care thou receive not this doctrine in the notion only, lest
thou bring a just damnation upon thy soul, by professing thy self to be freed
by Christ's blood from the guilt of sin, while thou remainest still a servant to
the filth of sin. For I must tell you, that unless you have the true and saving
work of the Faith and Grace of the Gospel in your hearts, you will either go on
in a legal Holiness, according to the tenor of the Law; or else through a
notion of the Gospel (the Devil bewitching, and beguiling thy understanding,
will, and affections) thou will Ranter* like, turn the Grace of God into
wantonness, and bring upon thy soul, double, if not treble damnation, in that
thou could not be contented to be damned for thy sins against the Law, but
also to make ruin sure to thy soul; thou would dishonor the Gospel, and
turn the Grace of God held forth, and discovered to man by that, into
licenticusness.

But that thou might be sure to escape these dangerous looks on the right
hand, and on the left, see that thy faith be such, as spoken of in S^^^pture,
and that thou be not satisfied without that* which is a faith wrought by the
mighty operation of God, revealing Christ to, and in thee, as having wholly
freed thee from thy sins by his most precious blood. Which Faith, if thou
attain unto, will so work in thy heart, th^^ first thou will see the nature of
the Law, and also the nature of the Gospel, and delight in the glory of it; and
also thou will find an engaging of thy heart and soul to Jesus Christ, even to
the giving up of thy whole man unto him, to be ruled and governed by him to his
glory, and thy comfort, by the Faith of the Lord Jesus.

The End.
Books printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle without
Temple-Barre.
CHristianismus Redivivus, or Baptizing and Inchurching believers, after faith
and repentance vindicated; also the writings of Mr. Bax^er, Dr. ^eatley, Dr.
Hilins, Mr. Marshall, Mr. Blake Mr. Cook, Mr. Cotton answered, with a
Vindication of Ordinances, till Christ's Personal coming proved; in Folio.

The Work of Faith with Power; Wherein the nature of that (dead Faith is
detected) by which multitudes that hope for Salvation, are (as is to be feared)
deceived. Published on purpose to rectify some dangerous and Damning mistakes
of Men about their Faith, and to Awaken all to the Work of Faith with Power; In
quarto.

Means to prevent perishing, or, the usefulness of the saving knowledge of God
discovered; Showing what blessed tendency the right knowledge of God has to
bring men to Salvation; in 4to.

Sions groans for her distressed; Proving it the undoubted right of Christian
Liberty, under different persuasions in matters Spiritual, to have equal
protection as to their civil Peace, with the Testimony of 15. Ancients, humbly
offered to the Kings Majesty, Parliament, and People; in 4to.

Faith in Gods Promises, the Saints best weapon, or, the great use and
availableness of (...), both for the support, and growth of Saints in times
most perilous; With several considerations for the increase of Faith, 4to.

A Contention for Truth, In two Public Disputations before thousands of
People, between Dr. Gunning, and Mr. Da^n, touching the Baptism of Infants,
Whether Lawful, or Unlawful, 4to.

The free Grace of God to all the Sons of Adam vindicated, In a plain discovery
of that Truth, with 20 Queries to all men concerned, 4to.

A Plea for Toleration of Opinions and Persuasions in matters of Religion
differing from the Church of England; Showing the unreasonableness of
prescribing to other Men's Faith; and the evil of persecuting differing
Opinions, Humbly Presented to the Kings Majesty, 4to.

The great Case of Conscience Opened, in the particular unfoulding of those two
difficult Texts, Matthew. 5. 33, 34. with Jam. 5. 12. about the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness of Swearing, 4to.

Godly Adversity, far better than Wicked Prosperity; or, The Rage of the Wicked
should not hinder the Race of the Godly, 4to.

An Epistle of Information and Consolation to all such as are distinguished by
names of reproach; Containing also, A sober Rebuke for former Slothfulness, 4to.

The (...) causes of Gods Forekno^^^g of Election and Predestination, and of
Man's Salvation or Damnation* As also, Whether Christ Dyed for all* or not for
all with the Causes and Effects that may follow, or not follow. The fifth
Edition, 4^0.

Mr. Hooles Latin and English Grammar, fitted not only for the use of Schools,
but very useful for any person that is desirous to learn the Latin Tongue;
being a more plain and speedy help, than any yet ext^nt. The fourth Edition,
Octavo.

A Discovery of the Latitude of the Loss of the Earthly Paradise, by Original
Sin; With 20 Characte^s of the true and false Ministry; To which is added*
Si^ns Redemption, with the manner of the Rice of the Man of Sin; with a brief
Description of Christ's Personal Reign upon Earth a thousand years.

Symptoms of Growth and Decay to Godliness, In LX. Signs of A Living and Dying
Christian; with the cause; of Decay, and Remedies for Recovery, Octavo.

Laying on of Hands Asserted, under New Testament C^nsi^erations, viz. 1 Upon
Persons for Healing With a brief Discovery of that Ordinance of Anointing with
Oil. 2. Upon Persons to Office. 3. Upon Believers Baptized as such.

A Profitable Concordance to the Bible, With Doctrinal and Alphabetical
Observations upon most Points material in the Holy Scriptures, Oct.

Saturday no Sab^^^^ or, (...) Sabbath proved not to be (...) force to
Believing Gentiles, neither by the Law of Nature, Law of Moses, nor Law of
Christ, Octavo.

The truth of the Resurrection of the Bodies, both of Good and Bad at the Great
Day, Asserted and Proved by Gods Word; also the manner and order of their
coming forth of their Graves; And a Discourse of the Last Judgment, and final
Conclusion of the whole World; in Octavo.

A short Catechism very teachable, as well for young Christians as Children,
in seven particulars; in Octavo.

Christian Beheaviour, being the fruits of true Christianity, te^ching
Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, so to walk, as to please
God, the 3d Edition in Twelves.

Prayer with the Spirit and Understanding, also showing what it is to pray with
the Spirit, and with Understanding, the 2d Edition; in 120.

Prison Meditations, directed to the heart of suffering Saints, and reigning
sinners; in 120.

Self (...) the grand Enemy of Jesus Christ, or a Treatise showing what a
heart-plague self is, with special Remedies for its ruin; in 12^.

The Doctrine of Christianity, teaching how to become a Christian, how to lead
a Christian life, and what is the Government of Christ's Church, with the
Articles of their faith; in 12^. first (...) with the Rule of Three; also the
way to find the solid content of Board, Glass, Land, Timber, Stone, Globes,
etc. in 12^. 2d Edition.

One thing is needful, or serious Meditations upon the Four last Things,*
Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell; with a Conference between Christ and a
sinner, in 12^.

The Line of Life, and the Line of Death, or a Map showing the order and causes
of Salvation, and Damnation, all cut in Brass.

The Poor Man's Physician, or the true Art of Medicine, as its Chimically
prepared for the healing all Diseases incident to Mankind.

A brief Confession of Faith, as it was presented to the King, in the name of
many thousands, commonly called Anabaptists.

Also their Apology and Vindication against the injurious aspersions, of being
like some pretended German Anabaptists.

A Treatiise touching fa^ling from Grace; or 13 Arguments proving that
Believers may fall from the truth of Grace; with the most material Objections
to the contrary Answered, 4^0.

Gods Oracle, and Christ's Doctrine, or the Six Principles and beginning word
of ever, Christian Man, showing the Foundation every Convert* is to lay.


