ADVICE TO PARENTS and CHILDREN. The Sum of a few SERMONS, Contracted, and
Published at the request of many Pious Hearers.

By DANIEL BVRGESS, Minister of the Gospel.

He shall turn the Heart of the Fathers unto the Children, and the Heart of the
Children unto the Fathers, lest I come and smite the Earth with a curse, Mal.
iv. 6. LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three
Crowns in Cheapside; and J. Lawrance at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1690.

To the Flock Committed to my Care. Especially those whose Importunity Extorted
this Publication.
Brethren,
YOu would not Excuse, you must therefore Accept this small Labor. Were it not
for the Writing, I would not Name it a Labor. The Meditation and Delivery of
it were very Pleasure to me. He knows it, who knows what my Heart feels in my
Hopes of Benefiting you; and in my Discernments thereof.

I have contracted it; and the rather, because my late Sermon of Early
Conversion is gotten into many of your Hands I presume.

Under the Law, he that built a new House was to make a Battlement for the Roof
of it; lest any walking on the Roof, should through their Imprudence fall from
it. Deuteronomy. 22.8. God was not satisfied, to have Householders only forbear
Pushing Men down. But Commanded them to make Provision against their own
falling down. So that no Man should easily come unto hurt in their Families.
None should slip, if he would not wilfully leap down headlong, over the
Battlements. Believe it, my dearest Friends, the Law is still in force. God is
not content that your Children be not by you put upon sinful courses. He
Commands that they be by you kept from them. That you set up such Spiritual
Battlements in your Houses, as shall make it hard for a Child to fall into
them. I have directed you how to make those Battlements. If you set them up,
and your children will leap over them into Hell, yet your own Souls are
delivered. If you do not set them up, their Blood will be required at your
Hands. To prevent their Perdition and your Sorrow thence, I have prepared for
them, that which I must trust you to deliver unto them.

My Life is spent in Prayers and Pains for you and them. I hope, I do not Live
a day, wherein I have not the help of your Holy Prayers. You do by this time
know my need, and my desire also.

May every of you be Blessed in your children, and your children in you. May
all the Graces of the Blessed Spirit, all the Promises of the Gospel Covenant,
and all the Joys of the Heavenly Mansions, be the Lot of your Inheritance, and
of theirs. I am

Your very Affectionate PASTOR, DAN. BURGESS.

An Introduction into the Discourse intended; sc. In six memorable Positions
concerning second Table Duties: Or, Duties toward Man.
THey are not few, whose highest Aim and Business is to cultivate Moral
Virtues. Speaking but seldom and but little of the Holy Ghosts supernatural
Operations, and Gospel Graces. But, as its every where seen, they are the death
of Morality where they come. And by setting it up in opposition unto
Evangelical Obedience, they do, (eventually, however undesignedly,) depose both
of them. They that desire no more, do not possess so much as true Morality.
They that aspire not to be Godly, do reach but unto counterfeit Honesty. Men
wise unto Salvation do know the difference, between true Pearls produced by the
beams of the Sun of Righteousness; and the false ones, that are formed by the
smoaky heat of depraved Reason.

But they are also too many, who sin on the contrary hand: Who, it may be do
affect, and certainly do account themselves to be very Saints, not being so
much as Men. Yea, and wanting nothing more of Bruits then their Innocence.
Neglecting Duties toward Man, as though they had never been required by God.
Or, as though, being of the lower Hemisphere, they were unworthy of their
Thoughts and Care. But who has bewitched the one and the other? that they
should not discern the monstrousness of unregenerate Morality, and of immoral,
yea unnatural Piety. Of the two, it must be confessed, this latter is the most
visible monster. Moralists, void of Gods Holy Spirit, are poisonous Snakes, but
with fairly painted Skins on their backs. Whereas Saints in Profession, not
having natural Affection and reasonable Conversation, are Naked without any
fig-leaf. Are Devils in black, without their cloven foot hid. Sepulchers, not
painted, nor so much as covered. In a word; the Plant called the sensitive one,
has no more sense then the lowest Vegetable, but has a little faint
resemblance of it! Graceless men of the most refined Morals, are as truly dead
in sin as the most lewd men are; but they have a shadow of gracious Life. And
that shadow it self, is more then is attainable by your utmost Fasting and
Prayer unto God, while you lead a course of Injustice and Uncharitableness unto
Men.

To prepare you for the Duties I am to commend, I premise these six
Memorandums. I would have their Fire heat your Iron before I strike.

Pos. 1. Duty unto Man, is required just so as Duty unto God himself is. I
mean, as immediate duty unto God is required. The same God made the Law for
both: And also wrote with his own hand the Law for that and for this. And
caused the Law for both to be alike preserved in the Ark. Nor are the three
Motives prefixed in the Praeface unto the Law, restrictly put to urge us unto
the observance of the Commands of the first Table only. No, but to engage our
performance of those of the second Table also, the Lord declares; (1.) He is
Jehovah, and therefore to be Obeyed. (2.) He is the God of his Peoples Choice
and Covenant, and therefore to be Obeyed. (3.) He is their Redeemer and
Disembondager, and therefore to be Obeyed.

Pos. 2. Duty unto Man, is in like sort explicated in the word as Duty unto God
immediately is. The four general Precepts of Duty unto God, are notably
explicated in numberless Texts of Scripture. And so are the six Precepts of
Duty unto Man. I will instance but in four, noted to my hand by Mr. Durham on
the Decalogue, p. 311, 312. Mat. 22.39. We are bid to Love our Neighbors as
our selves. Which teaches that our Duty unto Men, ought to be discharged with
warmth of Affection. Mat. 7.12. We are told we should do unto all men, as we
(regularly) would that men should do unto us. Which instructs us unto
impartiality and extent of affection. Phil. 2.4. We are charged, not to look
(singly) at our own interests, but at others. Which gives us to understand,
that our Duty unto Men stands not only in Affection and good Wishes. No, but
Consideration and Action too are required. (...), etc. Romans 12.10. Be kindly
affectioned one to another with Brotherly Love, in honor preferring one
another. Which extraordinary words signify to us, that our Duty unto Man is to
be paid with naturally free inclination, (...), etc.
and very inward esteem of him.

Pos. 3. Duty unto Man, is a fruit of Duty unto God. Of Flattery and Pageantry,
I do not speak; but very Duty, and such Duty unto Man, as is acceptable unto
God. This, all of it, grows from Duty unto God, as its root. Our Duty unto God,
is double: First, Submission unto his Authority; Secondly, Expression Practical
of that Submission. Now, till we submit to his Authority, and own him to be
what he is unto us; we cannot be rightly affected unto our selves or unto any
other Creature. And till we set our selves to express our submission to his
Power, by observance of his Precepts, we cannot square aright one action toward
them or our selves. But when we subject our selves to the divine Power, and
conform our ways to the divine Precepts, what follows? Why then, our Lunacy
is over. Owning him our Head, we own every fellow Member too. And being by him
governed, every just office to him and to our fellow Creatures is introduced.
His Authority is sufficient to oblige unto both; and his Laws are extant,
obliging unto them, Wherefore, rendering unto God the things that are Gods, we
necessarily render unto Man the things that are Man's. Whereas, while we are
Rebels unto God we are Devils to our selves, and unto one another. And must
needs be so; being that so long as we are in the state of Rebellion, we are
deserted by the Spirit of all good; and are acted by the clean contrary Spirit.
Blind they are therefore, that see not the Nobility of second Table duty in its
Heavenly Descent. It comes from first Table-Duty; and therefore must needs
partake of its Dignity and Excellence. It is very observable, that, according
to what is said, all second Table-Duties are pressed from the consideration of
the first. As those of Subjects unto the Higher Powers, Romans 13.1. Let every
Soul be subject to the Higher Powers. For there is no power but of God: the
powers that be, are ordained of God. Of Wives to Husbands, Ephesians. 5, 22. Wives,
submit your selves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord. Of Children to
Parents, Ephesians. 6, 1. Children, obey your Parents in the Lord: for this is right.
Of People unto their Ministers, 1 Thessalonians. 5, 12. And we beseech you, Brethren,
to know them which Labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you. Of Servants to Masters, Colos. 3, 22. Servants, obey in all things your
Masters according to the flesh; not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God. The one Agument unto all, is Conscience of
the first Commandment. Which, as the Great Luther well said, Is in every
Commandment to be understood,

Pos. 4. Duty unto Man, is a very great Mean of Duty unto God. I have read of a
Tree growing in a hot and dry Country, whose Leaves do drop a Liquor that
excellently moistens and maintains the Root. Duty to God, is indeed the Root of
Duty to Man: But Duty to Man is that whose influences do greatly contribute to
the Life and Liveliness of that Root. A Truth so bright, that it needs no
proof, nor meets with any denial. Lev. 19.3. Reverence unto Parents, seems
called for as a mean of the Sanctification of Sabbaths. And 2 Timothy 1.2. We are
plainly bid to do our great Duty to Kings and all in Authority, yea and to all
Men; for this very end, that we may lead quiet Lives in all Godliness and
Honesty. In a word, it is the Holy Spirits pleasure, ever to verify this
memorable saying; All Graces and Duties be mutually Mother and Daughter unto
each other. Love of God, and his Service, brings forth Love and Serviceableness
unto Man. And Love and Serviceableness unto Man, brings a like Love and Service
of God. He that would not Love and Serve Men for their own sakes, should do
both for the sake of the Love and Service of God. A Duke would Court the
Friendship of a Beggar, if that would half so much promote his Friendship with
the King.

Pos. 5. Duty unto Man is the only convincing proof of sincerity and Duty unto
God. Duties toward God, are, for the most part Spiritual and Invisible. When
you are true therein, who but God and Conscience can see your Truth? The Duties
toward God, that are Bodily and Visible, are now in the Gospel-day, all, very
easy and cheap. Very Hypocrites do not begrudge them, and unfeigned Friends of
God can never be known by them. It Is otherwise as to Duties toward Men. They
are naked and open to Men's Eyes. Their Light as the Sun, shines before all
Men. And few will question your Piety, if they see your Universal and Exquisite
Honesty. For this reason it seems, that in the day of Judgment Christ
insisteth upon Christians Duties of the Second Table. Mat. 25.35. Because they
are the most sensible Discoveries of Faith and Holiness, and fittest to
justify Saints before the World. The Servants of God, are obliged to show
abroad who their Master is. But they have no way to do it without that which is
foresaid. Therefore is it that the World so hardly believes us Christ's
Disciples, because we so little Love one another. They will acknowledge us his
Servants, when they see more of his Livery, which is Love, among us.

Pos. 6. Duty to man has Promises of Reward, as well as Duty unto God.
Wonderful, yet most certain this is. The Fifth Command is known to be called
the first with Promise. Ephesians. 6.2. The Second, has but a general Promise made
to the Keepers of the whole Law: The Fifth has a particular Promise made to
the Keepers of that single Commandment. Let it never be doubted therefore, but
that it shall be richly Rewarded by God, whatever at his Command you perform
toward Man. Even toward the poorest Child. The Gift of a Cup of Water, shall be
as truly rewarded as Martyrdom it self. And be it known unto you Parents and
Children, that of all Duties between Man and Man, the greatest are those
between you. The Fifth Commandment seems the Hinge of both Tables. And, by
its place, to speak thus much. sc. That in order to the Knowledge and Obedience
of all the other Commandments, it is highly necessary that the Fifth be well
Known and Obeyed. It is true, Natural Parents are not all that be meant
therein. All true Governors are included. But Parents only are mentioned, as
being the first Governors we have; some years before Kings take notice of us.
And as being the Principal Governors to whom we are most obliged, as the
Authors of our Beings: and those whose Government is not founded in Choice and
Contract, as others is, but in Nature it self. Which being considered, I
proceed.

Parents Advised to their more Genearl and Particular Duties. And pressed with
Motives thereto.
The Duty of Parents to Children, is implied and concluded in the Fifth
Commandment. It thus summarily expressed in the Westminster Assemblies Larger
Catechism. It is required of Superiors, according to that power they receive
from God, and that relation wherein they stand, to love, pray for, and bless
their Inferiors; to instruct, counsel, and admonish them; countenancing,
commending, and rewarding such as do well; discountenancing, reproving, and
chastising such as do ill; protecting and providing for them all things
necessary for soul, and body; and by grave, wise, holy, and exemplary carriage,
to procure Glory to God, honor to themselves, and so to preserve that
Authority which God has put upon them. I will transcribe no more of our many
Summaries. But propose these particulars which I take to be comprehensive. And
such that God will judge all the neglecters of; and not hold them guiltless,
however full they be of excuses. Knowing the Terror of the Lord, I thus
instruct and persuade every Christian Parent,

1. Be Exemplary in Universal Duty. Ill Example, is the rankest Poison in the
World. Parents ill Example, is the worst that Children can have. I know not
what God has forbid or required, if he forbids not ill, and requires not good
Example. Good Example, for Duty foresaid. Would be a good Parent? Thou can
not, till thou do understandly, affectionately, and practically keep the
Gospel Covenant. Owning the Engagement of thy Holy Baptism, renewing it at the
Lords Supper, observing it in all thy ways toward God, other Men, and thy
self. You that do not this, ye bid your Children not to do it: In practice, ye
bid 'em. And ye who bid them, not to do this, ye bid them (virtually) be
Atheists and Devils and Rebels, to God and to your selves. As little as ye
think of it, this ye do. God, and Godly Men, count you so to do. Parents,
Parents, con ye well Job 22, 21, 22, 23. Job is advised to Acquaint himself
with God, to receive and lay up God's Word in his Heart, to return unto the
Almighty: (that is, to do all I have here foresaid:) And for his encouragement
he is then told, his relative Duties will come on with their Blessings. He
shall be built up, that is, he shall have more Children. And he shall put away
Iniquity far from his Tabernacles; that is, he shall be a good Father and
Master, and remove the Iniquity of his Children and Servants; and promote
Family-Godliness. Which, without that course prescribed, he could not expect to
do. Preceptive Teaching alone, is a little more than, a Cipher; it is practical
Teaching is the Figure. The Language that God binds Parents and all Teachers to
use, is this. Come with me, unto this and that Duty. Fly with me, from this and
that Sin. Mourn with me, for this and that Omission and Commission sinful.
Delight with me, in this and that Holy Service. And be it written on all our
Walls, They that are not Patterns to their Children be plagues to their
Children. They who give them not good Example, give them nothing good; at
least, nothing like to do them good. For a grain of bad Example does an hundred
times more hurt, than a pound of good Counsel (ordinarily) does good.

2. Be as full of prayer, as St. Austin's Mother. That Holy Creature got her
Son and her Husband Converted by her Prayer. But not by slight and sleepy
Prayer. Think of this, Parents! As their greatest Wickedness makes not Prayer
hopeless, so your greatest Sanctity makes not Prayer useless. Our Redeemer,
whose Obedience is Meritorious, he himself asks, before God gives. Nor will God
give, till in his Name ye ask. Ordinarily, he will not. But if ye ask not
amiss, ye can never miss of what ye ask. And I will be allowed to say; Prayer
for our Children is that Duty to them, without which we can discharge none. We
must be joined to God in the Covenant of Grace, before we can rightly Pray. And
we must Pray, before we can expect to benefit our selves or our Children by any
means possible. Genesis 17.18, 20. Abraham prayed for Ishmael, and that warmly.
And what says the Text? God said, and as for Ishmael I have heard thee, behold
I have blessed him and will make him Fruitful, and will multiply him
exceedingly: twelve Princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great Nation.
David prayed hard for Solomon his Son. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of
Israel our Fathers, give to Solomon my Son a perfect heart to keep thy
Commandments and thy Statutes 1 Chronicles. 22, 12, 1 Chronicles. 29, 18, 19. The seventy
second Psalm is David's Prayer for his Solomon, Parents; Of all things be not
niggardly of your prayers for your Children! Rather deny them Victuals and
Drink. For many can give them both, that cannot put up prayers for them. And
the same may be said of the will as of the power of most. I know few do think
it, but it is true, a stock of prayers is a richer Child portion, than a stock
of broad Gold,

3. Be Catechizers through the whole compass of the words of Eternal Life.
Suffer not thy Child to say, there is one Truth, or one Grace, or one Duty
necessary to Salvation, that thou knew but never taughtest him. Who ever
doubted, but if a Man had a blind Child, he was bound to use all the likely
means he could come by, to recover it is sight. I am very confident that Adam,
Seth, Noah, and Sem, were, all, Catechisers. From the Cradle, the Church was
still kept up by Catechizing. Of Abraham, God speaks plainly, Genesis 18. 19. For
I know him, that he will command his Children and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment; that the Lord
may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. David and Bathsheba
too Catechized Solomon soundly. 1 Kings 2.2, 3. I go the way of all the Earth:
be thou strong therefore, and show thy self a Man. And keep the charge of the
Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his Statutes and his Commandments
and his Judgments and his Testimonies, as it is written in the Law of Moses,
that thou may prosper in all that thou do, and whithersoever thou turnest
thy self. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou, Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: for the
Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off for ever. Prove. 31.1. The words of King Lemuel, the
prophecy that his mother taught him. Lois and Eunice are praised on this
account. 2 Timothy 1.5, 3, 15. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned Faith that
is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice;
and I am persuaded that in thee also. And that from a Child thou have known the
holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith
which is in Christ Jesus. After the death of the Apostles, the Churches had
Officers for the single work of Catechizing. Clemens, Origin, Cyril,
successively held that work at Alexandria. And truly Parents, you had need take
it up your selves now. For you are your Childrens first Ministers, as well as
their Guides and Rulers. And an uncatechising Parent is a non-preaching
Minister; which is so bad a Creature, that one has said, He thought Hell was
paved with their Skuls. This forget not, I beseech you; every prayer you make
for your Children, that is not followed with your pains with them, is a very
mocking of God and of them.

4. Be as kind as ever you can with good Conscience. Never provoke 'em, or by
unnecessary hard looks, words, or acts, discourage them. Col. 3, 21. Ephesians.
6.4. God expressly forbids you. But catch at every opportunity to encourage them
to begin and go on to do well. This God commands you to do toward all, and
especially, your own Children, I trow. It was wickedly that Saul called his Son
Jonathan, Son of the perverse and wicked Woman; and more wickedly that he threw
a Javelin at him: which caused him to rise up in fierce anger, which was very
contrary to the Reverence of a Parent. 1 Samuel 20.30, 33, 34. And as wicked were
the blind man's cow-hearted Parents, who shrunk from his defense and left him
to shift for himself, saying, he was of age, forsooth. Jo. 9.21. Praise
worthily, Joash stood by his Son Gideon in the contest, Judge. 6.29, 30, 31, But
in brief: the Holy Ghost supposes good Fathers to brook what may be born in
their Children. Mal. 3.17. As a Father spares his Son. For Mothers, see Isai.
66.13. As one whom his mother comfort. Convince your Children, if it be
possible, that you love them as the apple of your eyes. And do pray and labor
to make sweet their Time and Eternity. Ruling them but as God does, drawing
them with the Cords of a Man, the Bonds of Love. Showing them by the likeness
of your Government, that it is in God's stead that you do Rule over them. Even
the God who is Love. And whose severity is as rare as Thunder, while his
Benignity is as common as the day Light. Flints will break upon Wool, that will
not upon Iron. But,

5. Abhor David 's kindness unto Adonijah. It is said, That David had not
displeased him at any time, in saying, why have thou done so? 1 Kings 1.6. This
kindness is the bloodiest Cruelty. God pronounces such Parents Haters of their
Children. Prove. 13.24. He that spares his rod, hates his son; he carries it
mischievously toward his son, as though he did hate him. David found it so, when
Adonijah was in Rebellion. Isaac found it so, when his son Esau, whom he had
suffered to sport out his time in Hunting, came to grieve his heart and his
Wives. Genesis 25.27. Genesis 26.35. Eli found it so, when, for the indulged sins of
his coldly rebuked Children, he was sentenced terribly by God, and his whole
Family also. His Hophni and Phineahs being both doomed to die in a day. 1 Samuel
2. Government, is a high Talent; Dominion makes like unto God. Foolish
fondness prostitutes unto contempt. And exposes to scorn any Governor, yea the
God for whom he Governs. A wickedness, that, I think, God never lets go
unrevenged in this World it self. A wickedness, that many at the Gallows have
said, was the cause of their perishing thereon. A wickedness, that slays more
of the Children of the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, than any other appears
to do. Parents, as you value your Childrens Souls, be sure to abhor Tyranny on
one hand, and Anarchy on the other. Be not so Cruel as to give them their wills
in no thing, or to deny them their wills in any thing that is good. Nor so much
more Cruel, as to give them their wills in every thing, or in any one sinful
thing. Prove. 29.15. The Rod and Reproof give Wisdom, but a Child left to
himself brings his Mother to shame. Apes be not the only Bruits that hug
their Whelps to death. Be it remembered that I say: Brutish is that Parent that
ever corrects a Child but when it is necessary, or ever does it not to the
subduing of his Spirit when it is necessary. When it comes unto a contest, he
that lets his Child outbrave him, does shame himself, and (in a sense) murder
and damn his Child. Prove. 23.13, 14. If thou beatest him with the rod he shall
not dye. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from Hell.

6. Lay out, and lay up for your Children. They have Bodies as well as Souls.
God commits to you the care of both. And requires that, next to their Souls,
you be of all things most kind to their Bodies. That you lay out upon them what
is meet; for Comfort, and Ornament, as well as Necessity: Though abhorring
superfluity; into which extreme most Parents do run. It is an odious sight,
when Children are Apparelled, Fed, and Lodged very poorly, though the Parents
are all richly. It shows that the Parents are Monsters, and it tempts the
Children to be Vipers. He that is greedy of gain, in this way as well as
others, troubles his house, Prove. 15.27. This unnatural vicious niggardice
unto Children, makes a Wasps nest of a Family. Laudable was Jesse's liberal
care for his Sons: 1 Samuel 17.17. Jesse said unto David his Son, take now for
thy Brethren an Epha of this parched Corn, and these ten Loaves, and run to the
Camp to thy Brethren. An Epha contained about ten Pottles, a sufficient
allowance for a days food.
And carry these ten Cheeses to their Captain, and look how thy Brethren fare,
and take their pledge. Jacobs care for his Sons was alike lovely; Genesis 37.14.
He said to Joseph, Go I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy Brethren.
and well with their Flocks, and bring me word again. But whatever you lay out
upon your Children, you are obliged also to lay up for them. 2 Cor. 12.14.
Prodigals, that spend all their income, (unnecessarily, I mean;) are horrid
Felons. And rob their Children of their due. Parents ought to exercise together
great Diligence, and great Frugality, with an eye to their Childrens needs.
Their needs of charge to the setting of them in proper and comfortable
Callings; and afterward to the disposing of them in convenient Matches. In
which a wise Man would take the most curious care, next to the Salvation of his
Child's Soul. But it need not be said, how little the greatest care uses to do
in either their Callings or Matches, without a provided stock of that which
answers all things. Jacobs question is therefore every faithful Parents: Genesis
30.30. And now when shall I provide for my own house? They Conscientiously
consider, if they provide not for them, they are worse than Infidels. 1 Timothy
5.8. Parents, lay to heart what I tell you: If our Children be without
Callings, they be outlaws from Gods Kingdom. If they be in bad ones, they are
in continual Temptations. If we lay not up what we (innocently) can for them,
they are not like to have good ones. If through our Sloth, Prodigality, or
Covetousness, they do miss of good ones, what an action have they against us?
It would cut the heart of a gracious Parent to have his Children say, as Labans
Daughters said, Genesis 31.14, 15. Is there yet any portion for us in our Fathers
house? Are we not counted of him strangers? And has he not quite devoured also
our money. Neither are your Children, Angels. It is your duty to provide,
seasonably, for their disposal in Marriage. Some delay it, looking after a
Match more rich then yet offers: Others delay, as loath to part with so much of
their Riches as is requisite. But commonly you pay dear for your delays. Lot
delayed to dispose of his Daughters, and he deeply suffered for it. Genesis 19.30,
31, 32. Judah delayed; suffered for it, and confessed it, Genesis 38.26. Tamar
(that played the Harlot) has been more righteous then I, because that I gave
her not to Shelah my Son. Unto this delay of Parents must be ascribed, the
invincible Melancholy, the Distraction, the Debauchery, the temporal Ruin and
Infamy of thousands of English Children. History tells us of many that have
conspired and got their Parents murdered, for crossing them in their Matches. I
would that Religious Parents could but look into the hearts of all the Children
that they cross herein, and see the resentments of them. But I add this word
only more; Forbidding to marry is a doctrine of Devils, among Papists; and
seems to be a practice of Devils among many Protestants.

I proceed unto some more particular Counsels. Calculated for the greatest
number of Parents, who do need them. Those, more rare ones, that do not, may
overlook them. I exhort those who are weak enough to want, and humble enough to
accept these Lines, as follows.

1. Understand and lament your Childrens sin and misery. Know and consider what
their natural unrenewed state is. Till you do so, you will neither incline nor
understand how to do your Duties. For you are without your Motive and your
Rule. I often think and say; Original sin must be more learned, before Parents
duties be better practiced. Did you know your Children to be sick, and know
their disease too; I do persuade my self you would not so generally neglect
their cure.

2. Begin their Education very early. The Twig greenest, bends easiest. They
that tame Lions, or convert very many Sinners, break them when they are very
young. Stubbornness of will, ruins the World: But young Stomachs are most
easy to be pulled down. Besides, God is honored by your have to make your
Child honor him. And most commonly he honors and blesses that have. The
sooner you are doing, the more and better you are like to do.

3. Employ them constantly. Keep them out of Idleness, as you would out of the
Fire, or out of the Thames. Hold them always Musing, Hearing, or Doing. Rather
make them sweep the House, then stand idle in it. Find some good work or
innocent for all their time, if ye would have them do good in a good manner at
any time. Neither Children, nor Men, can refrain from evil, any longer then
employed in good.

4. Keep them from bad Company. That is Pitch; and if we let them touch it,
they must be defiled. Their Playfellows worst words and ways; get into the
best of them, very soon. And your own, and their Masters best words and blows
will not so soon get them out. Who knows it not? Company is one of the most
powerful means of Grace, or the contrary. It opens the doors of the Soul, more
then any, unto Good or unto Evil.

5. Make them neither too Bold with you, nor too Fearful of you. Not too Bold;
they be not Equals. Nor too Fearful; they be not your mere Servants neither.
Familiarity will bring them to contemn you, and your Government. Fear will make
them to hate both. Children be reasonable Creatures, they love themselves, and
love those that love them. You must give them such freedom with you, as may
speak your love of them. For the sense of that, will make it a pain to them to
displease you; and a pleasure to gratify you. But you must not give them such
a Liberty, as does directly carry them to Licentiousness. For alas, poor
things, if you will make them as bold as Equals, they (before ever they are
aware of it,) will make themselves as bold as Superiors. In a word: You must
neither make them too timorous to look upon you, not too audacious to be awed
by a look of yours. Let them love to see you, and fear to let you see ought but
what you like in them.

6. Let the doctrine of God and of his Covenant word, be first, and most taught
them. The sixteen things concerning God which I have Printed for your use, may
be leisurely dropped into very young Minds. So may my short account of the
Covenant of Grace. Till they are learnt, I know not what can be profitably
learnt. And when they are, all Religion is more easily learnt. Early and
frequently, and mostly inculk upon them; How great and good God is, what a
Covenant his Gospel presents, what an Engagement and Encouragement Holy Baptism
is. Happy be the Scholars who are set to learn first things in the first place.
Order gives Perspicuity, and Perspicuity makes Affection and Memory.

7. Speak of holy things in their Presence, with the greatest reverence
possible. Poor Creatures, their honor of you is the highest they have. They
take you for wiser then all the World. They believe best and loveliest what
they see you take to be so. And they will shrewdly guess by your Speech and
Carriage, what it is you take for best, and what for worst. Now a sight of your
prefering God and Covenant duty to him above all things; and a sight of your
hating and dreading sin and Gods displeasure more then Pain or Death; what does
it on them? Truly, more good for ought I know, then is done by all things else
to be named. Yea, and their hearing you speak of Holy things but as of Common;
and their smelling out your low esteem of them, is the greatest bane of them
that can be invented. If any thing more strengthens their Original Corruption,
it is somewhat that I have not yet understood.

8. Show them by Words and Deeds your Love of best Ministers and People, and
your loathing of trifling Ministers and vain People. By this will they be
brought to love the one and loath the other, before they understand them. And
be forengaged to Hearken to the best, and to be Deaf to the worst. A benefit
very great! And one whose influence is often seen to last throughout the Lives
of Men and Women. As is also the power of the contrary. I mean; when the cursed
example of Parents brings Children to mock at Gods Prophets and People; and
to esteem as the pleasantest Company, such as make a God of this World, and
make but a jest of Religion. And this before they know themselves, who are the
best and wisest, and who the most miserable people and foolish. Scarcely one of
an hundred is ever reduced, from the fatal error so early swallowed and
blindly.

9 Make their Recreations to deserve their name. I mean, to be such only, as do
indeed Recreate, and Whet, and Sharpen. Such as do make for Health of Body and
for Cheerfulness of Mind; and leave them more fit, and not less fit for
Business, then they found them. One of our Holy Martyrs, repented his having
played at Chess. Bishop Usher betimes left the use of Cards, as finding them an
ensnaring Game. All I say is this; Games that do not exercise the Body, and do
much stretch the sinews of the Mind, and do exhaust great sums of Time, these
do bear the Superscription of Satan. For in them, Play becomes a very work. And
the Gamester does as a Mower, who should spend all the day in whetting his
Sith.

10. Observe carefully each Child's peculiar Temper. The difference is very
great. And the need to know it is great. For how shall you else suit your
dealings unto it? You must never expect to obtain your end by unsuited means.
If you are very rough with some Children, you frighten them not unto their
duties but out of their wits. Others, will scarcely learn any thing unless they
be taught like the men of Succoth, with briars and thorns. And only a middle
way, with sweetness and severity immixed, will reach others. Besides, as every
Man, so every Child has some one or other supreme sin; that supports all the
rest; and being deposed, the rest would soon be mortified. Now the Child's
temper being found, this King-sin of his would not be long to seek. And this
being well watched and resisted, great would be the hopes of the Child's desired
Salvation.

I conclude with a few Motives, or moving Considerations. Do but remember them,
and neglect what is foresaid if ye dare?

C. 1. Your Children are Gods Children by Creation and Redemption; and
committed to your Tuition. O think what you would do for the Kings Child, if
you had one of his to educate.

C. 2. Your Children are your selves. Very parts of your selves. And is it no
shame for you that are Men and Christians, to neglect or but slightly care for
your selves.

C. 3. You are Baptized, and have had your Children Baptized, and at their
Baptism you engaged to do all this. In your Baptism you were bound to do all I
have named. You saw your. Children in their Baptism, bound to obey the whole
Gospel. And you then Promised to do all you could to help them to do it. Is all
this very nothing?

C. 4. You have more Advantages to do all, then all the World beside has. You
best love, and are best beloved by your Children. You are nighest to them. You
have greatest power over them.

C. 5. Your Honor, Pleasure and Profit, is most concerned in your Childrens
good. More then other Men's is. More than your own is in ought beside, except
your own Souls Salvation.

C. 6. You are they that have done your Children most hurt. You propagated or
derived Adams sin to them; through you they received the Infection: And by your
own sins, you make sad work for them too. Who should help to save them if not
you?

C. 7. You know too, (do you not,) that it is by ill Education, next to Original
Corruption, that the World is made such a Hell as it is. And will you
nevertheless give your Children no better Education?

Oh be not so unmerciful! You begat them not Beasts; oh do not breed them as
such. Mercy, mercy, have mercy on the Souls that must be Blessed or Miserable
for ever. And whose Life or Death seems next to Gods own hand, in yours. Help,
oh help poor Babes so weak. And do not stay, till your Help is nothing worth,
or much less then now. To murder Souls and your own Childrens, is fitter work
for Devils then for you. O lay not out Pounds for their Bodies, for every Penny
you lay out for their Souls. O Pray, O Labor, O Wait, till God say to each of
you, I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thy Offspring.
They shall spring up as among the Grass, as Willows by the water courses. One
shall say, I am the Lords; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob;
and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by
the name of Israel. Isa. 44.3, 4, 5. Be it known to as many as will not thus
do, they are notorious enemies of God, the Church, and the World, And of their
rotting names their Children will be forced to speak Lies, or Nothing, or Evil
things. The Speeches, Laws, and Actions of many Heathens, (which I may not here
repeat,) shall one day shame them. But I conclude with Prayer. O God turn the
Hearts of English Fathers to the Children, and do not come and smite us with
thy Curse!

Children exhorted to their Duties unto their Parents. General Duties, and
Particular. Motives to both.
In Prisons and upon the Gallows, poor Miscreants do often exclaim, that their
ruin began in disobedience unto Parents. Nor can it be doubted, but Hell rings
with the same complaint. Hear the words of your Life, dear Children! Read ye
these Lines, as though they had been written with the finger of God before your
eyes. And you were called to by name in every Paragraph. As sure as they are
any words they are Gods word. And his word unto you; to all and every one of
you. And his word designed and qualified to help you keep all his whole word.
The fifth Command is a directory for keeping all, of both Tables.

1. Love your Parents most dearly. Honor imports Love. When Husbands are bid
to give Honor to Wives as weaker Vessels, they are bid to be tenderly
affectionate toward them. All do so construe it, 1 Pet. 3.7. And when you are
bid to Honor your Parents, you are bid to Love them. And so Love them, as
those to whom you are most engaged next to God himself. You must love God, much
more. If they put you upon any thing displeasing to God, you must then show,
that in comparison of God, you do hate them. Luke 14.26. That for Gods sake you
can forget your Fathers House, leave it and be glad to be out of it. Psalm.
45.10. That in God's Cause, you have Levi's courage; read it, Deuteronomy. 33.9. You
must equally Love your Mothers and Fathers. Fathers are put first, Exodus 19.
Mothers are put first, Lev. 19.2. Ye shall fear every Man his Mother and his
Father. Both must be Loved best. The Mother, is the Fathers Inferior, some
ways; but she is his equal as to their Children. She is a Parent as well as he;
and much more painfully so. God commands that she should have the same Love as
he. And the self-same Reward is promised to the Love of Mothers as of Fathers,
and all Duty toward them. You must Love your Parents constantly, sincerely,
and eminently. Your Father must not be despised when poor, nor your Mother when
she is old, Prove. 23.22. Nor either of them, when they rebuke you for sin. Pro.
29. Your Love must be pure, and not mercenary for gain from them. As Absolom's
was, for all his Flattery, 2 Samuel 14. And it must be eminent. It Is unnatural to
Love a Father or Mother no more than we Love the most beneficial of our Friends
in the World. Nature and Justice give Parents the Pre-eminence.

2. Honor your Parents most highly. Next unto God, most highly. In your
Thoughts, Words, and Behaviors, Honor them. Fear to think an ill thought of
them. Their faults forget and cover, this is praiseworthy. Shem and Japheth,
are Blessed, and Cain's posterity Cursed. Genesis 9.22. to 28. Let every Speech
unto your Parents be expressly Reverent. Rachel's to Laban was so, Let not my
Lord be displeased. Gen 31.35. It Is unnatural when it is not so. Mal. 1.6. A
Son honors his Father: that is, naturally Sons do. Break a bone as soon as
omit to bow it to your Parents. Irreverent gestures of body are wicked, most
scandalously. Solomon bowed to his Mother. 1 Kings 2.19. Joseph bowed himself
with his Face to the Earth, unto his Father; Genesis 41.12. Where I see not this
threefold Reverence in you to your Parents, I cannot think you other than
ignorant despisers of God and your Parents.

3. Obey your Parents most absolutely. I mean, in the Lord, as the Scripture
speaks. Where God forbids not, do what they bid you, and because they bid you:
though it be against your own minds and wills. For this is God's most Wise and
Holy Will. Col. 3.10. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is
well-pleasing unto the Lord. Where is the honor required in the Fifth
Commandment without this? Read Prove. 13.1. Prove. 1.8, 9. Prove. 30.17. Children,
Rebecca and Rachel kept Sheep at their Parents command. Genesis 24. Genesis 29.
Jesus. Christ himself was subject to Joseph and Mary in their mean employment.
Luke 2.57. Matt. 13.15. How wonderoufly yielded Isaac to Abraham, see Genesis
22.9.10. And the Rechabites to their Father, Jer. 35.5, 6, 7, to v. 11. He that
says, I will not do what my Parents would have me, he therein says also, I
will not do what God would have me. Unless he can say, therefore do I disobey
my Parents because I should otherwise sin against God. A good Child's heart
speaks thus: Whatever I can do without sin, let my Parents command, and spare
not.

4. Requite your Parents most Zealously. 1. Tim. 5.4. Let them learn with Piety
at home, to requite their Parents: for that is good and acceptable toward God.
The Honor in the Fifth Commandment includes Recompense; which is called
Honor, Numb 22.37. 1 Timothy 5.17. Children, had you Kingdoms to give your
Parents, they would not pay your Debt unto them. You must all your lives long
be paying of it; you will never have paid the sum total. Never come out of your
Parents debt. Therefore, always, according to their needs and your abilities,
you must be paying your Thank-Offerings. A Child is a servant. Mal. 3.17. As
thee his son that serves him. Phil. 2.22. As a son with the Father has he
served with me. You must ever promptly serve them to your power, in every
innocent matter. And if they fall into want, you must supply them readily as
ever they supplied you; and as liberally; and more richly too, if you are able.
You must in many cases, spare from your selves to give them. Yea you must lay
out the less upon the Worship of God too, to bestow on them. To withdraw from
Parents, even for God's Worship, was an abominable fault of the Pharisees,
condemned by our Savior, Mark 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. In a word; it is not enough
if you do nothing to grieve your Parents. You sin, if you omit any thing in the
power of your hands to comfort them; and to make their Loins bless you. Blessed
are the Joseph's that nourish their Parents and Brethren! Genesis 47.12.

5. Behave your selves so, that you may be high Honors unto your Parents. I
mean, so Holily toward God, so Righteously toward Men, so Temperately toward
your selves. So as may make for the Honor of your Parents. The Honor of their
granted prayers and their blessed pains took for you. So as may make both Town
and Country have your Parents in more Notice and Reputation for you. This
Counsel comprehends all. O what a World should we have, if it were followed?
Children come on and begin and set to mend this World. You cannot doubt but
this my Counsel is certainly commanded in the Fifth Commandment. You must needs
know, he cannot Honor his Father and Mother, that is a reproach and shame to
them. Whose whole life casts disgrace on their Persons, Families, and Names.
Yet so do theirs do, that observe not this Counsel. See Prove. 17.25. A Foolish
son is a grief to his Father, and bitterness to her that bare him. Come, unless
you will say plainly, ye will be Atheists; that your Conversion shall never
make joy in Heaven; take this day my advice. Say just now, If prayers and pains
will prevail, I will make glad my Father and Mother that ever they had me given
unto them. I will learn diligently every Truth they teach me, I will pray hard
for every Grace they commend. I will perform seriously every Duty they set me.
I will resist every Lust and Temptation they warn me of. I will imitate all the
good I see in them. God, I will know. His Gospel Covenant, I will enter, and
live by. My Holy Baptism I will know and keep. The Lords Table I will prepare
for and hasten to. Holiness I will industriously perfect, in the fear of God.
No Man living, shall say henceforth, that I wrong him wilfully; or do him right
unwillingly. And neither of my Parents shall be able with truth to say, that I
do so much as seem to forget my debt to them and its depth. When this is truly
said, and with full purpose of heart, you then first begin to be good Children,
and dutiful. Then you may be called, the Crown and Honor of your Fathers, as
Prove. 17.6. and their very Glory, as it is Hos. 9.11. Such as make them not
ashamed (but honored) in the Gate, or in all company; as Psalm. 127.4, 5. And
until you thus resolve and declare, you are the clean contrary. For you are
Fools. And he that begeteth a Fool, does it to his sorrow, the Father of a Fool
has no joy. It Is no joy, save to a Fool, to beget and breed up Slaves for the
Devil and Fuel for Hell. And this Holy Parents do know, if you not, sc. That "A
wicked Child of Godly Parents is one of Earths uglyest burdens; and (without
wonderful Grace intervening) one of Hells certainest Firebrarnds.

More particularly, I now Exhort You.
1. Be it for Conscience sake still, that you Honor your Parents. Be sure it
be your desire to please, and your fear to offend God, that makes you fear to
offend and desire to please your Parents. Read heedfully Lev. 19.3. Ye shall
fear every Man his Mother and his Father and keep my Sabbaths. There Is the
Precept. I am the Lord your God; that is, you else offend me who am God, and
your Covenant God. There is the Motive. Charge your Consciences to be your
daily Remembrancers of this; that the true Honoring of Parents is a Fruit,
whose Root is the true Honor of God.

2. Be it as you would receive and lay up Gold, that you receive and lay up the
Advice your Parents give you. Have, and show that you have as true a pleasure
in taking the one as the other from them. Convince their hearts that they do
delight you, when they do instruct you. That would be an advantage to them and
you too, beyond the expression. Make them to see that what is imparted unto
you, is not lost. And that you treasure up their sayings, as the Sons of
Cassius did his Books. When it was threatened their Fathers Books should be
burnt; they answered, Then must you burn us too; for we have his Books in our
hearts. Prove. 6.20, 21. My Son keep thy Fathers Commandment, and forsake not
the Law of thy Mother. Bind them continually upon thy heart, and tie them about
thy neck.

3. Convince your Parents that you much delight in their presence. That you
love to be near them, to hear their Wisdom. Even little Children are tainted,
when they like better to be in the Kitchen with the servants, than in the
Parlor with their Parents. More grown ones be poisoned, when they think
themselves then best, when farthest from holy Parents Observation and Counsel.
Neither do love their persons or their piety, if they love not their company.
The Prodigal, when he had wandered from his Fathers House, is said to have been
dead and lost, Luke 15. Holy Joseph bid his Brethren tell Jacob, Thus says thy
Son Joseph, come down unto me, tarry not. Thou shall be near unto me, thou and
thy Children, and thy Childrens Children. Genesis 45.9, 10. And Ruth, (who lost
nothing by it) said to her very Mother in Law, Entreat me not to leave thee, or
to return from following after thee: for whither thou go, I will go, and
where thou lodgest I will lodge, where thou die will I die. Ruth 1.16, 17.
God ordered, that the advanced Captive should, for a months time, bewail the
loss of her Father and Mothers converse, Deuteronomy. 21.13. But,

4. Let all the house see, that your Parents Friends be yours, and your
choicest ones. That your affection is swayed by theirs; and you cannot but love
such as they love. Prove. 27.10. Thy Fathers Friends forsake not. In loving my
Parents, God and Men do show me love; and my Parents love of both, directs and
excites me to the love of both, I am a Child unnatural, If I love not both the
better for their loving and being beloved of my Parents. Hear Moses, Exodus
15.2. The Lord is my strength, he is my God, (my own) I will (therefore)
prepare him an habitation; my Fathers God, and (therefore) I will exalt him.
Remember this, Children; and observe ye well; it is made an extreme aggravation
of your sin, that it is sinned against the God of your Fathers. That is,
against the God that was very kind to them, and was by them Honored and
Worshipped. Judge. 2.12. They forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, and the
anger of the Lord was hot against them. So Deuteronomy. 32.17. it is a dreadful charge,
They Sacrificed unto Devils, to new Gods that came newly up, whom their Fathers
feared not.

5. Joy your Parents joys, and grieve their griefs, Let Sympathy show your
Unity. Let one joy of theirs, make you forget six troubles and seven of your
own. And one sorrow of theirs, unsweeten as many comforts of your own. Jacob's
Sons and Daughters, all, rose up to comfort him, 37.35. And Judah professed he
was not able to see his Father in superadded trouble; How shall I go up to my
Father, and the Lad be not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall
come on my Father. Genesis 44.34. q. d. Rather had I be thrown in Irons my self,
and live and die in Slavery, than add to the sorrows of my Fathers gray hairs.
So Reuben, before, when Joseph was lost; in the dread of his Father's sore
aching heart, bittterly cries out, The Child is not, and I, whither shall I go?
Genesis 37.30. Hark also how Saul speaks, 1 Samuel 9.5. Come let us return, lest my
Father take thought for us.

6. Sleep not under your Parents displeasure. If you any way raise it, use
presently all means to lay it. Be it a just or unjust Flame, show you that it is
one you are grievously tormented in. Eat not, Drink not, Buy and Sell not, till
it be quenched. At least till you have humbly offered all possible means for
quenching it. I mean, all that you can do without offending God, for pacifying
them. Next to God's wrath, I would deprecate my Parents. And next unto his
Blessing, I would desire theirs. Numb. 12.14. If a Father spit in a Child's
face, should not the Child be ashamed seven days? Very Esau himself, finding
his Father's Blessing gone from him, could not bear it: but cried with tears,
Bless me, even me also, O my Father. Genesis 27.13. And as for Heavenly Joseph,
when he heard his Father was sick, he makes his utmost speed to him, with his
Sons also carried, that he might not miss of his Blessing, Genesis 48.

7. Bear patiently, and bless God heartily for your Parents rebukes and
corrections. Very often do the best Children need both. And it is of pure and
greatest kindness that good Parents do give both. Following them with holy
prayers for Divine Blessing. Go you therefore as often as you are chastised, and
say to this purpose: O sin, sin, I hate thee. Had I avoided thee, I had escaped
this correction. My tender Parents punish themselves in punishing me. Thou, O
my sin, have now troubled them and me. Much rather had they have seen my Duties
than heard my Outcries. God bids them strike, and not spare for my crying. Yea
and tells them they hate me if they scourge me not. Prove. 19.18. Prove. 13.24.
Children! of all Creatures they are most miserable, that are incorrigible; and
most incorrigible, that are impatient of reproof, and most impatient of
reproof, that cannot bear it from Parents. See Heb. 12.9.

8. Make your Parents in all things your Privy-counsellers. Acquaint them with
your Secrets which are of any weight. Ask their advice in matters of any
difficulty. This will speak your esteem of their Wisdom, Faithfulness, and
Affection. And convert all of them unto your use and benefit. O think of
Sampson's words! Judge. 14.16. I have not told my Father nor my Mother, and
should I tell it thee? As if he had said; Of all Mankind my Parents Breasts be
the Treasuries of my thoughts. What I do not communicate unto them, I am not
like to communicate to any Souls living. Children! take your Parents advice, as
to your Trades, your Matches, and all things of Moment, And as far as their
words do agree with God's word, closely follow them. If ever you repent it,
upon me be shame and your curse.

9. Pray, and beg others prayers, for the conversion of your Parents if they be
unregenerate. Abraham did all he could, to help his Father Terah out of his
Idolatry. Compare Acts 7.3, 4. with Genesis 11. latter end and 12.1. and Josh.
24.2, 3. In this City I have the request of several pious Children to pray for
their profane Parents Conversion. And to send Letters and Books to some of
them.

10. Praise and imitate all that is good in your living Parents, and decently
honor them at their death. It is said of the Virtuous Woman, Prove. 31, 28. Her
Children rise up, and call her Blessed. Every Godly Parent speaks to his
Children, in words much like the Apostles; Phil. 4.9. The things which you have
both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do; and the God of peace
shall be with you. Happy the Children, that obey that charge! Abraham's Sons
buried him honorably. Genesis 25.9. So also did Isaacs Sons bury him. Genesis 35.29.
As for Jacob; it is said, that Joseph went up to bury his Father, and with him
went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the
elders of the Land of Egypt. And all the house of Joseph, and his Brethren, and
his Fathers house: There went up with him both Chariots and Horsemen, and it
was a very great company. Genesis 50.7, 8, 9. Some observe that Isaac mourned the
space of three years for his Mother Sarahs death. He is then said to have been
comforted against his trouble, when he took Rebecca to Wife; Genesis 24.67. And
they make it three years after the death of his Mother, that he Married. In a
word; the Children that quickly forget Parents when they are Dead, did never
overload them with honor when they were Alive. And it is a wonder if they
themselves do not both live undesired, and dye unlamented.

Now the Lord make the following Considerations to be indeed Motives: And of
good significancy unto as many Children as shall read them.

C. 1. Parents do most of all represent God unto their Children. Their
Generation shadows forth his Creation. Their Education, his Propriety,
Government, and Love. To contemn Parents is to contemn God, in his most lively
Representatives unto Men.

C. 2. Parents, are under God, the greatest of Benefactors unto Children. By
them God conveighs his Spiritual and Temporal Blessings unto Children. Romans
11.28. The Children are beloved for the Fathers sakes. Prove. 20.7. The just man
walks in his integrity, his Children are blessed after him. Undutifulness to
Parents, is the lowest pit of ungratitude toward Mortals.

C. 3. Parents, are next unto God, the principal Owners and Rulers of Children.
God the sole Proprietor has made Children most eminently theirs. He gives his
Servants Children for Rewards, Psalm. 127.3. God the supreme and universal
Rector has made Parents his special Vicegerents. To Teach, Rule and Judge
Children. Whosoever therefore resists Parents, resists the Ordinance of
God; and is most aggravatedly Felon and Traitor.

C. 4. Sins against Parents are most prolifical sins. Such as do bear all sort
of sins against God, Men, and our selves. If a Child honor not his Father and
Mother whom he has seen, how shall he honor God whom he has not seen? If he
Curse his Father, and do not Bless his Mother, that gave him his being; how
shall he, as to others, Bless and Curse not? Ezekiel. 22.7. In thee, (Jerusalem,)
have they set light by Father and Mother. The Hebrew word is directly opposite
to that used in the fifth Commandment. The word there used for Honor,
signifies weightily, and in extraordinary measure to honor. Here in Ezekiel
the word used signifies to lighten, and to abate weight and measure. The fifth
Command would be read thus; Load with Honor thy Father and Mother. But it is
said here, that in Jerusalem, Children had took off that load. They had made
great abatements of the due honor of Parents. Well, and what then? Why then
Hell broke loose, then Bloodshed, then Oppression, then Profaneness, then
Sabbath-breaking, then Adultery and Fornication, and what not? He that allows
himself in sin against Parents, must not pretend to disallow any sin: Or if he
does, he must not be believed to be other then an absurd Pretender.

C. 5. Sins against Parents are threatened with the most and worst of
Judgments. Disobedient Children are branded for Fools; Prove. 15.5. A Fool
despises his Fathers instruction: but he that regards reproof is prudent.
And for Bruits; Prove. 12.1. Whosoever loves instruction, loves knowledge: but he
that hates reproof, is brutish. They are told they shall come to a shameful
end, Prove. 20.20. Whosoever curses his Father or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put
out in obscure darkness. To an infamous death and terrible; Prove. 30.17. The
Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of
the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. Of old, God
commanded the Civil Magistrate to put them to death; Exodus 21.17. And he that
curses his Father, or his Mother, shall surely be put to death. Lev. 20.9. For
every one that curses his Father or his Mother, shall be surely put to death:
He has cursed his Father or his Mother; his blood shall be upon him. It Is
certain therefore, if ye Honor not your Parents, you Fear not him that is able
to destroy both Soul and Body.

C. 6. Sins against Parents, very long persisted in, are a token of utter
Desertion by God. It Is seldom they return that long walk in disobedience to
Parents. O what words do I read, 1 Samuel 2.25. They hearkened not unto the voice
of their Father, because the Lord would slay them. Child, Child, stay and read
over this ten times together: If God give thee not Grace to hearken obediently
unto thy Father, thou must look for nothing from his hands less then slaughter.

C. 7. Childrens sins are Parents sorrows, and stains in the World. Prove.
17.25. A foolish Son is bitterness to her that bare him. Parents need no proofs
of this. Lev. 21.9. If the Daughter of any Priest profane her self, she
profaneth her Father, she shall be burnt with fire. She profanes her Father,
that is, she exposes his Person, Ministry, and Religion unto contempt. Hear me,
Children: Under the Gospel, true Christians are all and every one of them
Priests. And if you are profane, you see what you do. And you may see more;
Tit. 1.6. The scandal of riotous Children and unruly, do make a Parent
unqualified for the Ministry. If you will be Impious, your poor Parents must be
Infamous in a measure with you.

The Father of Lights clear your Minds from Folly and Ignorance; and cause your
Wills to feel the attractive Power of his Blessed Word: And to make a most free
and firm Choice of your required Duty, which is your undoubted Interest.
Heathens and Mahometans, Jews and Papists, Protestants of all persuasions,
agree herein.

I conclude with this only added unto both PARENTS and CHILDREN. This word,
which contains the very reason of my first Preaching, and now Publishing what
is presented. Religion is horribly decayed among us. All sensible Christians
are still crying, Reformation or Ruin is at our door. And dream ye not that
the best King, Lords and Commons, can keep us safe in our sins. The Nation
cannot be reformed, till the Church is. Nor the whole of the Church, till the
parts be so. Nor our Congregational Churches, till their Members be: Which said
Members then Reform, and not before, when they come to David's resolution, Psalm.
101.2. I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. And Joshua's; Jos.
24.15. As for me and my house we will serve the Lord. Nor is Reformation to be
expected but from Family-Piety beginning and promoting it. I mean the Pious
discharge of Parents duties to Children, and theirs unto Parents. For this I
Pray and Labor. As in my self most certain, that if the Lord come not, and
thus turn the Hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the Hearts of Children
to their Parents, he will surely come and smite our Land with one or other, or
many, or all his sorest Curses. Mal. 4.6.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus, grant, of his great Grace, better
things. Namely, that in our Lands, the Fathers to the Children may make known
his Truth. Isa. 38.19. And the Children may obey their Parents in the Lord, in
all things; for this is right and well pleasing to the Lord. Ephesians. 6.1. Col.
3.20. Amen, and Amen!

FINIS.
Books lately Published by Mr. Daniel Burgess, and are to be Sold by Thomas
Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
A Call to Sinners, such as are under sentence o Death, and such as are under
any prospect of it from the long-suffering, and gracious, but most righteous
God. Three Questions resolved briefly and plainly, viz. 1. What Conceptions
ought we to have of the blessed God? 2. What are those Truths, whereof the
Knowledge appears most indispensably necessary unto our Salvation; and
(therefore) to be first and most learnt by us? 3. What is the change wrought in
a Man by Gods H. Word and Spirit, before he can safely conclude himself passed
from Death to Life? Being the Sum of three Sermons. The Christian Temper: Or,
the Quiet state of Mind that Gods Servants labor for. Set forth in a Sermon at
the Funeral of Mrs. Vrsula Collins. A seasonable Question plainly resolved,
(viz.) What are we to judge of their spiritual estate who neglect the Lords
Supper. And what is that discerning of the Lords Body in it, without which men
do Eat and Drink their own Damnation. The Christians earnest Expectation and
Longing for the Glorious Appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ. Set forth in a Discourse occasioned by the Decease of that Excellent
Christian and Minister of Christ, Mr. Noah Webb, late of Sandhurst in the
County of Berks.
Some Books sold by John Lawrance at the Angel in the Poultrey.
GElls Remains, being sundry Pious and Learned Notes and Observations on the
New Testament, opening and explaining it; wherein Jesus Christ, as yesterday,
to day, and the same for ever, is illustrated; by that Learned and Judicious
Man, Dr. R. Gell, late Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, London. In Folio. The
Jesuits Catechism, according to St. Ignatius Loyola; wherein the Impiety of
their Principles, Perniciousness of their Doctrines, and Iniquity of their
Practices are declared. Quarto. The Privileges and Practices of Parliament in
England: Collected out of the Common Laws of the Land. Commended to the High
Court of Parliament. Quarto. A Vindication of the Reverend Mr. Alexander
Osborn, from the aspersions cast upon him in Mr. George Walkers Account of the
Siege of Derry, etc. Together with an Historical Narration of the Proceedings
of the Nonconformists of the North of Ireland. Quarto. Monsieur Jurieaus
Judgment, with Relation to the Affairs of England, being a Vindication of the
present Revolution. Quarto. A Discourse of the Nature and Power of the
Conventions in the Kingdoms of England and Scotland. Quarto. Several
Discourses; viz. I. Of Purity and Charity. II. Of Repentance. III. Of seeking
first the Kingdom of God; By Hezekiah Burton. D. D. Published by Dean
Tillotson. Octavo. The Triumphs of Grace: Or, the last words and edifying death
of the Lady Margaret de la Musse, a Noble French Lady, who dyed May 1681. Aged
only 16 years. Twelves. Clavis Grammatica: Or the ready way to the Latin
Tongue, containing most plain demonstrations for the regular Translating of
English into Latin, by F. B. Schoolmaster in London. Octavo. Orbis Imperantis
Tabellae Geographico, Historico, Geneologico, Caronologicae, in quibus
Geographiae Epitome Mappis quo fieri potuit exactioribus, descriptio Historica
Imperiorum, Regnorum, and Rerum Publicarum, seculorum series a Christo Nato ad
hunc usque An. 1685. On Copper Plates. Octavo. A Relation of the Conquest of
Florida by the Spaniards. To which is added, Two Journeys of the present
Emperor of China into Tartary in 1682, 1683. Octavo. A Help to true Spelling
and Reading, with a Scripture Catechism. By William Scoffin. Octavo.
FINIS.

