THE Scripture Directory, FOR CHURCH OFFICERS AND PEOPLE OR, A Practical
Commentary UPON THE Whole third Chapter of the first Epistle of St Paul TO THE
CORINTHIANS.

To which is annexed the Godly and the Natural Man's Choice, upon Psalm. 4. verse.
6, 7, 8.

By Anthony Burgess Pastor of the Church of Sutton Coldfield in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller for T.U. and are to be Sold by Thomas
Underhill, George Calvert, and Henry Fletcher in Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

TO THE READER.
THe sound Interpretation, and Practical Application of Scripture, for the
Advancement of Holiness, as it is the most profitable and pleasant part of our
Ministerial Employment; so it should be the Readers wisdom and diligence, to
Exercise himself most in the perusal of such Spiritual Helps: As for
Controversies, to look on them, like the Briars and Thorns on the Ground; even
the Effect of original corruption. So that to leave the Practical and
Affectionate part of Religion, for the Speculative and Disputative, is to part
with our sweetness and fatness, to become a bryar. Yet, Experience does too
much confirm, how great a depravation is herein upon the minds of men,
naturally doting upon Questions, Strifes, of words wherein is no Edifying. It
is reported of a Philosopher, That he would not be resolved in the doubts he
had upon his mind, that so he might not be deprived of that pleasure and
delight which he found in seeking and searching out of truth: Which is, as if a
feavourish man, would not be cured of the drought or thirst upon him, that so
he might still enjoy the pleasure he finds in drinking. But Skepticism and
inconstancy, and such inordinate affectation of Opinions and Controversies, is
contrary to the sound constitution of Christianity, which inclines to a solid
mind in Matters of Faith, and to an holy mortified heart in respect of our
conversation. Now to bring such an holy and heavenly Establishment upon the
soul, the only way is, to make a constant and diligent Improvement of Gods
Word, in all the happy and blessed Effects it causes upon the soul. He that
does thus, is like the tree planted by the Rivers side, that will not wither,
but bring forth its fruit in due season.

Among other Portions of Scripture, I have selected this third Chapter of the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, for the peculiar subserviency and particular
conduceableness it may have to heal such distempers, which at this time infect
many. The Church of Corinth, though immediately planted as a pleasant Eden by
Paul himself, yet quickly degenerated, the envious one sowing tares amongst the
good wheat: For, not only Godly Discipline was collapsed, and Profaneness in
men's lives much increased, but such factions and divisions were crept in
amongst them, that like the renting of the veil of the Temple, their
destruction was praesaged hereby, did they not in time prevent it, by having
one heart, and one way. The sky being thus red, did signify the foul weather
that was to ensue. For as Aristotle observes, Lib. 2. de Gener. cap. 10*
That the perpetual duration of things, is to be attributed to the simple and
quotidian course of the Sun, from the East to the West, but the generation and
corruption of things to the Oblique motion of the Sun and Planets, in the
Zodiac: So the preservation and continuance of Faith and Holiness in the
Churches of God, is (under Christ) to be attributed to the uniform motion of
the Guides and Officers therein; but all corruption of Doctrine and Discipline,
all generation of errors and vices, to their oblique and different courses.

This Chapter then, may be called, The Directory of the Holy Ghost, both to
Officers and People, in their respective deportments, that so there may be a
mutual edification: It may be looked upon, as a Pillar of Salt, to season all
other Churches. It seems to have that Inscription of Senacharibs Tomb upon
it, (...), By beholding of me, take heed of pride in Gifts and Parts; take heed
of schisms and divisions; set not up a Ministry against Christ, nor yet oppose
Christ to a Ministry. These are to be composed with one another, and not
opposed. Besides this general Matter, there are also several Truths of great
concernment contained in the Chapter; especially the best Wine you meet with
at last, where is described the rich Treasure of every godly man: There is an
Inventory given in of all his Goods; There is his Magna Charta confirmed: Yea,
as the Devil once showed the Glory of the world for a temptation, so does the
Spirit of God here discover, both the Glory of Heaven and Earth, for the
encouragement of the true Believer. I shall not detain thee any longer with
Prefacing, but conclude, Come and see.

Thine Anthony Burgess.
March 18. 1658.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS Practical Exposition ON THE Third Chapter of the first
Epistle of St Paul TO THE CORINTHIANS.
Verse 1. ANd I, brethren, could not speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but as
unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. Observe. That the ignorance and
sinfulness of a people, are a just cause why faithful and wise Ministers of
the Word do not sometimes preach of the more sublime and excellent points in
Christianity, p. 2 In what respects the peoples Ignorance is an impediment to
the Ministers preaching. p 3 In what respects the peoples Sinfulness is an
impediment to the Ministers preaching. p 3 Carnal. Its several significations.
Observe. That even among those who are truly, and indeed of the visible Church
of God, there is a vast difference; some are spiritual, some are carnal, some
are men, some are babes. p. 5 What it is to be a spiritual man, 7 What to be
carnal or babes, 8 Verse 2. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat.
Observe. 1. It must be the Prudence and Wisdom of the Minister, to preach such
matter, and in such a way, as the Hearers may receive good thereby. p. 9
Observe. 2. It Is necessary to acquaint People with the Principles of Religion,
before they go higher in Christianity. 13 Considerations about the principles
of Religion, and the knowledge and ignorance of them. 13 For hither to ye were
not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. Observe. That it is a great
sin, and just reproach to a people, that have lived long under the means of
grace, if they have not got the due profit by it. 17 The due profits and
effects of the Ministry, Intellectual and Practical, ib. Verse 3. For ye are
yet carnal. 21 Qu. Why those that are godly for the main are called carnal?
ibid. Observe, That the relics of corruption, which do abide in the godly,
ought to be an heavy burden to them, against which they are daily to strive and
combat. ib. Considerations about the Saints infirmities and corruptions, 22
And whence it is that they do not fully conquer sin, 23 And why God does not
cure his people at once, 24 For whereas there is among you Envying, and Strife,
and Divisions, are ye not carnal? 25 Envy, its several acceptations, ibid.
Observe. That envying, wheresoever it is, is a fruit of the Flesh, and such a
sin, that a godly man should especially watch against. ibid. Envy: Its
Original, Degrees, Object, Subject, Aggravations, Remedies, 26 The difference
between Envy and Zeal, 32 For whereas there is among you strife. 33 Observe.
That strifes, and quarrelling contentions amongst Christians, argue them to be
so far carnal. ibid. Sinful strife: Its Cause, Effects, Aggravations, 34
Whereas there is divisions among you. p. 37 Observe. That divisions and factions
do quickly creep into the best and purest Churches. 38 Divisions divided; their
Nature, Causes, 39 Are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 42 As man, its several
significations. ibid. Observe. That all those who are named Christians, and
would be accounted so, should walk and live, as those that are more than mere
men. ibid. What the phrase [to live as men] implies, 43 Verse 4. For whereas
one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? 45
Observe. That although it is the duty of People to have a great and high esteem
of the Ministers of the Gospel, yet they are not sinfully and inordinately to
admire, or rest merely upon any men's persons. 46 Wherein the respect due to the
Ministers of the Gospel does consist, ibid And when it may degenerate into
sinful admiration, 48 For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollo, are ye not carnal? 49 Observe. That it is not lawful for Christians to
call themselves by the Name of any men, though never so Eminent, so as to build
on them. 50 Of the Names that Christians have been called by in several Ages,
ibid. Observe. That when the Devil cannot hurt the Church by a profane and
sinful Ministry, then he labors to destroy it by abusing the names and esteem
of those who are truly holy and eminent. 54 What are the common ways of Satan's
doing hurt to the Church by the Ministers and Officers thereof. ibid. And even
by eminent godly men, 56 1 COR. 1.12. And I of Christ. 58 Observe. That although
Christ only is to be relied upon, as the Head of his Church, yet it is not his
will, that under this pretense, we should despise, or contemn his Ministry, and
the means of grace he has appointed. 59. Of sinful setting up of Christ.
ibid. Of the causes of grace, Efficient and Instrumental. ibid. Verse 5. Who
then is Paul? and who is Apollo? 62 Observe. That faithful Ministers seek not
to win or gain a people to themselves, but to Christ. 63 A twofold end of
preaching the Word, ibid. The Characters of that Ministry that seeks not the
peoples applause, but to bring them to Christ, 64 Who then is Paul, and who is
Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed. 66 Observe. That the Ministry in Gods
Church is the Means and instrumental Cause, he has appointed to work Faith,
and all other Graces in the Hearers. 67 How the Ministry is not an instrumental
cause of grace, and how it is. ibid The properties of the Ministry as such a
cause, 69 Who is Paul? and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed,
even as the Lord gave to every man. 70 Observe. That Faith is the great and
eminent grace, which God by the Ministry works, in some Hearers. ibid The
Nature of Faith. Its three Acts, Knowledge, Assent, and a resting on Christ. 71
The Effects of faith ad intra, 72 Ad extra, 73 Even as the Lord gave to every
man. 74 Observe. That God has given several Gifts and Abilities to the
Ministers of the Church, and thereby makes use of them all, for his glorious
ends. ibid. Why all Ministers have not the same gifts, 76 Rules or Helps to
profit by the Ministry, 77 Verse 6. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God
gave the increase. 78 Observe. That it is Gods unspeakable goodness, sometimes to
send his Word, and plant his Gospel among a people, that never heard or knew
any thing of it before. 79 Apollo watered. 82 Observe. That it is not enough for
a people once to receive the true Faith, and principles of Religion, but they
need a further watering and quickening them up to grow. ibid. Wherein this
spiritual watering consists, 83 And why there is such need of quickening means,
84 But God gave the increase. 85 Observe. That it is God only who can and will
give increase and spiritual success to the Ministerial labors in the Church.
86 How God works, 90 Wherein God gives the increase, ibid. And why he only
can, 92 Verse 7. So then, neither is he that planteth, any thing, neither he
that waters, but God that gives the increase. 93 Observe. That the best and
most able Ministry is nothing without Gods power giving the increase 94 What
the Apostle does not mean, and what he does mean, in saying, The Ministry is
nothing. ibid. Directions how to hear the Word, 96 Verse 8. Now he that
planteth, and he that waters, are one. 97 Observe. That although there is
diversity and variety in the gifts of the Ministers, yet they all ought to
agree in one. ibid. They should agree in Doctrine in their End, and Scope, and
in Affection, 98 The sad effects of disunion in the Ministers, 99 What people
should do when Ministers and Professors are divided, ibid. And every man shall
receive his own reward, according to his own labor. 101 Of Reward and Merit,
101, 105, 106 Observe. That according to a man's labor and working for God, he
is sure to have a proportionable reward. 102 All have work to do, ibid. A
twofold doing of good works, ibid. The requisites to such a work as God will
accept, 103 A lawful self-seeking. 105 Verse 9. For we are laborers together
with God. 109 Observe. That the Ministers of the Gospel are workers with God,
for the conversion of men's souls. So 2 Cor. 6.1. 110 Why God will have
co-workers, ibid. Ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building. 113 Observe. That
the people of God are his husbandry, and building. ibid. What our being Gods
husbandry and building jointly implies. ibid. And then what they severally
imply, 114 Ye are Gods building. 117 Doct. That particular Churches are, or
should be Gods house, Gods building. ibid Of Gods house or Church, ibid. What
Gods building, and our being his house implies, 118 Verse 10. According to the
grace of God which is given unto me, etc. 121 Observe. That it is the property of
godly men, in all the good they have, or do, to attribute all to Gods grace.
ibid. The Properties of praising Gods grace, ibid. Why the godly are so
sensible of Gods grace, 123 How profitable that duty is, ibid. What opinlons
are coolers of this duty of giving thanks to free grace, 124 As a wise
master builder, I have laid the foundation. ibid Observe. It Is a special part of
the wisdom and heavenly art of the Ministers of the Gospel, to lay a good and
sure foundation in the hearts of their hearers. 125 Of a twofold foundation,
Fundamentum cognoscendi, the foundation of our knowledge and faith in matters
of Religion, viz. the Scripture. And fundamentum essendi, or the foundation of
the being or existence of all our glory and salvation, viz. Jesus Christ, ibid
Four unquestionable Scripture-foundations, ibid. With a discovery of rotten
foundations, 127 Why it is such a sin to worship God many ways, as man
pleases, 132 As a wise master builder. 137 Observe. That it is not vanity, but a
duty in some cases, for the Ministers of the Gospel, to magnify and set up
their Work and Office. ibid In what cases a Minister may magnify his work and
office, ibid. And another builds thereon. 139 Observe. That people are not to
expect that Ministers should bring any other Doctrine than what is laid by
Christ and the Apostles already. ibid. The use of preaching, notwithstanding
the fullness of the Scripture, 140 But let every man take heed how he builds
thereupon. 141 Observe. The Ministers of God are greatly to take heed, that they
preach no other thing, than what is already contained in the Scripture. Or It Is
a dangerous thing to put that sense and meaning on the word of God, which is
not the true genuine sense of it. ibid. A twofold building upon the
foundation. ibid Why Ministers must take heed how they build upon the
foundation, 142 Verse 11. For other foundation can no man lay, than that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ. 145 Observe. That the Ministers of God ought to lay
no other Foundation than Christ. ibid. How many ways Christ is to be preached
as a foundation, ibid. Reasons why he must be preached as the foundation, 150
Objections and Doubts answered, 153 How Duties are to be done and preached with
relation to Christ, 154 The great Advantages those have that are built on
Christ, 155 Verse 12. Now if any man build on this foundation gold, silver,
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, etc. 157 Observe. That the Doctrine and
Truths of Christ are very precious and excellent. ibid What the comparing them
to Gold, etc. implies, ibid. If any man build hay, and stubble. 161 Observe.
That all errors and falsehoods in Religion, though not fundamental, are no
better than hay and stubble. ibid Some Propositions about error, ibid. Why
errors are called hay and stubble, 162 Verse 13. Every man's work shall be made
manifest. 165 Observe. That all the ways and works of wickedness, though acted
in never so hidden and secret a manner shall be made manifest. ibid. What kind
of hidden wickedness shall be made manifest, ibid. The Aggravation of those
sins that are secret and hidden, 168 Observe. That all the hidden and secret
ways of false Doctrines God will one day make manifest. 169 The Causes,
Nature, the cunning subtilty in divulging them shall be made manifest, ibid.
For the day shall declare it. 173 Observe. That God has his time, when he will
discover the errors and falsehoods of men's Doctrines. ibid. Errors are
spiritual judgments; the removal in mercy at Gods time, 174 Why God will have
a day to discover false Doctrine, 176 Because it shall be revealed by fire, and
the fire shall declare every man's work, of what sort it is. 177 The
interpretation of fire. 178 Observe. That God uses to bring people out of
errors and false ways, by his Word and Afflictions. ibid. Though the Word and
afflictions are both helpful, yet differently, 179 How wandering sheep are
reduced by the Word, ibid. How by afflictions, 181 Verse 14. If any man's work
abide, which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. 181 Observe.
That Gods Truths are of a firm and durable Nature, notwithstanding any trial or
opposition whatsoever. 182 Truth twofold, Increated and Created, ibid
Scripture-truths reduced to four heads, 183 Verse 15. If any man's work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.
185 Observe. That every man will be altogether a loser in any error or false
way that he has maintained, he shall suffer loss. 186 Wherein they shall be
losers, ibid. He shall be saved, yet so as by fire. 189 Observe. That even
errors of judgment may endanger a man's salvation, as well as ungodliness in
practice. ibid. The several kinds of corruptions of the understanding that
indangers a man's salvation, ibid. The Difference between error and heresy,
with the grounds of the Doctrine, 190 Observe. That every godly man, though
never so eminent, yet is very difficultly saved. 192 Verse 16. Know ye not that
ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you, 193
Observe. That the consideration of those Privileges and Relations which all the
People that profess God are put into, would be a great Argument against all
kind of Pollution. ibid Some of the chief Titles or Relations which the people
of God have, 194 Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God. 197 Of the word
Temple, ibid. Observe. That the people of God met together to worship him
according to his way, are the spiritual Temple of God. 197 What there is in the
Church allusively to the Temple, 198 Of Gods presence with his Church, 200 And
that the Spirit of God dwells in you. 201 Observe. That the Spirit of God, is
God. 202 The signification of the word Spirit, when attributed to God, ibid.
That the holy Ghost is God, and a person, ibid. Why the holy Ghost is called --
Spirit, 204 Observe. That the Spirit of God dwells in his Church. 205 What to
have the Spirit dwell in us implies, in that phrase, ibid. How many ways the
Spirit may be said to dwell in Gods people, 207 The special works and effects
of the holy Spirit in his Chruch, 209 I. Gifts, ibid. How far the gifts and
abilities of Ministers that are acquired by humane study and industry are to be
ascribed unto the holy Ghost, ibid. II. Sanctifying graces, 209 Of the saving
inhabitation of the Spirit, 212 Verse 17. If any man defile the Temple of God,
him shall God destroy. 216 Observe. That those men who defile the Church of God
with corrupt Doctrines, do highly provoke God to punish them. ibid Why errors
are said to defile Gods Church, 217 How God will punish Heretics, 219 A godly
man may fall into a damnable Heresies, 220 How a godly man erring differs
from a wicked man, ibid. Errors are erroneous persons distinguished, 221 Why
God is so provoked with corruptions in Doctrine and worship, ibid Him shall God
destroy. 222 Observe. That eternal Damnation is the destruction of a man. ibid.
Of the punishment of loss, sense, 224 With the Aggravations of this
punishment, 225 For the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, 226 Observe.
The holy Temple of God under the Gospel, is not any place, though never so
adorned or glorious; but persons believing and worshipping of him according to
his will. ibid Verse 18. Let no man deceive himself; if any man seems to be
wise in this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. 229 Observe.
Thut humane and earthly wisdom is a great enemy to all the heavenly things of
Christ. 230 A man having no more than natural humane wisdom, is an enemy to 1.
The supernatural Matter, and Doctrine to be believed, 2. The manner of
promulgation of it in Scripture, 3. The holy and spiritual duties required of
us. ibid. If any man among you seems to be wise in this world. 239 Observe.
That all humane and earthly wisdom comes far short, and is but a mere
shadow and appearance in respest of Scripture-wisdome. ibid. Wisdom of the
world, Speculative and Political, ib. That the Scripture way of believing,
exceeds their contemplative Science. And That the Scripture motive of doing,
surpasses all their morality, 237 Let him become a fool, that he may be wise.
239 Observe. That true Christian wisdom, is nothing but folly in the worlds
account. ibid The seeming follies that are in things to be believed, ibid. Let
him become a fool, that he may be wise. 243 Observe. That only in the Church of
God, or in Christianity is true wisdom. ibid. The point evidenced by ten
Arguments, ibid. Verse 19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God. 246 Observe. That all the admired wisdom of a mere worldly man, is nothing
but contemptible folly before God. 247 Their folly manifested both Active and
Passive, i^id. What humane wisdom it is that is here intended, 253 For it is
written, He takes the wise in their own craftiness. ibid Observe. That God
delights to take the earthly wise men of the world in their own craft. 254 How
many ways God takes the wise men of the world in their own craft, ibid. And
why he does it, 256 Verse 20. And again, The Lord knows the thoughts of the
wise, that they are vain. 257 Observe. That the choicest and best thoughts of
the wisest men, are vain. ibid. In what sense the Scripture uses the word
vain, or vanity, ibid. Verse 21. Therefore let none glory in men, for all
things are yours. 260 Observe. That it is a great sin to glory in men. 261 How
many ways we may be said to glory in men, ibid. For all things are yours. 264
Observe. That all things are for the spiritual good and advantage of the godly
man. 265 In what respect all things may be said to be the Saints. ibid. Why God
made all things for them. 266 Verse. 22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas. 270
Observe. That all Offices and Gifts, howsoever diversified, are for the Churches
of God. 271 In what sense Ministers are not Servants of the Church, against the
Brownists. ibid. And in what sense they are the Churches Servants. ibid. The
end for which both Offices and Gifts are the Churches. 273 Or the World. 274
How the word world, is to be here taken. ibid. Observe. That the whole world,
with all things therein, is for the spiritual advantage of a godly man. 275 In
what sense the world is said to be a godly man's. 275 Or Life. 278 Observe. That
godly men do only live; or, The godly only make a spiritual use of their life.
279 In what respects it is true that the godly man only lives. ibid. And in
what respects it is true, that the wicked man does not live. 281 Or Death. 282
Observe. That even death, which in it self is so terrible, yet is for a godly
man's advantage. ibid. Some Propositions about death. ibid. In how many respects
death is a godly man's. 283 Or things present. 286 Observe. That whatsoever falls
out for the present to a godly man, it is for his good. ibid. A division of all
Events, into happy and prosperous, and adverse and afflicting ones. ibid. In
how many respects both the one and the other are for the good of Gods people.
ibid. Or things to come, all are yours. 290 Observe. That all things which are
to come, or may fall out hereafter, are a godly man's mercy and advantage. ibid.
This is proved by Instances and Promises. 291 How on the contrary it is with a
wicked man, in respect of things to come. 293 Verse. 23. And ye are Christ's. 294
Observe. That a godly man, in all that he is, or can do, is wholly Christ's.
ibid. In what respects a godly man is Christ's ibid. Characters or Properties of
such as are Christ's. 296 And Christ is Gods. 298 In what sense Christ can be
said to be Gods. ibid. Observe. That Christ, as Man, and as a Mediator, is
wholly Gods. ibid. Of the Nature and Person of Christ, and of the Hypostatical
Union. ibid. How Christ, as a Man, and as Mediator, is Gods. 299 And how
admirable these Truths are. ibid.
THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE OF THE GODLY MAN'S CHOICE.
THat no Natural or Unregenerate man can lift up his heart any higher, then
unto a worldly happiness and content in the Creature. 1 The sinfullnesse, and
woeful Aggravations of such an Estate. 10 Antidotes and Means against setting
the heart upon the Creature. 14 That a gracious heart does more esteem the
favor of God, and the light of his Countenance, then any earthly thing
whatsoever. 19 The Qualifications or Characters of those who do value and
desire Gods favor above all things else. 23 A Consideration of some false
Grounds of a Persuasion of Gods Love. 27 Of the Joy of Saints in God and
Heavenly things, as one Effect of the light of Gods Countenance: The Nature of
it, and the Preeminences of it comparatively to all other Pleasures whatsoever.
32 Of the godly Man's holy Security, and Admirable quietness of spirit, as
another Effect of the light of Gods Counnance. 40 How the vigorous Actings of
Faith does quiet the heart. 46 The difference between Carnal and Gracious
Confidence. 49 The Reason of the Saints confidence, viz. That God alone is
their Preserver: Showing also, the Ways and Means by which God does Preserve
them. 53
The Bookseller to the Reader.
I Hope there will not be found, in the Reading of this Book, any considerable
Faults; some lesser Errata's there may (notwithstanding the great care that was
used in the absence of the Author) which of course must be pardoned.

The Contents noted in the Margin, with the Table, were done by a Friend, for
the pleasure of the Reader, which is mentioned to clear the Author, from what
weakness may possibly be observed in the doing of them.

Tho. Underhill.

AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations ON THE Third Chapter of the first
Epistle of St Paul TO THE CORINTHIANS.
1 COR. 3.1. And I, Brethren, could not speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but
as unto carnal, as unto babes in Christ.


FOr the Apostles method, observe this; you have his Complaint, and the Cause
of his complaint: His Complaint, I Brethren, could not speak unto you, as
spiritual, but as carnal. Where,

First, There is the Compellation, Brethren. He reproves, yet keeps up his
love: This mollifieth and suppleth the wound; Dilige and loquere quod velis,
said Austin. Some have observed in the Old Testament, the Prophets in their
Sermons were more severe, Thus says the Lord, and they never call their
Auditors Brethren; but in the Gospel, a dispensation of love, there is often
Brethren, and I beseech you by the mercies of Christ.

Secondly, There is the Matter of the Complaint, I could not speak unto you.
This phrase [I cannot] in Scripture, does not signify a plain absolute
impotency; for no question Paul being full of spiritual gifts, might, if he
would have preached to them, though carnal; but it denotes either some inward
affection in our selves, or outward occasion from others, that makes us suspend
our actions. Thus, The world cannot but hate you* ^iz. because of the inward
venomous affection against God. How can I do ^^is, and sin against God? viz.
because of his inward love to God. Mark 6. it is said, Christ could do no
miracles there, because of their unbelief; and so here, I could not, that is,
my prudence, my wisdom hindered me, you were not a subject capable, according
to that Rule, Illud possumus, quod jure possumus.

Thirdly, The Object of this complaint, the Corinthians described, first,
Negatively, not as spiritual; then Positively, but as carnal. Of these in their
proper place.

Fourthly, The Explication of that phrase Carnal, which might seem to provoke
them much, As babes in Christ. Many profitable points are in this verse. And
first from that phrase, I could not speak to you, Observe

Observe.
That the ignorance and sinfulness of a people, are a just cause, why faithful
and wise Ministers of the Word, do not sometimes preach of the more sublime and
excellent points in Christianity.

Paul desired not only to lay a good foundation, but also to build an excellent
superstruction, but the rudeness and ignorance of his hearers restrained him:
Even as the Husbandman does not sow his best seed, wheat, and the like, because
his ground is so barren and lean, that it will not bear it. As the Schoolmaster
teaches not his choicest notions, because the Scholar cannot receive them. See
how sadly Paul complains, Heb. 5.12, 13. they were not such who could receive
strong meat; therefore he presses them not to rest always in the first
principles and elements of Religion, but to be carried on to further
perfection. Ministers are compared by Paul to Nurses, 1 Thessalonians. 2.7. if they
should give bread and meat to young Infants, this were not to nourish them, but
to choke them: Our Savior to this very purpose, showing, that beginners are
not prepared for lofty and more spiritual truths, excellently instanceth, in
old bottles receiving new wine, Luke 5.36. which presently break, not being
able to bear the strength of it.

To open the Doctrine, consider, That in Christianity, and so in our preaching,
there is a twofold kind of matter: 1. That which is Fundamental, plain,
necessary and easy, being the first principles of Religion, the total
ignorance whereof damneth. 2. There are admirable Cons^quences and Conclusions
to be deduced from, and improved out of these, unto which the godly are to
grow, not resting in the former* but greedily desiring the later. The
forenamed place, Heb. 5.12. evidenceth this; where he tells us of first
principles, such as every one must learn, Repentance from dead works, Faith in
God, the Resurrection of the dead, and eternal Judgment; so these be principles
and foundations, and it is as impossible to build up toward Heaven without
these, as to build an house without a foundation. The Apostle compares these
to milk, and the other to strong meat. Now as it is a shame for a child always
to suck; so it is not only a shame, but a grievous sin, for a people to be
capable of nothing but milk. To be children always: And if Paul was so
offended at it, What cause have the Ministers of God in these days to burn
with zeal, because of the general ignorance upon most people? Alas, how many do
not so much as understand the first principles? How many have not laid a
foundation? We cannot preach to them, no not as babes, much less as grown men,
they are even brutish Pagans almost for their ignorance in religious things.
But of that more hereafter.


This is to show you, That Christ's school has many forms, and it is a sin
and a shame to be always in the Alphabet. For further prosecuting the
Doctrine, Consider first, How Ignorance does restrain the Ministers abilities.
And

2. How sinfulness, for both these are in the Doctrine. And both these Paul
intends in calling them carnal. Ignorance is an impediment to our preaching, in
these particulars:

First, In what respects Ignorance is an impediment to the Ministers preaching.
The more eminent and sublime mysteries of the Gospel about Christ and his
righteousness, we cannot so frequently preach upon, but these things which may
be known of God by the natural light of conscience, and by the works of
Creation. There are things known of God, partly by natural light of conscience,
especially if furthered with Education; and things by supernatural Revelation,
and Authority of the Scripture merely; such is the whole Doctrine about Christ
and his Offices. Now this later sort of matter, which is the marrow and life of
all preaching, many of our Congregations, as they now stand corrupted with
blindness and ignorance are not prepared to receive it. For generally people
know no more than what may be known of God, by the common principles of reason,
and what their Parents have taught them by tradition; but for acquaintance with
the truths of the Gospel, which are revealed to us in the Scripture, they have
but a glimering about them, if any apprehension at all. When Peter had made
that Confession of Christ, Thou art the Son of the living God; Christ says,
Flesh and blood had not revealed this to him, Mat. 16.17. Now most people have
no more knowledge, no more apprehension in matters of Religion, than what flesh
and blood reveals to them. We that are Ministers, and have occasion to
enquire into the knowledge of people, have cause thus to complain. Heb. 5.19. a
notable place, Every one that is a babe, is unskilful in the Word of
righteousness, that is, in the Mystery of the Gospel: so that to preach much
of Christ, till people be prepared by knowledge, or fitted by principles for
him, is to throw seed on the ground before it be plowed.

Secondly, As those sublime mysteries cannot be often preached on, (though
sometimes we must, because we are debtors to the wise, as well as the foolish,
and there are spiritual as well as carnal in our Congregations) so likewise,
That growth in knowledge, and increase more and more in heavenly light and
knowledge, cannot be pressed where gross ignorance is. You shall see this much
pressed in Scripture, not to rest in foundations, to grow in knowledge: Yea one
main end of the Ministry, is to carry us unto a full stature in Christ, Ephesians.
4 13. Now (alas) how can our Ministry be for growth to such, who are not so
much as babes, who are not yet begotten anew by the Word? Can we expect any
increase or fruit, when men are not so much as plants planted by God? Many
Congregations being like Golgotha, places not of dead skuls, but of dead
hearts, Oh how short do our people come of the primitive Christians! These very
Corinthians, see how Paul commends them, 1 Cor. 1.5, 7. Ye are enriched in all
utterance and knowledge, and yet he finds faults with them. Alas, the Ministers
of God have far higher and larger degrees of knowledge and grace to press you
to, if once the foundation were laid.

Thirdly, There are many choice and excellent duties, in the exercise whereof a
Christian would have much joy, and bring much glory to God; but the ignorance
of a people makes the Mixister not so frequently urge those, because other
things must be done first. The duties are these, Let the word of God dwell
plentifully in you, teaching and admonishing one another, Col. 3 6. And again,
Exhort and provoke one another, etc, Heb. 10.14 Thus the Father, he is to make
his family like the Church of God, he is to instruct those that are under him
in the knowledge of the Lord. Husbands they are to be such as can inform their
wives, if they doubt of any thing in Religion, Let them ask their husbands at
home, says Paul. 1 Cor. 14.35. So families are to serve God, as Joshua and
Abraham resolved, which is by praying to him, and calling upon his Name: How
can these things be pressed by a Minister upon a people grossly ignorant? How
few Parents or Masters have you that know how to serve God in their family? How
few Husbands that know how to inform their wives in matter of Religion? And how
few Neighbors are able to teach and admonish one another out of the Word,
whereas the constant exercise of those duties, would bring admirable glory to
God, would be infinite comfort to faithful Ministers; but ignorance and
dullness has covered the face of all people? How many Families are there who
eat, and drink, and swear, and curse, and go to bed, and rise like so many
bruit beasts, and you can no more expect religious duties from them, than
understanding and discourse from the worm that crawleth on the ground? Oh that
we could once preach to our auditors as spiritual in this particular!

Fourthly, The ignorance of a people, restrains the Ministers of God, that
they cannot so powerfully press at first, the pure and sincere worship of God,
and the leaving of all superstitious and traditional ways of worship, but they
must by degrees, here a little, and there a little, as they are able to bear
it. Thus our Savior showed in that forementioned place, Luke 5. No man
puts new wine in old bottles; The people were offended, that Christ and his
Disciples did not follow that external worship, which others did; and he tells
them, it is with Auditors and Disciples, as with bottles, if old, they are not
able to bear new and spirituous wine. Hence our Savior told the Disciples at
another time, I have many ohings to tell you, but you cannot hear them now;
therefore they were to stay at Jerusalem, till they were endowed with the holy
Ghost from above. If we should at first press a people plunged into all
ignorance and superstition to the highest and exact worship of God, they would
judge it madness. Hence our Savior by degrees, instructs the woman of
Samaria, who worshipped she knew not what. And Calvin commends that known
counsel of Austin to a Bishop, who desired his advise about Discipline, where
the sin of drunkenness had generally infected all, which was, That he should
proceed wisely and mildly, Monendo magis quam minando, etc. So Cyprian says of
himself, In remittendis delictis peno ipse delinquo, yet this must not be used
for slothfulness and remisness in Church reformation; For how greatly has God
blessed even the endeavors of a few against universal impiety. Thus much for
Ignorance.

What precious truths in Divinity the sinfulness of a people make them
incapable of.
Then the Sinfulness of people make them incapable of many precious truths in
Religion. As

First, The Ministers labor is most spent in discovering the damnable nature
of gross sins, taking them off from their brutish beastly ways; and as for
spiritual sins, unbelief, diffidence in the promises, carnal confidence in
themselves, etc. These they cannot so much press against, because such
Auditors come far short of civility, and therefore much less reach to piety.
Hence, though they can go along with Sermons that urge the leaving of gross
sins, yet those about Regeneration, and a New creature, they cannot perceive.
Thus our Savior, If I have spoken to you earthly things, and ye understand
xot, how can ye heavenly? John 3.12.

Secondly, To a people living in gross sins, we cannot so frequently and
gloriously preach Jesus Christ in the Offices of a Mediator. We cannot make it
our work to set forth the promise of the Gospel in its glory. We cannot preach
of joy and peace in believing. We cannot commend the resting and relying upon
Christ; for before this be done, men must be convinced of the guilt of their
particular sins. Thus Paul did to Felix, when desired to preach of faith in
Christ. Thus Peter endeavored to prick the consciences of those, that murdered
Christ the life of glory.

Thirdly, The performing of duties in a spiritual and gracious manner, so as to
have communion with God, and to enjoy him. This also is too high for sinful
wicked men, Wisdom is too high for a fool, says Solomon; and so the spiritual
praying, hearing, enjoying of God in those Ordinances, is a paradox and mystery
to them. What a glorious expression is that, We beholding as in a glass the
glory of God, are transformed into his image? 2 Cor. 3.18. but the world has
not received the Spirit of God to know these things, as the Apostle says in 1
Cor. 2.

Use. To arouse and awaken people out of their ignorance and sinfulness. If
Aristotle thought a young man no fit Auditor for his Morals, because he was
subject to unruly affections, how fit can people blind in mind, corrupt in
affections, be to receive the truths of God? How great is the labor and grief
of a Minister to preach to those that are not so much as babes in Christ? The
very Ox and Horse know the noise and command of the Driver, and turn as he
would have them, only man is more unruly and brutish, refusing to order his
steps, as he is commanded. How much of the study, labor, parts, and godliness
of a Minister may be lost through the indociblenesse of hearers? Though we
preach not Latin, yet the matter we preach may be so spiritual, heavenly, that
it may be as untelligible, as an unknown tongue. We would go on to perfection,
were not your slownesse, slothfulness an obstruction. Is not Christ, nor the
glorious promise no more published? thank we our selves for this. To such are
the wounds, the blows and the threatenings of the Law, not the imbracements, or
love of the Gospel, belonging.

The second thing observable, is the Subject or Matter of the Apostles
complaint, [ Not as spiritual, but as carnal;] This is not to be understood of
all, but of many amongst them; for he does acknowledge some wise and perfect to
whom he was a debtor. Carnal. The several significations it has in Scripture.


Now you must know this word or attribute [carnal] has several significations
in Scripture; sometimes it signifies no more, than to partake of the same
stock with us. Thus the Apostle calls them carnal Masters, or Masters after the
flesh, Ephesians. 6.5. And the Apostle makes a distinction between being in the
flesh, and walking after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3.

2. He is said to be carnal, that although he has a great measure of grace,
and with much spiritual fortitude does conquer sin, yet it many times haled
him away captive to those relics and remainders of corruption in him. And
this (as I remember) is but in one place, where Paul says, But I am carnal,
and sold under sin, Romans 7.14.

3. The most frequent application of this word, is to those, who wholly give up
themselves to the lusts of the flesh, and make provision for them. Even as
customary sins are called the works of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.3. This is the most
general use of the word, as we use it also in English.

4. Carnal is used comparatively, for those who are indeed godly, but very weak
and infirm, retaining many corruptions, and savouring much of the flesh, though
they for the main are godly. And in this sense it is used in the Text.

As unto carnal] He uses the word [As] for mitigation sake; and then explains
his meaning, calling them babes in Christ. Observe,

That even among those who are truly, and indeed of the visible Church of God,
there is a vast difference, some are spiritual, some are carnal, some are men,
some are babes.

Though God created Adam and Eve in their full perfection, yet he does not
regenerate us into a full stature in Christ. Though it be the opinion of some
Divines, That at the Resurrection, all the godly shall rise in their complete
perfection, children, in that stature, they might have grown up unto; yet it is
not so here; we are spiritually begotten babes in Christ, and so have several
degrees into which we are to grow; yea one Christian may so far exceed another
both in parts and graces, that one would wonder, that the same Heaven should
ever receive them at last. Yea one Christian in time may exceedingly differ
from himself: As the Apostles, how rude and evil at first, but how admirable
and wonderful, when they had received the Spirit from above in a fuller
measure? Thus as one star differs from another in glory; There is a vast
difference between the Sun and any of the less stars; so it is many times
in the visible Church.

To open this Point, Consider,

First, That it is a great Dispute, Who are truly members of the visible
Church? The Papists they make all public and gross sinners to be truly of the
Church; even as a wicked or ungodly man may be truly and indeed a Citizen of
such a City, and have the Liberties thereof. But the Reformed Divines, they
say, Gross and profane men are not truly and indeed of the visible Church,
which is a company of sheep, and not goats. It is that through neglect of
Discipline and want of godly order, profane obstinate men may abide in the
Church, who yet are to be cast out of it. And this is not a ground for any to
separate uncharitably and sinfully from the Church so polluted; yet such wicked
men continuing amongst believers, are not internally, but externally, and in
appearance only of the Church: Even as a wicked branch, or a dead hand is a
part of the body equivocally, it receives no life or influence; so neither do
these, though they pray, hear, come to Church, yet they receive no more
spiritual benefit from Christ, then the glass eye does vital operation from
the soul. And Bellarmine himself does at last acknowledge, That public and
open sinners, though they be De corpore Ecclesiae, yet they are not De Anima.
Happily therefore the Papists do not so much contradict the Doctrine of the
Protestants, as themselves. For Amesius does reject that Proposition, which
Bellarmine does impose on us; as if we held internal grace necessarily
constituent of a member of a visible Church; external profession of faith, and
of obedience to Christ, is enough to this, though Regeneration be wanting. John
said, Some were not of them, though they were amongst them, 1 John 2.19.

Primitive Christians distinguished.
Secondly, In the primitive times, they had a twofold distinction of those that
were in the visible Society. There were the (...), such as did take care only
about the body, and things pleasing to the sense, which is the generality of
people minding the necessities of the body, and the pleasures thereof. These
are even like bruit beasts.

2. There were (...), Animal, or natural men, and those indeed had the natural
perfections of the soul, learning, parts, morality, and whatsoever in an humane
way, would elevate the reason of a man.

Lastly, There were the (...), the spiritual ones, who being sanctified by the
Spirit of God, did all things upon spiritual grounds, and to spiritual ends.

Though this distinction may be allowed in an orthodox sense; yet the
Valentinians they made such a division, and by their spiritual men meant such,
who could not sin at all.

But the second and more common division of their hearers, were into the
Catechumeni, such who were to be instructed and taught the principles of
Religion. For they admitted no grown person into Church Communion, that were
not competently taught the foundations of Religion. Oh how many are amongst us,
though aged and married persons, that need to be placed in this form!

2. Poenitentes, the Penitents, of whom there were several degrees; and such
were those, who being Christians in profession, did yet fall into gross and
scandalous sins, such were kept from the Sacrament. They had a distinct place
in the Church, as not worthy the communion of the rest. Oh Beloved, in the
Apostles times, in the primitive times, when there was spiritual zeal for the
glory of God, a profane impenitent man was no more owned for one of theirs,
than we would own a toad in our dishes, or a swine in our garden. No, not with
such an one not to eat, Withdraw from such a man. Cast him out, says the
Apostle; and thus for many hundred years after Christ. But (alas) we are like
so many Hospitals full of diseased persons.

The other were those that were initiated and received into their Society, and
made partakers of the Sacrament. But

3. The Apostle in the Text, he speaks of two degrees only amongst the godly,
the Spiritual, and the Carnal, the men and the babes, even as we speak of the
Incipients and Proficients. Now the spiritual man is he that has attained to
an higher degree both of knowledge in the understanding and sanctification, in
the heart; of such the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6.1 This later is necessary. For
if a man have never such spiritual abilities, if he abound in the knowledge of
all mysteries, can preach, pray, and do all things to the ravishment of the
hearer, yet if he be not sanctified in his heart, he is carnal, and not
spiritual. These Corinthians are said to abound in all utterance, and they came
behind no Church in any gift; yet no Church so carnal, and so full of the works
of the flesh as this; here were gross heresies, here were divisions and
schisms among them, and several gross practices; so that a spiritual people,
is not presently a people of parts, and knowledge, and abilities only, but of
grace and raised sanctification also.

Now as there are these degrees and differences in the truly godly, What it is
to be a spiritual man.
so there are peculiar and proper duties required of them. The spiritual man,
he is first to be charitable and indulgent to those that are weaker, not to
despise and contemn them, for they are those whom Christ also thought not his
blood too dear for. Thus Romans 14. speaking of the weak and the strong, he bids
him, receive the weak, (...), into his bosom, as it were, with much pity and
compassion; he is to be the good Samaritan, to pour o^l in his wounds, Gal.
6.1. Ye that are spiritual, restore such an one with compassion* as we do
rejoynt dislocated parts of the body. It Is far from the Spirit or Christ to
contemn those that are weak in parts or graces. Christ did not, he would not
break the bruised reed, Matthew. 12.20. How patient and condescend^ng was he to
his Disciples, notwithstanding all their dullness and corruptions? Therefore
that opinion of some Anabaptists is full of pride and arrogance, that say, The
Church should consist of none, but those that are as perfect as Angels As Jacob
drove the sheep great with lamb, with much tenderness and ease: So art thou to
have great care of those weak Christians, who have burdens upon them, how thou
put them beyond their streng^h, and so they despair.

Secondly, The spiritual man is to walk humbly, and to be always in an holy
fear and trembling. Their full is most grievous, who fall from the pinnacle of
the Temple. Satan's greatest design is against the spiritual Christians; those
that are more eminent than others to throw into the mire; for hereby Religion
will have the greater wound and dishonor. Thus Satan desired to winnow the
Disciples, Luke 22.31. And, Thou that stand, take heed lest thou fall, 1
Cor. 10.11. And, Gal. 6.1. Thou that are spiritual, consider thy self also,
that thou may be tempted. It Is woeful, when a Christian of great parts and
grace, begins to have any confidence in himself, as Peter had; then you will
quickly see these Cedars fall to the ground. Grow therefore in grace, yet keep
up fear and trembling.

Thirdly, The spiritual man is to consider, God requires more of him, than of
others, his account will be the m^re terrible. If God has given thee ten, or
five talents, know, where God has given more, there he w^ll expect more
increase; See then, how faithful and fruitful thou art in thy place? Is thy
mouth like a fountain of living water to others? Art thou in thy house, in thy
neighborhood, as a tree of life? Do the souls of others bless thee for thy
teaching, reproving? Yea such are to be great helpers in the Gospel. Paul gives
great commendation of many Christians, men and women, who did much further the
success of the Gospel.

Carnal, or babes described and counseled.
Then as for the Carnal or Babes, two things belong to them,

First, That they be not dejected, or quite out of hopes, because they are
babes. Fathers have naturally tender and dear affections to those children that
are most infirm and weak. Christ had care of the bruised reed; he rebuked those
that would have kept little children from him, how much rather these spiritual
babes, and the promise of pardon, and glory, is made to the least degree of
grace? Do not then judge that which is little, nothing at all. The least faith
receives Christ as truly, though not so firmly, as the strongest. The little
pupil in a man's eye, can receive the species of the great Mountains; And
though thou have not such graces and parts, as David and Paul, yet thou have
the same God and Christ, which they have. Look to it therefore, you that are
babes in Christ, you are apt to be discouraged and dejected: remember the
branch does not bear the root, but the root it, and thou do not so much lay
hold on Christ, as Christ lays hold on thee. The little child in danger
catches hold of his father, and its safety is not so much, that the child
holds the father, as the father it. Thy safety and happiness is not, because
thy grace joins thee to Christ, but because his Spirit knits thee to himself.

Secondly, Take heed of resting in low things. To be always weak, to be
always carnal does highly provoke God, and grieve a faithful Ministry, as
appears by Paul: to grow in grace, and bring forth much fruit, are made
necessary to our continuance in the state of grace. And if Paul and such Giants
thought themselves dwarfs, and therefore they pressed forward, Phil. 3.14. How
much rather must dwarfs indeed make haste? Oh say, What a proficient might I
have been, if I had still pursued forward and forward? If the rich man still
increasing his wealth, is desirous to add to his treasure; how much rather
should thou desire the growth of grace? He that thinks he has grace enough,
never had any grace at all; And the rather we must grow, because we hinder our
selves of the chiefest truths, and the choicest consolations in the Scripture,
which are commonly for those that are spiritual. But of this enough here.

Use 1. To confute that proud and arrogant Doctrine, that will have none
members of a Church, but who are perfect; and those also who arrogate
perfection to themselves. Where can such be found? Must they not set ladders
and climb up themselves alone to Heaven, as Constantine told a Novatian? We are
not to encourage the weak in their weakness, much less to comfort the heart
of a sinner; but yet we must not expect souls free from sin here, no more
than bodies from pain and diseases. That constant prayer, to forgive us our
sins, argues we have spots and blemishes in our lives.

Use 2. Of Instruction. If those that are truly godly, yet imperfect, retaining
some ignorance, and some infirmities on them, are such a trouble unto the godly
Ministers; How unsufferable then are such as are altogether carnal? If wheat,
because of some blemish in it, be to be blamed, What then is cockle and plain
weeds? If imperfect fruit displease the Gardener, What then do brambles and
weeds? Oh that you would consider your selves, you who live in the constant
practice of gross sins, who sow to the flesh! What would Paul and the holy
Apostles, if they were alive, say to you? What do you in Christ's vineyard, who
are bushes and thorns? What do ye in his sheepfold, who are goats and swine?
you are a trouble to God, and to his Ambassadors; no godly man can cast his eye
on you, but with much grief and hearty sighing. If babes be offensive, what are
monsters and beasts? Such as these are spots and blots in our Assemblies, a
reproach to Christianity, a very burden to the inanimate creatures, and yet no
burden to themselves.

Verse 2. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat.
THis second verse is a further amplification of Paul's complaint, They were
babes, and not strong men. Wherein did this appear? by the meat he did provide
for them. He compares himself to a Nurse, who does not provide strong meat,
but milk for babes; for that were to kill them, rather then to nourish them. So
that in these words, you have Paul's action, and the matter and Object of it,
expressed metaphorically: The action, (...), I have fed you; or rather, I have
given you to drink: For so (...) does properly signify. Mat. 25.25. I was
thirsty, (...), you gave me drink. So Romans 12.20. Rev. 14 8. Afterward it is
used for watering. Yet because, in a general sense, milk is called Childrens
meat, so also may they be said to be fed by it. Now this action of Paul's, does
denote the great skill, and prudence, which the Apostle used, considering what
was fit for his Hearers, and condescending thereunto. He that was rapt up into
the third Heavens, what sublime Mysteries might he have preached upon? But he
preaches not to show his parts and learning, but to do good to them. Secondly,
You have the object of this action, milk. Although sometimes the whole Word of
God, with the truth contained therein, be compared to milk. As when Peter
says, As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2. There
the strongest Christians are exhorted to be like new born babes, because of the
greediness, delight, and sweetness they should find in the Word of God.
Therefore the Greek word is, (...), swallow it down. But here it is spoken by
way of opposition, and does signify, as compared with Heb. 5. the plain and
easy Principles of Religion. The Alphabet, the Foundation, whithout which
there cannot be any superstruction. So that two profitable Doctrines may be
observed hence: 1. It must be the Prudence and Wisdom of the Minister, to
preach such matter, and in such a way, as the Hearers may receive good. 2. It Is
necessary to acquaint people with the Principles of Religion, before they go
higher in Christianity.


Of the first; There is a great deal of prudence and wisdom required in the
Ministers of God, so to preach, as that it may be profitable to the Hearers.
The Nurse is carefully to observe what meat (and how prepared) the Child may
eat: The Shepherd, what are the fit Pastors for to lead his Sheep into: The
Husbandman, what is the proper seed for such ground: The Physician, what is the
proper Physic for such constitutions: Seeing it is a sure Rule, That the
actions of Agents, are received, according to the disposition of the Patients.
As the Apostle argues against public duties in an unknown tongue, so it holds
as well against unknown matter.

To open this Doctrine, Consider,

That a Ministers duty of feeding his Flock* lies in two things; The Ministers
twofold Work.
His teaching of them, and His governing of them: And both these require great
prudence. The Scripture calls it a Key, whereupon Divines have a distinction of
the Key of knowledge, and the Key of jurisdiction; in all which, they are to be
Lights, and Guides* to be so many Arguses full of eyes. If Solomon, above all
things prayed for Wisdom, to govern the people in civil things, how much more
have we cause to pray for Wisdom in the Administration of spiritual things?
How easily may we give you poison for Bread, without Wisdom? A Serpent for a
Fish without Wisdom? How easily (without Prudence) may even the good and
wholesome things we preach, prove also dangerous to you?

First therefore for our Doctrine, As the Key of knowledge; that is branched
out into several Particulars, wherein an Art of Arts is required: As a wise
Master Builder, (says the Apostle) at the 10th verse.

What wisdom is required in a Minister to choose out sound matter. 1. For
Information.
First, for Information. There is required judgment, and a sound mind to
separate Truth from falsehood: To know which is gold and precious stone, and
which is hay and stubble: To winnow the chaff from the wheat. Hence a Minister
is required, to be able to divide the Word of God aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. as they
did the Sacrifice, giving that to God, which did belong to him; and that to
man, which did belong to him: The consequent of which Wisdom, is not to be
ashamed, as if shame would sometimes or other confound those that had not this
skill. It Is impossible but you should be fed with chaff instead of wheat, with
dung instead of meat, if the Minister cannot separate the precious from the
vile. The Scripture speaks of some that were ignorant, that did wrest the
Scriptures (2 Pet. 3.16.) to their own damnation; but the ignorant Minister, he
may wrest it to the damnation of many others. How many in the world swallow
down damnable Heresies, feed on the draffe of corrupt Doctrines, because God
has sent false Prophets and false Teachers amongst them.

Secondly, As wisdom is required to choose out true, and sound matter, so to
proportion it to the Capacity of the Hearers. He is to be the wise Scribe, that
brings out of his Treasure new and old, Mat. 13 25. That is, such which may
affect every Hearer: It Is an allusion to Cantic. 7.13. They are indeed, as Paul
says, Act. 20.27. to acquaint them with the whole counsel of God; yet in a
methodical way, the most easy, and most plain.

First, To preach the Nature of God and his Attributes; of Original sin, of
Conversion, of Justification; as also about Christ and his Offices. These are
the New things, and the Old And as God made the most necessary things first,
and the ornaments in the world afterward, so are we. Paul in his Epistle to
the Romans, begins with the knowledge of God by the creatures, then Original
sin, afterward Justification and Sanctification, and then proceeds to
Election. It Is an excellent Rule of Nazianzen, We are not to preach of every
thing, to every man, at every time, in every place; but in prudence, to
dispense as Auditors are able to bear it: So did our Savior.

2. For Consolation.
A second part of this Doctrinal Key, is, To preach comfort, and dispense the
grace of God in the Gospel. But here is much wisdom required, that be does it
not to unbroken and impenitent sinners. To preach a Savior to those that do
not find themselves lost, to commend a Physician to those that find themselves
whole, to pour oil, where there are no wounds, is to pervert all order. Ho
every one that thirsts, says our Savior, Joh 7.37. And, Come unto me all ye
that are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. The Spirit of God, convinces the world of
sin, and then of righteousness. Oh but how much unwise and unfaithful
preaching is there in this respect? How many are there, that strengthen wicked
men's hearts, and make them not sad, whom God would have made sad? That daube
with untemppered mortar, that say to every profane man, if he do but cry, Lord
have mercy upon me, Be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. It Is this
daubing, and soothing up people in their wickedness, striking out all fear of
hell and damnation, that makes them wallow like swine in their filth. To such
to preach no comfort, but the Law and Threatenings; but to those that are broken
in heart, a tongue of the learned is required to speak a word in season. How
careful was Paul, that the incestuous person should not be overwhelmed with
grief, 2 Cor. 2? And here is the more wisdom, because Satan's temptations are
subtle and insinuating; We are not ignorant of his devices, of his schisms,
what false circumventions and appearances he will have. Now, How many are
there, that are not acquainted themselves with the depths of Satan, that are no
better Comforters then Jobs Friends were? Christ himself was affected with all
our temptations, that he might know how the more feelingly to pity others. Thus
a Minister that has himself been in the deep matters of God, that has himself
been exercised with all kind of temptations, he can only tell how to speak to
the heart of another. So that you see, much wisdom is required in the giving
of comfort. Alas, every sick man, every dying man, looks we should give
comfort, and they would have a word of comfort! Oh, but what has thy life
been! What truth of grace is there in thee? Have not some wicked men cried out
of their sins, in fear of death, and public judgments, as Pharaoh did?
Therefore we must take heed what we do; we must not comfort, whom God would not
have comforted. Here is great wisdom required.

A third part of his Doctrinal Key, is, To rebuke and reprove for sin. Now,
3. For Reproof.
how great a skill is it, wisely to reprove, to have zeal and knowledge
together? Some must be reproved sharply, T^t. 1.13 cuttingly. We must not
spare. Thus John called some a generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7. and our Savior,
Woe to ye Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; many times repeating that, upbraiding
of them. These were obstinate impenitent Hypocrites, Mat. 23.13, 14, 15. and
little blows will not move them. Others again are tender, tractable: meekness
will do more than austerity So that there is scarce any thing requires more
wisdom than public and private reproofs. Men can so hardly bear them, Genus
quoddam Maritirii est reprehensionem* patienter far, It is a kind of
martyrdom to bear a reproof patiently. And Ministers are either apt to be too
awful, and pleasing of men, or else too boisterous or passionate. So that the
Shepherd of irrational Sheep, have a far more easy task, then spiritual
Shepherds of men especially in superstitious Customs, in false ways of
worship. Here an Angels wisdom will scarce suffice. What a trouble was that to
the Church in her infancy, about the retaining or leaving the Jewish
Ceremonies? The Questions and differences grew so hot, that it had almost torn
the Church in pieces. The Council of Jerusalem was called about this; many
still Judaizing thought, that if you took the observation of times, and outward
Ceremonies away, you took away all Religion. Paul in his Epistle to the
Galatians, and Romans 14. is very diligent to inform them about this,
endeavoring to make them spiritual, and to draw up their hearts from those
beggarly elements: Paul was circumspect how to walk in this slippery
Controversy, To the Jew, I became a Jew, 1 Cor. 9.20. Not that he was a
dissembler, or an Hypocrite, or humoured them in their superstitious weakness,
but he took upon him all sweet affections; he was as a Jew to a Jew, as weak to
weak; he would consider them, as if he were in their case: Yea, to walk in
these Controversies was so hard, that Peter gave great occasion of offense;
yea, Barnabas was also laid aside, for he did not (...), which made Paul resist
him to the face, with this dissimulation, Gal 1. Now if the Apostle, was so
industrious to root out the practice of those Rites and Ceremonies, which yet
God himself had once commanded, how much rather should we those things which
were brought into the Church, without any command of God, or warrant of
Scripture, but merely by the will of man?

As for the other kind of Keys, Church Government, the wise managing of that,
is far more difficult, then Political: But I shall wave that, as not so proper
to this Text.

Let us consider the Reason, Why this Doctrinal feeding requires such skill
and Prudence. And

Reas. 1.
First, Because divine truths are not to be managed by humane, wordly wisdom,
but by spiritual wisdom: As it is God that teaches people to profit, Isa.
48.17. so it is God that teaches the Minister to preach profitably: Hence the
word of wisdom is reckoned among the gifts of Gods Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. and the
Apostle says, We are not able of our selves to think a good thought, 2 Cor.
2.5. as some expound it, in the way of our Ministry, we cannot think that
which is good and profitable to men's souls without God: Hence as of Christ the
chief sheepherd it is said, the Spirit of wisdom, counsel, and understanding
shall rest on him, Isa. 11.2. so it would be happy if the same Spirit
proportionably did rest on inferior shepherds, I have caught you with an holy
guile, 2 Cor. 12.16. There are divine stratagems to win men's souls, and if
Aholiab and Bezaliel are said to have the Spirit of wisdom given them to build
the material Tabernacle, how much more do others need it to edify this
spiritual one? Exodus 36.1. Seeing then the managing of holy truths is not had
by humane prudence, but by wisdom from above, we must be Scribes instructed to
the kingdom of heaven: we are not born but made Preachers of the Gospel by
God, no marvel if this be so great a work.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, Therefore is wisdom necessary in our preaching of divine things,
because the miscarriage of these precious truths, is a far greater loss then
any earthly loss. It Is pity for want of skill in any calling to miscarry in a
man's wordly affairs, but much more in heavenly; there needs not only
faithfulness but wisdom. A wise and faithful steward it is that makes five
multiply to ten. If the Prophet speaking of the Husbandmans skill, about his
several grains, tithes, and wheat, having several instruments for them, says,
his God teaches him, Isa. 28.26. otherwise planting, and sowing, and all cost
would be in vain; so it is here, if God teach us not, direct us not, all our
preaching is in vain, and our Sabbath days are lost. Our Savior would not
have any piece of material bread lost, but asks them, how many baskets full
took they up? why then should any thing be lost of the bread of life?

Reas. 3.
Thirdly, Therefore is wisdom necessary, because of the untowardness and
unteachableness of people, which have sundry humors, sundry appetites, sundry
affections, and desires; Nazianzen was much affected with the difficulty of his
Ministry in this respect; so many opinions, so many different affections, and
desires: that which draws on some, will drive others away; now who is able to
administer fit and convenient food, but he that is endued with heavenly
prudence?

Use. To show peoples duty, how much they are to pray unto God for their
teachers, that they may be directed into all good thoughts for their souls
good. Thou gettest no more profit, thou can not understand, thou art not
affected, Oh see, if this be not a just reward for thy want of prayers for thy
guide! How often does Paul desire the prayers of the people he writes to? how
happy is it when the Ministry is profitable to thee, and thou art profiting to
it? As God must be with the Preacher, so he must be with the hearer: a coal of
fire on his tongue to purify it, and a coal of fire on your ears to cleanse
them. Oh then how ungodly are they, who instead of praying, curse, grudge, and
nourish malice, for the Ministers work sake merely, when that should make him
honorable! Consider, why is the Ministry good to others and not to thee? why
is it the word of power and wisdom to others, but of weakness and folly to
thee; See if all this comes not by thy profane neglect and contempt of
earnest prayer for to make it so to thee? it is honey to others, but gall to
thee, it is a savor of life to others, but death to thee. Some sin or
spiritual judgment is upon thee, and therefore be afraid.

The second Doctrine remains to be amplified, which is,

That it is very necessary to have a people instructed with the principles of
Religion, before they make further progress in Religion. Observe.


Thus the Apostle, I have fed you with milk. Children, as they speak like
children, think like children, and do like children (as the Apostle in another
case, 1 Cor. 13.) so they have meat fit for children. And this point is of
great consequence. For how universal and damnable is the ignorance of most, who
have not yet learned the Alphabet of Religion, scarce have heard whether there
be an Holy Ghost or no? Who, though they have Christ often in their mouths, yet
know not what Christ was, and thereupon may justly have that doom upon them,
which our Savior passes upon the woman of Samaria, Ye worship ye know not
what; Joh. 4.22. To open this Doctrine,

Consider first, And bewail the miserable atheism, ignorance, and blindness
that every man naturally is born in, about Religion and divine truths.
Considerations about the principles of Religion, and the knowledge and
ignorance of them.
Hence Ephesians 5.8. they are called darkness it self, in the abstract, and the
natural man cannot receive the spiritual things of God, 1 Cor. 2. Zophar
compares every man by his birth to the wild Asses colt, Job 11.12. What is
more brutish then that? Now there are thousands of people, and those living in
the Church of God, who are not yet come out of this brutish ignorance, men that
never felt this Sun, or day star of the Gospel arising in their hearts.
Thus as God promised, knowledge should cover the face of the earth, as waters
do the seas, Isa. 11.9. Darkness covers our Congregations, as it did the chaos
at first.

Secondly, As people are thus naturally ignorant of divine truths, so also
their wilful slothfulness about them is much more damnable. He that does not
know his masters will, shall be beaten with many stripes; but he that shuts his
eyes that he may not know; he that bids the knowledge of the most High, depart
from him, he shall be beaten with more stripes. Oh then! why is it that thou
art such a blind Bat, or Owl in the day of the Gospel? thou can not say,
it is impossible for us to get knowledge; No, how great are the helps and means
that God has vouchsafed in these days? Theodoret tells us, That in his days,
the common sort of people, maids, old women, handycrafts men, laborers, these
could all tell the ground of their faith; but there are few among us who can
rise up to that duty, to give an account of our hope, yet the Scripture
requires this of all, 1 Pet. 3.15. Why then do thou say, I must know how to
work, how to plow, to sow, to maintain my natural life, and not also be as
diligent about thy supernatural?

Thirdly, Because naturally we are thus like a wilderness full of briars,
therefore God has strictly commanded this duty of instructing, and informing
those that are rude and ignorant in the ways of God. And this duty is not only
upon the Ministers, but the Scripture commands it indispensably upon Parents
and Governors. Thus in Deuteronomy. 6.7. they are commanded to wh^t the law upon
their family, and to write it upon the posts, and to be speaking of them daily:
Thus Joshua and Abraham, they made their family to serve the Lord, which cannot
be without the knowledge of him. In the new Testament, Paul commands parents,
To bring up their children in the knowledge of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.5. And Solomon's
Proverbs are full of these exhortations. For certainly if the Scripture say,
Jer. 9 23. Let not the rich man boast in his riches, nor the great man in his
honors, but in that he knows God; then the endeavor of parents to provide
wealth, riches, lands, or a great portion, is nothing so acceptable, as to
teach them the fear of God. Oh therefore that at last our families might be
made Christ's Schools, wherein the principles and commands of Christ may be
frequently urged! Oh who can make lamentations bitter enough for the neglect of
this! In many Families, there is the Devils School; people may learn to curse,
to swear, to become bruit beasts: But to have the Knowledge of God taught,
would be the greatest burden in the world. Well, consider that of Jeremy 10.25.
Pour down thy wrath upon the Families, that call not on thy Name: Which by
consequence, at least, reaches private Families and Households. And how can
they call, if they do not believe? and how can they believe, if they do not
know? As Aristotle observes, That Families are the beginnings of Common
wealths; and so they are good, or bad, as particular Families are. So it is
with the Church, that consists of particular Families. But if they be like a
Cage of unclean birds, like the Wilderness, wherein dreadful Birds are, what
good can be expected from a Church consisting of such? Men speak of Houses
where the Devils walk, where spirits haunt, men dare not dwell there: I tell
thee, That a Family where ignorance and profaneness is nourished, is an house,
not only haunted, but even possessed by Devils. And how can thou eat, sleep,
and live in such a place?

Fourthly, In the primitive times, there were a rank of people, that were
called Catecumini, (as we said before) Candidati, or Competentes; such who
being converted from Paganism, were not yet fully instructed in the matters of
Religi^n, and therefore they had time to get knowledge, before ever they were
admitted to Church Communion. And answerable to this, there was a Catechist,
one whose work and office it was, to instruct such before they were Baptized.
Thus you see, how careful in Antiquity they were, that they might have no
ignorant persons among them. And certainly, as in all Arts, there are
Principles which must be learned, before they can come to Conclusions; so it is
here in Religion. And oh, that we could see this Knowledge brought in amongst
people! To be a Christian, is to be anointed; and this Unction teaches us all
things, (Joh. 2.20.) viz. necessary to salvation.

Fifthly, Principles of Religion (largely so called) are of two sorts; either
Corrupt, Idolatrical, and Heretical; or true, Sound, and Consonant to the
Scripture. Now there are many in the world, are too forward to infuse poisonous
and dangerous Principles; so great a matter is it, to consider what men are
seasoned with at first, either privately or publicly. Thus many are infected
with Popish and superstitious Principles; many with erroneous and false
Doctrines; and these foundations being laid, it is very difficult ever to remove
them. As the vessel is first seasoned, or the tree at first planted, so it is
likely to continue. The Apostle calls those Jewish Ceremonies, the beggarly
elements, Gal. 4.9. or Principles of the world. Why so? because the
superstitious Teachers made them the first Elements, the Principles, the
foundation of all; and therefore they thought all Religion was taken away, if
they were removed. And thus you have diverse persons, they have indeed some
Principles of Religion, but they are Popish, and Superstitious, such as put out
the Knowledge of Christ, and the Scriptures. And, It Is a twofold labor (as
Socrates said) to a perverted Disciple of his, to teach them, for they must
first be untaught their erroneous Principles, and then must be instructed in
the truth. Oh then, look to this, that thy Principles about Religion be not
false, ignorant, and superstitious ones!

Sixthly, The true Principles of Religion, are reduced to several heads, and
are both short and easy, but necessary to be known. The Doctrine about God,
and Christ, and our selves, which is the Credendum. The Doctrine about Faith
and Repentance, which is the Agendum. And about things to come, which is the
Sperandum.

About God, we are to believe, That he is, and a rewarder of those that seek
him. About Christ, This is eternal life, to know Jesus Christ, (Joh. 17.2.) and
the holy Ghost; for, we are Baptized in his Name. About our selves, the
desperate pollution of our natures, the hainousness of sin, the aggravation
of the curses of the Law.

The things to be done, are Repentance, which drives out of our sins; and
Faith, which drives out of our own righteousness. But because these are Divine
Works, therefore a man must be regenerated and born again. And this Principle
Christ insisted on to Nicodemus, Joh 3.

The things to come, are, The Resurrection of the Body; The immortality of the
Soul; The Day of Judgment; The He^ven and Hell, provided for the godly and the
wicked. These Principles are plain and easy; not to flesh and blood, but in
respect of the manifestation of them. They are laid down clearly in Scripture:
None, without horrible impudency, can deny them. Indeed, there are many sublime
Disputes about the Trinity, and about Christ's Incarnation; but these are not
necessary to be believed by every one. Oh then, how great is thy ingratitude!
God has made the necessary things easy, and plain, and yet thou art not
acquainted with them. If God had commanded some greater matter of thee; If he
had required all thy time, all thy study, thou wast obliged to have done it.
How much rather in things of so easy apprehension?

But now, when we say, These divine Principles are easy; you must take heed of
two mistakes.

1. We do not mean, that the divine Faith and Belief of them, is easy to flesh
and blood; no: but they are easy, supposing the grace of God, in respect of
other particulars in Religion For otherwise: To believe with a Divine Faith,
viz. by the Spirit of God inabling upon divine Authority, (which is only true
Faith) is the immediate work of Gods Spirit. Therefore Faith, though it be but
Historical, and not saving, is the gift of God. When we desire a Knowledge,
and Faith of these Principles, we mean not such a Faith as most men have, a
Faith of custom and humane education; a Faith, because they are brought up in
such a Religion: but upon Judgment and Knowledge grounded upon the Scripture.
That which is usually called the Colliars Faith, To believe as the Church
believes; Is the Husbandmans, and the Tradesmans, and the rich man's, and the
poor man's Faith, too much in the world. So that as Christ says, His yoke is
easy, and yet also it is very hard: Easy to the heart sanctified, but
grieveous to the unregenerate. So it is here: The Principles of Religion are
easy and plain to the mind enlightened, but they are either foolishness, or
absurdities to the greatest Scholar that is, if h^s heart be not opened. And
thus Paul found himself derided, and called a Babbler amongst the Athenians.

2. We do not mean, that the bare saying of the Principles of Religian by heart
and rote, is the true believing and knowing of them. As the Child is not said
to be fed with milk, unless it swallow it down, and be nourished by it. So
neither can they be said to believe the Principles of Religion, unless they do
with understanding apply them* and receive them into their hearts. But this is
all that most attain unto, they can tell you, God made them; That Christ is
their Savior; That they must repent of sin: But these things are by mere
rote. They learn them, as formerly in Popery they learned their Prayers in
Lattin, they knew not what they prayed for; so neither these, what they do
believe.

Now the Groun^s for Instruction in these Principles, are,

First, Because God accounts of no zeal, nor devout affections, How necessary
the Knowledge of the Principles of Religion is.
if they be not the fruit of Knowledge. Thus Christ told the woman, that was so
zealous for her Fathers worship, Ye worship ye know not what, Joh. 4 22. Though
God once accepted bruit beasts as a S^rifice to him, Yet now (says the
Apostle) let us offer up our selves a reasonable Sacrifice, Romans 12.1. The Jew
had a zeal, but not according to Knowledge. Therefore those crafty Principles
in Popery, to keep men in Ignorance, (to make it the Mother of Devotion) that
thereby they may reign, and do what they list, is to lead men blindfold into
Hell.

Secondly, The Principles are Foundations, and are the Root. Now, he would be
an unwise Artificer, that should intend to rear up a House, and lay no
Foundation. So that, as long as we preach to a people ignorant of these, we
have no bottom to stand upon. Principles are like Seed: Every poor man will
make hard shift to get Seed to sow with.

Thirdly, Without this good Foundation laid, no Preaching, or Duties, can have
any spiritual effect. For, Why are not the bruit Beasts? Why not fools and mad
men, capable of any benefit by the Word preached? But, because the one have not
rational souls; and the other, though they have them, yet the actual use and
exercise of Reason is bound up. It is thus with all people destitute of
Fundamental Principles: All is done in an unknown tongue. They are Barbarians
to us, and we to them.

Fourthly, Conversion cannot be wrought without some Knowledge of the
Principles. We cannot believe in him we do not know. We cannot love him we do
not know. The Heathens, they indeed, built an Altar To the unknown God But it
is unsufferable for a Christian, if a Christian should perform his duties to an
unknown God, or unknown Christ. They must understand, and so be converted, Isa.
6.10. God makes light shine out of darkness.

5. The Knowledge of these Principles is necessary to salvation. You that are
ignorant totally of them, cannot upon any just grounds hope for salvation. This
is eternal life, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, Joh. 17.2. They are a people of no understanding, therefore he that
made them will not save them, Isa. 27.11. God would have all men to be saved,
and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. Oh then, how should you, who
sit in this palpable darkness be afraid! People use to fear in the dark; and
certainly thou should bewail thy self. I am an old man, an old woman; I have
lived thus long where the word has been preached, and yet how little do I know.

Sixthly, None can pretend excuses for their ignorance herein. To have much
Knowledge in Religion, there is required much time and study; many abilities,
better education. But for these Foundations, none can excuse, themselves
because God has revealed them in a plain easy manner: He that runs may
read them. So that it is our slowthfulness if we do not know.

Seventhly, Want of sound Knowledge in these, makes many Errors and Heresies.
Many affect to speak, and hold opinions in Religion, before ever they were well
instructed. Those that did not hold Christ the Head, they presently fell to the
worship of Angels. The empty straw, is carried about with every wind. He that
has no bottom, moves up and down.

Use. Of sharp Reproof, to such who continue in this damnable Ignorance, and
that though they live where the Word is preached. If the Corinthians were to be
blamed because they could not bear strong food, what then belongs to them who
are not capable of milk? The very Principles of Religion are too hard for them.
They know not what you mean, when you speak of these things. Thus they are as
bruit beasts, made to be destroyed. You may find as much knowledge of God,
amongst Pagans and Heathens, as among some that live in the bosom of the
Church. Some have not the Knowledge of God; I speak to your shame. Many have not
the Knowledge of God; It may be spoken to the confusion of our faces How does
this darkness cover men's faces by Aitheism, prophanenes, and great negligence?
They make it not their business to enquire after Knowledge. They greatly n^glect
the means of Knowledge, Prayer, Hearing, Reading, Instructing of others. Say a
man be greatly Ignorant, and you say he has enough to damn him to all
eternity: He will commit any sin; He will embrace any Idolatry; even as the man
in the dark stumbles, and knows not where he goes. Especially, this is a sure
bar against receiving of the Sacrament, for that requires discerning of the
Lords body, of examining themselves; which can never be done without a
competent measure of Knowledge in Religion.

For hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither now are ye able.

These words contain the reason of Paul's prudence, in dispensing spiritual meat
to the Corinthians, milk, and not solid food. We may not preach all things to
all people. There are giants and dwarfs; there are carnal and spiritual.

The words have no difficulty, only our Translators supply a word, for in the
Greek it is thus only, For hitherto ye were not able, neither are ye now able;
they supply [to bear] or to concoct and digest; for he pursues that metaphor,
of making Truth the food of the soul. Veritas est cibus animi. Such a defective
expression we have of the Hebrew word (...) potero, Isa. 1.13. speaking of
their solemn feasts, I cannot bear them. And Psalm. 101.5. Him that has an high
look, I will not bear. So that the words denote the weakness and infancy of
these Corinthians, and that, though they had given themselves up to the faith
of Christ, and had daily waterings by the Apostle, after their first
plantation. Observe,

That it is a great sin and just reproach to a people, Observe.
that have lived long under the means of grace, if they have not got the due
profit by it.

The Word preached is commended in Scripture for several and divine operations.
Now if thou have many years been under these droppings, and yet art a dry
wilderness, how unsufferable is it? In other things of the world, you think it
not to be endured. You send your children to be taught, and if in many years
they should not yet be able to spell the Alphabet, you would think all cost in
vain. If year after year you plow, and prepare a field for Corn, and yet there
come up nothing but weeds and thistles, this is a vanity of vanities, and
vexation of spirit. What the Heathens speak of their Tantalus, to be up to the
chin in water, and yet ready to perish for thirst, is true in thee.

For opening this, let us consider, What are those effects of the Ministry, for
the defect whereof a people may be severely blamed. 1. Intellectual effects.
What are those choice and noble effects of the Ministry, for the defect
whereof a people may be severely blamed. And they are of two sorts,
Intellectual upon the understanding, or Pract^cal upon the heart, affections,
and outward conversation. For the Word of God is both a shining and a burning
light. And for the first, That people will be found without all excuse, and
under a great condemnation, who have not found those intellectual effects.

First, Illumination, and enlightening of the understanding, to believe the
first principles and foundations of Religion. Every Science, and so that of
Divinity has its first principles, which are easy and plain. Principia luce
sua lucent, they shine with their own light, as the Sun shines with its own
light, you need not another Sun to see it. So that if these principles, this
light be put on the Candlestick, held out in the Min^stry, they of themselves
do easily enlighten the whole house; that is, Suppose a man come with attention
and faith, (for oportet discentem credere, and principles cannot be proved;)
but especially the sanctification of the Spirit of God is required. So though
the Sun be never so visible, if the eye be not prepared, all is in vain to a
blind man. Now then supposing this, Who can plead for that damnable ignorance
in many people, that have lived so many years, where the Word has been
preached? What can such say more than Heathens or Pagans, that do all things to
an unknown god (as you heard) and believe, and worship they know not what? I
tell you, such have not the first stone yet laid for any spiritual foundation.
What do such Bats and Owls in the Sunshine of the Gospel? Oh if thou had
lived in Sodom or Egypt, it had not been such a wonder, but in Jerusalem to
be so blind, argues thy case damnable!

Secondly, The Word preached expects this effect, not only to lay a foundation,
but to build upwards, not only to plant, but to grow. Thus Ephesians. 4.13. the
Offices in the Church are to bring us to a full stature in Christ. Paul went up
and down to confirm and increase, where he had laid a foundation. Where God
gives talents he looks for increase. The Ministry is a talent, of which God
will require a strict account: So that it is a just reproach to a people that
live under the means, if they be not out of the lower form, if they have not
left first and low principles, rising to higher perfection: As Paul does
sharply reprove the Hebrews for this want of growth, Heb. 6. Oh then sit not
down at the lower round in the ladder, stay not at the bottom of the hill.
Christianity is a race. There is work, and work enough for thee. Thus David
prays, His eyes may be opened to understand the wonderful things of the Law,
Psalm. 119. His eyes were already opened, and he had more knowledge than his
teachars, yet he prays as fervently to have his eyes opened, as if he were a
beginner, and Ephesians. 1. Paul prays for those already enlightened, that the
Spirit of wisdom and illumination might be upon them. What Paul said to
Timothy, Let thy profiting appear to all, 1 Timothy 4.15. so say we, you that hear
and enjoy teaching, Let your profiting appear to all. Let all the world see,
there is a vast difference between living under no Ministry, or a negligent
Ministry, and an instructing one. If Corn should grow no better in improved
grounds, then in the barren heath, it would be very strange. To a blind man,
the day and night is all one, he sees as well at one time as another. Oh fear
thy self in a state of blindness, to whom preaching and no preaching, the
Ministry and no Ministry is all one, for thou make no more progress!

Thirdly, A third Effect of the Ministry is, To establish and settle in the
truth, to give a sound mind* For through men's corruptions, pride and
vainglory, the Ministry, as it may increase men's parts, so accidentally
increase their errors. As April-showrs that make the flowers fresh and sweet,
so cause many croking frogs also. This age does testify it; If men get any
knowledge, any parts, or abilities, This is like new wine in old bottles, it
breaks the bottles. The sails are too big for the ship, and so they are
Doctores, before they be Discipuli, they are teachers of others before well
taught themselves. Now it is a shame and a blame for any people to run into
erroneous Doctrines, that enjoy a sound Ministry. Mark that place, Ephesians. 4.14.
speaking of the Office of the Ministry, one effect he mentions is, That we
should not be carried away as children with every wind of Doctrine. Hence
Ministers are called Guides and Shepherds; and a great preservative it is to
attend upon them, and submit to them, not with a blind obedience, but as owning
the institution of Christ, and the way to keep from falsehoods; and this is not
to preach our selves, but your good. It Is best for the sheep to keep to his
faithful Shepherd. They are not infallible it is true, much less art thou
infallible; therefore a blessing is to be expected in Gods order.

Lastly, It is a shame to a people living under the Ministry of the Gospel a
long while, if they are not thereby furnished with abilities for those several
personal duties, that God requires of them. As for example, Parents must bring
up their children in the knowledge of the Lord. Private Christians are to have
the Word dwell so plentifully in them, that they are to admonish one another.
The Husband is to instruct his wife at home, if she doubt of the things of
Religion. They are to instruct, rebuke, as occasion serves. Now how uncomely
is it (as we formerly showed) if thou a man so old, so long hearing the Word
preached, can not discharge these personal duties? Oh the dreadful account!
Oh the many duties God looks for at your hands, which will not be expected from
others!

In the next place, Let us observe, what a sin it is, 2. Practical Effects.
if people are not able to bear, or receive, the practical operations of the
Word. For all knowledge, if it be not after godliness, is a tinkling cymbal.
The Word is not only the tree of knowledge, but the tree of life also. And

First, The Word is usually clothed with this Majesty, as to awe men's
consciences, to make them civil, to cause them to forbear many gross and rude
ways they were once accustomed unto. Thus John's Ministry, though it did not
convert Herod, yet it made him do many things gladly. The rocky and stony
ground was a little mollified on the top to receive the Word, though it was not
soft at bottom. The Word, though it does not soak to the bottom of men's
hearts, though it does not enter so deep, yet it thaweth above sometimes, and
men grow more civil. This makes the walls fall down, though it does not take the
City. Oh woe then, and again woe to that man, to whom the Word has not done so
much as this, but he is as profane as a very beast, as if he had lived in
hell, and not under the preaching of the Word, which is called the kingdom of
Heaven! The wild beasts of the field, they hide themselves, when once the day
begins to break forth. And certainly, profane, uncivil men, should even call
to the mountains and hills to cover them, rather than be seen in such evil
ways. Those that are drunk are drunk in the night, says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
5.7. and they are called, works of darknsse. Why then do thou stumble in the
day? Thou have light to see where thou should walk. The Apostle speaks of one
sort of wickedness, That it was not so much as named among Heathens, 1 Cor. 5.
Oh then, How many gross sins are there, that should not be so much as named,
much less practiced among Christians! It Is a dishonor even to the word of
God, if thou shall not do so much, which the very light of nature, and moral
Philosophy has done among others.

2. The word of God (which is indeed the proper work of it) does convert,
regenerate, make men new creatures, not only civil, but godly, doing things
from God, and through God, and to God. Herein the word of God discovers it
self, to come from God, because it makes men of a divine nature. Every agent
assimilates the Patient into its own nature: Fire will turn all things into
fire: And thus the word of God coming from Heaven makes men heavenly. They that
live under the Sun are colored by the beams of it. Oh then, how comes it
about, that thou have lived so long under the means, and know not these
things? The Doctrine of Regeneration, of a new creature, thou art not able to
bear. It Is above thee, it is a riddle and a paradox to thee, as it was to
Nicodemus. Paul speaks of these very Corinthians, That they were his epistle to
be read and seen of all men, 2 Cor. 3.2. They were h^s walking epistle, what he
had commanded them to do, they willingly did it; all might see, what preaching,
what godly exhortations Paul gave by their lives. Oh it is an happy thing, when
a Minister can say, You are our Sermons to be seen and read of all men! All men
by your lives may see what is preached to you, and what you hear. Christ said
to the Pharisees, You are of your Father the Devil, and his works you do. Let
the contrary be applied to you, You are of God, and his words you do. Observe
that place, John 8.47. Ye therefore hear not my words, because ye are not of
God. See what terror is in this place. If a m^n receive not Gods word, and
manifest it in his life, it is, because he is not of God. There is not a
greater sign of reprobation, than disobedience to Gods will, and rej^cting his
Word preached.

3. The word of God should have this effect, to make men willing and glad in
the hearing of it. Nothing should be more necessary and pleasant to them. What
high price did David put upon it? It was more necessary than his food. With
what delight and alacrity did they exhort one another to go to the house of the
Lord? The preaching of the Word is like setting up spiritual trading and
merchandise, how busy and active should men be? It Is the Spring time, for
spiritual Bees to make honey. It Is the Summer time, for spiritual Ants to
labor and treasure up. Since the days of John Baptist until now, the
kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11.12. They take it by force. Thus
the Scripture exhorts, Heb. 3. While it is called to day. And again, Now is the
acceptable time. Some are threatened to run from East and West, from North to
South, because of the famine of the Word, Amos 8.12. You should do as Joseph in
the seven years plenty, he laid up against the seven years famine. Even John's
hearers, though they had no bottom of grace, did for a while rejoice in his
light. Oh then, how uncomfortable is it to see men live like bruit beasts under
the Ministry, not prizing of it, no ways thankful to God for it; but like the
Prodigal regard husks, when manna is near!

4. It Is a sin and reproach, if where the Word has been long preached, there
is not a preparedness for, and conformity unto all the instituted Ordinances
of Jesus Christ. The Church is a spiritual Society, and have a visible
Communion, or external Form; and that consists in Preaching, in Administration
of the Sacraments, in godly Discipline, spiritual Censures upon obstinate
Offenders. Now all Congregations should be able to bear these things. When our
Savior told his Disciples, That they must eat his flesh, and drink his blood;
some cried out, This is an hard saying, Who can bear it? John 6.60. and from
that time forsook him. And thus it is in spiritual Discipline, to have comely
Order about the Sacraments; all that walk disorderly admonished; the
contumacious cast out; men cry out, who can bear it? and to this day they
cannot bear it. These Corinthians had gross abuses crept in about the Lords
Supper, Men did not examine themselves, they came drunk and irreverent.
Therefore the Apostle brings them to the first Institution, 1 Corinthians. 11. Now
these things particular Congregations should be prepared for.

Lastly, It is their shame, if they cannot bear and submit unto all those
duties of self-denial, taking up the cross, preparation for persecutions. We
may observe, that our Savior, and so the Apostles, did much endeavor to take
men off from expectations of carnal advantages by the Gospel. The Devil showed
all the glory of the world; but Christ all the misery and temptations that
would accompany the profession of his Truth, Ye shall be hated of all men for
my Names sake, John 15.19. So that where the Word has been preached, there men
must bear commands, and also many sufferings.

Use of Instruction. If ye would receive the Word in the light and efficacy of
it, keep not any compliance with humane and carnal lusts; The Truth is above
your natural understanding, and the duties above your corrupt lives and
affections. Sore eyes cannot bear the light. Festered wounds cannot bear salt,
and yet the Ministry is both light and salt. Think if there be Truths, if there
be purity, you cannot bear them. Know also, there is wrath and vengeance for
the refusal of these, And who can bear them? Who is able to endure those
everlasting burnings? You cannot bear the Sermon, that bids thee, Depart from
sin, How then that terrible sentence, which bids thee, Depart into
everlasting burnings?

Verse 3. For ye are yet carnal.
PAul having in the verse before declared the reason, why he fed them with
childrens milk, viz. because they were not able to digest solid meat. In this
verse, he comes to the Designation or Specification of this their Infancy and
Incapacity. And this he declares, 1. Generally, For ye are yet carnal. 2.
Particularly, In their envyings, strifes, and factions that were amongst them.


At this time, let us view the General, For ye are carnal. In what sense the
Apostle called them so, is explained, verse. 1. viz. not absolutely, but
comparatively. They had the seed and root of grace, but yet corruption was also
very prevalent in them.

Object. To what has been said in explication of this, you may make one
Objection, Why the Apostle, if they were godly for the main, does call them
carnal: Is it not a certain Rule, that the denomination ought to be from the
greater or better part? Do we not say, there is an heap of wheat, though some
chaff and cockle be among it? And do not the Orthodox say thus to the Papists?
For when the Papists say, That if there be corruption in every work we do, if
a godly man has a principle of sin in him, as well as of grace; Then (say
they) we may as well call him a wicked man as a godly man, we may as well call
it a sinful action, as a godly action.

To this it is answered, That seeing a godly man regenerated is made a new
creature, and so that which is fundamentally predominant in him is grace; and
sin is praeter naturam, beside his nature. Insomuch that the Scripture says,
Being born of God, he does not sin, 1 John 3.9. He is a godly man, but not
perfect. As a sick man is truly a man, if life be in him, though not a sound,
healthful man. This must be granted; and therefore these Corinthians, that
were godly for the main (we speak not of individuals, but indefinitely) when
absolutely considered, are called Saints, 1 Cor. 1. and the Temple of the Lord,
and the sanctified ones in Jesus Christ. But if we take them comparatively, as
the Apostle here does, then that Rule comes in, Minus boni respectu majoris,
habet rationum mali. So that if these Corinthians were compared with others of
greater progress, they were carnal. Even as in learning, one of competent
knowledge, compared to an eminent Scholar, is but an ignorant man: so that this
is spoken by way of reproach unto them. They suffer those remainders of
corruption in them to prevail; they cut not off the hair, wherein the strength
of sin lies; they have a flux of this noisome blood running on them, and yet
they seek not out to a Physician, to have it cured. Observe,

That the relics of corruption, which do abide in the godly, Observe.
ought to be an heavy burden to them, against which they are daily to strive
and combat.

As God, when he gave the Israelites Canaan in full possession, yet let the
Inhabitants and wild beasts be still there, not totally destroyed, that they
might have daily exercise and dependence upon God. So it is here* though God
has put thy soul in full possession of Christ; though thou art renewed and
sanctified, yet all that corruption within shall not be subdued; but this is
left like a thorn in thy eyes, and a prick in thy side, to make thee pray
often to God for his grace. Hence are those commands even to such that are
godly, To mortify the deeds of the flesh, Col. 3.5. And to crucify them, Gal.
5.24. which argues, sin has some life in them still. And the Apostle, Romans
6.12. exhorts, That sin may not reign in their mortal bodies; He does not
say, let it not be, but let it not reign. Though the Tree be cut down, yet here
is the stump and root in the godly. To open this, Consider,

The imperfections and sins of the godly.
First, That even the most spiritual that are, the Christians of the first
magnitude, even those that shine like Suns in the world, have yet spots,
blemishes and wrinkles in them. So that not only these Corinthians, of an
inferior form, but even Paul himself, who reproves those for being carnal,
yet Romans 7. he complains of himself, That he is carnal, and that when he
would do good, evil is present with him. That Chapter does excellently declare,
what a great conflict and combat the people of God have in these: for when
they would believe, unbelief hinders them; when they would be
heavenly-minded, earthlinesse hinders them. And Gal. 6. the Apostle speaks
there universally of all the godly, of those that are Pillars, as well as
others, of the ^yes and head in the body, as well as the feet; The Spirit
lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. That
the things you would not do, those you do. So that it is plain, no godly man in
the world, is enabled in his whole heart with all might to what is good, as
Adam, or the Saints glorified in Heaven; but they have opposition within them.
They have heart against heart, mind against mind, will against will, affections
against affections. They are like a blind man, and a dead man coupled together.
Austin did much dispute this point, by reason of the Pelagians, Whether any man
might be perfect in this life, free from all sin? And although he seemed not
to deny, that a man might be, yet he affirms (de facto) none ever was. But that
former also must be distinguished of. For if you regard the power of God, no
question he can cure all diseases. He that gives thee any degree of grace, can
make thee altogether godly. God who made the world by degrees in the space of
six days, could have done it in a moment, as Austin thought he did. And so may
we say, Men may be without sin. But if we speak of the ordinary power of God,
or his declared will, whereby he has decreed not to give to men such a measure
of grace, as shall subdue all sin, then we say it cannot be: But the best
gold will have some dross; The best Garden will have some weeds. Hence they
have a perpetual pattern of Prayer, which a David, a Paul is to pray, as well as
babes in Christianity, that God would forgive their sin. So that this is an
undoubted truth, that even the most holy carry about with them a body of sin,
which they are always crucifying.

Secondly, Yet there are other Christians, who have sin more prevalent over
them, and are easier overcome, and these deserve more to be called carnal than
the former, their corruptions are more visible than their grace. As David had
several degrees of worthy valiant men; some were valiant and strong, but did
not attain by far to the degree of the first Worthies. Such a degree there is
in Christ's soldiers; all have spiritual strength, and the armor of Christ
upon them; but there are some who are the worthies of the first rank; others
there are, who are negligent and careless, who often fall into the enemies
hands, and get wounds and blows often to their consciences. It Is a sad thing to
see a godly man, not keeping his garments clean, but spotting and defiling them
by the pitch in the world. They walk as men, says the Apostle; carnal, as
others; proud, as others; earthly, as others; passionate, as others. Oh take
heed, that thy life be not as the sluggards field, all grown over with briars
and thorns! This is too often, that men hide their light in a bushel; nay, lose
their savourinesse; although godliness be in the bottom, yet nothing but
bitterness and corruption does appear.

Thirdly, As corruption does thus abide in all the godly, and works
differently, so it does sometimes flame out into open fire; so that it is no
longer the lust and motions of sin within, but the gross operations without.
In Peter, you see what a leak there was ready to drown the whole Ship. He
perfidiously denies his Master with terrible cursings and execration. We need
not tell of David and others. The Apostles, how often did they discover their
carnal frame of heart, by contentions about honor and primacy? Thus you see,
(...) ^^^ven in the godly, there are not only sparks and seeds of sin, but
through negligence and carelessness they may notably backslide and fall into
the hands of the Philistims, into the hand^ of gross sins. It is greatly
disputed, Whether the sins they may fall into, may be called reigning sins?
Some learned men say, I; some say, No: But they may be reconciled, by a true
explication of the word [reigning] for they do not so reign, as to have full
possession, with plenary delight, and constant content. Indeed David did
deliberate and wilfully consent to accomplish his wickedness; so that for the
present, there was no actual resisting in him; yet there was the life of grace
radically in him, he was kept by Gods power, and the promise against his own
will. And thus in regard of that dominion of sin, for a while it might be
said to reign; but because this was not perpetual, grace quickening of him, to
recover again, it is justly said not to reign. Now because such sins may
arise, and carry the whole man away captive; therefore the godly are exhorted.
To watch and pray, 1 Pet 4, 7. Yea constantly to pray, That God ^ould not lead
them into temptation. Whereas if there were no tinder within, upon which the
sparks of temptation falling, would presently blow up, there need to be no fear
of any temptation.

In the next place, Let us consider, Whence it is that the godly do not fully
conquer sin.
Whence it is that the godly do not fully conquer sin: For if you respect
Christ he is greater than the Devil; and if you respect grace, that is more
efficacious than sin; How then should any lusts, passions or motions abide in
us? Now the efficient grounds are these: And then the final grounds shall be
mentioned afterward.

The efficient, first, Because original corruption, which is the fountain of
those streams is not wholly dried up. We cannot expect the streams should be
dried, when that is not. Marvel not then, if the godly are carnal, diffident,
earthly, froward, for that which nourishes these is not destroyed. Though
Samsons hair be cut off, yet it is not pulled up by the root. There is the law
of sin in the members, as well as the law of God written in their inward parts.
So that there cannot but be those sinful affections and corrupt desires
stirring in thee; these noisome vapors cannot but exhale, as long as that
filthy lake or bogge is within thee.

2. The Spirit of God by which we come to mortify these corruptions, does not
put forth its full power. It Is a free agent, Rom 8. If ye through the Spirit,
mortify; So that by the Spirit of God, we come to conquer and subdue sin.
Now this is not in our power, no more than the Apostles could miracles, when,
and how much they listed (though there be some difference between miraculous
gifts and sanctification.) If the Spirit of God did come upon thee in the full
measure of sanctification, then thou would of a leper, become all over clean;
but Christ only received the Spirit without measure. It Is stinted to thee, thou
see more and more to be daily done in Christianity.

3 Therefore does corruption remain, Because the instrument of Sanctification
and Mortification, that also is imperfect and weak. Act. 10. Faith purifieth
the heart, Romans 11. Faith receives the fatness of the Olive Tree. Ephesians. 3.
Christ dwells in the heart by faith. Heb. 11. All those glorious works of
righteousness were done by faith. So that if our faith be weak, the effects of
it also will be weak; and that every man's faith is weak, appears, Because we
know but in part, and so can adhere and apply but in part.

Lastly, Therefore does corruption abide in us, Because the Law of God is
spiritual, pure and exact. This is not an efficient ground, so much as
occasional, to discover and manifest that this sour leaven still is in us. The
Law of God requiring the whole man, an universality of the Subject and Object,
and of Degrees, and of Time, which it is impossible for us to do; therefore the
transgression of the Law makes it to be sin. If the Law have not forbidden
weak love, weak faith, it had been no more sin, than weak health, or weak
strength. It had been a languor, or penalty only, as the Papists say, not
truly, and formally a sin.

In the next place, Observe the final grounds, Why God who is thus able to bid
us be whole at once; Or as Christ, whom he cured corporally, he cured
perfectly; he wrought no half-cures, why should he not do thus in spiritual
healings, as Castalio urges?

1. Because God intends in this life, to glorify evangelical grace, and the
righousnesse of the Gospel by faith, as the Epistles of Paul abundantly
witness. Now if we had a righteousness of our own works, how could it be
imputed without works? How could we with Paul account our own righteousness
dung and dross for the righteousness of Christ by faith, if ours were gold?
Oh then! how wise should the godly man be? Do thou discover thy foul, noisome
heart? Do thou tremble to see so much of the flesh in thee? Take the
advantage to glorify the grace of the Gospel; say, thou need Christ's robes
all the day long for thy nakedness.

2. God suffers these relics in us, that there may be daily exercise for
faith, patience, and other graces, so that these are left to increase the crown
of glory, not to diminish it. The people of Israel used themselves to warlike
exercises, (they were to be taught the use of the Bow) because their enemies
were not totally subdued; so that therefore God would have these things to try
thee, that thy spiritual valor and fortitude may the more appear. Tempests and
winds discover the skill of the Mariner. Thou may turn these clods of earth
into chains of pearl.

3. That we might not be puffed up in our selves, nor others lift up by
admiration. For as the Heathens when they saw the viper fall off from Paul's
hand, and not hurt him, changed their minds, thinking they were gods; but while
the viper at first was on them, they thought vengeance pursued him. Thus when
men see vipers cleave to thee as others, thou have thy infirmities, thou have
thy weaknesses, then thou art low in thy own and other men's eyes.

Lastly, These thorns are still in thy side, that Heaven may be the sweeter.
Lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. Then it will be no more a
vile, mortal body, or a corrupt diseased soul: Then pride, unbelief, dullness,
will be no more a trouble; thou will be no longer in the valley, but upon the
Mount.

Use 1. Of Instruction to the people of God, that they should not despair under
the discovery of daily infirmities. I do not encourage thee to sin, I do not
foster thee in thy infirmities, only make righteous judgment in this case.
Thou cryest out, How can I be godly, and have no better an heart? How can
Christ dwell in me, and I feel no more of his power? Oh distinguish between
weak grace and no grace, between the presence of sin, and the dominion of it!
Consider, God has left these for admirable ends, and none of these is to
discourage, and overwhelm thee: especially do thou cry out of those deeps to
the grace of the Gospel; be as much enlarged, yea more than Paul was in this
matter, if thou can.

Use 2. Of Information to wicked men. Do not conclude there is no grace in the
world, and that all men are hypocrites and liars, because even the godly are
subject to sinful weaknesses. This is to be the spider, to suck poison from a
sweet truth. Do not expect more from them, than is to be expected.

Use 3. If the relics of corruption be thus to be bewailed, as an heavy
burden, how then should they howl and roar out, that are under the whole power
of sin? That are not comparatively, but absolutely carnal: That have not weak
grace, but no grace. Sin is not only present with them, but they with
willingness and delight subject themselves thereunto. If he speaks of strifes
and factions, when you do these things, Are ye not carnal? How much rather of
Revelling, Wantonness, beastly lusts, cursed oaths; Are ye not carnal? Oh,
remember all this is in a mortal body, here to day, to morrow it may be in Hell.

For whereas there is among you Envying, Strife, and Divisions, are ye not
Carnal?

The Apostle generally declared the ground of their Indisposition, and
Incapacity of heavenly, sublime Truths. Now he enumerats the Particulars,
whereof Envy stands in the front. Some make a Gradation; Envy breeds strife,
and strife breeds Divisions, or Factions. If we regard the general state of
the Church in all Ages, especially in our days; there is no Subject more
necessary to treat upon, then these Distempers: Especially to show the
Sinfulness and Cures of them. The being divided into so many crumbs, and atoms,
that unless Democritus his Opinion should prove true, All things are composed
of atoms: Or rather, unless God show his power, to make dry bones, that lie
here one, and there another, as in Ezekiel's Vision, to come every one to his
proper place, and have flesh and life bestowed on them; I know not how we can
escape total destruction. It being such a known Maxim of state, which Christ
himself has confirmed: A Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand. And
so, Churches against Churches, godly man against godly man, they cannot stand
Although I say this be necessary to the public, (yet because I know not how
necessary for this particular Auditory, though I shall not pass by these
Particulars) yet I shall not handle them to the exactness of the Subject and
latitude thereof.

And let us consider the first Subject, Envying; (...). This word is used
sometimes in a good sense, and sometimes in a bad sense. In a good sense, Envy
its several acceptians.
it is attributed to God, and signifies that Jealousy he has about his Church;
especially his worship. When attributed to good men, it signifies either that
honest and lawdable endeavor in them, whereby they are inflamed to imitate, or
go beyond the Virtue of others, without any sinful grief or hatred. This is
commonly called emulation, 1 Cor. 12.14. Gal. 4. Or,

Secondly, It Is taken often for that grief of mind, produced by an holy
indignation in us, at those things which we conceive are unworthily done
against those whom we love. And that either God or others. God, 2 Cor. 7. Or
others, Col. 4. Or else (which is not so often in humane Greek Authors, if at
all) it is taken for Envy; as Act. 13.17. Gal. 5. Where (...) and (...), are
rekoned among the lusts of the flesh. And sometimes the Epithete (...) is added
to it, bitter Envy. Although the more known word in the Scripture for Envy, is
(...). This for the word. Observe

That Envying, wheresoever it is, is a fruit of the Flesh, Of sinful Envy.
and such a sin, that a godly man should especially watch against.

Are ye not carnal, because of this Envying?

To open this Doctrine. Consider

Its Original.
First, That the Original and Fountain of this Envy, is the same with the other
great impieties that are committed in the world; viz. The flesh, or Corrupt
part in a man. So Gal. 5. and James 4. Envying strifes, are said to come from
the wisdom of the flesh, and diabolical wisdom, opposite to the wisdom from
above; which is chaste, peaceable, and long-suffering. So then, seeing this is a
lesser stream from that bitter Fountain: This is part of the gall and wormwood
every one is in by nature: No man can conclude he is wholly godly, that has
not power to mortify this sin in some degree. And therefore in that, Gal. 5.
the Apostle reckons it amongst all those gross sins: Murders, Uncleanness,
Idolatries, Wichcrafts. And concludes, They that do such things, shall never
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Yet though the Scripture brand this sin as the
seed of the Devil, and the spawn of the flesh; how prevalent is this sin,
every where amongst bad; yea, amongst good? How many sad Envyings, and evil
eyes are there toward one another good? For so the Scripture calls it an evil
eye, because they look with discontent, and grudging upon others. Envy is a
squint-eyed sin, and so the more deformed sin. Vixque tenet lachrymas, quia
nil lachrymabile cernit.

The Degrees of it.
Secondly, This sin of Envy, may either be in the full Predominancy of it, or
only in Motions and Combats; or if breaking out into act, bewailed and
repented of. In the former manner, it is in wicked men; In the latter sort, it
may be even in the godly. For this Envy is such an imbred sin, that the
Spirit of Regeneration finds it one of the last enemies to be destroyed. Wicked
men are as full of it, as Toades of poison. Thus Act. 13. The Jews are said to
be filled with Envy against the Apostles. Filled they were with this sin, as
the godly on the contrary, are filled with the holy Ghost. And hereupon, this
Envy within, carries them violently to all outward wickedness; especially
Murder: For that is the natural fruit of Envy. Whom men envy, they presently
resolve the death of; if there be no restraint. (...) and (...), are very near
in sound and efficacy. Thus Pilate knew, that for Envy the Pharisees desired to
crucify Christ. And the Apostle puts (...) and (...), Gal, 5 21. Envyings and
Murders together. As the words are alike, so one presently follows the other.

In the godly this sin is too vigorously also. These Corinthians, and the
Hebrews James writes to, were ready to devour and consume one another, by
these Envyes. The Church of God, would always abide like an Ark, compacted so
close together, that no waters could enter in; did not Envyings, and evil eyes
upon one another, dissolve the cement and sodering, whereby they are united. We
shall find the Disciples of John, and of Christ, even those sweet Roses, to
have these worms breed in them. When John's Disciples saw the multitudes run
after Christ, and there Master was not so much admired as before, they came in
an envious manner, and complained of it. But how graciously did John labor to
rebuke that ill spirit, Joh. 3.30.? The Disciples of Christ also, they were
sometimes upon envyings and proud contentions; (For these always go together.)
and strived to have more greatness then others. Yea, at that time when Christ
informed them of Persecutions and troubles which should be undergone for his
sake. So that you see, even the Children of God, (and that while they are low,
and under Persecutions of a common enemy,) are yet ready to have envyings and
bitter affections one toward another. So remarkable is that place, James 4.5.
The spirit that is in us lusts to Envy. Even the spirit in the godly, lusts
to Envy: Is violently carried out that way.

What that is in others which is the Object of Envy.
Thirdly Consider, That Envy is accompanied with a grief and a trouble, that
others are indeed, or in an apprehension, in a better condition then
themselves. So that it is a sin that makes a man like a Devil. The Devil
first envied God in his happiness and glorious estate. And now, since he is
condemned into eternal torments, he envies man; the godly man, that has an
interest in Christ. He is tormented to see men delivered out of his Chains. He
is troubled that others have good, though he has no advantage by it. That so
many men are damned, it is no advantage to the Devil; yea it increases his
torment, because they were tempted by him: yet his Envy and malice carries him
out thus. Now, this devilish disposition is in every envious man. The Apostle
James calls it so, Chap. 14.15. So that all the while thou art troubled to see
it better with others then thee, thou art in a devilish frame. It Is devilish
wisdom: It Is devilish grief and vexation. Oh, how should this make the People
of God tremble at it!

Now, the good that is in others, for which this Envy may work, may be of
several Natures. As

First, Because of the Riches, Power, Greatness, and outward prosperity of
others. Thy eye is evil, because God gives wealth to others, not to thee:
Health to others, not to thee: Prosperity to others, not to thee. Thus Joseph's
Brethren envied Joseph because of his Dream, that all their Sheafes should bow
to his Sheaf; and because he had more of his Fathers love. Take heed then, of
being troubled at the Prosperity, and the good condition of others. This is
Envy. And, Shall thou be bad to thy own soul, because God is good to others?
Because God has not given thee the good things others have, will thou throw
away thy soul also? Or,

Secondly, It may be, Because of the Applause, and Honor, or Esteem others
have: Which will lessen thine. This is powerful Envy. When two Suns are (as it
were) together, when the increase of one, will be the decrease of the other.
This was the main quarrel, and the cause of all the Envy against Christ and
his Disciples. They saw the people run after him: They saw multitudes
following of him, and their wickedness and hypocrisy began to be discovered:
And this made them mad with Envy.

Thirdly, It may be still higher: Because of the Parts and Abilities that
others have better then theirs. And it is a greater sin, to Envy others
because of their Religious Parts and Abilities, then for any outward mercy:
Because these are the free gift of Gods Spirit. Now for this were the great
Envyings amongst the Corinthians. They were a people living in a rich and
Populous City: They abounded more in Parts and Gifts, then any Church we read
of. And so, here were the greatest Envyings and Factions. Insomuch, that it is
far more happy to have sanctifying Graces, then enlarged Gifts: Far more
glorious to have Love, then large Knowledge. That made the Apostle to commend
Love so much to the Corinthians, undervaluing all Gifts in respect of that,
Numb. 11.29. We read there of a good man Envying, because the Spirit of
Prophesying was poured out upon others; and Moses gives him a reproof for it.
So that where there is the more Knowledge, the more Parts in Religion; there
(through men's corruptions) are many times more Envyings and Factions. Now the
way to cure these, is not (as the Papists) to keep people in ignorance, but to
press mortification, and the true works of grace, above all Parts.

Lastly, That is the highest poison and wickedness that can be in Envy, viz.
When it is for the Graces and Godliness of others. Thou have a wicked,
malicious, and envious heart to others, merely because they are godly. Though
this be so heinous a sin, that some make it a tendency to the sin against
the holy Ghost, yet how often is it practiced? How many men are reproached,
envied by their neighbors and others, merely for their godliness? They are
carried out with devilish spite, because of that. If they were profane,
superstitious, carnal, and dissolute as they are, then there were no better men
in the world. But this makes them the object of their envy, that they are
godly. Thus Cain, he envyed, and so hated his brother Abel. We might have
thought, there being no more men, then those two, except their Father, they
should dearly have loved one another; but Abel's works they were godly, and
God had a respect to his sacrifice, and not to Cain's, and this made him envy,
hate, and at last murder him. And this might be charged upon the Pharisees,
when Christ terrifieth them about the sin against the Holy Ghost; for indeed
as you heard, to envy, spite, and malice a man because of his godliness, it is
an high degree to that unpardonable sin: Look to it; there is too many guilty
of this doleful crime.

Thus much for the object of Envy. In the next place let us consider the
subject, who are prone to it. And

The subject of Envy: Who are prone to it?
First, Those that are of weak, ignorant, and narrow spirits, Job 5 21. Envy
slays the silly one. It is the fruit of weakness in a man, his very envy
betrayeth his thoughts, that he thinks others are above him. Austin observes
this envy in children, as one of the first sins they are actually guilty of:
Vidi ego zelantem parvulum, (says he) he took notice, that the child sucking,
would envy another at the same breast. And that it argues sillyness, does
appear in this, There is no inordinate ^ffection, but men will sometimes
confess it, only no man will ever acknowledge he envyeth another, he will
confess he fears another, he will acknowledge he does not love another, but
seldom that he envyeth such a man, because this denotes a thought, that such
a man is Superior to him, and that is against the natural pride in every man.

Secondly, Those are subject to this sin of envy, who are in a similitude of
condition, estate, trad, or profession, or where there is any competition for
one thing, and both cannot have it, (...), One tradesman envyeth another of the
same trade, or profit; thus one Scholar, one Gentleman, one Favorite another,
one Co-partner in Government another. The reason why Lycinius grew so
desperately mad against the Christians, whom he had formerly defended, was,
because Christians in their meetings, prayed for Constantine and not him; the
ground of Readiness envy and hatred to David, was because the women sang, Saul
slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands. Phil. 1.19. Some preach Christ
out of envy, These were teachers, that out of envy to Paul, who had all the
glory, took the occasion, now he was imprisoned, and could not preach to set
forth Christ; and they thought Paul like themselves, ambitious of glory, and
esteem, and therefore that this would grieve and vex Paul; but such was his
grace, that he could rejoice in it.

Thirdly, Such are subject to Envy, who because they cannot abide the good of
others, they therefore study all the ways to disparage, and obscure the name,
and excellency of such: If they have any failings, if there be any weaknesses,
they rake in them, talk of them, neglecting the good, as the Kite that flies
over the pleasant meadows, and delights upon the dunghills, and Carrion;
therefore an envious man discovers himself by his talk, his words; though such
a man has never so much worth, and excellency, in him, yet that he will never
mention; or if he do, it is only craftily, that others may not think, he does it
out of envy. Thus where charity covers a multitude of sin, envy covers a
multitude of graces.

Use 1. Of all envyings, take heed of that which is against men, because they
are godly, because they live more holily then thou do, their lives condemn
thy life, their purity thy uncleanness, their pure worship of God thy
superstition; and this makes the^ as full of poison, as a Serpent. Oh if there
were an opportunity! Never did Paul once, or Bonner, or any persecuter, more
greedily destroy those that fear God, then thou could! Never comfort thy
self, that thou do not envy, or hate them for their godliness, but thou
condemnest them for this fault, and that fault! for the Pharisees that were so
moved with envy against Christ, they said, it was not for his good works, they
pretended he spoke blasphemy, he broke the Sabbath, you see they had religious
pretexts. Take heed of this sin, that bordereth so near upon the unpardonable
sin! it is too rife, it is too common amongst men: if God give thee not grace
to be godly thy self, if God give thee not a heart to be holy, yet let not the
Devil so far fill thy heart, as to make thee envy, rage, and blaspheme, at
godliness in other. Oh there is a great deal of difference between that sinner,
whom carnal pleasures or love to the world does keep from godliness! and that
sinner whom envy and a secret rancour against godliness, makes keep off from
the practice of it!

Use. 2. You that are godly especially, take heed of this: How contrary is this
spirit of envy, to that love Christ has put into you? He prayed most
earnestly, as the great thing before his death, that the godly might be one,
How then comes envyings, and bitter thoughts among you? you that ought to have
one heart, one mind, yea to lay down your lives for one another: How comes this
divelish sin to be in you? How come doves to have gall? Christ that thought
it no robbery to be equal to God, yet became in the form of a contemptible
man, for the godlyes sake; and have thou so much glory, or honor, to deny thy
self in, as he had? Grudge not one against another, or sigh not, as the Greek
is; no godly man, should have the least bitterness, or inward sighs, and
discontentedness against another, Jam 5 9.

Let us in the next place, consider the aggravation of this sin, and
howsoever the heathenish Poets, have described it in such an ugly, loathsome,
The Aggravations of Envy.
and deformed shape, that all may see the unloveliness of it; yet they being
matter only of fancy, and witty invention, we shall draw the pourtraiture of it
from the Word of God, which is a two-edged sword, and every arrow from this
quiver, may justly strike to the heart of it.

First, The wickedness of this sin, may be excellently illustrated by that
admirable good it is opposite to; for this is a rule, That privation is the
worst, whose habit is the best, that is the greatest evil, which is opposite to
the greatest good: Now there is a threefold good that envy does oppose, as
fire water, and darkness light. 1. The infinite goodness in God. 2. The
inestimable goodness in Christ. 3. The admirable goodness, in the grace of
love, or charity: So that if you would know, how great an evil envy is, say, it
is as great an evil, as God is good, as Christ is good; it opposes Gods
goodness, so that phrase implies, Is thy eye evil, because God is good? Mat.
20 15. that is not intensively, but privatively, for envy does take God and
Christ from me, my neighbor from me, and my self from my self; it makes Gods
goodness, and thy neighbors goodness, to be his evil who envyeth; this
bitterness upon thy heart, is because God is such a fountain of goodness, that
he communicates his mercies freely: Were envy able to fall upon that pure, and
spotless Majesty of God, he would not have created the world, nor made such
glorious Angels, nor give such excellent perfections to some in the world? for
many times God loses his glory by this means, when they do not praise him,
but dishonor him: yet for all this, behold the goodness of God, that does so
liberally diffuse it self, though his glory be obscured thereby. Oh! if it lay
in an envious man, to make men great, or admired, or despicable, and
contemptible, how quickly would he make the world a poor Hospital, that he
might have all the glory! Behold then, the venomous poison of this sin of
envy, which does grudge, and repine, at the glorious Attribute of God, his
bounty, and liberality; that which David is so ravished with himself, and calls
upon Angels, and other creatures, to praise God for, viz. His mercy which
endures for ever, this the envious man is vexed at. There was a seed of this
bitter wormwood in Jonah, how discontented, and grieved was he, that God did
not destroy that populous City of Ninev^h, on a sudden, and how patiently did
God expostulate with him, and confute him by his own Gourd, that he was
troubled at, because consumed by a worm on a sudden? Jon. 4.10. Oh if an
envious man would think, thus would I have God no better to me, then to such an
one! Should I be willing, to have the Lord deal with me, as I desire to others?
this might change him. It Is related of Nero, an envious, cruel man, That he
would sometimes bewail, there were none of those terrible judgments in his
time, as in former ages; That there were no sudden earthquakes, no violent
plagues, and such sore demonstrations of Gods wrath: well might be called clay,
and blood mingled together.

2. It opposes that admirable goodness in Christ: Oh come with admiration, and
read, and consider, the life of Christ, and his death, and you will see, envy
is as direct contrary to him, as the Serpent to the Dove! Consider what he was,
and yet how debasing himself for our sakes; He thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, Phil. 2. for it was his due, being of the same essence with
him, so that he might always have declared that infinite Majesty: but he
willingly does obscure this Sun in a cloud, this Divinity in a vail of flesh;
and when he does not take the nature of Angels, but man, even then he does act
the condition of the great, and mighty, and honored men of the world, but of
the most contemptible, a worm, and no man; yea see how good to us, to those
that hated him, envied him; how destitute of a place to lay his head in; that
supported all the world by his power, at his death how abused, scorned,
reproached, and handled in the most ignominious, and scurrilous manner. Oh
admire all this, you that hear and believe! Had there been any gall in this
Dove, any envy in Christ, would he have emptied himself, thus to make thee
full? Would he have become poor, to make thee rich? Oh then if envy at any time
stir in thy heart, say, Did Christ do thus? Was he of this temper? and it
must need fill thee with confusion.

3. The grace of love and charity is often prayed for, and that by Christ
himself, that his people* might have it; he prays for nothing so earnestly as
that. It is made the sign and symptom of Christ's Disciples, not by miracles,
not by prophesies, but by love, shall all men know Christ's Disciples. It is a
duty enjoined also; for faith has the preeminence in the upper region of
justification, so love in the lower of sanctification; now the nature of the
grace of love, is to have idem velle, and idem nolle, to make all good things,
and all bad things common: yea the soul of the lover, is not where it
animateth, so much as where it loves; Love seeks not her own, love envieth
not, love is not puffed up, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. Oh then, if as in the Temple, every
thing was covered with gold, so among Christians, every word, and action,
should be covered with love: Let all your things be done with charity, 1 Cor.
16.14. Then what a damnable sin is envy, which breaks these silken cords?
when these hellish motions of envy stir in thee, cry out for the Spirit of
love; Oh say this is none of Christ's Spirit, this is not a Gospel Spirit! As
love is the fullfilling of the law, so envy is the dissolution of it, and as
Moses, and the Prophets, hang upon love, so they do all fall to the ground,
where envy is; if then there were but these three objects to look on, God,
Christ, and Charity, it might make a man to abhor, to take this toad of envy
in his breast. But

Secondly, There is still further abomination in this sin; for it is the very
lively image of the Devil. There is nothing so like the Devil, as an envious
man, with his horns to push at every one, and his cloven foot to make
divisions, and wranglings: This you heard, this wisdom, viz. whereby men make
strifes, and envyings, is said to be divelish, Jam. 3.15. Oh then! What accord
has Christ with Belial? Why art not thou ashamed to look God, or good men in
the face, that have this divelish temper in thee? As the Bafilisk does so hate
man, that they say, he will take the very picture of him, if he can: Thus the
envy and malice of the Devil, is so great against God, that because he cannot
vent himself upon God, therefore he does upon man, made after Gods image, and
although it be no profit to him, yea an increase of his torment, to tempt man
to sin, and to damn him, yet he delights to do it: Other sins of
Drunkeness, and Uncleanness, turn men into Beasts, but this of envy, does into
Devils, insomuch that an envious man, in the constant full power of it (I speak
not of motions, and temptations,) is farther off from godliness, then a beastly
profane man.

Thirdly, This sin of Envy, is a mother-sinne, a fountaine-sinne. There is no
wickedness in the world, but this sin will conceive it, and bring it forth:
Through envy, they stoned Paul, through envy, they murdered Christ; all the
persecutors of Christians, did burn with envy themselves, before they burnt the
Martyrs at the stake. Hence Jam. 4.5. the Apostle alleges that place, The
spirit within us lusts to envy, aiming at that, Genesis 6.5. The imagination of
the thoughts of the heart are only evil, and that continually; Now he names
not the general, but particularizeth in envy, as that which is the chief cause
of many sins; For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every
evil work Jam 3 16. Nay not only personal, private evils are in the womb of
this, but all public miseries commonly begin from this spark of envy. A
Commonwealth is made a field of blood, through the envy of ambitious men; the
Church is cut inpeices like the Levites wife, through envy of ecclesiastical
persons, insomuch that we may say, all Kingdoms and Churches in some respects,
have died of this disease: this has cut all the nerves, whereby any society is
compacted together. Oh therefore pray we, that God would have out this
incendiary, and Boutefeu from all Churches and States! The Devil is called the
enemy, Mat. 13.15. and therefore the envious one, that came and sowed tares; so
that all the tares of discord, dissensions and different opinions, are sowed by
the envious one, that grudgeth at our peace and unity.

Fourthly, This sin is a just torment to him that commits it. When a sin is
a sin, and a punishment, it is the more deadly sin; now this of envy, it is a
very gibbett, a very rack to him that is moved with it, he is like one
possessed with the Devil, that forms that is thrown into fire and water, his
heart is a very hell, he has a torturing within him, as if so many Devils were
pulling of him. The Heathen observed it saying, That the greatest Tyrants that
ever were, never found out a greater torment. And certainly if the motions and
stirrings of envy in the godly, be like so many Scorpions stings in them, what
are they to wicked men, where envy is in its full power.

Fifthly, This sin of Envy does deprive Christians of all exercise and
comfort of common graces. The people of God are as building and lively stones
compacted together: at the first beginning of the Gospel they were with one
heart, and one mind. The duties of communion and relation to one another, are
frequently spoken of, such as exhorting one another, reproving, comforting,
whetting, and encouraging one another; compared therefore to members of the
body, all which have need of another. Now if one member should envy the good of
another, how quickly would the whole be consumed? Thou have faith to help
another unbelief, thou art strong to support the weak, thou art quick to raise
up him that is du^l, grace is not only for thy self but to profit others with,
as coals of fire together do inflame one another. Now envy that sets all at
distance, obstructeth the nourishment that is to go to every part, and instead
of helping and drawing out another graces, it draws out their corruptions:
this makes strangeness, suspicions, uncharitable censures, so that Lambs become
Tigers to one another, and Myrtle-trees Brambles.

Lastly, It Is a tenacious inbred sin. You see even in the regenerate, these
sparks of Hell are alive: These worms will breed in the sweetest Roses: These
mothes in the finest Garments. So that the more contumacious and inherent this
sin is, the greater cause to be afraid of it.

Remedies aginst Envy.
Well, If it be so dangerous a sin, what Remedies may be used against it? If
this Viper will stick on us, how may we (at least) order it, so that it shall
not stay on, so as to make us fall down dead by the poison of it. And

First, Turn Envy into Pity; and this is an excellent cure. Nothing breaks
Envy, so soon as Pity. Now their is no good thou enviest at in others, but it
affords meditation of Pity and Prayer for them that have it, rather then Envy.
For if they be wicked men, whose prosperity thou enviest, David tells you, they
stand in slippery places, and they are fatted to destruction. Does any envy the
Garlands and Crowns that were put on Beasts, when they went to be sacrificed?
The godly, who are so apt to look with an ill eye, at the great abundance,
success, and outward happiness of wicked men, should remember this; Their great
Honors, are but like oil poured into the fire, to make it burn hotter. And if
he be godly that has outward mercies, then he has the greater account to
give: He has received more Talents, and so greater increase is expected. So
that he is more to be prayed for: He having a greater Treasure, is more
obnoxious to theifts and dangers.

Secondly, Consider That if instead of Envy, thou would bless and praise God
for the Gifts and Graces bestowed upon others, they would thereby be made
thine. When thou can glorify God for the great abilities given to others, and
rejoice in the success they have; though thy glory be obscured, this makes it
accountable to thee. For as he that wills, and consents, and delights in other
men's wickedness, makes theirs his, so it is in good things.

Lastly, Be contented with thy condition. Envy commonly comes from discontent
at what is ours. If therefore thou can bless and praise God with joyfulness
of heart, for what thou have, this will kill that snake of Envy in thy breast.

But thou may say, How shall I know a just zeal against others, especially
when they have applause and followers in the world, (though in an evil way,)
from Envy? A Case resolved.
For this may seem very hard.

As for Instances: Numb. 11. There some prophesied as well as Moses, and others
envied it for Moses his sake: They would have him have all the glory: For which
they were blamed. Yet when Corah and his company, said Moses and Aaron took too
much upon them; and that all the people of God were holy as well as they; Moses
was enraged against them: Not from Envy, but Zeal.

In the New Testament. The Pharisees were hot against Christ, because all the
people followed him: And it is plain, Envy moved them. Yet there were false
Apostles, that led captive silly women, and had many followers. Now Paul is
severe against them; and it is not Envy, but Zeal. Thus the Ministers of God,
may preach against false Teachers that have many followers, and yet it be no
Envy.

The difference between Envy and zeal.
Now (I may afterward be larger upon this, when I come to speak of the
particular Factions in this Church;) only the difference briefly between Envy
and Zeal, may be

First, In the matter. They are affected in a good thing, the cause of God: The
others, many times in a false thing.

Secondly, True Zeal seeks to gain followers, and esteem not for themselves,
but to present them to Christ.

Thirdly, True Zeal can reign in debasements, and though they be accounted as
nothing, if the Work of God go on. So cannot Envy.

Use. To abandon this red Dragan from your societies. Let not Envy enter into
your Families. Let Envy be no more between neighbors; especially, that is most
horrible, when a rich man shall Envy a poor man, if he get any thing. Oh fear,
lest God bring such desolating judgments, that this shall be nothing but object
of pity and woe!

For whereas there is among you Strife.

We are come to the second sign specified. This thorn argued them to be
brambles, not figs: In a great measure carnal, not spiritual. This sin (we
told you) might be considered as a further degree of evil, then the former.
Envy was a bitter affection in the heart: Strife comes to words, and many
actions of enmity and malice. Now there could not be a greater reproach and
uncomeliness, then to see those that were Brethren by Profession, and
Christianity, to have that brand upon them, which Paul gives to others: Hating
and hated of one another. If the Psalmist in vehement affection cried out, How
good and comely a thing is it, to see Brethren live together in Unity? Psalm.
133.1, 2. comparing it to that precious ointment poured upon Aarons head: On
the contrary; How bitter and woeful a thing is it, to see those that are called
Christians, through malice, uncharitableness, and contentions, made so many
Tygars to one another? Observe

That Strifes, and quarrelling Contentions amongst Christians, Observe.
argue them to be so far Carnal.

It Is not from God, nor his Spirit; It Is not from Christ and his Word, Of
strife and contention.
that they are given to such froward, malicious, and turbulent dispositions.
This Doctrine has its great use. For what inward rank or has neighbor to
neighbor? What detraction and back-bitings have men one of another? Insomuch,
as humanity, which has been taken for courtesy, kindness and civility, may be
put for malice, hatred, and all violent unjust dealings one with another.

For opening this Point. Consider,

First, That the true ground of all Love and Peace, all Concord and Agreement,
Godliness the only motive of love and agreement.
can only be upon a Motive of Godliness and honesty. Only godly men can truly
love one another, because the Motive of it, is the Image of God: The cause of
it, is Gods command: And the end of it, is to do good temporal and spiritual,
to one another. Hence this is called love in the Faith, Tit. 3.15. and in the
Spirit, Col. 1.8. And therefore, if the people of God at any time quarrel, and
strive one with another; there is so much manifestation, that their love was
not because they were godly, but for other ends. For if so, then because they
are the Children of God still, they are such as have grace. They are such as
God has cast his love upon, therefore thou dare not but love them still. How
dare thou but be reconciled with him, to whom God the Father through Christ,
is reconciled? The Apostle does very frequently urge this duty of love, and
that without dissimulation; knowing the corruptions and falsehood, that would
be even in the godly, did they not take heed. But as for the wicked, the very
Heathen said, Amicitia nisi inter bonus esse non potest: Friendship can only be
upon grounds of goodness and honesty. Therefore if you see any man agree upon
evil grounds, because others are wicked like themselves, or for matter of
profit, or matter of pleasure; here is no sure Concord, But are as dogs,
playing together in the room, while bones are cast amongst, The agreement among
the ungodly.
and then they snarle and fight with one another. Take all the wicked men that
are, though they are never so great, yet matter of pleasure or profit, will
presently divide them. So that it is no wonder, if Herod and Pilate cannot
agree, unless it be against Christ. Wicked men never join together, unless it
be to oppose godliness.

A twofold striving. I. Good.
In the second place, take notice there is a twofold Striving or Contention.

First, That which is good and laudable. Thus Jude commands to contend for the
Faith once delivered; To be in an agony for it, verse. 4. And we must in our
places strive, and ever zealously quarrel with wicked men, for the honor and
glory of God. Now though this Contention and Striving be not intended here, yet
I shall speak a little to it in the close, because there are those who account
all zeal and fervency for God, to be quarrelling and making tumults: As Jer.
15.10. Woe is me that my mother bear me, because I am a man of contention. Why
so? He reproved them for their sins: He spoke contrary to their carnal
humors, and thereupon he was thought to be the only troubler of the Kingdom.
But

II. Ungodly, and that about a twofold object. 1. Civil.
Secondly, Their is a sinful and ungodly Striving. And that may be about a
twofold Object. Either in Civil worldly things, quarrelling and wrangling
about them, or in Religious matters. Their is a desire in some, to be cavilling
against the Truth, and to be gainsaying those Duties that are commanded; or
needlessly striving with idle Disputes, that make not for godliness: Of which
the Apostle speaks fully, Tit. 3.7. A great disease in these times.

Now lets briefly speak to both these. And we will

The cause of sinful strife and contention.
First, Show the Sinfulness of the Causes.

Secondly, The Effects wherein they manifest themselves. And

Thirdly, The Aggravation of the sin.

The Cause in the general, is, That bitter poisonous fountain of corruption
within every man. Man by nature, is a Spider, a Toade: He can spit nothing but
venom. He is a bramble that tears every one that comes near him. Thus Gal. 5.
strifes and Contentions are made the manifest works of the flesh. It Is not a
doubtful or an hard matter, to determine whence they come. All thy jangleings,
clamours, and evil speakings, they come from that gall and wormwood in thee.
James 4.1. Whence come wars and fightings? He calls that strife amongst them a
War. Do they not come from the lusts that war in your members? See here;
There is no man striveth, and brawleth with another, but he has a lust in his
heart, which striveth and fights against his soul. Thou seek to be
wronged, to undo another, but that anger in thy heart, will undo and damn thy
own soul.

But the Particular Lusts, are,

1. Pride. Where pride is, there is Contention, Prove. 13.10. A proud man, he
cannot but strive, no more then fire cannot but set all on a flame, where it
is. All the Divisions and Troubles that are, either public or private, come
from Pride. Every man would have his will to be done: Whereas humility and
lowlimindedness, that keeps all in peace and quietness. The Chimny that is
higher then other parts of the house, puts out all the smoke and dark vapors;
and those sometimes that would exalt themselves above others, they must needs
evaporate their loathsome stomach against others.

2. Ambition and vain glory; Which comes near to Pride. When men are ambitious
for great earthly power, or the high places in the Church, this makes many
quarrels. Absolom's ambition for the Kingdom, what a terrible shake did it make
in Israel? This ambition is an huge Whale, that quickly will swallow up all the
good and welfare of others; and it is no less dangerous in the Church. Have not
the Divisions thereof, been through the ambition and vainglory of some, who
have inordinately loved applaus, and many followers? This has always been
like a Sword in the side of the Church, that has brought out both blood and
water.

3. Malicious froward dispositions. There are some of that rancorous, turbulent
natures, that they cannot be quiet, but in the disturbing of others:
Salamanders that can live no where, but in the fire; never at rest, but when
they are in brawlings or contentions, that have not only their tongues, as
James says, but their hearts also set on fire from hell, Jam. 3.6. As these
are dangerous persons in a Kingdom, for they do to it, as the Devil to the
possessed body, throw it sometimes in the water, and sometimes in the fire; so
they are also in Families, and in Towns. These are cursed men. For as
Peacemakers are blessed, so strife-makers, and quarrel makers are cursed men.

4. Covetousness and sinful love to the things of the world, that makes men
quarrel and brawl. So that some say, those two Pronouns Meum and Tuum make all
the strife that is in the world; an unjust covetous desire to have more than is
thy own, or lusting after other men's, or discontent at thy own condition This
makes thee fill the world with quarrels.

Lastly, Impatience, when men know not how with patience and godly wisdom to
pass by many injuries and wrongs. The Scripture bids us overcome evil with
good; and if a man strike on one cheek to turn another, Luke 6.29. He does not
there forbid a lawful resistance of evil before a Magistrate, or a defense of
his right, but all private revenge, and impatience of spirit, whereby we are
ready to resolve, As he has done to me, I will do to him; Oh no! Christ
teaches us a spirit of meekness, of patience, to pray for those that
persecute and hate us.

Now the sinful Effects, first, Of striving about worldly things, is
discovered, The effects of sinful strife and contention about worldly things.


1. In passionate and railing speeches; Let all clamor and evil speaking be
laid aside, Ephesians. 4.31. Mat. 5.22. Whosoever is angry with his brother,
calling him fool, is in danger of hell fire. Little do you think of this, whose
mouths are as loathsome as open sepulchers: Oh the names and foul language,
that that mad rage makes thee cast upon others! Whereas the Angel did not give
the Devil railing accusations; Those foul mouths, they argue a foul heart;
that black tongue of thine will at last be punished with black darkness in
hell without repentance.

2. It Is seen in backbiting, slandering, inventing of lies against others,
whispering, and secretly reproaching of others, where they are not present to
justify themselves. These sins should not be named among Christians: but now
men are not only wolves, but Devils to men, (...), falsely slandering, and
traducing others. To be a backbiter is reckoned up in the Catalogue of the
great sins, the Heathens were guilty of, Romans 1. and Psalm. 15.3. is made the
character of one, Who shall no^ ascend unto Gods holy hill. Thou have a Devil
in thy tongue, and the other has in his ear, to whom thou spreadest these
slanders. Thus Christ himself, How was he slandered? And Paul. Whereas the dogs
with their tongues did lick Lazarus sores whole, thou do with thy tongue
make the whole places sore; But consider that Psalm of Doeg, a small
mischievous slanderer, What shall be given unto thee, O thou lying tongue?
Coals of fire, Psalm. 120 5 Fire is thy sin, and fire will be thy punishment.

3. A delight to go to Law, and to implead others at the Courts of Judicature.
The Corinthians strifes did break out in this manner, 1 Cor. 6. They went to
Law with one another, Why do ye not rather suffer wrong, says he? Now it is
true, the Apostle does not there prohibit all kind of going to Law for our own,
but the readiness of heart thereunto, and the scandal of going before
Heathens, and their want of preparation of heart to suffer wrong, rather than
to go to that extremity; they did not try all other ways of reconceliation
first. And is not brawling and squabling the very trade, the meat and drink of
many quarrelling people? They will go to Law presently. Indeed the Prophet
says, To the Law, to the testimony; but that Law would quickly moderate this.
Thou will go to Law whatsoever it cost thee, what if it cost thee thy soul,
thy salvation, as it may do by thy anger, malice, revenge and impatience
therein?

Lastly, This civil or uncivil contention, rather is seen in the procuring of
all that hurt and mischief to others we can, either in Name or Estate. So that
whereas the command is, to procure all good, thou art ready to do all mischief
to thy neighbor. We might think these things need to be preached only to
Jews, and Turks, to Canibals or such savage men; but even Christians are
turned such horses and mules, that they need this bit to be put in their
mouths. So that you see, this strife is in tongue and hand; and if the tongue
has a world of evil, how much evil then is there, when tongue, and hand, and
heart are all full?

The effects of sinful strife about religious matters.
As for striving in religious matters, that is seen two ways:

1. When men are given to cavil and contradict the truth, though never so
evidently discovered, especially because of the purity of it, because it
convinces and arraigneth thy lusts, greatly condemning them. Thus the
Pharisees were frowardly bent to oppose Christ; insomuch that when they were
silenced, and had nothing to say, they did as the Devil to him, Depart for a
season, and afterward came to tempt him again. Take heed of such a froward
disposition, it is far from the nature of Christ's Sheep, which hear his
voice, and follow him.

2. When men dote about Questions and Disputes, that have no profit, or if
profit, yet attend not to them in their place. The Apostle condemns this
doting and striving about words; and for this reason, Because they profit not,
Tit. 3.9. A man with needless disputes, is like a field that bears nothing
but briars and thorns. There came a man to ask Christ, Whether many should be
saved? Our Savior does not answer the Question directly, but bids him, Strive
to enter in at the straight gate, Luke 13.23. thereby rebuking his curiosity.
And Zuinglius did truly observe and complain, That men seldom came from
religious disputes more crucified* and more heavenly.

The aggravations of this sin
I intend to spend but one Sermon on this Subject, and therefore I must heap
many things together; I come to the Aggravation of this sin of Contention.

1. This striving temper is directly opposite to many commands, that vehemently
press love, brotherly kindness, peaceablenesse. As much as lies in you, have
peace with all men, Romans 12.18. Be affable, be courteous, 1 Pet. 3.8. Thus you
see, as Christ himself did not strive or lift up his voice in the street, but
lived meekly, peaceably; so ought we.

2. These strifes and quarrellings make all our prayers and Religion in vain.
God hears no prayer from that man, who is in anger and malice with others,
Forgive us our sins, as we forgive others. Yea, if a man have brought his gift
to the altar, and remember such a man has ought against him, he must leave
that, and be reconciled, Mat. 5.24. Oh how could contentions and quarrels be
thus among you, if this were thought on.

3. The relation we are in, commands peace and unity. There is one God, one
Christ, one Spirit, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5. Why fall ye out seeing ye are
Brethren: so that Christianity is reproached, when you seek to devour one
another; it is an argument the faith of Christ never had any power over thee.

As for the good Contention, I mentioned, that is, When men strive and contend
for the truths of God, for his honor and glory, when he is zealous to reprove
and punish sin. There are many men that call this Contention, and this they
condemn for turbulency; as Ahab called Elijah, the troubler of Israel, because
he rebuked him, and Jezabel, for their cruelty and injustice. And thus
Jeremiah, you heard, was accounted a man of strife, that set all together by
the ears. Now this striving for God against the sins, against the humors of
men cannot be omitted without great sacrilege. And if the suppressing of sin
in an orderly way, make any strife, it is thy fault, not his that is zealous.
Christ himself came to set father against son, and a man's enemies in his own
house against him; but this was not the fault of Christ's Doctrine, but of their
corruption. And further, This striving and trouble will work a good effect. The
Angel that came down with healing, moved and troubled the water, but that was
for good. So the Physician he stirs the humors, he puts into great pain and
sickness for a while, but this is the way to health. It Is good to be
troublesome to the sins of men; and better be a man of strifes, in this sense,
then preach peace to sinners.

Use of Admonition, To lay aside all those malicious revengefull actions one
toward another. These times of war have especially wrought such bitter
enmity against one another, that this generation will not quiet it, unless
grace overcome. Take the Apostles Rule, Let nothing be done through contention,
and pride, and covetousness, or impatience; and then what calmnesse and
quietness will there be? As he said of Physicians, Quot funera, tot opprobria,
so many funerals, so many reproaches to them. And certainly, so many
branglings, so many Law suits, so many reproaches to the Gospel of peace, to
Christ the Prince of peace, to the Officers in the Church, the Ministers of
peace. I speak not of necessary defensive Lawsuits, to which men are
unwillingly haled having used all other means before, but that pronenesse and
impatiency that is in men. Oh be not thus Tigers and Savages one to another!
Thou that dealest in anger, how do thou expect Gods love? Thou that wilt not
be pacified, but breathest revenge, how shall God spare thee?

Whereas there is divisions amongst you.

We are now upon the third and last sin enumerated, Of Schisms and Divisions.
as an argument of their carnal estate. The worst wine, or rather vinegar, is
left to the last. Divisions. Some render it factions; it adds to the
wickedness of the former, that by this envying and strife men are divided into
several parties. They imbody themselves in several factions, to the destruction
of the whole. The Greek word is (...), The same word ( Gal. 5.) is translated
Seditions. There are three Greek words in the Scripture, which express
Factions or Divisions. That in the Text, when men divide themselves into
parties, in a sinful and inordinate way; otherwise to divide from wickedness,
and from the general impieties and errors of the world, is no faction, though
the world be apt to call godly men factious; so that not the mere division, but
the cause and the ground is to be considered. For as all punishment and
constant sufferings for a point in Religion, does not make a Martyr; so neither
division or opposing in a lawful way of a multitude, when erring, is a
faction. The Christians were charged by the Heathens for making factions. To
this Tertullian answered, (Apolog.) Quando boni coeunt non est factio, sed
curia dicenda.

The other word (...) is 1 Cor. 11. a metaphor from cloth, or the body, when
one part is rent from the other. As Austin thought it a very difficult thing to
define what heresy was; so it is also what Schism is. This is certain, it is a
breach of that love and union which ought to be among Christians.

3. There is Heresy, or a Sect* which is more than a Schism, especially as
Ecclesiastical use has made it. And although it was at first used for a mere
opinion, or way, without any evil sense; as when Tully said, Cato in ea fuit
haeresi; and some say it is so used in the Acts of the Apostles; but in the
Epistles it is always used in a bad sense.

I shall not trouble you with what learned men say in the Explication of these
words; This is enough, That the Scripture condemns them as great sins. They
come from a bitter root; Christ nor his Church do not own such things. Observe,

Observe.
That Divisions and Factions do quickly creep into the best and purest
Churches.

This Church of Corinth was a Garden planted by Paul, and notwithstanding all
his care, his constant inspection, yet these weeds grow up in it. In the
Parable, when the good seed was sown, the Devil came and sowed his tares, while
men slept, Matthew. 13. But here, while the Officers were awake and diligent yet
these tares grow up.

To open this point, I shall but give you drops out of the Ocean of this
matter. It Is a subject to be handled with tears; only the Scripture gives
cordials, that the godly should not sink under it.

Divisions divided.
First, Let us divide, (for Logical divisions are good to teach and instruct,
though Church divisions are not) and then show wherein the Nature of a
division, or faction lies. Then the Reasons, why such things will be.
Divisions or Factions may be either,

1. Civil.
1. Civil, or Ecclesiastical. Civil, are all those rents and ruptures that are
made by the lusts of men in a Commonwealth. Thus Jeroboam made a division, he
rent ten Tribes from the other two, and made a distinct Kingdom; and which,
would make one wonder, but that God had foretold it, those ten Tribes never
reunited again, that breach was never made up. These Civil seditions are sad
Prognostics of the destruction of those places where they are, as the renting
of the Temple, was a Prognostic of the abolition of all the Jewish worship.
Aristotle giving several differences between Monarchy and Tyranny, reckons this
for one, That tyranny makes and foments factions, nourishes divisions, that so
while people have a mutual hatred against, and diffidence one in another, that
reigns the more securely, according to that Rule, Divide and impera. But this
is wicked policy. Our Savior calls those blessed, that are peacemakers; and
they who endeavor to make all the godly as one man, do instrumentally
accomplish Christ's prayer for this thing. It was horrible wickedness in
Ahitophel, to persuade Absalom to go into his fathers Concubines, thinking
thereby to make a perpetual irreconcilablenesse These are not the
Scripture-rules of State government.

2. Ecclesiastical.
The other Divisions are in the Church; and they are o^ two sorts, either when
different Doctrines, and Opinions are maintained, and these are called
Heresies: Or when there is a soundness of Doctrine, yet men break the bonds of
love, and live in malice, frowardness and uncharitableness, and this is
called Schism. Now all these kinds of divisions are very sad and dangerous
things. And when God speaks of the destruction of a people, Zech. 10.11, 13.
it is excellently described of breaking two staffs, the one called beauty, the
other bonds, that is, as some expound it, their unity and their order.

2. Factions or Divisions are either Personal, between godly men particularly,
or more public between Societies and Societies, Churches and Churches. Between
Persons: Thus Paul and Barnabas, they were in a bitter dissension one with
another, (...), Acts 15.39. and that about the companion they should take. So
Paul and Peter; Paul reproved Peter, and withstood him to the face, Gal. 1. Or
more public. Thus many Jews that believed, raised great dissentions about
Circumcision, and the retaining of the customs of the Law. What sad divisions
did that dispute make? In Antiquity the like might be showed. Epiphanius and
Chrysostom were at extreme variance one with another, and both orthodox.
Several days before the famous Council of Nice was gathered, those many
hundred Bishops that were assembled together were spent in libelling and in
accusations of one another, till Constantine took all the papers and burnt
them. We might tell you of the other great Council of Constantinople against
Nestorius, with what factions, carnal policies, and sinful animosities,
Nestorius and his party did strive against the Orthodox. But of this enough. We
see how prone these worms are to breed in the sweetest roses: Satan is busy in
this way; God put enmity between the Serpent and the woman's seed, and he
labors to put enmity between the woman's seed among themselves Now let all
these divisions be what they will, public or personal, Civil or Religious,
they come from sin, and tend to confusion. Now God he is the God of order and
of peace, not of confusion, 1 Cor. 14.33.

In the next place, What makes division or faction? What it is that goes to the
making of division or faction
And

1. That is, when men promote any false or wicked way against truth and
godlin^sse. We see all parties brand one another with divisions and factions.
The Papist calls the Protestant a Sectary, and that though a Metropolitan; and
says, The leaving of their Church, that had so much Antiquity and
Universality, was a schism. The Metropolitan he makes all those guilty of
schism, whether Bishops or Presbyters, that recede from obedience to him, as
appears in a late Book. (Hammond of Schism.) But it is not the calling, or
the branding of any with the name of schism, that makes the thing so; but you
must consider the cause and the matter. If Elijah, and some few with him, will
not bow their knees to Baal, nor will not go with the multitude of Idolaters,
this is no sinful division or faction. When Arianisme like a deluge did
overflow the Church, the Orthodox, who were called Eustathiani, from Eustathius
(the President in the Council of Nice, and a valiant Champion for the Truth)
had their private and secret meetings, not daring to communicate in the public
worship with the Arians, yet no sound man in judgment will brand these with
schism. If the people of God come out from Babylon, and separate from their
uncleanness, this is no schism or faction, but a duty, God commanded them.
So that before we charge any with this crime, we must always consider, the
Cause and the Matter, who has the truth, who has Gods Cause, otherwise men
are heretics and schismatics to one another, and so they judge by partiality,
not by the Rule. Neither is it enough for men to say, they have Scripture, or
to alledg Scripture, for that may be wrested to their destruction, but the true
sense and meaning of it, which is attained by those that walk humbly in Gods
way, and use those means God has appointed in his Church. If therefore a man
plead against the Idolatries, the impieties and falsehoods of other men; This is
no faction; if so, Paul himself, who condemns these, had been the most
factious man in the world; For who more zealous than he in Christ's way against
the superstitious Pharisees, and those who pleaded the Law for Justification?

Secondly, Faction and division is seen, when though the matter be true, or
good they strive for, yet they do it not in a godly orderly way. He that
striveth is not crowned unless he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2.5. A good
intention, even in a good matter without good order, is not warrantable. The
Disciples that would have fire come down from Heaven, knew not what spirit they
were of. Vzzahs sudden punishment for the touching of the Ark, should make us
look not only to a duty, but to the order of a duty. The Apostle lays down
this injunction, We must not do evil that good may come on it, Romans 3.8. And he
says of those teachers, that would make such constructions from his Doctrine,
That their damnation was just. The Apostle by the similitude of members in the
body, does show, how every member should keep to his own office.

A third thing in Division is, When men do not keep to their proper places, to
their Offices. If the foot will be the eye; if the hand will be the head; here
is a monster, not a comely body. The Apostle Paul is very large in this, and oh
that this age would observe it! To teach every member in the body to keep to
its own Office, and to its own Calling, not to take one another operations,
but to convey their mutual nourishment one to another in their proper way. In
what a blessed Unity, and comely Order would the Church of God be, if every
member would do its proper work? The Apostle calling so much for humility and
modesty, and not to think of our selves above what we ought to do, foresaw how
hard a matter it would be for Christians to keep up Unity and Concord among
themselves.

Fourthly, Thus it is division and faction, when the affections and passions of
men are scured and imbittered with any carnal dist^mpers; so that this sin
does affect the heart and spirit of a man, and then it breaks out into actions.
Though men should be in a good way, and are for the truth and glory of God, yet
if they do this in anger, and passion, and frowardness of heart, here is a
sinful division upon them, though for the matter and way it self they be
right: Gods righteousness and truth needs not our passions. So that all
these, or any of these, is enough to make the divisions in the Text here
forbidden.

The causes of Divisions.
In the next place, What are the Causes, that make these the efficient cause^?

First, The ignorance of men, as long as men, know but in part, have not
perfection in the understanding; and this breeds difference of opinions, and
difference of opinions, difference of affections. The Apostle charge the
wresting of the Scripture to men's destruction, upon their ignorance. In which
Epistle are many things hard to be understood, which the ignorant or unlearned
wrest, 2 Pet. 3.16. Thus our Savior told them, They erred about the
resurrection, because they knew not the Scripture, Mat. 2.29. So that those who
have but a slighty, flatry-knowledge in matters of Religion, they presently
run into ways of division. These are children easily seduced.

Secondly, Self-confidence and arrogance. When men think those abilities, or
that worth is in them, which indeed is not. This makes them bold, and
distracting of the Church. Thus Corah, Dathan and Abiram, they said, Number. 16.3.
All the Congregation is holy; They thought there was as much in every person,
as in the Priests whom God had set apart for that office. Oh what an excellent
pattern is that to all, which David gives! O Lord, I have not lifted up my self
too high, or, to things above me! Psalm. 131.1. It was an excellent speech of
Ambrose, Heretics with Scripture are like David in Saul's armor, they are too
heavy, too weighty for them; in stead of defending themselves, they are wounded
with it. Hence the Apostle commands us, not to mind high things, Romans 12.16.
viz. which are above our power or capacity. We are all to grow in knowledge,
and mind the things of Religion, but still we must be sensible of our own
weaknesses. If any man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. Oh it is a dangerous thing, when a man that is weak
does not know his weakness, but thinks he does know, as much as others!

Thirdly, The last efficient are (for these will come in better in the after
verses) Worldly hopes and desires of carnal advantages. What made Judas cause
such a sad breach among the Disciples, but earthly gain? The Apostle charge
this upon many false Apostles, this made the shipwreck of their faith, and a
good conscience; 1 Timothy 6.5.
when men judge gain godliness, judge gain Religion, and measure all things by
this, it cannot but make great divisions. Many of those Heretics in former
times were so discontent, they missed that worldly greatness and pomp they
expected, which made Austin put this in the definition of an Heretic, that he
does beget, or follow new opinions, Alicujus temporalis commodi gratia, for the
sake of some temporal advantage.

Lastly, There is an occasional cause, but not efficient, and that has been
the tyranny, and scandalous lives of Church Officers. This has many times made
sad rents. Church Officers by their loose lives, and rigid cruelty, have made
schisms, and then they cry out of them, and punish them. One cause of
Tertullians Montanizing was, the loose lives of the Roman Clergy. We see by
Christ's Parable, Luke 12.45. it is no new thing for such Officers to rule in
Christ's house, as shall drink and be drunk, and beat their fellow servants,
putting off the thoughts of their Masters coming. Therefore the bloody cruelty,
or licentious profane lives of those that have ruled in the Church, have made
a just cause of troubles and divisions; neither are those that make the
division then to be blamed, if it be in that which is good, and after a good
manner: but the actings and lives of such Church Officers. I should speak of
the final causes, but they will come in afterward.

Use 1. Of Instruction, That Unity and Catholic consent is not a sure mark of
a Church, or divisions a note of a false ox. The Papists, they think they
strike us to the ground by this. You Protestants are fallen into manifold
Sects; they will reckon up fourscore factions. Now this indeed is a very
plausible objection; but it might have been cast upon the Church of Corinth,
and upon the primitive Churches. As for the Protestants, they that take
themselves to be so indeed (for Socinians and others, we own them not) they
differ not in fundamentals. In matter of Church-goverment, or Rites of
Religion, there may be some discrepancy, but in fundamental Articles they
consent. And as for Papists themselves, their Writers have factions and bitter
strifes one with another, as might be showed at large. They have no such
consent, as the vulgar people are made to believe. Do not therefore be
scandalized to see diversity of factions and opinions? What grief is it to hear
people say, one is of this way, and another is of that way? who can tell what
is true? and so they grow very Atheists. If thy faith were sound, this would
not stagger thee; God has wise ends in suffering of these breaches.

Use 2. Take heed whom you call factious and seditious; for, if men go no
farther than to strive for the true Doctrine against errors, or the power of
godliness against profaneness, and that in a prudent and orderly way; this
is no faction but zeal. Christ himself made these divisions, Father against
son, and son against father; to disquiet Satan's kingdom; to bring sin to a
due punishment; to make a cord, as Christ did, to cast out all profaneness
and superstition out of the Church of God. This is still no faction, but true
zeal, and love to God.

Use 3. Of Admonition, to those that are or would be accounted godly; be
humble, modest, keep your places God has put you in. Oh think it had been
better thou had never been born, than to make any sinful divisions in the
Church! I say sinful. For to divide from sin and Idolatry, is a necessary
duty; only be sure hat be sin and Idolatry, which thou call so. All that
reproach and scandal which comes to Religion and godliness by divisions, will
in a great measure fall on thee. Take up Jonahs resolution, when he saw the
tempests and winds did rise, because of him, Take and throw me into the sea,
for I have sinned. If godly men cannot be of one mind, yet humility,
moderation, pure ends, and love to the Word and Ministry, will much further it;
for the divisions of Reuben were great searchings of heart, Cursed be their
fury, for in their anger they dug down a wall, yea they tore the body of Christ.

Are ye not carnal, and walk as men?

The Apostle had proved they were carnal, and so incapable subjects for the
sublimer Mysteries of Christ, by an enumeration of several sins, that did
necessarily demonstrate this, upon which he makes a repetition, or
re-inforcement of the Conclusion to be proved, Are ye not carnal? Where the
Interrogation does put more quickness and sharpness into his words. And for the
further amplification and shame of them, he adds; Do ye not walk as men. As
if he had said, What a reproach and dishonor is it to you, who are called of
God; who have put on Christ; who are sanctified by his Name; to be as other men
of the world? Passionate as they are: Covetous, earthly, envious, and
quarrelsome as they are.

In the Scripture, the word man, or according to a man, has several
significations.

Sometimes it is put for love and mildness. Thus God said in Hosea, Hos. 11.4.
He drew them by the cords of a man; that is, love. And so, to chastise with the
rod of man, (2 Samuel 7.14.) is to do it moderately and mercifully.

At other times, the Phrase, to speak after a man, denotes, to use any
similitude, or Comparison from matters used amongst men, Gal. 3.15.

But most frequently, the word is used in a debasing way: Either for frailty
and misery; As, What is man? And, That they may know themselves to be but men,
Psalm. 9.20. Ye shall die like men. Or else, for that which is sinful and
wicked; because man is wholly corrupted and plunged into all sin, Romans 6.19
Hos. 6.9 So that to call one a man, or to say a man, you name all sin and
misery at the same time. Oh, how should this debase and vilify the proudest
and higest of men! How should this make them look upon themselves as worse then
Toades or Serpents, in many respects? And in this sense it is used here: Walk
ye not as men, in opposition to God, his Power, and Holiness, which he
demonstrated in all Believers.

Doct. That all those who are named Christians, and would be accounted so, yet
walk and live., as those that are more than mere men.

A Christian life must exceed a humane life.
They must not live according to the ways, ignorance, folly, and customs of
the world, They are to shine as lights amongst a froward and crooked
generation, Phil. 2.14. Pure Religion, is said to keep it self unspotted from
the world, Jam. 1.27. All the wicked and ungodly ways in it, are not to defile
and soil him. As they speak of a River called Alpheus, that emptieth it self in
the Sea, yet even in the very Sea it keeps its sweetness, and is not made
salt and brackish, as the waters of the Sea are. They are in the world, but not
of it. Hence Romans 12. Be ye not conformed unto the fashion of the world; but be
transformed in your minds. Here you may see, who are men of the best fashion in
a place, not men of the greatest wealth, honors, or earthly dignity; but who
do not conform to the fashion of the world; that has not the cursing,
swearing, lying, uncleanness, and all the works of darkness, that the world
is said to lie in.

Let us improve this Doctrine, and I know no truth a sharper sword to enter
into your bowels than this. For generally men think it a disgrace not to live
as most men do; what to grow so precise and strict, as not to do as others do;
They are afraid to own such, to be thought such. Oh what Antipodes are such men
to the Scripture! Either lay down the name of a Christian, or else live above
what men of the world do. As Alexander said to a soldier, named Alexander.
Either lay aside his name, or else do valiant acts. Matthew. 5. If ye love them
that love you, what singular thing do ye, do not even the publicans the same?
Mark that, there is a godly singularity, and the people of God must be
singular; not do so, or live so, as most men in the world do.

The Apostle in this phrase, To live as men, or, According to man, What is
implied in this phrase, To live as men.
may imply these things:

First, Mere men have no divine faith in the matters of Religion, wrought in
them by the Spirit of God, but walk according to the natural dictates of
conscience and education, and so are for that Religion which they have been
brought up in, and accustomed to, whether it be right or wrong, whether good or
bad. This our Savior clears, when Peter made that excellent Confession of
Faith, That Christ was the Son of God; our Savior graciously accepts of it,
and tells him, Flesh and blood has not revealed this to him, Mat. 16.17. So
that then, men walk as men in all matters of Religion; when they have no more
than custom, or the countenance of the Laws of the Land, where they live, no
more than flesh and blood has made known to them. Thus we see the Jews, the
Turks, the Papists; they all wilfully adhere to the Religion, they have been
used to; and so many Christians, believe in Christ, upon no better grounds than
they do in their falsehoods. Be not then any longer such men, and servants of
men, as the Apostle calls it; that is, to believe the tru^hs of Religion upon
humane authority, humane motives. That our Savior means, when he bids us,
Call no man master on earth, because Christ is the only Master, Mat. 23.8. Not
that the instruction and teaching of Church officers is to be rejected (as some
absurdly would infer from those places) for we are commanded to hear them,
and to enquire for the truth at their mouth; only it is not a divine faith, till
it be upon divine grounds; Not as the word of men, but as the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. It Is a sad thing to consider, how many walk as men in this
respect, being in matter of Religion, without any eyes of their own, as if
another man's faith were to justify them, and not their own!

Secondly, To walk as a mere man, is to propound some outward inferior
comforts, as the ultimate end, and chief felicity of our souls. Take a man, as
a mere man, and the utmost end for which he labors and strives in this world,
is some earthly advantages. Oh but what says the Apostle of true Christians!
We walk not by sense, but by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. And we behold not the things
that are seen, but the things that are not seen. What made Moses deny all that
earthly greatness he might have had in Pharaohs Court? Who would have made
such a choice as he did? To suffer reproaches for Christ, rather than the
pleasures of Egypt? Why is this? Because he saw him that was invisible, and
had an eye to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. See then, Moses more than a
man, he propounds to himself, as the greatest happiness, the enjoyment of God,
and communion with him. And as the Sun puts out the lesser light of the
stars, so this good in God, obscured that in all earthly things. Then
therefore men walk as men, when they look no further than the good things of
this life, riches, honors, earthly pomp and greatness; and as for the
enjoyment of God, which is indeed the true end, that they come short of. Oh do
not then walk as men any longer, placing all your affections, thoughts and
desires in inferior comforts! Is this to have your conversation in Heaven? Is
this to sit with Christ in heavenly places? Is this to make God your portion?
Is not this rather to have the Serpents curse upon you, to lick up the dust of
the earth, and to mind earthly-things?

Thirdly, To walk as mere men, is to put confidence and hope only in second
causes, and visible instruments, not trusting the promise of God, or believing
his power, that he reigns and rules in Heaven and earth, doing what he
pleases. This is not only to walk as men, but as the wise men, and most
admired men in the world. The Scripture brings in the thoughts of the wise men,
as if God sat in Heaven, and did not judge all things, as he pleased: The fool
has said in his heart (and that fool is every mere man) there is no God, Psalm.
14.1. No Judge, no Governor; Therefore they look only to instruments, to
second causes, and they puff up themselves, and grow insolent, when they have
these bladders to swim with: As on the other side, they sink, even as Pharaohs
host, into despair, when such outward props are taken away. Know then, that
all thy dedejections, cares, and doubtful thoughts, either about thy self, or
the public, they argue thee to walk as a mere man. Our Savior does
excellently shame his Disciples for this, when using several Arguments to the
Disciples against their distrust and carfulness, he tells them, Such things
the Gentiles and Heathens seek after, Mat. 6.7. So that to walk as men, is to
be affected in our own particular, or in the public good, as if there were no
promise, no God; as if men were Omnipotent, as if men brought about all things.
When Melancthon was often dejected, about the affairs of the Church, being
prone to distrust and fears, Luther told him, That God had bound up the affairs
of the Church in one common place, which his Rhetoric and Logic had not, and
that was faith. The godly were more than men, in Hosea 14.3. when, being
ashamed of their carnal confidence, they said, Ashur shall not save us, we will
not ride upon horses.

Fourthly, To walk like men, is to be full of falsehood, deceitfulness, or
hypocrisy, to have no truth in heart or word one to another. Thus David says,
Every man is a liar; and he makes that sad complaint, Help Lord, for the good
and faithful man perishes; every man speaks vanity to his neighbor, Psalm.
12.1. Oh this is the way of men upon the earth! Hence the Scripture exhorts us,
Not to put trust in men, (Psalm. 146.3.) no not in Princes, or the great ones of
the world. Oh but all such lying, hypocrisy and dissimulation should not be
named among Christians! Christiana fides should be far more firm and
resolved, than Romana fides. Let us love (says the Apostle) not in word only,
but in heart and deed also, 1 John 3.18. The Christians at first did meet
together with one heart, and one accord. The very Poet said, he hated him even
to hell, who spoke one thing with his mouth, and thought another thing in his
heart. Know then, that cunning Artifices, and lying dissimulations are far
from that truth that God desires in the inward parts. Christ's sheep must not
be the Devils foxes. It was the Heathens desire, That his breast might be as
transparent as glass, that so all his thoughts within him might be seen. How
should this shame the guile, dissimulations and falsehoods that are in men one
to another?

Fifthly, To walk as men, is here in the Text to be in anger, hatred, and
revengefull thoughts one against another; whereas all beasts agree among
themselves, even the savage Bears and Tigers, yea the Devils are not divided
one against another. Man naturally finds nothing so sweet, as revenge upon
others. Therefore our Savior, to show that we must be more than man, bids us,
Love our enemies, do good to those that hate us, and despitefully use us, Mat.
5. This is a lesson or duty that cannot be found in Tullies Offices; he thought
it lawful to be revenged upon enemies. Yea, Aquinas a great Schoolman
thinks, That to love and forgive our enemies is not a precept or command to
all, but a counsel of perfection, to some of more perfect and admirable
excellencies. Oh then, when you see men full of back-bitings,
uncharitableness, envyings, and revengefull purposes, you may see those walk
as men! When Jacob expected nothing but cruelty and bloody revenge from Esau,
and finding the clean contrary, he says, He saw his face like the Angel of
God, above a mere man.

Sixthly, To walk as men, is to make a man's self the Alpha and Omega, the
center wherein all the lines must meet. The Apostle reckoning up a Catalogue of
monstrous sinners, he puts this in the front, Men shall be lovers of
themselves, 2 Timothy 3.2. And Christ on the other side, requires it as the
fundamental qualification in every Disciple, To deny himself, and take up his
cross, Luke 9.23. Now for a man to deny himself pleasures his self-interests,
his self-advantages, this does argue men to be of God. It Is noted as the great
admirable perfection in Christ, whose copy we are to write after, That he
emptied himself, and became of no reputation, Phil. 2. That he pleased not
himself; In nothing did he seek his own glory, his own ease, his own
exaltation. And there is nothing can more demonstrate Christians to be above
men, then to be as Christ was in this respect. It was a sad complaint of old.
All seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil, 2 21.

Lastly, To walk as man, is to commit any sin, rather then to be persecuted
for the truth of God. To swear, or forswear, to turn into all shapes, to avoid
danger. This Christ aimed at, when Peter would have him decline his sufferings,
Get thee behind me Satan, (said Christ) Thou savourest not the things of God,
but of man, Mat. 16.23. What is it to savor the things of a man? To do any
thing, or to use any unlawful, and unwarrantable ways to escape the present
danger; such are counted wise men, and crafty men, whereas this is dishonesty
and ungodliness, and no wisdom, for such forsake their own mercy.

Use of Examination. How are all our Congregations? How live they? How walk
they? Do they not live as men? yea, how many like bruit beasts? how many like
Devils? Oh whose image and superscription is this? Does God require this? Does
his Word command such things? Did Christ live thus in the world? Are ye not
called to be holy as God is holy? Are ye not to do Gods will on earth, as
Angels in heaven? Why then are ye as men? Who are you then that say, you will
do as others, you will not be singular, you will not be strict and precise? Thy
Christianity does enforce thee to these things, if thou do hearken to it, If
ye will be Christians indeed, you must not live according to the fashion of the
world; yea the world most wonder that you run not in the same excess with
them; that you will not swear, curse, riot it, and live loosely. Do not please
your selves with a mere title.

Use 2. of Exhortation to the godly. Oh see to what exactness, circumspection
you should rise! Be ashamed and blush, if thou art as men of the world, proud
as they, earthly as they, peevish and discontented as thee. Oh when thou art
overtaken with such distempers, go and chide thy self! Lord, how have I been a
foolish, and ignorant man to day? I am like others of the world, I have not
behaved my self as one that is born of God, that has a more divine Spirit! As
it is a great shame to see a grown man speaking and doing like a child; so it is
here. As Michal in a sinful scornful way said of David in a good action, we
may of thee in a sinful action, Thou have made thy self as one of the vile ones
to day, that frowardness, discontent passionateness, argues thee to be like
one of the world.

Verse 4. For whereas one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are
ye not carnal?
THe Apostles scope is (as you have heard) to repress the pride and contentions
that were in the Church of Corinth. And now in this fourth Verse, he describes
the particular factions and divisions among them, One says I am of Paul, and
another, I am of Apollo. Paul was the first Apostle that preached the Gospel to
them, who though unskilful in speech as he says, speaking as some think only
by way of conception, yet was mighty in power through God to them. Apollo he
came after Paul, and was more eloquent, and so more apt to affect the hearers,
this some makes the ground of the faction, but it is first disputed, Whether
indeed the Corinthians set up these eminent persons as heads of factions? or
that he did only by supposition attribute these things to themselves, as may
seem seem, 1 Cor. 4.6. I shall therefore wave that Question, and handle it when
I come to consider these divisions in the heads of them, and whether it be
lawful for Christians to name themselves after the names of any men? whereas
then you see the Corinthians blamed for setting up these names, though men of
great worth and repute in the Church. I observe

Observe.
That although it is the duty of people to have a great and high esteem of the
Ministers of the Gospel, yet they are not sinfully and inordinately to admire,
or rest merely upon any men's persons.

You that are the sheep of Christ, have a great duty required of you, you are
to abound in all love and ready submission unto the doctrine of your faithful
Shepherds, and yet also, not so to admire any person, as thereby to be drawn
into errors or falsehoods, they may possibly maintain. The Apostle Jud. 12.
makes one great cause of the errors these men followed he speaks of, that they
had men's persons in admiration; That is, when men love the truth for the
persons sake, not the person for the truths sake, when men are of such an
opinion, or such a faith, because those that they admire are so, though they
understand nothing in it: whereas it is an excellent rule of Tertullian, lib.
de prescript. Non fidem ex personis, but personas ex fide dignoscimus. This
truth may much heal the disease of the times, for men believe much as they
affect, and admire, and few have a sound mind and judgment to discern of
things that differ, qui credit quod vult, non quod est, cupit errare: but I
shall speak little of this to this auditory. Two parts there are in the
Doctrine.

First, That great and high respect is to be showed to the faithful Ministers
of the Gospel.

Secondly, Yet this respect must not degenerate into sinful admiration, so as
factiously to set up one Minister against another.

Let us consider the first part, and here I shall not speak of that temporal
respect and honor which Gods Word in several places commands, lest by captious
men we should be thought to plead for our own selves; but for that spiritual
respect and entertainment of the Ministry, which is for your good not for
ours: people are apt to think, if they come to hear us, if they commend our
Sermons, that this is for an advantage; No, the powerful receiveing of divine
truths is for their good. The wearied traveller that drinks of the spring by
the way, does not benefit the fountain, but advantageth himself; now the
spiritual respect or entertainment of the Ministry, lies in these particulars.

Wherein the spiritual respect due to the Ministers of the Gospel does consist.
1. Highly to account of the office and the work of the Ministry, as being the
divine institution and appointment of Christ in his Church. Thus the Apostle
Chap. 4.1. Let a man account of us as the stewards of Christ. They are the
officers set up in Christ's house, to give the food of life, and God has set in
his Church, pastors and teachers, 1 Cor. 12.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. Act. 20.28. The
Elders of the Church are said to be made overseers by God, to feed the Church.
So that if any man set himself against the office of the Ministry, to slight
it, or contemn it, he does immediately oppose the institution of Christ. God
has set it, and will thou endeavor to pull it down, so that profane and
carnal men who argue against it, know not what they talk of, they consider not
the Scripture, nor the Word of God: and if thy heart were not much hardened,
thou would have an awful reverence and fear of this divine office. Even the
very Heathens have exalted the office of their Priests that drew nigh to God,
and Aristotle well observes, that all religion, yea and the notion of the gods
themselves would be vilified, when they that were employed in that office, were
contemned.

2. Your spiritual respect lies in the hearing of the Word preached, and the
receiving the Word with all gladness of heart. Thus Christ says, He that
hears you, hears me, Luk, 10.16. and therefore they are compared to
Ambassadors, that do in Christ's stead entreat you to be reconciled unto God, 2
Cor. 5.20. Indeed profane and ungodly Ministers, or erroneus and superstitious
Ministers, they falsify their trust, they alter their embassage, and therefore
the Scripture compares them to unsavory salt, that is fit for nothing, but to
be cast on the dunghill: and God speaking of the corrupt Levites says, Mal. 2
3. I will spread dung upon your faces: Thus God deals with those Ministers
that walk unworthily; but as for those that diligently and faithfully preach
the Gospel, such are to be heard and received withal joy, How beautiful are
the feet of those that bring the glad tidings of the Gospel? Romans 10.15. and
there is nothing that God does so much curse, as the profane rejecting of his
Word, and Ministry. Jerusalem was quite off, and there was no more remedy left
for her, when she refused the Prophets rising early and delivering the message
of God to them, 2 Chronicles. ult. The tree that had often culture and cost bestowed
upon it, and yet barren, was at last to be cut down and burnt in the fire; so
then as the Ministers are to pray God would give them an open mouth, so you
hear also, open ears, and open hearts. Shall the advice of the Physician for
thy body, and the advice of the Lawyer for thy estate be accepted, and not the
advice of the Minister of God for thy soul? Hence they are called guides: Now
what disobedience is it, when they would gu^d thee in the way of holiness, they
would lead thee out of the dangerous bogs, and precipices thou venturest on,
yet thou will not follow? Oh how will this cut thy heart one day? that the
Ministers of God would have guided thee in other ways, have lead thee to other
actions, but thou would willingly fall in the ditch, even into hell.

3. You are not only to give them respectfull hearing, and diligent waiting
upon their Ministry, but to obey and submit unto that work of the Lord, which
they enjoin ^ou out of Gods Word. Therefore twice in one Chapter Heb. 13.17.
the Apostle calls on them, To obey and submit themselves to such as watch for
their souls, and makes one of his Reasons, this is good for you. Profane and
proud men, they are apt to scorn the truths we preach, they will not submit to
the doctrine we hold out; but if they did rightly consider this is good for
them, how readily would they obey? If therefore you become our living Sermons,
and turn the things you hear into practice, though we shall rejoice in it, yet
the advantage will be yours. Oh then take heed how ye refuse to submit unto
those things, that out of Gods Word we enjoyne you! If we urge commandments of
men, if we come in our own name, and not in Gods, if the Word of God command
not that which we command, then it may be neglected; but when we bring you
clear Scripture, and say, Thus says the Lord; then how great is your
disobedience? Consider that Heb. 12.25. The Apostle aggravates the sin of
those that refuse Christ now speaking from heaven, above those that refused
Moses. You may say, who refuse Christ speaking from heaven? Even such as obey
not the Word delivered by the Ministers of God unto them: How often have thou
heard, Go away and sin no more, curse no more, swear no more? but yet thou
have not submitted to this.

4. All this hearing, love, and obedience, must be to them for the works sake.
This the Apostle urges, and there is a greater matter in that: Have them in
all respect for their work sake, 1 These. 5 13. For many may carry it fair, and
respect the Ministers of God for other ends, but it is nothing if it be not for
their works sake; now their work does mainly consist in instruction, and
reproof; and this is very distasteful and thankless to profane and wicked men:
there is nothing men desire so much as to be pleased in their sins, that we
should heal their wounds slightly, saying peace, when there is no peace. Now if
we dare not do these things, but discharge our work faithfully, we are had in
no respect, and that for our very works sake; so that the work of the Ministry
informing, reproving, and powerfully terrifying for sin and wickedness, that
ought to be esteemed by you.

5. You ought to show your spiritual respect and entertainment to the
Ministry, in avoiding all those evil and wicked ways, which may grieve and
make sad the hearts of godly Ministers. When Jeremiah saw his people walk so
disobediently, he said, His soul should mourn in secret for them, Jer. 13.17.
Did not Christ weep over Jerusalem, because she refused the Prophets that were
sent to her. And Paul pressing beleivers to unity and godliness, he uses this
Argument, Fulfill ye my joy, Phil. 2.2. and again, We live, if ye stand fast,
1 These. 3.8. So that all the impieties and errors that any of you shall run
into, are like thorns in the eyes of a godly Minister, this will make them
give their account with grief, as the Apostle says, Heb. 13 17. Oh that these
wicked actions which greive the Spirit of God, which greive the hearts of godly
men, and godly Ministers, should not also greive thee. Now let us consider,
when this respect may degenerate into sinful admiration. And

Wherein our respect to the Ministers of the Gospel may run out into sinful
admiration.
First, When we set up the gifts and persons of men, so as to neglect Christ
working in and by them. If it be so great a sin in temporal and outward
things, to take of the glory due to God, and attribute it to instruments; how
much more is this in spiritual things? Therefore observe the Apostle, he to
cure this desease amongst them, takes them off from instruments, and bids them
look up to God, What is Paul, and what is Apollo says he, but instruments by
which ye believe, and God he only gives the increase, though others may plant
and water; and that is the reason say some, why in the first Chapter of this
first Epistle he does so often name Jesus Christ: to take them off from
instruments, and to look more to him; not that the instruments are to be
excluded, but God the principal agent is to be owned, and honored. Rest not
then upon excellent parts and powerful preaching, for it is God that works by
these.

Secondly, Then men sinfully admire, when they set up the gifts and abilities
of one, to the contempt of others. No doubt but God gives variety of gifts,
and some are more eminent then other, yet none are so to prefer the
excellent, as to contemn and discourage the weaker. What the Apostle speaks
about the several members of the Church, some are more excellent and honorable
then others, yet the meanest is not to be despised, is also to be done about
the several gifts and parts of Ministers.

Thirdly, Then men sinfully admire, when their failings and errors they will
follow, and defend. If these Corinthians that were for Peter, should have been
led aside, as he did many to Circumcision, this was their infirmity. In
primitive times, Origin a famous and eminent man, proved a great temptation to
the Church; for men had rather err with him, then think the truth with others.
Thus among the Sadducees and the Pharisees, whatsoever the grandees of their
sect taught them, though it were that the left hand was the right, yet they
thought themselves bound to believe it. But of this more hereafter.

Let us make Uses, First of exhortation, to receive the Ministry of God, with
that spiritual respect as you ought to do. The best praise and love you can
have to the Ministers of God in their work, is to turn all that is preached
into practice; there is no sin for which God will sooner be avenged, then
this contempt of the Ministry: What is a greater contempt, then to be often
invited, often exhorted to forsake thy sins, yet to retain them still? You do
not despise or reject men, but God himself: God did for many years bear with
Jerusalem, and was unwilling to give her up to total destruction, till his
Prophets were slighted and abused; then they that would not have Ged rule over
them, had the greatest tyrants, and proudest enemies to trample over them. Now
there are diverse Motives to give this spiritual entertainment to the Ministry.
For

1. They are the Ambassadors of God, they come from God, Motives to give
spiritual respect to the Ministry.
and declare his will. Do not thou then harden thy self presumptuously against
this way of God.

2. The Ministry will judge thee at that great day. You must give an account
of all the pains and labor that has been taken to reform thee.

3. If you receive the Word, you receive not that alone, but all blessings with
it. When Obed-Edom has the Ark, then Gods blessings do manifestly accompany it.

Use 2. Of Instruction, Why the Devil in all ages has still set himself
against the faithful Ministry? It is because that is the great engine to
destroy his kingdom. As also this may inform us who are his instruments in
this matter? Even such as feel not the benefit of these Ordinances: there is
nothing that makes a man to love the Ministry upon good grounds, but the
spiritual good they receive by it. When these Corinthians slighted Paul, and
doubted about his call, he proves it by experimental works on them. Conclude
it therefore, that all those men who cavil and oppose the Ministry, they are
such who know not what it was to get any spiritual good by that office.

For while one says I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not
Carnal?

These words (you have heard) prohibit a sinful admiration of any man's person,
or gifts, though he be an Apostle Paul, though he be an eloquent Apollo. More
spiritual matter this Text will also afford; only I must first answer that
Question; Quest.
Whether the Corinthians did indeed set up these eminent godly men as Heads, of
Parties; or whether his meaning was, that they set up many false Apostles, and
became factious Disciples to such: only the Apostle spares to name them,
thinking it wisdom to do so, and instanceth in himself and other Pillars;
teaching them hereby, that if such as were faithful and godly ought not to be
exalted, how much less corrupt and false Teachers? Some are for the
Affirmative, and some for the Negative, Answ.
but I think both Expositions may well be joined together. For, the Corinthians
(some of them) did too much glory in Paul and Apollo, and set them up.
Otherwise; Why should Paul bless God so much for that Providence, that he had
baptized so few? For men were apt to set up those that baptized them, as if
they had been baptized into their name. Therefore, certainly the Corinthians
did sinfully rest and glory in such as Paul. Wherefore he takes them off, and
excellently concludes, Let him that glories, glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.13.
Thus the first Exposition is true. Then that the other also is true, that
although Paul instanceth in himself and others, yet thereby meaning other
ambitious Teachers that affected Disciples, appears also, 1 Cor. 4.6. where
he says, He had by a Figure transferred those things to himself and Apollo,
for their sakes. That is, for their Instruction, to teach them, that they must
not think of Paul and Apollo above what they should (as many of them did) much
less of false ambitious corrupt Teachers, as many others also did.

This explained, we may observe two more Doctrines.

Observe. Of being called by the Names of eminent men in the Church.
1. That it is not lawful for Christians to call themselves by the Name of any
men, though never so Eminent, so as to build on them.

Christ and his Truth, are the foundation we must build upon. The Apostles
indeed, are called the foundations, Rev. 22.14. but they were immediately
inspired; and they were but secondary foundations, fundamenta fundata, not
fundamemta fundantia, as Divines say. So that we are not Believers in Paul, or
Peter: We are not the Apostles Believers, much less the Fathers, or any Doctors
and Teachers in the world. That is our Saviors meaning, when he says, Call no
man Master but Christ, Mat 23 8. It is true, this Doctrine is abused by some,
as is to be showed, when I come to speak of those, who said they were of
Christ, viz. in a sinful factious way. They were not for Paul, or Apollo, or
any Ministers; they cried down all the Ministry: They are for Christ to teach
them immediately. But thus far the Doctrine is true, we may not be called
after any man's name. We are not to set up any Persons or Councils in Christ's
stead: We are not to believe in them. Homines non debent aedificari super
homines, said Austin.

For the opening of this, let us Consider,

The Names that Christians have been called by.
First, The Names that Christians have had in the New Testament, and afterward
in the Church. For by wise Names, we come to know the nature of things. And

First, Christ did often call those that followed him, his Disciples. Thus, He
that would be his Disciple, must hate Father and Mother for his sake. And when
the Apostles are sent out, their Instruction is, (...), make Disciples. Indeed,
there are the seventy Disciples, who were in a Church-Office next the Apostles:
but every follower of Christ, his Doctrine and way, was called a Disciple; but
it is Christ's Disciples. Disciples.
They were never called the Apostles Disciples, or any man's Disciples. And
certainly, this does excellently denote what Christians should do, viz. Take
that duty which God from Heaven commanded us concerning Christ. Hear him, Mat.
17.5. a Disciple is not to dispute, but to believe. A Disciple is wholly to
learn and receive from his Master. And oh, how excellent would this be, if
every Christian would thus hearken to what Christ says! If thou art Christ's
Disciple, learn of him how to live; how to walk; how to obey. Lean not to thy
own understanding; Lean not to others; for only Christ is Truth.

Believers.
Another Name (and that most frequent) was Believers. Christians are often
called by this title; None more frequent. And this also does difference
Christians from all other sects in the world. All the Philosophers, they
affected to be knowing men, not believing. Averroes by scorn, called Christians
credentes, Believers: For such as he, affected to know the Causes of things,
and to inquire in the hidden secrets of Nature, counting it a disgrace to
believe upon mere Authority. Thus Julian upbraided Christians with their (...),
believe only. Hence Romans 1. The preaching of Christ, was accounted foolishness
to the Gentiles. They sought for wisdom, for strong demonstrations; but the
Apostles merely declaring and preaching such Doctrines, were accounted foolish
bablers. So that to be a Believer does denote the captivating of our
understandings unto the Word of God, and every sublime thought, or reasoning
that does exalt it self. And certainly, if a Christian would think, how much
he is to submit his understanding to believe the Doctrines of the Scripture, it
would much enable him also to believe the Promises for the Church in general,
or in particular for his own self. Faith of assent would breed Faith of
fideucial adherence. Should it be so great a matter to believe, that God will
raise up the Church, when it has no help? Or, subdue thy corruptions, when
thou believe greater matters in Doctrine? As the Trinity, That God was made
man; the resurrection of the body. This is an excellent point to be pressed,
though not so proper here.

Another Name often attributed to Christians, is, Saints. The Saints at
Corinth: and in many places. Oh, the very Name of this title, should strike
blasting and confusion into man! Art thou a Saint-lyer, a Saint-drunkard, a
Saint-Blasphemer? All that are Christians, should be Saints and Holy. And
therefore the Scripture calls them by that Name. Not that all will be holy in a
Church, no: There will be tares, as well as Wheat. Nor that we are to depart
from a Church where wicked men are not cast out: Or, that the Sacraments are to
be administered to none, but who are truly godly, though they be free from gross
sins; These things cannot be inferred; only Christians are called to be
Saints, and are Saints by Calling, and so should be in their lives. Oh,
consider this, you who are profane Beasts, and tremble at it!

But the most famous and distinguishing Name of the people of God, is,
Christians, They were first called so at Antioch, says the Scripture, Act.
11.26. Some have questioned, whether others did not then put this Name upon
them by scorn and reproach, because Christ was crucified; or whether they
themselves did not voluntarily take upon them this Name, as being a glory and
honor to them. I rather think the latter, because it is used as a Name of
honor. If any man suffer as a Christian, (says Peter) 1 Pet. 1.3. Now this
title Christian, is of great importance. Many are apt to say, As they are a
Christian, when there is no real Christianity in them. For to be a Christian,
is as much as to be one anointed: For as Christ was so called, because
anointed with all Graces in an unlimited manner; so every Member of Christ, is
called a Christian, because anointed with Graces. Oh then, thou that gloriest,
in that thou art no Heathen, no Infidel, no Jew, but a Christian; consider
whether this be not a vain boast! For is thy profaneness, thy wickedness, thy
impieties, the anointing of Gods Spirit? So that to have the real power of
Christianity, is a difficult and straight work.

In after times, the title Christian still continued. And although they were
sometimes called Cornelians from Cornelius, Cyrillians from Cyrillus, and
Joannitae from John Chrysostom, Eustathiani from Eustathius; yet they did not
own these Names. And as Heresies began to rise up in many places, some teaching
one thing, some another; the Christian that kept to the true Faith, that was
constantly and universally believed in all the ages of the Church, beginning
from Christ and the Apostles times, was called Catholic, or universal; in
which sense he said, Christianus mihi nomen, Catholicus cognomen. So that to be
a Catholic, was to believe that Faith which had been universally taught,
first by Christ and the Apostles, afterward by faithful men in all ages. And
for the Papist to call himself a Catholic, when the Roman Church has so
manifestly degenerated from the Apostolical and Scripture Doctrine; and for
them to make the Roman and the Catholic Church all one; is as absurd, as if a
man should call London, or England, all the world. The Papist therefore is no
Catholic in a true sense; because he cannot prove his Faith by the
Apostolical Doctrine in the Scripture: yea, accuses the Scripture as
insufficient. And some of their learned men have confessed, that if they should
try their cause by the Scripture merely, it was gone. I shall instance in one
famous Name, Whence the name Protestant came.
given to such who truly own Christ and his Truths, and that is, Protestants.
They were called thus, not many years since, in Luther's time; whereas the
Orthodox had got some indulgence for the profession of their true Religion, and
pure worship. The Popish party did importune the Emperor of Germany, to make
an Edict at Worms, and afterward at Spires, That no Religion should be
publicly professed and owned but the Roman. The Lutheran Party, both Noblemen
and others, made a Solemn Protestation against that unjust Decree, and ever
since all that reformed from Popery, have been called Protestants. So that all
those, who have a compliance with Popery, that admire their way in their heart,
or act by their principles, cannot truly be called Protestants. Thus you have
heard the chief names by which Christians are called, And still after no man's
name. And whereas Papists call us Lutherans, Calvinists, etc. we indeed own
Luther and Calvin, and such men for worthy and famous instruments of Gods glory
in their time; but it is their calumny to call us after their Names. It is
true, a man by way of difference or distinction, he may say a Lutheran and
Calvinist, to denote some peculiar opinion; but to own any man, as an Author of
our Faith, or the foundation of Religion, is not consistent with true
Christianity.

There are pregnant Reasons for this:

First, Because as our faith in regard of the efficient cause is the gift of
God, so the object and motive of it, must be Gods authori^y, because he speaks
and reveals such things. Humane faith is, because a man sa^^h such a thing;
divine faith, because God says so. Now see how careful the Apostle was, that
the Churches faith should not be in humane wisdom, but in the mighty power of
God. And so the Thessalonians received it, not as the word of man, but as the
word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. The Apostle says, They had not dominion of their
faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. They were not able to make any Articles of Faith necessary
to be believed. You see then, none may be called after men; we are not their
Disciples, their believers; for that which rests on men is but an humane
faith, and we ought to have a divine faith. Men indeed may be instruments to
propound the things to be believed, but the motive is a divine testimony,
because God says so. Solomon by his wisdom declared, to which woman the
child belonged to, but he did not cause the affections of the mother to the
child: So faithful Officers of the Church may declare the truth of God, but
they cannot work faith in thee.

Secondly, Therefore we may not be called after men, to build on them, because
we are not baptized into any man's name; and we are only to profess those, in
whose name we are baptized into? 1 Cor. 1.13. Paul does powerfully urge this
Argument, why they might not say, they were of Paul, because they were not
baptized into the name of Paul. So then his Disciple thou art, and his badge
thou only art to wear, in whose name thou were baptized; and that is not into
the name of a man, but the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost.

Thirdly, The Apostle presses another Argument; Was Paul crucified for you?
Did Paul die for you, 1 Cor. 1.13. His meaning is, In him only we are to
believe, who is able to make our reconciliation with God, who has wrought our
Redemption for us. And therefore it is a very high sin to build your faith on
a man; It Is to make him a Savior, it is to put him in Christ's room.

Fourthly, Our Apostle urges a further Argument in the same Chapter, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord: And Christ is made unto us Wisdom. So all
boasting in men is to be excluded, as well as boasting in works. Oh but what is
the cause of so many errors, of so many divisions! It Is from boasting in men,
such a man, and such a man; and by this means the glory due to God is taken
away.

Fifthly, The Scripture makes it a great sin in matters of Religion, and the
worship of God, to be servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. Now what is it to be a
servant of men? when, as bruit beasts, we are wholly led at the command of
others; believe what they bid us believe; worship with such worship as they
command; yet this has been an universal sin in all ages of the Church. Men
nuzzled in ignorance and pleasing themselves in their folly, have without any
judgment or information from Gods Word taken such a Religion, and followed
such a Worship, as has been imposed upon them. Hence they have been sometimes
of one Religion, and sometimes of another, because they have been servants to
men, and not Disciples of Christ. Malunt credere, quam judicare. Thus they
offer an Ass for a sacrifice.

Sixthly, The Ministers of God, though never so eminent, have been afraid of
this, they have prohibited such restings upon them. But of this in another
Doctrine, viz. That it is the property of godly Ministers, not to bring men to
themselves, but to Christ.

Several Uses may be made. As

First, That a Papist as a Papist, following the principles of Popery and going
no further, has but an humane blind faith. They are so of the Pope, and bound
to his Determinations, that all their Religion is built upon his Decision. One
of their learned Rabbis Valentia, brings in a private Man, consulting what
Religion he should choose and he argues, That if he be a Protestant, then he
must read the Bible, and other Authors; and (says he) I have not time to do
that. Therefore I will be of the Popish Religion, for it is but believing as the
Church, and as the Pope believes. Now (says the Jesuit) God will at the Day
of Judgment crown this man with glory for believing so, yea he merits by
believing so. Now, how contrary is this to Scripture, which bids us, Search the
Scriptures, Try the Spirits; Not think of man above what is meet? So that their
Faith is an humane Faith, their Religion an humane Religion, believed for man's
sake. And that is the reason, why the people of the greatest ignorance are most
taken with it, for it commends ignorance, and pleases the vulgar fancy with a
gorgeous worship.

Use 2. To bewail the great ignorance and blindness that is even in most
Protestants. For how few are there that believe this Religion upon judgment,
and searching the Scriptures, upon knowledge and faith of the Word, but they
were brought up in it, and the Laws of the Land command it? Oh consider, if
God would not have a Sacrifice without eyes, no more will he have a Faith, and
a Religion without eyes! What Jeremiah can make Lamentations equal to this
gross ignorance, that covers the face of all Congregations? You have no more
than an humane Faith, and an humane Religion or Worship of God.

Use 3. To bless God for the Instruments of Faith, and the Ministers of grace;
but still to rest in God for all benefit and fruit by their labors. It may be
the Ministry has been no more efficacious, no more lively and profitable to
thee, because thou have not owned God in it, as thou should. It is God that
opens the eyes, it is God that opens the ears, and the hearts of men:
Therefore look up to him.

For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not
carnal?

What great use the Devil makes of the names and esteem of men.
The divisions here reproved in the Text, have afforded us profitable
Observations, and yet we have not finished all. We come to a third; Observe the
devils subtilty, and emnity, to the good and glory of Gods Church: how many
engines he uses sometimes he stirs up false Apostles, who by their venomous
doctrine may impoison the fountains where all should drink; and if that will
not do, then he labors to overthrow the Church, by the repute and names of
eminent teachers; if the wickedness and malice of ungodly teachers do not hurt,
then the affected admiration of those that are true and godly, shall bring
about his end. Nero was a man that envied and hated other men's excellencies,
and therefore at his Court, when any had a mind to undo another, they would
praise him, which made Tacitus say, Pessimum genus, inimicorum laudantium. And
thus the Devil stirring up Disciples fondly and sinfully to praise eminent
persons, wrought the same destruction, as he would have done by open hostility
and persecution. If he cannot by such Heretics as Hymeneus and Philetus, by
open doctrine draw off from Christ, then he will by secret applause and
admiration, make them so rest upon Paul and Peter, that Christ shall not be
eied as the author of all faith, and success by the Ministry. And Austin's
observation is remarkable, Quamvis non per impiorum sed sanctorum nomina, tamen
impia agebant Schismata. Although they did not advance the names and persons of
wicked men, but of holy and eminent men, yet by these names of holy men, they
made unholy and wicked divisions. Observe

That when the Devil cannot hurt the Church by a profane and sinful
Ministry, then he labors to destroy it by abusing the names and esteem of
those who are truly holy and eminent.

The Devil has his methods, Ephesians. 6.11. and he is the old Dragon for cruelty
and craft; sometimes he is compared to a Lion roaring, and that is in times of
persecution; sometimes to a glittering and curious Serpent, and that is in
subtle pretenses and colors. Now Bernard said, Timeo Serpentem magis quam
leonem rugientem: yea he is said to have his depths, Rev. 2.24. his secrets,
and mysteries of his state of darkness; and as they say of some witchery, that
it comes by praising: Hence that phrase praefiscisne loquor, when we are about
to praise any, so the Devil when he cannot destroy souls by stirring up wicked
instruments, he will endeavor that men should think of good instruments more
then they ought. What is the common and most notorious way of Satan's doing hurt
to the Church of God? 1. By corrupting the lives and conversations of the
Ministry.


To open this, First take notice, What is the common and most notorious way of
Satan's doing hurt to the Church of God, by the Ministers and Officers in the
Church, And this way he would always take, if he could.

The first is by corrupting the lives and conversations of the Ministry,
making them profane and scandalous, by which means all Religion comes to be
abhorred. Thus Hophnes and Phinehas Elyes sons, because of their tyrannical
violence and uncleanness, it is said the people abhorred the sacrifice of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2.14. So that a profane Minister is like a poisoned fountain,
where all must drink; he does not only damn his own soul, but draws others
to hell with him. Thus in the Old Testament, the corruption of the whole Church
did in a great measure arise from the profaneness of the Priests. Hence in the
New Testament it is so carefully required in a Minister, that he be blameless, a
lover of good men, Tit. 1.7.
not given to any gross sin: so that the Devil cannot have more service done
him, nor destroy the kingdom of Christ more, then by the scandalous and
profane lives of Ministers; this hardens the people, this makes them contemn
exhortations: whereas let a Minister walk holily, though their love to lusts
will make them hate them, yet in their consciences they cannot but fear and
reverence them, as Herod did John Baptist, because he was a just man, Mark 6.20

Secondly, If he cannot hurt the Church this way, then by raising up Ministers
full of superstition, and doting upon unwritten traditions, and bringing in a
will worship, 2. By raising up Ministers full of superstition, and doting upon
traditions.
where there is no rule or warrant. [One man though learned is not able to
maintain his new notion of (...), will worship, as if it were in a good sense,
against the general sense of many others; and this does exceedingly please
ignorant people. What opposition did Paul find by such, that taught taste not,
touch not, that brought in worshipping of Angels, and left Christ the Head? and
all this was done under a color of wisdom and humility, Col. 2.23. Even as in
Popery still they urge we must have the Saints and Angels Mediators to God for
us; for is it fit, say they, an inferior person should go into the presence of
a great King, without the favorite? Thus the Heathens argued of old, and thus
the Papists; now these things carry a show of humility, and so those thousands
of superstitious ceremonies and ways of worship that have been brought into
the Church, they come under the name of zeal and devotion; but observe the
Scripture, you shall see Baptism, the Lords Supper, when purely administered
although in a grave and holy way, yet in such simplicity and plainness, that
there is not the least mention of the least ceremony or traditional worship
that afterward was introduced; and this the Apostle meant when he said, He was
afraid lest the Serpent should beguile them from the simplicity of the Gospel
of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.3. Oh that is a worthy place! there is a simplicity in the
Doctrine, Worship, and life of the Gospel, and your minds are easily corrupted
from this.

Thirdly, If the Devil cannot yet scatter this little flock of Christ, 3. By
raising up all the power civil and ecclesiastical against the Church.
then he raises up all the power civil and ecclesiastical against it that he
can. Thus they were the builders (Church Officers) that refused Christ, Mat.
21.42. Observe, and you shall see the greatest persecutors of Christ and the
Apostles were the Priests, a Council of them was called, they were always
combining to put them to death; so that a corrupt superstitious Ministry has
always been the greatest enemies to Reformation and god^iness: Heu Domine qui
sunt in Ecclesia primi, sunt impersecutione primi! And therefore at our first
Reformation, the Protestants d^d truly affirm there could never be any
Reformation, unless they first began with the Court of Rome, and the corrupt
Clergy. Sigysmund the Emperor said to one counselling to begin the Reformation
a Minoritis, yea says he a Majoritis. The Sun in an Eclipse makes great
corruptive alterations in sublunary things, was the tradition; and so a
corrupted Ministry cannot but oppose and set against all those, that discover
and reprove their abominations, and thereby are destructive to the souls of
their followers. Now with these venomed arrows has the Devil for the most
part shot into the bowels of the Church. But if he cannot do thus, yet there
will be a godly faithful Ministry, maugre all his malice.

Fourthly, Then he steereth the clean contrary; He will see how he can destroy
men's souls, by causing men to give them too much honor. 4. By causing men to
give them too much honor.
Even as Nehemiah's enemies that did oppose and do all they could, to hinder
the building of the Temple; when they could no longer prevail by open violence,
then they proffered to build with them. You have a notable History, Act. 19.13,
14. of vagabond Jews that were conjurers, who took upon them to adjure by the
name of Jesus. Thus you see the Devil, when he could no longer work in his own
name, he works in Christ's name; And therefore Paul says, He transformeth
himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14. Now he cannot do that better,
then by abusing the repute of those that are eminent godly Teachers.

How the devil hurts the Church by godly men. 1. When he tempts them away into
any error.
Let us consider, How many ways even by godly eminent men, he may hurt the
Church? And

First, When he does tempt and draw them away into any error or falsehood, than
their example draws many after them. The godliness and learning they have,
makes a way for an universal reviving of their falsehoods. We see this in Peter,
when he, out of fear, complied too much with the Jews, confirming them in their
superstition; it is said, He compelled others to live as Jews, Gal. 2.14. How
did he compel them? He did not threaten and use violence, as Paul compelled
Christians to blaspheme; but his example merely was so potent, none dared do
otherwise than Peter, a Pillar of the Church; yea, Insomuch that Barnabas also
was led aside by this dissimulation. So that the Devil, if he can no longer by
the Chief-priest endanger the Church, he will by the errors of one of the
chief Apostles. We might clear this in after ages by several instances,
especially Origin, a man so famous for godliness, learning, and suffering for
the faith of Christ, that men thought it safer to err with Origin, than be in
the truth with others. What a great temptation did he prove to the Church? as
Lyrinensis does excellently amplify it? He could do more hurt by one Origin,
than by many Marcionites or Manichees.

2. Evil practic^^.
Secondly, If he cannot corrupt their minds, then he tempts eminent instruments
in the Church to some failing in their lives, to some unjustifiable practices,
that so their whole Doctrine may be condemned. How circumspectly and warily did
Paul walk, that the enemies of the Gospel might not have wherewith to
blaspheme? Therefore our Savior said, The Devil had desired to winnow the
Apostles, Luke 22.31. In winnowing there is the purging of the wheat, and the
driving away of the chaff. Now the Devil hoped for the later, to find them but
chaff; as he thought by his temptations to make it appear, Job was but an
hypocrite, and served God only for carnal ends. And thus the Devil he labors
to stir up flesh and blood in them; as it was woeful in Peter to deny his
Master, whereby profane persons might say, who would care what Peter says, he
in danger will lie and forswear his own Master? Especially Judas was a fit
instrument for him, he used him, to bring about the death of Christ; so that
Judas did as much hurt, as all the Priests; for he was one of Christ's
followers, knew his way, and for him to become Satan's instrument, this made
much for the kingdom of Satan. Not that Judas was once truly godly, as some
plead alate, thereby proving the Apostasy of the Saints; but in esteem and
appearance he was for a while (at least) reputed of as a Saint.

3. Setting them up too high.
Thirdly, If he can neither corrupt their judgments or practices, then he sets
them up too high, he makes men in Christ's room. And this the Apostle does so
much argue against, They have nothing but what they receive, they are but
instruments; so as Paul spoke in another case, viz. of miracles, asking the
people, Why do ye look upon us, as if we by our own power had done this wonder?
The same may be applied to all ministerial success. It Is not Paul, or Apollo
does enlighten the mind, does convert the heart. See how much hurt the Devil
does the Church, by the name of these instanced in; One says, I am of Cephas,
that is, of Peter. Now the name and repute of Peter, is that upon which all
Popery is built. They are the Successors of Peter; It Is the Patrimony of
Peter; They made him an Universal Head, superior to all other Apostles. For
the Fathers also; it is true, many of them were of eminent parts and gifts, yet
all of them had their errors: But how much hurt has been done to the Church,
by setting them up as a Rule, or infallible Judgers and Interpreters? Therefore
Austin, good man (as it were) foreseeing this, disclaimeth it, and says, He
would have none read his, or other men's books, so as the Canonical Scriptures,
Soli Scripturae fides, caeteris judicium. Luther was afraid to leave any of his
Works behind him, lest they should draw men off from Scripture. Thus the godly
have been afraid with Paul, lest any should idolize them. We read of a Dispute
that the Archangel, and the Devil had about Moses his body. Some think it was
this, though other Interpretations are given; God, we know, did wonderfully
hide Moses his body, when he was dead, from the Israelites, and the Devil would
have it known and buried, that so it might have been adored afterward, as in
Popery. What adoration? what invocation, and divine worship is given unto some
Saints, and to some that were no Saints, but canonized by the Pope?

2. The Devil works mischief to the Church, even by the repute of good men,
when such opinions and doctrines are attributed to them, as they never owned.
For as the Devil has brought in his superstitions by pretended places of
Scripture; hence he wre^^ed Scripture, when he tempted Christ; so also he uses
the names of eminent instruments of God, to countenance falsehoods. Thus Paul
writing to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians 2.3. bids them, Not be troubled, as by
letter, or epistle from him, as if the day of judgment were at hand. It
seems there were some, that taught in those days, that the day of judgment
was immediately approaching, and this did much trouble the godly: for they
believed it, and why did they believe it? Some pretended it was Paul's
judgment, they had a letter, and an epistle from him to this purpose. Here,
you see, even in those days, men to propaga^^ or countenance their falsehoods,
would abuse eminent men, and so most of the Ancients have many spurious and
counterfeit Tractates go under their name, as Ignatius and Clemens; and why so?
but that under this pretense many superstitious customs might be pleaded for.
Yea, there is a Book, called Enochs Prophecy, and Barnabas his Gospel, and
many such, pretended to be written by those that had divine inspirations, and
all are this grand Impostors.

Lastly, The Devil brings hurt by good men's name, when he s^weth discord and
dissentions among them. This makes the common enemy triumph: Oh (say the
Papists) if you Protestants have the Spirit, why are there so many Sects? Why
does the Lutherans spirit, and Calvinists disagree? Now although we might
better retort on them, Why have there been several Popes, who have all said,
they determined infallibly, and yet have condemned one another Canons? And
could this be by the same spirit? Yet the answer is plain in the Parable, when
it was asked, How came those tares, seeing the Master had sown good seed? The
answer was, The envious one has sowed them, Mat. 13.

I might give Reasons for this. As

First, The insatiable malice of the Devil against the Church of God. He
always envieth the peace, the good order and Ordinances of the Church; and
therefore, when he could no longer raise up bloody persecutions against the
Church (for Constantine was turned Christian) then it was divided and miserably
rent with heresies. So that the Church has always been like Noah's Ark on the
waters floating up and down.

Secondly, The very name of Religion and piety has such authority upon men's
consciences, that the greatest enemies of godliness have always pretended to
it. If the Pharisees persecute Christ, Oh (they say) it is for his blasphemies,
he will not keep the Sabbath, and because he said, he was the Son of God.
This does mightily justify Piety and Religion, that all men are fain to use
the name of this for what they do.

Use of Exhortation. Take heed of two extremes, either a profane delight in
wicked, dissolute Ministers, such who will never trouble thy conscience,
reprove thy sins: Or the other extreme of minding godly instruments, so is not
to look up to God. The former is a general sin. For what people are there
that would not have Ministers like themselves, loose, dissolute, as they are?
Thus God of old complained of the wickedness of Priests, and the people love
to have it so. Oh that is too much! Give them one that is not so strict, that
will do as they do. Oh wretched men, that think it not enough to be ungodly
themselves, but they would those also who are to be guides to them; in the same
manner; people will be deceived, and who can help it? They will have those that
shall speak peace to them, give them comfort, when yet the Lord has commanded
them to make the hearts of such sad.

1 COR. 1.12. And I of Christ?
THat I may finish Paul's reproof from that Text, 1 Cor. 3.4. concerning the
Faction^ and Divisions at Corinth, I am necessitated to take in this Text, for
here is a larger enumeration than in that place; for here is an addition of two
persons more, I am of Cephas, I am of Christ. By Cephas is meant Peter; and
because he was the Apostle of the Circumcision, as Paul of the Gentiles,
Happily some of the believers, who did too much cleave to those legal
Ceremonies might advance him. And if that opinion of some be true, That in most
Cities converted to the Faith, there were two Churches, the Gentile Christian
Church, and the Jewish Christian Church, then this might foment the division
more; howsoever the Popish Interpreter labors under this difficulty, how
they could be guilty of sinful factions, who advanced Peter: but they build
upon a rotten foundation.

But I shall not consider any further this division, that did exalt
Instruments, and Ministers too high.

I come therefore to those that did offend on the contrary way, and that is
such, Who did so set up Christ, as to neglect Paul, Apollo, and the Instruments
of their faith. For here two contrary factions are forbidden, which are very
frequent in the Church; and oh that this age were not infected with this
disease! Some did glory in their teachers, boasting of them in a contentious
way, to the contempt of others. Others again, they ran into the clean
contrary, and contemned all Teachers, all the Prophets, and pretended to be
taught by Christ only.

And I of Christ.] To open the word, we must acquaint you, that many of the
Ancients thought, they that said thus, I am of Christ, were not to be reproved,
but are instanced in, as an example, that they all should follow. Yea,
Chrysostom thinks this to be Paul's words; others said, I am of Paul, I am of
Apollo, but says Paul, I am of Christ. Thus they expounded it, thinking it not
matter of reproof, for any to say, they were of Christ, and (they say) Paul's
arguments would hold for this, as much as they did against glorying in men. For
though Paul was not crucified for them, yet Christ was. Though they were not
baptized into Paul's name, yet they were into Christ's. But to answer this: It Is
true absolutely and simply, it is not a sin, but a duty, for every believer to
say, he is of Christ, To call no man Master, but Christ, therefore he is called
a Christian, because a worshipper of Christ. And the Apostle 1 Cor. 3.22. uses
this Argument, The believers were not Paul's, or Apolloes; but on the contrary,
Whether Paul or Apollo, etc. all are yours; but then mark, he does not say,
Christ is yours, but you are Christ's: So for believers to say, They are
Christ's, is in the general a duty; but that which the Apostle here reproves,
is such a setting up of Christ, as does oppose the Instruments that Christ also
has appointed, and that the Apostle blames those, who said, They were
Christ's, it is plain by the Context: It Is told me by the house of Chloe, That
there are divisions and contentions. This was a fault complained of. And then
he instanceth in the matter of the contentions, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I
am of Christ. This is in the same manner reckoned as the former; whereas if the
Interpretation of the Ancients were true, the expression must have been
adversative [But I am of Christ] And then the Argument following is plain, Is
Christ divided? viz. Is the Doctrine or Person of Christ divided? Has Peter
one Christ, Apollo another, or these immediate pretenders another Christ? Now
these that set up Christ thus in a sinful way, may be either those, that
pretended immediate teachings by Christ, for such were in the Apostles days;
therefore he bids them, Try the Spirits, or such, 1 John 4.1.
who happily might have heard Christ himself teaching in his own person, and so
did wrest those Doctrines that Christ taught, and yet in their sense made
Christ the teacher of them, both may be included.

Although I must add, That a further thing also is to be comprehended in this
factious exalting of Christ, v^z. not only thereby to exclude Instruments; but
also to conclude, that they only had Christ amongst them. For this is the
property of many Sects, to appropriate Christ to themselves, as if none had
Christ but they. Thus the Donatists did monopolize the word Christians to
themselves. Observe,

That although Christ only is to be relied upon, Observe.
as the Head of his Church, yet it is not his will, that under this pretense,
we should despise, or contemn his Ministry, and the means of grace he has
appointed.

So that this Text, with the former, Of a sinful setting up of Christ.
does excellently bound the spirit of believers; that though they delight and
rejoice in the gifts and office of the Ministry, reaping much spiritual benefit
by it; yet they are still to look up to Christ in the Ministry, as the author
of all increase. And on the other side, Though the Ministry can do no good
without Christ's teaching, and it is the Spirit that gives grace, not the
Ministers; yet we must not so immediately depend on Christ and his Spirit, as
to neglect the instruments, and means he has appointed. Our Savior clears
this, when in one place, He sends his Disciples to preach, commanding all to
hear them. And yet again, Bids us call no man master upon earth. Here is no
contradiction; but if a Christian be wise, he may excellently compose them. No
man is to be called Master, principally and authoritatively; yet Christ has
appointed Teachers and Doctors, by whom we are to believe. So that it is the
error and foolishness of men, when they run into extremes; even as in the
Doctrine of Grace and Free Will. The Marcionites and Manic^ees, they denied the
Natural Liberty of a man; and the Pelagians on the contrary, the efficacious
grace of God.

To understand this, Consider,

That there are principal and efficient causes of grace and salvation, There
are principal and efficient Causes of grace, and subordinate and instrumental.
and there are subordinate and instrumental, and these must not be confounded.
A sound mind must not make instrumentals, principals, as ignorant people do,
thinking the very Sacrament will save them. Nor yet must we exalt the
principal, to exclude the instrumental, as Enthusihsts do. The Efficient Cause
of all grace is attributed only to God, or the three Persons, the Father,
Son and holy Ghost, in their appropriated way. So that it is true, Every good
and perfect gift comes from God the Father of lights, Jam. 1. No man can come
to Christ, unless the Father draw him, John 6.44. And Christ says, He will
draw all men to him, John 12.32. He is the chief shepherd of our souls: He is
the truth, way, and life, John 14.6. The Spirit of God also, that leads into
all truth, that sanctifies, that inlightneth the mind. So that when we have to
do with a people, that do rest upon outward means: As some think, the
Ministers gifts, the Ministers parts, or the very coming of a Minister to them,
and praying for them, while sick, is enough to send them to Heaven. To such
hearers, we are much to preach of the efficient, principal cause of grace; We
are to cry, Sursum corda; we are to say as the Angel to the women, looking for
Christ in the Sepulcher, He is risen; Look up to Heaven: so to such, who rest
upon external means and Instruments, Why look ye downwards, look upwards? We
see among the people of Israel, yea, and Christians in the New Testament too,
so great a pronenesse to rely on Instruments; but as in civil things we must
not rely on an arm of flesh; so neither in Church matters on a tongue or
mouth of flesh, as the Ministers are.

In the next place, There are Subordinate and Instrumental means of Grace,
which God, though he could do all spiritual things immediately for us, and in
us, yet he has obliged us to the use of them. So that it is an high contempt
of God, and such may never expect the workings of his Spirit, or virtue from
Christ, that does not use those instituted means he has appointed.

Now there is a threefold Instrumental cause of Grace, [When we call them a
Cause, we mean not a natural Cause producing Grace, by any inherent power, as
fire does burn; no, but only instituted Causes,] God in the faithful use of
these, will work Grace in us. And they are three especially:

The chief instituted instrumental causes of Grace.
First, There is the Scripture the Word of God. This, as it is written, and
consigned into a Canon, is a Rule by which all must believe, worship, and live;
Insomuch that if a man pretend any Revelations or teachings, which are not
warrantable by this written Word, he is to be held as accursed; To the Law and
to the Testimony, Isai. 8.20. Christ himself still directs to the Scripture:
Paul directs Timothy to the Scriptures; and Peter commends believers, That they
did give heed to the Word of God, as a light shining in dark places, 2 Pet.
1.19. So then, the Scripture or written Word of God, is one instrumental Cause
of all our Faith and Godliness. It Is the Rule God has tied us to, we are not
to receive Angels from Heaven, Galat. 1.8. much less men on earth against
Scripture.

A second Instrumental Cause of Grace is, The Ministry appointed in the Church
of God. It would be in vain to reckon up the places, that speak of its
usefulness and necessity. What is Paul, or Apollo, but instruments, or
Ministers by which ye believe? 1 Cor. 3.5. Though they are not principals, yet
they are instruments. Ephesians. 4.11. God has given gifts to men, Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints; That they be not carried away with
every wind of Doctrine. Yea, they are called Fathers, because they beget men to
Christ; and they are said, to save men, and convert men, because they are
instruments. Yea, they are called Workers with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. What a great
expression is this? So that you see the Ministry is an instrumental cause.

Lastly, There are the Sacraments, when duly administered and received, There
are many great expressions given to them. Bread and wine, (1 Cor. 10.) is the
Communion of the Lords body and blood. Baptism is the putting on of Christ.
Now the truth is, the greatest error that ever was by putting too much in
Instruments, has been about the Sacraments. In Popery, the Scripture was far
enough from being set up too much, they disparaged that, making it insufficient
and imperfect: but then for the Sacraments, they maintain, The very Act of
receiving, is to work grace; and in this Popery many people do still remain,
not considering that unworthy receivers, receive their damnation, as well as
the worthy, Christ and his benefits; but when the Devil cannot destroy the
power of godliness, by tempting men to put too much confidence in
instrumentals, then he brings about Atheism and irreligion, by a total
rejecting of them, opposing them to Christ. Therefore

Secondly, There have been Enthusiasts or Illuminatists, who have thought
themselves spiritual only; That have either in whole or in part rejected these
instrumentals. A dangerous delusion it is, and has many times surprised those
who have been hopeful in the ways of godliness, and had many parts and
religious abilities, but wanting a sure and sound foundation, they living
against the knowledge of truth, God has given them up to such delusions;
neither have they stayed in denying the Ministry and Ordinances, but some of
them have gone so far, as to neglect the Scripture also, calling it the dead
letter, and saying, a godly man is above the Scripture, and the Bible. Thus
subtle is the Devil, that when he cannot destroy by open profaneness, he
makes them decline too much on the right hand, lifting them up to some
pinnacle, and then afterward throwing them down by some dangerous temptation.

But this is a great sin so to advance Christ, and the Spirit, as to oppose
his instituted means and Ordinances.

First, Because it is a presumptuous tempting of God. For as in providential
things, if a man should argue thus, Man lives not by bread, but the Word of
Gods mouth; Clothes and food are nothing, if God do not give the blessing. If
a man upon this Argument should neglect all secondary helps, Would it not be a
presumptuous tempting of God? You know how angry God was with Ahaz; The Prophet
promised unexpected deliverance to Israel, and proffered a sign, to confirm
this; No (says Ahaz) I will not tempt God, I will ask no sign, Isai. 7.12.
You might think this had been great faith, but it was great presumption, he
tempted God, while he said, he would not: Thou may think, this is high and
raised Godliness, to have Christ only, and the Spirit only thy teachers: but
if thou do this, to exclude his instituted means, thou do tempt God.

Secondly, It Is great pride of heart, and disobedient unthankefulnesse to God,
and that against his goodness and wisdom. It Is Gods great goodness, that he
has appointed men of the same mould with us, to deliver his Embassage. The
people of Israel, when the Law was given, could not bear the expressions of
Gods Majesty; and if God had appeared at any time, they thought they should die
presently. Now God knowing our frailty and weakness, did appoint men of the
same nature and passions with us; and for thee to neglect this, is to be
horribly unthankful. And then the wisdom of God is much magnified, by the
foolishness of preaching, as the Apostle calls it (in the account of humane
wisdom) to save them; and thereupon he amplifieth Gods wisdom, that chooses
vile and contemptible things to confound the mighty and wise things of the
world, 1 Cor. 1. Take heed then of the neglect of the Ministry, and means of
grace, it does arise from that carnal pride, that cannot condescend to the
seeming low means in Christ's way.

Thirdly, And I will name no more (other matter belonging to this, will come in
afterward.) It Is the immediate furthering of the kingdom of Satan. Oh what a
sad thing is it, that which the profane enemies, and Antichristian adversaries
did formerly endeavor to overthrow (to wit) the godly Ministry, and means of
grace* that thou should in another way do it! For the preaching of the Word,
and the Ministry thereof, (how low soever it be with thee) yet the Scripture
calls it, The Kingdom of Heaven, often, and that is in a great measure, the
Kingdom we pray might come. And therefore tremble, and again tremble, left the
Devil begin to undo thy soul, by withdrawing thee from the Ministry of Christ.
Alas, thou think to set against that, and overthrow that! But poor man, thou
set against thy soul, and overthrowest thy own soul! Do not then
entertain any opinion or practice, which opens a way to set Satan up in his
Throne.

Use of Admonition, To you, who have knowledge and parts, and a repute of
Religion, take heed of Satan's temptation, in this kind. It Is a pleasing
delusion, he has seduced many this way. Lay therefore up a good foundation:
Shake off such suggestions, as Paul did the Viper upon his hand; walk humbly;
take heed of pride, self-conceit, affecting to be some extraordinary person. Oh
be not ignorant of Satan's devices and subtilties in this kind! Remember, if
thou art godly, how useful, profitable and comfortable a godly Ministry has
been unto thee.

Use 2. To rebuke with all severity those atheistical profane men, that
neither regard Christ the principal, nor the Ministers, as Instruments. They
are neither for Paul, nor Apollo, nor for Christ; but they are for their lusts,
their pleasures, their mammon; as for matters of Religion, either Christ's
teaching, or the Ministers teaching, they make no matter of.

Verse 5. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo?
THese words are an argument to prove, why they should not set up any Teachers
as the principal Head, but in all the parts and abilities of the Ministry
still to look up to Christ. And the Argument is to this effect, Those that are
instruments only, they must not be made principal agents; But even the most
eminent Ministers, such as Paul and Apollo, are instruments only. Therefore

So that for opening the words, Consider the condition, and the state of the
Ministry. It Is an instrument, They are Ministers, therefore of necessity to be
used; God that might work conversion without it, has yet appointed this
instrument the Ministry. And yet

2. It Is but a Ministry, not a principal.

Secondly, There is the effect attributed to this instrumental cause, viz.
Faith, The Ministers by which we believe.

Thirdly, Here is the diversity of the gifts in the instruments, with the
efficient cause, Even as the Lord gave to every man.

Lastly, Consider the manner of Paul's expression, Who is Paul? and who is
Apollo? This Rhetorical interrogation is spoken to take them off from
instruments, and to look up to Christ. Now in this observe the modesty and
godly uprightness of Paul, though he himself be one of the men that is thus
admired, yet he takes them off from himself, as well as others; he does not
take advantage of them by this their praise, and admiration of him. Observe

That faithful Ministers seek not to win or gain a people to themselves; The
end of faithful Ministers is not to win people to themselves, but to Christ.
but to Christ.

They preach not that their gifts and abilities may be exalted, but that the
people might be brought out of their sins to Christ. Admire their preaching,
praise their Doctrine never so much; yet if thou art in thy lusts still, if thy
life be not reformed from thy impieties, they have no true joy concerning thee.
See how excellently Paul expresses this, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to
one husband, that I may present you a chaste Virgin to Christ. He does not
espouse the people to himself, but to Christ; he wooeth and entreats them for
Christ: it is not your good to us, but your obedience unto Christ, that we aim
at. Thus John Baptist calls himself the friend of the Bridegroom, Joh. 3.29.
which is the duty of every Minister; the friend of the Bridegroom, which
stands and hears, rejoices greatly because of the Bridegrooms voice. It Is
an allusion to the custom in those days; the Bridegroom he had his friend and
spokesman to bring him into the Brides presence, and he heard their conference;
if there were a willing agreement between them concluded, then the friend
rejoiced greatly. Thus it was with John, and also with every Minister: We are
Christ's spokesmen, we woo you, we entreat you, we bring you and Christ
together every Sabbath day. Now if any soul will receive him, and be married to
him, forsaking his former lusts, and all bypast sins, then is the friend of
the Bridegrooms joy greatly fullfilled; it would therefore be horrible
unfaithfullness in us, if we should do as Sampson's friend did to him, who got
Sampson's wife for himself.

To open this Doctrine, Consider in the general, A twofold end of Preaching the
Word.
There may be a twofold end of preaching the Word of God; Either a corrupt,
sinful end, or a gracious, godly, plain, and upright end. The Apostle speaks
of many false Teachers that did corrupt the Word, to please men, 2 Cor. 2.17.
and they sought their own glory, A corrupt end.
their own advantages, they did not desire to make them Christ's Disciples, but
their own, they intended their own greatness, their own profit by them, Gal.
6.13. Some false teachers, they persuaded men to be circumcised, that they
might glory in their Disciples flesh, id est, That they might boast we have
such and such followers, that will presently embrace our doctrine, receive our
commands, and such a Ministry has always crept in the Church; for either
they have aimed at external greatness, or else to propagate some false
doctrines; and either of these ways; the people were not taught to come to
Christ, they were not brought to receive him as their Lord, but to rest on
them, as Teachers. A good end.
Now see how Paul does wonderfully disclaim all such corrupt preaching, 1 These.
2.3. Our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness, or guil: We did not
please men, we sought not flattering words, we did not use the cloak of
covetousness, he did not under fair pretenses rob them of their estates, as the
Pharisees under pretense devoured widows houses made of long prayers. O what a
pure and excellent frame of heart was this, to disclaim all such base and
corrupt ends! and see how Paul to these Corinthians 2 Cor. 1.12. comforts
himself with this testimony, That in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, he had behaved himself. Oh this is a precious cordial, when
under all the censures, reproaches, and uncharitableness of the world to the
Ministry, Ministers can upon good grounds comfort themselves, that they have
walked in all godly sincerity, endeavoring the salvation of men's souls, and
with tender bowels mourning for those that go astray, rejoicing to see any
person or families owning Christ, setting up his ways and Ordinances.

Now this point will be profitable for you the hearers, as well as the
Preachers in the discovery of it. Characters of that Ministry that seeks not
you to applaud them, but to bring you to Christ.
And we will first give you sure Characters of that Ministry, which would
bring you not to applaud them, but to give up your selves to Christ.

First, They that are so, do rejoice in the grace and progress thereof in their
people, though they should not esteem, nor highly prize them. Oh this is a good
sign! Though thou do not applaud, or admire them, yet if they see thee walk
in the ways of godliness, and mortify sin, they are glad of it, and praise
God for it: this proves plainly it is not themselves they aim at Thus Paul, 2
Cor. 13.7. I pray God that ye do no evil, not that we should appear approved,
but that ye should do that which is honest. Paul earnestly prays, that they
might not do any evil, especially such gross evils as should deserve his
censure, not that he might be approved, he cared not for that, let them think
what they will, and say what they will, if they keep from evil, he shall
heartily be glad of it. To these very Corinthians also see what he says, 1
Cor. 4.8, 9, 10. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise: Ye are
honorable, but we are despised: Ye have reigned as Kings without us, and I
would to God ye did reign. The Apostles meaning is, That they thought
themselves strong, and rich in all grace, they despised Paul for his
afflictions, and contempt the world poured upon him. Oh says Paul, this
troubles not me, I would ye did reign, I wish it were indeed so well with you
as you think, and then for my part, I could be content with all the scorn and
reproach I have in the world! Oh then when a Ministry is still praying for,
desiring, and pressing men to the reformation of their lives, and for all their
reproaches, uncharitable judgments, he matters them not, if he could see them
forsake sin, walk holily, obey the Laws of Christ, let them account him a
reprobate, the dross of men, any thing he cares not.

Secondly, Then the Ministry seeks to bring men to Christ, and not themselves,
when they are faithful, and bold to reprove men for their sins. They do not
seek to humor, or to please any men. Flattery is a debasing sin in any, but
in a Minister it is a kind of Sacrilege. Now those places I mentioned, show how
Paul did abhor such a way, We use not flattering words, we came not in
deceit. And Gal. 1. he says, If he should please men, viz. in their
corruptions, in their lusts, He could not be the servant of Christ. But the
false Teachers, that set up themselves, and not Christ, They came with enticing
words, they sought to please. And thus the corrupt Teachers in the Old
Testament, they did daub with untempered mortar, Ezekiel. 22.28. They preached
peace, peace, to such as went on in their wicked ways; and by this means the
Priests did bear rule over them. There cannot be a surer sign of Ministers
seeking themselves, and not Christ, then when they will let every man alone in
his way, not reprove them for their impieties and wickedness. Alas, if he did
entreat for Christ, if he came upon Christ's business, he would find the Word
of God, like fire burning in his bones, and he could not hold his peace. And
this should exceedingly convince people, to take all sharp reproofs kindly. If
we press hard against any sin, thou live in; for if we did regard our
selves, we should have more love in applying our selves to humor you, to
encourage you, to do every thing for you, you desire. But now, because we come
for God, and it is his Glory and Honor we are to propound, we dare not be so
unfaithful, as to conceal his anger against such sins. Oh, how should this
convince you! The Minister in this reproof, in rebuking of those sins, goes
against himself, he will be more hated, he will lose by it, and yet will do
it, because Christ commands him.

Thirdly, When a Ministry affects any new false ways, that cannot be justified
by the Word, then it is a plain sign he comes for himself, and not for Christ.
Christ himself would not arrogate, to come in his own Name, but in his Fathers.
And, The Doctrine I preach, is not mine, but my Fathers, Joh. 7.16. Whatsoever.
I hear of my Father, that I do, Joh. 8.28. Lo here, and wonder, Christ himself,
though the Treasure of wisdom, yet coming as sent by God the Father, does
therefore still attribute all his Doctrine to the Father. Now, if Christ do
thus, shall any Minister, who pretends he comes in Christ's Name, teach any
other Doctrine but Christ's Doctrine; Declare any thing but what is warranted by
the written Word of God? I have delivered unto you (says Paul) that which I
have also received, 1 Cor. 11. And, Timothy is to keep that which was committed
to him, 2 Timothy 1.14. So then, this is as an Argument of a Ministry seeking it
self, when it affects to broach new Opinions, that have no sound foundation
in the Word of God. They are not in this, subordinate Teachers to Christ: They
do not learn out of the Word, but they themselves are the chief Masters therein.

Fourthly, Then they bring their people to themselves, and not to Christ, when
they seek only great external pomp, or earthly advantages, and not the
salvation of men's souls. In this, the Pope of Rome, and the Roman Clergy have
been industrious. How much craft? What artifice has been used from age to age,
to bring the Church of Rome to that temporal greatness it is come unto? They
have commended ignorance; been indulgent to men in lusts; fomented discord
between Princes; raised up Civil Wars, where they could send their
Incendiaries; forge lies about Constantines Donation; and many such things. And
all has been to make themselves great. But says the Apostle in the name of
godly Ministers, We seek not yours, but you, 2 Cor. 12.14. The Apostle does
(indeed) urge it in several places, That those, who sow spiritual things,
should reap carnal; yea, and be accounted worthy of double honor. But yet the
principal and chief aim, must be the uniting of the people to Christ, and
causing them to give up their Names to him.

Lastly, Then does the Ministry labor to bring to Christ, and not to
themselves, when they do not affect a tyranny, or dominion over the Faith and
Consciences of men. Thus the Apostle, Not having dominion over your Faith, 2
Cor. 1. ult. And Peter, Not lording it over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. And that
is especially done, when they are unwilling, the things they preach, should be
tried by the Word. The Bereans are commended for trying Paul's Doctrine by the
Scriptures, Act. 17.10. They are to compose those duties together, to try all
things, and yet to obey and submit to their Guides.

Now the Grounds, Why a faithful Ministry does thus? Is,

First, From their Calling and Condition; They are servants unto Christ.
Reasons why a faithful Ministry does thus.
They are Ambassadors, and so act not in their own name. The servant in the
Parable, that was commanded to traffic till his Master came, did not gain for
himself, but his Master. Yea, as they are servants to Christ, so in some sense,
servants to the Church also. All are yours, whether Paul or Apollo. And, We
preach our selves your servants for Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.5. They are not
servants in this, as if they had their power from the Church, or did act in the
Churches name, no: they act only in Christ's Name. And, the Holy Ghost sets them
Overseers, Act. 25. But they are Servants to the Church, because all their
Parts and Abilities are finaliter, for the Use and Benefit of the Church.
Seeing then, they are Servants, they may not take the glory and honor to
themselves.

Secondly, As they dare not seek themselves, but Christ, so if the people
should set them up instead of Christ, they dare not own it. Let no man think of
us (says Paul) above what he ought to do. When the Lyconians would have given
Divine worship to the Apostles, they rent their clothes, and were grieved at
their blasphemy.

Use 1. How well pleasing it is to God, that the Ministers should walk in all
simplicity and plainness of spirit. Many Officers in the Church, have thought
by carnal policy, and crafty designs, to have advanced themselves; but nothing
is so well-pleasing to him, as for us to abound in all humility, self-denial,
and public affections to men's souls. If you consider the rage of the Devil,
and the malice of wicked men, you would wonder, how God has preserved a
Ministry in all Ages. But as the Ark was not preserved in the water, as Ships
are by the skill of the Pilote, and other helps, but by Gods goodness: So it is
with the Ministry and Government of the Church.

Use 2. Of Exhortation to you the people. Has the Ministry been useful to
bring you effectually to Christ himself? This is that Paul desired. You may
hear much, you may pray much, you may be much affected with the matter
preached, and yet all this while not close with Christ; to receive him as a
Savior, and to obey him as a Lord. A woman may have many Letters and Tokens of
love from him whom she loves, and be much affected to him, yet not married to
him, nor enjoy him as her Husband: And so, thou may have some affections and
good desires, but thou art not yet united to Christ. The work of the Ministry
is not done, till we can leave you in the arms of Christ: Till we have prepared
the way for Christ to lodge in your fouls.

Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believed?

The former part of this Text has been considered, viz. Paul's modesty and
sincerity in gaining people to Christ, and not to himself. Now let us consider
in what order, or rank of Causes the Apostle puts the Officers of the Church;
and that is, in the Instrumental Causes. Wherein you may Observe, the Effect,
viz. Faith. 2. The Manner of working it, it is by Ministry. They are not
principal Agents. They are Ministers by whom you believed. The Greek word is,
(...), Deacons: And this is sometimes used for a special Office in the Church,
for those who had the care of the poor. Thus the Elder and the Deacon, are
sometimes used for the settled Officers in the Church: but in this place and
many others, the word is used largely for any Ministry or service: And so the
Apostles, and Elders, and Pastors, may be called Deacons in this large sense:
viz. Such who by their labors and pains, serve the Church and its good.
Observe, that this word (...), as almost all the rest of the Greek words that
denote the duty and quality of Church Officers, signify no dignity or honor,
but care, diligence, and all solicitude. Thus the most glorious creatures have
Names, signifying their Ministry and service. The Hebrew word for the Sun,
comes from a root that signifies to serve; as also, for an Angel to be sent by
way of ministration. So the simple word (...), Hesychius makes to signify, to
make haste, to run to the marks end; also as a man by this much striving
stirs up dust ((...) is dust) like that of Virgil: Pulverulenta fuga Rutuli
dant signa per agros.


So that the word in its native signification, denotes that earnest labor,
and striving, which men that run to some mark usually make, by stirring up so
much dust, that does even obnubilate the air; and from this it does
metaphorically signify, that labor, pains; yea, agony, and striving, which the
Ministers of God ought to have in their work: As Paul expressed it; I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4.7. Thus the word is
opened, and it does (as we told you) denote the quality and condition of the
Officers of the Church, in respect of their Auditors. They are Ministers,
Instruments by which God works Faith in the Hearers.

Doct. That the Ministry in Gods Church is the Means and Instrumental Cause,
The Ministry is the appointed means to work Faith and all other Graces in the
Hearers.
he has appointed to work Faith and all other Graces in the Hearers.

This Point has its good use, for this will teach you what you should expect,
pray, and hope for by the Ministry. How does it beget and increase Faith in
thee? How does it wash thee, and make thee clean?

But let us be more particular. And

1. We shall show you how it is not an Instrumental Cause. And

2* How it is. Only take Romans 10.14. for an eminent place to confirm this
Truth; where observe the excellent Gradation Paul makes: How it is not an
Instrumental Cause.
None can call upon God, or pray, without Faith; and none can believe, unless
they hear; and none can hear, unless they have a Preacher; and none can be a
preacher, unless he be sent. See what a dependence here is, and how strong a
place it is to prove the necessity of the Ministry. This premised, we go to the
method proposed.

First, When we say, it is the instituted means, or Instrumental Cause, it is
not to be understood, as if the Ministry or Peaching of the Word, by any inward
natural power of it self, can work grace in the hearts of the Hearers; no:
Experience witnesses, that after ten thousand Sermons, men remain as ignorant,
and as brutish as before. The words reach only to the ear, but they make no
forcible impression upon the soul. So then, the Ministry does not beget grace,
as the fire burns, or the hatchet cutteth; which are Instruments that work by
their own inward dispotion and power to pruduce their effects. This is good to
observe, that so still our hearts and prayers may be up to God, who works in
and by the Ministry.

Secondly, Because it is not a natural Cause; therefore it does not also work
necessarily these Divine Effects in every subject, but where and when God is
pleased to apply it. The Sun shines every where, upon one thing as well as
another: The fire burns always every where, in one place as well as another.
But the Ministry does not so, that is successful in one place and not in
another: That works upon one Congregation, and not upon another. And herein
Gods wisdom makes a wonderful difference. The most unlikely; the most
indisposed many times find the Ministry inlivening and quickening of them, when
others are blinded and hardened. So, that though we should have the Ministry of
Angels, and of the most eminent men that ever lived, still we must take heed,
that by our unthanfulness, negligence, profaneness, we do not provoke God to
withdraw his power and presence in the Ministry. For if it be so (as it is to
be feared it is so to too many people) then the Ministry is but a shadow; or if
a body, a body without a soul: It Is but a dead letter: Yea, not only the Law,
but the Gospel and all preaching is but the ministration of death, and
condemnation, when without Gods Spirit and power. As Elias servant, though he
had his Masters staff, yet that could do no good, to raise the dead Child, till
Eliah came himself. Oh, then say, Lord, be thou in their Sermons; in their
Ministry!

How it is a Cause.
In the next place, let us show how it is a Cause or Instituted Means? And that
is thus.

First, God has appointed the constant and diligent use of this in the Church,
and the peoples constant and diligent attending on it. 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the
word in season, and out of season. That signifies the diligent dispensing of
the Word. And then the people, they are commanded to be swift to hear, James
1.19. And, As new born babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2 2.
So that God has indispensably commanded all people, of what degrees or ranks
soever, To hear and depend upon the Ministry: To wait at the gates of wisdom:
To obey and submit themselves to such guides, Heb. 13. Let no man think himself
too great, or too wise and learned, or too holy and godly: These are
soul-destructive ways. For as it is a woe to us, if we preach not the Gospel;
so it must be a woe to you, if you hear it not. For the same command that
commands the diligent dispensing of this Word of life, does also command to the
constant receiving of it. Thus you see God has commanded it. It is not
indifferent whether you will hear or no: He has not given any exemption to any.

Secondly, As God has thus commanded, so he has also graciously promised to
go along with it. So that the Word works by reason of the Promise. God speaks a
word of command to the Ministry; Let it pull down sin; Let it build up grace:
And then, it prevails against all opposition. Thus, when Christ gave his
Apostles Commission to make Disciples, and to preach to all men, he encourages
them with this; That he would be with them to the end of the world, Mat. 28.20.
Thus in this Chapter, Paul plants, and Apollo waters, but God gives the
increase. So then, God has commanded this way, those means: and has promised
to be powerful in them. And therefore it is God that sanctifies: God that
begets us: God that saves by the Word. As you see the Husbandman, he
prepares the ground, he throws in seed, but he cannot make it grow. In the
Apostles time, and the first age of the Church, how wonderful and admirable
was the Word in propagating Faith? In converting men from their sin, and
lusts? And all, because God was mightily with them.

Thirdly, The Ministry is a means to beget Faith and Conversion, as it is
accompanied with Arguments to convince the understanding and Consciences of
men, as also with Arguments of terror, or joy to move the affections. For this
you must know, that although the Ministry works not by any inward power, as
natural Causes; yet it is very suitable to work upon men, by propounding
Arguments and Motives. And these being powerfully set home by God, make a
wonderful alteration, by conjunction of the judgment. So we may read of Paul,
that he did by several Arguments, prove and demonstrate that Jesus was the
Cstrist: So, that they could not gainsay him. Whereupon, they did either
believe, or prove obstinate opposers.

If you ask then, How comes the Ministry to be thus Instrumental? The Answer
is,

By a potent and strong conviction of the Conscience, declaring Grounds out of
the Scripture. So that the Ministry is called the Candlestick which holds out
the light. The Word (indeed) is a two-edged Sword, dividing into the inwards:
But there must be an hand to weild and govern it. The word is an hammer, but
there must be an arm to strike it home. And certainly, it is a wonder of
wonders, that people should be led in such captivity and slavery to their
lusts, that though they sit and hear, and are convinced, yet they believe not
How often have we demonstrated out of the Word, that thy lusts and
dissoluteness, are sins? And how often at the same time does thy conscience
join with the Word, that thou art convinced? It Is thy case, and thou art the
man, yet thou art obstinate, and do not reform: Does not the Word bind thee
up, take away all thy cavils, stop thy mouth, thou have nothing to say? yet
thou will be wicked, because thou will be; and so the Word is instrumental to
beget grace, because it works upon the affections by the Ministry: There are
Arguments of fear and terror on one side, there are Arguments of love, glory,
and immortality on the other. Now if humane O^tours have been able to persuade
their Auditors, and Rhetorique has made such changes in men's minds, insomuch
that some Heathens made Hercules so famous for strength, the god of eloquence,
as if that were his his great might; what shall we say of the Arguments and
power of Gods Word, which is above the hearts and consciences of men? so that
the Word works faith and conversion, by convincing the judgment, and
enflameing the affections

As it is means or instrumental in this manner; The Properties of this
instrumental Cause.
so there are these four Properties of this instrumental cause.

First, The Ministry is the only ordinary way that God has appointed, either
for the beginnings or increase of grace. For the beginnings, Thus Faith is said
to come by hearing, Romans 10.17. And God has begotten us by his Word, Jam.
1.18. And for the increase, Ephesians. 4. You may there see it is for the completing
of us in a full stature in Christ. Thus as the ordinary way for a man's life is
by outward food, and sustenance; so the ordinary means of all spiritual life
is by the Ministry of the Word. Indeed some propound particular cases, as of
Infants wh^ cannot hear, or of deaf men, or of some persons by unexpected
calamities cast where no Ministry is to be had; but we do not now speak of
extraordinary ways, we know God did feed the Israelites with Manna from
heaven, when they could have no ordinary food; but in Gods ordinary way, unless
thou expect a miracle, the Ministry is the instrumental public means.
Indeed the godly example of others, and afflictions, these may much prepare the
heart, but the Ministry that is the proper instrumental cause.

Secondly, Because it is the ordinary means, therefore it is the necessary
means to which all are tied. We cannot be without it; if a man enjoy it not,
his soul becomes like a barren wilderness, yea like a noisome dunghill. Hence
the Ministers are compared to those servants, that distribute convenient bread
to others. As a house or family cannot be without bread, so neither can the
Church without the preaching of the Word. The Ministry is frequently compared
to rain, the same word in its root for to rain and to teach, and the preaching
of it, to the plentiful seasonable showers that came upon the parched ground;
so that as ^ Land or Kingdom cannot subsist without the rain from heaven, so
neither people without these means, Isa. 5. When God commanded the clouds to
rain no more upon his vineyard, his meaning was, he would take away the Pastor,
and the Teacher from them, and then woe be to that land.

Thirdly, This instituted means is very unlikely for such glorious effects to a
carnal^^ie. Hereupon it is very despicable and contemptible to humane reason.
The Apostle calls it the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21. not that it is
so indeed, for ^t' the wisdom of God to salvation; but the Apostle calls it so
according to the principles of humane wisdom. For whether you do regard the
matter or manner of preaching, it is both very unlikely ever to produce such
effects: The matter is high, paradoxal, incredible to flesh and blood; The
manner of delivering is plain, without the affected wisdom of the world,
without either miraculou^ signs, or scientifical demonstrations, either of
which would much persuade men.

Fourthly and lastly, It Is the perpetual invariable means God has appointed to
the worlds end. When the Ministry and Preaching shall cease, then shall all
this world with the things therein cease: Thus Ephesians. 4. it is there said to
continue till Christ's coming; and Paul's direction about the Ministry must be
kept till the coming of Christ. The former dispensation is altered, he has
taken away Priests and Levites, the sacrifices and Altars; but he will never
take away Pastors, and Teachers, and Sacraments, and these must abide as long
as there is a Church on the world.

Use of Examination. It Is the Ministry, this is the ordinary, necessary,
appointed menans for faith, and other graces. Why then is it, that it has not
been so to thee? Oh it would be an heavy trouble to thee, thou would think
God had some extraordinary jugement upon thee, if thou could have no clothes
to warm, no food to nourish thee, no creature be that to thee, for which it is
appointed. But behold a greater judgment then this, no Ministry does convert
thee, no Preaehing begets faith, or repentance in thee. In the Apostles times,
What multitudes were converted by the Word? Yea in the first times of
Reformation from Popery, How many did not only receive the truth in their
minds, but grace in their hearts? they were not only converted from Popery, and
superstition, but from profaneness and impiety? But now alas to whom is the
power of God made known? Certainly the Word is the same, Gods arm is as strong
as ever; but men by their wilful ignorance, by their unthankfulness, and
rebelling against the light, have sinned away the presence and power of God
from the Ministry, and then if God go not along with us, Alas what can we do!
Oh that you who are hearers would deeply lay these things to heart! God says
his Word is an enlightening Word, a sanctifying cleansing Word: Why is it not so
to thee? Why art thou no more reformed, then where there is no Preaching, no
Ministry at all? The same cursing, swearing; the same lusts, pride,
covetousness, and ignorance. Is not all this, because God does not appear in
his own Ordinances? Oh men without hope, How desperate is such men's condition!
for if the Ministry cure thee not, what will cure thee? Woe be to thee, if the
Word that is so effectual and operative to others, be not also to thee

Who is Paul? and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the
Lord gave every man.

The third thing in order to be discust, is the noble Effect, whereof the
Ministry is said to be an Instrumental Cause, viz. Ye believed. Faith is one of
the most eminent Common-places in Divinity. It Is the Sanctum Sanctorum in this
spiritual building. Its the fat in that spiritual Sacrifice we offer to God.
And because of the spiritual, and most sublime nature of it, it is least
understood by the natural man.

I shall not at this time handle all the main particulars about it, because the
holy Ghost intends it not in this place. Only take notice, that in stead of
all the work of grace, repenting, reforming, he names believing, because this
is Initial and Introductory to all the rest. The word Faith, or Believing, is
of a very large and fruitful signification; but it is impertinent, at this
time, to trouble you with it. Observe,

Observe. Of Faith.
That Faith is the great and eminent grace, which God by the Ministry works, in
some hearers.

Thus upon Christ and the Apostles preaching, still this is recorded, And many
believed: Insomuch that Faith is said to come by hearing, Romans 10.17. The
Scripture indeed sometimes speaks of faith, as prerequisite to make the Word
profitable, Who has believed our report? And the Word profited them not,
because it was not mixed with faith, Heb. 4.6. Here we see unbelief does
obstruct and hinder the savoury effect of the Gospel, But that is finally in
those that p^rish, but in those that shall be saved, God in his due time will
by the Word preached work faith, viz. enlighten their minds, and open their
hearts to entertain it.

To open this Doctrine, Let us consider the Nature of Faith, The nature of
faith. It consists in three Acts. 1. Knowledge.
and that is usually said to consist in three acts; whether they be all
essential, or some only, I shall not here determine.

The first is, Knowledge and understanding. This is eternal life, to know thee,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John. 17.3. Yea, it is a strong and
powerful conviction of the mind. Hence it is called, The substance and evidence
of things, Heb. 11.1. Believing in the soul is compared to the corporal seeing
of the body. To say a blind faith, is as great a contradiction, as to say, a
dark Sun, or a cold fire. If it be faith, it does see the ground of its
belief. Indeed faith cannot comprehend the matter we believe, the Doctrine of
the Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, are like the dazelling Sun to our
Bats-eyes; but though faith cannot comprehend the matter believed, yet it
knows the ground why it does believe, in those places of Scripture, and the
testimony of Gods Word, which says, It is thus and thus. Oh then! How far
are many from being believers? For ignorance covers their souls, as darkness
did the Chaos at the first. The very principles of Religion, the total
ignorance whereof does damn a man, yet is like a veil upon most men's eyes. Oh
then consider that knowledge and understanding is the necessary way to let in
faith, or rather is a beginning and part of it! If thou had lost thy eyes, or
were smitten with corporal blindness; How much would it affect thee? But now
thou have unbelief, and spiritual blindness, yet it does not break thy heart.
Say no more, thou believe in Christ, thou believe in God, if thou know
not what Christ and God is. Though ignorant people are full of their devotion,
yet because it is without knowledge and faith, it is as abominable as a Sacrifice
without eyes.

Secondly, But knowledge is not all; How many Atheists are there, 2. Assent.
that know much, and understand the points of Religion, yet believe not?
Therefore the second Act of Faith is to Assent, to give credit to them, as
true; and this indeed we mean, and Scripture also means this most commonly,
when it speaks of believing the Word of God, that is giving a firm and sure
assent to it, as true. Hence that expression, Faith is the substance, Heb.
11.1. that is, by faith we make those things that are future really subsist, as
it were in our souls, as if present: Thus Faith makes Heaven and Hell present.
The Apostle excellently describes it, They behold not the things temporal, or
seen, but the things eternal, which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4 18. Thus Moses is
said, to have an earnest eye of faith fixed upon the reward, and that is an act
of faith, Heb. 11.26. And in this respect most fail; They do not firmly assent
to the Doctrine of Gods Omnisciency, of a Day of Judgment, of giving an
account of every evil word. Did they believe these things, as the Word of God,
which cannot deceive, which cannot be false, how dared they live in such
professed impieties? But the fool has said in his heart, there is no God,
Psalm. 14.1. No Judgment, no Heaven, no Hell. If an humane faith can set men so
much on work, when yet all men are liars, what shall not a divine faith do?

Thirdly, That which is the complete and formal act of faith, 3. A resting on
Christ.
is a resting on Christ, a receiving of him, a coming to him. Hence are those
emphatical expressions, which are in no humane Authors, (...), To believe in
God, in Christ; and this act of faith, is expressed by words of resting,
rolling the soul, waiting, and expecting, by receiving, embracing. A godly man
is called a member of Christ, and faith is the ligament, and that which
uniteth: a branch in the Olive Tree, faith is that whereby we receive fatness
of it. So that the power and life of faith lies in this, that it gives up the
soul to Christ, and receives Christ in the soul; hereby it is said, Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. And this act is only in the godly.
This is the difference from all hypocrites, they are said to believe, they
know, they give credit to many things; and this works some slighty affections,
but they are not united to Christ; they cleave not to him, so as to to be made
one with him; They receive him not both as a Mediator, and as an Head, to whom
they will conform, and live as Members answerable to such an Head. This then is
the marrow, and the soul of faith, when a man so knows, so assents, as
thereby he is incorporated into Christ, receiving of his virtue and influence;
so that all is Christ (as it were) I no longer live, but Christ in me; and the
life, I live, is by faith in Christ, says Paul, Gal. 2.20.

Now this faith thus described has glorious Effects, and also many Properties,
we will select some of many. As

The Effects of faith ad intra.
First, The noble effect of Faith, ad intra, is to receive the righteousness of
Christ, and thereby to make it ours; by which means faith is so often said to
justify, and we are justified by faith; And Paul did so exceedingly desire to
be found, not in his own righteousness, but by that of faith in Christ, Phil.
3.9. This is the hand to put on those glorious Robes to cover our nakedness.
This is the eye by which we look upon that exalted Serpent to be healed. It Is
not repenting, sorrowing, reforming, no nor martyrdom it self, that has this
honor, which faith has; neither is this for any dignity, or worth of faith,
but because it is an instrument to receive the righteousness of Christ, which
no other grace can be. So that as the child new born, presently moves it lips
and mouth for the breast, to be sucking there: So the new born spiritual Infant
immediately goes out of its own works, it is own righteousness, and desires
to be found in Christ only. This way of believing is very paradoxal, and
hidden to a guilty conscience; Cain did not know it, Judas was not acquainted
with it, and thereupon eternally perished.

A second Effect of Faith ad intra, is to receive virtue and power from Christ,
to subdue our corruptions, to conquer our sins; so that faith is the
instrument of Sanctification, as well as Justification. Thus we are Members,
and Christ is the Head; branches, and he the Vine; and as these are nourished
and enlivened, bringing forth fruit, by having sap and virtue from the head or
tree; so are we supplied with virtue and efficacy for all imperfections by
faith from Christ. In so much that the excellent ready way to conquer any
sin, to subdue any passion, or unruly affections, is by Faith to apply Christ
to the soul. If the branch would flourish, it must not depart from the tree,
but still be ingraffed closer to receive power; and thus thy way to overcome
any noisome temptation, is not to keep off from Christ, to be discouraged by
unbelief; but the more sensible thou art of thy weakness and infirmities, to
lay the faster hold on Christ. But oh how hard is it, ere many of the children
of God come to learn this good way! They lie discouraged in their combat and
conflict with sin; they are ashamed of their hypocrisy, their guile. Oh they
are so unworthy, and so wretched, that they dare not come near Christ, and this
hinders them! Even as Peter out of a preposterous humility, would not let
Christ wash his feet; but (says Christ) If I wash thee not, thou shall have no
part in me, John 13.8. And then Peter says, Not my feet, but my whole body
also. Oh when thou come to know how acceptable it is to God, and how
comfortable to thy own self! In the midst of all weaknesses and failings, still
to catch hold on Christ, then thou will be inamoured with it, saying, How
foolish and ignorant have I been? Even like a beast, and an enemy to my own
good. Therefore if thou art at any time overtaken with a sin, cast not away
thy faith also; That is, as if a soldier, because he has received a blow,
should throw away his weapon, by which he might offend his enemy. If by thy
doubts and diffidence, thou art kept off from Christ, how can thou ever get
power against sin?

But let us come to the Effects ad extra: For all say, they believe; Ad extra.
all are confident in Christ for their salvation; there is no man, though
profane and abominable, but he says, he believes in Christ with all his
heart. Therefore there are Effects of faith ad extra, in the outward man, from
which this Faith can never be separated, no more than heat from fire, or light
from the Sun. As

First, It purifieth a man inwardly and outwardly from all filthiness. He that
truly believes, he cleanses himself from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit:
Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves, 2 Cor. 7.1. and we have not
them to make use of, but by says; especially that is to our purpose, Act.
15.9. Purifying their hearts by Faith, which is seen in a great manner, by
cleansing away that dross, that mudde which is in every man's heart; every man's
heart is a filthy poisoned, noisome fountain, and faith cleanses it, purifieth
it. Thus John also, He that has this hope, which is a necessary companion of
faith, purifieth himself even as God is pure, 1 John 3.3. Come then thou who
speak of thy faith: What is thy heart, thy life, are they clean? Thy heart
men cannot enter into, that may be a cage of unclean birds, that may be a den
of thieves; their pride, covetousness, uncleanness may lodge, and none in the
world condemn thee for it; but Faith would quickly dispossess these, and make
it clean for Christ to dwell in. And then thy life, How pure is that? Do thou
talk of believing in Christ, when thou hate purity, makes a scoff and a taunt
at it? I tell thee, if thou did believe, thou would be pure and strict
also. As Saul that went with no good will to the Prophets, when he came to
them, the Spirit of God sell on him, and he prophesied also. Thus thou that art
a malicious enemy, a profane scoffer at purity and holiness, should the Spirit
of God once fall upon thee, thou would become pure and strict also. Know
then, a man can no more carry faith in his heart, and this not reform his
life; then ointment about him, and that not discover it self.

Secondly, Where there is a true lively Faith, that will make a stout, though
wise confession of the truth, when God does require it. Romans 10.10. With the
heart man believes, with the mouth confession is made to salvation; and the
Apostle, We believe, therefore we speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. Indeed there is a faith
about some disputable poin^s in Religion, that are not essential to salvation,
that the Apostle bids a man have it to h^mself, Romans 14. but for the main
points, the owning, or not owning whereof, is the owning or not owning of
Christ. Our Savior speaks terribly to the not confession herein, He that shall
not confess me before men, though before a cro^ked and perverse generation,
him will not I confess before my Father, nor the holy Angels, Mark 8.38.

Thirdly, Where faith is, there it will carry a man out to the ready
performance of all obedience, justice, temperance, libera^ity, equity, and
every good work. The Apostle James, Jam 2. does at large show, That that man
is but a vain man, and an hypocrite, one who cousens his own soul, that
thinks by faith to be saved, when this is not incarnated, and manifested in
all godly conversation: Yea faith puts all graces on working, as Heb. 11. That
seems to be the great wheel that sets all others on going.

Lastly, He that does truly believe, is not discouraged from his duty, because
of any trouble or persecution in the world. Christ prayed for Peter, That his
faith might not fail him. No danger, no fears could have drawn him into sin,
had faith been active. It was faith made Moses choose reproaches and
persecutions, rather than the glory of Egypt. A man that lives by sense, and
by worldly advantages, he cannot but with the Chamelion turn into every color
of that object which is by him, because worldly fear reigns and rules in his
heart; but Faith that overcomes the world. If it conquer Devils and Hell, much
more the world. Yea, it makes a man rejoice in tribulations.

Use of Examination. Has the Ministry had this effect to make you believe? Oh,
you will say, Who doubts of that! Are we Atheists? Do you make Pagans and
Infidels of us? Consider, there is a great difference between the Title, Name,
and Profession of a Believer, and the real Efficacy of it. It Is said, Simon
Magus believed, because he outwardly professed so, yet he was in the state of
gall and bitterness. It Is said, John 2. ult. That many believed, but Christ
would not commit himself to them, because he knew what is in man. Therefore, Do
you really believe all that the Scripture says? And, if so? How dare thou
lie, swear, deal unjustly? No: you flatter your selves. The Faith of these
things, would make you tremble; yea, roar out: Oh! What shall I do to escape
this great wrath! Therefore set Faith more on work, from day to day: I am no
Atheist; I am a Christian; I believe a Day of Judgment: Why then live I thus?

But Ministers by whom ye belived, even as the Lord gave to every man.

We are come to the last Particular observeable in this Verse, and that is the
Efficient Cause of this Ministry and Service in the Church, with the variety of
the Gifts of those that are employed therein: Even as the Lord gave to every
man. This the Apostle adds, still to take off all from the Instruments, and
give it to God. They are indeed Pipes to conveigh Gods grace, but they can no
longer run, then this Fountain fills them. They are indeed spiritual Trumpets,
to give warning of Gods wrath approaching, but they cannot breathe forth any
sound, but what the mouth of the Lord does first breathe into them. So that
although the Church of God, in respect of the several Gifts God bestows on
her Officers, be like the Queens Daughter, clothed all in needle and
embroidered work; Even as the Kings Daughters were wont to go in parti-colored
clothes; Yet all this Ornament and comeliness, is put upon her by God alone.
So that every Minister has a peculiar Gift; yet so, as all comes from above,
from God to him.

Of diversity of Gifts in Ministry.
Doct. That God has given several Gifts and Abilities to the Ministers of the
Church, and thereby makes use of them all, for his glorious ends.

The Apostle does in many places, delight to compare the Church to a man's body,
where there are several parts, and every part has its peculiar Office. There
is the eye, the hand, the foot; and though all are not equally eminent, yet all
are equally necessary. But 1 Cor. 12.4, 5. you may see this excellently
described: I here are diversities of Gifts, and of Administrations, but all
from the same Spirit, the same Lord, and all is for the same end. The
manifestation of the Spirit is to profit withal. Whatsoever Abilities and
Gifts God has given, they are not for vain ostentation: They are not for
humane applause, but for use to profit withal. Insomuch, that if any man
should should use his parts, his abilities, to propagate error, or to
strengthen men in wickedness, they did greatly abuse the good Gifts of God, and
turn wholesome meat into poison.

To open this Doctrine, you may consider, That the Gifts of God to the Church,
1. The Office it self is a Gift to the Church.
are (as to our purpose) of two sorts.

Sometimes the very Office and Function it self is called a Gift. To be an
Apostle; to be a Pastor; to be a Teacher; is a Gift. Thus Ephesians. 3. Yea,
Christ's Ascension. He gave Gifts to men. As Kings at their Coronations
distribute large and plentiful gifts. And what are these Gifts? Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. Thus the very Office is a Gift, and that a
great one too: More then all temporal mercies, though the ungrateful world
cannot think so. Thus, the Psalmist speaking of the Word of God, and the
Ministry given to the Jews, he adds; He has not done so to every Nation,
Psalm. 147.20. Alas, for temporal mercies he had, he gave them peace, quietness,
and plenty; all abundance; and filled them with good things: but this was
nothing to the Ministry of the Word. And certainly, no plenty, no quietness, no
abundance, is a mercy equal to the Gospel. Therefore Amos threatened the famine
of the Word, as more terrible then that of Bread, Amos 8.11. But when will
swine prize a Pearl, or carnal men the things that are spiritual. But then

Secondly, The several Abilities, 2. Their several Abilities and various Parts
that Officers in the Church have, while they discharge their Office.
and various Parts that Officers in the Church have, while they discharge this
Office. This we commonly call, such a man's gifts: He has a special gift in
such or such a way. The Apostle speaks of the Word of Doctrine, some men has,
viz. doctrinally to open the sense of the Scripture, and solidly to confirm it.
And another man has the Word of exhortation, Romans 12.8. His Ability is, in
applying thoroughly and powerfully the Doctrine confirmed to the Conscience of
the Hearers. And both these are admirably necessary. This is to be a shining
and burning light. Shining by Doctrine, and burning by Application. Thus some
have more Eloquent Gifts, others more plain and solid. Esaias is full of
Eloquence, and Amos is more plain. Austin said, Qui dedit Petrum pisca^^rem
dedit Cyprianum Rhetorem. God has called plain men, yet enabled by Gifts, to
preach his Word; and he has also called eloquent men. The Hen (though with an
hoarse voice) can cluck her Chickens together, as well as the Nightingale her
young ones with a sweet voice.

In the next place, This latter sort of Gifts are of two sorts: Either
Extraordinary, 2. And these are of two sorts: 1. Extraordinary.
such as the Spirit of God gave immediately, without any humane industry or
labor. And thus in the Primitive Times of the Church, their Gifts were
extraordinary: For though the Apostles were at first Tradesmen and illiterate;
yet ere they had a public Commission to preach to all the world, they had the
Spirit of God extraordinarily descending on them in cloven Tongues: That as
diversity of Tongues did once destroy Babel, so this variety of Tongues, would
destroy the Devils Kingdom. So that the gifts of Tongues, the gift of
Interpretation, and many of those things we read of, 1 Cor. 12. they were
extraordinary: According to the Prophecy of Joel, Act. 2. That God would pour
his Spirit on them, and their old men, and young men, should see Visions, and
dream Dreams. These were extraordinary. But because such extraordinary gifts
were in the nature of Miracles to confirm the Apostles Doctrine, and their
Mission from God, they now cease.

Therefore in the second place, there are Ordinary gifts; and they are such,
which by labor and study, and praying, we obtain at Gods hand. For even these
ordinary abilities of learning, Parts, and gift of Doctrine, of Exhortation,
they come by the blessing of God. And therefore, when God is angry, he blasts
men, and takes away their gifts from them. Now, these ordinary gifts, the
Appostle supposes, would be in Churches constituted after his departure:
Therefore it is required of every Elder, he should be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2.
Yea, those that had extraordinary gifts, did make use of study, and labor* and
diligent pains. Thus Paul exhorts Timothy, to give himself to reading, that
his profiting may appear to all men, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. Yea, Paul himself made
use of his Parchments. So that those Lamps which were inlighted by God himself,
did yet need the continual oil of their labor and pains. And if this was
true of those extrordinary gifted persons, how much more of ordinary? The Nurse
that feeds not, cannot long give milk; so neither the Miinster that studieth
not.

Why all have not the same Gifts.
Now in the next place, Consider the Ends, Why all have not the same Gifts, but
some one way, some another. And

First, Hereby God does declare his Wisdom. His honor is magnified by these
varieties. It argues there is plenty and fullness of the Spirit with him. When
God made the world, how many several Species and kinds of Creatures did he
make, which no man can reckon up? And then, every individual in that Species,
different by some individual Properties from one another. Every man has a
different face from another: Which variety of the creatures, does wonderfully
extol the treasure of his wisdom. The Musician shows his skill, by his
variety of Notes. When the Tabernacle was to be built, there was Aholiab, and
Bezaliel, endowed with excellent wisdom for that purpose. So that in this
diversity of Administrations, we may behold the wisdom of God, and praise him
much more in the Church Assemblies, then in beholding the creatures.

Secondly, God gives several Gifts, that so the meanest may not be despised,
nor the greatest puffed up: Because they did not only all come from God, but
they are in their harmony necessary. The foot is a necessary member as well as
an eye, but the eye is more noble. So that where the meanest gifts are, if
gifts, when faithfully and conscionably employed for the public good, they
are not to be contemned, because Gods Gifts. And in this sense, He that
reproacheth the poor, reproacheth his Maker. Even as the least creature in the
world, is not without its proper use and office. And then, the greatest gifts,
they are but gifts, and therefore we must not arrogantly be puffed up with
them. We must not take this wedge of gold, and make an Idol of it, and worship
it. Great parts and gifts, have many times been great temptations, and brought
great misery: As Matthew Paris speaks of one that having spent his time in his
Lectures, to prove that Christ was God, and being greatly applauded for it, he
cried out and said; O Jesus, thou art beholding to me for thy Divinity this
day! (Or to that effect.) Whereupon immediately this great Doctor was stricken
with such ignorance and forgetfulness, that for ever after, he could not so
much as say the Lords Prayer, but as a little Child said it to him. Let those
then that have Parts, take heed they do not promote the Devils Kingdom thereby;
and so at last be cursed by God. Ornari a te Diabolus quaerit, said Austin to
an Heathen, a great Scholar, whose Conversion he endeavored. But

Thirdly, Gods main end of giving diversity of Gifts, is, that so (if possible)
men may be converted and healed. To one God gives Doctrine, to another the Word
of Exhortation; and all is, that if one prevail not, the other may. Thus there
are some, who are Sons of Thunder, others that are Sons of Consolation,
that so both the way of terror, and the way of mildness may prosper. So that
the diversity of Gifts, is a great demonstration of Gods willingness, that men
should repent and be healed. Our Savior comparing John's Ministry and his
together, Mat. 11.16, 17, 18. which seemed to differ exceedingly, makes this
use of it: John came unto you in a strict extraordinary way; he kept in the
wilderness; he went in rough garments. And all this ridged way was to bring to
repentance. The Son of man, he came eating and drinking, viz. in a more
familiar and conversing way. And therefore he says, it was like the Childrens
play, We have piped to you, and you have not danced; mourned to you, and you
have not wept. We have several ways treated with you; But behold! the
wickedness of the people; they get good by neither. John that came that ridged
way, they said, he had a Devil; and Christ that came that loving way, they
said, he had a Devil. Always, wicked and ungodly men, they will have some
fault to find with the Ministry; either this it wants, or that it wants. And
all this is from the Devil, who hardens them against it, to their own
destruction. Therefore let there be what Ministry they will, those that are
left by God, will reject it against their souls good, objecting some defect or
other.

But I will hasten to that particular matter which concerns the Hearers. And

First, Does God make use of several Gifts for this end, to gain you; that if
Boanerges do no good on you, Barnabas may? Then, How inexcusable and
unjustifiable will the wickedness of all those men be, who though they have
lived under several gifts, and heard variety of Sermons, yet are still the same
ignorant and profane people that ever they were? Should thou send thy Child
to all kind of Teachers, and yet none of them do any good to him, thou would
conclude, the fault is in the Child's dullness and incapacity, not in the Masters
Art, or method? Should thou in a dangerous Disease go to all kind of
Physicians, and yet still no cure, thou would fear least thou art incurable,
thou would no longer blame the Physician? And is not this as palpable here?
Thou have gone to many Sermons, heard the several gifts of Divine Teachers, yet
thou art as ungodly, and as averse to holiness as ever. Oh, do no more blame
this or that kind of preaching (if profitable) but thy own barren and corrupt
heart! Thou would have been a weed, though planted in Paradise. Oh then,
bethink your selves, and humble your selves, for unprofitableness under the
means of grace! God (you hear) has appointed all Officers in the Church, and
distributed all gifts, only for your spiritual profit. And the Word, in the
whole nature of it, is profitable either for Instruction, Reproof, or
Correction, 2 Timothy 3.16. Now if profit, and only profit be intended by God, how
will thou answer it at the last day, that have neither profited in knowledge or
practice? In all earthly affairs, still the question is, Cuibono? What profit
will this be? Why not at the end of every Sermon do thou not ask, How has
this profited me? Do I know more? Do I live more holily?

Now that ministerial Gifts may be profitable to you, take these Rules.

First, Lay aside all prejudices and cavils, either against the Ministry, Rules
or Helps to profit by the Ministry.
or the matter, or the manner, when it is in an wholesome and soul-saving way
delivered. Hence commonly arises all unprofitableness, that Hearers are
prepossessed with carnal prejudices, and as a man troubled with a noise in his
head. Thus he that has distempered affections in him, he will always find
some Argument, why the Word does no good to him. Consider, Christ himself, in
whom was the Treasures of all Wisdom; no man spoke with such Authority as he
did; What wonderful Miracles did he? And all those Miracles were of good
things only, either to heal the blind, or sick, still they were acts of
Charity, as well as of power. And yet for all that, the Pharisees grew worse
rather than better, more envious and malicious, and so further off from
repentance and grace: And why so? They were prepossessed with carnal
prejudices; they had resolved aforehand to be the same men they were. And
hereupon, Christ himself did convert very few in the time of his Ministry.

Secondly, He that would hear profitably, he must lay aside all superfluity of
naughtiness. He must not come doting upon, and engaged to his former lusts, for
then he does but mock God: as Jeremiah's Hearers came and told him, they would
do whatsoever God should discover by him to them, while they did hope, it would
be what they desired; viz. that they might go down into Egypt: but when they
saw that could not be, then they plainly and impudently told Jeremiah, They
would not do what God bid them, Jer. 42. Thus thou pretendest by hearing and
outward deportment, to do what God shall command thee, yet when thou come to
thy temptations, to thy lusts again, then thou will not obey, come then to
hear, as one that finds sin a burden, thou art weary of it, thou would fain
be freed from it. Oh thou would think it the greatest mercy in the world to
be freed from it: Now to such an hearer God will make ministerial gifts
profitable.

Thirdly, Pray much unto God, and earnestly look up unto him; For seeing they
are but instruments, they do but plant and water, It Is God that gives the
increase, then thou must lift up thy eyes and heart to him. And commonly the
Ministry is successful unto thee, according as thou prayest, Be it unto thee
as thou have prayed, says God. And hence it is no wonder, if so few are either
enlightened in mind, or reformed in life. For who is there that striveth and
wrestleth with God in prayer for a blessing therein? That can say, Lord, rather
let not my bread nourish me, my clouts warm me, my fields give their increase,
than the Ministry not be spiritually helpful unto me.

Fourthly, If thou would have the Word preached profitable to thee, hide it
up in thy heart; be the clean beast that cheweth the end, meditate on these
things. Thou think all is done, when the Sermon is done, when the Sabbath is
over; nay then thy work begins. The seed sown in the ground many days and
months, afterward shows it self, and so should the Ministry, the week, the
month, the year after. Oh then, take heed of formality in hearing and hearing,
and only hearing; for these things God will strike thee with spiritual plagues,
with a blind eye, an hard heart, that because thou would not receive profit,
God shall say, Never fruit grow on thee more; This a great part of Christians
is plunged into; they are damned with a natural confusion, every day more
disliking, more disrelishing the things that belong to their eternal peace.

Verse 6. I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase.
THis sixth verse is a further amplification of the parts of that service and
ministration, which the Apostles were implied in. And it is described in a
continued Metaphor or Allegory, I have planted, Apollo's watered. Where the
first instruction in the principles of Religion, is compared to planting The
daily admonishing and quickening up in further degrees of knowledge and piety is
compared to watering, and God he is compared to the earth. For as the earth
gives life and nourishment to all the plants, called therefore Alma Matter: So
God, who is the Jehovah, that gives all being and life to natural things; and
much more to supernatural. Though God may be compared not only to the earth,
but the Sun also, according to that Rule, Annus non ager fructificat.

This Text then contains two noble and choice parts of their ministerial
actions, to plant, and to water. To begin the foundation of Christianity, and
afterward to build a superstruction.

So that Paul's planting, supposes the Corinthians to be a barren, untilled,
and confused people; like the world at first, a Tohu, and a Bohu, a mere horrid
wilderness, till the Gospel being planted among them, they become a pleasant
Garden, and a fruitful Field. From whence we may observe,

That it is Gods unspeakable goodness, sometimes to send his Word, Observe. Of
Gods planting his Gospel among a people.
and plant his Gospel among a people, that never heard or knew any thing
before.

If you consider all the Countries and Kingdoms, wheresoever the Gospel has
taken effect since Christ's time, you shall find that they were thrones of
Satan, places where Idolatry reigned. They were like those desolate places the
Prophet speaks of, where the Satyr and screech-Owl, even all black and
Heathenish confusion did exalt it self. So that where God does out of stones
raise up children to Abraham, turn a Paganish, Heathenish people into a Church,
there is wisdom, power and goodness no less; yea more wonderful than when
he did out of that deformed confusion and chaos, make a (...), a beautiful,
adorned world. Even this England, this ancient Britain, was once a place of
horrible Idolatry, Paganism, no knowledge of Christ, nor his Gospel, But served
dumb Idols, and walked according to the course of this world, having the Prince
of darkness ruling over us, as in other places. So that the Gospel that is
like the glorious Sun, and every Kingdom or Nation is like a do^esome black
dungeon, yea like an hell, where Legion of Devils are, till the beams of this
light do enlighten them.

To amplify this Doctrine, many things are observable:

First, That when the Apostle says, That he planted the Gospel, it does
suppose all people to be a wild, barbarous people, till the Gospel both
civilizeth and sanctisieth them. To plant is properly of Orchards, and Gardens,
and Vineyards, and supposes the great care and skill of him that plants. Thus
God is said to plant Eden, Gen 2.8. And so a people are made the Church and
people of God by plantation, by Gods goodness and power; of themselves they
are like wild beasts, not knowing the way of happiness. It was the custom of
the Grecians and Romans, because they had the culture of Arts, and good Civil
Government, to call other people Barbari, Barbarians: And thus the Apostle
opposes the Grecians and Barbarians together, Col. 3.11. Barbarous comes from
the Hebrew Bar, g^minated, that signifies a field untilled, a desert, so they
looked upon all other men in the world. But indeed, even the Grecians and
Romans were barbarous wild people comparatively, till the Gospel came among
them; They had no true knowledge or understanding, till the Word, the Rule of
all wisdom was discovered to them. Oh how should this make us of England
magnify the goodness of God to this Land, who once had no Ministry of Christ,
who were like so many lumps of earth, that worshipped the Devil, and the Idols
of the world! They had their Dryades, which Julius Caesar speaks of, that were
like Witches serving for their Priests, that lived up and down in woody places.
Why might not we have been born in those days, while Britany was Paganish and
Heathenish? Antiquity in Religion is no good plea; for here was Idolatry, and
the worship of the Devil before any knowledge of Christ. It Is a great mercy to
be born in such times, in such an age, and in such places, where the name of
Christ is published; for this is wholly in Gods disposal; he has determined to
all men the times of their life and habitations.

Secondly, Consider, That in the Old Testament God did limit his gracious
presence to the Jews only. In Judea only was salvation, and the knowledge of
God, John 4 That was the Goshen where light was, all the world else was
darkness. Indeed some few particular persons, that were forrainers and
strangers, became proselytes, and gave up their names to God; but there were no
Countries, or Nations, received the Word of God, but Judea only. But when
Christ came, then that partition wall was broken down; and after his death, he
gave a Commission to preach the Gospel to all the world: And thus the Word,
like the Sun in the Heavens, went from one end of the world to another, and
none could hinder the course thereof. Yea, where Roman Emperors power and
sword could not get dominion, there the Apostles and their Successors,
conquered and prevailed. And this, and no other is the Universal Grace, the
Scripture speaks of, whereas formerly it was particular. Then Christ the
strong man came and bound the Devil, who had possessed the earth, and kept it
in quiet slavery to him, so that under the times of the Gospel, Christ has
been made known; where God has sent his Word, though it were into the utmost
parts of the earth.

Thirdly, Therefore that there might be spiritual plantations, and holy
Colonies, the Lord Christ appointed extraordinary Officers, furnished with
extraordinary abilities, to propagate the Gospel. These were called Apostles.
It was for the Apostles, and not ordinary Officers to plant Churches; so that
they had a Commission to go and preach to any people in the world: They were
not bound to keep residence at any one place, but to go from Nation to Nation,
to disseminate the spiritual seed of the Gospel; and that like mustard seed at
first, small and little, presently grew up to a tall tree, and spreaded its
branches through the whole world. And as the Apostles had this universal
commission; so they were endued with power to work wonderful miracles; for
miracles were, because of the Heathens and unbelievers. By these they confirmed
their Doctrine and calling to be of God immediately, yet this was not so tied
to the Apostolical Office, but that in after ages, many Countries have received
the Gospel by other means, especially persecution, and the patient sufferings
of Christians did much help thereunto: That as a captive Maid was a means to
bring Naaman to the knowledge of God, and his Worship; so captive persons have
been instrumental to make whole K^ngdoms acquainted with the Gospel of Christ.
Thus God has always disappointed the hopes of wicked men, and that very way,
whereby they have thought to destroy the Gospel, it has flourished more. It Is
the Vine that by pruning has increased: As the grain of corn, except it die,
cannot bring forth any fruit; so is it with the Gospel: These precious herbs,
the more they are pressed and pounced, the sweeter smell they make.

Fourthly, Gods severity and mercy has been observable about the first
planting of the Gospel. For when a people have lived rebelliously and sinfully
under it a long time, then he takes it away, and gives it to another Nation.
Thus God began with the Jews, told them, That to them the Word must be first
preached, but seeing they had rejected the counsel of God, they were to go to
the Gentiles. And Rom 11. shows at large, how that the breaking off of the
Jews, was the ingraffing of the Gentiles. And thus, if we consider, those
famous places, where the Word was at first planted, we shall see them for their
barrenness and unfruitfulnesse turned into a dung hill. The seven Churches of
Asia, Where are they? This Corinth, What is become of it? Those that would not
obey Christ, whose yoke was easy, are forced to endure the iron chains and
bonds of Mahom^t. Rome in this Apostles time had her faith published over the
whole world, but is so apostatized, that her Idolatry and Heresy is as much
proclaimed: Insomuch that the Epistle ad Romanos, is now in, or contra Romanos.
The Epistle to the Romans is an Epistle against them, because of the gross
corruption of those main points of Predestination and Justification, and other
material points. Thus you see, how Gods administration is very various and
dreadful, he gives it to one Nation, and takes it from another. It Is the
judgment of some men, That the Gospel will be taken from all these western
parts of the world, and given to the East Indies, and other parts; but how
certain this is, none can tell. In these later days, we hear not of any
Heathenish Nation converted, some glimmering light the Natives in New England
have received, that is the most that has been done lately For as for the
Jesuits boasting of their conversion of the Indians, the bloody cruelty and
horrible violence they have used, deplored even by some of their own parties,
makes that but a fable It Is the opinion of all, That Heathens and Pagans are
not to be compelled to the true Faith, because they are without the Church; and
she has nothing to do with those that are without the Church. Though
Heretics, and such as are within may be compelled to the means of truth and
salvation. Why then in these later days Heathenish Nations do not receive the
faith, as in former times who can divine? Only the fervor and zeal of
propagating the Gospel, is far less than formerly: Insomuch that it is
bewailed by a learned man, Hornbeck, that that injunction and command to go and
preach the Gospel to all Nations, is not enough laid to heart.

Fifthly, In planting of Churches, commonly their infancy and beginning has
been more pure and godly, than the successive ages. Take Rome in her nascent
condition, and their faith was eminent, but in her crescent, or growing estate,
she presently degenerated. All Churches have been at first planted, either by
the Apostles themselves, or Apostolical persons, and they had purity of
Doctrine and godliness of order and life, only then they were but few and
obnoxious to persecution, all which made them heavenly and holy, but when they
began to be numerous and prosperous, and the meaning of the first planters was
worn out, then the Church grew not like her self. One of the ancientest
Ecclesiastical Historians Egesippus says, of a pure Virgin, she presently
became a Strumpet, because of all that false and superstitious worship that
crept into her.

Lastly, Because of that pronenesse to degenerate, and from gold to become
dross. Hence God has in mercy raised up Reformers, and stirred up men with
invincible zeal, being full of the holy Ghost, who have labored to bring
Churches to their first plantations and institution. Thus the Jews, a people
planted by God, yet many times so grossly corrupted through Idolatry and
profaneness, that the Governors thereof are called Princes of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Isa. 1. Now to purge this fountain, How many zealous Prophets did God
raise up in his time? And thus after Christ's time, when the wine of Gods Word
began to be mingled with the water of men's inventions, and all Religion was
turned into a mere Pageantry, as in Popery, God then raised up Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, and others, by whose means Christ became known again. Now
there is a great difference between a plantation, and a Reformation. A
Reformation does not pretend to make new Churches, to bring a new faith in the
world, as a plantation does, but only to file off all the rust that has been
by long custom upon the Church of God; Plantation is to make Heathens and
Pagans, Christians; but Reformation is to make degenerate Christians, who have
degenerated in their knowledge, worship and life, to make such remember their
first in^titution, such ignorance and profaneness was not at the first.

Use of Instruction, How much God may justly expect of us in England, who have
not only had a plantation of the Gospel many hundred years ago, but after a
deep apostasy, a gracious Reformation also. What manner of persons should we
be? Angli, quasi Angeli, it was said of old. Certainly, we should be so in
respect of knowledge, worship and godliness. The Christian Faith was by some
received, long before we were called English, for in the eight hundredth year
after Christ, Egbertus King of the West Saxons, having got all the dominion
into his own hands almost, made an universal sanction, that the whole Nation
should be called the English Nation, being named Brittans before. It is not my
intent to enter into that Dispute of the learned, who planted the Gospel in
England? As for the Papists, who would make one Augustine to be our Apostle, is
so ridiculous, that it cannot be believed: for there were godly Christians
already in the Island, that refused him, because he was a superstitious proud
person, saying, The Spirit of God was not in him, because there was not
humility in him. The Gospel was brought in here long before those days. Some
say, Joseph of Arimathea: Some say, that Pudeus and Linus, whom the Apostle
salutes, were Britains; For Martial in his Epigrams mentions them as
Britains. This is clear, that in Tertullians time, the Gospel was spread in
this Island, and though unknown to the whole world, yet the word of God found
it out; but to see our degeneration, it may make us astonished, especially in
ignorance, superstitious worship and profaneness. Oh, were we thus planted at
first, or were we reformed to be thus? Do not many among us live like bruit
beasts, rather than Christians? Setting aside the name, what is there either
for knowledge or life, more than is in a mere Pagan or Heathen? Oh the patience
of God that should continue the Gospel thus long amongst us!. Was there more
unworthiness in Jerusalem, in Ephesus, in other Churches, which yet God has
made desolate places? Certainly, we might well conclude, That God would remove
our Candlestick, were there not a remnant that love the Gospel, delight in it,
and labor to walk worthy of it. How can profaneness and beastly courses be
found amongst us, when the light of God has shined round about us? Bring
therefore forth fruit, meet and worthy of such an heavenly plantation, lest the
same God, that planted us, do at last pluck us up. For God he sometimes speaks
to a Land, to build it up and plant it, sometimes again to pull it up. Oh fear,
lest that curse fall upon you, yea that sentence be already come out, Cut that
unprofitable tree down, and cast it into the fire!

Appolo watered.

This is the second main particular of the ministerial imploiment of
Church Officers, To water, (...); he does a little alter the metaphor, for that
is properly to give beasts water, yet as those that have plentifully drunken,
are said, irrigari, so to give to drink, may be said to water. The Metaphor is
taken from plants to man's soul, as the Garden is, of a wilderness, planted
with sweet and precious herbs; but this is not enough, it is afterward to be
watered, else all will immediately decay: So it is here. Though we have
received the principles of Christianity, and are settled therein, yet if there
be not continual watering, and pains taking, the Church of God will presently
become like a wilderness. No Church is like Paradise at first, which being
once planted needed not any water from Heaven, but rivers came from the midst
of it, to water it, and make it fruitful. So that to water, is no more, then
to use all those ministerial helps, that Christ has appointed, that the
spiritual seed once sown, may grow up to a plentiful crop. God, Isa. 5.
compared his Church to a Vineyard, which when he had bestowed much cost on, and
for their unfruitfulnesse was resolved to destroy it, then, among other things,
he commanded, That the clouds should not rain on it. So that for God to deny
spiritual watering to a people once planted, is a sad forerunner of future
desolation. The Doctrine is,

Observe.
That it is not enough for a people once to receive the true Faith, and
principles of Religion, but they need a further watering and quickening them up
to grow.

If the Husbandman should sow his seed, and never have any rain to drop
fatness, his seed would rot under the ground. And the Gardener, who has set
his plants, has had his water-pot to cherish and refresh his dried plants. Now
as the Apostles they planted, so there were Evangelists, who did either
accompany the Apostles, or went where they had already planted, and further
instructed them. Sometimes we read Paul himself watering, where he had planted:
And it is the constant employment of Ministers, in a Church already settled, to
water; that is, to endeavor the further growth of their knowledge and graces.

First, Let us consider, Wherein this spiritual watering consists; Wherein this
spiritual watering, or further quickening of Christians does consist.
and then the grounds.

First, It lies in a more explicit and distinct instruction about the
principles of Religion already received. For there is no vessel that receives
all this heavenly liqour at first. Apollo himself was an eloquent man, and
potent in the Scriptures, yet he that watered others, did once need watering
himself; Priscilla and Aquila did further instruct him in the ways of God,
Act. 18 26. As the Sun does not come to the vertical point immediately, but
by degrees; so neither do a Church, or people presently arrive to the fullness
of knowledge in the things of Christ, but they still grow in more
understanding. Thus the Apostle prays, Ephesians. 1. for the Ephesians already
converted and enlightened, that they might have the Spirit of revelation and
wisdom, and may be able still further to know the depth and breadth of Gods
love in Christ: And the Apostle Peter commends Believers, that they did still
give heed to the Scripture, till the day star did arise in their hearts, 2
Pet. 1.19 Oh then, Who can bewail the imperfect and defective knowledge that is
every where? The eyes that should have grown clearer and clearer, are become
blinder and blinder: You consider not, that much more even about the very
principles of Religion is yet to be understood, then most do understand. The
Heathen even dying would still desire to learn and know more; how much rather
should Believers, seeing the objects to be known are so heavenly, spiritual and
necessary. The Philosopher thought a little natural knowledge about the
Heavens, better then a great deal of knowledge about the nature of sublunary
things: how much then is the supernatural knowledge of heavenly things in a
practical way to be esteemed, which will bring us to life everlasting? Know
then it is your great duty to come up to more understanding in Religion: Shall a
David that had more knowledge then his Teachers, pray yet to have his eyes
opened? Psalm. 119. What fervent and earnest prayers should thou then have, that
thou die not, and be damned in ignorance?

Secondly, This watering lies not only in advancing our knowledge, but in
giving further and clearer Arguments to confirm our faith, and to make us
unshaken and steadfast. Oh we see for want of this particular, how many reeds
there are that be shaken with every wind! They were indeed planted, but not
well rooted, and what has not a deep root, will immediately wither. Thus the
Apostle exhorts often to stand steadfast and immovable in the work of tho
Lord: 1 Cor. 15. ult.
How can that be, but by being strengthened more and more in believing. We read
of the Disciples, that sometimes when any great miracle was wrought by our
Savior, it is said, His Disciples believed, Joh. 2.11. Why, did they not
believe before? Yes, but now they were more confirmned; establishment and
confirmation either in the truth, or in godliness, is a great matter, yea it is
all in all. We read of a glorious likely building, but because it was upon the
sands, therefore it fell down immediately, and the fall was great, Mat. 7.27.
The third kind of ground miscarryed after all the hopes it gave, because it had
no deep root, Mat. 13. So that a choice part of the Ministers work, is to see,
that whatsoever faith, whatsoever holiness there is, this be so confirmed, that
it waver or wither not. We read of the Apostle going even to those places that
were already planted, that they might confirm those that believed: Alas the
things of Christ meet with so much subtilty to undermine them, and so much open
violence to prostrate them, that there needs daily confirmeing and following
them! We are subject to many strong winds, and violent blasts, that unless
deeply rooted, we cannot subsist.

Thirdly, This watering contains direction about the beauty and order of
Churches in the government thereof, when once planted. As Rome, so neither
Jerusalem is not built on a day: The Church at her Infancy is not a prepared
subject for those many duties that are required of her, especially the Church
being a society of men orderly knit together, there is need of government,
without which men instead of being Saints and Christians, would be wild beasts,
and this must come in by degrees; it is an essential Church, before it can be a
political one. Thus the Apostle Paul after he had planted this Church, yet had
not settled all things concerning the order of it, especially he bewailed that
irreverent and profane receiving of the Sacrament which was amongst them;
therefore he concludes, The rest will I set in order when I come, 1 Cor. 11.
ult. So that herein also is a great work, the laboring to instruct, and bring
people to a full conformity to all that heavenly order, and godly course of
life, which Christ has commanded: We see men have quickly submitted to the
doctrine of Christ, who yet do not in their lives to the Laws of Christ; men
may have a sound faith, but a rotten and unsound conversation. Oh this is the
blemish and reproach of Christianity to this very day; Herein is great work
still for the Ministerial employment: Though we are planted gardens, yet they
are so full of noisome weeds, and poisonous herbs, that there must be daily
inspection. Has God planted thee, and watered thee for this only, to become a
weed or a bramble? The work of the Ministry is necessary, as long as there is
one bitter root growing up amongst us: Esau a profane man is called a bitter
root, Heb. 12.15. And so indeed every wicked man is a bitter root, bitter in
himself, he is in the state of gall and wormwood, he is not a Naomi, but a
Marah; though he does not feel it, yet his soul is full of all misery, and then
he is bitter to others both actively and passively; actively in grieving, and
troubling the souls of those that are godly; and passively in being grieved at
the godly; their doings, their actions, make heavy the hearts of the godly, as
it was in Lot by the Sodomites. Now then what care is here required, that there
may be nothing in our Assemblies that may offend the pure eyes of Gods glory.

Fourthly, This watering lies in the stirring up of men to fruitfullness in
their places and relations. The end of watering is to make fruitful; and thus
all the spiritual plants in Gods garden, though they have deep root, yet need
this outward watering. Barrenness is a great sin, even amongst the godly,
they may all fear God has a controversy with them. Oh the decays and
consumptions that are upon Christians graces! Now how may these withered plants
be restored to health and strength again, but by the daily watering of the
Ministry; these spiritual clouds are to drop fatness upon them, the barren
heart under these waterings, is made like the tree planted by the rivers side;
Here are fountains to refresh the thirsty soul: How distasteful unto God
unfruitfullness and unprofitableness is, appears partly by those terrible
curses, Never fruit grow on thee more; and at another time, Cut it down, why
cumbers it the ground? And partly by that enraged anger against that servant
who hid his talent in a napkin, Mat. 25. Consider then it is not enough to
receive the Truths of God, it is not enough to be once planted by him; but
there must be fruit, and still more fruit brought forth by thee: Therefore God
as he has appointed watering, so he has an hook also to cut out all the
weeds, to prune off all the branches, and these are afflictions and
chastisements; so great a matter is it to have people fruitful and profitable
in their places, to make the best they can for God, and the advancing of his
Kingdom: At the day of Judgment, it is not commission of sins, but omission
of duties, Why there is such daily need of these quickening graces.
for which they hear that dreadful sentence of departure into everlasting
torments. In these things mainly does consist this duty of watering.

Let us consider, Why there is such daily need of those quickening means of
grace. And

First, It does arise from the heart, which is an unnatural soil to grace and
supernatural things. The temporal curse to the ground to bring forth nothing
but thorns and thistles, is likewise spiritually true in us; of it self, there
come nothing but evil thoughts, corrupt affections, distempered lusts, it is
like an hell, from whence are unquenchable sparks of lusts: Were it not
therefore for this daily watering and spiritual inspection, the soul would
immediately degenerate into a barren heath. Oh therefore call often for these
waterpots! thy graces will quickly wither, thy heart is no kindly soil: As some
grounds will bring cockle instead of wheat, such is thy heart if not daily
dropped upon, unless it be always fenced, it will bear no crop.

Secondly, The temptations that are so frequent and many, do likewise
wonderfully destroy and wither all, if this constant watering be not. As there
are Paul's to plant, and Apolloes to water, so there are also the Devils to
plant, and his instruments to water men in wickedness: Seeing therefore thou
art in a daily expense of thy oil, thy lamp will quickly go out, if there be
not daily supply; you had therefore need of quickening, need of thriving, when
there be so many obstructions, so many hindrances, all is little enough to put
thee forward; the Devil, the world, thy own heart draws thee back; therefore
thou need daily drawing forward.

Thirdly, There needs watering, because of that indispensable duty to grow. to
grow both in light and heat, to grow in head and heart; grow in the knowledge
of God, and in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. It being then a great sin to stand at a
stay, to be dwarfes always, to be Babes always, God having appointed this as
the way to grow, it behooveth thee the more diligently to wait on this watering.

Use of Exhortation. To try whether you grow up into more knowledge and grace
or no? Are ye more acquainted in the ways of Religion and Piety? Know it is
your duty not only to be planted, but to grow up exceedingly. Oh it is to be
feared that many are dead at the very root, at the very heart, all the
watering, the preaching, the exhorting makes them not stir forward! If a man
water a plant dead at the root, or a dead stump of the tree, though he do it a
thousand times over, yet no leaves or fruit will ever grow on it; so when you
see a people after much preaching, many exhortations, to be as ignorant, as
profane as ever; Oh say, these are dead at the very root, something would
sprout forth, if there were life.

Use of Admonition. To the children of God to prize the Ministry, and means of
grace. Be you as the thirsty land, and the Ordinances, like streams of water;
fruitfulness and flourishing in godliness is expressed for this end. We preach,
and you are to hear: Let the things that are dying be strengthened: Let thy
decaying love be revived. Oh how will formality and deadness trouble thee at
thy last hour; the barrenness of thy life will be terrible to thee.

But God gave the increase.

The Apostle (as you heard) does excellently join these two things togeher,
which the world is so apt to sever, The Ministry, and Gods efficacy thereby: We
may not rest upon the Ministry, so as not to depend on Gods efficacy; we may
not expect Gods efficacy, but in the Ministry. Here may be a sweet
subordination, man's corruption makes the opposition; so that this Text, as it
does divide the whole Ministerial employment in two parts, planting and
watering, so it attributes the chiefest and noblest of all to God, without
whom the other abilities are in vain: The fat in the offerings was to be given
to God, and God gives the fat to us in spiritual services; the soul and life of
all is expressed in this word (...), it is one word in the Greek, but our
English Translatours, and so the Latin read it, giving the increase: The
Metaphor is easy. As the Gardener sets his herbs, waters them, but he cannot
make them grow, he cannot make the least flower that is, though he has never
so much skill: Thus it is here, though they be Ministers of Seraphical
affections, and Cherubinical knowledge, yet they cannot make the Word to
prosper, and to increase in the hearer; it is God does that, Isa. 55.10. Isa.
61.11. There you have such similitudes; so that this latter part is an
admirable direction to look above the abilities, above the parts and gifts of
men: We think, Oh if we have such a Ministry, all would be well! whereas
Apollo and Paul cannot give increase. God only gives success to the Gospel.
Observe

That it is God only who can and will give increase and spiritual success to the
Ministerial labors in the Church.

God that at first said to the earth, which had no more natural power of it
self, then a stick or piece of wood, Increase and bring forth fruit; does also
speak to such exhortations, instructions, to convince and convert, when there
is no inward strength in them; and therefore howsoever the preaching of the
Word be compared often to rain that falls on the ground, and makes the grass to
grow; yet there is this difference: The rain works by a natural power, as a
natural cause; but the Word of God only as an instituted and appointed cause by
him. Did it work naturally, all that hear would be converted, every Sermon
would work like those of the Apostles, that brought home so many.

To open this. Consider

First, God works in and by the Ministry.
That though God only gives the increase, yet it is only in and through the
Ministry. We must not make such cavils: What use is there of Preaching? What
need of the Ministry? Men will be as profane, and as ungodly as ever, till
God change the heart; for you may as well urge, What needs the Husbandman plow,
or sow, or prepare the ground, it is God only that blesses it? No, God has
instituted means, to which he has bound us; and those that will not hear Paul
planting, or Apollo watering, may justly expect God will give no increase:
Therefore the Apostle foresaw that great evil, of forsaking the Assemblyes, the
Ordinances, and bids them take heed, as the forerunner of Apostasy, Heb. 10.25,
26. If you take a tree from the River side, where it grew and brought forth
fruit, and plant it in a wilderness, it will quickly wither.

God works on whom, and when he will.
Secondly, As God gives the increase only, so the time when, and the persons on
whom, is wholly at his good pleasure. The Lord makes the Word prosperous at one
time, and not another; sometimes it comes like fire into the bosom, it
burns thee all over; at another time thou find no operation: To some
people it is like the leaves of the tree in the Revelation, it is the healing of
the Nation, it is the healing of people, it makes the ignorant to know, the
profane to become holy, it mollifieth the hard heart, it turns a wilderness
into a garden. But to another people, it is like salt that has lost its savor,
or that makes a place more barren, it makes no relish, no taste, no
alteration. You would wonder a people should sit so long under the beams of
the Sun, and be no more colored by it; preaching and no preaching is all one
to him: this is the Lords doing; it should be not only mavelous in our eyes,
but dreadful to our ears; To some it is given to know and understand, but to
others not, Mat. 13.11.

Now let us consider why God only gives the increase; and then the ends that
God has in this.

Why God only gives the increase.
First, God only can give the increase, because he only has a sovereignty and
power over the heart. Others may speak to the ear, propound Arguments to
persuade; but to change the heart, to persuade the heart indeed, that God only
can who made the heart. Thus Noah prays or prophesies, God persuade Shem to
dwell in the tents of Japhet; God persuade him, or God will persuade him, we
translate it enlarge; as if he should say, all the men of the world, all
Arguments cannot, till God overpower his heart, Genesis 9.27. So Ezekiel. 36.36. I
will take away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh. No Potentate, no
Emperor, can say, I will give a man another heart. He may force the body, but
not change the heart. Hence it is, that the Scripture atttributes all the work
of grace; to Believe, to Repent, only to God. Oh then! lift up your hearts on
high, in every Sermon! Look up to those Hills to Heaven, from whence comes
Conversion! When the Apostles wrought Miracles, they looked up to God, and the
people, they glorified God; They were convinced none could do such things, but
God. And so, we Ministers are to look up to God, and you people, that God may
be glorified.

Secondly, God only can give the Increase, because the Increase is of spiritual
and supernatural consideration: It Is altogether Heavenly. Now, there is no
proportion between humane abilities, and heavenly graces. There is no
disposition, Inter ordinem naturae and ordinem gratiae: The order of nature,
and the oder of grace. All that the most able Ministers can do, is within the
compass of nature; but the fruits being Heavenly, must come otherwise. As in
man, though a Child has his body from the Father, yet the soul comes
immediately from God; because it is of an immaterial and immortal substance.
Thus also Faith and Repentance being immaterial Graces, though the Minister may
prepare and dispose the Subject, yet the working of them is only from God. It Is
true (indeed) that the Parts and Abilities of one Minister, may be objectively
better for Conversion, and more likely for profiting then another: They may
propound stronger Arguments to convince the Conscience: They may set those
Arguments home with greater life and vigor; as Apollo was said to be potent in
the Scripture. Thus one Minister may exceed another in Glory, as one Star
does another: Yet, God only is the efficient Cause of every good and perfect
Gift.

Thirdly, Therefore God only gives the increase, because of the deep pollution
that is in every man, who is not only blind and deaf, but dead. Now to what
purpose is an eloquent Pathetical Oration to a dead man? David that did with so
much affection, weep over dead Absalom, yet could not bring him to life. So
that the Preachers of the Word, differ from all the humane Orators, Greek and
Latin. They might by their eloquence and affections, persuade their Hearers;
for it was about Civil and Moral matters, about which men had understandings
naturally able to perceive, and wills, naturally able to choose the things
persuaded: But Preaching is about those things, to which man has no
understanding to believe, nor no heart to receive. But God must give the
hearing ear, and the seeing eye, else we miscarry. So you are not to come to
Sermons, as to humane Orations: Your own understanding, your own natural Parts,
are enemies, and Adversaries to good and holy things of God. There are two
Parts of wisdom (said Lactantius) The former, to understand what things are
false. 2. The second, to know what things are true. We are to be untaught,
undeceived, before we come to know heavenly things. So that all is of God, both
the Word to be heard, and the Ear to hear. Both the Word to be believed, and
the heart to believe. In the next place,

Let us consider the Ends, Why all increase must be of God only: And that is,
To preach Humility both to the Preacher, and to the People. The Apostle
carries it wholly for this end, That he that glories, may glory in the Lord.
And, That no flesh should glory in his presence.

First, The Minister. That Peter, who had so many thousands converted by his
Sermon, that Paul, who was so exalted by God, that he might not be lifted up
above measure. For alas, What have they done? It Is God that gives the increase.
It has been the rock upon which many have splitted themselves, that they have
had followers and admirers. The Manichees (said their Master) did (...), pour
out Manna. The Donatists would swear By the head of Donatus, as people do
solemnly By God, to show how they reverenced him. Now that man (though greatly
exalted by God) may be humble, he has reserved all success to himself. It Is
not thou, that has made the blind to see, or the lame to go: It Is God that
teaches to profit. And it is said, They shall be all taught of God, Joh. 45.
viz. Converted; because man he gives the Ministry and outward service only.
Hence it is, that God makes many eminent Preachers, as he did some eminent
Women go barren: They see not the fruit of their labors; they have spent
themselves in vain: They go Childless to the grave: They cannot say, Behold me
and the Children whom thou have given me. Again

Secondly, It teaches the People also to glorify God, not to rest in the
parts, and gifts of men. As Michal said, Now God will bless me, because I have
a Levite in the house. So we are apt to say, Now we shall go to Heaven; Now we
shall have salvation, because we have such Preaching. It is not enough to be
affected with, and admire the gifts of Ministers: They may ravish you, they may
greatly move you; but you resting on these merely, find no success at all. As
it is said, We do not know Christ after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. After humane
considerations: So neither are we to know the Ministry, or preaching after such
carnal respects. That is admirable preaching, that is an excellent Sermon,
which God makes spiritually to prosper in thy soul.

Thirdly, Therefore God only gives the success, that so we may seek and pray to
him, and do all those things that God may be pleased with. We may easily
provoke God to turn Bread into Stones, and a pleasant Poole, into a Wilderness.

What we must do, that God may give the increase.
Now, that God may give increase, do these things.

First, Bewail bypast unthankfulness, and unfruitfulness. O Lord, How often
have I been an hearer? How long have I gone to Sermons? Yet, What a barren
wilderness is my heart? I say, bewail this: For, nothing provokes God more, to
curse the Ministry unto thee, then unfruitfulness. The ground that often
receives rain, and brings no fruit, is nigh unto cursing, Heb. 6.7. Why is
Isaiah sent with that dreadful Message, Isa. 6. To make men's eyes blind, and
their hearts fat, that they might not be converted; but because seeing, they
did not see, and hearing, they did not understand.

Secondly, Love that Preaching, which will more discover thy self to thy self.
Which will acquaint thee with thy own deformities. As sore eyes are afraid of
the light, so many men, have so much guilt within, and live in so many secret
corruptions, that they dare not have the Word come with all its might upon
them. No wonder then, if God bless it not with increase, when thou love it
not, and bring it not home to thee. Can the plaster cure, if thou art
afraid to lay it to the sore? They that are delivered up to Antechrist, were so
punished, because they did not receive the truth in the love of it, 2 These.
2.10. Yea, the very Heathens were delivered up to those unnatural lusts,
because they detained the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. How then will God
punish thee, who hate and kickest at those things that would convert thee? Am
I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth (says Paul) Gal. 4.16. Those
things that have the best operation, have many times the unpleasant taste. Oh,
say then, let the Sermon smite me; let it tell me of all that ever I did; I
shall love it the better.

Thirdly, If thou would have God give the increase, come not pr^possessed
with thy own righteousness; with thy own good heart. Our Saviors preaching had
no success, though in him were the Treasures of all wisdom, because his
Hearers were those that justified themselves. The humble he will teach his way.
Laodicea, that thought she wanted nothing, was furthest from cure. Do not think
I am well enough already; I need no change. Say, oh my soul, What art thou come
hither for to day! Is it not to see that evil and folly in thy flesh, thou
never perceivedst? Art thou not yet to lay the very foundation of godliness? It
makes all out of order?

Use 1. Is it God that gives the increase? Then we Ministers are not to be
inordinately cast down, if people receive no divine stamp on them. If we water
not; If we plant not; then, woe be to us: But when both is done, yet if there be
no increase, that is our misery, not our sin. God will give to every Minister
according to his work not according to his success. I have labored more
abundantly, says Paul. He does not say, he had success more then all others.
Did not the Prophets; yea, Christ himself complain for want of this spiritual
increase? It cannot but grieve us, to see people damn themselves: Yet, How can
we hinder a wilful people from destruction?

Use 2. To the people. Sigh and mourn unto God in earnest Prayers for this
increase. How terrible will it be, if the want of profiting be in your selves?
You do not what God would have you. If the Patient distemper himself wilfully,
all the Physic in the world cannot cure him. Know, there is some heavy curse,
why after all the planting and watering, yet God gives no increase. Oh!
consider, thy account is drawing on! Thy decay, and the Day of Judgment is
approaching: God will not let his Word fall to the ground. It will be for life,
or for death. Sigh then, and strike upon the breast and thigh: Cry out, Oh! my
leanness, my leanness! My barrenness, my barrenness! Help Lord, for I am
perishing! Pray to God, that the Blessing upon man kind, to Increase and
multiply, may be fulfilled on every Sermon, for thy good.

But God gave the increase.

We have (out of the former part) handled the twofold ministerial Employment
of Church Officers, to Plant and Water: We continue a further amplification of
the peculiar Operation, attributed unto God in all this; with that opposite
distinction. But God gave the increase. The Metaphor (as you have heard) is
taken from natural things, where though the industry and skill of the Gardener
and Husbandman is required, yet God gives all the Increase: (As is more to be
showed.) Now, this follows, a minori ad majus: If in natural things, the
Husbandman cannot make an Apple or Cherry, or the least grain of Corn; much
less in spiritual things can he make the nature of Grace and goodness. He
cannot work the heart to believe, though he make a sound in the ear. Yea, it is
good to observe, that God in this spiritual industry, does more give the
Increase, then in natural. For in all the fruit and profit of natural things,
God does not exclude nature from some kind of co-efficiency, as the earth has
some inward power to help to the producing of the fruit thereof: But in this
spiritual increase, God does wholly exclude all natural ability. Grace does not
fructify by the Ministry, as Herbs and Corn do in the ground; for, the ground
is the Mother, and has a kind of vivifical influence into them. But here, God
works all and solely. So, that neither the Ministry without, or the natural
power and freewill of man within, has any joint efficacy with God. And
although the Apostle says, We are workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1. that
is not to be understood of the immediate efficiency of grace, for that comes
from him only, as the Beams of light comes immediately from the Sun: But in
respect of the outward Ministry, they make the external application of the
remedy; but the power of grace, gives the quickening. Even as men may say on
the contrary by sin, Original corruption, that plants sin; temptations,
they water it, and the Devil, he gives the increase. So then, it is not the
learning, the eloquence, the efficacy of the Ministers words, but Gods secret
and invisible power, which does accompany it, that makes a glorious change.
From whence observe what was formerly taken notice off, but further to be
enlarged.

That it is God only, who makes the Ministry, and all Spiritual Means of Grace
successful and prosperous.

If God cloathe the grass of the field, and make the Lillies to grow, how much
more does he cause the Ministry to fructify and bear fruit? At the first
creation, God gave the word of Command, which works to this very day;
Increase and multiply. So it is here, God does all, from the beginning to the
end of Grace. If we cannot turn the color of an hair, much less the torrent
and custom of lives. If this had been in the Prophets power, Jeremy, Isay, and
others, they had not made such complaint for their barren Ministry as they did.

To clear this, Consider

Wherein God gives the Increase.
Wherein this work of God, to give Increase, does consist. And

First, In that spiritual Revelation and Illumination or opening of the eyes,
whereby the mind understands and perceives the things of God. The word is
compared to light, only God by this works above all light. For the Sun,
though it gives light, yet it does not give a blind man eyes. He that cannot
see the Sun, the Sun (though never so visible) will not give him eyes: But
now God by the Word, does not only propound light, but gives inward light: That
the soul cries out with more joy, then that blind man cured by Christ. For
now, it knows what it did not know: Now he sees terrible objects before his
eyes, as Balaam at last did. If he had gone further, he had perished in the pit
irrecoverably. A greater work then it is, and mighty from God the Father of
Spirits, when a man can say, O Lord, I was as blind, as senseless, as obstinate
as any! Yet, Oh! the glorious light of the Gospel, that has shined in my dark
heart! This then, is a part of Divine Increase, when God makes the morning
Star to rise in thy soul. Thou that once did not perceive thy own misery,
or Gods mercy. Thou did not either know thy Disease, or the Remedy; Have now
found God saying, Let there be light, upon the dark confusion of thy soul.
Should thou hear a thousand and thousand of powerful Sermons, yet thou
perceivest, know, and understandest nothing at all experimentally, till God
give this seeing eve. Therefore you must know, the Scripture speaks a strange
Paradox to humane reason: Having eyes, they see not; ears, they hear not;
hearts, they perceive not. That which the Scripture attributes to dumb Idols,
it applies to every natural man. Has God given thee a spiritual sight? Art
thou not rather like the Owl, that sees in the night, but not in the day?
Thou have understanding in worldly earthly things: Thou can tell how to make
thy wealth and earthly advantages to good, but thou have no knowledge in
spiritual things. Who would think it possible, under so many Instructions,
Informations, Convictions, that thou should be so blind, so sottish? but God
has not given any Increase to thee. Oh! though God give thee outward increase;
he makes the Lands, and the Cattle, and the Corn to yield increase, but if
not the Ministry to be likewise so to thee, though thou blessest thy self, yet
God curses thee!

Secondly, Gods giving increase, lies in removing the negative incapacity, and
the positive contrariety in all men's heart to the Word preached. As the
Husbandman, he first prepares the ground, by stocking up all those Briars and
thorns, and removing all the stones that lie in the way, which would hinder
the Corns growth: So it is here, God takes away all that cursed and serpentine
nature which is in thee. Thou art naturally a Beast, a Devil; and, till God
change thy nature, thou show thy self no better to the Means of Grace. Look
upon the Prophets and Apostles in their Ministry; Were men any better then mad
Dogs, and Lions against them, till God changed them? The Prophets did plough
and sow upon rocks, till God made their Hearers the good ground. The Ministers
of God cannot do otherwise: All men's hearts are rocks. You may sooner get water
out of hard flints, then any godly sorrow or compunction out of their hearts:
No wonder then, if God only give the increase, because he only can alter the
nature of men's hearts. He makes the stony heart, melting and bleeding: He
makes the rough and violent, tame and mild. Oh then! in all our Preaching and
soul-Administrations, look up higher, still cast your eyes upon God! Man does
not live by natural bread, but by the Word of Gods mouth: So, neither by the
Spiritual Bread. O Lord, make our hearts, other hearts; our affections, other
affections.

Thirdly, God gives the increase, when he makes the Word preached, to take
root and settling in men's hearts. Our Savior purposely takes notice of this, in
his Parable of the Sower that went out to sow, and the miscarriage of the most
hopeful crop, was because it had no rooting, Mat. 13. While the Word is in the
ear, or floating only in the affections, it is like seed on the grounds Surface;
there will be no good of it, till it take inward rooting. This is called
dwelling in a man: Let the Word dwell in your hearts, Col. 3.16. Let not our
Sermons be as you your selves are, pilgrims and strangers: God many times
threatens the people of Israel to root them out of the Land, as men do Trees
and Plants, which is an irrecoverable destruction, when the root is pulled up,
there is no hope: And one main cause was, because the Word of God did not take
any deep rooting in them. Think it not then enough, to hear it; no, nor to
write it, or repeat it, or confer of it; but let it be rooted in thy vital
parts. If the ground you till and sow, should yield no more increase, then thy
heart does to God, thou would give over thy labor as a vain thing: And one
main reason of this barrenness is, those things go not home to your hearts,
they reach not to the inward parts.

Fourthly, God gives increase, when he makes this rooted Word to grow. For as
there is in Corn, first the blade, and then the ear; it comes to perfection by
degrees. So it is here; the Word carries a man up by degrees toward Heaven;
he is first a dwarf, then a giant; first a babe, then a man; first carnal, then
spiritual. Oh! it is much, that thy profiting should no more appear! But we see,
God, even when he has planted a Vinyeard, hedged it in, made the Clouds to
drop on it, yet it may bring forth wild grapes, for grapes, Isa. 5.4. Oh! how
angry is God with our Assemblies that does not give this increase. The Church
sadly complained, Why Gods ang^r did smoke against the Sheep of his Pasture,
because of temporal d^solation, Psalm 74.1. But this is more terrible.

Now, this growth that God give^h, it may be either Intensive or Extensive*
Intensive, so God gives increase, when those graces, that are already planted
in the soul, are made more lively and fervent. This may be called a particular
personal Increase. Men are not only to enquire how God gives increase in the
general, but how in particular to their souls: Art thou made more believing,
more holy, more humble then before? The Children of God do not with that fear
and trembling consider, Whether God gives the Ministry such increase to their
particular, or no. Oh it is a sad thing to see the decays and abatements that
are even of godly men's graces! When God is the same God, the Word is the same
Word, there is as much cause to grow as ever. Consider, lest thou live in such
sins, that make God cause the Ministry to be barren to thee. Or else it may
grow extensively, and so God gives increase, when the Word spreads it self
further, to more persons or Nations. Those that do not mind, or regard heavenly
things, do now lay them deeply to heart; and the people that sat in darkness,
have now light shining on them. Thus our Savior compared the Gospel to a grain
of mustard seed, Mat. 13.13. the least of all seeds, which yet in time grow
very great: and Gods power and goodness has been very remarkable herein,
making the Word to thrive and prosper in those parts, and amongst that people,
where the earthly, or material sword could make no entrance. In these respects,
God gives the increase. The work may be of men, but the success is of God.

Why God only can give the increase?
Now the Grounds, Why God only gives increase, may be,

First, Because even in natural blessings, and outward mercies, success is
attributed to God, not to men, much more in spirituals. Thus the Psalmist
attributes to God, That the ridges are full of corn, that cattle are fruitful
and do not miscarry. God he keeps the key of Heaven, and gives earthly
blessings, as he pleases. Thus the blessing of the Lord that makes rich, Prove.
10.22. And the battle is not many times to the strong, or the race to swift, or
wealth to the wise, Eccl. 12.9. but all is as God orders it. If then these
ordinary mercies, which are wholly natural, are only by God, he gives life, he
gives wealth, he gives strength, how much more does this hold in supernaturals?

Secondly, God only can give increase, Because he only has the supreme power
and dominion over men's hearts. We are teachers to the ear, God is a teacher of
the heart. God is the only searcher of the heart, he knows the thoughts and
inward affections of men; and so God only makes and fashioneth the hearts of
men. Let us then look up with more earnest prayer to God, that his Spirit would
move upon these waters. Not only the Law, but the Gospel is but the letter
merely, and the administration of death, if the Spirit of God does not enliven
it. John 11.
Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died, says she to Christ,
So Lord, if thou art in the Sermon, thy power, and thy presence, then it had
not so often miscarried.

Object. But you may say, If God give the increase, Why then does not the Word
bear fruit in every place? Are any hearts too strong for the Lord? Cannot he
turn a wilderness into a Paradise? Has not he the key to open the hearts of
men, and none can shut them?

Answ. I answer, A people by their sins may provoke God to depart from his
Ordinances. The Temple in Jerusalem was dedicated unto God, and he made a
gracious promise to be there present, yet the Jews did so long rebel against
him, that he wholly left the Temple, and would no more answer them by Vrim, o^
Thummim. Lay then the blame where it is; say not, If we had lived in the
Apostles days, had seen their miracles, certainly we should have increased in
all grace; but we have not such preaching as then was; we have not such
miracles, we have not Apostles. Oh it was not those great things that wrought
grace, but God by them, and the same God can do it by weak and unlikely means!
Conclude then, If the Word then be not a Word of life, a soul-saving Word to
thee, t is for some sin or other upon thee. Thou have grieved the Spirit of
God; God is angry with thee; Qu. What means must we use that God may give this
increase?
and therefore thou art like the mountains of Gilboa upon whom no Dew fell.

Secondly, You may ask, If God only give increase, What means may we take to
have God bless us in this manner? And

First, Do thou highly esteem and prize the Ministry God has appointed, expect
not Gods increase, where Apollo does not water. The Apostle (you heard) does
admirably join both these together, man's Ministry, and Gods Efficacy. Think not
then contemptibly and vilely of the means of grace. But

Secondly, Lean not on it too much, as if that of it self were able for any
spiritual good. He that waters, and he that planteth are nothing, (viz.)
comparatively and relatively to God. We are apt to run from one extreme to
another. Some despise Ordinances, and some rely on them, and not Christ in
them. Christ said of his own flesh, that it did not profit, it was the spirit
that quickened, John 6.63. How much rather may we say, it is not the Ordinance,
but the Spirit by it that does quicken.

Thirdly, Would thou have God give the increase, Fear then the miscarriage of
it. Be in daily trembling, lest the Word should not prosper to thee. Look upon
it as the greatest judgment, to hear, and hear often, and yet find no
spiritual progress. The Apostle gives a terrible example and comparison in
this case, Heb. 6.7. and says, Such are nigh unto cursing. Oh say! Lord, I
tremble, lest I am nigh to an everlasting curse, because I find no increase.

Fourthly, Make much of that, which God has bestowed on thee already. To him
that has shall be given, Mat. 25.29. The good hearer is compared, to new born
babes, that greedily sucks down the milk, 1 Pet. 2.2. Why should God give any
more increase, when thou have abated from that former efficacy and vigor of
grace? We judge famine and decays of trading, hard and sad times; but when God
suffers a spiritual decay, and withering on men's souls, this is more terrible.

Verse 7. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God that gives the increase.
THese words are a Conclusion or Inference from the former Proposition: They
that plant only and water, and do not give the increase, they must not be
rested on, nor set up as Masters; neither are factions to be made for them: But
thus Apollo and Paul and all the eminent ones do, and no more. Ergo.

Therefore in this Conclusive Assertion, let us consider, 1. The Subject. 2.
The Predicate. 3. The opposite Proposition.


The Subject is twofold, He that planteth, and, He that waters. You have
heard, these are such that lay down the foundations of Religion, and afterward
build thereon. This has been already handled.

2. The Predicate, Is not any thing. Any thing here, as in other places,
signifies no great thing; it is not able to do those things which the credulous
Disciples are many times apt to believe: And therefore when he says, They are
nothing, it is to be understood comparatively or relatively. It is not any
thing without God. The Ministers of God are like Trumpets, they make no sound,
if breath be not breathed into them. They are like Ezekiels wheels, they move
not, unless the Spirit move them. They are like Elisha's servant, whose
presence does no good, except Elisha his spirit be there also. Now although
this verse and the former seem to contain no new matter, yet as we must not
think the holy Ghost has vain repetitions or battalogies; so neither will the
enlarging of the same matter prove a needless repetition to you, but I shall
still amplify it in new considerations. Observe,

Observa.
That the best and most able Ministry is nothing without Gods power giving the
increase.

As in natural things, the Sun could not shine, the fire burn, without God
the Author of nature; so neither in supernatural things can the Ministry
enlighten or convert, without God the Author of grace. You might wonder, why
the Apostle should in several verses press this point; But the necessity of it
may justly challenge a frequent inculcation. For even in our days, we shall
see, that one main reason, why Gods word does not pluck up all sin by the
root, and plant all godliness among a people, it is because men pray not to
God, seek not to God; they provoke him by unfruitfulnesse, by a profane
contempt of the means of grace, and so he turns even a garden into a
wilderness to them, and bread into stones.

To open this,

What the Apostle does not mean, in saying, The Ministry is nothing?
First, Let us consider, What the Apostle does not mean, in saying, The Ministry
is nothing. And

First, He does not mean, as if the Officers of the Church were not in their
way and place necessary; for then the Apostle in the same tongue should
contradict himself, for he says, We are workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6.1.
Yea, this very Epistle might thereby be accounted nothing, because, though Paul
wrote the Epistle, yet it is God that gives the success unto it. They are
therefore in themselves the necessary institutions and means of grace. And we
are commanded to hear them, to wait on their Ministry, to submit unto them in
the Lord. Do not therefore conclude from this, the uselesnesse and
unnecessarinesse of preaching Gods word. For in other places, when the
Scripture speaks absolutely, glorious and absolute effects are attributed unto
it; and it is called no less than the Kingdom of Heaven. And if there be so
much ado for an outward Kingdom, and earthly greatness, how much rather
should this be prized and received?

Secondly, When the Apostle calls the Ministry nothing, the meaning is not, as
if it were not sufficient in its kind, to work those things for which it is
appointed, otherwise this would reflect upon the wisdom of God. For as in
natural things, Frustra est illa potentia, quae nunquam reducitur actum. So in
supernaturals also. As we say, the Sun is sufficiently able to enlighten the
whole world, yet blind men would never get any good, if the Lord did not open
their eyes. So it is here, The Ministry faithfully discharged, is sufficient to
enlighten the minds, and convert the hearts of all that hear. No wickedness so
powerful, no sin so rooted, but that is able to conquer and remove it; yet
unless God mould the heart, and give understanding, they perish in their
sins, and take no warning.

Thirdly, When the Apostle says, They are nothing, This is to be understood of
the Ministers of the Gospel, and preaching of it, as well as the Ministers of
the Law, and preaching that. For you might say, It is no wonder to hear Paul
say, That the Law is a dead letter, that the ministration of the Law is
killing, 2 Cor. 3.6. but to have this true also, that the Preachers of the
Gospel are of themselves but dead and killing, this seems very hard. Now to
answer this, know, That both the preaching of the Law and the Gospel, if Christ
do not enliven the Word, are dead letters, or dead preaching. Hence those
complaints, of Stretching out the hands in vain, and laboring in vain, are
taken up in the New Testament, Romans 10.16.21.
as well as the Old. And experience teaches us, That where Christ is preached,
and the Gospel in a glorious manner promulged, yet it is but dead preaching to
many. This voice does not make them come out of the grave of sin; only
herein the Law and the Gospel differ, that the matter of the Law pressed will
condemn us, none being ever able to fulfill it. Yea, the godly cannot do all
things the Law requires, and so the Law is a killing letter to him. But the
Gospel, that comes with a moderation, where the graces of Gods Spirit are,
though weak and imperfect, there, through Christ their weakness is forgiven.
So that the preaching of the Gospel to a soul oppressed for sin, is like the
year of Jubilee to poor servants and indebted prisoners. Howsoever then the
preaching of the Gospel is said to be the ministration of life, and of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. yet that is not to be understood simply of it self; but as
accompanied with the power of God. Hence the Gospel is said to be the power of
God to salvation, Romans 1.16. the power of God, not of man. It Is not man's
wisdom, that our faith is grounded on. Thus much for what the Apostle means
not.

What he positively means, or infers, are, First, That it is not in the
power or choice of the Minister, to make it effectual. He cannot bid or command
the Word to work as he pleases, for then the guilt of all men's souls, and the
damnation of all would lie upon us* As our Divines say to the Papists, when
they brag, The Pope has the Keys of power above all things, not only in
earth, but in purgatory; Why then does he suffer those souls to lie tormented
there, as he does? So it would be here, Why are any damned? Why do any lie in
their sins, if the Ministry by its own power could convert them? No, the
Ministers of God they can only pray, they can mourn and grieve in secret to see
the miscarriage of the Word, and the wilful resolution in men to destroy their
own souls; they can mourn over the dead, but they cannot recover them to life.

Secondly, The Apostle by this intends, that both the Ministers and the people
should keep themselves in their due bounds. The Ministers, though never so
eminent, though never so much applauded by a numerous company of Disciples, yet
they cannot make one black hair white; They cannot say of any people, obeying
the Gospel, That we by our own power have made such believe. It Is true, they
are said to be Fathers, and to beget men to the truth; but that is only
instrumentally and metaphorically, by external application of the Word, not
internal power; for so we have only one Father in Heaven. Pride and ambition
do easily breed in the most eminent parts, as worms in the sweetest fruit; but
when they shall consider, that they are nothing, and God is all, this is a good
way to humble them; and then the people hereby are also taught much moderation.
Some men's persons they are apt to admire, Not such a man in the world! Oh but
what a great God is there in Heaven, without whom this man is nothing! This is
spiritual Idolatry, and that worship, which is to be given to Christ only, you
give to instruments.

Lastly, In making the Ministry nothing, and God all; The Apostle would have
both Minister and people in their Ministry, to have our hearts and eyes up to
Heaven. As the Bird after every drop of water it sips, looks up presently to
Heaven, so should thou. Lord, what the Minister has spoken, what he has
pressed, oh set it home with a blessing! Cause it to come like rain upon the
new mowed grass! Oh the careless and profane hearing that is every where!
This makes God give no increase; you matter it not, you believe not, you
tremble not under it, you do not earnestly pray about it. If a man have a leg
or arm to be cut off, oh you desire all you meet with, to pray about it; Why?
because it may cost him his life. How much rather about every Sermon, every
Duty that is preached, should thou pray, and again pray? Oh, it may be the
damning of my immortal soul, to miscarry therein!

Quest. But how may we address our selves to hear, and to the Ministry, so
that God may make them something to us?

Answ. To be made something, is, when the Word does greatly wound thy heart, or
comfort thee, when it makes a noise and a pain at thy very bowels, when it
makes thee sick at the very heart; when it makes thee cry out, Oh me, a
wretched sinner, what have I done? Whither shall I go? Ah wretch that I am! In
what a woeful condition am I plunged? Sin is on one side, hell on the other,
the wrath of God above me, and all the curses of the Law round about me. Then
it is something, then our words fall like hot burning coals upon your
consciences; you cannot sleep, nor rove, but tremble under it. Now this will be
done these ways:

Directions, how to hear the Word.
First, Make it a real and conscientious matter, to pray unto God to give
increase. As to the woman our Savior said, According to thy faith, so be it
unto thee: So according to thy prepared prayer says God, this Sermon, and this
duty shall be blessed unto you. As your cruise is fitted, so will God pour in
oil. If we then complain, that the Ministry works no more notable effects, that
it makes no more transcendent alterations, judge whether the blame lie not on
thy own self. Prayer is that which moves with God. Prayer is that in which the
Sermon rolled, produces suitable operations. The Word of God is a two-edged
sword; but prayer makes it penetrate, that sets God on work, and God sets his
Word on work. A man much in prayer, is always much in profiting. As the
Preacher is to pray (Christ prayed much in the night, as he taught much in the
day) so the hearer he also must pray much.

Secondly, Exercise strong and divine acts of faith, this will make the
Ministry something to thee. The Word profited not, because it was not mingled
with faith, Heb. 4.2. or as some interpret, because by faith they were not
mixed (as it were) with the Word, they were not incorporated into it, and who
has believed our report? Romans 10. Faith is that which comes at first by
hearing, and then afterward makes hearing profitable. The Atheism and unbelief
which is on men's hearts make the Word without efficacy, such are profane
mockers. As you see, they despised the Prophets that often said, The burden of
the Lord, the burden of the Lord. Men believe not the things preached to be
Gods truth, that they are Gods word, that they will be made good, whether they
will or no; they are living words, and sure words, and faith only lays the
first foundation of this spiritual building, believe the threatening, and thou
dare no more gainsay it.

Thirdly, Lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, Jam. 1 21. If Aristotle
thought not a young man a fit Auditour for his Ethics, much less is a propane
beast, wallowing in his filth fit for the Word. The ground must have all the
briars and thorns pulled up, ere the seed sown can bring forth any fruit. No
lust, no sin lived in, has ears to hear. When the Law was to be promulged,
what washings and preparations were there for several days together? Thou that
come to the Ministry with all thy goar and filth upon thee, thou art a
loathsome and an abominable object. Do men use to sow in bogs and quagmires? So
neither does the Word thrive in men of loose and dissolute lives. The Prophet
in an indignation at the sinfulness of his people, cries out, Hear, o
Heavens, and hearken, o Earth! Isa. 1.2. as if those insensible creatures would
more attend, than some men.

Use of Exhortation. Labor to find the Ministry something, some great thing,
some terrible thing, some comfortable thing to thee. Oh, how many are there to
whom it is nothing! They make nothing of any Sermon they hear; yea, and people
generally delight in such a Ministry, that brings nothing to them. They love
not, when it is like fire, like a two-edged sword; they love not, when it
troubles and disquiets them for sin; the more it is nothing, and passes away
as nothing, the more contented they are. Oh people prepared for destructon! Oh
people hated by God! For wherein does God show his love more to a people, then
by causing the Word to be like fire in the bowels? Those whom God loves, they
find the Ministry efficacious and vigorous: they find it to come with power
and authority: they cry out great is the power of the Lord. Oh how it searches,
how it tries, how it convinces, how it conquers, nothing an stand before it!

Verse 8. Now he that planteth, and he that waters, are one.
THe Apostles scope is as you have heard to prevent factions and divisions,
both in Preachers and hearers; to unite them together in love and agreement;
for which he has used several Arguments. And this eighth Verse begins a new
Medium to prove the necessity of concord, both among the Ministers themselves
and the people: What is said of men joined in earthly power, Erunt
insuperabiles, si inseperabiles; the same is true both of the Officers and
members in the Church of God. Now the Argument the Apostle presses, is to this
effect, Those that are one ought not to be divided, either by themselves or by
their hearers; But all the Officers in God^ Church, whether those that plant or
water, they are one: Therefore they ought not to be divided.

So that you see, though there is diversity of gifts and employmenss; yet they
all agree in one; it is unity therefore among Ministers and the people, that is
made the ground of concord: This would be a very necessary subject in these
times of multiplied divisions, it being very hard now a days to say, He that
waters, and he that planteth are one: But I shall pass it over briefly in one
Sermon. Now this phrase, They are one, is not to be understood essentially, as
if they were one nature; in which sense 1 John 5. it is said, There are three
that bear witness is heaven, and these three are one. Nor secondly are they one
in respect of labor and worth; No, Paul labored more abundantly then they
all; and as the stars differ from one another; so do the Ministers of God in
worth and ability: Therefore the Apostle prevents such thoughts, by the words
appendant, Every man shall receive according to his own labor: Vnum sunt non
individuo, non gradu, non donis, non vocatione, non autoritate, non tempore,
non labor, nec non maerore, says Baldwin on the place. But they are said to
be one in regard of the scope and end for which the Ministry is appointed,
viz. to gather a Church unto God, and to build them up in says and godliness.
Observe

That although there is diversity and variety in the gifts of the Ministers,
yet they all ought to agree in one. Observe. Ministers should agree in one.


They are to have the same mind, the same ends, the same mouth: Hence is that
expression, According as he has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets,
which were from the beginning, Luke 1.70. All the Prophets ever since the world
began, had but one mouth; He does not say the mouths, but the mouth: To show
there was no contrariety, no opposition, but all agreed in this. Thus it should
be, the mouth of the Ministers of Christ; they should go the same way, one
should not preach contrary to the other, one should not destroy what the other
affirms. Hence our Savior did so earnestly pray, That his Disciples might be
one, Joh. 17. For what a scandal and offense would it have been, if they who
were to be Teachers of the Word, and to lay the foundation of the Gospel,
should not have agreed among themselves? So that whereas the Apostle pressing
unity, Ephesians 4.4, 5. does reckon up several kinds of unities, One body, one
spirit, one hope, one Lord, one faith, one Baptism; so we may add one
Ministry; so that divisions are a great argument of weakness, and of error,
for truth cannot be divided, is not contrary to it self, as error is: not that
unity is a note of the true Church, as Papists plead, who yet have little cause
to boast of it; especially not unity in matters that are not fundamental, and
necessary. The Apostle supposes that, when he says, If any be otherwise
minded, the Lord will reveal even this also to him, Phil. 3.15.

To open this: The Ministry ought to be one,

They should agree in Doctrine.
First, In respect of doctrine; and true doctrine, that is the soul and life of
all, 1 Timothy 1.3. Paul lays a charge, that they do not (...), teach another
doctrine. Oh it is a sad prognostique of ruin, when some Ministers preach one
doctrine as necessary to salvation; others another: now the true doctrine is
revealed in the Word, and whatsoever is another from that, is not grounded
there, that is to be rejected: Yea the Apostle would have us anathematize an
Angel from heaven that should bring any other doctrine, Gal. 1.8. And John,
would not have us so much as receive them in the house, or bid them God speed,
2 John ver. 10, 11. and who does so, he says, is partaker of all his evil
deeds. So then the Ministry ought to be one in respect of doctrine; to preach
one God, one Christ, one Faith, one way to heaven; for they are not to be
inverters, but keepers only of heavenly doctrine: Keep that good thing
committed to thy trust, said the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.14.

2. In their end and scope.
Secondly, There ought to be unity in regard of their end and scope. They all
ought to shoot at the same mark, which is twofold; 1. The glory of God, to set
up God and Christ in their Congregations: Ambition, pride, self-seeking, this
has always made divisions, for this has made men set up themselves, and not
Christ. Oh what a comfort, and glorious sight would it be, to see the Ministry
not gratifying parties, not making interests, but affectionately advancing the
glory of God, though they be accounted as the off scouring of the world! Paul
he gave us this example, and we are to follow him. The second end in which they
are to agree, is the conversion of men, and edifying of them up in faith and
godliness. If this be our end, that will quickly dispell all other things that
obtrude thmselves; the salvation of men's souls, and tender bowels herein, would
quickly make all one; but when men do not agree in the end, it is no wonder if
they are contrary also in the means; when we desire to preach our own notions,
and our own opinions, more then to procure your salvation; it is no marvel if
there be as many opinions as there are Ministers. So then these two things
would wonderfully unite, Gods glory, and the salvation of men's souls; and all
our preaching, studying, and laboring, ought to be for this.

3. In Affection.
Thirdly, There should be unity in affections, to love one another, to bless God
for the abilities and gifts of one another. Envy and pride is apt to get even
amongst the best: You see Christ's own Disciples, they were striving who should
be greatest, and one ambitiously affected to be over another; and even in those
pure Apostolical times, you may read of a Diotrephes, that loved pre-eminence
above his brethren, he was not according to his name, for he was not nourished
and taught by Christ to do so: Our Savior foreseeing what mischief this would
bring to his Church, does again and again press love among those that were to
labor in his Church. It was a gracious expression of Calvin concerning Luther,
who was an hot man, and apt to break out in violent expressions: Oh says
Calvin, I honor Luther as an eminent servant and instrument of God, though he
should call me a Devil a thousand times over. When our Savior had compared his
Disciples to salt, to show it was not his meaning they should be salt to one
another, he says, Have salt in your selves, and peace one with another, Mar
9.50. there must be salt and peace. Oh but as it is said of Reuben, so may we
say, for the divisions of the Ministers, and the divisions of the people are
great thoughts of heart.

Now to amplify this we shall show how sad a temptation it is upon the Church
of God, when the Ministry is not one, either in doctrine, ends or affections.
The sad effects of dis union in the Church.
And then what people should do in such cases.

First, When the Ministry is not one, this is apt in the first place to beget
atheism, and irreligion in the people. They begin to think that Religion is
nothing but a matter of imagination, or invention; or else that there is no
such thing, and therefore they will regard it no more, they will look after it
no more. Oh woe be to the world because of offenses in this kind! He that makes
a division from the true doctrine, or true ends of the Ministry; he had better
never have been born; he that is a firebrand here, may fear to be a firebrand
in hell: How many Atheists and profane scoffers may thou make by this
division of thine?

Secondly, Where there is not this unity, it does much grieve and unsetle the
hearts of the godly. They know not what to do; they cannot tell what to take
to; such godly men say it is a sin, others as godly say it is not a sin: Now
to those that are tender, and would not sin for an whole world, this is a
very racking and torturing of their consciences: Oh what shall they do!

Thirdly, When there is not this unity, profaneness and ungodliness does the
more increase; godliness does exceedingly decay in the power of it. For while
the Ministers should all, as one man, labor to destroy the kingdom of Satan,
to discourage impiety, to make the heart of the wicked sad, that he may return
from his evil way: They commonly le^ve this, and all their preaching is to
maintain those particular opinions, and to set up that particular way, which
they walk in. Now we shall see the Apostle takes off much from such
controversal disputes, in which the essence of godliness does not consist. As
the kingdom of heaven is not in meats and drinks, but in joy, and peace, and
righteousness, Romans 14.17. so it is good to have the heart established with
grace, and not with meats, Heb. 14 9 and in other places, the Apostle calls
those things vain, which do not edify; Not that the least truths of God are to
be neglected, yea all things are to be tried, but this should not be the main:
the one thing necessary is to seek the kingdom of heaven, and the
righteousness thereof.

Lastly, These divisions do wonderfully harden and confirm the Papists in
their way. They say, how does the Lutheran and Calvinists spirit agree; that
which one says, the other contradicts. Now although the same may be retorted
on them, the manifold differences in Popery, and that about a necessary point
of faith, viz. Whether the Pope be above a Council, or the Council above the
Pope; yea several Popes have at the same time pretended, and in arms fought to
be head of the Church: Though I say, these may be retorted on them, and stop
their mouths, yet it cannot be denied, but that such differences do wonderfully
scandalize and harden people, especially those that consult not with Scripture,
and seek to be antidoted against such temptations. And for that, take these
prescripts:

1. Do not thou by thy pragmatical m^dling, widen the difference, What people
should do, when Ministers and Professors are divided.
and raise more dust. In this Chapter, you have the Apostle laying down
Arguments against divisions, and sometimes they belong to the Teachers, and
sometimes to the Hearers. The indiscretion, and hot busy carriages of the
Disciples, do sometimes make a greater distance among the Teachers. You see
John's Disciples out of emulation and envy* did what they could to stir up
John's spirit against Christ; but how graciously did he quench those sparks by
that humility of his? I must decrease, but he must increase, John 3.30.

2. Consider this, That those that are godly do agree in the main fundamental
point* So that whatsoever is necessary to salvation, that they do not fail
in; They agree in the soul and life of Religion, for other things we cannot
expect unity in this life, as long as some have more knowledge than others, and
more grace and self-denial than others, so long there will be differences. You
see Paul and Barnabas had a sharp contest with one another. And the Apostle
speaks of the corrupt censurings that the strong and weak Christians had of
one another, Romans 1.4.

3. Do thou labor to be informed with a true and divine faith out of the
Word, thy own self. Those that at first believed Christ upon the woman of
Samaria's report, did afterward believe Christ for his own sake. The Ministry
is that by which we do believe, but we do not believe in it. Now that is the
reason, many do so stagger, and know not what to say or do: They are not
steadfast and immovable in faith; The just shall live by his faith; by his
faith in particular. And then, though the whole world should turn Sceptick, yet
he would be as resolute as a Stoic in the matters of God.

4. Humble your selves under these differences, when they go not the same way,
when they preach not the same things. Let these things fear and wound thy
heart, as much as they do the Churches peace. Say, as he did, Why do we fall
out, seeing we are Brethren? Say, Oh Lord, it is for our sins that are the
hearers, our unprofitablenesse, our barrenness and vanity, that God has
raised up such a contentious spirit amongst us.

But because this is more necessary for us, than you, though necessary for
both, let us see what Use you ought to make of it. And

First, Is the Ministry thus one? Then when any does set upon this maine work,
they meddle not with other things, they preach not about other thins: How
inexcusable will you be, if you answer not God thus calling of you? You cannot
plead, Lord, we heard nothing but disputes, nothing but controversies; we were
puzzled with one side, and with another side! Oh no! The plain and necessary
things, without which thou could not be saved, have every day sounded in thy
ears; Preaching has not distracted, has not filled you with troublesome
Disputations, but wholesome Exhortations. It will therefore be thy greater
wickedness, if thou refuse. Oh then, as all the Ministry are to be one in this
way, so that all that hear were one also, that their thoughts, affections,
study and utmost endeavors were for the main necessary things! Oh consider,
you frustrate the Ministry of the proper end it has, your edifying, your
conversion! For this God has appointed us to labor in preaching to you, and
if you fail here, all is lost.

Use 2. Ought all ministerial abilities to be employed in one way? Then no
wonder, if the Devil, when he cannot destroy preaching, yet makes it useless
and unprofitable, and that is, by raising divisions and enmity. And thus he
takes the old Rule, Divide and impera, while he divides others, he himself
reigns alone, and his Kingdom is advanced.

Use 3. Are they all to agree in one, in the same ends, in the same Doctrine?
Then take heed of itching after sinful novelties. Faith is but one faith; and
if thou art weary of it, it is as if a man should be weary of the Sun,
because it is not a new Sun. Why do you not desire a new Scripture, and a new
Bible as well? Oh it is a grievous thing to be weary of old truths, because thou
know them already! This is to despise Manna, and God in judgment gives
thee up to an inconstant spirit, to have Reubens curse, Unstable like water.

And every man shall receive his own reward, according to his own labor.

The former part of the verse was an Argument against Divisions amongst
Teachers and People. When all are one, there they ought not to be divided. Now
this later part is a kind of an anticipation, or answer to an Objection, thus,
How can they be one, who are so different in their parts, abilities and labor?
The Apostle therefore does by way of explication add this: although they are
one in their Office, Institution, and End; yet there is a diversity of Gifts
and Labor, as also a diversity of Reward.

So that the words contain a Proposition, wherein you have,

1. The Subject, with the Note of Universality, Every man. If you take it
strictly, in relation to what went before, then the meaning is of Teachers and
Officers. Every Church Officer shall receive according to his labor: But it is
also a truth concerning every man, in any way God has appointed him to work.

2. You have the Predicate or Attribute, He shall receive a Reward, (...). Here
the Popish Writers triumph, pleading for the merit and causality of works it is
a reward; but the Scripture speaks of a twofold reward, Of Reward and Merit.


1. Of Debt, Romans 4.8. To him that labors, the reward is of debt; and that
is, when a man by his own power, does those things which have an inward
condignity and proportion with the reward, as it is in the payment of a
day-labourer.

2. There is a Reward of Grace and mere Promise. When such a reward is a sure
consequent of such an antecedent; not that it was a Cause, or Merit, but God
has appointed such a necessary order and connection, as between grace and
glory; glory necessarily follows, not by causality of our works, though from
grace, but by the fidelity of the promise. Hence God is said to be Debtor
sibi, not nobis, reddit debita nulli debens; and therefore this eternal life,
which is called a reward, is in other places called a gift, and (...), an
Inheritance, very frequently, in allusion to the Land of Canaan; where several
Tribes had their several portions of Land by lot, not according to any worth;
and that the Ancients did mean no more by Meritum, our learned men show at
large.

2. Consider the Appropriation and Distinction of this Reward; He shall receive
his reward, implying by this, that there are degrees of reward, and glory in
Heaven. There are some learned men that think there are no degrees of glory in
Heaven, but all are alike. And certainly, there are many places, which are
usually brought to prove it, which when thoroughly understood, do not convince
it, yet I believe the different Degrees of glory to be a truth; and this Text,
among others, may confirm it; where you have an excellent Appropriation, (...)
for (...), is not here opposed to a contrary species, as in other places, He
shall receive according to his works, good, or evil, but to degrees in the same
kind, one labors in the good work of the Lord more, and another less; now
according to this gradual diversity, shall be gradual differences of glory.

Lastly, There is the Measure and rule of this reward, According to his labor;
he speaks it of the Minister; he does not say, According to his success,
according to the fruit of his Ministry: If he labor and take pains, God will
reward him, though no man has believed the Word preached.

I shall consider this Proposition generally, and not limited to the
ministerial labor. Observe

Observe. Of Degrees of Glory.
That according to a man's labor and working for God, he is sure to have a
proportionable reward.

Although the Wiseman inscribes this Motto upon all the labor under the Sun,
That it is vanity and wearisomnesse; yet spiritual labor has a sure
recompense; It Is not praying in vain, it is not seeking Gods face in vain. 1
Cor. 15.58. Always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know
your labor is not in vain. Oh it is comfortable to be found always doing Gods
work, for we are sure that will have a good end; there will come eternal profit
by it.

All persons have work to do for God.
To clear this, Consider,

First, That there are no persons, be they never so mean, so poor, so
contemptible, but they are in their way and calling to do Gods work. Do not
think that only Ministers and men in public place; Only rich men and great
men, they have the Lords work to do; Thou deceivest thy self herein. For the
service of God is required of a poor man, of a co^tager, as well as those in
great places. Matthew. 20. and Matthew. 25. you have two excellent Parables to this
purpose, to show, That God gives to every one more or less Talents; none are
to stand idle, but to labor in Gods vineyard, God at the day of Judgment will
call these laborers together, and see how they have improved all things, and
the idle servant, or unprofitable has a dreadful sentence upon him, To be cut
in pieces, and to have his portion with hypocrites. All idleness is a kind of
hypocrisy, because it deceives the expectation, (as it were) of God, who
looked for fruitfulness, and behold barrenness. Know then, whosoever thou
art, thou art called to labor in Gods vineyard; thou have thy peculiar
service, whether married, or single, bond or free, rich or poor; and thou must
abound in this work.

There is a twofold doing of good works.
Secondly, There is a two fold doing of Gods work; either the work of his
providence, as passive instruments, or the work of his commands, as active
instruments. This is a necessary distinction, God has raised up many men, as
instruments to bring about the works of his providence; but because they did
not know God or propound godly ends in doing so; therefore though they did the
work of the Lord, yet they shall meet with no reward in Heaven. You have a
notable instance for this, Isa. 10.5, 6, 7. where the King of Assyria is called
a rod, or a staff in Gods hand; God did use him as an instrument to scourge the
Israelite; howbeit he means not so, he thinks it not in his heart; here he
was a passive instrument, he did Gods work without any heart, or love to God;
and therefore verse. 12. When I have performed my whole work (says God) against
Jerusalem, I will punish him. Here you see, a man may do Gods work, and yet be
punished for it. So Jehu, he was immediately raised up by God, to destroy Ahab,
and his whole family; and God tells him, He had done all that was in his heart;
a great expression; yet Hos. 1.4. God (says he) will be av^nged upon the house
of Jehu, for all that blood he had shed. For though he did the work of Gods
providence, yet because he did it upon ambitious and sinful grounds, not
keeping close to Gods way, therefore was he punished. Thus you see, there is a
great difference between doing the work of Gods providence, and the work of his
command, out of faith and obedience to him. For this later is, when we do not
only the matter God commands, but out of love and obedience to him, with that
godly frame of heart, that is acceptable unto him.

In the next place therefore, let us consider, What is the acceptable doing of
Gods work, which will be rewarded? And

First, That only is Gods work, which is commanded and willed by him. What it
is to do a good work which God will accept and reward.
We are often commanded, to understand the good and acceptable will of God.
Many think they are doing Gods work, when it is the Devils, because they look
not for warrant of it in Scripture. By the knowledge of Scripture a man is made
perfect, or prepared for every good work, 2 Timothy 3.17. So then, that is Gods
work, which is appointed by him, approved and commanded by him, of which a man
can bring Scripture, and say, Thus says the Lord. All that superstitious
worship, which the Pharisees so multiplied, and for which they thought to be
more accepted with God, than others; It was none of Gods work; It was not
acceptable coin; it had none of Gods superscription upon it. And our Savior
speaks of cruel persecutors, that they would think they did God service in
killing his own sheep, John 16.2. This is an heavy and a dreadful delusion,
for men to take the works of the flesh, and the works of the Devil for Gods
work. If therefore thou would not be deprived of a reward, be sure out of the
Scripture, that it be Gods work for the matter of it.

Secondly, It Is acceptable laboring, when it is done in such a manner. For God
does not accept of any labor for him, merely from the painfulnesse of it; For
if a man give his body to be burnt, and have not love to God, it is nothing
worth. Not (I say) from the painfulnesse or length of time, but from other
qua^i^^cations; and they are these,

1. It Is profitable working, when the persons are first made the Lords, when
they are justified and sanctified. Make the tree good, and then the fruit will
be good. The person must be first sanctified, ere any work can be acceptable:
He is an unclean person till then, and all things are unclean; To the defiled
all things become defiled, Tit. 1.15. Oh that people would attend to this! They
only look to the good matter of the work; they pray, they give alms, they live
soberly, but they have no knowledge about the root thereof. Are their persons
justified, their natures sanctified, without which no work of God can be done
acceptably.

2. A Reward is due to that work only, which is done for Gods sake, out of love
to him. The Pharisees praying, and other acts of Religion, have a terrible
verdict by Christ upon them, Verily I say unto you, they have their reward,
Mat. 6.2. O words of terror and horror! They did all those acts to be seen of
men, to be applauded by men, and they have their reward, this is all they shall
have; our Savior uses that affirmation, Verily I say unto you, when he speaks
earnestly, and would have men diligently mind what he says, Verily they have
their reward. Oh what will the praise and glory of men avail thee, when thou
and thy duties shall be cast away! Know then this worm will devour thy gourd,
vain glory, car^al ends and designs upon Gods works, will make all to be thrown
away. When the Devil cannot keep thee in the works of darkness and of
wickedness, that thou will do them; then he endeavors to mar thy good
works, by throwing some dead fly in this box of ointment, vainglory, and
self-advantage.

3. That work will only have a reward, which is done with that measure and
degree of love and fervency that it ought to be. Every Sacrifice was to be
offered up with fire; and every duty is to be performed with much zeal, and
inflamed affections to God. Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11.
(...), boiling over; that argues the fire of zeal is under every duty. I have
something against thee, says Christ, because thou have left thy first love,
Revel. 2 5. she had not lost all her love, she was not bereaved of all; but yet
because she had not such degrees, such fervency as she had, God reproves her.
Have not many of Gods own people lost their first praying, first hearing, their
first zeal and affections to good things? Cursed be he that does the work of
the Lord negligently, Jer 48.10. Here is no reward, but a curse to such, who in
Gods work are negligent and careless; and it is a great dishonor to God, that
thou should be fervent and active in the pleasures of sin, in the service
of Satan, and not in Gods work.

4. The work to be rewarded, is that which is constantly done with
perseverance, holding out to the end. Mat. 24.13. He that endures to the end
shall be saved. If a righteous man leave his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, etc. all his righteousness that he has done shall not be remembered,
Ezekiel. 33.13. There are those who begin in Gods work, and end in the Devils.
There are those who by the knowledge of God escape the pollution of the world,
and then return again to their vomit, The later end of such is worse than their
beginning, 2 Pet. 2. Take Judas for a dreadful instance, he leaves all, and
follows Christ, he preaches the Gospel, he works miracles, he casts out
Devils from others, but he proves an Apostate himself; the Devil enters into
him at last, and so all those seeming good works perish. Oh that those who have
an aguish goodness, some good fits in time of danger, of diseases! Then they
will call upon God, then they will speak of God, and do what is good. Oh that
such had an heart always to do so! Blessed is he whom his master, when he
comes shall find so doing, Matthew. 24.46.

5. The work to be rewarded is, that which is done fully and plenarily. There
is a full measure of grace to be heaped over. The Scripture speaking of Caleb,
as one that followed the Lord heartily, says in the Hebrew, He fulfilled to go
after the Lord, Deuteronomy. 1.36. that denotes his whole heart was in it. Now there
must be a threefold fullness in the work of the Lord:

1. A fullness of the Subject. The united strength of the heart must be joined
together; not to serve God with distractions, an heart for him, and an heart
for the creature.

2. A fullness of the Object; every work of the Lord. They are to be prepared
for every good work. You read of many that did many good things, Joash,
Amasiah, Herod, but because they were not fully for every good work, they lost
this reward. Now of all works, those that do more immediately relate to God, to
the Gospel, his truth, any work looking this way will be rewarded Hence a Cup
of cold water given to a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, Mat. 10.41. in
reference to this work, shall have a Prophets reward.

And lastly, Fullness of degree. They are to abound in the work of the Lord; to
add one grace to another, to be rich in faith and other graces.

Use. Will a good work thus circumstantiated be sure to be rewarded? Then take
heed of two contraries to this work of the Lord,

1. Of idleness, unprofitablenesse and unfruitfulnesse. The way to Heaven is a
way of labor, the work of faith, the labor of love, and the patience of hope,
says the Apostle, 1 These. 1.3. Every grace is laborious, and therefore we are
commanded to strive to enter in at the straight gate, Luke 13.24. Oh set it
down for a principle, such a jolly, loose and secure life, that I live, can
never be happy! Christianity is compared to running in a race, 1 Cor. 9.26, 27.
to fighting and wrestling; the subduing of sin, to mortifying and crucifying
of the flesh; What then will become of thy carelessness, thy negligence? Oh
fear, lest God curse thee, as the barren fig tree, lest he say, Cast that
unprofitable servant into everlasting flames!

2. Take heed of the other contrary, upon which the greater wrath of God will
fall, and that is, To do the Devils work. Our Savior told the Pharisees, They
are of the Devil, and his works they did, John 8.44. What were those works? To
oppose Christ in the Ministry, to rebel against that glorious light of the
world? Men are possessed with the Devil in their souls, as well as in their
bodies. Thus the Devil is said to enter into Judas heart, and to fill Ananias
heart; and when they are thus, then they only serve him, and fulfill his lusts.
Lying, that is the Devils work: Malicious opposing of godliness, and good men,
that is the Devils work: Yea, all sin is in some sense the work of the Devil,
1 John 3.8. Therefore Christ is said, to come into the world, to dissolve the
works of the Devil. Take heed then, lest while thou share with him in his
works, that thou do also in his punishments: L^st it be said, Depart into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; as also, his fellow
workers.

Having considered what the work is, now let us consider and admire at the
Reward: And before we come to show what Reward it is, take notice of a
distinction or two.

First, There is an Essential Reward; and that is, The enjoyment of God in full
Assurance and Delight. This, all that work for God are sure to have. All that
are made happy, have the same God, and the same Christ. They all agree in this.
The dwarf and the giant are both equal in this, as the Apple of the eye in a
Child, as well as in a grown man, is able to see the same great Mountain.

Secondly, There is an Accidental Reward; and that is, Some Degrees of Glory:
Because of greater labor and sufferings for Christ, one may partake of more
Glory then another. For, though all the glorified Saints are compared to Stars,
yet as one Star differs from another in Glory; so it is here. In
Justification, all the godly are equal, though some men have more sins
pardoned then others; yet, the acceptance of them through Christ, is equal.
So that intensively, though not extensively, all are alike justified. But in
salvation, there are Thrones prepared for some above others. Neither in that
ambitious Petition of the Mother of Zebedees Children did our Savior deny,
there were chiefer places then other in his Kingdom, but he rebuked their
carnal apprehensions about such things, Mat. 20.33. Thus you have a Prophets
Reward spoken of as a greater Reward then others, because of their choice work
for God; and the manifold contradictions they endure from sinners, because of
their labor.

Secondly, It Is lawful to encourage a man's self in working for God, by this,
that there is a Reward. There is a lawful self-seeking, viz. of immortality, A
lawful self-seeking.
and honor and glory, Romans 2.7. This is good to be observed, because some
tender people have been much troubled, as if they were gone no further then
hypocrites, because they find such desires of Heaven and Glory, moving them in
their duties. Oh! they think this is to serve God for their own ends! Did not
Christ live and die for me, though he got nothing by me, and why should not I
for him? Now, two things we say to this.

1. It Is true, in every godly man, there is such an ingenuous Principle of
grace in him, that he loves God and Christ for their own sakes. Though there
were no Heaven, no Hell, yet such is his spiritual constitution, that he cannot
but love God, and hate sin. The reason is, because he is made a new Creature,
has a Divine nature: And that is, a spontaneous, free, and willing principle
to what is holy, without any outward motives. As a dutiful Child loves his
Father (though poor,) though he has no Inheritance to give him. As the Mother
loves her Child, and takes all that care about it, from an inward (...), when
there is no hope of a reward. Hence the motions of grace are compared to
thirsting and hungering. Now, you know, Mat. 6.
we do not use to promise a reward to an hungry man, if he will eat. And thus
you may see David often in those pure strains of love and longing after God,
making him the Object of his delight, he loves God, that he may love him more:
And, he loves him, because he loves him. If he said of humane love, that it
was a nescio quid, burning in a man's breast; it is true of Divine love. But yet

2. It Is lawful for all this to stir up a man's heart to this duty, because
of the glorious Reward God has promised, both by Precept and Example. Precept:
For in several places, the Scripture exhorts to our duty; Because our work
will not be in vain, 1 Cor. 15 ult. We judge these afflictions light (says the
Apostle) while we behold the things that are not seen, 2 Cor 4. ult. Christ
shows his Disciples the glory of Heaven, that thereby they might not be
discouraged in doing or suffering for him. Now the Word of God, must stir up
an unlawful coveting in the heart, if seeking thus for eternal Glory were a
sin. And then, we have the Example of Christ himself; He in all his
Sufferings, had a^ e^e to the joy that was se^ before him, which made him
endure the Cross. And of Moses, it is said, Heb. 11.26. He had respect to the
recompense of the Reward: He did mark it diligently, as the word sign^fieth. We
must therefore distinguish between Amor m^rc^dis, and Amor mercenarius, a love
of the Reward is not presently a mercenary love; but then, when it is only for
that; when there is no inward change of the nature and frame of a man.

The reward of godliness twofold.
Thirdly, The reward of godliness, or working for God, is again twofold: Either
Temporary here in this life, or Eternal in that come. Godliness has the
promise of this life, 1 Timothy 4 8. No promise of any temporal mercy, is made to
a wicked man. God (indeed) by his Providence, d^sposeh many of those outward
mercies to them, but they are not by the promise to them. They are Ismael's,
not Isaac's. For all the Promises are Yea and Amen, firm and su^e in Christ, 2
Cor. 1. God (indeed) gave Nebuchadnezar a temporal reward for his service, in
destroying Tire: And Austin says, That that earthly dominion the Romans had
in the world, was a reward of their Civil Justice: But these things are not
still the fruit of a gracious Promise. Therefore they have them not in special
mercy, neither are they sanctified to them. They have a right and dominion
concerning them, but not a sanctified use: They are to them as Saul thought
Michall would have been to David, to his utter ruin and ensnaring of him.
Otherwise:

Godly men only have the Promises of all the good in the world. No good thing
will he withhold from them that fear him, Psalm. 84.11. But the Reason why these
Promises are not always made good to them, is, Because this would hind^r the
grand Promises, that are for the^r spiritu^l good.

These things explained, let us consider Wherein lies this reward of working
for God, Wherein lie^h the reward of working for God 1. In this life.
either in this life, or in the life to come. And truly, in this life, if there
were no Heaven, no Happiness, no Enjoyment of God, there is enough to put us on
it. As

First, There is a great deal of Peace and Comfort of Cons^ience in doing what
is good. The very Heathens observed, that Virtus est sibi praemium; Virtue is a
reward to it self. It brings such quietness, such tranquil^ty, such comfort;
that it is desirable to be doing Gods work, if there were nothing else. When
David with the people, offered so willingly unto God, what a deal of comfort
and joy did David find in the very duty it self? Who are we, that we should be
able to offer so willingly, 1 Chronicles. 29.14? For as on the other side, sin
has a sting, and carries a tor^ment with it, filling the Conscience with fear
and trembling, and horror, as in Cain and Judas. None rationally would have
the pleasures of sin for a season, for the tortures and torments of it which
are perpetual. Thus on the contrary, Faith and other Graces, they are
accompanied with joy in the holy Ghost. When a man keeps a good Conscience
toward God and man, he has a continual Feast, better then Dives, he fares
diliciously every day. Pindar, a very Heathen Poet, called a good Conscience,
The sweet Nurse in old age; yea, in young age and all ages* Not but that the
godly themselves, may be many times in great trouble of spirit: You see David
often crying out upon his soul, because it was so cast down, and calling upon
himself to trust in God. But this disquietness in the godly, is caused partly
by their own fault, and partly by the Devil; he is a roaring Lion, he disquiets
their peace, though God indeed suffer him, for his wise ends; as you see it was
to Job. Oh then, that you would always be doing Gods work! If you did but know
how comfortable, and how sweet it is above the labor for worldly things, your
hearts would be enamoured with it.

Secondly, When we do Gods work, he further rewards with more spiritual
strength, and enlarges our Abilities; so that the more we work for God, the
more we may.Thus in the Parable, He that had five, he gained ten, Luke 19 16.
To him that has, shall be given. And the promise is, That the godly shall not
be faint or weary, but renew their ctrength like an Eagle, Isa. 40.31. Yea, as
they grow, so they shall persevere and overcome, and be established in what is
good: Now this is a great Reward in a godly man's account, though the wicked
regard it not. That they shall have more gracious strength; that they shall
grow up into further Communion with Christ; that their hearts and graces shall
be better. Oh! How heartily does the soul pray for these things, and grieve,
when it finds a defect! Now, God has promised this to those that abour in his
work.

Lastly, They are sure to have Gods Protection and Presence to support them in
all their labor. The Apostle calls it labor, and that which is accompanied
with painfulnese: And indeed, the whole work of grace is very troublesome to
flesh and blood; their Combats and Conflicts within; and then very troublesome
to man without in the world, which makes the world hate and oppose them. Now
then, the work of God being thus opposed within and without, did not God
protect, did not he draw nigh with his support, and deliver, or strengthen;
none were able to abide. Thus you see a threefold encouragement the godly have
to labor for the Lord, even in this life. Oh! Why then should any be so
diffident, as to think they shall lose by God, that godliness will be an
hinderance to them! Do but be sure, that thy work is Gods work, and thou do
it in Gods manner, and never fear the issue of things. God is not unrighteous
(says the Apostle) to forget your sufferings, Heb. 6.10. You read, that God
put up all David's tears into his bottle: As Christ would not have the least
fragment of bread lost, so God will not let thee lose one mite for him: Thou
shall never say, God has hindered thee. When Abraham, for Gods glory, would
take none of the King of Sodoms wealth, God presently said to him, I am thy
exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.

In the next place, consider What is the eternal Reward, 2. In the life to come.
and how eye has not seen, nor has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive. If the Queen of Sheba's spirit fainted within her, to see all the
glory of Solomon, what then would it do, to behold all the glory of God, laid
up for those that love him! This is like Ezekiel's waters, that rise up higher
and higher. God (by reason of the sovereignty he has over us, and because we
are his creatures, having all from him) might have commanded all our work and
labor, and given us nothing when we had done; yea, he might have annhilated us
immediately into our first nothing: for we were his servants, more then any can
be servants to men: And our Savior says, What Master, though his Servant has
been at work, will bid him sit down presently, and not rather command him to
wait on him? Does he thank that servant after he has done what is commanded,
Luke 17.9? Now then, if God (who might have given us no reward) shall yet out
of his bounty give us a recompense, and that, not only in this life, but so
glorious an one in the life to come: Here the soul may be amazed, and cry out,
It Is straightened, It Is straightened, within it self, not able to speak of the
bounless love of God! For, consisider how great a Reward it is.

First, It is God himself, communicating his goodness, The greatness of the
heavenly reward.
and comfort to him that has done his work: Then shall we be with the Lord for
ever. This is called seeing of God; and, seeing him as he is, 1 John 3.2. No
longer as in a glass. It Is disputed, Whether formal Happiness consists in the
acts of the understanding, as, knowing of God; or in the acts of the will,
loving of him, and embracing of him: But we conclude, in both. So that this
reward being God himself, as he told Abraham, it is infinite as he is, and as
God himself is inestimable. Et tunc digne eum aestimans quando inaestimabilem
dicimus, and quicquid de Deo dici potest, eo ipso est indignum, quia dici
potest. Thus it is of the reward. The great mercy covenanted in the Promise,
is, That God will be our God; and this is completed in Heaven.

Secondly, This reward lies in the full glorification of the soul in all the
faculties thereof, and body in all the parts thereof. The spirits of just men
made perfect, Heb. 12. There needs no more grace, no more holiness; There is no
more sin or remorse about it. It Is like the higher Region, where no troublesome
meteor's are. Oh! What a bottomless subject is this! That thy understanding
should have no more darkness in it! Thy will, no more disobedience in it! Thy
heart, no more dullness or sluggishness in it! Oh! you would think we were
speaking of some Platonical Idea, or metaphysical abstraction, and not of a
reallity indeed: But yet the Scripture assures the godly of this Reward. And
then for the body, it is made a glorious body; all vileness and loathsomeness is
removed: It Is an immortal body: No more death, pains, or any distempers. This
Honor will God put upon those that labor for him.

Thirdly, The Eternity of this happiness, that is astonishing also. We shall be
with the Lord for ever, 1 These 4.17. Come ye blessed, inherit everlasting
glory. Oh! Who would think much of the present service or labor for God, when
it will bring an eternal weight of Glory! Think what eternity is, if we poor
mortals, that measure all things by time, can tell how to think about it.

Fourthly, The fullness of this happiness; an aggregation of all things that may
make happy, either within or without. Therefore in the Scripture it is
represented by all those things that are glorious in the world; a Kingdom, a
Crown, a great Feast, Jerusalem from above, is paved with all precious stones.
This is only to lift up our hearts, and to say of all earthly glory, Alas, what
is this to heavenly? If the taste of this; if drops be so much, what then is
the Ocean.

The vast disproportion that is between the work and the reward.
Fifthly, Consider the vast disproportion of this, to those works thou do for
God. What equality is there between God and all those glorious Privileges, and
those duties thou do? How can any plead merit or worth? Where can there be
any trusting in our selves? Oh! you that think to be saved for your Prayers,
Alms-deeds, you know not what a great and glorious thing salvation is! If a man
should have all the world given him for lifting up a straw, it is no such
disproportion as here is. For

1. The one is infinite, and thou art a finite limited creature. The Angels are
not found pure in his sight, and what hope have thou?

2. What work thou do for God, God he first works it in thee; so that thou
labourest for him of his own, and yet he rewards it.

3. What thou do for him, it is accompanied with much evil and many
imperfections. Bona meaneque mea sunt, neque pure bona sunt. There is four
leaven still abiding in thee.

4. Thou have formerly been a servant to Satan, done his work; so that God
might damn thee upon the old score, though thou were now able to do all things
perfectly.

5. Whatsoever thou have done, is but thy duty: God need not reward thee, or
might have bestowed a less reward.

6. What work thou do, as it is a due, besides God does not need it: It
adds nothing to him, if thou art righteous, that does not better him; it is
thy happiness, not Gods.

Lastly, All thou do is but for a little time, that the little work thou
have done for God, should be rewarded to eternity. Here is matter of wonder: So
that all these considerations should teach deep humility. O wretched and
foolish Pharisee! Thou fastest, thou prayest, and think by this to be saved.
O pray for eye salve, to have thy eyes opened! Let this

1. Drive people out of self-righteousnesse, and trusting in their works. I
would this sin were only among Papists. Oh no, it is too much imbred in the
hearts of Protestants! How can the civil righteous man die without roaring, and
trouble of spirit? lest he be an hypocrite, an unregenerate person, one that
never felt the power of godliness; but only he has a secret confidence of the
goodness of his heart, such and such things he has done, and there are many
worse, and this does exceedingly harden him.

2. Be not slack, or grudging in Gods work. Oh how unreasonable is it that thy
heart should be so unwilling, so listlesse, so repining? Why do thou not
remember what a reward God has laid up for those that labor for him? Oh when
thou come to enter into thy Masters joy, thou will think, if it had been ten
thousand times more, it had been too little!

Verse 9. For we are workers together with God.
THis ninth verse is a further amplification of Paul's intent, which is to
press unity against factions and divisions; and it is a declaration of his
Argument before, which was, The planters and waterers are one, but God gives
the increase. This he further illustrates in the beginning of this verse, For
we are workers together with God. We are all in Gods vineyard, and labor unto
him. So that this expression does as much extol the office of the Ministry, as
the former did seem to depresse it. For how great a glory is this, to be
workers together with God, Omnium divinorum divin^ssimum est, says an Ancient.
It Is the divinest work that can be to be instrumental to bring a rational soul
to its first principle, which is God, from whom it has apostatized. But

First, The words most be explained, then the sense. We are (...), Laborers or
Workers with. The Vulgar Translatours, Dei adjutores, we are helpers of God;
but that is very unsafe. For to help supposes weeknesse and infirmity* Yea
some dislike the expression, Gratia adjuvans, as if God did not change the
will, but only help it: as Lactantius also blamed the Heathens for calling
Jupiter a juvando. But God has appointed the Office and Gifts of the Ministry,
not out of need, but from mere love to us, dealing with us in a suitable and
accommodated way to our nature. The Apostle uses the same expression, 2 Cor.
6.1. We as workers together with him, etc. If we interpret the word thus, then
in what sense can this be made good? And

First of all, The Apostle does not here speak of every particular man, in
respect of his conversion, as if we did work with God in that, by our own power
and free will. There were some Divines called Synergists, from the word in the
Text, because they did hold, That man's will did cooperate and work together
with God, in turning to him. But this is nothing to the Apostles meaning in
this Text, for he speaks of ministerial labors, and Gods blessing them.

Neither in the second place is the meaning, though of the Ministers, As if
they with God did work faith and repentance in the hearts of the hearers. No,
the Apostle said before, That God only gave the increase. Baldwin the Lutheran
upon this place, puts the Calvinists and Swenckfeldians together; because
the Calvinists hold, That the Ministry reaches only to the outward man, the
words thereof not being able to reach to the heart; but they do greatly differ
from the Swenckfeldians, who do make the verbum externum nothing, and run
wholly to the verbum internum, whereas we hold, the necessity of the external
Word, though ehe efficacy thereby be solely to be attributed unto God.

Neither in the third place is the meaning of it, as if the Ministers of God,
in what they labored, did it by their own power. No, when the Apostle said, I
labored more abundantly than they all, he adds, yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Therefore God first inables them to work;
They are (...), before they be (...), sub-operatours before co-operatours.

But the sense in the first place, though not generally received, may be this,
We are Gods workers together in his vineyard, or for him. So that the
Preposition (...), will not have relation to God, but to fellow laborers, as
Paul calls others, his fellow laborers. Timothy is called his (...), Romans 16.21
But

Secondly, Take it as generally set down, the sense is, God who only gives
increase, has yet appointed the Ministry in an external manner to be
dispensed. So that we work with God, in that we preach the Word, and apply it
to men, though God only give the virtue. Even as the Apostles might be said,
to work with God, when they wrought miracles; they touched the diseased man,
they speak to him; but the miraculous cure is wholly of God. Hence Mark 16.20
God is said, (...) with the Apostles, because he wrought mighty signs and
wonders by them. Observe,

Observe. Of the Ministers being workers with God.
That the Ministers of the Gospel are workers with God, for the conversion of
men's souls. So 2 Cor. 6.1.

In what sense they are (you have heard) not by immediate producing of any
spiritual effects, but by the external application of the Ministry to the
people. As Gehezi carried his Masters staff, and touched the child with it, but
that did no good, till Elisha came himself. God in Creation did use no
instruments at all. Yea, some Schoolmen dispute, That no creature can be used
as an instrument in Creation, because it cannot work, but about something,
whereas the form of Creation is nothing. But in these divine effects, which
are also a spiritual creation, and no less impossible to humane power, God will
have the Ministry as a necessary antecedent means unto the conversion of men.
Hence the Scripture does so often attribute this mercy unto the preaching of
the Word, yea and increase of grace afterward.

In the first place consider, What Reasons may be for this; Why God will use
such workers with him, he needs not the parts or gifts of any. It Is but his
word, and all things by it are wrought in Heaven and Earth: Yet both in the Old
Testament and New, he has appointed some, by whose outward Ministry, he would
gather a people to himself. And

Why God will work by the Ministry of men.
First, This is a fit, and an accommodated way to our natures. When God sends
men of the same mould, and subject to the same affections; this may the more
easily draw us. When God delivered the Law himself, it was with such terror
and majesty, that they desired, that God would not himself speak any more to
them; so that mere men would not be able to bear the immediate approaches of
the Divine Majesty to them. Hence in the Old Testament, when any divine
apparition was made; they presently concluded, they should die immediately, Can
any see God and live? Thus then it is Gods goodness and love to appoint men of
the same mould to be his messengers, to importune you in his stead. This is
more suitable to you. As the Fowler catches many birds by one decoy, a bird of
the same feather: or rather as the Apostle argues concerning Christ, It became
us to have such an High Priest, that could be sensible of our condition, and
compassionate with us, Heb. 7. Thus it is here, it becomes us to have such to
bring us home unto God, that are affected with our estates, that have the same
temptations in them, as other men. Hence the more experience, Gods Ministers
have of the work of grace, the temptations of Satan, the deceitfulness of
sin, the more fit they are to comfort others, or to deliver them out of
snares. As face answers face, so the heart of man answers another, Prove.
27.19.

Secondly, He may do it to oblige us and tie us to his instituted means. It Is a
great caveat in the Scripture, and frequently urged, No man must follow the
imagination of his own heart. And in the New Testament many Commands, To obey
them that watch over them in the Lord, and to submit to them for their works
sake, Heb. 13. Thus also in the Sacrament, God, though he be not bound to them,
he can work grace as he pleases, yet he has bound us. Therefore that no man
might neglect or despise the Ministry, thinking, What needs this preaching, I
may have grace by immediate revelations, God is not tied to these externals?
Now God would prevent such loose principles, and bind us up to his instituted
way, he will bind us, though he is not bound.

Thirdly, Her^by God would exercise the humility, meekness and obedience of
men. Oh it is a great matter for men to submit to Gods institution! These are
Sh^pherds, they are Guides, they are Watchmen, they are to instruct, to exhort,
to rebuke, and that sharply, as occasion may serve. Now how many men do abhor
and disdain this, thinking all such Church-subjection, worse than Turkish
slavery? The Scripture indeed commends to the Ministers of God much patience,
much meekness, and that they should not Lord it over Gods heritage, 1 Pet.
5.3. But it is hard to discharge all ministerial duties, especially that of
powerful reproving of sin and Church Censures, and not to have this
accounted pragmatical lordlinesse. As they said to Lot, He will needs be a
Judge over us, Genesis 19 9. because he opposed them in their wickedness. Hereby
then God will try thy humility, and exercise thee, if thou can submit to
those ways God has instituted in his Church, not scorning to be either
instructed or rebuked by such.

Fourthly, That men might be the more inexcus^ble. For if thou art not now
converted and turned from thy sin, who shall plead for thee? We may take up
that of the Apostle, you need not say, Who shall ascend up into Heaven, or
descend into the lowermost parts of the earth? For the Word is near you, and
nigh unto you. Yea the Scripture makes it a mercy, when we have men of our own
tongue, and not a strange one, that delivers the Word unto us. Oh then, how
speechless will thou be at the great day, when God shall arraign thee? Why
have thou not left thy sins! Why have thou not forsaken thy evil ways? Did I
not send Messengers of thy own flesh and blood? Did they not speak in a tongue
thou know and understoodest? Why then have ye been rebellious? Oh think of
this! for there is no sin, that God will punish so severely, as that his
Messengers have come away doing no good to a people. God will one day make you
know, what it is to have a labourer for him amongst you, Then shall they know
they had a Prophet among them, Ezekiel. 33.33. Then when they shall be punished
more than any other people in the world. Then, when in their own consciences
they shall be convinced: Oh we heard these things, we were told of these
things, but rejected them!

Fifthly, God will hereby declare his power so much the more. For God to have
laborers with him, does not derogate from his power, but advances it the
more; for when you see him work those divine and admirable effects, by such a
contemptible way in the judgment of flesh and blood, hereby God is the more set
up. We have this treasure in earthly vessels, that the power may be of God, 2
Cor. 4.7. Hence Paul calls it, The foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21. that
which is so mighty through God, to confound the great things, and wise things
of the world, he calls it, The foolishness of preaching, because in carnal
reason it is so, both in regard of the matter and the means, or messengers
thereof. God could have immediately and suddenly destroyed Jericho with his
command, but he would have them compass the City seven times, and blow with
Rams horns, and then the walls must fall down. Now Gods using such unlikely
means, made his power the more apparent, which made the Apostle say, Our
weapons are not carnal, but spiritual, but because they are spiritual, may they
not be despised? No, they are mighty to the casting down of the strong holds of
sin, and whatsoever does lift up it self, 2 Cor. 10.5.

Now to this there needs one Caution to be added, viz. That this connection
between the labor of the Minister, and Gods working, is not natural, necessary
and perpetual. Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, yet God give no increase.
We may work, and yet neither the presence or power of God be therein. It Is not
here as in the works of nature; there God has made a perpetual and unalterable
Decree, where such and such causes work, he will also work; but this is not so.
As for the Lutherans, who will not acknowledge, that the Ministry, and Gods
Spirit are ever divided; neither in the Sacraments, (Baptism for example) will
allow a Baptismus externus, and internus, I know not how to understand them,
much less consent to them.

Now if you ask, When may it fall out, that though the Ministry labors, yet
God does not work with it? I have spoken to this already; Reasons may be on
Gods part, the Ministrers and the peoples. I shall only speak to the hearers
this twofold duty, if they would have God work with us, if you would find the
Lord in our Ministry, that howsoever it have no virtue or efficacy to others,
yet it may have to you; do these two things,

First, Work with God in prayer, that he would work with the Ministry.
Effectual prayer is the first wheel that sets all on going. Prayer is the key
of Heaven. Hence the Apostle James speaks of a prayer, (...), Jam. 5.16.
working. Whatsoever God will do, he will do only to a praying people. It Is like
the Prophets arrow, if that be stuck not in the ground thrice, but often into
Heaven, so often will it bring glorious effects. Now let this prayer be working
two ways:

1. In the general, That God would set up spiritual laborers in every
Congregation. Our Savior taught his Disciples to pray, That God would send out
laborers into his harvest, Matthew. 9.38. Every particular Congregation without
such a worker with God, is like the world without a Sun. Woe be to them that
are thus alone.

2. Pray in particular, That Gods work by the Ministers work may go home to thy
heart. Be exceedingly afraid, that thy condition be not made like that of
Saul's, whom God would not answer any kind of way. As Elisha struck the waters
of Jordan with Elijahs mantle, saying, Where is the God of Elijah? and
presently the waters did divide and give way, 2 Kings 2.14. Do thou say, Oh
where is that mighty God that wrought so with Peter and Paul, and other
servants of his!

Secondly, Take heed of such sins, as may provoke God, not to be with the
Ministry. The word of God is not an hammer battering, is not a fire consuming
many times, because of thy unthankfulness and rebellion. The Jews did so long
sin against God, that he forsook the Temple, and answered them no more there.
Thus a people may quickly provoke God to leave the Ordinances, so that thou
shall find no benefit; no power in them, but even consume in thy sin.

Use. 1. Is the^ Ministry a working with God, then it may teach Ministers,

First, That they be not workers with the Devil. And that is two ways; either
by bringing in the Doctrine of Devils, all Heresies and false worship, which
are the works of the Devil: Or, Secondly, That they do not sooth and flatter
men in sin, as if they prayed that the Kingdom of darkness may come, and not
the Kingdom of God. And

Secondly, So to walk, as those that work with him. Who is sufficient for this?
What holiness, purity, humility is required?

Use 2. To the people. Is it a working with God? then lay aside all prejudice
and cavils against it: Neglect it not, thou refusest the work of God upon thy
soul. This is the way wherein God will discover his power.

Secondly, Wonder not if the Ministry has many times wrought such powerful
effects; that the blind see, the poor are humbled, the lofty cast down, and
men's hearts changed, for God works with it.

Ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods building.

The former part of this Text contained the description of the Office of the
Ministers in the Church of God: They were laborers with God; This latter part
describes the nature of the people, and the Church of God, in what suitable
relation they stand in, viz. They are Gods husbandry, they are Gods building.
Here is a twofold Metaphor, and the first, that refers to the comparisons
the Apostle had used before, of watering and planting; Now answerable to this
is Gods tillage: the latter, of building the Apostle prosecuteth in the
following Verses: Both these similitudes tend to the same thing, yet they both
have their peculiar signification likewise, and emphasis. The first word (...)
signifies both the matter and object, that they are Gods field, ager colendus;
as also Gods work about it: we may put both the similitudes together, and
Observe

That the people of God are his husbandry, and building. Observe. The people of
God are his husbandry and building.


The Scripture does delight to compare the Church to many similitudes; all
which show the tende^ and dear respects it stands in toward God: Sometimes to
a wife; sometimes to a body; sometimes to the branches of a Vine; at other
times to a garden; to a Vineyard; and here to a field, and an house. Every one
of these similitudes has some peculiar respect, which the other has not; and
yet they all show the near conjunction and relation they have to God. They are
excellent similitudes, because they partly show Gods tender love to us; and
partly they teach what holy and pur^ persons we should be to God: So that here
is both great privilege, and exact duty. We will first handle these two
similitudes jointly, and then severally: Jointly in that they are Gods
husbandry, and house; It implies these things.

First, The power and goodness of God in making them so. What our being Gods
husbandry and building, jointly considered, implies.
A building is not of it self; every body that sees a house, presently
concludes the house did not make it self; so if you see a field well husbanded,
plowed, sowed, and clothed with goodly Corn, we all know, of it self the earth
would not do so: but rather its curse is to bring forth briars, and thorns: So
when you see a people leaving the sins and superstitious Idolatry of the
world, walking according to the rules revealed in Scripture* you must
necessarily conclude, this men have not of themselves, they cannot have this by
flesh and blood. Hence God speaking of the Church of Israel, said, He planted a
Vine, Jer. 2.21. even as the pleasant garden of Eden was planted at first. Thus
the Psalmist speaking not of our natural, but Church-Creation, says, We are
the sheep of his pasture, he has made us, and not we our selves, Psalm. 100 3.
So then it is God that has made us not only creatures, but a people believing
in him, and worshipping of him.

Secondly, It does imply dominion and absolute sovereignty over us. Even as the
Master that builds the house, appoints what customs and orders shall be in
the house; the Husbandman appoints what seed he pleases for the ground, Heb.
3.6. Christ is said to be a Son over this house, whose house the godly are;
he is there exalted above Moses who was a faithful servant in the house of
God, and appointed what worship God commanded, but Christ was over the house,
as well as over him that built it. This point is of great consideration; for
how durst men in all ages have brought in such superstition, such heresy, such
tyranny in the Church of God, if they had remembered there is but one Master in
the house of God, one Law giver: All Officers are but servants, and not Masters.

Thirdly, It denotes propriety and interest that God has a right to us, that
we are his, and not our own. The house is the owners, he has the propriety of
it; and therefore the Scripture is not content with these similitudes, but
uses these that declare a sweeter union, and nearer; as that of a wife to a
husband, that of the body to the head: So that by this means, they who are
indeed of this building, of this field; they are more happy then all others in
the world, for God is in covenant with them. To them only God is their God, and
they his people. And when the Psalmist had spoken of all external felicity,
saying, Happy are the people that are in such a case; he adds, Yea, happy are
the people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.15. So then, we cannot name a
greater Prerogative and Privilege, then to be in such a relation, all that God
has, is their's; his wisdom, power, and goodness. Only by the way, take
notice, that many are externally of this husbandry this building, that are not
internally; and therefore such have not the Promises made good to them in all
respects. How hardly can we say of many people, They are Gods building? Yea,
they are rather the Devils Den, and his Hell. (But more of this hereafter.)

Fourthly, It supposes care, love, and protection: This flows from the
other. Propriety causes care and love among men. What cares a man for another
man's Field, another man's Corn, but he looks to his own? He weedeth that, he
fenceth that, he keeps that from all violence: And this (certainly) should
encourage the godly in their conflict with sin. Oh! they complain of the
weeds, thorns, that grow up in their heart, that choke the good seed; let them
remember, they are Gods, as well as their own, and it belongs to him! It Is for
his honor and glory to have these thorns pulled up: It makes for Gods praise,
that thy heart be a room swept and kept clear for him to lodge in. Oh! urge
this in Prayer! O Lord, am I not thy husbandry? Is not my soul thy building?
Why then lies it thus ruinous? Why is it neglected by thee? It Is not only my
comfort, my happiness, but thy glory and honor is interested in this.

Come we in the next place, to consider the several similitudes: And

First, Ye are Gods Husbandry. Take notice, that he does not here speak, of the
invisible and mystical Church of Christ, but as they were a visible Church at
Corinth; As there was a visible company of men, openly and publicly
professing the Faith of Christ, and joining together in an external Communion
in holy Ordinances. Here is much in this, for it shows how all our particular
Congregations should be; what manner of Societies, even such as are Gods
Husbandry, Gods Tillage, Building and House. This is the great truth that
people should hearken after, that they walk worthy of such glorious Titles and
Relations.

This Relation of being Gods Husbandry, implies something on his part, What to
be Gods Husbandry implies. 1. On Gods part.
and many things on ours. On his part:

First, That he finds all people of themselves like a barren wilderness, and
fruitless desert. The Curse upon the ground, is fulfilled in them, to bring
forth nothing but briers and thorns. All the things of grace and godliness,
are not only above our natures, but contrary to them: Even as if a man should
see a piece of ground like the very rocks, that no Husbandry could ever do any
good on it: The same are all people, when the Word comes at first to them. In
other expressions it is called raising up Children to Abraham out of stones. And
as wild beasts delight to be in the wilderness, that is their habitation: Thus
are all men till converted by the Word, so many wild beasts carried away with
brutish lusts, in the wilderness of the world; which makes the Scripture
compare them so often to such things. Oh then, bewail the roughness and
obstinacy in thy heart to what is godly.

Secondly, It supposes that grace and godliness is wholly planted by God in
their souls; for this flows from the other. Seeing we are such a barren
wilderness, what fruit can ever be expected from us? All the fruit then, of
righteousness and godliness does come wholly from him: We of our selves stand
like so many rotten fruitless trees, to be cursed by God, and cut down for the
fire; but it is the grace of God, that works the beginnings and increase of all
godliness in them. Marvel not then, if you see a people under the sweetest and
best seasons of grace, to be yet barren and unprofitable; for this fruitfulness
is only of God. Oh, we would wonder, that a people who know so much, who hear
so much, that have clouds so often raining on them, should yet be like so many
stones and rocks! Oh, this is the wrath and judgment of God to be trembled
under it! For he makes one to grow and not another; He causes grace to spring
up in one, and not another.

Thirdly, This supposes that God likewise gives all the seasons, and
opportunities of growth and fruitfulness. As the Gardener, he looks to his
times when he must water the Plants, lest they die: The season of the year
helps to grow, as well as the nature of the soil: Annus non ager fructificat.
Hence God when he is angry, he threatens that he will command his clouds not
to rain, Isa. 5. God threatens it as the greatest judgment, to deprive a people
of the Ministry, and s^ason of grace, how low and slight thoughts soever people
have of it! Observe that place, Ezekiel. 7.26. Mischief shall come upon mischief,
one calamity upon another: And what then? They shall seek for a Vision of the
Prophet, but the Law shall perish from the Priest. Thus Amos 8.11. When God
will make a people a barren and desert Nation, then he makes those spiritual
heavens like brass and iron. Oh then, know, that as the natural seasons and
times are of his appointment, so much more the gracious ones.

On our parts, who are the field to be tilled, there are these things: 2. On
o^^ part.


First, A willingness to have the Word of God prepare and wound our souls; even
tearing our heart to pieces, that so the Word as seed, may fructify. This is
that the Scripture calls, plowing up the fallow ground, Jer. 4.3. That is, when
the Law and Threatenings of the Word enter into our very bowels; is like the
Plough, that makes deep furrows in the heart. Oh then, that the secure,
confident, and quiet heart, that has thus many years layen quiet and at ease,
feeling no grief nor trouble, may at last be wounded and cut assunder! This is
not an acceptable pleasing work to you, but very necessary it is: Could the
ground be sensible, it would feel the plow making torments and rents in the
bowels of it. Thus it is here; the Law of God, the Word of God, that comes like
a two-edged sword in thy bowels; that blows like a strong tempest, and shakes
thy sins at the very root. Oh, expect not healing, and peace and comfort,
till you have been thus disquieted! Do not then quarrel at the Word of God,
but rather bless him for the power of it, when it changes the whole face of a
Congregation; fills thee with many sad and anxious thoughts; sends thee home
enquiring, Lord, what shall I do? What will become of me? The Psalmist
complains of wicked men, They made long furrows upon his back; but this is
happy, when the word makes deep furrows in thy heart; otherwise, it is but
sowing upon the highway, which comes to no good.

Secondly, This implies that you should answer the satisfaction of that
Husbandman, whose Husbandry you are. Who will bear that ground, which after
much labor and cost, brings forth no fruit at all? Now, God has greatly
complained of this, that when he looked for grapes, behold wild grapes; when he
looked for righteousness, behold Hemlock. Oh, this will confound you at the day
of Judgment! This will be your condemnation. This you will never endure, that
God has caused his seed to be sown, given you an excellent seed-time, precious
seasons of grace, but you for fruit, have brought forth briers. We read of
Christ, that when he looked for fruit on a Fig Tree, and saw none, he cursed it
for ever, although the Text says, it was not the time, or season for figs,
Mat. 11.13. Oh then, with what a grievous Curse, may God curse thee, when the
time and season is of fruit, and thou have none! Oh, bethink your selves, how
you shall answer God in this matter!

Thirdly, It supposes a careful improvement of all those means which God
uses for our spiritual good. If we be Gods Husbandry, we are patiently to
receive, and fruitfully to improve whatsoever may make for our fruitfulness.

Now the means are of two sorts, either essential, and entire and perfect;
such as the hearing of the Word, praying, godly Communion; or, accidental and
occasional, such as afflictions, troubles, and persecutions. Even as the
pruning of the Vine, the burning of the Ground makes it fruitful; so all the
troubles, calamities and miseries, that God brings on his Husbandry, is to make
them more fertile. They need a Winter as well as a Summer. If thou then
despisest the Ministry; thou art careless under the means of grace, no wonder
if thou art no better then Heathens, or Pagans, that live in the wilderness.
Thou that art a tree planted by the River side, yet bring forth no fruit,
thy condemnation is near.

Lastly, Consider how near such a people are to utter ruin; while you are but
near it, there is some hope of scaping, if you seek out; who after all Gods
Husbandry, are the same ignorant and profane people still. The Apostle is
plain in this; The ground that often receives rain, and yet brings forth
nothing but briers and thorns, is nigh unto cursing, Heb. 6.8. It is nigh,
that is a mercy; but at last it will be actually cursed, and thrown in the
fire. Thou that art a wicked man in Gods field, it will be worse with thee then
all the wicked men in the world, that are not Gods Church. Let there be a weed
in a Corn-field or a Garden, it is sure to be weeded up; whereas, if it had
been in the Heath or highway, it might have grown long enough. Oh, then say,
it cannot be that I should hold long with this wickedness in Gods field, his
judgments will overtake me.

Use of Instruction: Learn understanding by this familiar similitude, You are
Gods Husbandry. The Spirit of God from the vocation and calling of many of you,
uses a comparison, that so by earthly things, you may come to heavenly. What
you would have your fields be to you after all your pain and cost, the same be
you to God. Barrenness and unfruitfulness, how does it discourage you? You care
not for that Ground, which never will yield a crop after all cost upon it; How
can God endure thee? Thy soul is Gods field. Oh, what fruit, what reformation
should thou show forth? Thus not only the Sabbath day, but every day may be a
Sabbath day: Every field thou go into; Every goodly crop thou see on the
ground, it may teach and preach unto thee. As our Savior said, If I have
spoken to you earthly things, and you understand them not, how then heavenly?
Joh. 3. If heavenly things be represented to you, under the comp^rison of
earthly things, and you not receive them, how then if spoken in their own
nature? Take heed then, lest thou who art, as yet, Gods field, by his love and
care on thee, do not by his just wrath, make thee a field of blood; yea, the
blood of thy own soul.

Ye are Gods building.

This is the later similitude, which taken singly of it self, affords many
necessary considerations. For still take this along with you, that he speaks
not here of the mystical and invisible Church, but that visible Church which
was at Corinth; and you will conclude this is a great title. If the Centurion
said, He was not worthy that Christ should come within his roof. How much more
unworthy then are a people to be made a constant dwelling house for Christ
spiritually to reside there? And as it is a Title full of glory; so it is also
full of duty. What manner of persons ought they to be, who may be called Gods
house, Gods building? I need not enlarge my self further in the Preface.

The word has no difficulty; only as the former similitude did seem to
comprehend both the matter, and Gods action about it; So here (...), may take
in both, that we are the house of God, and that the building also is of God;
that we are of God both in fieri and facto esse.

Doct. That particular Churches are, or should be Gods house, Gods building.

Gods house, or a Church, Of Gods house.
is not properly the building made of timber and stones. When we call that
place a Church, or the house of God, it is only by a Trope, the persons
contained put for the place containing; and we can hardly in the New Testament
find it so called; yea some learned men say not at all: to be sure, there is
but one place (1 Cor. 11.22) contended for, that Church is put for the place
where believers meet. It is true, some other places are pressed for this sense,
but with great constraint. But in our common speech we call the material
building a Church figuratively; as Civitas is sometimes put for the place,
whereas properly it signifies the Community of men met together by some
orderly way. So Synagogue does properly signify the company gathered together,
or their gathering together, though afterward for the place, as in the
Scriptures often. Thus custom has authorized it about the word Church.

Now see what degeneration grew in time. The Material building, which they
called the Church, the House of God, they gave a relative sanctity to; they
made it holyer then other places, but a real sanctity, or personal holiness of
those men, who indeed were the Church, and the House of God, that they
persecuted and destroyed. Isidore Pelusiota, in an Epistle of his, speaks
excellently to this purpose, reproving a Bishop that adorned the
Church-building with Images and costly Ornaments, but persecuted those that
were the Church indeed. The latter he calls (...), and the building, (...).
So then, take off your thoughts from all superstitious conce^^s about holiness
in places. Gods House, Gods Church, are the persons and men that do outwardly
profess his way, and live accordingly: Whose House we are. Heb. 3 6. With those
God is present. Indeed 1 Chronicles. 7. we read of a Temple, a great stately House
dedicated to God, with a relative holiness, with Prayers that God would be
present there; his eyes and his heart would be in that place. But to argue from
that Temple, to our material Churches, it is very unsafe: [ It is true, Mr Made
(whose opinion about the relative holiness of Churches in Gospel times, is
publicly known) does endeavor to answer this Argument thus, viz. That though
we have not such a command as the Jews had about the Temple for our Churches,
yet by Analogy, such a Jewish command will bind, etc. But through this w^de
gate the whole Jewish administration may croude in upon us, etc.] For, the
Temple was typical of Christ's body, and therefore was destroyed with all the
other significative Ceremonies. So then, they err on one hand too rigidly, who
think we may not call this material building, a Church: for, we may call it so,
by a figure, which is ordinary about such things. And they on the other hand,
who take of their thoughts from minding the true Church indeed, and House of
God, by holiness and purity of life, addicting themselves to curious building,
goodly Images, and external worship. But this occasionally only. We see here,
the Apostle speaks of persons, and not of places; and he says, They are Gods
building. All our particular Societies should be of such men for knowledge and
godliness, that we may say they are Gods House, not the Devils den.

What Gods building, and our being his house implies.
Now this comparison of building, supposes these things.

First, That a people of themselves, are nothing but so much rubbish and sit
fuel for Hell fire; and that it is God who makes them this glorious building;
That as you see the Temple was built by excellent art; The trees in the
forest, and the stones in the quarrey, could never have prepared themselves,
nor put themselves into so goodly a structure: So it is here. Men by their own
power, their own ability and strength, could never become a fit habitation for
the Lord to rest in. We are not born but made the house and building of God: so
that although by our birth and education we may have many Church-priveledges,
being born of Christian Parents; yet we have no saving privileges, till God
has wrought something upon every man's soul in particular, that it may be his
faith, his godliness, his patience, and so indeed the Temple of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, It implies that the matter of this building should be sound,
precious, and substantial. The material Temple was built of the choicest stone,
and most excellent timber; and the Apostle in this Chapter, supposes this
house to be built of gold and stone, and that the building of hay and stubble
is very absurd and dangerous: which although it be chiefly to be understood of
the Doctrine, yet it has some relation also to the persons constituting a
Church. It Is the great Question in this age, What is the matter of a Church?
What persons ought to be taken in, to constitute a Church? I shall not touch on
that now. It is one thing to say, What should be, and another thing, What the
Scripture fore-tels will be. It Is true, all that are of this building, should
be really and truly sound both in Doctrine and life; and where any of heretical
Doctrines, or profane lives have got into this house, the Scripture commands
such to be cast out, as being a dishonor and a burden to the house: but yet it
also fore-tels, that there will be tares among the wheat. That in this house
there will be vessels of honor and of dishonor. But more of this anon. This
is certain, we cannot sufficiently lament to see the ruins of Gods house in
this spiritual sense. As they wept to see Jerusalem the second time built,
because it came so short of the luster and glory, the former Temple had: So may
we mourn exceedingly to see what our particular Congregations are,
comparatively to primitive Institutions, and the pattern upon the Mount. Indeed
this Church had some weeds; but how restless is Paul to pull them out? Oh how
desirous, as he says, 2 Cor. 11.2. to present them a pure Virgin to Christ,
free from all false worship, and all foul transgressions! Oh that you would
think of this, what ye ought to be! Holiness to the Lord, should be writ on
your hands, foreheads, and whole conversation.

Thirdly, It implies the gracious presence and power of God among his people.
An house is the place, where a man dwells and continually resides; and this is
one great reason, why God uses this Metaphor to show with what re^t and
delight he will take up his habitation in his Church. Thus the Covenant of
grace runs from this, when the Apostle 2 Cor. 6. had showed, That there ought
to be no agreement between the Temple of God and Idols, he adds, They are the
Temple of the living God; and therefore what he infers, I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people,
(...) and (...), As the Apostle to describe the innate power of original sin
said, It dwelled in him. So it is here, God to describe how intimate, familiar
and gracious his presence is, says, He will dwell in them. This particular
then shows, there are many in this house, that are not of this house; for how
is Gods presence and power manifested in them? Nay, does not the Devil and
sin discover themselves dwelling in them? Do they manifest any thing but the
blackness of darkness in their words and works? Glory not then of being in
the house of God, if you find not the powerful presence of God in you; which
is two ways; by sanctification and consolation. In these two ways God does
discover himself, he fills with grace, and consolation, he sanctifies and
comforts, They are in Christ, and Christ in them.

Fourthly, This house or building does imply, God to be the Master therein,
that he only may prescribe the Laws and orders, what shall be done, and what
not, he appoints every one his work, and his labor. All the Officers in the
Church are but servants. None may take upon them to appoint what is to be
believed? How God must be worshipped? This is of great consideration. Christ is
said to be more faithful in this house, than Moses in the former, Heb. 3.
Hence came the neglect of all true Worship and piety, because the orders and
laws of the Master are not followed. Come then and be afraid, thou that live
in profaneness and impiety, what Law, what order has God for this in his
house? His House is an House of Prayer: Ye are to be a praying people, but thou
art a cursing and blaspheming wretch: In his House every vessel was holy, but
thou art a loathsome vessel of all impiety and filthiness.

Fifthly, Here is this further in this building; It Is not an ordinary building,
but a sacred and an holy one. Therefore (as you heard) they are called, The
Temple of the living God. Now then, what an astonishing consideration is this?
Those that are of this House, must be separated unto God, from all profane and
common things; even as the Temple might not be polluted by any common action.
And hence is that phrase, They are sanctified; that is, they are made holy, by
a peculiar dedication unto God. Therefore in that 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. when the
Apostle had said they were the Temple of the living God, he adds this
Exhortation; Therefore come out from among them, and touch no unclean thing. Oh
then, if you would be thought the House and Temple of the Lord, consider what
Communion has light with darkness! What agreement is there between Christ and
Belial? Be not then forgetful of this, when thou art tempted unto any gross
impiety.

Sixthly, It being an house, all within are servants, and so they are to do
their Masters work, to live to him. Whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of
God, 1 Cor. 10 31. All those servants in the Parable, called for by the Master,
and bid to merchandise till he came, Luke 19 12. And those who have been
eminent in Gods work, they have this title in a peculiar manner. Thus Moses the
servant of God, and Paul the servant of Christ. Now (alas) who thinks of
these things? Every man lives to himself, to his own ease, gain and advantage.
We walk not as servants, who though they have gained never so much, yet say,
this is none of ours, we may not do with it what we please, Servus non est
persona, sedres, says the Civil Law. Thus, this health, this wealth, these
parts, this time is none of m^ne, I must improve it for my Master. Oh what a
good consideration would this be for every one to think, I am set in this
place, I am in this relation, I have these helps to serve God with! This is my
chief end.

Seventhly, It supposes Order and Government. The Church of God is an House;
now that has domestical Laws. There are Oeconomicks as well as Politics; it
does not deserve the name of an house, where there is no body to command, nor
none to obey, but all do as they list. And must not this be much more in the
spiritual house of God. Paul did rejoice to see the Churches Order, and her
faith, Col. 2.5. her Faith for Doctrine, her Order for Government. Hence the
Scripture speaks of those that govern, and those that are to obey; and God who
is not a God of confusion, has not left every man to believe, and think, and
maintain what he lift. Hence are those spiritual censures, of reproving,
admonishing and casting out a man, Some walk disorderly, (...), 2 These. 3.11.
it is an excellent word, it signifies such an exact order, as in an army, none
may break his rank. Thus God has set a spiritual order in his Church; some are
eyes, some hands, some to preach, some to hear, some to rule, some to obey; and
it is a monster, and not a body, when every member would be an eye, every
private man a public Officer in the Church. This would be a Babel, and not
Gods house.

Eighthly, Unity, love and concord among those that are in the same house. Oh
let this shame all animosities, fractions and quarrellings! Are we not of the
same house? How comely a thing is it to see brethren dwell together in unity?
Psalm. 133.1, 2. It Is compared to that precious ointment poured on Aaron. We
read in one Parable of some wicked servants, that were drunken, and did beat
their fellow servants; but how severe will their Master be against such? How
much respect have Laws given to the material building, that none might quarrel
or fight in the Church or Churchyard? Now it is a far greater matter to have
those brawlings and contentions in the spiritual house of God. The primitive
Christians were remarkable for all this, when they all had one heart, and one
mind; If it be a body, and Christ's body, then one member must not fight with
another.

Use Of Direction to our particular Congregations. Oh consider what titles and
names the Scripture uses to give to such societies! To be Gods house. Is not
this enough to confound us, when we have by our lusts made them the sty of
swine? or as Jerusalem was in her desolation made for Owls and Satyrs to dance
in, so we chase away the presence of God from our Congregations, and the Devil
and lusts reign over us. Oh how unworthy are we of such names! Know then that
of all places, Gods judgment will first begin with his own people, Then
judgment must begin at the house of God. Your condemnation will be greater
than those who never were dignified with such titles. Study Reformation every
one in his particular, lest Christ take up a rod and whip to cleanse his
Temple. Certainly all our particular Congregations need much building, much
reforming; this has made so many sad questions, Whether they may be called
Churches, because so many ignorant and profane abound every where. Let us
labor to take away these blemishes; woe be to those that give these offenses:
you go on from one lust to another, and never think what order God has left to
guide you by. What purity, zeal, mortification ought to be every where? To be
like an heavenly orb full of glorious stars. What does the profane man, the
liar, the proud man, the beastly drunkard in Gods house? A master of a family,
that loves God, and has care of his own soul, will not let such a person
dwell in his own house; and do you think God will suffer it? So then look not
only to your own sins, as private persons, but as servants in so many houses.
Pray for godly order, comely society.

Verse 10. According to the grace of God which is given to me, etc.
THe Apostle having used those excellent similitudes of a field, and an house;
in which relation, particular Congregations are or should be unto God. In this
tenth verse he declares what he had done among them, as the house of God,
persisting in the same similitude. So that the words are partly declaratory,
partly exhortatory. Declaratory: and in that, there is the person set forth by
a twofold property, a Master builder, and a wise builder.

2. Their is his action, I have laid the foundation.

3. There is the efficient cause of this, According to the grace of God given
unto me.

The latter part is Exhortatory; but of that afterward. I shall (at this time)
consider the ground and rise of all Paul's strength, to lay this foundation,
viz. The grace of God given to him. He is necessitated to praise his Ministry,
and to exalt his Office: But lest this should be thought pride, or as if he
himself were to have glory and honor by this, he renounceth all, and gives it
wholly on Gods grace. Observe

That it is the property of godly men, in all the good they have or do, Observe.
Of exalting free grace.
to attribute all to Gods grace.

Not unto us, Lord, not unto us (says the Psalmist) but unto thy Name be all
glory given, Psalm. 115.1. Paul is very much enlarged in the magnifying of
Grace; that as other godly men have had their remarkable Graces; David for
sincerity, Moses for meekness, Abraham for believing, Peter for zeal, John for
love; so this is admirable in Paul, that he never satisfies himself in
exalting grace.

Now because the grace of God is twofold, either of asistance and common
ministration in the service of God, whereby we have gifts and abilities; or, of
Sanctification and holiness: We shall have Paul acknowledging both.

The grace of asistance or gifts: So Paul, I labored more then they all, yet
not I, but the grace of God with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. And speaking in part of his
Ministerial employment, he says; We are not able of our selves to think a
thought, 2 Cor. 3.5.

And then for the grace of Sanctification, whereby of a wretched sinner, and
open persecuter, he became a faithful and bold Disciple of Christ. This he
does often enlarge upon, making it grace, free grace, riches of grace; yea,
exemplary grace: that all the ages to come, might take notice of it. As then
thou art affected with the sense of thy sinfulness and impotency, and art
thereby prone to adore the fullness of Gods grace; so, thou may have a
discovery of the work of grace upon thy heart. It does not only consist in
mortifying sin, in crucifiing of lusts, but in gratitude and thankfulness to
his grace.

Now when we say, a godly man acknowledges all to grace: Consider,

First, He does it heartily, seriously: It comes from his bowels: The
Properties of praising Gods grace.
All within him, is called upon to bless God. What is a more formal and
ordinary phrase, then to say, I thank God? I bless God? But the gracious doing
of it, is like fire in the bowels. Observe Paul Ephesians. 1. how copious and
overflowing he is in blessing of God for his manifold graces to the godly? No
fountain does run ^ore sweetly, fully, and purely then he does. Oh, his heart
is an happy spring, from whence comes such Rivers of living water! And thus
David his Psalms, are the sweet liquour running over, by the boiling, that the
fire of his zeal does make. He seems to be a Distillatory over the fire,
droping sweet and precious water. So then, to acknowledge grace, is a duty that
possesses the whole man, if ever his soul be in a transfiguration. If ever his
heart be consumed within him, it is in matter of the grace and favor of God.

Secondly, This acknowledgment is accompanied with a renouncing all his own
works: His own strength, his own duties, he does not so much as think of them,
nor mention them; Yea, he is afraid of them: He cries, Woe unto him, if grace
be not ready to plead for him. Thus you have Paul running from his own
righteousness, and speaking worse of them, then some do of their very sins,
Phil. 3.8. And why? Only to exalt the grace of God in Christ. That proud and
arrogant Pharisee, he could thank God: I thank thee, I am no extortioner, nor
such a sinner as this Publican, Luke 18.81. You see, he could thank God, who
yet trusted in his works, and expected Justification by them. Therefore then
you thank God, when you have no inward secret confidence in your works; when
you have no inward rest upon the goodness of your heart, and your actions. I
tell you, this is the secret poison that destroys many. If men are not
Publicans, then they are commonly Pharisees. To be a Publican, is to live in
some gross, notorious, and filthy sin. And if they are not such, then how
apt are men to be Pharisees? that is, to trust in an external righteousness,
and outward conformity unto the Law of God. Now, this sin is a very damnable
one, because it does immediately oppose Christ in the whole work, and necessity
of mediation. For, if so be thy actions, thy doings, be to this purpose
considerable, what need is there of Christ? If thy tears can do away thy
sin, what need is there of the blood of Christ? Oh, take heed then, of this
inward confidence in thy self! We are of the Circumcision, who rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. Our Savior spoke
a Parable against those that trusted in their own righteousness, Luke 18. All
godliness does not lie in renouncing of thy lusts, and thy filthy sins, but
also of thy righteousness and thy duties. Then thou art a pure and Evangelical
and Gospel Christian, when thou go out of this latter as well as the former.

Thirdly, This acknowledging it must be from an inward sense of our own sin
and unworthiness, how ill we have deserved at Gods hand. No man can ever praise
grace, that has not felt the sting of sin, the power of the Law. When Paul
had discovered the spiritual and accurate nature of the Law; how impossible it
was to keep it; how grievous the Curses are; this made him so much magnify
grace. Therefore all those, that preach up free grace, and cry down the
preaching of the Law, and the convincing of men of their sin, in all the
aggravations of it, do indeed destroy grace. None do esteem the dead Serpent,
but he that has been stung with a live Serpent.

Fourthly, He must wholly and solely acknowledge grace. He must not give some
piece to grace, and the rest to his own free will: He must not by grace, mean
the outward manifestation and revelation of it, but the inward efficacy of it.
Pelagius was an Heretic, that denied grace, yet being often convinced by the
Orthodox, at last he granted grace; and grace necessary for every good work:
but all this while he called nature grace; or, the mere revelation of the
Gospel. And so now, the Arminians and Papists, they do exceedingly (in a
seeming appearance) acknowledge grace, but when it comes to a secret scanning,
it is but a partial grace, not a total grace. It Is a grace that requires thy
free will, as well as thy free will grace. It was well said of Bonaventure the
Schoolman, That if a man must err, it is better and safer erring in giving too
much to grace, then too little. See then, thou detract not in the least measure
from grace, but give it both totum and totaliter, all and the whole.

Lastly, He must set up this grace of God in a Scripture way. Not to oppose
godliness or holiness, or to sin more securely and boldly: This is not to
acknowledge grace, but to abuse grace. Shall we sin (says Paul) that grace
may abound? (Romans 6.1.) God forbid. See with what indignation and disgrace he
speaks it, God forbid. Oh then, far be thou from drinking down such deadly
poison, as to think because grace is free, thou art also freed from duty. There
is such a pestilential corruption in man's nature, that makes use of grace, to
patronize sin: To harden and embolden a man in evil, because God is gracious;
Oh know, God is not gracious, but a consuming fire to such!

In the next place, Why the godly are so sensible of Gods grace.
consider Why the godly are so sensible of Gods grace. And

First, This is the final Cause of all the good that God does enable us unto:
This is all he looks for. We cannot add to God any more happiness then he
has: We cannot make him more blessed: All that we can do, is to acknowledge
his grace, to publish this to all the world. Thus Ephesians. 1. That we should be to
the praise of the glory of his grace. And again: That we should show forth the
power of him, who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1
Pet. 2 9. So then, it was a very heavy and grievous sin, if the people of God
should not abound and be diligent herein; for this is all God looks for: for
this he made us* he converted thee, he opened thy eyes, turned thy heart to him.

Secondly, The Children of God are endowed with an ingenuous, free, and
excellent spirit: Therefore they cannot but confess by whom it is they have
obtained grace. If he said of humane learning, Ingenuum est, It Is an ingenuous
thing, to confess by whom thou have profited; How much more have the Children
of God this ingenuity.

Thirdly, The real sting, smart, and danger they have been in, makes their
heart full, and mouth full of the grace of God. Paul that was so near Hels
mouth, for him to be saved, all the world could not make him hold his tongue,
but he must publish the grace of Christ. Men that have been in the deep, in the
Whales belly, in the Lions mouth, for these to be delivered, they must sing of
grace, speak of grace, and plead for grace. Oh then, fear the less thy heart is
affected with Gods grace, that the less it has been affected with the
greatness of sin.

Fourthly, They are an humble debased people in themselves. They have low
thoughts of all that they do: And therefore it is, that they are so precious
with God. He dwells in the Heavens, and in the humble heart, Isa. 57.15. Be ye
clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 3.5. That must be a garment all over us. And
wherein is humility more seen, then in giving all to God?

Fifthly, They must needs acknowledge grace, because they have the experience,
how hard it is to do any thing spiritualy, and upon heavenly grounds. And
therefore if they are ever enabled thereunto, they cannot but exalt grace.
Nothing is done graciously and acceptably unto God, unless it be from a
sanctified nature, and divine principle; and unless it be from a heavenly and
divine motive, from God, and to God. Now natural men, never consider the
gracious doing of any thing, and therefore do not extol grace.

Sixthly, To praise and exalt the grace of God, it is a very profitable and
advantageous duty also. It Is two ways profitable.

1. It procures more grace and mercies from God. James 4.6. He gives grace to
the humble. The only way to have new mercies, is to acknowledge the grace of
God for the mercies. It Is an heathenish thing, to sacrifice to our own nets,
and our own power. Tully said, It was a foolish thing, to thank God for our
virtues, because they were in our own power* But he was ignorant of the
Scripture.

2. This acknowledging of grace, will enlarge a man, and make a man more
willing and ready in all the ways of God. It Is like oil to the wheel; It Is
like wings to the bird. Duties done with the spirit of praise and thanksgiving,
have great life and vigor in them.

What Opinions are Co^^ers of this duty of giving thanks to free grace.
Now I shall add one Caution, corrupt Doctrines and Opinions in Religion, may
much cool this duty of giving thanks; I shall instance in some. As

First, The denying of Original sin, is a great Ingine against the grace of
God. When Paul would raise up the Ephesians to confess Gods grace that had
quickened them, he tells them they were dead in sin; and, by nature the
Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2 So David when he would extol Gods mercy in
pardoning, he goes to the very iniquity he was conceived in, Psalm. 51.

Secondly, The maintenance of free will, does much detract from free grace.
It Is strange that any should hold this, when the Scripture does in so many
places, make man by nature, a corrupt tree, from whom no good thing can come.

Thirdly, That the Law is not to be preached; no, not for Direction or
Obligation: Whereas Christ and Paul do often press this.

Lastly, Universal Redemption: As if God and Christ did no more for one then
another.

Use of Direction. Would you be a people capable of this duty? Then study the
Law of God. Apply it to your souls: Oh, see what curses are due to you! How
often you fail! entreat God to affect you with the danger, and damnable estate
you are in! Then, how of often will thy mouth be opened, to set up the grace of
God? Be ashamed, if thou art sensible of temporal mercies, and not spiritual:
Feel thy self dropping into Hell; apprehend thy self a very Cain or Judas,
unless Gods grace does interpose.

Use of severe Reproof of that presumption and carnal confidence men put in
their works and in their duties. Oh, be afraid to be found in any good thing
thou have done! Shall David be afraid of his secret sins and errors which he
understands not? Shall Paul be afraid, though he knew nothing by himself, and
dare thou hope or think to be saved by any works thou have done? Thou know
not Christ; Thou art not acquainted with the Gospel.

According to the grace of God given unto me, as a wise master builder, I have
laid the foundation, etc.

This Text (you heard) was partly Declaratory, and partly Exhortatory.
Declaratory: and therein was considerable the Person, described by his office
metaphorically; As a master builder.

2. The quality, A wise master builder.

3. His effect or action, Have laid a foundation.

4. The efficient cause of all this ability, According to the grace of God
given unto me.

This latter has been dispatched already, I come now to consider of that work,
or Ministry performed by Paul, expressed likewise in that continued Metaphor,
which he had begun, I have laid the foundation. The plain meaning is obvious;
he acquainted them with the fundamentals of the Gospel, that which they never
heard of before, or knew nothing of, he did first instruct them in: As Romans
15.20. Paul was careful not to build upon another man's foundation, which was,
To preach the Gospel where Christ had not been named.

There is no difficulty in the words, only a doubt may be raised, How Paul can
say, He lays the foundation? which is no other but Christ, as appears at
the eleventh verse, seeing God appropriateth it to himself, Isa. 28.16. Behold
I lay in Zion a foundation stone, etc? But

The answer is, God lays this foundation, 1. By his Decree appointing Christ
thereunto. And 2. By his temporal mission of him into the world; but Paul laid
the foundation only ministerially and declaratively, by publishing Christ to be
the Savior, especially to those who never heard of him before.


It Is a special part of the wisdom and heavenly art of the Ministers of the
Gospel, Observe. Of laying a good and sure foundation in Religion.
to lay a good and sure foundation in the hearts of their hearers.

This Paul makes the principal part of his wisdom, that he began with a good
foundation. If people are not rightly built upon this, any tempest that arises
will throw down all the^r Religion. Our Savior speaks a Parable, Luke 6.48,
49 like to this, of the wise builder, and the foolish builder. And although
there it be meant of every particular Christian, yet we may apply it to every
Minister: He that does not build up his people upon sure and Scripture
foundations, they are like the chaff and straw that the wind does drive to and
fro. There is no true faith, no tru^ godliness, no true hope of salvation,
where the right and sure foundation is not laid

The point therefore in hand is of great consequence, both to the Preacher and
to the Auditor, to consider what foundation his Religion and Godliness is
fixed upon.

For the opening of this, Consider that Divines do ordinarily make a twofold
foundation:

The one they call, Fundamentum cognoscendi, A twofold foundation, The
Scripture and Christ.
The foundation of our knowledge and faith in matters of Religion; and this is
the Scripture only. We can lay no other foundation for matters of Faith, but
the word of God, Non credo, quia non lego, said Tertullian of old. And

Secondly, There is, Fundamentum essendi, The Foundation of the being, or
existence of all our glory and salvation, and that is only Jesus Christ. He is
the foundation-stone, and every one is to believe in him only for Salvation and
Justification. So that as God made two great lights for the world, so he has
done for the Church, the Scriptures and Christ.

This Doctrine is true, yet Heb. 6.1. we there read of more foundations than
one, for there are practical fundamentals, as well as speculative.

I shall therefore not limit my self to this one foundation mentioned by the
Apostle, but enlarge my self to the necessary foundations in our Christian
life, and show you the necessity of that wisdom which will build upon these
fundamentals. And although I am not ignorant, That the Dispute about what are
foundations, or fundamentals in Religion, and what not, is very hard and
difficult, yet I shall instance in four unquestionable foundations, which are
the four main pillars that support our Christian building. The necessary things
of Religion are these four. Either 1. The Matters to be believed. Four
unquestionable Scripture foundations.
2. The Worship and necessary service of God. 3. The spiritual Benefits and
mercies, Justification and Salvation. 4. The things to be done by us in our way
to Salvation.


All these are fundamental and necessary in their kind to salvation; and
therefore it behooves every Minister of the Gospel to principle and settle his
people in all these particulars. For herein is the danger not of men's bodies or
estates, but their immortal souls.

The Scripture is the only foundation of our faith.
We will begin with the first, The foundation of our faith, or divine assent in
matters of Religion. What is that which every man must build his faith upon?
What is the foundation he must lay there? And that is the Word of God, declared
and written for our instruction in those Canonical Books of the Scripture. When
we come to believe the matters of our salvation; the ultimate motive into which
all is to be resolved, is, Thus says the Lord, (...), The word of God has
spoken it. It Is not antiquity, universality, or the laws of the Land, or the
tradition of our fathers, that is the warrantable foundation, but the Scripture
only. Thus Timothy is commended for attending to the Scriptures, which are able
to make him wise to salvation through faith, 2 Timothy 3.17, 18. So that although
other things be required by way of helps and means, as prayer, interpretation
of the Scripture, Gods assistance, the guidance of the Ministry; yet by way of
a Foundation, or a Rule, that is the Scripture only. As God at first put all
the light into the Sun, and the Stars shine by a borrowed light from it: So
God has now put all supernatural light into the Scripture; and all guides are
to shine by that. Hence it is so often compared to a light, and a lamp unto our
feet; So that the Ministers of the Word do then lay a good foundation, when in
matters of Doctrine, and truths to be believed, they build them on the
Scripture, make them a Scripture-auditory, a people that dare not, that will
not take any matter of faith, but upon Scripture-grounds. Thus those Bereans
are commended for a noble and ingenuous people, that compared what Paul
preached with the Scriptures, they then had, whether it was consonant to them
or no, Act. 17 11. So that that people, who know nothing of the Scripture, are
not instructed by the Word, have not their faith, their Religion from it; all
they offer to God is a Sacrifice without eyes, they do believe they know not
what.

Now that the written word of God is the only foundation of our Christian
faith, appears by these Reasons,

Reas. 1.
First, A Christian faith ought to be a divine, supernatural faith, not a bare
humane faith. Now nothing can be the ground of a divine faith, but a divine
authority, a divine Argument suggested by God himself. Most men that call
themselves Christians have no more than an humane faith in matters of Religion.
They believe thus, because their parents did so, because the Laws of the Land
compel them to do so. Thus they have no other grounds of faith, then the Turks
or Papists have for themselves; but as copper is not gold, so neither is this
humane faith, that holy and Christian persuasion, which the Spirit of God
through the Word works in man, because revealed in the Word, 1 Thessalonians. 1. They
are commended, That they did not receive the Word preached, as the word of men,
but as indeed the word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.13. So that whosoever has an holy
faith, he must have a divine persuasion for this, from the Authority of God;
that as an humane faith is, because humane authority speaks it: so a divine
faith, because God reveals it in the Scripture. But (alas) generally our
people can no more look into these things, then an Owl in the dazelling Sun.
How few are persuaded of the true Doctrine of Christ from this Divine
Authority, because God has said thus, God has spoken thus? Oh then believe no
longer as men! Do not think, or speak as men, but as those who have God
persuading you.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, The Scriptures are only the foundation, because they are the
immediate verity or truth, coming from God, who is the first essential truth.
They have not only a Divine Authority, but evident infallibility. As God
himself is Truth, and is not like man, that may lie: So his Word is likewise
Truth, and cannot lie, or deceive, as the writings of men. Therefore Psalm. 19.
they are said to be purer, than gold seven times refined. And it is said, The
Scripture that cannot lie, or cannot be broken, John 10.35. It Is an heavy
judgment to be delivered up in matters of salvation to believe a lie. It Is the
spiritual curse that is threatened to those of the Antichristian apostasy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Now they must needs be thus punished, that forsake the Scripture,
and build upon other foundations. Seeing then the Scripture does contain
infallible truth only, and not one iota, or tittle of that can fall to the
ground, and in all other foundations that may be laid, there may be falsehood,
error, and grand Impostures: Let then those hearers that are careful to keep
a good faith, walk by this Rule. Chrysostom said, Never expect good from that
man, who is not searching of the Scriptures, attending to the Scriptures. It Is
an heavy grievous sin, that in your family, in your closets, you do no more
acquaint your selves with the Bible. Take a Tree from the River side, and plant
it in a wilderness, what can you expect, but a withering? And thus it is, if
you take a man from the Scripture, his seeming faith, graces, godliness will
all presently vanish.

Thirdly, The Scriptures only are the foundation of faith, because they are
only immutable and unmovable. They abide always the same, they are not
subject to changes, to perturbations of affections, as men are. Councils
consisted of men carried by passions and interests. Even in the Council of
Nice, and the four first Councils, there were great sidings, great animosities
particular interests and parties: and therefore unless we had an unchangeable
foundation, we must be mutable Camelions. Now the word of God, that is said To
abide for ever; whereas all flesh is grass, and the glory thereof fades away,
1 Pet. 1.24, 25. It Is called the eternal Gospel, Revel. 14.6. So then, that
which was three thousand years ago, is still true, because the Scriptures are
still the same. There is no new Bible, though there may be many new opinions,
and new Sects. Aristotle commends the Government of a Nation by Laws above
the wills and arbitrary resolutions of men, because Laws are fixed and known.
And so it is in the Church of God, that has a known Law and Rule. Therefore it
is an heinous error, which the learned note in Cusanus, though otherwise not a
very bad man, in affirming, That the Scripture is to be interpreted, Secundum
currentem statum Ecclesiae, according to the present course, and exigency of
the Church; and therefore in some age those things are received, which in
another are rejected.

Lastly, The Scripture is only to be laid for a foundation, because this only
is strong enough to support and bear up in sad hours of temptation, and
dangerous times of persecutions. Who would be cheated or distinguished out of
the Truth by subtle Heretics, or scared and terrified by violent opposers?
Therefore we had need be built upon such a rock, that can endure all waves. How
could the Martyrs have resisted to blood, had not they had Scripture-assurance?
Luther had this temptation, Tune solus sapis, etc. and nothing but the
Scripture confirmed him. Our Savior quelled Satan's temptations by arrows out
of the Scripture quiver. When a man comes to die, may he not be assaulted about
the truth of his faith, whether he die not in heresy or damnable opinions, and
nothing but the Scripture can uphold him?

Now for the matter of Doctrine to be believed, Four rotten, weak and false
foundations. 1. The Authority of the Church.
some men lay four rotten and weak foundations; others may be reduced to this.

The first is, that of the Papist, The Authority of the Church, and the Pope;
being wholly ignorant themselves, but resting all on their Authority.
Bellarmine does not blush to expound that place, Behold I lay in Zion a
foundation stone, secondarily to the Pope. Now although we grant, That the
Ministry of the true Church is very useful and necessary, as the instrument of
our faith, and the preservation of it: In which sense it is called, The pillar
and ground of the Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. yet it is only a Ministry, not a
Magistry. It Is a political Pillar upon which Edicts use to hang for Declaration
of the Magistrates will, not an Architectonical Pillar, that bears up the
house. So that Austins speech is true, I had not believed the Gospel had not
the Authority of the Church moved me, (viz.) by way of introduction and
preparation. As the woman of Samaria did to the Samaritans, who at first
believed, because she told them, but afterward they believed for Christ's own
sake. We do not believe in the Church, as we do in the matter revealed in the
Scripture. Therefore that ignorant implicit faith, to believe what the Church
says, is not a Scripture-faith, faith of knowledge; besides then, every member
must believe according to that Church he is of, and seeing there are Churches
against Churches, there shall also be faith against faith.

2. The Authority of the Civil Magistrate.
The second foundation men lay, is, The Authority of the Civil Magistrate. This
is a mere political faith. Many men have no other apprehension about Religion,
than the Laws of the Land, wherein they live. They matter not, whether true or
false, whether acceptable to God, or consonant to Scripture, but this is
commanded, and this they do. As Seneca said in his time, He observed that
Worship of their gods, Non tanquam Diis grata, but legibus jussa, not as
acceptable to the gods, but commanded by the Laws. But the Apostles example is
clean contrary; for they preached a faith to be believed, that was
contradictory to that Religion, which was established by humane authority, and
they resolve thus, It Is better to obey God than man, Act. 5 29.

3. Enthusiasm
The third is, Private Revelation and Enthusiasmes. As the Papists on one side,
have cried down the sufficiency and perfection of the Scripture: so
Illuminatists, men fancying to themselves Revelations from God, have also
decried it, making themselves above the Scripture. A dangerous and damnable
delusion. Therefore the Apostle John bids us, Try the spirits, and that cannot
be without the Rule of the Word, 1 John 4.1. And

4. Mere humane Reason.
Fourthly, Another false foundation is, Mere humane Reason. There are many risen
up, that make Reason the Judge and foundation of all Doctrinal Points; the
Socinian especially; hereupon they reject the Trinity, the Divine Nature of
Christ, as being against Reason. Now although rectified Reason be necessary, as
an instrument to revive the things of faith, yet it is no Judge, no foundation,
because our natural Reason is corrupt, and therefore the understanding must be
captivated. Many things are above our understanding, though not contrary to
Reason, to which we must yield the obedience of faith.

Use of Admonition. In matters of faith, lay this foundation; in times of
disputes, of varieties of opinions, such as these are, be as a people that have
had a good, and sure foundation laid among you. Run not on one side, into a
Popish brutish and blind obedience of faith: Nor on the other side, be not
carried away as empty straws, with every wind of Doctrine. Oh it is a blessed
thing to have the full assurance and persuasion of truths necessary to
salvation, not to have Reubens curse, to be unstable like water! Especially you
that are ignorant and earthy, who never make any matter about the principles of
Religion, do you rouse up your selves; Why has God given you reason and
understanding? Why are those many Texts, To search the Scripture, To prove all
things, if you sit down, and regard not these things?

As a wise master builder, I have laid the foundation.

It has been observed, That it is a great part of the wisdom and heavenly skill
of the Ministers of the Gospel, to lay a right and good foundation in the
hearts of the Hearers. What principles are in any Art or Science, the same is a
foundation in matters of Religion. Now if the principles be false, all the
Conclusions likewise are false; so it is in matters of Religion: If we lay
rotten and unsound foundations, all the building will prove no better. You have
heard of a fourfold foundation, upon which this spiritual building is fixed: A
foundation of Faith or Doctrine to be Believed; and that is, The written Word
of God only. This has been dispatched.

The next in order, is no less necessary; and that is, The foundation of Gods
Worship.
The foundation of Gods Worship. For as their are heresies and false doctrines
which over throw the sound Faith, so there is idolatry and superstition, which
destroys the true worship of God.

We shall at this time therefore show you, how necessary it is for the
Ministers of the Gospel, to lay a sure and right foundation about the worship
of God. And 1. We shall show the necessity. The necessity of pure Worship,
because 1. God is greatly provoked by the contrary.
2. What is the foundation, and the Reasons of it.


It Is necessary to lay good Principles here:

First, Because there is no sin does ordinarily more provoke God, then the
corrupting of his worship. The glorious eyes of God, have not sparkled more
with vengeance against any persons, then those that have defiled themselves in
sinful worship.

Now three ways God may be provoked about his worship: God may be provoked by
sinful worship three ways.


1. When we adore and worship a false god instead of him. Thus all the Heathens
that worshipped the Sun or the Stars, and other creatures, they were guilty
of gross idolatry. So the Jews, when they worshipped Baal-Berith, Baal-Phegor,
and Dagon, and Ashtaroth, they did point blanck thwart the first Commandment,
Thou shall have no other gods before me.

2. Gods worship is corrupted, when we do indeed worship the true God, but not
by such means and ways of worship as he has appointed, but in such a manner
as we in our immaginations think best. This God often does caution against,
that they should not go after the the imaginations of their own heart. Thus
they set up groves and high places: Thus Jeroboam made a golden calf. They
intended the solemn worship of the true God, but only they forsook the true
manner of worship he had commanded.

3. Then is Gods worship corrupted, when (though we worship the true God, after
the true manner) yet we add something to what is commanded. We rest not in his
simple institution, but as Eve added to the Commandment of God, so do these.
Thus the Pharisees, they retained the substantial worship of God, but then they
added a thousand of superstitious observations more to it. Now the corrupting
of Gods worship any of these ways, is a grievous sin; for though the first
be a greater sin then the second, and the second then the third, yet all of
them are such as are immediately committed against God, and for which the
Prophets do chiefly pronounce those Judgments threatened by them. For this sin
Jerusalem was brought low, and the Temple, had no more a stone left upon a
stone. The Jews to this day are so sensible of it, 2. Corrupt worship ^ends to
the breach of Union between God and his Church*
that of all sins they take heed of this idolatry.

Secondly, It Is necessary to lay a good foundation in this, Because this sin
does either immediately break the spiritual Union between the Church and God,
or else much dispose thereunto. The Prophet Ezekiel and the ^est, do frequently
delight to express the sin of idolatry by adultery; and going a whoring after
our imaginations. And when the Apostle was careful to lay a good foundation
here among the Corinthians in this matter of worship, see what he says; His
care was to present them a pure Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.1, 2. He was afraid
they should be corrupted from the simplicity of the Gospel. So then, Idolatry
and Superstition, they are Adulteries and Fornications: Now as Adultery does
dissolve the marriage bond, and may justly provoke the Husband to be no more an
Husband; so it is in matter of worship. It Is true, all superstitious worship
does not presently rise to such an height. Many sound Churches have retained
some superstitious worship, yet as wanton Dalliances and meretricious behavior
in a Wise, though they do not break the conjugall knot, yet dispose thereunto,
and raise much jealousy and anger in the Husband; so it does in matters of
Gods worship. Oh then, how careful should people be, to see they go upon right
grounds in the worship of God.

3. God looks upon corrupt worship as done to Devils.
Thirdly, We had need be careful, because God is so far from accepting of
that worship which he has not commanded, that he accounts it as done to
Devils, and not to him. Though those that worship so, thought they honored
God, and had a good intention, yet God judges it as done to Devils, not to
him. So was Jeroboams worship he did not forsake the true God, he set up that
worship only out of politic designs; and certainly the people that went in
the ignorance of their spirit, little thought to give worship to the Devils
thereby; yet says the Text, Jeroboam set up this worship to the Devils. 2 Chronicles. 11.6. So these very Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10.21. Who would go to the
heathen Corinthians Feasts and communicate with them in that worship, though
they thought they might lawfully do it, and it was an act of charity and good
society; yet the Apostle says, They did drink of the cup of Devils. Oh then,
how should thou be like Ezekiels living creature full of eyes behind and
before, of heavenly wisdom, lest thou worship Devils instead of God?

4. Men are prone to invent new worship.
Fourthly, There is a necessity of laying a good foundation, Because our hearts
do in nothing more presumptuously work then in the worship of God. There is a
secret delight and pleasure men have to make a worship of their own, as
Children have to make Babies. The Scripture fore sees this, and therefore does
so often bid men take heed; and they must not follow their own hearts, and they
must not go in the way they shall choose, and they must not do what seems
good in their own eyes. These strict Prohibitions do suppose an itching
inclination in men to make a worship of their own, and the several ages of the
Church have given sad experiences of this sin. The Church which had at first
a simple, plain, and spiritual worship of God, became to abound more in
external Ceremonies then the Jews, as Austin in his time complained. If then it
be so dangerous to err about the worship of God, What is that sure and
steadfast Foundation which both Ministers and people must build upon? And that
is, Only the Command and Divine Institution of God himself. I do not speak of
natural and necessary circumstances, as time and place, but whatsoever is the
essence or part of the worship of God; or the means thereof, that must have a
positive Command, and a divine Institution. The second Commandment, which
forbids all kinds, or parts, or means of worship, which any man shall make to
himself, does thereby command that only which God has appointed. So that as
all that money is to be rejected as not current, which has not the legal
superscription on it; so also all that worship is to be refused, of which you
cannot say, This the Lord requires; This the Lord has Commanded. Austin does
to this purpose, apply a sentence of Socrates: God (says he) is to be
worshipped only in that manner as he himself wills and appoints. Oh, the
purity of Ordinances that we should have enjoyed! And how beautiful would the
Tabernacle of the Lord have been, if this Foundation had been always laid? Now
that no other foundation may be laid, but a Divine Command, and Gods
Institution, will appear by several Reasons.

First, There is express Scripture to keep close to Gods Commandment. Reasons
to prove that all acceptable worship must have a Divine Command.
Deuteronomy. 31, 32. Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it, is Gods
Commandment. This Command is four times repeated in the Scripture, by which it
appears, that no men under any pretense of stirring up devotion or decency,
may add any thing unto his Command, or de^ract from it, as the public Coin
of a Land my not be clipped; but it is a Capital crime to do so, and equivalent to
this, is that Exhortation, Not to turn to the right hand or to the left, Deuteronomy.
17.11. and alibi. In the Hebrew they are Verbes, Not to dextrate it, or
sinistrate it, as we may say. The left hand, is, when men out of profaneness
and atheism, or irreverence neglect the due worship God has appointed. The
right hand is, when men out of pretended zeal, and good intentions set up that
which God has not commanded. We are not then in our worship to offer a
Sacrifice without eyes, which then we do, when we have not Gods Word a light to
direct us: We are not to be l^ke Sheep that follow those that go before: Non
qua cundum est, sed qua itur, as Seneca said. Hence those Pharisees that were
so diligent and officious in their invented worship, our Savior in two or
three words throws it all down: Who has required these things at your hands?
And, In vain do they worship me, Mark. 11.7. See there is no worship, no
service of God, but thou must be able to answer this Question, Who has
required it? Who has commanded it? Otherwise, it is a vain worship In vain do
they worship me. And of all van^ties, this is the saddest, when thy Religion
and Worship will be found an empty vain thing: It has not advantaged thy soul:
There is no reward laid up for it.

Secondly, Therefore must Gods Institution be a foundation, Because when we
have to do with God, whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. There
was a great dispute in the Church about eating and not eating, about observing
days and not observing; some placed worship in that which others did not: Now
among other things, what golden Rules does the Apostle lay down, and this
chiefly; Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin? Whatsoever is not of persuasion,
that it is lawful and acceptable to God, if I do it, it is a sin: And now,
How can any man be persuaded that is acceptable to God, which is not commanded
by him, which is not his will? Had any man in the Old Testament, brought a dog
or any other unclean be^st to be sacrificed, had not this been a great
dishonor to God? The head in every sacrifice was to be thrown away, to show
(say some) that man's own invention is not to be attended unto in the worship of
God.

Thirdly, Gods Institution and Command must be the foundation, otherwise all
our worship would come from ignorance, and it would be endless. From ignorance,
for the Word of God, that only is compared unto light; so that every one
walks in darkness that is not thus directed. Therefore Joh. 4. that woman of
Samaria, who pleaded so carnaly for her false worship, Our fathers they
worshipped here, and art thou greater then our fathers? Our Savior tells her,
They worshipped they did not know what. It was a worship they had no Command, no
Institution for, and so they did, they knew not what. As it would come from
ignorance, so it would be an endless worship; for if we have not Gods
Institution, then every man may add what he pleases. As we see in Popery,
what a multitude of Ceremonies are introduced, which they make worship of God?
And by what reason they do these, they may bring in ten thousand more: And it
cannot be otherwise, if once you take away this sure foundation.

Fourthly, To the true and right worship of God, there is a gracious Promise of
presence, acceptance, and blessing. I said not to Jacob, seek my face in vain,
Isa. 45.19. Thus take up all the sorts of worship, Prayer, and ministration of
Sacraments, Preaching of the Word; these things (if done in Gods order) return
full of precious mercies to those that are employed therein. Now if we are not
conformable to this Command, we may never look for any Promise, for these two
are always joined together. As in the old Testament God promised to answer by
Vrim and Thummim, suppose the High Priest had taken two other stones, would the
Lord have answered him? No: it was not according to his institution. What a
great breach did God make upon Vzzah, because God was not sought in his due
order, as David said, 1 Chronicles. 15.9. So then, as no man, or company of men can
make a new Article of Faith, or can institute a Sacrament, because they cannot
give the grace signified; so it is in matter of worship, they cannot appoint new
worship.

Quest.
But you may say, Why should it be such a sin to worship God any way a man
pleases? And the more ways he multiplyeth the worship of God, may it not be
the more acceptable to him? Do not men hereby show their good affections, and
zeal to him? Can a man worship him too much? Can we exceed in any way of
worship of him? As we cannot love him too much, nor delight in him too much, so
neither can we worship him too much? This does satisfy some men in their
multiplied ways of worship.

Answ.
The Answer is this: There can be no excess in the formality of true and lawful
worship; so a man is to worship God wit^ all his might, and strength; but in
the matter of the worship there may be an excess: That is, a man may take up
more means and parts of worship then God has appointed, and so thereby there
is a sinful excess: So that all thy good intentions, and zealous devotions,
they have no acceptance with God; and whilst thou think to honor him, thou
do dishonor him. Even a Platonist Philosopher said, That a superstitious
man was Gods flatterer, not his friend.

Now this is the rather to be observed, because there are few whom the
simplicity of God pleases. Oh, that Text Joh. 4. My Father seeks such as
worship him in spirit and truth, is worth the gold of Ophir! See all Christ's
Institutions, the administration of Baptism, of the Lords Supper; though they
be full of majesty and gravity, yet also full of plainness and simplicity.

Now instead of this true foundation, there are three rotten ones.

First, The imagination of a man's heart: This God does often and often forbid.
Oh, it is not enough to say, Methinks this is very good worship; Methinks this
is excellent! There must be more then a methinks.

Secondly, A desire to satisfy and please the sense. The Prophet calls them,
Their goodly Images: As Eve saw the fruit, that it was comely, and good to
eat: O miserable delusion! All worship of God is the exercise of thy faith, to
draw out spiritual Meditations, not to please the eye. Yet all those goodly
Images, and curious Ornaments, were only to satisfy the eye.

Thirdly, Antiquity, Custom, and tradition of Fathers. Austin complained much
of this, Vah tibi flumen moris humani quis resistet? Our father worshipped
here, says the woman. That of Cyprians is commended, Antiquas mihi Jesus
Christ, and Christ said he was truth, not Custom, says the Father. This
Argument all Jews, Turks, and Heathens pleaded against the Christians.

Use of Instruction. How necessary is it to be well settled in this foundation
of Gods worship? Oh, where shall we find a spiritual people, that delight in
the simple, pure, and plain Institutions of Christ! That say, Hitherto I must
go, and no further. That as the possessed party said, Paul I know, and Peter I
know; but who are you? Thus, this worship I know, and that I know; but who
brought in this? Who appointed this?

As a wise master builder, I have laid the foundation, etc.

The third Foundation every faithful Minister is to lay in the hearts of his
people, is for Comfort and Salvation. But this I shall reserve, as more
properly to be handled in verse. 11.

The last therefore I shall insist on, is, The foundation for outward practice
of holy actions. It Is not enough to pray, to hear: It Is not enough to exercise
the acts of any grace; but we are still to consider upon what foundation these
are built.

I shall therefore, first, lay down the foundation of all practiced holiness,
then the Necessity of this.

The foundation therefore of every good duty or work we do, Of the foundation
of practice.

The parts are, 1. It Is directory, Gods Word.


has these parts:

First, There is a foundation by way of a Direction or Rule, to which every
thing we do must be commensurate, and by which it must be regulated, now that
is the Word of God. For Gods word is not only a Rule of Faith, but of Manners.
And as thou must be of no other Religion, than the Word directs to; so thou
must do no other actions, or live any other life, than that guides thee too.
Therefore when it is commended for a lamp, or a light, it is to a man's feet,
that they do not slip or fall, By them thy servant is forewarned, Psalm. 19. And
as many as walk by this Rule, peace on them, Gal. 6.16. So that we shall never
come to do any truly good action all our life time, unless we do it according
to this Rule; which does not only inform about the Duty, but the manner, end,
and all other qualifications. So then whosoever does not pray, as the Scripture
speaks of praying: who does not repent, as the Scripture speaks of it, he
fails in a very foundation; he has not laid, as yet, so much as an hopeful
beginning for his salvation.

A second part of that foundation we must lay for the practice of holiness, 2.
The justifion of our persons.
is, The Justification and Reconciliation of our persons with God through
Christ. For till our persons be thus accepted of, though we should give our
bodies to be burnt for the Truth of Christ, it would not be accepted of. Thus
God had respect to Abel, and then to his offerings, Heb. 11. We are by faith to
be planted in Christ, and then as his branches, we are able to bring forth
fruit. Now this truth is very transcendent to our thoughts. Who does not think
it is in Divinity, as they speak in moral Philosophy, Just a agendo sumus
justi, by doing good actions we come to be made good and acceptable with God?
This is that dangerous Position which the Apostle does so often oppose, showing
grace and works can never be brought together in the same subject. We must
therefore in this matter wholly go out of our own selves; we must attend to
the acceptance of our persons first, otherwise all our best works are
damnable and loathsome to God; we are stubble, and he is fire. Though the
Papists thinks it hard Doctrine, yet it is sure enough, that every man
unjustified, does sin and provoke God in every thing he does.

Thirdly, Another foundation he must lay is, 3. A receiving power from Christ.
To receive power and strength from Christ only, both in the beginning and
progress of all good actions. Without me ye can do nothing, says Christ, John
15. The branch separated from the Vine is dried and withered. James 1.17. Every
good and perfect gift, comes from God alone. As all light is from the Sun; I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, says Paul, Phil. 4.13.
He is the Head, and the Member receives all its virtue and power from it. So
then, whosoever thinks to set upon any good work, by his own ability, is like
Samson, when his hair was cut off; alas those Philistims of lusts are too
strong for him, he cannot go out against those Goliahs of temptations, but in
the Name of the Lord. Now here is the ignorance of most people: they that
should not resolve to say so much, as that they will go to this, or that place,
unless the Lord will. Those that cannot add a cubit unto their own stature,
do yet think by their own strength to work out their salvation. Oh know, thou
have laid no sure foundation, unless all thy strength and power be fetched
from Christ! Thou art too weak a child to go, unless he hold thee. Christ is
the rock we must be built upon.

4. A renewed and sanctified nature.
Fourthly, The last part of this foundation is, A renewed and sanctified Nature.
And this is of great consequence. Nicodemus though so great a Master in Israel,
and exact in the external obedience of the Law, yet being ignorant of this, did
fundamentally err in all his obedience. Therefore of all points, you see our
Savior chiefly insists on this, Unless a man be borne again, John 3. This was
a very strange paradox to him, and it is no less to thousands of people, who
go on in a formal customary road, they regard the work done, the action it
self, but never the Regeneration of the nature from whence it is to flow:
Whereas this is all in all, Make the Tree good, and then the fruit will be
good, said Christ, Mat. 12 33, The Spring and Fountain must first be clean, ere
the streams be: The root sweet, ere the fruit be. Why then art thou pleasing
thy self with the actions thou do, when thou art in the old, polluted,
defiled nature? Can men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Let thy
external actions be never so religious, so glorious, they are but like fine
flowers on the dunghill, or on a dead corpse, there must be the inward
uncleanness, the inward filthiness cured first. Oh that men had ears to hear
this! Oh that God would give you understanding in this thing! For till the Old
man be put off, and the New man put on, you are still in your sins; all that
you do is fit fuel for Hell, none can deliver you from it, till there be a
change. Thus unless Ministers and people begin here, though they should
build of gold and precious stone, the foundation is but of hay and stubble, and
that is worst of all. And certainly, if the Apostle make it so hard a thing to
be saved, though a man do lay a good foundation, if he build hay and stubble
on it: How impossible will that man's salvation be, whose foundation is hay and
stubble? Mark then, and consider these things in your whole conversation: Let
every good action have these four foundation stones under it: The Scripture to
direct, justification to accept through Christ's merit, Christ to enable through
his Spirit, and a renewed nature to sanctify. For, as it was with the Temple,
and the gold in the Temple, The gold did not sanctify the Temple, but the
Temple the gold: So it is here, our actions, our duties do not sanctifies us,
do not justify us, but these privileges sanctify and justify our actions.

Why we should be careful of laying these foundations for every good action.
Now let us consider, Why we are to be careful about laying this Foundation.

First, Because it is very dangerous, and it is very easy to miscarry in this
matter As Austin said about the Trinity, That in any matter, Nec facilius, nec
periculosius erratur. Thus it is here, Not more dangerously, because eternal
life and death is more immediately concerned herein. The welfare of thy
immortal soul should be more unto thee, than all the world, and that is in thy
actions: If the foundation be not well laid, thou art undone for ever. In
matters of men's estates, or of their bodily life, how careful are they to go
upon a sure foundation? Only they wilfully venture their ruin in the matters
of their soul. Thou would be unwilling to live in an house, whose foundation
was rotten, thou would fear the falling of it about thy ears every hour. Oh
but what fear and trembleing should seize upon thee, lest all the good thou
have promised thy self in thy souls way, should fall to the ground for want
of a sure foundation! Consider then, Am I in the right? Timor facit
consiliativum, Fear would make thee jealous and suspicious. As we err
dangerously; so here

Secondly, We mistake easily. We see the greatest part of Christians never
attend to these things. And withal the difference between true and false
foundations is spiritually to be discerned. Now the blind man does easily
swallow any fly. The hypocrites foundation, and the true godly man's are very
much alike; and without much prayer, humiliation, and consideration, we cannot
practically discern the difference. Oh then say, I do the outward works of
Religion, I am careful to discharge them! But how easy may I build all upon a
false foundation? The Parable our Savior propounded of a wise builder, and a
foolish one, should always stick upon you, Matthew. 7. Did he speak it in vain,
you are all builders? And every one is either building a Jerusalem, or a Babel.
Apelles was so careful in drawing his lines, because he would pingere
aeternitati, as he said. All thy actions do build either to an eternity of
misery, or an eternity of happiness. Be then in an holy trembling; every
prayer, every word, every action has influence to eternal life, or eternal
torment.

Thirdly, Therefore we must look to our foundation, because of the great
confusion that will be at last on those, who have failed therein. Thus it was
with the foolish builder, when the tempests arose his house fell, and the fall
was great. It was terrible and dreadful. He did not think so, he looked for a
comfortable and quiet possession, but it proved otherwise. So it is here: Thou
have lived thus many years, thou have gone on in a customary way of religious
duties, thou have performed them over and over again, but have never looked to
a foundation. Oh the confusion that will fill thy face, when at the Day of
Judgment, God shall say for all those duties, I know you not! When you shall
see all these to be a broken Reed to trust unto. Oh if men would but consider
aforehand, what the agonies and perplexities are, that will then fall upon
them, they would consider and search, and never give over, till all be sure!
What confusion was upon the foolish Virgins? How did they bewail their
condition, running up and down, if there might be any hope? But all is too late.

Fourthly, Therefore lay a good foundation, For if this be wanting, thou do
nothing but sin in all thou do. Not only those plain gross acts of sin,
but all thy civil, natural, and religious actions, as coming from thee, are
altogether sins. To the unclean all things are unclean, Titus 1.13. Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? The bad Tree brings forth only bad
fruit. Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. Oh then! How
terrible is thy estate, who have not laid this foundation? Thou art damning thy
self all day long: Thy eating, thy drinking, thy waking, yea thy praying, thy
hearing, as they come from thee, are sins continually. As the T^^d cannot
vent honey, but only poison. Romans 8. Those that are in the flesh cannot please
God Oh dismal and sad condition! Howsoever thou may please thy self, and
others please thee, yet God is not pleased with thee.

In the third place, let us take notice, What are those weak, The ^o^ten
foundations that men build upon in regard of practice.
and rotten foundations that many men build upon in regard of their practice?
And

First, A conformity to the life of others; they do as most do, they shall
speed as well as they; what would ye have them to be singular, to be different
from others? This is a most rotten foundation, which many support themselves
with. Now the Scripture is express, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil, Exodus 23.2. Do thou not know, that the most are damned? And will thou
do as the most? Take Lot for an example, he was but one man, and his righteous
soul was so far from conforming to them, that it was tormented with seeing
and hearing their unrighteous deeds, 2 Pet. 2.8. Our Savior tells his
Disciples, They must do some singular thing to the world, Mat. 6.47. Gratias
ago Deo, quod dignus sum, quod mundus oderit, as Hierom said, I thank God, that
I am worthy to be hated by the world.

Secondly, Others build upon a partial practice of good things. The
hypocritical Jews they rested upon their Temple, their Sacrifices, their
outward worship of God; in the mean while their hands were full of blood, of
unrighteousness and injustice. So then, whosoever builds his salvation upon
his parts, his duties, his joys, his enlargements, and does not perform all
the acts of righteousness, truth and equity to men, this man's foundation is
self. Others they build upon their moral righteousness, and just conversation
to men; they lie not, they defraud not, none can accuse them of dishonest
dealing; but then for the religious duties of prayer, humiliation, and
different walking to the world, there they exceedingly fail likewise. These
build on a rotten foundation.

Thirdly, Anothrr rotten foundation is, The mere work done. They consider no
more than the external act of Religion, of Justice, of Charity, and so they
think they have obeyed the Commandment, and kept the duty, if they have done
this. This was the Pharisees foundation; But what woes does Christ pronounce
against them? He bids them look inward, cleanse the heart, the fountain: And
certainly, God being a Spirit, he will have all things done spiritually to him.
This opus operatum is the foundation of most men's Religion, not attending to
the manner, whereas it is a known saying, God loves Adverbs better than Nouns;
not what, but how is this and this done?

Fourthly, Another rotten foundation is, The goodness, yea supposed perfection
of the work they do: Especially if men be poisoned with Popish Doctrines about
the ability to keep all the Commandments of God, and that what they do is
meritorious of salvation. Some Popish Interpreters do greedily catch at that
expression, 2 Timothy 6.19 where rich men are exhorted to works of liberality,
that thereby they may lay up in store for themselves a good foundation. But by
this good foundation is meant a certain and sure happiness, which is not
merited by such actions, but graciously promised as a reward. This is a most
presumptuous and arrogant foundation, thus to build upon thy own self, and with
the Pharisee to trust in thy own righteousness. How different was Paul from
this? he laid another foundation, when he desired to be found, not in his own
righteousness, but in that of Christ's, Phil. 3.18. Now all this arises from a
great ignorance of that total and universal pollution of man by nature.

Use of Admonition* to be awakened in this point. What is the foundation that
you have laid for a godly life? How are all your duties and actions built? Are
they founded upon Christ for strength, upon Scripture for direction, upon
justification for acceptance upon a sanctified nature for the root of all? Then
blessed, and thrice blessed art thou; blessed now in this life, but more at thy
death, and the day of Judgment, when the condition of wicked men will be most
cursed and miserable. But to whom has the Lord revealed this? Whose ear does
God open to understand this? Oh what a confusion will it be, to see all thy
Religion, all thy morality thrown into hell, for want of a sure foundation?
It Is a matter of heavenly skill and wisdom so to do thy duties, as they shall
eternally live with thee. What is a tree without a root in the midst of a
storm? What is a ship without an anchor? The same art thou, who have no sound
bottom to stand upon. Think then, whether this Sermon may not make thee to
begin all anew? Thou must pull down all thy old building, and raise up a new
one.

As a wise master builder I have laid the foundation, and another builds
thereon.

I have deferred the handling of the foundation of all our comfort and
salvation, till we arrive at the next verse, and so shall take up those
Particulars that are observable in the text, not hitherto handled; as the
Adjunct or Quality Paul attributes to himself in this Office: As a wise master
builder.

Here it may seem vainglory in Paul to write after this manner. Does not this
expression savor of pride and self-conceit, rather then of the humility and
meekness of Christ's Spirit? Is it not Solomon's Rule, Let another man's mouth
praise thee, not thy own? No: We may not charge Paul with any folly, or va^ity
in this thing, especially when we shall consider the Reason* moving him
thereunto. From whence Observe,

That it is not vanity, but a duty in some cases, Observe. Of Ministers praising
themselves.
for the Ministers of the Gospel, to magnify and set up their Work and Office.

It Is not vainglory, or self conceit, but sometimes a necessary duty to
justify themselves and their Office; otherwise, the dishonor would much
redound to God, and danger be conveyed to men's souls.

To clear this, (though I intend to be brief in it) because as Tully said of
Hortensius that eloquent Author. He praised eloquence to the Heavens, that he
himself might be carried up with it. So people are apt to think whatsoever the
Ministers of the Gospel say in this case, they do it for their own ends. I
shall only instance in what cases they may do it, and what manner; for he that
does it, had need be an Argus full of the eyes of wisdom and prudence, the
matter is so nice and obnoxious to ill interpretation. As

First, Then they may exalt their Office and work, In what cases Ministers may
magnify their Work and Office.
when false and malicious slanders and calumnies are raised against them by the
ingratitude of the world: When they devise all manner of evil, and lay it to
their charge; here they are bound to preserve their good name, and declare the
good things they have done, and of what necessary use their Office is. Habent
mores suas odores, and colores; odores in fama, colores conscientia. And
therefore it is not enough that our consciences be not black or pale through
guilt, but that we be the sweet savor of Christ, as Paul speaks it, 2 Corinthians. 2.15. Now this cannot be, unless they discover the falsenesse and
weakness of any unjust aspersions. Thus Christ himself, when the Jews talked
of stoning him; For which of my good works do you stone me? John 10 32. And so
the Ministers of God may plead, Why are you become enemies and adversaries? Is
it because we convince of sin? we inform of duty? we labor the eternal
salvation of men's souls? In such a case as this, (...) is no sin, though
Aristotle make the affected vain glorious discourse of a man's self, his fault.

Secondly, When there arise false Teachers, that under specious and fair words
would draw away their people to errors and falsehoods, it is then lawful to
justify themselves. This you shall observe very frequently in Paul. The ground
of saying this in this Text, was, that the people might not regard other
foundations then he had laid. And so in another place, especially 2 Corinthians.
11.22, 23. he does at large reckon up both his excellencies, and also his
indefatigable sufferings for the Gospel sake, and is very copious in it; yet
all this was no vain glory. Why? because it was in opposition to false
Teachers, who labored to bring him into disesteem; who endeavored to
represent Paul contemptible: And this makes him exalt himself.

Thirdly, When their is an undermining, or open endeavoring to overthrow the
very Office of the Ministry; to make it common. Herein also we see how men,
far from any pride and wild fire, have been zealously inflamed. Numb. 16.3.
There some took upon them to invade the Priests Office: Ye take too much upon
you; all the Congregation is holy as well as you: Wherefore lift you up your
selves above the people of God. How did this fact provoke Moses, that was the
meekest man upon the earth, and far from self-seeking and revenge? If these
men die a common death, the Lord has not sent me: And immediately the earth
swallowed them up all, and all that appertained to them. Those that did
sinfully strive to be as high as others, God throws them lower then others.
They lifted up themselves to Heaven, and he casts them lower then the earth.
Hence the Apostle, Let a man account of us as the Ministers and Stewards of
God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man, he speaks indefinitely, though never so great a
man, so learned a man, so gifted or gracious a man.

Thus you see there is a necessary cause of vindication, when the Office it
self is shaken.

Fourthly, In these two general Cases, which may comprehend all the rest, they
may set up their work and Ministry.

1. When the glory of God is apparently concerned in their sufferings and
debasement, when it is plain that reproach and dishonor will redound upon God
himself; then it is no modesty or humility to hold their tongue. And the Reason
is, they are Ambassadors and Messengers sent by God. Now, whatsoever reproach
and scorn is cast upon them, redounds to him that sent them. And

2. When there is an evident utility and profit for the people* Paul in many of
his Epistles, speaks so much about himself, not that he regarded applause, or
had any carnal designs; no, he could appeal to God, and had the testimony of
his Conscience; but it was for the good of Believers, that they might not be
seduced, or led aside in damnable ways. So that it is for your good, and not
ours, if these things be spoken off.

But now here are Cautions in such self-justification:

First, We must attribute nothing to our selves, as of our selves. Paul in this
very Text, speaks of the grace of God: He is but the Trumpet, that sounds not
of it self, but from the mouth that breaths in it: He is but the Pen of the
Writer: And therefore see how careful he is in another place, lest any man
should think of him above what he ought to think, 2 Cor. 12.6 Oh, this is an
admirable convincing way! When what we say, is still with the acknowledgement
of grace, and we are afraid men should look to our parts, to our abilities,
more then to Christ himself.

Secondly, It Is so to be done, that it may plainly be seen, we seek not any
earthly greatness, or glory of our own, but only that Christ and his own way
may be acknowledged. We see Christ himself, though he thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, yet looking upon himself as sent by the Father, he says; I
seek not my own glory, (Joh. 8.15.) but the glory of my Father that sent me.
Oh, admirable pattern for us to follow! And when Paul had spoken of this
authority and power he had, and pressed them so to walk, as that he might not
come with a rod, and was afraid he should come to them otherwise then they
desired, adds; Though we be accounted as Reprobates, Cor. 1.2. Undervalue and
despise us as you please, yet if you be holy, and keep in the truth, I shall
rejoice in my debasements.

Lastly, It must be necessarily, not voluntarily; even compelled to it. Thus
Paul, when he had exalted his sufferings, I speak as a fool, you have complled
me, 2 Cor. 12.11. Could he have done his duty without it, he would. Especially
you have a notable instance of Paul's modesty, 2 Cor. 12. where being to relate
some extraordinary Visions and Revelations, see with what humility he does it;
you cannot tell whether it was Paul or no: I knew a man in Christ, above
fourteen years ago. He had kept it silent all that while. Certainly by this we
see, that whosoever God gives extraordinary dispensations, he fills the persons
with much modesty: They do not boast of them: They do not despise others. And
thus John the Evangelist, whereas the other, when they speak of the Disciple
beloved by Christ, named him, John himself does not, because he was the man.

Use of Instrustion to people. To take heed how the Devil or his Instruments
ever seduce you, so as to contemn or withdraw from the faithful and powerful
Ministry of the Word. No marvel the Devil assaults it, because it is the only
Engine to batter down his Kingdom. I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning,
said Christ, when he sent his Disciples to preach, Luk 10.18. Certainly, thou
have never got good by it, or have forgot it, in that thou do reject it.
Paul uses this Argument to the Corinthians, that they should remember the
proof of Christ speaking in him to themwards, was not weak, but mighty, 2 Cor.
13.3. And let not this happily take thee off: Thou hear no more then thou
know already: I would come, if every day I might have new things, new
questions, and new opinions. For what is this but to be weary of the old Bible,
and to desire a new. To write the same things (says Paul) to you, it is safe,
Phil. 3 1. It Is a safe and sound way to hear the same necessary soul-saving
things: for the affections are slow to receive, though the understanding be
quick. You are not weary of the same sun, though it rise every day.

We proceed to the next particular in the Text, viz. the Event or consequent of
Paul's foundation, Another builds thereon. So then, Paul and the other
Apostles laid the foundation, in that they planted Churches at first; and all
that are to come after, are only to build on that. They must not divulge any
new necessary Articles of Faith, we must rest content with what is done by them
already. Observe,

That people are not to expect that Ministers should bring any other Doctrine
them what is laid by Christ and the Apostles already. Observe. Ministers are not
to preach any new Doctrine.


Religion is matter of Doctrine which we receive from the Scriptures, not
matter of invention, that we make of our own head. Thus even Timothy is
commanded only to build upon, not to lay any foundation: O Timothy, keep that
which is committed to thy charge, 1 Timothy 6.20 That good thing committed to thy
trust. The necessary truths of salvation are deposited in the Scripture, and
committed to faithful men. Now they must look they deliver the same: Aurum
accepisti, aurum read, as Lyriuens^s.

To open this* consider, That the Apostles sent by Christ, made it their
business to inform in all things necessary to be believed and done. They
declared the whole counsel of God by a lively voice, preaching to those that
lived in those days: It is true, they likewise informed of many other truths
and duties in Religion, that were not fundamental; but still wheresoever they
came, they preached Faith in Christ, and Rpentance: Faith in Christ, that
required the knowledge of things to be believed; and Repentance, that was about
things to be done. And indeed, if the Apostles had not laid down all things
necessary, their Commission would have been very imperfect, and it would have
redounded to Gods dishonor to send such foolish builders, that could not lay a
sound foundation. So that it is horrible presumption for any to think, that God
has revealed more to them then the Apostles. What the Apostles had not
revealed to them as necessary, we are not to think it necessary. Therefore

2. When the Apostles were to leave the earth, and could no longer by a living
voice commend those necessary things to them, it pleased God, that what they
had delivered by mouth, should be commended to writing. These things are
written (says John) that believing we might have eternal life. So then, the
believing of things written is enough to bring eternal life, Joh. 20 31. And
Timothy is commended, that from the youth up, he was acquainted with the
Scriptures, which were able to make him wise to salvation, 1 Timothy 3. Since
therefore the Apostles were taken into Heaven, the foundations that we have to
build on, are the Scriptures only. Hence though Christ be here called the
foundation, yet the Apostles and Prophets also are called the foundation, Ephesians.
2.20. upon which Believers are built; viz. secondary foundations. So that to
expect necessary things beyond the Scripture, is as vain as to look for another
Messiah with the Jews. He that cannot see with one sun would not see with an
hundred.

The use of Preaching notwithstanding the fullness of the Scripture.
3. Although the necessary foundations be thus laid, yet our preaching, and your
hearing is not in vain; for there is this further work to be done.

First, Those necessary things we are to explain more distinctly, and confirm
more plainly, that so Faith may be the more settled. Necessary Principles of
Religion, have many excellent conclusions latent in them; as fire lies in a
stone, which does not appear, but by striking out. The Ministry therefore is,
to explain, and distinctly to interpret these things. As the candle, though of
it self it has light enough, yet unless put on a candlestick, it cannot
enlighten the whole room: so the Word of God, though it be full of light, yet
there must be the interpretation and application of it. Therefore they are
commanded to divide the Word aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. The bread must be broken and
digested, else it cannot nourish. So that this building lies in the further
explication of what is believed: We do not preach nova but nove, not new
things, but in a new manner.

Secondly, Though we are only to build on this foundation, and no new thing be
expected, yet matters of Religion may be said to be new in themselves, or unto
us. In themselves, and so certainly there can be no new thing preached; for as
there cannot be a new Christ, or a new Scripture, so neither any new Faith:
Yea, the Apostles and Christ himself, did not bring any new necessary matter of
salvation, to what the Patriarchs and Prophets had before. The Old Testament
and the New are the same for the substance of Salvation, though there be new
Rites, and new Sacraments, and a clear explication. But in the second place,
things may be new to us: As in Popery, when the reformed Divines first preached
Justification by Faith, denied the merit of works, as also the Pope to be head
of the Church: These were said to bring a new Gospel: but it was a slander, it
was new only to men corrupted with errors, and living in ignorance, as the sun
is new to a man that was blind, but has received his sight.

Thirdly, This building upon the foundation lies in the powerful application
of necessary truths, to the hearts and consciencies of men. For the Scripture
that speaks generally, the Ministry that is to come particularly; that does as
Elisha, laid himself upon the Child mouth to mouth, and body to body, that so
life might be procured. To do by particular application of what is spoken
generally in the Word, this is the Ministry.

Use of Instruction. That it is a fundamental miscarriage in Religion to affect
any thing further then the Scripture and the Apostles have left to us: To
expect such new things as cannot be built on this foundation. Oh, take heed of
being weary of any point in Religion, because thou know it already! There is
a sinful itching both in Preachers and Hearers, many times in these things: As
they were weary of the Manna, because used to it. We are indeed to grow in
knowledge and in light, both Persons and Churches are to grow in a reformation;
yet they must grow within the same kind, as a Child grows in the parts of
mankind, he does not degenerate into another nature.

But let every man take heed, how he builds thereon.

We are now come to the later part of this verse, which is Exhortatory, Let
every man take heed, etc. By this he shows, that it is a matter full of
danger; his loss may be exceeding great: And then withal, a man had need use
much diligence and circumspection, otherwise he may think ^he builds gold and
silver, when indeed it is nothing but dross or lead.

And when he says, Every man] his meaning is only of Officers and Teachers,
he does not speak of private persons, though they also are to take heed they
put no false or erroneous sense upon the Scripture; but he speaks of public
Teachers, who by their calling and Offices are to build.

Now the Object of this Exhortation is, To take heed what they build. To build
after the foundation is laid, is the same with watering after planting. And it
implies a further continuation and illustration, explication and application,
as also a clearer confirmation of that matter, which is already laid down by
the Apostles. So that observe,

The Ministers of God are greatly to take heed, Observe. Of Ministers building
upon the foundation of Scripture by their preaching
that they preach no other thing, than what is already contained in the
Scripture. Or

It Is a dangerous thing to put that sense and meaning on the word of God, which
is not the true genuine sense of it.

They are with much care, fear and trembling, to consider, how they build upon
the Scriptures. And if Ministers are thus to take heed; then likewise all
others, who read and search the Scriptures, are to take heed of presumptuous
boldness, and irreverent ignorance in the perverting of it. The Scriptures are
called (...), the Testament, or Will of Christ. Now as it is a dangerous thing,
Gal. 3.15.
even by the Laws of a Land, to corrupt, forge or falsify a man's will: No
less capital is it to the soul of a man, any ways to pervert the Doctrine of
the Word of God, 2 Pet. 3.16. They that are unlearned wrest the Scriptures unto
their own destruction. See here, a man may damn his soul by wresting and
tormenting the Scripture, as it were upon a rack, to a contrary sense, then
what it intended. Oecumenius on the place says, It Is as great a sin to
pervert the writings of the Apostles, as it was to cut and mangle, or murder
their bodies.

To amplify this consider, There may be a twofold building or ADDITION to the
Word of God, either Destructive and Corruptive, A twofold building upon the
foundation.
such as wholly overthrows the true meaning and sense of the holy Ghost. And
this is a very dangerous sin. Or else Perfective and Explicative. Thus the
New Testament was added to the Old, as a perfective addition, not corruptive;
though it could not have been added, as Scripture, but that the Authors thereof
had a divine infallibility. And now what the Ministers of God in their
Ministerial labors do, it must be an addition explicative of the foundation,
though it be not with divine infallibility. We see here, God thought it not
enough to plant a people, but he will have in all ages men to water; not enough
to lay a foundation, but he will always have builders, who are to build on
this. For indeed we must not strain the Metaphor too far; Paul did not only
lay the foundation, but did also build up all the necessary parts of the house
also; only by this similitude he would show, That there must be always in the
Church public persons, who by their Office are to build up people in faith and
godliness; but they are not left to their own imaginations, to their own
thoughts; They must dress every Sermon at the glass of the Word; they must
preach as they read in Scripture.

Both the words of Scripture and the sense of Scripture must be attended unto.
Secondly, The word of God, which contains the foundation, that the Apostles
have laid, may be either considered in respect of the words only, or in respect
of the sense clothed with the words. Now indeed it is not the holy Scripture,
but when both the sense and the words go together: if a man take the words only
contrary to the sense, he abuses it, and so promoteth the Heretics, and the
Devils interest, not Gods glory. For the sense, that is the internal for me and
life of all the words. So that it is not enough to allege the words of the
Scripture: It Is not enough to be able to say, The Scripture says such words;
but the true sense and meaning, that is the soul; the words are the body only;
yet the words must be diligently attended unto, as that by which we come to
find out the sense. The Devil brought Scripture, but he perverted it, applying
it to an ill sense, and so all Heretics have alleged words, but not the true
sense breathing in them.

Why Ministers must take heed how they build upon the true foundation. 1. On
Gods part.
In the next place, Let us consider, Why we ought so to take heed, and that is
to be manifest in many respects:

First, From God himself, his glory and honor is greatly concerned herein. For
when we come in his Name, and pretend his Word, and indeed it is our own; What
is this but an high offense to God? God does severely threaten those Prophets
that broached their own thoughts, and preached the lies of their own
imaginations, yet said, Thus says the Lord. It Is no dallying matter; it is a
matter wherein much prayer, much humility, and many graces are to be exercised,
lest we should highly dishonor God. Oh if this were written in men's hearts,
they would be more tender and fearful in delivering their opinions, in saying,
This is the sense, or that is the sense. For when thou say, This is the
meaning of the holy Ghost, This is the truth of God, it behooves thee again and
again to consider, lest thou put thy lie, thy falsehood, thy sinful imagination
on God.

Secondly, On Gods part, we are to take heed, Because he has so severely
threatened all those that add or detract to his Word. Any that shall alter
these foundations, or change these bounds. If it be so heinous a matter among
men to remove a landmark, and to confound such bounds, how much more here?
That command, not to add or take away, is set home with a terrible threatening,
Revel. 22.18. If any shall add, God shall add unto him the plagues that are
in this book. Oh see then, what thou deliverest out of Scripture, as Gods word,
for the judgments of God are threatened to such as offend herein! And Prove.
30.6. Add not unto his words, lest he reprove thee. Thou challengest any
adversary to confute thee, see here, God will confute thee, he will reprove
thee, and thou be found a liar. Thou think happily such and such an
adversary will reprove thee, take heed God does not become thy enemy for such
an opinion. Oh then while we are preaching, and delivering our heavenly message
to you; we are under a dreadful account; we are to pray, and fear, and
consider lest God find us liars, and reprove us at last.

2. On the peoples part.
Secondly, On the peoples part. Therefore we ought greatly to take heed. For,

1. The word of God in the true sense of it, is the only food and nourishment
of the soul. That only does nourish and cause to grow. So that all those who
build up any thing but Scripture-truths, they give poison to a people to live
upon. How great a crime is it to poison any fountain, where all people fetch
their water? And thus all they do: and if it be not poison, yet it is but chaff.
What is chaff to the wheat? said the Prophet, Jer. 23.28. All corrupt errors,
though not fundamental, are called hay and stubble. It behooves us therefore to
take heed what we do, that we give you not gall for honey, poison for food. The
Apostle compares all Ministers in himself to a tender nurse, 1 Thessalonians. 2 now
she is careful to give fit and convenient food to her child: Scripture-truths
only can give nourishment.

2. If we build not on this foundation, the preaching of the Word loses those
glorious and excellent effects for which it is appointed. You have many
admirable properties of this; The word of God enlightens the mind, Psalm. ^9. It
sanctifies the nature, Joh. 17. It is the power of God to salvation, 1 Cor. 1.
It Is the instrument by which we are begotten anew, Heb. 4.12. It Is a two edged
sword to enter into and discover all the secrets of the heart. Now alas, are
the foolish and unwarrantable opinions and doctrines of men able to produce
such gracious effects? No, Gods word only is blessed to such great ends; and
therefore it is good to consider, that our Savior looking upon the people in
his days, it is said, His bowels were moved within him, as sheep without a
shep^erd, Mat. 9.36. They had the Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees then, who
read the Scripture, and taught in the Synagogue every day, yet because they
mingled their own sour leaven, they brought their chaff to the wheat, therefore
he pitied them.

3. On the peoples part, we had need to take heed, Because they are more prone
and ready to receive any corrupt sense, than the pure meaning of the Scripture.
A natural man perceives not the things of God, they are foolishness to him, 1
Cor. 2.14. he has enmity to them. Paul said, The Law was spiritual, but he was
carnal, Romans 7. No man naturally can love the Bible, in the true and heavenly
sense of it, (no more than a malefactor can his Judge), for that condemns
sin, that convinces of folly, that spares not, that flattereth not. As the
people of Israel could not endure the light on Moses his face, but they would
have a veil on it: So neither are people able to receive the true and pure
sense of the Scripture; it is too glorious, too spiritual, therefore they put a
veil upon it. Hence you see how quickly errors and false doctrines, especially
such which give license to sin, get a multitude of disciples. Paul complained
of this, when he said, They would suffer false teachers to abuse them, to
oppress them, 2 Cor. 11.20. The Corinthians would endure false teachers,
though they domineered over them, kept them in bondage, when yet they would not
bear Paul's Ministry. And did not many willingly suffer the Egyptian thraldom in
Popery, who would not endure the yoke of the Gospel? Thus Christ complained, If
any man come in his own name, you will receive him, John 5.43.

Lastly, On the Ministers part, it is necessary that he should take heed. For,
3. On the Ministers part.


1. He has not a Magistery, but a Ministry committed to him. He may not be a
Master to dictate and affirm what he pleases, but his Office is a Ministry, to
deliver nothing but what he reads. Thus Paul, That which I have received of the
Lord, I deliver unto you, 1 Cor. 11. If among men, Judges must not make new
Laws, but are strictly bound up to the Laws made to their hands: Then much more
are the Ministers of God bound up to their Rule, the Scripture; truth is
committed to our charge, we must be sure to render that in kind, which was
betrusted to us. And as Aristotle observes, He that is unfaithful in any
thing deposited with him, is worse than an open unjust, or unrighteous man,
because he wrongs the good thoughts and opinion the other man had of him, he
thought him faithful and honest, but he proves not so. Now every Minister
h^th the truths of God deposited (as it were) in his faithful custody.

2. He is accountable for all the sin and error people run into through his
neglect. If he indeed sound the trumpet, and warn the sinner, then he has
delivered his soul, and the blood of wandering sheep will never be required at
his hand; if he has used all means to keep them in the sheepfold, and they
would not. It behooves us therefore to take heed how we build, for herein we do
not only endanger our own selves, but others. The blind lead the blind, says
our Savior, and both fall in the ditch, Mat. 15.14. It was Luthers temptation
he had sometimes on him, Q^id si tu d^^naris, etc. What if thou by thy doctrine
are damned, and drawest many others to hell with thee? It Is true indeed, the
seduced are under a milder punishment then the seducers, yet they are not
excused. Those that received the mark of the ^^^st in the hands and foreheads,
though but followers, yet had not their name written in the book of life. This
certainly should make every one take heed what he delivers; for should he be a
snare to, or a murderer of other men's souls, the blood of the soul will cry
more terribly, than the blood of the body.

3. He must take heed, Because though a man do preach the substantials, and the
necessary things of salvation purely, yet if he add or mix any corrupt
opinions, though of a less nature, that man's salvation is very difficult: and
that the Apostle drives at in this place, If a man build gold and silver, that
is, the precious fundamentals, and afterward build hay and stubble, that is,
frothy, unsound and unsavory doctrine, though it does not overthrow the
fundamentals, that man shall be saved, yet so as by fire. I know it is a place
about which much fire of contention has been, but generally the most learned
do agree, That it signifies the difficulty of that man's salvation, he must go
through many tribulations, look for many afflictions, which will be as fire to
get his dross out. Oh do not then account such errors in judgment, so easily
venial, yea almost innocent, as the Socinians saying blind men are to be
pitied, not punished! The Scripture puts a severer character upon them.

Directions to Ministers and people, how to build aright upon the foundation.
In the next place, What is to be done both by people or Minister, that they may
both build and be built on a sure foundation, that they may not take dross for
gold?

1. Be much in prayer. That is the key to open all mysteries locked up
studying, praying, and temptations make a Divine, said Luther. Daniel was much
in prayer about studying those seventy weeks, and God instructed him, revealing
them to him.

2. Prayer is not enough, There must be a holy and godly life. Thou will never
understand Paul's sense, if thou have not Paul's spirit, nor David's Psalms, if
there be not such a spirit in thee, as was in David. He that does my will,
shall know whether the Doctrine be of God, or no, John 7.17.

3. Neglect not those external means which are requisite to understand the
sense of the author, as knowledge of the tongues, observation of the peculiar
phrases. For whereas the matter is sometimes wholly new, and supernatural; so
the words are not always used in the same sense, as humane Authors do.
Comparing also the Context, is very useful, and parallel places, consulting
also with the gifts and abilities of others. When Philip asked the Ethiopian,
Understand thou what thou read? How can I (said he) unless I have a
guide? Act. 8.31.

Use of Admonition, to all who take upon them to give the sense and meaning of
the word of God; let this Text be as a pillar of salt to season thee; it is a
dangerous thing to wrest Scripture: Thou that put it upon the rack, God
will put thy conscience upon the rack. Why do thou so proudly, so arrogantly,
so boldly meddle in this matter? The people of God are not to be kept in
ignorance, that is a Popish principle; but yet they must learn with humility
and self-denial, with the use of all means necessary. He must not be his own
master, he that is so, ^ath a fool to his scholar, say the Rabbis, and yet
this must not be so interpreted, but that he who brings truth may resist the
whole world, as one Paphnutius did an whole Council.

Use 2. That it is not enough to bring Scripture, to name many Texts, unless we
find out also the true and proper sense. This makes for the honor and dignity
of the Scripture, that all would fain authorize their tenants by that. It Is no
derogation to the Scripture, neither may it be called a nose of wax therefore,
but it exalts the Scripture the more.

Use 3. Of Exhortation to you people, as we are to take heed what we deliver,
so also what you receive, what you believe. It Is a very hard thing to reconcile
these two things, To give all the respect and obedience that is due and called
for by God, to your spiritual guides and teachers; and yet to exercise your own
faith and judgment likewise. He that does not run into one of these extremes,
either to neglect the Ministry, and to use his own eyes only, or else to put
out them, and rest only upon the eye of his guide, is a wise and a solid man.
Be thou careful to split upon neither of these rocks, but be wa^y what you
receive, and how you believe.

Verse 11. For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.
THis Text is a Reason of that Caution delivered in the verse before, Every man
must take heed how he buil^eth: Why? Because there is no other foundation but
Christ. To set up any thing in Christ's stead, or to deliver any thing contrary
unto Christ; this is here reproved. So that in the words, Christ is described;
secondly, the Ministers duty about him declared.

Christ is described: 1. By his proper Name Jesus, a Savior of his people. 2.
By his Office, Christ the Messiah, the anointed one. 3. Metaphorically, the
foundation, sometimes Christ is called the foundation; and sometimes the corner
stone; and all is to one sense, to show that he only supports the spiritual
building, whether we mean the Church in general, or every soul in particular.
Now, it is true, the Apostles Ephesians. 2. and Rev. 21. are called the foundation
also, but theirs is Fundamentum fundam^ntorum, as Austin; or fundamentum
fundans, and fundamentum fundatum: The Apostles are only foundations that are
built upon another foundation, viz. Christ. Or else the Apostles might be
called a foundation, because of their Doctrine; in which sense Peter is called
a rock: And Christ says, he would build his Church on him, viz. upon that
Doctrine confessed by him, Mat. 16.18. Though Cameron understands it of the
person of Peter, yet not in the Popish sense, but because Peter was to be used
as the first Person, who should preach the Gospel to the Gentiles: so that he
is the rock of the Church, because on his preaching first was built, the
declaration of the Gospel to the Gentiles: But this I affirm not. For, you see
here, he is not only the foundation, but the solitary foundation; No other.

Secondly, Their is the duty of the Minister, Any other can no man lay. Can
none; that is, none ought. Illud possumus, quod jure possumus. Observe,

That the Ministers of God ought to lay no other Foundation then Christ.
Observe. Of preaching Jesus Christ as the foundation.


They are to build their people upon no other rock. All is to refer to
Christ: All Threatenings, all Promises, all Commands, all Duties; they are to
bring to Christ As every thing in the Temple was covered with gold, so Christ
is to cover all things: To be in all things. But how is this to be unnderstood?
We shall show how many ways Christ is to be preached as a Foundation, How many
ways Christ is to be preached as a foundation.
and you the Hearers are to make use of him in that sense.

First therefore, He is to be laid down as the only foundation, in respect of
knowledge and instruction. We are to preach and set up him, as the great
Prophet and Teacher of his Church. He calls himself the light that came into the
world, Joh. 8.12. The Ministers, they are light, but as the Stars do lucere
luce aliena, with a borrowed light from the Sun; so neither do the Ministers
of the Gospel enlighten any other way but by light from Christ. Hence he was
prophesied of betimes, as the great Prophet whom God would raise up for his
Church; and for this end he is so often called the Word, because he does reveal
unto us Gods will, and God from Heaven commanded all to hear him, Mat. 17.5.
All the Prophets were the Prophets of Christ; all the Officers in the new
Testament, are the Officers of Christ. So that we are to declare that all
people, who expect Instruction, Reformation, and any profit by the Ministry,
must not build on man, but Christ. And this is the chief scope here. No man may
lay any other foundation: No man may set up any other Doctor or Teacher, viz.
principal, but him; as is to be seen in the former Chapter. And that is the
reason (say some) why Paul does so often name Jesus Christ in that Chapter. And
no marvel if he be the foundation, for none Teaches as he, both objectively
and subjectively. We all reveal the Object, and propound the Doctrine to your
ears, though none did so objectively as he did; but subjectively none can teach
as he: He gives the understanding heart; he opens the eyes to see, and the
ears to hear. Never therefore expect the powerful effect of the Ministry,
unless thou build on Christ more then the parts of a man. The abilities of the
man, these are but like Gehazi with the Prophets staff, they will not raise the
dead Child, unless Christ come himself. It Is true, we must not set up a
teaching of Christ, in opposition to the Ministry, as some did: They would have
no Ministry at all, but expect to be taught by him; yet as we must necessarily
use it, so it must be subordinate to Christ.

Secondly, We must preach Christ the foundation of all strength and power, from
whom we receive all ability to do any thing that is good. To lay free will for
a foundation; to preach up man's power, for Christ's power, will be found
st^ustble and hay, if not worse, when the fiery trial shall come Thus Joh. 15.
Without me ye can do nothing. O there he does excellently show! As the branch,
unless it be in the Vine, must wither, and can bring forth no fruit; so unless
a man be in Christ, and abide in him, he is not able spiritually to live or
move. And this is a necessary and excellent way of preaching Christ, when he is
set up as the only fountain of all our spiritual abilities, when the humane
strength of man is debased, and contemned; yea, discovered to be not only
impotent, but abominable and contrary unto God. Hence Christ is compared to
the Olive Tree, from whence we have all our fatness, Romans 11. And he calls
himself the life and the way, Joh. 11.25. The way, that is a Prophet: The life,
that is a foundation of all spiritual strength. Now in Popery, when there was
so much advancing of free will, and magn^fying the merit and worth of the good
works we did, Christ was much obs^ured. Therefore ^e are not only to exhort you
to pray, to repent, to reform, but to preach Christ as him by whom you must
have power to do those things. People generally make little, or no use of
Christ in this respect, when yet thou need him all the day long. I can do
all things, through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.

Thirdly, Christ is preached as a foundation, when he is exalted in our
Mi^istry, to be the head of the Church, and he that governs all things. The
head is for direction and government, and also for lively influence and
nourishment. And thus Christ is 1 Col. 1. to the 15. What divine and admirable
exaltations are there of Christ, setting him up above all things, and making
him the head of the Church, which is his body? Oh, the preaching of Christ's
Head-ship and supremacy is of great consequence! There had never been such bold
presumption, to be an universal head in the Church; never such tyranical
government therein; never such Angel-worship, and invocation of Saints, and a
thousand of those derrogatory Doctrines, had Christ been exalted as Head. Paul
says, They brought in worship of Angels, because they held not the Head, Col.
3.19 And that blasphemous Doctrine, of making the Pope an head of the Church,
though they would extenuate it, by calling him a ministerial head, is a gross
invasion of Christ's right. Though Christ thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, yet the Pope ought to think it robbery to be equal with Christ. Who
then can excuse Bellarmine from blasphemy, who is not afraid to apply that
promse of Esaias, Behold I lay in Zion a foundation stone, to the Pope, though
secondarily? Look we then, that are Ministers, and you that are people, To keep
this Doctrine pure. Christ is the head of the Church: All direction and
government must be from him: All vivificall influence into the Churches is by
his spirit. So that as the body cannot live or move without the soul, so
neither can the Churches of Christ spiritually move, without life received from
him. The Scripture does often delight to use this similitude.

Fourthly, Christ is to be set up the only foundation, in respect of mediation
and intercession with God. We can have no approach to God without him, because
of the great gulf sin has raised between him and us. He is a consuming fire,
and we are stubble, without Christ. Concerning Deus Absolutus, as Luther would
say, The soul of a man may not think of him without horror, or despair; but as
he is Deus relatus, related to us in Christ. And this is (indeed) the primary,
and the most noble setting up of Christ as the foundation, when we again and
again instruct you of what distance and contrariety there is between God and a
sinner; and that only by his mediation there can be an agreement. There is one
Mediator, (says the Apostle) 1 Timothy 2.5. No man may, can, dare, to draw nigh
to God, or think of him, without this Mediator. Oh, but how practically
ignorant are people of Christ herein! They do not go to God in Christ's Name:
They do not desire, by Faith to bring Christ (as it were) into Gods presence,
that he may behold us in him; that we may be Jacobs in our eldest Brothers
clothes. As Joah bid the Messenger tell David, when his anger should rise,
because they had the worse in battle, that Vriah is slain; and this quieted
David. So it is here: When the wrath of God shall be ready to arise against
thee, Why have thou b^oken this Command? Why have thou trasgressed this Law?
Then say, Christ was killed: Christ was the Lamb slain. And this will appease
the wrath of God. Rev. 10.1. Christ is there described with a rainbow upon his
head, very fitly. As God said, He would not drown the world any more, but look
upon the rainbow, and remember that Covenant of mercy: So it is here; God will
not damn the poor sinner repenting and believing, but he will remember this
rainbow; he will look on Christ. Now this preaching of Christ, has been
wonderfully obscured in setting up other Mediators, other Intercessours; so
that Christ was seldom spoken of, but the Virgin Mary, St Francis, and others.
And this very point was the first occasion of coming out of Popery, The
obscuring of Christ's Mediatourship. They equalized St Francis to Christ: They
(indeed) said, the way to Heaven was by Christ, but it was easier by St
Francis. So that if you look upon the Doctrine of other Mediators, about the
Virgin Mary; about their Canonized Saints; about Images; about Indulgences Oh,
the black clouds that were drawn over that glorious Sun of righteousness! Let
then Ministers and people keep to this; look to this: For without it, all the
marrow of Religion is lost. Only by Christ his mediation with God. God is an
enemy to me, and I to God. And for this end were all those Sacrifices appointed
in the old administration, to show, that by Christ was all reconcilement and
atonement. Do not thou then think thy tears must do that, which belongs to
Christ's blood. Thy tears, thy humiliation, thy broken heart for sin, is
indeed necessary; but to think by these to have a mediation with God, is to
build another foundation then what the Apostles laid. And truly, if sin be
rightly considered, in the infinite aggravation of it, we we must quickly
yield, none but who is an infinite person, can be our Mediator.

Fifthly, From this flows another necessary way of preaching Christ a
foundation, viz. Of acceptance of our persons and duties. Our Justification is
built only on him, and all the sweet savor that our duties have, is through
him. Thus Paul does frequently make Christ the P^llar and foundation of all his
boldness and acceptance of grace through him. Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have
boldness and free access. We cannot inherit or obtain a blessing, unless we
come in our elder Brothers clothes, as was even now said before. He is made
unto us wisdom, righteousness, and sactification; yea, we are made the
righteousness of God through him, 2 Cor. 4. ult. Which expression first used
by Ambrose, but found in Cal^in by Pigh^u^, was a means to bring him off to
imputed righteousness. And Paul throws away all his own works as d^^g, in
comparison of the righteousness through faith in Christ, Phil. 3. Thi^ i^ a
special foundation; few are acquainted with this Gospel foundation. The^ build
on their works, on their duties; they rest on them as a foundation, nor making
Christ all in all. He is the Altar from whom the incense of the Prayers of the
Saints is accepted. As Jacob said, Let not me see your face, unless you bring
Benjamin. Thus God says, Pray not, but in the name of Christ: Give not thanks,
but through Christ. What a Mystery was this to the seduced Belivers, even in
the Apostles times? The Epistle of the Romans, and especially to the
Galathians, is wholly to settle this foundation: That it was not the
righteous^ess of the Law i^ their own persons, or ^f works they were to seek
after, but a righteousness of Faith through Christ. Yet where is the Christian
to spiritual, so Gospelized, as to go out of all his duties, resting on Christ
only? He is diligent and careful in the use of them, but leans on Christ
only. We are the circumcision, who worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus only, Phil. 3.3.

Sixthly, Christ is to be preached as the foundation of all fullness, for all
our necessities and spiritual wants. The people of God, they sit dejected
through the^r nakedness and poverty. Oh, they would have better hearts, more
fruitful lives! and they complain and complain, but they do not make use of
Christ's fullness, for all their wants. He is the fountain, their streams are to
be replenished by him. Of his fullness, we all receive grace for grace, Joh.
1.16 That is, abundance of grace, as some; or grace, answering the grace in
Christ. And Col. 1. It pleased God, that in him should all fullness dwell. So
that the soul cannot be cast into such straights, as not to know where to be
supplied. There is the fullness of the fountain, and therefore the vessel may
well be filled: This is the fullness in the Head, therefore the members may
thrive and flourish It Is a sad thing to consider how unacquainted even the
godly are in this point. They do not improve Christ: They do not go to his
fullness. As the Mothers breasts are filled for the Child, and it is an ease to
the Mother to have the Child to suck them: Thus Christ received the fullness of
grace, as an Head for us, and by Faith we sucking of it, do exceedingly please
and honor Christ.

Use of Instruction. What it is to preach Christ, even to set him up in all
this glorious fullness; To represent him in all these Offices and Perfections
for us. It Is true (indeed) there are few people that can prize him, that can
see the glory of these Properties. They admire nothing but the pleasure of
si^ne, and the glory of the world. Therefore our work is not so often to set
forth the beauty of Christ, as the foulness of sin, and the torments of Hell.
We like John P^p^ist, are to prepare a people for Christ; to cast down high
mountains; to wound and break the heart of sinners; to take them off from all
false foundations. The ignorance, stubbornness, and stupidity of most hearers,
do call for the two-edged sword to wound and cut, not for balm and oil to be
poured in their wounds. But yet certainly, this is our main work, to preach
Christ in this his heavenly glory. Although, to speak properly, (as is to be
showed in time) to preach Christ, is to preach also all the duties, all the
threatenings, all the Commands Christ required. To preach Repentance, is to
preach Christ; but we take it most strictly in this place. Oh then, that our
Auditories were such, to whom Christ in all his glory might be displayed; such
as we might have into this Wine-celler every day; such as might be invited to
this Banquet, and heavenly Feast that the Gospel has provided. A people that
know the the need of Christ; that desire and thirst after Christ: That say with
the Church, I will hold him, and will not let him go. Bernard did not like to
read Tully's Works in all his eloquence, because he did not find Christ there.
How should thou in all prayers, duties, conference, still desire to enjoy
Christ? Saying with the Church, I am sick of love.

The Ministers of the Gospel are to lay no other foundation but Christ Jesus.
If ye are branches, he is the Vine: If ye are the body, he is the Head: If ye
the building, he the Foundation. He is the Rock, He is the Root. Heb. 1.3. He
upholdeth all things by the Word of his power in Creation, much more in
Redemption.

Two or three Particulars more we are to instance in, by which it may appear in
what Christ is laid a foundation. And

Seventhly, He is to be preached as the Fountain of all the happiness, joy, and
spiritual content the godly hearer can have. We are to preach Christ as the
center in whom all the lines of your hope, love, and desire are to meet. Thus
Paul himself, I determined to know nothing but Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2.
The Greek words are comparative, Christ crucified rather then any thing else.
There is no Doctrine, no Opinion; there is no outward or earthly advantage that
I desire to know, but Christ. And in many other places, you have Paul despising
and renouncing all privileges: To be a Jew, was nothing; Circumcision, was
nothing: To be an Apostle, to be a pure Roman; all these were nothing with
Paul, in respect of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ. Therefore it is,
that Christ is compared to our King, to our Husband, to our Head; because all
our affections, desires, and inclinations, should be toward him. And this is
so necessary a foundation, that no man can be Christ's Disciple, that does not
attain to this; that does not hate Father, and Mother, and Children, for his
sake. Oh then, consider, Where is thy joy, thy love? Upon whom is thy heart
set? If it be on any thing but Christ, thou errest in the Foundation. Oh, but
how hard a thing is it, thus to Disciple our Auditors! Some have the world for
Christ, some their lust for Christ; and thus instead of building gold and
precious Stones, they build dung and silth.

Eighthly, Christ is to be preached as the person with whom we are to close in
all Ordinances. We are to look for Christ, and enjoy him in every Prayer, in
every Ordinance. Any duty without Christ, is like the body without the soul;
the shadow without the substance. Truly (says the Apostle) our Communion and
fellowship is with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. Thus
Christ is said to come to us, and sup with us: By which phrases is employed,
that the heart of a man should not rest in any duty, and stay there, but go to
Christ in it. As they that looked for Christ's body, were not content to see the
linen where his body lay, but did still seek after him: It was not enough for
the Church to be in the Garden where the Spices and Flowers did smell, unless
she found her Beloved there. And thus it is not enough to come to any duty, to
pray, to hear, to draw nigh in any Ordinance, unless we meet with Christ
himself. But to whom are these things known? Is it not with us as with little
Children, they can take a Book, they look on it, turn over the leaves, but know
not any of the sense of it? Thus it is with many people, they come to pray, to
hear, to the Ordinances; but to speak of Christ enjoyed by them, to have
spiritual Communion with Christ in them, is such spiritual sense, they
understand not. That was the great sin of the Jews, they rested in the
Ordinances and duties of the Law, and never looked out to Christ: And against
this the Apostle does so vehemently dispute. And thus we do with Ordinances of
the Gospel, people generally rest in the external performance of them, and not
on Christ in them; a^ if the Wise should be content with the Picture of her
Husband, not cari^g for the Husband himself. The preaching of Christ as a
foundation in this respect, ^s of such practical necessity, that all true
godliness lies in this. The Apostle speaking the quintessence of all
godliness says, We are the Circumcision, who have no confidence in the flesh,
but rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.3. This is praying; this is hearing; this
is the true performance of any religious duty, when we have no confidence in
them, but rejoice in Christ Jesus only.

Lastly, We are to preach Christ, not only as the foundation of our approaches
to God, but of all Gods gracious actions and visitations to us. We are not only
to come to God in Christ's name, but to expect that God will come to us through
Christ. God is in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 1.19. We are
justified in Christ, and saved in Christ. All Gods gracious actions vouchsafed
to us, are founded upon Christ as the meritorious cause of them. It Is rue the
indeed, predestination, though it be in Christ, for the accomplishment of all
our spiritual mercies, yet it was not for Christ. This the Orthodox do well
maintain by Scripture, that Gods predestinating of us in the Original of it, is
wholly from the sovereign power, and good counsel of God; yea, that Christ
himself is the effect of Predestination, from that good pleasure of his, he
gave his Son for us. But then all the eff^cts of Predestination,
Justification, Adoption, Remission, Sanctification, Salvation, these all are
bestowed for Christ's sake. They cost blood, even the blood of his only Son,
ere we could be partakers of them. Thus Christ joyneth Heaven and Earth
together; makes a Reconciliation between a provoked God and a sinful sinner.
And this the Apostle considers, when ^e says, That by him all things are
reconciled in Heaven and in Earth, Col* 1.20. Thus you see, Christ is a
Fountain always running: We Ministers, and you people, may always draw out
there, and yet the Fountain be never dry. He is like those waters of Ezekiel,
that arise higher and higher: In these an Elephant may swim. We may still
discover more excellency, more fullness in him. The Queen of Sheba had no
spirit to see Solomon in all his glory; but behold a greater then Solomon here.

Reasons why Ministers are to lay no other foundation but Christ.
In the next place, let us consider the Reasons why we Ministers are to lay no
other foundation but Christ: To make him all in all.

First, It Is the main end and scope of the Scriptures only to exalt Christ, and
the end of the Ministry should be the same with the end of the Scripture. All
the Prophets before Christ, they witnessed of the Messiah; still they comforted
the people with promises of his coming. Abraham, though so long before Christ's
Incarnation, yet it is said, He saw Christ's day, and rejoiced, Joh. 8.56. All
those Sacrifices which were immediately ^t the beginning of the world did look
to Christ, they typified him. Noah offered a Sacrifice, and God did smell a
sweet savor of rest, Genesis 8.^1. Alas, Could the material Sacrifice do that?
God cares not for the Rams and Bullocks upon the hills, it smells there
offensive; but it was because of Christ. Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices thou
would not have, then said I, Lord I come, Heb* 10.9. All those Rams, those
Bullocks, those Goats, they all did typifie a Christ. The people that then
lived, ought not to think, that pardon of sin could be had by shedding of their
blood. Especially, the Covenant of grace that God made with Abraham, and
renewed so many times, did relate to Christ, the seed in whom all Nations were
to be made blessed. And it is good to consider how, when the Church was in any
great extremity, the Prophets would then comfort it about Christ. Isa. 9. To us
a Son is born. And Isaiah 53. he does as plainly prophecy Christ's
sufferings, as the Evangelists relate it; insomuch, that some have called
Isaiah the fifth Evangelist. And the Prophet Micha, He shall be our peace, when
the Assyrian shall come into our land, Mich. 5.5. Thus then you see, that all
the Old Testament does wholly tend to magnify Christ; and as for the New
Testament, that is wholly spent, either in relating the History, or the
gracious Effects of Christ; condemning all Doctrines and Opinions that would
set up any thing in Christ's room.

Secondly, As the Scripture, so Gods great purpose and counsel from all
eternity, was, to set up Christ, and to have him glorified. Therefore would God
take such a way, as that by his Son all mercy should be obtained, that so all
honor, glory, and praise, might be for ever given to him. Hence it is, that we
read of God the Father sometimes appearing in a glorious manner, and owning of
him. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, viz. with man kind,
(Mat. 3.17.) hear him. It Is disputed among Divines, whether there could be any
other way for our Redemption and Salvation, but by him; but who can tell, what
God absolutely may do, or not do? To be sure, God has determined on this way,
as that wherein the glory of the Father, and of the Son, may be more
magnified. If then God was pleased to have all glory given to Christ, and to
have him set up in all things, it is a great Reason we should honor him, whom
God would have us honor.

Thirdly, We must preach Christ the foundation, because in him there is such a
Treasure of the riches of Gods Grace, and Gods Love; that the Angels, they were
never satisfied with this point. How greatly the Angels were affected when
Christ came into the world, there Hymn signifies: As also how speedy they
were to be Evangelists, to bring glad tidings of a Christ. Glory be to God on
high, in earth peace, and good will to men, Luke 2.14. This Song is the
foundation of all Religion and Comfort. Yea, The Angels (says Peter, 1 Pet.
1.12.) desire to search into this Mystery: (...), to stoop down, as they did to
look into the Sepulcher, or as men do to behold themselves in a Glass. If
therefore the Angels, such pure and heavenly substances, be so affected with
this way and Doctrine of Christ, how much more we? For we need him more then
they. Some Divines indeed, say, The Angels needed Christ to confirm them: And
in this sense, he is their Head; but a Mediator of an atonement, he was not
unto them as he is to us. Consider that place, Ephesians. 3.10. By the Church and
the Ministry thereof, the manifold wisdom and riches of Gods grace in Christ,
are made known. So that the very Angels are glad to hear, and know this
Doctrine about Christ.

Fourthly, Therefore are we to exalt Christ in our Ministry, to lay him the
foundation, because in Heaven, though Christ will then lay down the exercise of
his Mediatory Kingdom, yet the glory and honor must be given unto him for
ever. The Saints in Heaven, will for ever acknowledge the glory, the happiness,
the blessedness they have to be by Christ. Is it not necessary therefore to
instruct you in that work, which we are to do to all eternity? Christ is not to
be laid aside in Heaven. His blood, his sufferings, his atonement will never be
forgotten: For, only by Christ, is their such a place as an Heaven; only by him
is salvation possible. Why then should not that truth fill our mouths and our
hearts here, which will possess our souls to all eternity?

Fifthly, The necessity of preaching Christ the foundation, arises from the
ignorance of people, who do grossly err about Christ, both Doctrinally and
Practically.

Doctrinally: For though Christ be in every man's mouth, yet few have knowledge
of his Person and his Offices. Though they be called Christians from Christ,
yet they can give no good account of their knowledge of him. And if this be
eternal life to know Jesus Christ, John 17.2. certainly the gross and
notorious ignorance in many, proclaims them far off from the Kingdom of
Heaven. How can thou hope in Christ, and believe in Christ, who know not
what Christ was, and for what end he came into the world?

And then Practically many are ignorant of him. They feel not the necessity of
him as a Physician, as a Mediator: They perceive not at what a distance sin
has cast them from all hopes: They feel not the arrows of the Almighty darted
into them: They feel no l^ad or burden of sin upon them, and therefore the
Name and Office of Christ, is not welcome to them.

Sixthly, The necessity appears, because of the subtilty and emnity of Satan;
who has continually set himself against Christ and his Church. I hat as at the
first ingresse into Christ's Ministry, he violently assaulted him, and never
left opposing his person, so ever since he has labored to obscure Christ, and
traduce his way. In the first age of the Church, then he set against the Person
of Christ: Hence came up those many Heretics, some denying he was God,
saying, He was only man; Others, Only God, and not a man, but in the appearance
of a man. Some confounded his Natures, some multiplied his Personality; so that
all the subtle power of the Devil, was, to overthrow the Person of Christ. But
in this latter age, he set against the Offices of Christ. And thus in Popery
(though Socinians revive those old blasphemies) his Priestly Office, his
Prophetical, his Kingly; all those were quite darkened by their Mass and
Indulgences: and many such abominable derogations from Christ.

Seventhly, We have the more need to exalt Christ, because there is pro^enesse
in every man to trust in his own works; To rest upon his own righteousness; To
advance and set up nature. Now, so much as these are exalted, so much is Christ
debased. We see our own natures in the Jews, though it was in those glorious
times, wherein Christ, and the Apostles manifested themselves, yet men did
still seek to be justified by the works they had done: Their endeavor was to
establish their own righteousness, though that, like Dagon before the Ark, did
fall to the ground before Christ; and truly, such were greater enemies to
Christ, more then profane Publicans and sinners. So that the Scripture
preaching of Christ, will drive men out of their civil righteousness, out of
their formality, and confidence in themselves, which is the strongest hold that
the Ministry has to batter. We may sooner dissolve those gross acts of
wickedness, then remove this mountain of self-righteousnesse. Yet, if Christ's
Righteousness, his worth be all, why will thou be a Christ to thy self?

Use of Instruction. What matter of woe and lamentation it is, to see so few
build upon this foundation? Some put their trust in riches, in charriots and
horses; some in the works they do; and thus Christ, whom God designed to be all
over glorious, is not glorified by us. Examine your selves in this one thing
among others, Is Christ the bottom and foundation of all thy love, joy, and
delight? Art thou affected with him in a spiritual manner, as the Church is? Is
he the chiefest of ten thousands? Do men of the world come and ask thee, What
is thy beloved more then others? What is there in Christ, more then any thing
else? Can thou say, as Aristotle to him who asked why such colors refresh
sight, It was a blind man's question? So, this is a natural man's, an earthly
man's question. It Is a sign thou never did taste of his goodness, of his
power: It Is a sign thou have not eaten of his Honey-combes, or were fed on his
spiritual dainties, that do make such questions. Never lay claim to Christ,
if Father, Mother, Riches, Honors, and thy own life be dearer to thee then
Christ is.

For no other foundation can any man lay, but Christ Jesus.

In how many particulars Christ is to be preached as a foundation, and the
reasons thereof, you have heard. I shall now remove some Objections, that so
the truth may be more cleared, and then give you the Properties and
Encouragements or Privileges those people have, who are built on Christ this
foundation. And

First, It may be objected, How can Christ only be preached as a foundation?
Object.
For is not the Doctrine about a God, that there is a God, and but one God; Is
not this a foundation? Does not the Apostle say, He that would come to God,
must believe that he is, and a rewarder of those that seek him? So that this
foundation must be laid, as well as about Christ. And it is made eternal life,
to know God the Father, the only true God, as well as Christ, John 17.12. Where
the object of our faith, that is fundamental, is divided into that of God, and
of Christ, the (...), and the (...). Thus also the Doctrine of the Trinity,
That there are three, and these one God, is a foundation, because we are
baptized into the Name of these three, and the knowledge of them must needs be
fundamental.

To answer this. When we say, Christ is to be laid as the only foundation, Answ.
that is exclusive of all humane foundations, it does not exclude God the
Father, or God the holy Ghost, but inclu^es them rather. So then, we are not to
preach Jesus Christ, as the foundation of all our comfort, peace and salvation,
as that God the Father, and the holy Ghost are to be shut out of this. No, they
had all their appropriated working in this great Redemption of mankind. And
therefore as in those places, where God the Father is said to be the only God,
and one God, that is not exclusive of the other persons, but of made and
feigned gods, of Idols made gods by men: So it is here, Christ Jesus is preached
as the foundation, yet God the Father, and the holy Ghost, have their peculiar
workings also, though only the second Person is the Mediator.

And therefore secondly, Christ Jesus cannot be preached as the foundation,
unless the Doctrine of God the Father, and the holy Ghost be also made known.
Hence are those expressions, He that knows the Son, knows the Father
also. And, He that denies the Son, denies the Father; And he that honors
the Son, honors the Father, John 8.19. John 5.23. The Doctrine of Christ
as Mediator, cannot be laid down without the Doctrine of God the Father,
giving his Son to be thus a Mediator for us, and the Spirit of God, as
applying, working, and sealing all those benefits, that Christ has purchased.
Hence Christ does often acknowledge the Father in that work he came to do for
mankind. So that Christ Jesus is the foundation; but there may be a more
explicit revealing of what is necessarily implied in this foundation.

A second Objection is, Is Christ only to be preached as the foundation? Object.
And are people to be built upon him? Then what need Ministers preach of any
thing else but Christ? What need they preach of faith and repentance?
Especially, Why should they preach of the threatenings, and the curse of the
Law, of the torments of Hell? Does it become the Ministers of the Gospel to be
sons of thunder? Have they any work to do, but to offer Christ to every one?
Every Sermon, should it not be an Ho to every one that is thirsty, naked, or
miserable, that is burdened and laden to come to Christ?

Thus indeed some have run into extremity, Answ.
and thought Christ was not preached, because he is not always proffered as a
Savior to sinners, but the Law and Duties, and Hell torments are preached. Now
to this we say many things:

First, When the Ministers of God preach duties, the work of repentance, or
mortification; they preach them not as foundations, They do not lay them in
Christ's room, and therefore they do not cross this Text. Does not this Paul,
who is so careful to lay no other foundation but Christ, diligently exhort in
other places to avoid sin, to live in the fervent practice of holy duties?
Who is more zealous in this way than Paul? Paul to these very Corinthians, has
many severe admonitions, to make them humble and sorrowful for their sins,
yet he did not lay another foundation, because these are preached only as the
way whereby Christ may be obtained. We do not then transgress this Text, when
we preach repentance to the sinner, humility to the proud man,
heavenly-mindedness to the earthly man, righteousnnesse to the unjust man,
chastity to the unclean man. We do not forget our Office, we do not run from
our Text, because we preach them not as a foundation. Indeed if any preach them
so as to rest on them, to put confidence in them, this man lays another
foundation; but so do not the Orthodox, we preach Christ the meritorious cause,
duties are the way, not the cause. And although Christ be said to be in a
different sense the way, yet duties are the way, Christ is the way effectively
and meritorious; but so are not duties.

Secondly, Though the Ministers are to lay no other foundation, yet they are to
build upon this; they must enlarge themselves in the explication of this
foundation. They must not build hay or stubble, but gold and precious stone: So
that we are not only to lay the foundation, but to add all other things that
may make us a comely building upon Christ.

Thirdly, To preach Christ, is not only to preach Christ as the Object matter,
but all the things Christ would have us to preach. That is to be observed, we
preach Christ when we preach all those things he has commanded, as well as
when he is the subject matter of our Sermons. When Paul about the Lords Supper
said, I delivered unto you, that also which I received of the Lord Christ. Here
he preached Christ, as well as when he said, This is a faithful saying, Christ
came into the world to save sinners. So that here may be a great mistake, thou
think Christ is never preached, but when he is named, when he is the matter
of the Doctrine and Use: Yet, when we preach the whole counsel of God, and
deliver what ever he has commanded us to reveal to our people, then we preach
Christ. Thus the Apostles in their voyages and journeys where they went, are
said to preach Christ; and in those Sermons, they did not only preach Jesus to
be the Messiah, but also commanded all other duties of faith, repentance, love,
as the Auditories did require.

Fourthly, We are to preach duties, but in reference to Christ. Take any
particular grace, that the Ministers of the Gospel provoke men to; this cannot
be done without bringing the soul to Christ; and therefore though the Ministers
of the Gospel do not in every Sermon name it, yet it is to be supposed: As for
example, take repentance; we say, every ungodly sinner, unless he repent,
unless sin be a burden, an heavy bitterness to him, and he fully forsake
it, he must necessarily perish. Now many ways Christ is concerned in this. For,

1. He cannot repent and be humbled for sin, unless Christ give him
strength. Without me ye can do nothing. The branch separated from the tree has
no moisture, no juice in it, John 15. Thus a man without Christ has (...), an
hard heart, a withered heart, an heart without any moisture, any softness, so
then Christ is here implied.

2. Repentance cannot be Evangelical and filial, without Gods love in Christ.
Judas did repent, the Scripture calls it so, but because there was only gall in
it, and no honey, only horror and terrors, and no faith to allay those waves;
Therefore his very repenting and despairing was a grievous sin. So then to
preach such a repentance as drives from God, fills the heart with cursed
horrors, and hated of God, and thereby to run to hills and mountains to cover
us from God: Or to put a man upon such penal and afflicting labors to the
flesh, that may satisfy and appease God: This is to bid men bring wild and
sour grapes for sweet: This is to preach from Christ, not to preach Christ. But
repentance truly preached is to have our sorrow for sin, accompanied with
faith in the promises, and a resting upon tht blood of Christ. Thus as it is in
repentance, so in every grace. When we preach it, we preach Christ, because by
him we only have ability to do it, and through him only have acceptance, and
as we said, though the Ministers in every exhortation do not thus name Christ,
yet this is to be supposed.

Lastly, We do not transgress this Text, no not when we preach the Law, the
threatenings, the torments of hell, because these are to drive us out of our
selves, to make us see our own poverty and wickedness, that so Christ may be
the more welcome. Christ himself, though sometimes he calls the heavy laden to
him in a meek way; yet when he has to do with such as trusted in their own
righteousness, and found no need of his Mediatorship, he calls them Hypocrites,
he bids a woe to them, he threatens them with hell. And Paul tells you in his
own experience, he had never come to prize Christ, to esteem him, had not the
Law discovered sin to be out of measure sinful; then he died, then he was
undone, then, Oh miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me? What shall I
do? And thus Peter converted three thousand by conviction of a particular
sin they had committed, viz. the murder of Christ, and the aggravation of it,
and this pricked them at heart. And so Paul being called to preach of faith in
Christ to Felix, he presently preaches about righteousness and temperance,
because Felix lived in the two contrary vices; and also of the Judgment to
come. Thus he would have brought Felix to the esteem of Christ. So that to
preach the Law in the purity of it, in the cursing nature of it; to preach
hell, and the eternal torments thereof, is necessary, because this is to make
way for Christ. This is to put iron in the fire, that so being softened, it may
be put into any fashion.

Thus we have removed the Objections, and showed you, That though other things
are to be preached besides Christ, yet reductively all things are brought to
him at last. They are but as the rivers that come from the Sea, and empty
themselves therein.

I shall conclude thi^ Text, with showing you, The great advantages which those
people have, who are built on Christ.
The great advantages that people have who are built on Christ.

First, They are a sound steadfast people, not carried away as the chaff, and
straw is with every wind of Doctrine, Heb. 13. Jesus Christ the same yesterday,
and for ever; and then follows, Be not carried about with diverse and strange
Doctrines. The Connection is thus made by some, The truth of Christ, the
Doctrine of Christ is still the same. And therefore do you retain the same
steadfast faith. Oh when men are not built on Christ's Doctrine, but their own
opinions, their own conceits, they have Reubens curse, Unstable like water! Col
2. They that fell to the worshipping of Angels and Saints did not hold the
head; Look then to what thy faith, thy soul is bottomed upon, whether Christ be
thy teacher, or thou be thy own teacher. Now this steadfastness and
immoveablenesse of those that are founded on Christ, appears in their
resisting of the violence of persecution, and the subtilty of heresies. In the
one, the Devil is a roaring Lion: In the other, he is a glistring, sliding
Serpent. The one is like the violent wind to the traveller, that by force would
pull off his garments: The other like the hot Sunne-beams, that by degrees
makes him throw them away. Oh this is excellent comfort, in the winnowing to
be found wheat and not chaff; in the fire to be gold, and not dross! God you
hear in this Text, will have a fire, to try all men's doctrines, and if it be
stubble and hay, it will quickly be consumed. My sheep hear my voice, and a
stranger they will not hear, or follow, John 10.5.

Secondly, A people built on Christ, will not be formal and customary in
religious duties, resting upon the performance of them, but carried out to
Christ himself. Oh who can bewail this enough! How are all duties of Religion,
but as the picture without a substance, as a body without the soul? They pray,
and hear, and hear, and pray, but close not with Christ in these things. Thus
as Rehoboam for the golden vessels that were in the Temple, put in materials of
brass. So whereas the people of God in their spirituality, fervency and
heavenly mindedness had their hearts up to Christ; Now they think all is done
with the external labor of the lips, or bowing of the body. We may say to you
thus affected in your duties, as they that were looking for Christ in the
Sepulcher, He is risen, he is not here. As false teachers, that brought in the
works of the Law, and the duties of the Law, did put these in stead of a
Christ; so do Christians make their Duties, their Ordinances, their
Performances a very Idol-Christ to save them, but those that are built on
Christ know better.

Thirdly, Those that are settled and founded on Christ, they have spiritual
strength, and holy vigor communicated to them in the ways of godliness. For
though Christ be here called a foundation, and that gives only support, yet in
other places he is the root of the Vine; the Head, which denotes more than a
mere foundation, viz not only supporting, but conveying all grace, and lively
nourishment to the godly heart, whereby they grow up and increase to more
degrees of holiness. Now this is a woeful spectacle to see a people the same,
both for knowledge and life, they were many years ago; no more understanding in
heavenly things, no more growth in faith, in zeal, in communion with God. Even
as the picture on the wall that is still the same, not one cubit is ever made
to the stature thereof.

Lastly, Those that are built on Christ, receive of the Spirit of Christ, in
all the works of it. A spirit making thee pray with groans unutterable, a
convincing, a sanctifying spirit, or sealing and assuring spirit. An auditory
destitute of Gods Spirit, is like a Golgotha, a place of dead men's skuls, or
rather dead hearts: They savor no spiriual duty, privilege, or motive. The
Corinthians are said to have Christ amongst them, because they had the Spirit
of God in the gifts and operations thereof.

Use of Instruction. What manner of persons ye ought to be; such who have a
sure, and a good foundation both for faith and godliness. Look to what bottom
you stand upon. The reason given, why storms and tempests could not beat down
that house is, Because it was built upon a Rock* Mat. 7.25. Especially try your
selves by those foregoing properties, do you under all temptations of troubles
or errors stand like the rock in the midst of the waves, whereas Christ said,
We must leave father, and wife, and children, and houses, and life to follow
Christ? Do ye not leave Christ to follow these? Are you like the green leaves
in the river? The Locusts did not eat or consume, and not the dried ones
prepared for any falling off? Do ye show the efficacy and lively power of
Christ in your selves? Oh if ye were branches in him, how could such ignorance
and profaneness be in many men's lives? Ephesians. 4. The Apostle speaks of
knowing the truth as it is in Jesus; How is that? When the truths we believe
make us put off the Old Man, and put on the new, when they are like coals of
fire in your breast; but the impiety and formality of most people proclaim they
have not this foundation.

Verse 12. Now if any man build on this foundation gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble, etc.
THis verse contains a distinction of builders upon the foundation, and they
are of two sorts:

1. Such who build gold, silver, precious stones. 2. Who build wood, hay,
stubble.
Now these are allegorical expressions, and you may ask, What is the plain
meaning of them?

Some therefore of the Ancients understood by gold and precious stones, godly
and holy works: And by hay or stubble, evil and wicked works: or, as Austin,
inordinate affections and desires to earthly things, preferring them before
Christ. It is true, the same Author calls this Text, Vnus e difficilimis
locis, one of those most difficult places, to which the Apostle Peter relates.
But this his interpretation cannot be the meaning here, partly because the
Apostle says, Those that build hay and stubble shall be saved, though by fire,
whereas those that live in wickedness and inordinate love of the world, cannot
be saved under any notion whatsoever; And partly, because the Apostle
restrains his matter to those that are builders, and they are Doctors and
Teachers, not to all believers.

Secondly, Some by gold and precious stones, understand the pure and solid
preaching of the Word; and by hay and stubble, curious light, and vain
affectation of humane eloquence. And indeed this is part of the Apostles
meaning, as appears by the sharp reproof of those Teachers for their carnal,
humane wisdom. But

Thirdly, That which is chiefly the meaning is, the matter they preach; Gold
and silver is the pure and sincere Doctrine, that is agreeing with the
foundation. Hay and stubble are corrupt and sinful errors, which disagree
from it. He does not by hay and stubble speak of such dangerous, and damnable
heresies that overthrow the foundation, such are not saved, though by fire, but
they bring upon themselves swift damnation, 2 Pet. 2.1. but lesser errors and
falsehoods, which do not overthrow, yet are no ways agreeable or suitable to the
foundation. As if you should set a glorious Palace with marble walls, and
pillars of gold and silver, but then a wooden rooff, and thatch covering with
straw; how ridiculous would this be? Such is every man's preaching, though he
keep the foundation, that adds dissentaneons Doctrine thereunto.

We shall join the two last senses together, the Matter and the Manner; The
truths of Christ preached in a pure and sincere manner, this is gold, silver
and precious stones. Whereas then you see the truths of Christ, compared to
these glorious and excellent things, gold and precious stones. From whence
observe,

That the Doctrine and Truths of Christ are very precious and excellent. Observe.


The preaching of the Gospel is compared to a Pearl, that a man sold all that
he had to obtain, Mat. 13.45. And indeed so must every hea^er do, What is
implied, by comparing the truths of Christ to gold and precious stones.
he must part with all his lusts, his sins, he must throw away all the earth he
has in his hand before he can receive this gold.

To open the Doctrine, let us consider, What is implied in this, when the
truths of Christ are thus called gold and precious stones? And

1. In respect of the matter.
First, The preciousnesse of them is hereby declared, They ought to be esteemed
and desired by us, as much as the covetous man desires his gold and silver. The
truths of Christ are sometimes compared to milk, for the nourishing virtue in
them: Sometimes to honey, and the honeycomb, for the spiritual sweetness and
refreshment the godly find therein; and sometimes to gold and precious stones,
because of the admirable excellency and worth in them. Hence we are commanded,
To contend for the faith, Jud. v. 3. to be in an agony; Why? It Is more worth
than gold. This made the holy Martyrs willingly die for it, they thought it
more precious than life; they thought it no loss to be deprived of their own
gold and silver to testify to this, and to propagate it to their posterity.
The Apostle calls it (...), That good thing committed to thee. To you that
believe Christ is precious, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.7. and so is every
truth of Christ's.

Secondly, It does denote the rarity of it. It Is hardly and difficultly
obtained: Gold and silver is not so common as the stones of the street: There
are but few mines of gold, to the mountains of earth. And thus for the most
part, the Churches of God have been so corrupted with errors, that very little
gold did appear. It was a rare thing to have any one truth of God made known.
In the Old Testament, under many Kings, Idolatry and Superstition had so
prevailed, that the book of the Law of God in Josiahs time was a rare thing;
and in Asa's time, They had been without the Law, and a teaching Prophet for a
long while, 2 Chronicles. 15 3. And in Popery not only the covering was thus
deformed, but the very foundations were shaken. So that it is not so easy a
matter to obtain the truth, that is found out with much prayer, humility,
holiness of life, and industrious using of all means appointed by God. There
are few, it may be none, who though they build gold and silver, do not also
add some hay and stubble. So that this very expression, Truths are gold, are
precious stones, and they lie one by one, called therefore uniones, they say
should teach us, not to be confident, not to rest in our own understanding.
Search the Scriptures, (...), John 5.39. Some make it a metaphor from those
that with much labor dig into a mine of gold. So that the Scripture that is
the mine, where all the gold and silver is, there we must dig, thence we must
replenish our selves.

Teirdly, There is implied the durablenesse and constancy of it. Gold will not
melt away in the fire, or be consumed as hay and stubble will. And thus the
Apostle alludeth to afterward, He shall be saved, so as by fire, and the fire
shall try every man's work. He speaks of a probatory, and not a purgatory fire;
that is, afflictions, or the light of Gods word shall burn all this stubble. So
that the truths of God they are so constant and abiding, that when a man comes
to be afflicted, to be persecuted, to be undone for the truth of God, this will
abide. What is the chaff to the wheat? Jer. 23.28. When a wind comes, the chaff
is blown away. And therefore this should make all very careful herein, both
Pastor and people. God will have his fire; there will be winds and tempests,
whether it be gold or stubble, wheat or chaff, then it will be discovered,
whereas diverse and strange erroneous Doctrines, they have not been willing to
come to the fire. Every Heresy in the Church went up and down like Cain
trembling, left every place of Scripture that met it, should kill it.

Fourthly, The truths of Christ are compared to gold and silver, Because of the
solidity and ponderosity of them, they are weighty and heavy. Whereas errors
are compared to hay and stubble; what is lighter than these? And therefore such
as give way to falsehood, they are said to be carried away with every wind of
Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. as if they were so many feathers or straws. Whatsoever
opinion then is accompanied with vanity, levity and emptiness, it is not solid,
grave and substantial, refuse that. It is said, Solomon's ships, they went for
gold of Ophir, and they brought home pearls. Thus do many men, they make us, if
they sought out the admirable and solid truths of God, and they bring Peacocks,
empty, gaudy flourishings of wit, or curious opinions. This is not the weighty
and solid truth of God.

Fifthly, They are compared to gold, Because of the purity and sincerity in
them. The truths of God, they have an holy simplicity and sincerity, and
therefore false Teachers are said (...), 2 Cor. 2. to corrupt the pure word of
God, as hucksters do their wine. David compares Gods word to pure gold, even
seven times refined, Psalm. 19 And hereby it becomes a very dangerous sin, for
any to counterfeit it, or corrupt it. If among men their Laws make it a capital
crime to counterfeit, or clip their coin, certainly God will account it no
less heinous a sin to do so with his truths. As it is gold for sincerity; so
it is compared to the water of life, for its purity. And as Isaac complained of
the Philistims as the greatest injury that could be to stop up his wels with
earth; and it is a matter of death to poison a fountain or spring where men use
to drink; so destructive and heinous a sin it must be, to infect the pure
streams of the Sanctuary, that people should thereby suck down their own poison.

Sixthly, It Is compared to gold, for the efficacy and choice virtue thereof.
Gold is not only of price and esteem* but it has it is powerful operations in
medicinal ways against bodily diseases. And thus certainly the truths of God
are, when received by faith, they are mighty to the casting down of all the
strong holds of sin; they are powerful to overthrow the greatest
oppositions, Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is truth, John 17. Thus it is
said, Psalm. 19. To convert the soul, as the learned there interpret, it is,
revive the soul to bring life again; when a man by discouragements and
dejections is even swooning away. Oh then these golden truths of Christ, they
have a special influence upon the heart of a man, to revive against faintings,
to dispel all distempers, and to preserve against all languishings.

Seventhly, They are compared to gold and silver, For the usefulness and
profitablenesse to all things. Money answers all things, says the Wiseman,
Eccles. 10.19. Many outward comforts in this world may be had for gold and
silver; you may have friends, food, raiment. Hence the Heathens made Pluto
wealth, a god, because it wrought all things among men, Clausum aur a custodit
Jovem. Horace spoke of the covetous man, He keeps his god in his chest; And
covetousness is called Idolatry, Col. 3.5. Thus gold and silver prevail in the
world: And therefore Balaam to express his resolvednesse not to curse Israel,
said, Though Balaak would give him an house full of gold, yet he would not
curse them. But alas, what are these to the truths of Christ? They are
profi^able for such things, which material gold and silver cannot do. Judas,
when tormented in in his conscience foa sin, What could his thirty pieces of
silver comfort him? Could that ease his conscience? Give gold and silver to the
damned men in hell, will that comfort them? There are many mercies that all the
gold and silver in the world cannot help us unto; but now there is no
condition, no doubt, no affliction, no want, but the truths of Christ are very
profitable unto. The truth of Justification by faith in Christ, Is not that
more worth than the gold of Ophir? What precious and powerful operations has
it upon the hearts of the godly?

Eighthly, The truths of Christ are compared to gold and precious stones.
Because they are able to enrich a man with all graces. There is spiritual and
heavenly wealth, as well as earthly and temporal; and the truths of God are of
the first sort. Thus the poor of this world, are said to be rich in faith, Jam.
2 5. And Christ became poor to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8.9 not in outward
respects, or external greatness, but in internal, and spiritual riches. Mark
that counsel, Revel. 3.18. to the Church, who thought her self rich, and
needing nothing, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou
may be rich. Oh that people were spiritual! You see here is gold offered to
all, and he is indeed foolish that refuses this. There is many a man with gold
and silver, and much wealth in this world, and yet is very poor toward God.
When our Savior had declared that Parable of Dives, and the eternal torment he
had after his great pleasures, he concludes, So is every man that is rich in
the treasures of this world, and is not rich toward God, Luke 12.21.

In the second place, To build gold and precious stones on this foundation, is
not only to preach sound and pure matter, 2. In respect of the way and manner
of preaching them.
but this matter in a pure and exact way.

Now this golden way of preaching, to be Chrysostoms and Chrysologues indeed,
consi^eth,

First, In preaching of them after Scripture Authority, when they are conveyed
unto you, as having the stamp and Authority of God. The Prophets came with,
Thus says the Lord; and this like thunder may make the stoutest trees to
tremble. The sayings of any men in the world, though never so eminent, are not
brought in religious matters for confirmation, but illustration: And it is a
great proficiency in hearers, when they affect and delight in such preaching
Austin while a Marcionite, and a great Humanist, had much ado to delight in the
Scripture, because he did not find such humane eloquence; but when he came to
find the words thereof like fiery darts and arrows in his soul, then he was
ravished with the excellency of it.

S^condly, It Is to preach them with Scripture gravity and solidity. As the
Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. he does not say (...), as the words, but (...), as
the oracles; implying the power and efficacy of Gods Spirit upon us, a^ having
more of divine inspirations than humane acquisitions. The more of men's wits,
fancies and conceits, the less of God, and so carries the less reverence and
awe. And this the Apostle does greatly aim at: Those false teachers came with
cunning and enticing words, and so deceived; whereas the Apostle speaks to
the contrary, That the Gospel came unto them not in humane eloquence, but in
demonstration of the Spirit, and of the power of God. Indeed humane parts, and
humane arts, they are to be used but as servants, not as mistresses. It Is
Austins allusion, concerning Cyprian, The Israelites took gold, and jewels, and
earings from the Egyptians, and turned them to their own use; and so we may
take humane abilities and excellencies, and make them contribute to the Gospel;
only they must not be affected, nor made the principal. As the flowers that may
be in a Corn field, all the plowing and sowing was not for them, but for corn.
Christ's truths you see are precious stones, and they need no painting.

Thirdly, They are to be preached with Scripture simplicity in respect of aims
and ends. For though a man should build gold and silver, yet if it be for
humane glory, and earthly greatness, he builds hay and stubble, though this be
known to God only: But this fire will discover the secrets of men's hearts. And
therefore we are not only to look to what we build, but why we build; Is it the
glory of God, the salvation of men's souls? This will be comfortable at the day
of revelation of all things.

Use of Instruction. With what delight and holy covetousness you should
receive the truths of Christ; they are no less worth than gold, than precious
stones. The Tabernacle was covered all ove^ with gold, and they brought
precious stones to it; and thus is the Church of God still to be built, Revel.
21.19. And as in Solomon's days, God made gold as common as the stones in
streets: So in these later days, those golden truths, which before were rare
and precious, now are common; but the common familiarity of them has brought
contempt and neglect of them; else thou would take up every truth of Christ,
as a precious pearl. These are the best Jewels in the ear. Oh but who can
bewail the swinish lusts of men, who had rather have their dross, than those
pearls! No wonder God has brought so many terrible judgments upon us; for we
have been wanton under the choicest and most precious mercies, even the holy
truths of God. Every Sermon has been throwing pearl to some swine, to brutish
wicked men, that in stead of loving of them, have turned again, and rent them,
as much as lies in their power.

If any man build hay, wood and stubble.

The Apostle in this Text describes two Buildert; the wise one, and he builds
gold and precious stones, viz. the excellen^ truth^ of God: And the foolish
one, he builds wood, hay and stubble You heard by these later are meant all
errors, and false doctrines, although they be not destructive of the
foundation. For the Apostle alludes to some kind of building, which a man may
imagine in his mind, whose foundation and chief parts is of gold and silver;
but all the superstructure wood, hay and stubble. This would be a most deformed
and incongruous sight, as the Poets Mulier formosa superne, but aesinit in
piscem. Now do but observe what contemptible, unprofitable and vain matter, all
false doctrines, though never so gloriously dressed, are by these similitudes,
even like Nazianzens Ape in man's clothes. It Is but Michals Image of straw that
she put in David's room for David. Observe,

That all errors and falsehoods in Religion, though not fundamental, Observe.
Errors not fundamental are hay and stubble.
are no better than hay and stubble.

Thus the Apostle, Be not carried away with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14
Errors are a sudden gust of wind. Philosophers say, It Is a dry exhalation
from the earth, and violently beaten back again from Heaven: So is any false
Doctrine, it comes from earthly and carnal lusts and desires; and it is beaten
back by God from Heaven, he does not own it; Quid vento levius? and so these
winds of Doctrine are uncertain; sometimes they blow in the North, sometimes in
the South, even as necessity and carnal advantages drive them, and which is
more, not only the Doctrine is thus light and empty; but the builders are such
as their Doctrine; the Doctrine is stubble, and they are stubble; therefore he
says, Be not carried away with them, as if the persons were nothing but straw:
Even as the Psalmist says, They that made Idols were wholly like them: Thus it
is here. Let men therefore that broach falsehoods, and people that receive them,
never so much dote, and be inamoured with their own false opinions, as if they
were gold and precious stones, yet the Scripture calls them no less than hay
and stubble, such as God will raise a fire to consume and devour. Thus the
Prophet Jeremiah, What is the chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? Jer. 23.28.
The Doctrine of the false Prophets, that is the chaff; and of the true, that is
the wheat.

To amplify this truth, Consider,

First, Though all errors in opinion and religion have no better a name,
Propositions to amplify this point.
and no better a nature, yet those that build them do not think so. They judge
what they build gold and silver; they think their monsters beautiful, and
comely. The false Prophets in the Old Testament, they would presumptuously call
their dreams and imaginations the word of the Lord; and Zedekiah the false
prophet struck Micaiah the true, saying, Which way went the Spirit of the Lord
from me to thee, 2 Chronicles. 18.23. Now the Apostle Peter tells us, That as there
were false Prophets, in the Old Testament, so there shall be in the New, who
shall bring in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. Not that they judge them so, for
happily they might speak, as Paul says, he thought he was bound to do what he
did against Christ and his way. And our Savior speaking of the bitterest
enemies the Christians should meet with, he says, They think, they shall do
God good service by their persecuting of them, John 16.2. Every erroneous
person therefore is not presently convinced in his own conscience of his false
way; he may (as the Antichristian party is) be delivered up to believe a lie;
To call light darkness, and darkness light: Even as the distempered palate
may call sweet things bitter. So then, though errors in Doctrine be stubble
and trash, yet they are not thought so by the Authors of them. The Manichees,
called Manes, Manicheus, because he did (...); they commonly commend their
falsehoods, as the precious, rare, and unheard of truths of Christ.

Secondly, When the Apostle calls these errors hay and stubble, he does not
speak of fundamental errors neither, but such as are consistent with, and
built on the true foundation. They do not damn the Author of them, but they
make his salvation difficult; He shall be saved, but by fire. For as for those
Doctrines that race up the foundations, Peter calls them damnable heresies, 2
Pet. 2.1. Paul reckons them with Idolatries, Witchcrafts, and all the gross
sins that palpably exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven, Gal. 5.21. Yea, if an
Angel from Heaven should bring such a Doctrine, we were to hold him accursed,
Gal. 1.8, 9. And all the faithful are commanded, Not to bid such an one, God
speed, John 2. Epist. As John the Apostle would not wash himself in that Bath,
where Cerinthus the Heretic had been. So that these expressions of hay and
stubble, are only for lesser errors. But those that are in Folio, (as it
were,) they are poison; They are the venom of the red Dragon; They are like
the Plague that strikes dead into Hell quickly, without a speedy recovery. So
that as all sins are not alike, so neither are all errors: And we are to
make a difference between those that are fundamental, Circa-fundamental, and
Super-fundamental, as a man may so say. As in sicknesses, some are mortal, and
deprive of life immediately; others are not so.

Why errors are called hay and stubble.
In the second place, Let us consider, why the Apostle calls errors by such
names, wood, hay and stubble.

First, Because of the vileness and contemptiblenesse of them. Men if they did
understand the Scripture, and walk by that Rule, would no more regard them than
the straw under their feet, as we say. For as the true Doctrines of Christ were
compared to gold, because of their precious and excellent nature; so errors
are called stubble, because of their base and vile nature. In the Old Testament
the names of Idols were names of contempt and scorn, Baal-Phegor, and
Baal-zebub, and thus here, the sinful opinions that men deliver are straw and
stubble.

Secondly, The Apostle describes the Idolatry of the Heathens under this
aggravation, Romans 1. That they turned the Image of God into an Ox that eats
hay; and truly all that love and delight in errors do so. They who should be
after the Image of God, delighting in precious and heavenly truths, make
themselves like the beast that eats hay. Vitiated and corrupted stomachs will
eat trash; and so distempered minds and corrupted will receive falsehoods.

Secondly, It Is compared to hay and stubble, for the levity and uncertainty of
it. What solidity has a straw that is blown up and down with every wind? Now
the lightness and uncertainty appears in three things,

1. It cannot abide the touchstone, it cannot endure to be tried. Straw cannot
endure the fire. The thief, or he that does evil, hates the light, says our
Savior, John 3.20. Counterfeit and base coin cannot abide the touchstone;
whereas the Apostles when they preached, they were willing to have their
Doctrines tried by the Scripture; and the Bereans are commended for making such
an enquiry, Acts 17.11. The Owls and the Bats cannot endure the day. As soon as
error is detected, it is confuted, whereas the precious truths of God, they
grow more excellent and glorious by the trial of them. The wheat loses nothing
by winnowing; the iron by filing. By all the errors and heresies that ever
have been, truth has gotten the advantage: As the ark was the more lifted up
to Heaven by the waters:

2. It Is uncertainty is seen in the diverse shapes and moulds it has, denying
and affirming. As Tertullian of the Peacock, Multicolor, versicolor, nunquam
idem and tamen semper idem. Thus erroneous Doctrines are always in new
dresses, in a new garb, as they are necessitated by truth. How often was
Pelagianism interpoluted? Therefore the Apostle calls the dealing of such
persons who use to sow these tares (...), Ephesians. 4.14. and (...), a slight
juggling, yea and bewitching, Gal. 3.1. making such things to appear to the
sense, that have no subsistence. Thus among the Arians, both the Eusebiusses
were in crafty and diverse dresses, sometimes for the Orthodox, sometimes
against them. And Pelagius did four times change his opinion about Grace, or
rather his expressions. At first he denied grace, then he made nature, grace;
then the outward preaching of the Word, grace; then granted the grace of
remission of sin. Thus he did gratiae vo^abulo uti, ad frange^dum invidiam.
So that herein the levity and uncertainty of falsehoods does appear, that they
are diverse and strange Doctrines, strange to the Word, and diverse, and
disagreeing among themselves.

3. It Is uncertainty is seen, that it does never stay, till God in mercy to his
Church put a period to it. Therefore false Doctrines are compared to a
G^ngrene, 2 Timothy 2.17. you know that spreads and spreads, till it has even
consumed the body. And thus it is with error, it spreads from one to another;
and not only so, but this young Serpent will grow up to a Dragon in time. Arius
una scintilla fuit, was but one spark, and yet he-set the whole world on fire.
Wicked men shall grow worse and worse; one error draws on another: When a
man begins to tumble down the hill, it is hard staying ere he come to the
bottom. And therefore when thou once beginnest to wander from the truth, fear
thy self thou will presently be in a wilderness; yea thou will be like an
Hazael in time. Those opinions and blasphemies thou would once have trembled
and quaked at, thou will excuse and defend. Experience has ^^en too true, but
very sad, of this in all ages of the Church.

Thirdly, Errors are compared to hay and stubble, For the uselesnesse and
unprofitablenesse of them. They are but fig leaves to cover our nakedness; and
that will appear in these particulars:

1. They do not truly inform and enlighten the mind. Truth is light, and does
inform and instruct the mind; but all errors do bring more darkness; so that
while they think they know more then they did, they know less. Hence they are
said to be men of corrupt minds, 1 Timothy 6 5. and deluded, or deceived. Oh, what
a dreadful thing may this be, for thee to think thou have more light than
ever, when it may be thou art in more darkness than ever? To think thou art
in a nearer way to God, when it may be thou art further off than ever!

2. The truths of Christ are profitable to sanctification and holiness.
Sanctify them by thy truth, John 17. By the Word we come to take heed of sin,
Psalm. 19. to order our lives; whereas error that is wholly instrumental to
wickedness and impiety: A corrupt mind, and a corrupt life go together: Faith
and a good conscience are kept together, and lost together. When a man falls off
from the truth, he will also fall off from that power of godliness, and degree
of holiness ^e once seemed to have. Truth is the eye, and if the eye be dark,
the whole body will be dark. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18 these go together. If therefore thou would keep up the
whole way of godliness; all that accuratenesse and strictness thou have been
exercised in; take heed of erroneous Doctrines, they loosen the reins, they
corrupt good manners: Though some Heretics have been of a seeming religious
life, Wickedness in practice the fruit of error in judgment.
yet even they were but as glistering Serpents, full of inward poison, for all
their fair outside, viz. of inward pride and hypocrisi^. And indeed it is
commonly Gods judgment to punish the abuse of knowledge with an ungodly life.
The Heathens did not glorify God according to their knowledge; and therefore
God gave them up to strong delusi^ns and vil^ affections, Romans 1. It Is good to
have the heart established with grace, and not with meats, Heb. 13 9. Loosnesse
of opinions is apt to beget loosnesse of l^fe, as ill dist^llations from the
head breed the consumption of the vitals.

3. They are unprofitable for any sound comfort and joy. That we through the
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. The truths of Christ will
only be owned by him, and to such as suffer for it, he administers much
consolation and comfort: As the Martyrs felt unspeakable joy and assurance. It
cannot be denied but Heretics and erroneous persons may find much sensible
comfort in their false way. Therefore no man must conclude the truth of a
Doctrine from comfort, but he must try his comfort by his Doctrine; yet even
that comfo^t men have in a false way, is not like the true joy, God^ truth
brings. To give differences between them is not here my purpose, no more than
between the patience of a true Martyr, and the quietness of an Heretic in
their sufferings.

4. They are not profitable for duration or continuance. This straw will not
keep off the rain of Gods tempests. Hence God will purge his people from this
dross. The Disciples were many times in great errors, but Christ did recover
them: And truly such is the goodness of God to his elect people, that they
shall never totally and finally be deceived; you see here, they shall be saved
by fire, and the fire will try it. God will by some severe affliction, or other
means bring his people back again. The sheep that wandered will come home
again, acknowledging their folly, and that they did only lose their wool in the
briars of needless disputes.

Use of Instruct^on, To show the vanity and folly either of such teachers or
hearers, that dote on errors, that admire hay and stubble, as if it were gold
and precious stones. Oh try and prove things first by the Word, ere you rejoice
or boast in them!

2. What makes a Church truly glorious, even when it is pure from errors and
heresies? A Church embracing the truth, is like a goodly Edifice of all
beautiful excellencies; but where errors and falsehoods are, there is a
disgrace and dishonor to it.

Use of Exhortation. In all the matters of Religion, see what solidity and
profit there is in the thing thou believe. If they be full of divine
Authority; if they make for godliness, for exactness in life, for true and
sound peace, then it is something; but if they do intoxicate men's brains, make
them spiritually drunk, they stagger and reel, if they make them straws, an
empty reed shaken with every wind, then fear these things.

Verse 13. Every man's work shall be made manifest.
IN the twelfth verse you had a Description of a twofold Builder. Now in this
verse, and the other following, the Apostle proceeds to show a twofold event.
And

1. He generally declares, that there will be a Manifestation of every man's
work. And then

2. The Consequent Effect^ upon that Manifestation; that there will be a
discovery at last, though for a while men may carry on their purposes with much
subtilty, you have in the first part of the verse.

Peter said of Paul's Epistles, That there were in them many things hard to be
understood. And Austin he thought (as you heard) this Text was one of them.

I shall therefore explain it by degrees. And

First, I shall at this time, consider the Proposition laid down by the
Apostle, as a ground work, Every man's work shall be made manifest; Consider,
the Subject, the Note of Universality, and the Attribute.

1. The Subject, Every m^ns work, [work.] Here the Apostle calls erroneous
Doctrines; as also the publishing and propagating of them works, which
overthrows that nice distinction of some, who pressed with that place, Romans
13. The Magistrate is a terror to evil works. Works (say they) not opinions,
or false Doctrines, for though the opinion simply as so, is hidden in the
heart, yet the professing and publication of it, is a work, therefore here they
are made all one. So verse. 8. it is called a man's labor. And John epist. 2. we
must not bid God speed, to a man that brings a false Doctrine, lest thereby we
be partaker of his evil deeds.

2. Here is the Note of Universality, Every man's work; that is, every Doctors,
every builders work.

Lastly, Here is the Attribute, Shall be made manifest. Which implies, that
all errors and falsehoods have a glittering outside, they are maintained with
much subtilty and specious pretenses; so that he who looks only to the seeming
outside, and appearances of false ways, will easily be deceived. But as the
painted face, when it comes near the fire will melt; so these painted errors,
when God brings his fire will dissolve away. So that there is much in that
phrase, Shall be made manifest.

Now although this Proposition is to be taken in a limited sense to the false,
subtle and crafty ways of errors, and the authors thereof; yet I shall first
handle it as a general truth, and so as the Apostle may take it as a general,
and then apply it to the particular of foolish builders. Observe,

That all the ways and works of wickedness, Observe.
though acted in never so hidden and secret a manner shall be made manifest.

When, and how, I shall not yet enquire: All that I have now to do, is, That
such works, though creeping under the ground will be brought to light. So Chap.
5.10. Eccles. ult. and ult.

First, We will show, What kind of hidden wickedness shall be made manifest.
What secret sins shall be brought to light.
And then, The Aggravation of hidden and covered wickedness.

First, All the secret and hidden thoughts, affections and purposes of the
heart, God will one day make manifest to the whole world. The heart of a man
that is the womb, wherein all those serpentine and venomous lusts of men's
hearts are begotten and bedded, and for want of a Summers warm day, these
snakes many times do not creep out. Men do not accomplish the wickedness of
their hearts, because they want opportunities, for shame, or fear of men: but
God has a time, when all that heart-malice, heart-adultery, heart-murder,
shall no longer be kept close. So in that place mentioned, He will make
manifest the counsels of the hearts, 2 Cor 5.10. That as there are a world of
flies and motes in the air, which we never see, till the Sunne-beams arise; so
there are thousands and thousands of proud, unclean, covetous and malicious
thoughts and purposes lodging in men's hearts, which the world never knows, but
God will one day have Heaven and Earth take notice of them. Oh then, what a
curb should this be to thy heart, to thy thoughts? Thou think they are free,
you may think what you will: No, God will manifest and j^dge thee for these
things. Good Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, 2 Chronicles.
22.23. It Is the property of a godly man, though he commit no outward
wickedness, yet to mourn and humble himself for his secret thoughts. Oh what a
beast, what a Devil was I for thinking so? What if God should discover those
imaginations to all the world? When Gehez^ had taken gifts of Naaman, Elisha
discovering it, rebukes him sharply, saying, Is this a time to buy fields and
orchards? 2 King 5.26. Why says he thus to Gehezi? Because it was in Gehezi's
thought and purpo^e to enrich himself. And Christ does often reprove the
Pharisees for their wicked thoughts they had, when yet they did not manifest
them. Oh then, remember your thoughts are the firstborn of your soul, and your
soul is much as they are, they shall no^ alwa^s be hid! Every man's breast shall
be according to that man's wish, to have a glass there that all may see and
read what is therein.

Secondly, All the impure and unclean works of the flesh committed in secret,
these also shall be made manifest. The Scripture speaks of the hidden things of
dishonesty, 2 Cor 4.2. And the adulterous waiting for the twilight. As also,
the whores wiping her lips, pretending even Religion, paying her vows, when she
has been committing her lewdness. And again the Scripture says, That it was
a shame to speak of what was d^ne by some in secret, Ephesians. 5.12. Oh how
greatly does the Land mourn to bear such unclean persons? Thou walk abroad
boldly in the day time; thou come to Church, and performest the duties of
Religion: But Oh the secret hidden ways of uncleanness thou runnest into! The
walls of the chamber, the timber in the house will bear witness against thy
wanton and lascivious carriages; Thou do these things secretly, but God will
reward them openly. Hence he says, Whorem^ngers and adulterers God will judge,
Heb. 13.4. Why God? Will not men judge them in this world? And will not God
judge other sinners as well as these? But therefore he says, God will judge
them, because such sins are carried so closely, so craftily, that none but
God can find them out. Oh therefore let all such tremble, who have been, or are
guilty this way, let them judge themselves that God may not judge them! All
things are open and naked to the eyes of God, and shall one day be to the whole
world; then it will no longer be smothered up; yea in th^s world, God many
times does so terrify the hearts, the consciences of unclean persons, that
they themselves out of very horror, and to have ease, are forced to confess
it, Prove. 5.14. Oh know, that heart of thine, that now burns with hot lusts,
will, if not timely converted, burn like hell with tormenting flames, and be
consumed with gnawing worms.

Thirdly, The hidden works of thieving and stealing, and unjustly taking away
of other men's goods, will one day be manifest. Stolen things, though sweet in
the mouth, will prove gravel in the belly; yea thou will be forced to vomit all
up again. Onesimus ran away from his master Philemon, and stole some of his
goods from him; now the Apostle writes an Epistle on purpose to him concerning
this matter; and the holy Ghost thought it good, to have it recorded, as part
of the Canonical Scripture, though he would think the matter were but light,
for it is to assure Philemon of Onesimus his repentance for what he had done,
and that he would be indeed (...) hereafter, though he had not been so before,
and that wherein he had wronged him, he would forgive it, and set it upon Paul's
score. Achan stole a wedge of gold, Josh. 7.21. and God would not let all
Israel alone, till it was discovered; for a wedge of gold is a tongue of gold,
as it is in the original; and indeed it did speak and cry aloud against Achan;
and so all the things thou have craftily and falsely taken from others, they
have a tongue with them, they many times talk to thee in thy conscience, and
cry to God to be delivered to their true owners. This is a secret work of
wickedness that God will manifest.

Fourthly, There is a hidden work of unrighteousness, which is not plain
stealing, but it is crafty and artificial cosening in thy trading and commerce
with others. You shall not find them grossly cosen you, but they have mysteries
in their trade and crafty over-reachings: These are secret works of iniquity,
which God will also manifest. You know a notable place, Hos. 12.7, 8. The
balance of deceit was in his hand, and he was become rich, yet he should find
no iniqu^ty in him that was sin; they should not discover he dealt
unrighteously, they could not prove he dealt falsely. Oh then let such who
trade, who buy and sell in the world, take heed that for worldly gain they do
not circumvent or go beyond their brother! This be assured of, that in such
sins of injustice, there can be no pardon, till there be restitution, or a
prepared heart for it. The first thing that troubled Zacheus, when he was
converted, was his wronging of others, If I wronged any (says he) I restore
him fourfold, Luke 19.8. God is a righteous God, and he loves righteousness.
Oh then take heed of overreaching this way! Thou bring such money or goods
home, and thou think this will help my wife, my family; this will enrich me;
and thou do as the Eagle, that catching flesh from the altar, had a live
coal cleaving to it, which when she came to her nest, set nest and young ones
on fire. The curse of God is like a secret moth eating into such things.

Fifthly, Carnal and worldly policy to have earthly greatness, and power, and
honor in the world: this is a very deep and secret work, but God will manifest
it. Policy is no policy, if the design be not laid deep and secret. Therefore
Isaiah reproving carnal Politicians, says, Woe to them that take deep counsel,
Isa. 29.15. And in other places, That cover with a covering, but not of my
Spirit. God has his time, that he will discover the thoughts of the worldly
wise to be vain, he will make known all the secrets and crafty consultations
against his truth and people, and he will be avenged for all the Atheism and
profane boldness, and hardness of heart, such carnal policy has been
accompanied with: For he said well, That a Politician was a man that stood upon
his head with his heels upwards, shaking them against Heaven. Well then, it is
good for such to remember, that ^very work shall be made manifest; and when the
storm arises, those cob-webs will be driven away.

Sixthly, Dissimulations and inconstancies in matter of Religion. This is a
secret work God will manifest. Divines call it to be a Nicodemite, He came to
Jesus by night, John 3.2. and durst not openly profess Christ for fear of the
Jews. There were some who have held. That they might do any external acts of
Idololatrical worship, be at Mass (say they) believe any thing, so that they
keep their consciences and minds pure. The Priscillianists are noted for wicked
dissimulations herein. In Ezekiel we read the Prophet is commanded, To dig
through the wall, to see the women and men committing their religious
abominations in private, Ezekiel. 8.8. Now God will bring this hypocrisy to
light, External profession is nectssary to salvation, when the command
requires it, as well as inward faith. With the heart man believes, and with
the mouth confession is made to salvation, Romans 10.10. So that in case of
confession it is damnable not to acknowledge the truths of God. God gives a
great commendation of seven thousand in Ahabs time, that had not bowed their
knee to Baal, 1 King. 18.19. They would not dissemble that outward worship;
commonly there are never more subtle and secret shiftings then in matters of
Religion. But of that more in time.

The aggravation of secret hidden sins.
In the next place, Consider the aggravation of those sins that are secret and
hidden. For although to be an open bold sinner, is in some respects a greater
sinner, than a close private sinner, because hereby there is more dishonor to
God, more scandal to others, and more impudency in the sinner, which happily
might be the cause of that speech attributed to Athanasius, Vtinam omnes essent
hypocritae. Hence some are reproved for having an whores fore head, that they
were not ashamed, when they had sinned, that they b^asted of it, yet in many
respects these secret sins, have terr^ble aggravations:

1. It argues a m^n has more consciousnesse to himself, that he does not
wel^, therefore he wou^d not have the world know, Now when any man sins with a
consciousnesse to himself that he does sin; this is a bloody aggravation.
Tremble at this, you who live in secret wickedness, Why do thou keep it so
close? Why art thou so fearful? Why do thou as Rachel make a^ excuse to
cover thy Idols? All this argues the more consciousnesse, the more gu^^t in
thee: Thy conscience is awakened, thou have ^^ruglings and conv^ctions within
thee; this is to rebel against light; this is to stop the mouth o^ ^hy
monitour; thy conscience within, which the very Heathen could say, was a god to
every man; I tell thee, sinning thus against conscience* more have despaired
than upon any other ground. Oh they did thus, and they lived thus; but all this
while they had a consciousnesse to themselves they should do otherwise. This
has made them so deep^y possessed (though happily upon false grounds) that
they have sinned against the holy Ghost.

2. This secret sinning puts far more respect and fear upon men, than God.
Thou will be unjust in secret, thou will be unclean in secret: Why? thou art
afraid such men know it. Oh thou wicked wretch! Art thou afraid of the eye of a
man, and not of a great God? Carest thou not, though God see thee, whereas thou
would hide thy self, if man come near thee? Thus thou art a coward to man,
but thou bravest it to God; Thou do in effect say, Though God behold, though
God know, though God be acquainted with it, I matter it not. Oh foolish and
unwise? Can man damn thee? Can man fill thy conscience with terrors? Can man
bid thee depart into everlasting howlings? Why then art thou afraid of man, and
not God?

3. The more secret any wickedness is it argues the heart is more studious
and industrious about it, how to contrive it, how to bring it about. Of all
David's sins, that in the matter of Vriah, the Scripture gives the greatest
b^and on it, because it was done with such secrecy. ( David did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, save in the matter of Vriah, 1 King 15.5) and
premediation Mark Josh. 7.11. how Joshua in Achans sin observed the secrecy,
and the dissimulation, and craft used in it. Oh that men and women would
consider this thing, God takes notice with how much craft and subtilty you
commit your sins, and none never know it!

Use of Admonition. Take heed of secret hidden sins, God will one day manifest
what thou have been. Oh it may be the world thought of all the men that lived,
thou would never do such and such things* but God knows thy down-sitting
and uprising! Whither can you fly from his presence? Oh let every one then
bewail the plague sore of his own heart! When Christ convinced the woman of
Samaria of the secret sin she lived in, she cries out, Come and hear one
that has told me all that ever I did, John 4. Prevent confusion hereafter at
the day of judgment, by humble confession of all thy secret sins unto God, and
he will not then upbraid thee.

Every man's work shall be made manifest.

This Proposition has been handled as a general truth; and so is a
thunderbolt against all secret sins, what they do in secret, God will reward
openly. The more secrecy, the more guilt.

Now I shall consider this Proposition in its limited and restrained sense, as
it relates to false Doctrines, to those that build ha^ and stubble; where the
very expression, That it shall be made manifest, denotes, That error for a
long time may go undiscerned, it may have a counterfeit pass; even hay and
stubble may be thought gold. The false Prophet may get Elijah's mantle, and
hide himself in it; but it shall be made manifest, first to the builder, and
then to the whole world. To the builder it may be a manifestation for Direction
and Illumination; he shall see he was in error; he shall confess he was
seduced, and built unprofitable stubble, or a mani^estation of confusion; He
shall be confounded with shame, when his nakedness shall appear; and like Adam
shall hide himself, because of his nakedness. And

2. It shall be manifest to others, to the whole world that they shall see a
difference between truth and error. Even as you see the Magicians did such
things, as Moses, and for a while there seemed to be no difference; but at last
there was a plain discovery, which was of God, and which was not. Observe

That all the hidden and secret ways of false Doctrines God will one day make
manifest. Observe. Hidden and secret ways of false doctrine shall be made
manifest.


God will raise a fire to consume hay and stubble; it will be put to a
touchstone, whether gold or counterfeit. This certainly should make us tremble,
about what we teach or preach; it will all be examined again; God will discover
all the Errata's, and that by a sharp fi^e; if we build hay, we shall suffer
loss. All that time, labor and study will be wholly lost.

To open this, let us consider, What, concerning errors, will be made
manifest. What concerning errors shall be made manifest.
And

1. The Causes and Ends of them.

2. The Nature of them.

3. The cunning Artifi^e in divulging of them. And

First, God will manifest all those hidden causes, and ends of thy false
Doctrines. 1. The causes of error shall be manifest. 1. Pride.
Now the Scripture gives these causes.

1. Pride and self-conceit, or overweening of thy own abilities and
sufficiency; such a man is in the high way to all errors, For the humble and
meek God will teach, Psalm. 25. The valleys are fruitful, when the high
mountains are barren. Therefore the Apostle in this Epistle, and in many others
beats down pride and vainglory, H^ that thinks he knows any thing,
knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. Oh this is a golden truth!
A man must have that modesty, that humility, as to think himself a Disciple,
rather than a Teacher. Paul that had such extraordinary Revelations, God gave
him a thorn in the flesh; some extraordinary heavy temp^ation, to humble him,
that he might not be lifted up, 2 Cor. 12. Consider that God will make manifest
all those secret works of thy heart. Thou think it zeal, thou think thou
have received greater abilities than others: but God will make it known, whether
it be no^ thy self-confidence, thy self-conceit or no. As in the Apostles
times, they had miracles to confirm their Doctrine, and that they were of God;
they did heal the sick, and raise the dead: So I may now say, humility is that
miracle, which may confirm our Doctrine; If thou art of God, if thy ways are
of God, thou have no glory, no boasting in thy self above others. Christ's
symbol was a Lamb, and the Spirit of God appeared in the form of a Dove: If
thou have the Spirit of God and Christ, thou will be of a Lamb-like, Dove-like
disposition. Take heed then of heart-pride, and pride of gifts; it is worse than
pride in clothes or wealth. This carries thee to the pinnacle of a Temple, sets
thee on high, and throws thee headlong Unless a man become as a little
child, he cannot be my Disciple, Matthew. 18 4. Here is a copy of humility and
modesty to write after Many Heretics have been bold, self-conceited men; the
first that ever were almost in the Church, called themselves G^ostici, The
knowing men, as if none had knowledge or understanding but they; but God will
raise a tempest that shall discover this root under ground.

2. Ignorance
2. Ignorance and weakness of judgment. And truly this is the most innocent
cause of errors, when men through ignorance and weakness go in a false way;
yet this does not excuse. For Peter says, Even ignorant men wrest the
Scripture to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16 Though ignorant or unlearned
men, yet that will not excuse them. Thus the Disciples through weakness of
their faith and knowledge manifested very gross errors about Christ and his
Office, till they were endowed with the Spirit of God from above. And where
there is a cordial and plain desire to know the truth, they s^udy, they read,
they pray, they do conscientiously make use of all means God has appointed:
for that is a great matter to make use of all means; what one opinion says as
well as another; what one Tex^ says as well as another; such (I say) as those
are to be tenderly handled, Romans 15. Him that is weak, (...), receive him
lovingly. In this case, Saeviant illi, qui nesciunt, quantis gemitibus vel
tantillum datur intelligere de vero, as Austin of old. When it is not obstinacy,
perverseness, but mere ignorance; and thou do instantly day and night pray
to God, using all means; this does greatly extenuate, though not totally
excuse; thy blindness may make thee fall in the ditch, and God will have all
this ignorance manifested to thee sometime or other it may be.

3. Hypocrisy.
3. Hypocrisy. The Scripture brandeth that for a heavy cause sometimes of the
errors and falsehoods in Religion. This indeed is a work that God only can
manifest, who knows the hearts, and tries the reins; yet that this is the
bitter root of many bitter errors the Scripture gives pregnant instances. The
Pharisees were famous for building hay and stubble: What trash and trumpery,
superstition and false worship did they introduce? And now Christ who knew
their hearts tells them it was nothing but hypocrisy. It was not God, nor a
love to his truth or glory, but their own credit and glory, They do all things
to be seen of men. Woe be to you hypocrites, said he often, Ma^th 23.14. And
Paul tells of men, that taught lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2 Oh it is a matter to
be trembled at, that such hypocrisy should ever fill a man's heart, that we
should scatter errors, propagate falsehoods, to get our selves a name! As they
went to build Babel, that they might have a name. Search thy heart, what moves
thee to hold any opinion; if it be this hypocrisy, God will bring hidden
things to light, and to have our portion with hypocrites is the highest
condemnation, Mat. 24, 51. 4. Ambition and affectation of high places.


4. Ambition and affectation of high places in the Church of God, and to be
above others. This has made men build hay and stubble. This indeed is a
daughter of pride, and so is of the same nature, yet it is a distinct head; for
more bitter fruit has grown on this root, than upon most sins, which made
the Apostle James give that excellent Antidote, Not to be many Masters, James
3.1. Do not ambitiously affect places of trust and rule in the Church of God:
and thereupon he makes a large digression, to show the several wicked ways of
the tongue, that is the unruly member, that sets all on fire. If thou once
have a pronenesse to offend there, look to it, set a watch before thy mouth;
nature has hedged it in by teeth and lips. The Scripture also has put many
muzzles, on thy mouth, especially that, My Brethren, be swift to hear, and slow
to speak, Jam. 1.13. You ought to be far more desirous to hear than to speak.
If ambition and affectation to be above others, provoke thee to false ways,
know God will make it manifest; yet this corruption is wonderful pleasing The
Pharisees loved the high places, and to be called Rabbis. Nestorius and many
others broached heresies, because they missed of such great preferment as they
desired. Donatus was so admired of his Disciples, that they would swear by him,
as by a god. Thus men with Herod, love to have acclamations, The voice of God,
and not of a man; though his terrible judgment might be a warning. 5.
Discontent and imparience.


5. Discontents and impatiencies at some things which have fallen out in the
Church, has been a great cause to make divisions, and to sow tares amongst the
wheat. Marcion, because he was censured by Church Officers for his
misdemeanors, he cried out, (...), I will throw fire into the Church, and
divide it. Thus men by way of revenge, to grieve and vex others, have taught
false ways. Paul complained of such, That thought to a^de afflictions to his
bonds, Phil. 1. But this will not always be under the ground.

6. Envy and si^full emulation to the gifts and abilities of others that have
been above them. This has made men bring in strange Doctrines. 6. Envy.
This worm is apt to breed in the finest spirits: You see John: Disciples were
soured with it: Master (say they) Him to whom thou bear witness baptizeth,
and all go after him: That this was envy appears by the remedy John gives,
He must increase, and I must decrease, John 3.31. Thus among the Disciples,
there was often emulation, Who should be greatest amongst them. Oh this has
eaten like a Gangrene in the body of the Church, and has made the Church to
have such a deformed face, as envy it self is said to have! Pallor in ore sedet
macies in corpore toto. So then, as some sharp thorny bushes have pleasant
blossoms on them; so many specious and fair opinions, that are set out with
much glory, may yet grow upon such thorny and corrupt causes

7. A contemplative delight in a man's own notions and conceptions he has. 7.
Contemplative delight in a man's own notions.
This has caused more errors than any thing, especially in learned men.
Therefore heresy is called from choosing, when a man does voluntarily choose
such a way to go in; and the Scripture does excellently call it, Going a
whoring after a man's heart No adulterer finds more pleasure in those delights
of the flesh, then the mind of a man corrupted does with its own notions. No
woman is more fond of her child, than the understanding is of its own
conceptions.

The second thing to be manifested is, The nature of every man's Doctrine, II.
The nature of error shall be manifested.
and if false, than the vizor will be pulled of. It will appear counterfeit
coin, and you know to be guilty of that is a capital crime, pro thesauro
ca^bones, Gods authority and stamp will not be ^ound on it. Rehobo^m, when the
golden vessels were taken out of the Temple, he put brass ones in the stead.
It Is not so well in the Text, for here is stubble for gold; so an Ancient did
well express it; as if a man should ^^e an Image all over gilded, and touch
it, you shall find nothing but mouldring d^st; though it may be ae aurata, yet
it is not aurea; it is but earth gilded over. If the^ God would never bring our
assertions to his touchstone, we might be the more bold, but that cannot be.
III. The cunning subtilty in divulging them shall be manifested.
I shall say no more to this head, because enough was spoken, when we showed,
why errors are compared to hay and stubble.

In the last place, God will manifest every man's work, In the cunning subtilty
he has managed it with. For the Scripture speaks of the great crafty and
subtle ways men use, that they do (...), 2 Corinthians 2. adulterate, and mix the
word of God; he calls it (...), and the (...), Ephesians. 4.14. such juggling and
cheating as men use with their dice. For,

1. Before hearers are publicly prepared for them, they go privately, and
secretly vent their ware: So they are said, Privately to bring in damnable
heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. They are said, To creep into houses, 2 Timothy 3. They are
the moles that creep under ground, whereas Christ said, He taught nothing but
what he did publicly; all did hear.

2. Their craft is seen, In mingling some truths with their error, that while
we take one, we may swallow down the other; and this is worse than palpable
heresy in some sense; Pejus est veneno oceidere quam gladio; they mingle their
wine with water. Thus some false Apostles, they preached Christ as well as the
works of the Law; but this craft God will manifest, when ^e shall separate the
precious from the vile, and that is the reason (say some) why Christ would not
own the confession that the Devil made, That he was the Son of God, lest
speaking some truth, he should also vent his lies by owning him.

3. This craft is seen, Either in sweet and winning words, full of love and
kindness; or else in pretense to deep and sublime mysteries. Some men are most
taken with moral and popular discourses; therefore Paul says, they have (...),
Romans 16.18. good sweet honey words. Others a^e more taken with subtle and
philosophical Arguments; therefore the Apostle bids them, Beware of philosophy,
Col. 2.8. and says, it is knowledge falsely so called. Philosophi fuerunt
Patriarchae haereticorum. Yea these Nani, that hay and stubble we find in some
of the Greek Fathers, about Free Will and Grace, is attributed to their
Platonical Philosophy, which was soaked too much in them, and so continued,
though Christians; as Aristotle's Philosophy infected the fountain in the
Schoolmens time.

4. Their circumspection to observe the fit seasons, to disseminate their
errors. Thus while all were asleep, tares were sown, upon the fittest
subjects, women as being more affectionate, They lead captive silly women, 2 Timothy 3.6. Tender and soft hearted men, upon whom specious pretenses will easily
work. These and thousand of other subtle and artificial ways, God will make
manifest.

Use of Instruction to us Ministers. Take we heed, how we build, and that is,
by avoiding the causes of error, pride, ambition, envy discontent. Oh it is an
happy thing, when we can say, O Lord, we have served no parties, drawn on no
designs, engaged in no factions, but plainly and faithfully desired to know
thy will, and to preach the truths of Christ! This will be a crown of rejoicing
unto us at our death. Not as pleasing men, but God, says the Apostle, 1 These,
2.4. As of God, and in the presence of God, 2 Cor. 2.

Use of Admonition to People. Take you heed of those causes likewise; for the
same sins that spread errors, the same sins make hearers to receive them. Be
not proud, self conceited, though you have got some understanding, and can
confer with better gifts than others. Alas, thou have cause enough to be
humbled; the more thou know, thou will see thy ignorance the more. A poor
man thinks a little sum of money great treasures.

For the day shall declare it, etc.

This Text (you heard) contains the proportionable Effects or success, which
builders wise or foolish have in Gods house. And the Apostle first lays down
a general Proposition [Every man's work shall be made manifest] which has
already been dispatched.

We therefore now proceed; and for this manifestation, the Apostle informs us
of the time first, and then the manner how.

The time first in these words, For the day shall declare it, and of this at
this present.

All the doubt is, What the Apostle does mean by the Day?

There are some understand it of the Day of death, when every man receives his
particular judgment; he shall then know, whether his building will abide or no.

Others understand it of the Day of Judgment, which is called the day of the
Lord, and that day, by an emphasis. Bellarmine indeed is positive in this,
because (...) is used with an Article, which signifies the Day of Judgment,
but that is false. For the time of the Gospel is called (...), Romans 13.12. The
night is past, the day is at hand, etc. So that we cannot close with this
interpretation, because the Apostle carries it all the way for this life,
while we are in this world, as will be showed, when we come to explain, what is
meant by the fire.

We take therefore Day for no more than Time; such a day has God in his
wisdom appointed for the blowing away all this chaff. As we see a covering of
thatch does not ordinarily hold long, but fire or wind arises and cosumeth
all. Thus the Septuagint sometimes render (...), Time: So that the meaning is,
Howsoever these errors and false Doctrines may continue, yet time at last will
discover the vanity and weakness of them. The Grecian said, (...), Time was
the Touchstone the trial of all things. And the Latins say, Veritas est
temporis filia, Truth is the daughter of Time* The day will declare it, that
is, time will make them manifest; only the Article (...), that Day, does
denote the appointed and set time, which God has for the taking of all such
disguises, whereas it is the clean contrary with truth: The longer that lasts,
the more it is believed, the sufficiency and evidence of it, is the more
entertained. Now although we thus understand it of time in this world, yet it
cannot be denied, but at the Day of Judgment there will be a full discovery of
all the works and Doctrines of men. Observe,

That God has his time, Observe. That God has his time for the discovering of
error.
when he will discover the errors and falsehoods of men's Doctrines.

A day shall declare it. You have a parallel expression, Their folly shall be
made manifest, and they shall proceed no further, 2 Timothy 3.9. he compares false
teachers to Jannes and Jambres, as they did miracles like Moses for a while,
but at last their folly and sorcery were discovered: So it is here, God will put
a stop to the torrent of errors; he will show a great difference between his
truth, and men's inventions; the one shall be received, and the other rejected.
This Gangrene that spiritual Physician can stop from further contagion. God
that could stop the infection of the plague on a sudden, that the arrow should
kill no more at midday, has done this also wonderfully in his Church. The day
did declare Arianism, Pelagianism, Nestorianism, and the like.

To enlarge this Doctrine, consider these things,

First, In that the Scripture calls the time of manifestation, a Day, wherein is
light, and the Sun beams; it does excellently imply, That all the while there
are corruptions in Doctrine and Worship, that time is a time of darkness. Let
men never so much rejoice in them, and count them happy times, yet the
Scripture calls them dark times. So that to take away the truths of God, the
pure worship of God, is indeed, Solemn e mundo tollere, to take the Sun out of
the firmament. All the while the Church of the Jews was without the Law and the
Prophet, without true teaching of the Word of God; they were in a worse
condition than the Egyptians, in their Egyptian darkness, for that hindered
them only in their bodily motions, and outward accommodations; but this tends
to the destruction and damnation of soul and body. The true Ministers of Gods
word are compared to light, and to salt, Matthew. 5 13. Nihil Sole and sale
utilius, both are necessary and useful. They are called the Stars, and it
must needs be a dark night, when no stars shine. Since the Apostles times,
the Church of God has many times come under such dark times, that it has been
like the old Chaos, when darkness covered the deep. Take we heed then of
calling darkness light, there is a woe to those that do so, Isa. 5.20. as some
do the times of Reformation, the times of Deformation. If these corrupt
Doctrines, which come from the prince of darkness, thou call light, as
coming from the Father of lights; Thou intitlest God to the Devils work, and
that is no mean ^in. This should teach the godly what to think under the
overflowing of errors, to account them dark and sad times.

Errors are spiritual judgments.
Secondly, There are no foolish builders that thus deform Gods Temple, but they
are by Gods permission; in his wrath and anger, because men have abused his
truth, and waxed wanton under it, therefore has he sent the spirit of delusion
and errors amongst men, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. For this you must know, though God be
not the Author of any evil, and it were blasphemy to ascribe sin to him, as
the cause of it; yet, as a just Judge he does not only suffer, but also order,
that heresies and corruptions shall be in the Church. They are of the Lord by
permission and ordination, though not efficiency and approbation. Thus in Deuteronomy.
13.3. If there arise a false Prophet, I the Lord do it to try you. And in Ahabs
time, you may read of many lying spirits in the false Prophets, yet they could
not go to delude such or such, till God gave them leave, 2 Chronicles. 18.21. Thus
1 Cor. 11. There must be heresies: Why must there be so? God to punish men's
corruptions, their pride, their ignorance, their wilful abuse of his
knowledge, will suffer such things to be. Though he has a gracious end, That
the approved may be made manifest; That as all the persecutions, which have
been in the Church were from God as a just Judge, to exercise the patience of
it: So all the heresies and errors which have been, were to exercise the
wisdom and true faith of the Church. So that howsoever times of overflowing of
errors be dark and uncomfortable times, yet to consider the cause, is far
more uncomfortable, for these came from men's corruptions, and Satan's
instigations, as also from a provoked God in Heaven, who punishes our former
unthankfulness and disobedience, with corrupt ends and practices: As it is
said, Because men did not receive the truth in love, God gave them up to
believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. So that it is hard to say, whether is more sad to
consider the nature of the errors, that dishonor God, or the cause of them,
which is Gods anger against a people for barrenness and unthankfulness. God
then has his times, when for the sins of a people he lets Satan loose, and
suffers this red Dragon to vent his dreadful poison

Thirdly, As the corrupt errors of men came from Gods anger, so in mercy he
has appointed times, wherein he will purge and take away their dross. For
these Church-burthens and Church-corruptions have been far more heavy upon
Gods people, than State-oppressions. Therefore the first thing that Gideon did,
who was raised up by God, to be a Judge to deliver Israel from their cruel
oppressions, was to remove their Altars, and all their Idolatry: he began with
God first, Judges 6.28. And so when Moses had gathered the people of Israel
into a body, and they were capable of a Civil Government, yet the first thing
he does, is to prescribe them Laws concerning the worship of God; and in the
Decalogue, the first Table is for the Duties relating to God. By this you see,
That corruptions in Gods worship and truth, as they are greater sins than
others; they are talents when others are pounds; so they lie more heavily upon
the people of God, they bewail them more. Rome, as it was Egypt, did not so
much trouble the godly, as it was S^dome; the Idolatry more than the cruelty
offended the people of God. This being so, God among temporal promises of
deliverance, of righteousness and peace, does also comfort the godly with
times of Reformation in his Church, that this hay end stubble shall no longer
stand to dishonor his building. Thus God by the Prophet Isaiah promises. To
purge away their dross, and to take away their tin from them, Isai. 1.25.
which does relate to their Church-sinnes, their Idolatries, as well as
State-sinnes. And by Ezekiel, you have a glorious promise concerning
Church-Reformation, Ezekiel 36.25. as well as temporal, He will give them to
see their Idolatries, so that they shall be confounded and never open their
mouths. Especially, God has those times, when people shall be ashamed of their
errors, of their superstitions, and shall never open their mouths again to
plead for them, or justify them, When they shall see the pattern of the
Mount, Ezekiel 43.10. You have a notable promise, Malachi 3 3 where upon
Christ's coming, there is promised a glorious restoration, He shall sit as a
refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi. Christ
when he came into the world found all Gods worship grossly polluted; all the
Priests had defiled themselves: Now this was one end of Christ's preaching to
purify them, to cleanse them from these defilements. It Is true, profane and
worldly men, or mere Atheistical Politicians, they make no matter about Gods
truth, they make advantage of any Religion that serves a design; but this was
the great work of Christ's Ministry, to make a Reformation in Doctrine and
Worship. Though this was very unpleasing to corrupt men, therefore it is said,
Who can abide the day of his coming? It is even like a day of judgment to
them. It is observable what our Savior says, as much to our purpose, and
parallel with the Text, John 4.23. The hour comes, and now is, when the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth. You see how God has
his hour, his time and season for such a thing; and then when that is come,
they shall worship, God will so overruled, enlighten, and persuade men's hearts,
that they cannot but yield. Such an hour or time God had, when we recovered out
of Popery, Then darkness covered the face of the earth: The Sun, and the
Moon, and the Stars were turned into blood: The Officers of the Church, who
should have had light to instruct, did cruelly and bloodily persecute such as
did hold the truth. Now, though all the world was thus in darkness, yet when
God raised up those instruments of his truth, Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, and
others: They were no more able to stop the spreading of the Gospel, then they
could hinder the Sun from running its race. Gods hour was come, and then the
eyes of men would be opened. There were many persons, before Luther's time,
learned and godly men, that did withstand Popish errors, that died in
contradiction of them; but yet the world was not awakened; they did not think
of coming out of Egypt, till Gods time was come.

Fourthly, This Day of Gods revealing, may be a long while, as to our
expectation. God may suffer corruptions to cover all the body of the Church:
You may see only chafe, and no wheat; and this may be a long while; so that
the godly do even languish under their expectations. Thus in Elijah's time, 1
Kings 19 14. to his knowledge, and according to visible appearance, he only
was left to vindicate the pure Glory and Worship of God; And in what a
temptation was he about it? It Is true, God told him, He had reserved seven
thousand that had not bowed their knees to Baal, that did not communicate in
Idolatry: But what was seven thousand to all the people of Israel? No more than
the gleanings of the Harvest. And thus also we might show, how in the Christian
Church, when errors had once got possession in it; they were like the
Jebusites, and the wild beasts in the Land of Canaan, which could hardly be
destroyed. Donatisme lasted above two hundred years. Pelagianisme, and
Arianisme, though but sparks, yet kindled such a fire, that it was not
extinguished in many generations. So that we may say of this time, as Christ to
the Disciples, It is not for us to know the times and seasons, when God will
restore his Church to her purity. That is enough, which our Savior says,
Every plant that is not of my Fathers planting, shall be rooted out, Matthew.
15.13. That is an excellent place, compared with this Text: God has his time,
when he will root out all the plants, that he did not plant in his own
Vineyard: But how long it will be, ere this day break forth, God has not
discovered to us.

These things thus explained, Let us consider the Reasons, Why God will have a
Day to declare men's works in matter of false Doctrines? And

First, Because the truth of God is dear and precious to him. Christ himself
makes it one main reason, why he came into the world, (viz.) To bear witness
to Gods truth: So that Divines say, Though Christ's death in respect of God the
Father appointing him to be a Sacrifice for sin, was (...), an atonement or
expiation, yet if you do respect men, before whom he made a good Confession,
as Paul says, 1 Timothy 6.13. So it was (...), a Martyrdom; Christ died a
Martyr, as well as a Mediator, because by his blood he witnessed Gods truth.
You see then, how dear his truths are to him: And the Psalmist, among other
arguments, uses this, It Is time for thee, Lord, to work, for men have made
void thy Law, Psalm. 119.126. And though it be but the least Commandment, yet if
any man shall teach men to break it, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven, that is, he shall be none at all in the Church here (as
some expound) and of Heaven hereafter, Matthew. 5.19. Know then, that not only
profane lives, but corrupt Doctrines do provoke God.

Secondly, It Is necessary there should be a time, because of the people who
belong to Gods grace, that they may see their errors, and bewail them: That
they may redeem the time, by pulling down their hay and stubble, and building
gold and silver. Thus Luther, and all the first Reformers (alas) they had a
long time built hay and stubble, till God opened their eyes, and then they were
as much for truth as once against it. How could the people of God come out of
Babylon, if this day were not? And if there be so much joy, for reducing one
straying Sheep, how much more of wandering Shepherds?

Lastly, In respect of men hardened in their errors, that their obstinacy may
appear the more: That when they will not see, though the day appear, who then
can justify them? Thus the Pharisees, the proper builders of hay and stubble,
yet Christ tells them, He came into the world, that they might not see. Their
blindness was the more increased by his light.

Use of Admonition, To embrace those days of light and Revelation, which God
brings into the world. Do not dote upon thy own Opinions; thy old corrupt
Doctrines and Worship: It Is no longer night, the day appears. It Is true, such
a day is very terrible to men, who are wholly corrupted with their errors: As
Mal. 3. The Prophet speaking of his coming to purify the sons of Levi, cries
out; Who may abide the day of his coming? It Is as terrible (you heard) as the
Day of Judgment to them. Certainly, to superstitious and idololatrical persons,
the day of Reformation is a terrible day: They cannot abide the purity and
holiness of it. Do not dispute, but wisely observe when God causes such days
to arise upon thee; thy blindness will be the more inexcuseable.

Because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work
of what sort it is.

We now proceed to the manner, or Instrument, by which the Day of God shall
declare it, and that is by fire. This is the place that has raised much fire
of contention, while Expositours differ about the interpretation of fire.
Austin (as you have heard) thought it one of Paul's hard places, to be
understood; and is so modest, that he professes he had rather learn from
others, then dictate any thing himself. This Text the Papists make the chief
place for Purgatory; therefore Bellermine lib. 1. de Purga. cap. 5. is very
large in the explication of this place, calling it as difficillimum for
tilissimum, etc. one of the most difficult places of the whole Scripture, and
yet most profitable, because the Catholics build their Ecclesiastical
Doctrines on this place, viz That there are venial sins, and that there is
Purgatory. Indeed, he does in part Orthodoxly expound the fire in this verse,
saying, Herein we do not dissent from Calvin and Martyr; but he would establish
it on verse 15. Of which in its time. But it is well, that if there be such a
fire, it is only of hay and stubble, and will not last long. By Purgatory fire,
they mean a severe punishment, though not altogether so terrible as Hell; in
which place they go, that are good for the main, but yet have many sins
cleaving to them, from which they were not purged in this life. If you ask for
a text of Scripture, some say, It cannot be proved by Scripture, but only it is
a Church tradition: Others, as Bellarmine, labor to prove it by Scripture, but
by very obscure texts, such as these are. Now, necessary things, to Faith or
Salvation, are some where or other, laid down plainly in Scripture. But that
this is only a probatory fire, and not a a purgatory, as they hold, appears
by this clear Argument. They hold that only wicked actions shall come into the
purgatory fire, but the Apostle makes all actions, good or bad, to come under
this fire. The fire shall try every man's work. If it be gold or precious
stones, it must be tried by fire, as well as hay or stubble; whereas, purgatory
fire is only for hay and stubble. And this sufficiently clears the place from
any such corrupt gloss, which would build hay and stubble, even from that very
text that threatens fire to such Doctrine.

But it is not enough to confute a false interpretation, unless we give a true.
What then is meant by fire? And

What is meant by fire.
First, We will take it for granted (though some think otherwise) that fire is
used in the same sense by the Apostle in these verses. It Is revealed by fire.
The fire shall try. Yet ^o as by fire Three times the Apostle names fire, and
it is not likely, that in so short a space, he should use it in different senses.

Taking it therefore for one and the same fire, let us consider how the
Scripture uses the word fire; and I shall not reckon up all the
significations, but what respects to this in my Text, And

1. Fire signifies the wrath and anger of God. Why is thy anger kindled like
fire? And, God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29.

2. For the Effect of Gods anger, tribulations and punishment. When thou
walk through the fire, Isa. 43 2.

3. It Is used for any thing that will try and examine. That as the fire tries
the gold, but consumes the dross; so whatsoever way God takes to examine,
that is fire. Thus Psalm. 66.10 Thou have tried us as silver is tried And Gods
Word is said to be like gold seven times tried in the furnace, Psalm. 12 6.
Especially Zechar. 13.9.

4* More particularly, it is used for Gods Word, because that does try and
discover all false ways. Jer. 5.14. I will make my ^ords in thy mouth fire,
says God to Jeremiah. For fire has light and heat in it; both these try.
First, Light: Every thing that is manifested, is manifested by the light,
Ephesians. 5.13. Secondly, Heat: Calor separat heterogenea. Heat separateth the
dross from gold. Now the Word of God is light and heat.

5. Fire is used for temptations, afflections. The precious trial of your faith
by fire, 1 Pet. 1.7. Count not the firey trial a strange thing, 1 Pet. 4.12.
Mark 9.29. Every Sacrifice shall be s^lt^^ ^ith fire. That is, as some expound
it, Every man that would be acceptable to God, he must have salt to season him;
and this salt, is, the fire of afflection.

By these places you see then, that fire signifies in the general, Gods severe
judgment, discovering and trying men's ways, which are partly by his Word, and
partly by afflictions. So that the Apostle continues in his excellent Allegory
of building. Those parts of the house that are wood and straw, are presently
consumed by fire, but gold and silver will abide. This I conceive the genuine
meaning, only further take notice, that the Apostle speaks in the
Present-tense, it is revealed; but we translate it in the future; because it is
usual in the Scripture, to speak of a thing that shall be continued, in the
Present-tense; as also to show the certainty of it. It Is also doubted to what
this does relate: The day shall be declared by fire; Some say, the Lord shall
be revealed in fire, as 1 These. 1.7. Others more probably, the work of every
man.

The way God takes to bring people out of error.
Doct. That God uses to bring people out of errors and false ways, by his
Word and Afflictions.

By the word and afflictions.
The Word to inform, and Afflictions to prepare the heart. Even as men out of
their senses, are kept in Prysons with hard usage; so God, to humble and tame
such a people, sadly afflicts them, that they may hearken to his Word. God made
Egypt an Iron-furnace to the people of Israel; they lay under great
oppressions, that so Canaan might be the more welcome to them.

To understand this, consider, That though the word and afflictions, Which are
both helpful, but differently in these respects.
both help to bring a man out of false ways, yet far differently. For

First, The word of God, is of it self sufficient, in a way of light, to inform
and instruct; and has threatenings also, to be like a goad in the side: but
afflictions, of themselves, do not inform, do not teach. Gods Word is able to
reduce without afflictions, but afflictions cannot do any thing without Gods
Word. Hence all that fire which is poured upon Idolaters and Heathens, is like
the fire of hell; calidus, but not luci^us, because they have not the Word to
guide them. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and teach thy word,
Psalm. 94.12. Should a man go through fire and water, give his body to be burnt
for any error or superstitious doctrine, all the imprisonments and burnings in
the world could do them no good, unless the Word go before. Heretici sunt
lapidandi argumentis e Seriptura petitis: Arguments fetched out of the
Scripture, may strike down the greatest Goliath.

Secondly, There is a difference between the Word and Afflictions, because
though afflictions have a voice as well as the Word, and the rod speaks as well
as Gods Word, yet the word of God does it distinctly and plainly, afflictions
in a general manner. They tell us God is angry; they tell us they come for
sin; but why and wherein, or what are the sins, that Gods Word does only
inform us. So that Gods Word has the prerogative above afflictions.

Thirdly, Though the Word of God be thus only able to instruct and convince,
being a perfect Rule, yet that does not exclude other helps, especially the
Ministry; for Ministers are called the lights, and guides. So that the word of
God is the light, but it must be put on a Candlestick. The Word of God will
convince heretics, but in the hands of w^^ and faithful Teachers: Otherwise,
men through ignorance and corruption, fetch their errors from the Word of God
misapplied. Which made Ambrose compare ignorant heretical persons, using
Scripture, to little David in Saul's Armor; it was more then he could weild,
and so instead of defending, it did wound him.

These things being premised, 1. Let us see, How God by the word reduces the
wandering sheep. How wandering sheep are reduced by the Word.
2. How by afflictions. And


First, The word of God is instrumental to open the eyes, to enlighten the dark
understanding. David does wonderfully commend the Scripture for this use, that
it was a lanthorn to his feet, and a lamp to his paths; whereby he became wise,
and understood even more then his Teachers, Psalm. 119. This is the EYE SALVE.
For want of searching into the Scriptures, it was they erred so grossly about
the resurrection. When Christ is promised to be as a refining fire (Mal. 3.) to
the Sons of Levi, how did he this, but by the clearing of the Word from
Pharisaical interpretations? And Estius, though a Papist, thinks this place
alludes to that of Malachi; and indeed there is a great resemblance.

Secondly, The word of God is fire to try men's works, because it contains all
matter necessary to salvation. So that when we believe hoc credimus, quod nihil
ultra credere debemus: the Scriptures are said to be able to make us wise to
salvation, 2 Timothy 3 15. If nature does not fail in natural necessities, much
less will the Scripture in supernatural. These things are written, that
believing you might have eternal life, Joh. 20.31. As God at first put all the
light into the Sun, so he has all necessary things into the Scripture. The
Word of God then will manifest and reveal, both objectively, in discovering
that matter which is true, and subjectively, in preparing the eye to see, which
is more then the Sun can do: Though that enlighten the medium, yet it cannot
give a seeing eye to the blind.

Thirdly, The word of God will be a fire to try, because it does direct to all
those means whereby we may come out of all errors. As

1. It presses humility, not to lean to our understanding. God will teach the
humble his way, Psalm. 25. Though such may a long while wander, yet they will
come back, and then they are not ashamed to recant before the whole world.
Peter commends Paul for the wisdom given him of God, 2 Pet. 3.15. and yet we
know how Paul reproved Peter to the face, as is related Gal. 1. This was great
humility in Peter, to love and commend the excellencies in Paul for all this.
Austin wrote his Retractations at the latter end of his age, which argued great
humility.

2 The Scripture bids us love that truth we do know, and so far as we have
obtained, to obey, and to walk according to that Rule, Phil. 3.16 You heard
last day, That errors are not only men's sins, but their punishments likewise.
Because men receive not the truth in the love of it, they are delivered up to
believe a lie. Now then, the godly are care^ull to prevent the cause thereof.
He that does my will, shall know whether the doctrine be of God, Joh. 7 17.
Foggy mists draw a cloud over the Sun, and so noisome affections, they
becloud the judgment.

3. The Scripture directs to earnest Prayer: That is the Key to open Heavens
Treasury. Ask and ye shall have. If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of
God, James 1.5. David, though a great Proficient, prays that God would open
his eyes to understand the wonderful things of his word, Psalm. 119.18. Prayer
must begin, and Prayer must end all reading, and hearing, and all meditations.
To study much without Prayer, to read much without Prayer, is like the stomach
that eats much, but wants natural heat for digestion.

Object.
But you will say, How is ^^a^s word a fire? How does that reveal, when many
very exp^rt in Scripture, do yet run into very many errors? Do not those
that build hay and stubble, bring many texts of Scripture? How can these be
said to reveal?

Answ.
Answer 1. The defect is not in the Scripture, but in men themselves. The Owl
and Bat is made blinder by the Sunne-beames, not through any defect in the
Sun. A diseased stomach, grows worse by the good meat it eats. The
Papists call the Scripture, The Heretics Book; and Luther did so also, but
upon different grounds: For the Papists, they say the blame on the Scripture,
making it insufficient, imperfect, a nose of wax: but Luther, on men's
corruptions, that profanely and presumptuously put that sense on it, which it
does not own. But

Secondly, Men swallow down first the sweet poison of errors from false
Teachers, and then they think every place in the Scripture makes for them. And
this is the main cause of errors. They have men's persons in admiration; they
do not judge of persons by their Doctrine, but their Doctrine by their persons:
and when they are thus prepossessed, then they easily persuade every text is
for them, or at least not contrary to them. A man that has a noise of wind in
his ears, thinks he hears the like abroad; and the distempered palate,
thinks every sweet thing bitter.

Thirdly, They do not attend to the whole Scripture. They compare not place
with place. Mark any errors; they fasten upon some places of Scripture, and
they do not wisely consider other texts as well. If we take that place, We are
no more under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. here you would think the Law
were quite laid aside; but take ^^other place, The law is good, if a man use it
lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.8. And, ^^ we make void the Law, God forbid, Romans 3.31. So
then, you see the Law has its use still.

Lastly, It Is not enough to have Scripture, to have many texts, but we are also
to make use of those helps for the understanding of them, which God has
appointed. The Scripture is the only Rule, but not the only Means; for, else
there needed no praying, there needed not the Spirit of God, nor the Ministry;
but God has appointed Ministers in his Church, who by way of Office, are to
interpret and explain Scripture. They are called eyes, and Shepherds. And the
neglect of this, may lead a man, though perfect in the Scripture, into errors.

I come to the second way: Afflictions are Gods fire, they will discover men's
works by of preparation, and fiting the heart to receive; How afflictions may
help to reduce men from error.
even as the plowing and harrowing of the ground, makes it fit for the seed.
Many Psalms have this Inscription, Maschil, a Psalm of David; that is, a Psalm
that gives Instruction. Now many have afflictions for their subject: Hence is
that old saying, Schola crucis, est Schola lucis. We are careless proud,
wanton, negligent and will not hear what the Word says, till God has
c^^stized us; and therefore the Church of God was most Orthodox, and the purest
Virgin in times of persecution, but in the times of prosperity, then the most
damnable heresies did overflow. As in Summer, the Snakes and Adders are busy,
but in Winter they do not stir.

Use of Instruction, How much we are to bless God for his Word, and the pure
preaching of it. It Is that which preserve^h thee from swallowing down the
damnable poison of thy soul: It is that which keeps thee from falling into
the d^tch, though now we are grown wanton under it: We are weary of this Manna:
Yet when at first they came up out of Egyptian Popery, the pure preaching of
the Word, was accounted the greatest mercy. There was a solemn day of rejoicing
in Germany, when the Bible was translated into the vulgar native tongue.
Observe the Devils methods, when for a long time he destroyed men through
ignorance and horrid blindness, afterward he did it through too much
knowledge, or rather abuse of that knowledge and light which shined upon them.
But let not the building, though of hay and stubble, be accounted a light
matter, it will cost fire. It will not be a small matter to endure the burning
in this Text.

Verse 14. If any man's work abide, which he has built thereupon, he shall
receive a reward.
THe Apostle (you heard) has in a general manner, treated of the time and
manner, how all the works of the builders in the Church shall be tried, which
(persisting in his Metaphor) he calls fire. He now comes to the application of
this Allegory, and to show the particular disparity. And

1. He begins with the wise builder, and herein you have the good work
supposed. And

2. The good reward promised.

The good work supposed is, If it abide. If it can endure the fire, and be not
consumed by it; for so all truth will. The good thing promised, is, He shall
receive a reward. By the reward here promised, to understand only that honor
and dignity he shall have in the Church, is to limit it too much; we may take
it for all the honor and blessing God will bestow on him here, and eternal
life hereafter.

Now why it is called a Reward, and the improvement of that, has been already
considered; we shall therefore pitch on the matter supposed, If any man's work
abide. Now this must be understood, supposing all the other conditions likewise
required to salvation: For if a man preach truth never so truly; if he be never
so Orthodox, yet if his life be wicked, he shall loose heaven for all that.
Therefore those who are Orthodox in their judgments, and do not walk exactly in
their lives, are like those posts in the highway (as Austin said) that direct
passengers to go the right way, but they themselves stand still. The meaning
then of the Apostle, is, That on his Doctrines part, there shall be no
impediment to his salvation. If his life, and if his aims and ends be gold
likewise, as well as his Doctrine, he is sure to have a glorious Reward.

Now though this be a necessary point, to show that it is not enough for such
Officers to preach that which is truth, but they ought to have such aims and
ends, and such an holy conversation also, as the Word requires; else, they but
make Crowns of glory for others, and they themselves shall be cast into eternal
darkness; yet because it is not intended here, I wave it.

Again, when it is said, If a man's work abide: By work, is meant Doctrine. That
you may not suck that poison, which a Papist from hence infers, That there
are some works so pure, that they can abide Gods trial: David thought
otherwise, when he said, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, etc.
Psalm. 143.2. From the matter then supposed, If it abide. Observe,

Observe. Of the durable nature of Gods Truths.
That Gods Truths are of a firm and durable Nature, notwithstanding any trial
or opposition whatsoever.

Thus Christ Mat. 5.8. Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away, then one iota
or title. Whatsoever is asserted or threatened, or promised, stands firmer then
Mount Sion, like the earth, which cannot be removed. They who have endeavored
to overthrow Gods Truths, they are as absurd, as if a man should set his
shoulder to remove a huge mountain. 1 Pet. 1.25. Gods truths are exalted for
duration above all earthly pomp; All flesh is grass, the grass withers, the
flower fades, but the Word of God endures for ever. See then, the
incorruptibility and immortality of Gods Truths, that as it is said of God
himself, I am the Lord, and I change not, Mal. 3.6. so these are Gods truths,
they change not. All flesh is grass. Whatsoever greatness and power has
exalted it self against Gods truth, has vanished into dust, when truth has
still prevailed.

To understand this, consider,

First, Truth twofold, Increated and Created.
That there a twofold truth, Increated and Created. Increated, and that is God
himself, who is the first essential and immediate truth. God is true, and every
man a liar. I am the truth (said Christ) Joh. 14.6. And this is indeed the
ground why Gods truths are so permanent, because they are the Assertions or
Testimony of the first Truth. So that as the Sun, the Fountain of light,
cannot be dark, so neither is it possible for God to lie or deceive.

Created truths of two sorts.
Now Created Truths, are of two sorts. Natural Truths, such as are in
Philosophy, and are implanted in men's minds, either as principles, or as
necessary conclusions to be deduced from them: And these are of God, as
appears Romans 1. Which made one say, Omnis veritas est a spiritu sancto. And
these also are necessary and certain. And

Secondly, There are Divine Truths, such as are revealed in Gods Word, most of
which humane reason could not comprehend; but as Zacheus, of a low stature, got
up into the tree to see Jesus, so reason being too low, must ascend up into the
Scripture to behold these truths. Now these are more certain and durable then
those natural Truths, because natural truths are founded upon the nature and
essence, or properties of the creatures, but Divine Truths on Gods Word. It is
true, all Truth is said to be in indivisibili, and so one Truth is not more
true then another, but yet the foundation of this truth may be more firm in one
then in another.

In the next place, consider that Gods Truths in his word, Scripture truths
reduced to four heads.
may be reduced to four heads: 1. Assertory Truths, such as assert any matter
of Faith, or matter of fact. 2. Truths of Prophesying and Prediction; and such
do not abide always, because they are completed in the accomplishment of
them. 3. Truths of Promise or Promissory, and those have not only Gods word,
but some of them Gods Oath also, and they are founded in Christ, in whom they
are yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1. 4. There are Comminatory truths or threatenings: now
here is this difference between the two latter, since Promissory truths are not
made good, unless a man believe: It Is of says that the Promise might be sure,
Romans 4.16. but the threatenings of God are sure, and will be true, though the
profane person do not believe them, though he think the contrary. Now the
Ministers work, which he must build, is upon one of those foundations,
Assertory, Promissory, or Comminatory Truths, and this will abide, though the
flames burn never so violently.


Thirdly, This good building of truth, does not only abide the fire, Truth
willing to be tried.
but desires the fire; it is willing to come to the Touchstone. The thief
hates the light because his deeds are evil. Heresy and false Doctrine does
not love the Touchstone, no more then the Owl the Sun. Hence it is, that
being provoked to go to the Scriptures, they accuse the Scriptures of
insufficiency and imperfction. It Is a saying of Lindan a great Papist, living
in the first time of the Reformation, That it had been better, if they had
never yielded to the Protestants to prove things by Scripture, but kept only to
tradition. Whenever any erroneus persons begin to disparage, or to dethrone
the Scripture, not to adore the fullness and sufficiency of it, as a Rule,
suspect that man; he is like the Elephant, which because he cannot endure to
see himself in the water, is said to disturb and bemuddy it. So that the
truths of God do not shun the fiery trial.

Fourthly, The Truths of God, built by a spiritual builder, do not only abide
the fiery trial, but they grow more illustrious and glorious thereby. They grow
more illustrious by the fiery Trial.
All the heresies and Persecutions that ever have been, were like the waters to
the Ark, they lifted it higher to Heaven. The truth about grace had not been so
clear, had not Pelagius maintained free will. The Divine Nature of Christ had
not been so fully evidenced out of Scripture, had not the Arrians opposed it.
Justification by Faith in Christ, had not been so strongly and powerfully
proved, had not Justification by works been obtruded in Popery. So that it does
not only abide the fire, but it is grown more admirable thereby. Many doubts are
removed; and as the winds, shaking of some trees, make the root the faster, so
the difference and disputes about Religion, though they do hurt to some, yet to
sound and solid men, they have made them more established. Nil tam certum, quam
quod e dubio certum Which made an Ancient say excellent well, P^us debeo Thomae
dubitanti, quam Petro credenti: For by his doubting, Christ's Resurrection was
more confirmed unto us.

Fifthly, Not only the Truths of God in their Nature, The effects of truth also
upon the heart, will abide this trial.
but also in the proper and genuine effects upon the Hearers, they also abide,
and will endure the trial. Now the Truths of God revealed in the Scripture,
among other Effects, have these notable ones.

First, To assure and persuade the heart of the certainty of them. Hence faith
is called assurance; and, full assurance. Heb. 10.22 And The substance of
things Heb. 11.1. So that where Gods Truth has been fully received, there it
establishes the heart. It Is not carried away with every wind of Doctrine.
There are few that we can say of, that they have received the truth, not as the
word of man, but as the word of God, 1 These. 2.13. Many are so fickle, so
inconstant, so unsettled, that they are ready every day to have a new Faith;
this is, because the Word is not received as Gods Word, but as a man's Opinion.

The second notable Effect, is, To regenerate and make us new creatures: And
this is also an incorruptible effect, no sin, or Devil, or the temptations of
the world shall be able to obliterate that heavenly Image or Picture, the Word
of God has drawn upon such a man's soul. Thus 1 Pet. 1.23, 24. Being born not
of corruptible, but the incorruptible seed, which is said to abide, though all
flesh and the flower thereof does perish. It Is true indeed, David's grace, and
Peter's grace, in the fiery trial of sin, seemed to be quite extinct; but they
were as the trees in winter, which have life in the root, though no signs of
life appear by fruit, or leaves. If therefore you see any, who seemed to have
been regenerated by the Word, totally Apostatize and fall off, take the
Scriptures saying up, They went from us, because they were not of us, Joh.
2.19. No true Stars can indeed fall from Heaven, meteor's may. Thus not only
the truths we preach, but even you that are Hearers, ought to be our work, and
an abiding work. The Apostle calls the Corinthians, his Epistle, to be seen and
read of all men, 2 Cor. 3.2. You are to be as walking Sermon^; and no
temptations* or persecusecutions, yea, The gates of Hell are not to prevail
over you, Mat. 16.18. The forgetful or unprofitable Hearer, does as much as
lies in him, to make the truths of God, of no more durable operation then
humane figments.

Object.
Now to this Doctrine, there is an obvious and palpable Objection: How can we
say, that the true and Orthodox building in Christ's Church, will abide all
storms? Do we not read frequently, that in the Church truth has been
condemned, error owned? All those Martyrs, that lost their lives for the
truths of God, were they not condemned as heretics? Has not error always
found more upholders then the truth? Was not the Lord Christ condemned, and
that by a Council of the Priests and Elders of Jerusalem? Was not the whole
world turned Arrian? And in our forefathers days, was not the Egyptian
darkness of Popery, covering the whole world? Was not the Mass,
Transubstantiation and Image worship, set up as the principal truths of God?
And are there not men that write, the time will come, when the Word, Trinity,
Co-essential, or Consubstantial, shall be as much hated as Mass and
Transubstantiation?

To this Objection, we Answer: That those matters of fact cannot be denied, and
yet the Doctrine is true; for, those oppressions and overwhelmings of the
truth, were but for a while. The truth of God did abide the fire, even then,
and afterward prevailed more then ever. The Sun for a while, may be in an
Eclipse, and hidden by black clouds, but at last it is light does prevail. We
do not say, that in every place, and at every time, truth always is extolled,
and error condemned, but in time it will be. It Is with the truths of Christ,
as it was with Christ himself; he seemed to be overcome by his adversaries, he
was dead and buried, yet he had a glorious Resurrection and Ascension. So that
as God would not suffer his holy one to see corruption, so neither will he let
his holy Truths. But as in Christ, his bones (by Gods providence) were not to
be broken, the seat of strength, so neither can the bones of Truth be. The
Apostle says, The Day shall declare it; that is, the time appointed by God.

2. This abiding or decaying, must not be judged by carnal reason, but by the
eye of Faith It Is enough that to the godly and Believers, though but a few,
truth is acknowledged, though the greater part of the world vote for an error.
Christ himself was not owned for the Messiah, but by a very few that had the
eye of Faith; the greater part denied him. To every man's eye, the Sunnne is
less then the whole world, but to art it is far bigger. That therefore is
said to abide the fire, which indeed, and to the eye of Faith does so. Wisdom
is justified of her Children, Mat. 11.19.

3. We told you, Though the day of Judgment was not principally intended, yet
we could not wholly exclude it neither. And then the truth and sound principles
of faith will abide, when errors shall call for the mountains and hills to
cover them.

Use 1. Of Exhortation to us Ministers. Seeing we are builders, How behove^lli^
it to build such sound solid matter, that will abide? Oh that this Text were
written in the heart of every one that undertakes to maintain or preach any
thing in Religion! It is a Babel or Jerusalem thou buildest, and God will
discover so at last. But

Secondly, Of Instruction, what you hearers should be, such in whom the truths
we preach should live and abide: How can we say, All flesh is grass, but the
Word of God abides for ever in your hearts? Nay rather, the Word and all
preaching withers as the grass; and the works of sin and the world abide
for ever with you. Well, know this, that whatsoever we preach out of Gods word,
it is of everlasting abode, it will go to the grave with you, it will go to
Hell, or to Heaven with you. Do you forget it never so much, that will not
forget you? The Word will judge and condemn you; And how can that be, but
because it will be alive, and come forth at that great day against thee?

Verse 15. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.
THis Text contains the contrary event of the foolish builder to the wise. We
would think hay and stubble should be no such great matter; that God would not
much stand upon such small things: But this Text will sufficiently inform to
the contrary.

In the words then, consider, The evil work supposed; and the suitable Reward
threatened.

The evil work supposed, is to be such that cannot endure the trial, but will
be burnt. If any man's Doctrine be hay and stubble, which cannot endure the
fire, but will immediately be burnt.

Then there is a twofold reward, even resembling that of an hell,

There is Poena damni, a punishment of loss.

2 Sensus, He shall be saved, but so as by fire.

There is no difficulty in the former. For though it may be thought to refer
to the work, yet it is far more probable, that it does relate to the person
whose work it is. So that as metal cast into the fire loses its dross, and so
comes out less then it was; thus it shall be with him, he shall be afflicted,
yet so that it shall turn to his good. But the later is much vexed. And

First, You see the Apostle speaks not of fundamental Heresies, such as are
damnable in their nature, and carry the party without repentance to
destruction; but of such as are consistent with salvation. Learned men apply it
to the Gnostics, the famous Heretics of those times, who did not deny
Christ, but superstructed many evil and sinful Doctrines upon this rock or
foundation.

In the second place, They are such as make a man's salvation very difficult.
Even as you have an expression of a righteous man, A righteous man is scarcely
saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. For this phrase [So as by fire] is a proverb^al expression,
to denote the extreme danger a man is in, and yet escapes, as those three
Worthies in the fiery furnace. Thus Jude verse. 23. speaking to this purpose of
many people led aside with errors, says, Save them with fear, pulling them
out of the fire. They were in as great danger as a child fallen in the fire,
whom the father pulls out with great fear and amazement. Thus Joshua, Zech.
3.2. is said to be a firebrand pulled out of the fire; that is, delivered from
great and imminent dangers. The same expression is, Amos 4.11. Ye were as a
firebrand plucked out of the fire; he speaks of such who had escaped the
pub^ick judgments o^ God upon them. This proverb the Latins and G^ecians also
have, e slamma cibum petere.

This being so clear, we would wonder, what should make the Popish Interpreters
dream of a Purgatory fire; for they hold Purgatory a real fire, even as that of
Hell; but the Apostles expression is, As it were by fire; which denotes a mere
similitude and comparison, Gods examination and judgment; as also the Word,
and heavy afflictions, these are the fire, which he must go through.

Besides many of them hold, That the Apostle speaks of the Day of Judgment,
when all men's works shall be examined and judged; so that this fire must not be
till the Day of Judgment; whereas they hold Purgatory fire, presently upon a
man's death, and so necessarily before the Day of Judgment. So that Austin long
ago far more probably interpreted it of afflictions in this life: Even as a
Merchant in a dangerous tempest throws away all his goods, and ^oseth all
that he loved, to escape with his own life: So shall it be with any man that
builds unsound and false opinions, when God shall awaken him by t^^bulations,
he will be content to throw all away, to lose all: He will forsake all those
Doctrines he was so dearly inamoured with, that he himself may escape.

Qu. Whether any Ministers or Churches are quite free from building hay or
stubble?
Now here may be a very profitable Question raised, Whether there be any Doctor,
or Teacher in the Church of God, yea or Church, though never so reformed, that
does only build gold and silver, and not some hay or stubble?

Answ. To this only in the general, we say, That setting aside the Apostles,
who were infallibly inspired and directed. There is ignorance and sinful
affections cleaving to every man in part, and so to every Church* and therefore
even the most excellent men and Churches have had their straw and stubble,
whereby even every man's salvation, though never so eminent even on his
Doctrines part (not attending to his life) is very difficult. All the Fathers
had their Navi, their hay and stubble: And this is true of all, though never so
eminent in after ages. But from the first observe,

Observe. Every man shall be a loser by what error soever he maintains.
That every man will be altogether a loser in any error or false way that he
has maintained, He shall suffer loss.

Sometimes by false ways men propound base carnal ends, wealth, riches,
honors and applause in the world; sometimes they think of spiritual ends, more
comfort and peace of heart, more enjoyment of God; but what Doctrine or ways
are not of God, a man is sure to be frustrated of his expectations; if they
have them for a while, they will quickly vanish away as the crackling of
thorns, make a blaze, but continue not.

Wherein they shall be losers.
In the first place we shall show, Wherein they shall be losers.

First, If they thought by erroneous ways to better themselves in an outward
condition in this world, in this they are sure to lose. How many have turned
from truth, when persecuted, to errors and false ways, only to have their
lives and liberties, and external comforts, but in the issue have been deceived
of all? When the Turk so prosperously prevailed, many Christians embraced the
Turkish Religion. In Popery, and times of bloody persecution, men through fear
and love of the world denied the truth, asserted and maintained false
Doctrines; But what got they, many of them? Did not our Saviors Rule prove
true? He that will save his life shall lose it, and he that will lose it shall
save it, Mat. 16.25. And does not the Prophet Jonah tell us a good lesson, They
that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy? Jo^. 2.8. They that would
worship Idols, or go into superstitious ways, they forsake that very mercy,
God has provided for them otherwise. Oh that this were well thought of by
those, who think to better themselves by those ways that are not of God!

Secondly, If they looked for honor and outward dignity, to be applauded and
esteemed; this also they shall be losers in. For by the judgment of those
Churches or persons that are orthodox, they shall fall from all that repute and
esteem they had. The Church of Rome was set up like an high Mountain: Did not
all the people of the Christian world, when there were breaches in Religion,
look upon her, like a brazen Serpent, thinking to be heard presently? The
repute and authority she had in all men's consciences, made the politic Popes
triumph over all the great ones of the world thereby, and enlarge both Civil
and spiritual jurisdiction: But when her Idolatries and errors were
discovered, How odious and abominable is her very memory? Now it is the Sodom,
the Babylon, the Egypt John speaks of. So that howsoever errors may have
great applause and glory for a while, yet God in time will make them vile as
dung. As of those corrupt Priests in the worship of God, God said, He would
spread dung upon their faces, Mal. 2 3. The Ph^risees by their superstruction
of hay and stubble, they intended glory and honor of the people: They did all
things as men acting upon a Thea^re; but when Christ came and preached the pure
word of God, and discovered all the^r vanity and hypocrisy, then their esteem
and honor fell immediately in^o the dust. Mat. 5.19. Our Savior speaking
against false teachers, says, If any teach the breaking of the least
commandment, he shall be called the le^st in the kingdom of Heaven. The kingdom
of Heaven is the Church in this life (as some expound) And, he shall be called
the l^ast, that is, He shall be of no repute and esteem. Thus the names of all
the Heretics that have lived, are they not of unsavory memory? And though
some had excellent parts, and held many truths, yet this dead fly falling into
their ointment marred all.

Thirdly, They lose all their ministerial labor and study they used, in
building such stubble. And truly this loss should much affect every man,
whether Minister or private Christian. Some opinions thou have, thinking them
truths, but they being errors, all thy preaching for them, writing for them;
all thy endeavor to proselyte others to thee; thy going far and near to make
others of thy mind* all this is lost labor: It will not have so much reward,
as a cup of cold water, given ^n Christ's name, will have. A Wasp is busy, and
flies up and down, as well as a Be; but a Bees business brings honey, a
Wasps does nothing but a sting. Thus it may be thou art active and diligent;
thou art speaking of thy opinion to all; but art thou a Be making honey, or a
Wasp stinging others? Never care to company with those, that you perceive have
a sting only, and no honey. The Pharis^es, what a deal of pains did they take,
to disciple others to themselves? They compassed ^ea and Land, as Merchants to
get wealth, and when all was done, they made themselves and their hearers in
greater danger of damnation than before. Thus the Jesuits are as industrious
as the Devil, compassing the whole world, to make a prey of men's souls: But all
this labor will accuse them the more. The Wiseman observes great vanity in
all worldly labor: but especially in matters of Religion to labor in vain,
there to lose all thy nights and thy days, and thy study, and thy pains, is
beyond expression miserable.

Fourthly, They will lose their inward peace and comfort of conscience. How
many that have turned aside from the truth to error, have found tormenting
worms gnawing their conscience? They have not found it a light sin, witness
Spira, and many others. He that denies me, says our Savior, him will I deny
before the Father and the holy Angels, and the whole world, Mat. 10.33. And
indeed there can be no sound comfort, but upon Scripture truths; for Gods
presence will go along only with his own truths. Even as it is in his
Sacraments, Gods grace will be exhibited, and true comfort conveyed only in his
instituted Sacraments; if men should appoint any of their own head, they cannot
look for his presence and efficacy. So it is here, If men broach errors and
false ways, God will not own them; a fire of straw and stubble will give but
short and little comfort to a cold man.

Fifthly, They lose, though not the total seed of grace, yet the degree and
fervency of it; yea in regard of outward appearance all seems to be lost.
They have not that tenderness, that strictness they once had. Hence the
Apostle couples, The shipwreck of faith and a good conscience together, 1 Timothy
1.19 Lose one, and you lose the other. How careful is the Apostle to forbid
all those disputes, which do not tend to godliness, and which do not edify? 2 Timothy 2.16. The shellfish was unclean, it had but little meat in it, and a
great deal of difficulty to get it. Men given wholly to dispute, do not mind
the affectionate part of godliness. Grapes do not usually grow on such thorns.
This then should make every one look to what he builds; take heed thou art
not falling into a noisome pit; look lest that when thy eye grows dark, thy
whole body will quickly grow dark; and to decay in grace is a great provocation
of God. To decay in thy estate, in thy health, are sad things; but in thy love
to God, in thy fervency, in thy zeal, is much more miserable. Remember from
whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works, Rev. 2.5. It Is our duty to grow
in grace, and for thee to do the clean contrary, to decay in grace must needs
provoke. Now part of this growing in grace, is to keep steadfastly to the truth.
That is very observable, 2 Pet. 3 17. They must not fall from their
steadfastness, And how shall that be? By growing in grace and knowledge.

Yea lastly, Men lose their parts and gifts: They have not that clearness and
soundness of understanding, as they had. Hence error does corrupt the mind,
as rust does the iron. To him that has shall be given (it is spoken of the
right using of our talents) and from him that does not use it in a right
manner, shall be taken away all that he has, Mat. 25.29.

Use 1. Of Exhortation to us Ministers, to be much in prayer and diligent study
in attending unto the word of God. You see here, unsound and false preaching
may bring us to great and sad losses, worse than of outward substance and
maintenance, even of inward comfort and peace with God; and this we are the
more to attend to, by how much we know but in part, and understand but in part.
As the bodily eye is subject to a world of diseases, and any distemper there,
is very dangerous: So the mind of a man is subject to much corruption,
blindness, ignorance, injudiciousnesse, vain and false reasonings; insomuch
that it is a proverbial expression, Humanum est errare; what is that but as much
as humanum est damnari, if God prevent not? Seeing therefore we are thus
compassed about with infirmities, which may prove destructive; this should make
us humble, modest, to say as Hierom, Nunquam meipsum habui magistrum, I never
was my own master. If others will be bold and presumptuous, yet do thou
tremble; then thou will gain, when such shall lose.

Use of Admonition to you the people; see that in the matters of Religion you
be no losers. Religion is every man's study, the Bible should be every man's
book. Though God does not require of you controversal and sublime Divinity, yet
the knowledge of such Doctrines as are fundamental and necessary to salvation,
you are to be acquainted with; yea, you are not to be always in principles,
but as the Apostle says, To be carried on to further perfection, Heb. 6.1. Now
in all your study you may be losers. You may have a vain faith, a vain
Religion, and that is, when it is not upon the Scripture-foundation; every man
hopes he shall not lose. The Turk thinks he shall not lose by believing his
Alcoran. The Jew that he shall not lose his expectation of a Messiah. The
Papist hopes that all his Image worship, all his fastings and pilgrimages shall
not be lost, but the Word speaks contrary.

He shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

A twofold loss (you heard) was here threatened to erroneous teachers. And the
first part we have dispatched, and now proceed to the later; and the phrase is
already explained.

To be saved as by fire] signifies, The great extremity and danger such a man
is in of damnation: He is like a firebrand pulled out of the fire. For that
explication of some of the Greek Fathers, especially Chrysostom, who in many
other places of the New Testament, does often judiciously interpret, is in this
particular very incredible; He shall be saved (says he) that is, he shall be
kept alive, and yet in hell fire. So that he thinks the Apostle says, he
shall be damned, yet this damnation is a kind of a living death, and a dying
life, he shall be always in hell fire, yet saved alive. He does use (says
Chrysostom) a good word in a sad and evil matter, Every one may see this is
forced. We stand therefore to the former explication, as that which is most
genuine. And two things may be observed very material:

1. Whereas you see erroneous and false Doctrines, though not overthrowing the
foundation, do yet dangerously shake a man's salvation, puts it to a great
hazard. Observe,

That even errors of judgment may endanger a man's salvation, Observe. Errors
in judgment may damn a man, as well as a wicked life.
as well as ungodliness in practice.

An unsound mind, as well as unsound life may undo a man. Austin once made a
Question, and knew not well how to resolve it, viz. Which was worst, an
Heretic living with an unblameable life, or an Orthodox man, with a vicious
and corrupt life? Non audeo dicere, says, I dare not determine it. Though
Austin could not determine it; yet Salvian a religious and zealous Ancient, he
seems to prefer an Heretic, if unblameable in his life, before a wicked
liver. Now the truth is in some respects, one is worse than another; only
herein there can be less said to excuse a profane wicked Christian than an
Heretic, because moral duties, such as not to lie, swear, or to be drunk, or
unclean, are more easily known, than many points in Religion, especially those
which are of a sublime consideration: But yet if we speak in the general, they
both do endanger a man's salvation. Thus the Apostle Peter says, That ignorant
men wr^st the Scripture to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. So that you see,
a man may destroy his soul, not only by a profane life, but by a presumptuous
abusing and wresting of the Scripture from the true sense. And the Apostle
James speaks of it, as a great matter, To convert one that erreth from the
truth, he has saved a soul and covered a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.20.

To open this Doctrine, consider, That the understanding of a man has s^veral
kinds of corruption, which do more or less endanger a man's salvation. The
several corruptions of the understanding that endanger a man's salvation.


First, There is ignorance in a man's understanding, whereby he does not know,
or believe the truth, and this indangers a man's salvation. This is eternal
life, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent,
John 17.2. Therefore not (...) these is eternal death, God would have all men
to be saved, and to come to the k^^wledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3 7. Thus as the
true knowledge of God and Christ is the way to salvation. This is the star to
lead to Christ; so ignorance of these things is the way to damnation. Hence
wicked men are often said, Not to know God, and yet how universal is this
sin? Few have any knowledge or understanding in the matters of Religion; They
have Eagles eyes to worldly things, but very blind Owls they are in heavenly
things.

A second Corruption of the understanding is Error. Ignorance is in the first
act of the understanding, which they call simple and bare apprehension; but
Error is in the second Act, which they call Judgment. So that to err, is to
mis-judge in matters of Religion; as those that denied the Resurrection are
said to err, because they did not know the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. Indeed
sometimes the wicked ways of a man's life are called errors: They have always
erred in their hearts, says the Scripture of the Israelites, in reference to
their ungodly actions, Heb. 3.10. because every sin is (...), an error or
missing of the mark; so that in this sense, we may say thy ungodly actions are
errors. Thou do well to complain of errors in doctrine; but why do thou
not complain of thy errors in thy life, Omnis peccans est ignorans, every
sinner as so is ignorant and erroneous: but we speak not of this, but of those
errors in judgment, whereby it judges false things true, or true false: And
there is no man in the world, but he has some error in his mind. As there is
not in any constitution, Temperamentum ad pondus, an exact temperament: So
neither in any man's understanding, an exact and right judging of all things in
matters of Religion. We know in part, says the Apostle, 1 Cor 13. Yea, we are
ignorant of far more things than we know.

Thirdly, There is a further corruption of the mind, and that is heresy. Which
word though in the first rise of it, was innocent in its signification, and is
so used twice or thrice in the Acts of the Apostles, as some affirm, yet in the
Ep^stles it is always used in an ill sense, and by ecclesiastical use, it is
different from error two ways: The difference between error and heresy.
1. Error is in matters of less cons^quence, that are not of necessity; but
heresy they make to be of things fundamental: therefore the Apostle speaks of
some, Who shall bring in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet 2.1. 2. They make it differ
in the affection of the person. He that is an Heretic has pertinacy and
obstinacy; An Heretic after the first and second admonition, reject, Tit.
3.10. But errors are with willingness to learn, and to be informed, as
Austin, Errare possum haereticus esse nolo. Thus Ecclesiastical custom has
used the word Heresy, though I cannot say, the Scripture does make that the
adequate notion of the word. Thus you see in these three ways the minds of men
may be corrupted, and through every one of them, more or less, a man may be
brought to the very brink of hell. This is a truth little thought of; yea some
have thought Heresy to be innocence; yea there are some who have maintained, a
man may be saved in any Religion, or in any sect, which if so, then there could
be no damnable Heresies.


Let us consider the Grounds of the Doctrine. And

The grounds of the Doctrine
First, Therefore errors as well as ungodliness in life will damn, Because
they are a sinful corruption of the best and noble faculty in a man. The
understanding is wounded with sin, as well as the will and affections;
insomuch that if it were possible for a man to have a right will and well
ordered affections, yet the sinfulness of his understanding is enough to damn
him. Grant then that ignorance, errors, or heresies are sins, and you say
enough to make any godly man afraid of them. Therefore think of this, you who
make it no matter to hold this or that opinion in Religion. If not to know the
truth be a sin, know that is an infinite evil, that will divide between God
and thee; and then it is a sin of the best and most noble part, the
understanding and reason, whereby we are differenced from beasts. A disease in
the eye is a dangerous thing, because so choice a part; and if our eyes be so
dear to us, as that it is a Proverb: How dear should your minds and
understandings be: Nature has provided a covering for them, and hair to defend
them; and thus we should be careful to keep our minds from all infections.

Secondly, It must needs be damnable, Because it is opposite to saving grace,
and that is a true faith and knowledge of God in his Word. Now this is a Rule,
We judge of the illness of every privation by the excellency of the habit it
is contrary unto. Now ignorance and error, they are contrary to a sound faith,
to a true knowledge, and deprive the soul of those divine truths, which are so
instrumental to all holiness. Therefore to say, to err, or be of this or that
opinion, is no great matter, is as much as to say, faith is no great matter,
the truths of the Scripture are no great matter. It was well said of Austin,
Veritas Christianorum est incomparabiliter pulchrior Helena Graecorum: The
Christians truth is more lovely than the Grecians Helena, for whom there was
much strife. Hence the Apostle commands us, To strive earnestly for the faith
once d^livered to the Saints, Jude v 3.

Thirdly, They endanger salvation, Because all errors come from a damnable
cause. Gal. 5.20 Heresies are said to come from the flesh, as opposite to the
Spirit, and therefore are reckoned in the same Catalogue with gross sins. So
that if you go to the first fountain, you shall find errors in Doctrine, and
loosnesse in practice, both came from the same ground; they are both fruits of
the flesh; though they be different streams, yet they are united in one ^p^ing:
Though they may struggle one with another, yet both are twins in the same womb.
Oh what an antidote would this be against these soul-infections that are
abroad, to think that errors and ungodly practices come both from the same
fountain! They are all fruits of the flesh, and therefore have a damnable cause.

Fourthly, Errors in judgment endanger salvation, Because they lead into
sinful and dangerous practices. In Philosophy we are ^old of the great
connection that is between the understanding, will and affections. Now the
understanding, that is the Sun in this firmament; and if that be in an
Eclipse, you know that evils are portended thereby. The understanding is the
counselor, and if that be corrupt, the will and affections must be very
sinful and unruly.

Use of Admonition, To take heed we be not led aside with any error or corrupt
Doctrines. You see death is in these things, as well as in lusts; yea, if the
mind be corrupt, all else will be corrupt, If the eye be dark, the whole body
will be dark Errors will breed loosnesse and profaneness of life: They are a
disease in the choicest part of a man: and know, it is not thy wisdom, thy
care can preserve thee. It Is the Spirit of God through his Word, that leads
us into truth. Christ is the truth, the way, and the life, John 14.6 The
greatest learning and knowledge will not keep a man; learned men have been
Heretics: but two things will especially keep us, 1. Humility and lowliness
of mind; To such God gives grace; To babes and sucklings he reveals himself.
And 2. An holy conformity to Gods will, so far as we know. When we do not
detain truth as a prisoner in our lives.


Doct. 2. Whereas you see an eminent Officer in the Church, building but hay
and stubble, is yet hardly saved: We may hint this Doctrine, though not insist
on it.

Observe. The difficulty of salvation even to a godly man.
That every godly man, though never so eminent, yet is very difficultly saved.

If hay and stubble will put us to such danger, what then will evident poison?
If these errors of the mind, which are so hardly prevented, what will the
constant lusts, and daily infi^mities, even of all men? Which makes the Apostle
Peter say, The righteous man is scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. Which although
some understand of a temporal salvation, he is very hardly delivered from those
temporal afflictions that fall out in this life; yet by consequence it reaches
to eternal salvation. Hence is that command, To work out our salvation with
fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Yea Paul, who had one foot in Heaven, yet he
said, He kept under his body, lest while he preached to others, he himself
should be a reprobate, 1 Cor. 9. ult.

Now the Grounds of these truths are,

First, From the exactness and strictness that is in the way to Heaven.
Godliness is on the high hill, as he placed virtue. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate, Luke 13.24. Be in an agony; yea, how strait is it, as in Matthew 7
14 by exclamation, few do enter therein? To lay out the nature of a godly man,
or godliness from Scripture-rules, would be almost like Tullies description of
a perfect Orator; or Plato of a Commonwealth. Our Savior speaking of the
difficulty of a rich man to be saved, that is, one who trusts in them, as one
Evangelist says, Mar. 10.24 The Disciples cry out, Who then can be saved? They
do not say, What rich man? but who can be saved? because every man has
something or other be trusts in, as well as the rich man in his riches.

Secondly, The difficulty does appear from that remainder and relic or
corruption that is in every man, which is in danger to break out. Our Savior
bid hi^ D^sciples, Beware of drunkenness and surfeting; though they seemed to
be ^arre from it, Luke 21.34 Paul, how does he mourn under the powerful vigor
of sin still abiding in him, Romans 7. Yea the Apostle speaking of a combat in
all, The Flesh lusts after the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, Gal.
5. So that by this means, he is in constant danger of being undone. There is
heart against heart, affections against affections, etc.

Thirdly, There are many afflictions and tribulations which God brings on his
people, and they do much endanger. Did not God break out upon Aaron, Eli, David
and Moses very dangerously, as if he would have cast them quite off; and
therefore the Apostle brings in the difficulty of the righteous man's salvation,
upon that, Judgment must begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. So that if we
consider the tempests and rocks in the sea of this world, it is a wonder any can
come to the haven.

Use of Exhortation. Be quickened up to more exact, strict and diligent walking.
If Paul that knew how to abound and want, and to do all things; who was like a
giant running his race, and yet hardly gets to Heaven, Where will thou appear?
Hear what he says, I press forward, I forget what is behind, if I may attain
to the prize of the high calling. Oh then, how inexcusable is thy negligence,
thy dissoluteness? Is thy life a striving, an agony? Art thou like one in a
combat and conflict? By this we may see, the number of men that shall be saved
is very few; there are so few that strive, that pray, that work with fear and
trembling, that are violent for the Kingdom of Heaven, and get it by force.

Verse 16. Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you?
THe Apostle, though he alter his Metaphor, yet continues in the same matter.
In the verses before, he compared the Church of Corinth to a building, here he
shows what kind of building it is, even a sacred holy building; The Church is
Gods Temple.
The Temple of God. So that as in the Temple of old, which was consecrated to
God, whosoever did bring in any unclean and unconsecrated things to the Temple,
he did pollute it, and was to be punished; thus all corruptions in Doctrine,
Worship, or Manners, are a pollution of this spiritual Temple. So that in the
words you have a strong Argument against all Church pollutions, whether
doctrinal or practical, from a similitude or comparison the Apostle uses:
Those that are the Temple of God, must be dedicated to him, and not polluted
with any unclean thing, but the Church of Corinth, is the Temple of God: And
that this Argument might pierce the more, he puts the sting of a sharp
Interrogation upon his words, Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? Know
ye not? as if he would have said, This is a confessed Principle, a truth
acknowledged by all, none can or ought to be ignorant of it.

Now for the explication of the word Temple, and the Reason to prove they were
the Temple, as follows in the words, I refer it till we come at it: For
truly, this Text is a Mine of gold, every word has precious matter in it. Only
consider at this time, the interrogative Introduction, Know ye not? One great
cause why they admitted such prophanensse and corruption in the Church, was the
ignorance of or the not attending to those Privileges and Relations they were
called unto. If they had duly considered, they were Gods Temple, they would
not have suffered strange Doctrines, or strange manners to come in amongst
them; as no strange uncircumcised might enter into the Temple. Observe,

That the consideration of those Privileges and Relations which all the People
that profess God are put into, Observe. Church Privileges and Relations are
great Obligations to Holiness.
would be a great Argument against all kind of Pollutions.

In the 1 Cor. 6.19. the Apostle argues against all libidinous and unclean
ways, because their bodies were the Temple of the Holy Ghost; now here the
Apostle does not so much speak of every man, as their Assembly united together:
as they were a spiritual Society joined together: As is more largely to be
showed. The Apostle argues chiefly (though not excluding sins of practice)
against corruptions in Doctrine, and the Ordinances instituted in the Church;
by which we may see, the Scripture puts corruptions in Doctrine through
errors, and in our lives through ungodliness, in the same guilt; both are
unclean, and so may not be admitted into the Temple: even as the Apostle in the
first Chapter, verse 5, 6. and Gal. 59, uses a Proverbial speech, A little
leaven, leaveneth the whole lump, against corruptions in life and in Doctrine;
but of this more afterward.

That which at this time I insist on, is, To show what a goade and spur to
all purity and holiness in Doctrine and Manners the, consideration of
Church Priviledges, Church-Titles, and Relations a^e Thus Romans 6.3. Know ye not
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death? Ignorance of the extent of their baptism, what it did signify, and
oblige to, made them live in sin. I know nothing more to be complained of,
then that people generally rest in this, They are the Church of God; They are
Christians; They are baptized: but they do not understand what these things
mean, nor what they oblige them unto. It would make us all tremble, to consider
the vast disproportion between our Names, our Relations, and our lives. This
has occasioned many to run into an extremity, to say, We have no true
Churches, no true members of a Church amongst us; because the ignorance,
corruption, and profaneness is so great amongst us: though therein they go
beyond bounds. For, this Church of Corinth was not unchurched, by the disorders
and corruptions amongst it.

To enforce this Doctrine upon us, consider some of the chief and notable
Titles or Relations the people of God have, and see, if rightly considered,
they would not work like fire to consume all our dross. As

First, The very word Ecclesia, Church: This is given to all the spiritual
Societies and Assemblies that we read of in the Scripture* converted to the
true Faith. Thus the Church of Corinth, the Churches in Asia. Now how great a
matter is this very word Church? For a people to be a Church, the word
signifies as much as a company of people called out of the ignorance,
idolatry, and profaneness of the world, to worship and serve God in his way,
and to obey his Laws. So that when men come to be of this body, they are to
renounce all their former profaneness and wickedness, and live a life
conformable to the Word, which is the Churches Charter, and by which it
walks. Thus all our Congregations should be men called out of the ignorance
and profaneness of the world, to live according to Gods Rule. But where are
the persons or the Societies that do this? Are not many of our Assemblies in
the world and of the world still, in respect of conversation? There will be
scandals and offenses in the Churches of God too often; but woe be to such, who
by their profaneness, idolatry, and wickedness, give so many scandals as to
make us accounted a Babylon, a Sodom, or as the world. Indeed, they who do
thus charge us, go beyond their line: for we have a true Church, and a true
Ministry, and true Ordinances; only the lives of men are generally so corrupt
and wicked, so ignorant and beastly, that they are spots in our Assemblies, and
a grievous reproach to that holy Profession which we have taken upon us. So
then, if we would have our Congregations and persons freed from all these
defilements, remember what the word Church is; a company called out of the
world. And as for ignorant and profane men, the orders of Christ are to
endeavor their reformation, but if they continue obstinate, then they are to
be cast out. As the Clouds that are exhaled from the earth, which though
terrestrial in nature, yet follow the motions of the Heavens; so though in our
original we be of the world, and are dust and ashes, yet by this heavenly call,
we are wholly to live a heavenly conversation. Is it for Stars to be like the
dung of the earth? Is it for a Church to be a profane, ignorant, and worldly
people? Oh, this very title should raise up your hearts! Are we not a Church,
persons called out of wickedness? Why then are we such Apostates, as to
degenerate from our Titles and Names? If Christ complained of those that had
made the material Temple a den of thieves, Mat. 21.13. will he not also of
such, who shall make his Church a stew, a dunghill, a place of wickedness and
ungodliness? I beseech you know these things, and consider them better: If you
would have the Name of a Church, have the nature, Life, and operations of a
Church.

Secondly, The consideration that we are the people of God, in a more peculiar
manner then all the Nations of the world, that do not know God. This also
should affect us. This is that Covenant of Grace God enters into, I will be
their God, and they shall be my people, Jer. 7.23. 2 Cor. 6.16. Yea, a peculiar
people; Gods Jewels, Gods Treasure, Deuteronomy. 26.18. Psalm. 135.4. Tit. 2.14. Now
consider how great an obligation lies upon such as are Gods people: They draw
nigh to God in all duties of Communion, and God draws nigh to them in all
dispensations of grace. But how much holiness, faith, and purity, is required
of such? Did Ahasueros command those Virgins to be so many days persuming and
preparing themselves to come into his presence, what preparation then ought to
be in us, when we draw nigh to such an excellent Majesty? If you ask what are
the duties of Communion with God? Prayer and other religious approaches are:
And if we did know what these things were, we would throw away all our rags,
and every thing that may offend his pure eyes.

Now herein people not diligently meditate, Whose servants do we profess our
selves to be? Into whose presence are we going, when we come to pray and humble
our souls? May we not say to every profane and formal man, Know ye not, that
Prayer is a Communion with the most high God? Know ye not, that the Word you
hear, is the Word of the great and living God? And if so, Why do thou ta^e
no more heed? Why do thou not prepare thy self with fear and trembling? So
that if people would consider what it is to come and stand before God, how the
Angels cover their faces, this would make them diligently throw away all their
unseemlinesse upon them. Remember him in the Parable, that came without a
wedding garment, Mat. 22.12. So then, think of this more, how great that God
is, how precious and choice those duties are, which you go about.

Thirdly, If we did consider, That the Word of God is the Rule all ought to
walk by, when once they give in their names to Christ: This also would be a
special antidote against all sin. You that are Christians, are not to live as
you list, to make your covetous, ambitious, or malicious lusts your laws, but
you must take Gods Word to be your guidance. Thus David professed of himself,
that he made the Word a light and lanthorn to his feet, and thereby he was
forewarned from sin, Psalm. 19. So a young man, though unruly and masterfull,
yet he may cleanse his way by attending unto Gods Word, Psalm. 119. This is the
spiritual Bath that may wash away all our filth. Now where is the man that
attends to this? Does the Bible allow me to be thus and thus profane? Does the
Word of God suffer me to be thus licentious? Oh, ye know not what you do!
Should ye not know, that when you are Baptized, that thereby you do profess a
submission to Christ and his Laws, to walk in an orderly conformity thereunto:
What the Word says do, you will do; what that forbids, you will abstain from:
Yet how few do order their conversation hereunto; Oh, that we might prevail
with you in this particular! Take the Bible to be your Guide, to be your Rule;
write after that Copy: Let it be that heavenly Glass, according to which thou will dress thy self. Know ye not, that this is the Law you must walk by, you
must think and speak by.

Fourthly, The very name and title of a Christian, if men did consider how much
were in that, what great alterations and changes would it make. Thou gloriest
in the title of a Christian: Thou would judge it the greatest reproach that
could be, to be accounted no Christian. But what is a Christian? not a mere
title, a mere idle name, it is as much as one anointed with all the graces of
Gods Spirit. As Christ was therefore called Christ, because he was annoinned by
God with all abilities and sufficiency for that work of Redempt^on; so we are
called Christians, because we as Members from that Head, are anointed with fit
graces for our particular places and Relations. So that this spiritual and
precious ointment is poured upon every one that is a Christian indeed. But as
God complains of some, Rev. 3.9. who said they were Jews, but were not, but
of the Synagogue of Satan; so God will in time judge all those that say they
are Christians, and are not, but are of Satan, doing his work. Now if you look
into many a man's life, you may call that no more Christianity, then a noisome
dunghill a bed of Spices. What is Christianity? said Nazianzen; and he gives
this definition, (...), a likeness or resemblance of God, according to man's
ability. As if a man should say, Thou were a rich man, and thou find thy
self in extreme poverty: That thou art an healthful, strong man, but thou
find thy pains and infirmities. What? Would thou regard the titles and
names of things, if thou find the clear contrary? So it should be here; I am
called a Christian, but I have not the humility of Christ, the meekness of
Christ, the zeal of Gods glory which Christ had: What will this name avail me,
when the reality is wanting. I entreat you think of this more.

Fifthly, The consideration of a Believer, has much efficacy likewise in it,
and should be like fire in our bowels. Do thou believe? Art thou no Atheist,
no mocker and scorner, no scepticall, or disputer in matters of Religion, but a
serious, steadfast, and constant Believer? this is enough to make all within and
without thee consonant to Gods will. For take but two or three particular
Objects of thy Faith, which thou say thou do with thy whole heart
believe, thou can not, thou dare not deny them. As

First, Thou believe there is a God, who is omniscient and omnipotent, who
judges the world, whose eyes are always upon thee. David was much affected
with this, That God knew his siting down, and rising up, and that he could not
go from his presence, but God was every where present with him, Psalm. 139. Now
if you do believe this indeed, how dare thou do those things in secret, which
thou would not have the world know? Is not God in thy Chamber, in the Closet
with thee? And so, How dare thou have heart-sinnes, saying, All is well
because the world does not behold it? Thou have proud thoughts, malicious
thoughts. How dare thou do this, if thou do believe the eye of God is upon
thee? Oh then, when thou art solicited to any evil way, say, Oh, my soul,
know thou not that God is here! Am I afraid of a man's eye, and yet he cannot
damn me, he cannot throw me into Hell? and do I not tremble at Gods eye?

Secondly, To instance no more, Thou believe a Day of Judgment appointed,
when all men must appear to give an account of what they have done in this
world, when Christ shall come as a Judge in flaming fire, to take vengeance
upon all that obey not the Gospel. Those Lamps that the foolish Virgins had, as
well as the wise, are that outward profession of Christ's coming, and an outward
preparation to meet him. Now to believe such a day coming, of so impartial a
Judge, in such a terrible manner, might it not take off every man from his
dearest sins? The Apostle speaking (2 Pet. 3.11.) of this expectation, and
how the whole world shall be then on fire, he cries out, What manner of
persons ought we to be? For Heathens and Atheists that believe not this Day,
it is no marvel, if they eat and drink and take no care; but how is it, that
thou a Believer of these things, art not in Prayer often, in fasting and
humiliation in reference hereunto?

Use of Instruction. The reason of the deluge of all errors and profaneness,
is for want of good logic: They do not infer good conclusions from good
Premises. For to be a Church, to be Christians; to be Believers of such sure
and certain things, do not those infer to all, What manner of persons should
we be in all godliness and holiness of Conversation? Do you not know these
things? Are not these things acknowledged by all? How then can wickedness and
sin be found in any man's life? Oh, men be either desperate Atheists or, mad
fools! Atheists, if we believe not these things; fools, if we believe, yet our
lives not answerable thereunto. What will thou plead at the day of Judgment?
What will thy own conscience say for thee? Will thou not become immediately
speechless, not able to open thy mouth, when God shall command to take such a
sinner, such a wicked man, and bind him hand and foot, and throw him into Hell?
If these things be not true, deny them; if you cannot, you dare not deny them,
then go home, and mourn in secret, and meditate in secret on these things.

Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God?

The Introductive Preface has been dispatched, we come to the Assertion it
self; and therein we are to consider the Subject, who are compared. And

2. To what they be compared. And

Lastly, The ground or Reason of the comparison.

The Subject compared, is, [Ye] Ye are the Temple of God.

This [Ye] may be taken both Collectively, as a Church, a Community, a Society;
as the Temple was not one stone, but a multitude of stones artificially built
together. And

Secondly, Distributively. [Ye] that is, every man is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost. As 1 Cor. 6.17. Your bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost. But the
first sense, is here chiefly to be retained; he speaks to them as a Church.

2. Here is the Matter we are compared to, The Temple of God. How the word
Temple is used in Scripture.
I shall speak more of this in verse 17 Only the word [Temple] is used
sometimes for that magnificent and glorious building of Jerusalem, where God
had appointed all his worship. Sometimes it is used for Heaven, as being that
glorious Palace wherein the Majesty of God does effectualy demonstrate it self.
The Hebrew word (...) signifies any large Palace, or Tower, any Kingly House;
and is attributed to the Tabernacle, 1 Samuel 1.9. It Is used for Heaven as Gods
House, Mich. 1.2. and Psalm. 11.4. From Templum comes that word Contempl^r,
because all behold the glory of the Heavens; as also some say, Considere from
sidus. But metaphorically, the word signifies,

First, The Body of Christ. Destroy this Temple (said Christ) and in three
days I will build it up, Joh. 2.19. What it does signify.
And if the Temple were holy because of the Schechinah, the habitation of Gods
presence there, how much rather does Christ's body deserve to be called the
Temple, because the Godhead dwelled in it so fully, for the company of
Believers assembled and joined together in the service and worship of God? So
that as God promised to commune with the people of Israel from between the
Mercy-Seat, and did there graciously exhibit himself; so it is here. Thus
then, as the Temple was a peculiar place dedicated to God, wherein God promised
his gracious presence, so it is with a company of Believers joined together in
a Church way. Concerning the holiness of the Temple, more in verse 17.

Doct. Of Gods spiritual Temple.
That the People of God met together to worship him according to his way, are
the Spiritual Temple of God.

The ancient Temple was not more glorious and admirable to the humane eye, then
such Societies should be to the eye of Faith. Thus Antichrist is said to fit in
the Temple of God, 2 These. 2.4. that is, in the Church of God, where the true
Church was. And learned men think, that latter part of Exekiel's prophecy,
though very obscure, concerning the measuring of the Temple, is nothing but the
Promise of the building of the Church in the new Testament, in an heavenly and
glorious manner. The Scripture delights to allude to those ancient usages in
the Old Testament. So that Evangelical Duties, are sometimes called Sacrifices;
thus the people of God, a Temple, in this place.

To open this Doctrine, What there is in the Church alusively to the Temple.
let us consider what is in the Church allusively to the Temple. And

First, The Materials for the Temple were to be polished and fitted by art, ere
they could be made part of the building: The trees and timber of themselves,
the stones of themselves, were not fit for that goodly structure; but they had
Instruments of art going over them to prepare them; and thus it is ere a people
come in to be made Members of a Church: indeed, there must be a Divine efficacy
and power passing over them. We of our selves, have not Faith, have not
preparedness for such Church duties, till God does enable us. Look we
therefore, how we come into the Church of God. How is it brought about, that we
are so? If there be nothing but nature and custom, or because we are born in
such places; if we have no more for our being Christians, then Jews have for
being Jews. Turks for being Turks; this is not to be Gods Temple indeed. No;
that must be said to thee, which was to Peter, Flesh and blood has not
revealed this to thee, Mat. 16.17. Hence the Church of God is compared to a
Vineyard, to a Garden; all which are not naturally so, but by art and industry
are made such. Thus, it is here; whatsoever our Societies and Meetings are in
reference to God, it is wholly of his making.

Secondly, The Materials of the Temple were very excellent and precious, of
gold and silver, etc. not hay and stubble. The best stone, the best wood, that
would not putrify; and all things were covered over with gold, and the gold
was to be pure gold; even the very snuffers were to be of gold. Now what did
this represent, but to show what kind of people those should be, who were of
the Church of God; even as much differing from the others, as gold and precious
stones from pibble stones; as precious wood from briars? So then, if we be the
Temple of God, we ought to be a people of more noble and heavenly Conversation
then the world can reach unto. There ought to be no sinful debasing ways
amongst us. As Michall, though falsely, said to David, dancing before the Ark,
Thou have made thy self like one of the vile fellows of the Land; it is thus
truly with thee, if thou runnest into any excess of riot that the world
greedily pursues, Thou have made thy self like a Dunghill, not Gods Temple.

Thirdly, The Temple was full of external glory: A magnificent place, admired
by Heathens. And we see what weeping there was of the old men, that the glory
of the latter Temple was not like that of the former, Ezra 3.10. Now the glory
of Christians is likewise great, but in a spiritual and heavenly way. The
Church is all glorious within, Psalms 45 13. The Gospel that is preached, is
styled a glorious Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.11 And the Spirit of God, The Spirit of
glory, 1 Peter 4.14. It Is promised, That the glory of the second Temple, should
far exceed that of the first, Hag. 2.9. Now how was that made good? not in
any outward glory, but because Christ in a spiritual manner, did reform all
those corrupt Doctrines, and did sit as a refiner to purify the Sons of
Levi. This was glory, to have the spiritual worship of God. It Is true, this is
not the glory of the world, which the Devil shows, and so many do fall down
and worship it; but to a spiritual eye, that judges spiritually these things
are the greatest glory. Who would think that the Preaching of of the Gospel
deserved such a Title as a Kingdom, and a Kingdom of Heaven? The most sublime
and transcendent perfection that can be: Yet, What is more ordinary in
Scripture, then to dignifie it by that Name? Do not then account the glory of
the Church to lie in goodly Edifices, in glorious Ornaments, in stately Images,
but in pure Doctrine, Godly Government, and an Holy life. Such times, are
glorious times; such Administrations use to ravish a godly heart. David cried
out, How amiable were the Tabernacles of the Lord of Hosts? Psalms 84.1.10.
And one day there, was better then many any where else. And all, because of the
Spiritual enjoying of God in them. It Is the excellency of a Pearl to be in its
native luster; to paint that, would disgrace it; so it is the excellency of all
spiritual Ordinances and Institutions, to be in their pure native appointment;
and to add to them by goodly Inventions, is but to disparage them. Jesus
Christ, had no external glory, yet to the Spiritual Believer, Christ is
precious, as Peter says, 1 Peter 2.7.

Fourthly, The Temple was in a peculiar manner holy, in respect of other
buildings, as the Apostle says in the next verse. Now when we say it was Holy,
we do not mean an holiness inherent, as Angels and men are holy, but of
Dedication and Consecration; a relative holiness; being set apart by Gods
special Command to such an use. And therefore the Synagogues of the Jews,
neither our material Churches have such an holiness; as is to be showed, when
we come to the 18 verse. For that is a necessary point to handle, to take of
men from superstitious thoughts about holy places.

Among the Jews, there was a relative or typical Holiness: The Temple was an
Holy Temple, Jerusalem is called the Holy City; yea, every Jew, is called an
Holy person, Mat. 4.5. and Gentiles are unclean, as appears by that Vision to
Peter, Call no man unholy or unclean, Acts 10.38. But of this more. This is
enough, to show that the Temple was peculiarly dedicated to God, and had a
relative Holiness. Thus all Believers, they are in a spiritual manner
Dedicated to God: They are separated from the world, and sin: They are not to
live in the same wickedness and impiety, as men of the world do. Oh Beloved,
What a strong Obligation is this to us all to live holily! We are separated
from the world: We are not to have such thoughts, such lives, such affections
as the world has. Procul, O Procul esse prophani, they would cry, in respect
of their heathenish Temples; and this is much more true of the Church of God.
Moses was commanded to pull off the shoes of his feet, because the place was
holy, Exodus 3.5. Oh, much rather must thou pluck off thy sinful lusts, thy
carnal pleasures! For God is holy, and the Ordinances are holy, about which
thou art conversant.

Fifthy, Because of this relative Holiness, it was a Capital crime to defile
this Temple. There were Porters set at the Gate, to keep out all unclean
things, 2 Chronicles. 23.19 No unclean thing might be brought therein, and so it is
here; because the people of God are a company joined in such an holy manner,
for such holy ends. Therefore they are commanded to cast out all unclean
persons, 1 Cor. 5. ult. Here comes in the Necessity of godly Discipline and
Excommunication, which is merely medicinal, not vindicative; for edification,
not destruction. Thus the incestuous person, an unclean vessel in this Temple,
he was to be cast out: Cast out from among you that wicked person, 1 Corinthians 5.
The Church should be like an excellent disciplined Army. Therefore if any man
walk (...), disorderly, note such a man, and withdraw from him, that he may be
ashamed, 2 Thessalonians 3.11, 14. 1 Corinthians. 5.7. the Apostle commands them to
purge out the old leaven, the wicked person, that they might be a new lump, a
choice and holy company, worshipping God in Spirit and Truth. This spiritual
Sword is in the Church, as the temporal one in the Commonwealth. Neither is
this power given in vain, but that men who do ill, might be afraid. In the
Primitive times, this godly Discipline was admirably executed, as appears by
Tertullian and Cyprian, but when this weeding-hook was laid aside, or abused,
Gods Garden was run over with weeds.

Lastly, That which was the glory of the Temple, and the life of it, was Gods
gracious presence. From thence he did hear prayer, there he accepted
Sacrifices, thence he commanded blessings. His promise was, that he would put
his Name there, and this still continued in Gods Church. When two or three are
gathered together in my Name, I will be there in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20.
Though God be every where in the world, yet his gracious presence is only in
his Church. This is the Closet or Privy-Chamber; this is the Garden wherein he
walks.

Of Gods presence with his Church.
Now Gods gracious presence in his Church, is discovered these ways.

First, Here only are the Privileges of grace: Here only is Justification,
Adoption, Sanctification. This is the Pool of Bethesda, wherein the Angel comes
down. Through all the world be Gods, yet his Church is the place of his
gracious favoures. This is the Ark in which salvation only may be had. There is
no pardon of sins among Heathens; God indeed, does many times differ his
temporal judgments upon Heathens, and he hears their prayers and groans, as
their natural desires, even as he does the young Ravens; but their is no
gracious answer of any Prayer, nor any pardon of the least sin. Thus they
are, as some places of the earth, where (they say) it is always night; Ice and
cold always, no Sun beams to comfort and refresh.

Secondly, Here only is the Foundation of all graces, or the Mediator by whom
God is gracious to us As (they say) in Egypt there is never any rain from
Heaven; so all that part of mankind, which is without Christ, partaketh not of
gracious influences of Heaven; God is a consuming fire to them. There is no
death of Christ, no Ascension, no Intercession, no pleading for them; they come
into Gods presence without Benjamin

Thirdly, Only in the Church are such persons, who are qualified for gracious
Privileges. Here only is true Piety; here only is Faith, Repentance: Here only
men do in a right manner pray to God. All those moral virtues, and excellent
endowments amongst the Heathens, though gilded over, were nothing but dross.

Use of Instruction. Are the Churches of God, thus Temples of God? and should
every one of us be thus in particular? Oh then, how holy, how godly, how
orderly should all our Assemblies be? What Jeremy can make Lamentations bitter
enough, to see how this Temple of God is made a dunghill? How comes so much
ignorance and profaneness to be amongst us? Are we not places prepared rather
for the Devil and his evil Spirits to dwell with us, then Temples of the Holy
Ghost? Know this, that your defilements are worse then those of Heathens; and
therefore it is said, Judgment should begin at the House of God, 1 Pet. 4.17.
And in Ezechiel's Prophesse, The destroying Angel is commanded to begin at the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 9.6. Yet we sit and hear these things, and do not fear and
tremble. Where is Gods gracious presence discovering it self? How few are the
men that have God and his Spirit dwelling in them, but rather their souls are
possessed with Devils? Hence comes that pride, that malice, that opposition
unto all godliness. Oh then, let us so live, that we may say, Such men have
God, and his Spirit dwelling in them! Be men affected with understanding of
these things. To see nothing but a man in you, nothing of God; yea, to see
nothing but a Beast or a Devil in you, how contrary is it to that holy relation
we stand in?

And that the Spirit of God dwells in you.

We have considered what that is, to which the Church of Corinth is compared,
viz. The Temple of God: what more is to be said of that, will come in the next
verse. I proceed to the ground and reason of the Comparison, Why they were the
Temple of God; and that follows in the next words, And that the Spirit of God
dwells in you.

The particle [(...)] has many significations or uses in the Scripture: Here
it is Causall, as much as (...), for ye are. In many other places it is so used:
Jere. 42. Thou art angry. And, We have sinned. i. e. For (Joh. 2.) they staid
not there many days, and the Passover was at hand. i. e. For. So here, you are
the Temple of God, for the Spirit of God dwells in you. Thus you see it is a
causall Inference.

In the Reason, consider the Person described.

Secondly, His efficacy or operation

The Person described, is said to be the Spirit.

2. The Relation to whom, the Spirit of God.

Thirdly, The operation or effect, it dwells in you.

The Greek word Spirit, as the Hebrew Ruach, is of a vast signification in the
Scripture, I know none more boundless; but when attributed to God, The
significa. of the word Spirit, when attributed to God.
it signifies either absolutely the Divine Nature, common to the three
Persons; Joh. 4. God is a Spirit, because of his most pure and simple essence.

2. It signifies the Divine Nature of Christ, as when it is said to be dead in
the body, but quickened in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18.

3. Sometimes the anger of God, and the effects of his wrath. Thus we read of a
Spirit of judgment and burning, Isa. 4. And a Spirit of giddiness, etc.

Lastly, Relatively for the third Person in the holy Trinity. Baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. And thus
it is used here, because it is called the Spirit of God.

Now this Texe does two ways prove the Divine Nature of the Holy Ghost. That
the Holy Ghost is God and a Person.


1. From the Manner of argunig, They were the Temple of God, because the Spirit
did dwell in them; which could be no sound Argument, were not the Holy Ghost
God. And

2. Partly, Because Temples were built to none but God; even as Sacrifices were
offered to God only. And this is so ingrafted a truth in nature, and
acknowledged so professedly by Papists, that when they are charged for
Idolatry, in dedicating their Temples to such and such Saints, they say,
Temples indeed, are to be built only to God, but they name such a Saint only
for memorial, not as a Person they dedicate them to. But that distinction is a
mere fig leaf, if you consider their practice.

So that we have two Doctrines: 1. That the holy Spirit of God, is God. 2. This
Spirit of God dwells in the Church.


These Points will be very profitable.

For the first, The Holy Ghost is God. There have not only Heretics of old,
as the Macedonians, or of late in other Countries, as Polonia, and Transilvana,
Servetus, and the Socinians; but even some in this land very lately, not only
maintained privately, but have published Books on purpose to prove the Holy
Ghost not to be God of the same essence with the Father and the Son. Indeed,
there was a long contention, whether verbal or real, it is disputed between the
Greek Churches and the Latin Churches, about the procession of the Holy Ghost,
whether from the Father, and the Son also, or Father only; but no doubt at
all about the Deity of the Holy Ghost.

I intend to handle this point Practically, yet so, as first Doctrinally to
inform your judgments about the truth of it: and that I may do it the more
orderly, you must know, that those who have denied the holy Ghost to be God,
have been divided into two ways. Either

First, Such who have thought him to be no Person, but to be an attribute or
operation in and from God, which in man we would call an accident: So that as
Gods wisdom, Gods anger and power, they do not make a distinct Person (they
say:) So neither does this concerning the holy Ghost, but is no more than the
mighty power of God putting forth it self.

Secondly, Others make him a Person, yet not a God, but in the forefront of
the Angels; they make him the chief Angel, as (they say) there is a Prince of
Devils. But the Scripture is very clear to overthrow those damnable Heresies.
And

That he is a Person.
1. That he is a Person, not an attribute, appears, by all those personal
operations that are given to him. So that by what arguments we can prove God
the Father, or any man to be a Person, by the same we may prove the holy Ghost
to be a Person; as that form in which we are baptized, Into the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. To be baptized into
the name of one, argues that one to be a Person: And how absurd would it be to
say, the Father and the Son are Persons, but the holy Ghost is an attribute
or operation? So There are three that dear witness in Heaven, the Father, the
Son, and the Spirit, 1 John 5.7. Three] he does not say three things; but
three (viz.) Persons, as appears by the personal operations. These bare
witness in Heaven] Some read, The Spirit of God descended in the shape of a
Dove; which plainly denotes a thing subsisting, not an attribute. We are said,
To sin against him, which must needs imply a person, Thou have lied to God, Act
5.4. That which is here said to be God is called the holy Ghost, verse. 3. Thou
have lied to the holy Ghost. And the sin against the holy Ghost shall never
be forgiven, Matthew. 12.31.

Lastly, There is attributed understanding and will to him; Understanding, the
Spirit of God searches the deep things of God, and the things of God knows
no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. And Will, 1 Cor. 14. where he
reckons up several operations, Even as the same Spirit gives to whom he
pleases. So that you see the Texts are so clear, that were not men sadly
forsaken by God, they could not deny these things. That he is God.


In the second place, Let us prove, that it is not a chief spirit among Angels,
but in deed, and in truth, of the same Nature with God.

Now some choice Arguments to prove this, may be reduced into these heads:

First, Arguments.
The Name of God is directly and properly (not metaphorically) attributed to
him. Thus God is said to speak by the holy Prophets, which have been ever since
the world begun. And if you ask, What Person it is in the Godhead? 2 Pet.
1.21. The Prophets spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. So that the holy
Ghost was that God, who enlightened and moved all the Prophets that were from
the beginning of the world. Thus Acts 5.4. Why has Satan filled thy heart?
thou have not lied to man, but to God. Ananias he thought he had only to do
with men; but mark the opposition, not man, but God; especially 1 Cor. 12.3, 4.
There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit, the same Lord, the same
God; Spirit, Lord and God. So that by what Texts we can prove God the Father to
be God, the same we can prove the holy Ghost to be God.

Secondly, The holy Ghost has those works attributed to him, which do only
belong unto a God. Such as God only can do, as Creation, Sanctification and
Redemption, and miraculous operations. These things do demonstrate and prove a
God; Creation, Psalm. 33 6. By the word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and
by the Spirit (or breath) of his mouth they were created. Job 33.4. The Spirit
of God made me. Thus in the Creation at first, The Spir^t moved on the waters,
as the Hen on the eggs, giving vivifical influence. For Redemption, the holy
Ghost concurreth to that, in preparing and fitting the body of Christ, and
sanctifying it to be an oblation. Hence Christ is said, To be conceived of the
holy Ghost, which could not be an Angel, for then an Angel would have been
greater than Christ. And secondly, In the application of the Benefus, of the
Redemption to the godly. The holy Ghost both applies them, and assures
thereof, The Spirit of God that hears witness with our spirit, Romans 8.16.
And we are sealed by the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30.

Thirdly, In the works of miraculous operations. So 1 Cor. 12. all those
extraordinary and miraculous gifts are attributed to the holy Ghost. Hence he
is called, The finger of God, Luke 11.12. by which Christ is said, to cast out
Devils: And on the Feast of Pentecost, He descended in a mighty rushing wind,
and cloven tongues of fire, filling all the Apostles with miraculous gifts,
Acts 2.3, 4.

Lastly, The works of Sanctification, Faith, Repentance, and all other graces
are wrought by him: Yea he is called, The holy Spirit, because that is his
peculiar Office, to work holiness, and to sanctify men by the Ministry. Now
Divines say, It is a far greater work, and argues more power to sanctify
the natures of men, then to make a new world; yet this is constantly applied to
the holy Ghost, though not so as to exclude the other Persons in their order.
Hence likewise all the means of Sanctification, viz. the Ministry and the gifts
thereof, are also given to the same Spirit, Acts 25. Over which the holy Ghost
has made you overseers.

Thirdly, The attributes and properties of a God, as well as the works of a
God, are also in Scripture given to the holy Ghost; omnipresence, filling the
whole world. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? None can fly from it, Psalm.
139.7. His Omniscience, in that he searches the deep things of God, 1 Cor.
2.11. His Omnipotency, as you heard: His Eternity, called the Eternal Spirit,
Heb. 9 14. Though some understand that of Christ's Divine Nature, and being
before the world, in that he made it. Unity with the other Persons, These three
are one. So that having the properties of God, he must needs be God.

Lastly, The religious worship that is given to the Holy Ghost, does not only
argue he is a Person, but a Divine Person equal with God. And

1. We have the Angels giving worship unto him; whereas John, when he would
have worshipped the Angel, he is forbidden, Worship thou God, Revel. 19.10. So
that religious worship is only to be given to God. And thus the Angels in that
glorious vision sang, Holy, holy, holy -- unto God. Now it is worth your
observing, that this vision is attributed both to the Father, to the Son, and
to the holy Ghost. To the Father that is without doubt, Isa. 6. for there he is
described as a glorious Judge in all Majesty. To the Son, John 12.41. This
spoke Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him, viz. of Christ, as the
Evangelist applies it. Lastly, To the holy Ghost, Act 28.25. That men also are
to give religious worship to the holy Ghost, appears in their baptismal
profession, Being baptized into the Name of the holy Ghost: As also by that
form of prayer and blessing. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of
God, and communion of the holy Ghost, sometimes ^sed in the Epistles. Thus you
see the Scripture clearly determining this matter of faith: And if we cannot
comprehend, how there should be one God and three Persons, every one of them
God, and yet but one God; you must remember, That faith is the captivating of
the understanding unto a mere t^stimony. It Is not science, but faith, that
Christians profess. In humane things, Argumentum facit fidem; in divine
things, Fides facit argumentum. Neither is it any wonder, that we cannot in the
creatures find an exact comparison to repres^nt this, though many learned men,
ancient and later, have used similitudes, because there is no such thing as a
God, besides the true God. And therefore Basil said well to the He^etique,
desiring a similitude to represent the Trinity, Da mihi alium Deum, and aliam
trinitatem tibi ostendam. Thus we have labored to establish your faith in this
necessary point.

Why the holy Ghost is called Spirit.
Now I shall show, Why the holy Ghost is called (...), Spirit. The word at first
did signify wind, Why then does the Spirit of God assume this comparative
expression of wind? Or rather, Why is he called a Spirit? Even for these
Reasons,

First, Essentially: For the simplicity and purity of his Essence; and this is
common to every other Person, for God is a Spirit.

Secondly, Hypostatically: For his personal propriety; because he proceeds from
the Father and the Son by way of spiration; the manner whereof we cannot
comprehend, no more than the generation of the Son.

Thirdly, Effectively: Many ways: 1. For the Incomprehensibility of the
actions of the Spirit. John 3. The wind blows where it lists, and no man
knows from whence it comes: so is the Spirit. 2. The Diversity of his
operations: As the breathings of the wind is from several corners; the Spirits
dispensations have not been always alike. 3. For the Efficacity, moving the
hearts of men to love good, to hate evil. 4. For the Impossibility of resisting
this. 5. For the Necessity of it to every good work, as the wind is to the
ship.


Use. Is the holy Spirit God? Then take heed of that blasphemous scoffing,
which many carnal and wicked people are guilty of, which is to mock at the very
name of the Spirit. If a sin against the holy Ghost be unpardonable, and
doing despite unto the Spirit of grace, leaves a man in an impossibility of
recovering: How dare thou let thy heart and tongue be thus set on hell fire?
Thy body and soul is to be the temple of the Spirit? Thy duties are to come
from this Spirit, and do thou deride it?

Use of Admonition. Take heed of entituling thy own fancies, and delusions to
the Spirit of God. For seeing the holy Ghost is God, it must be a capital crime
to make such sinful fancies and thoughts that come from thy corrupt heart, to
flow from the holy Spirit of God. If to counterfeit the public Seal, or Coin
of a Land, be a capital crime, How great a sin is it, to ^ake thy sinful and
carnal affections, as if they were the workings of Gods Spirit?

And that the Spirit of God dwells in you.

Two Propositions (you heard) were contained in these words:

First, That the Spirit of God, is God; which has been demonstrated.

Secondly, That the Spirit of God dwells in his Church.

We therefore proceed to this second Doctrine. And now to open this, let us
consider,

First, What the phrase, to dwell in the Church implies.

Secondly, How he dwells there.

As the Spirit of God is said to dwell in us, so in other places, Of the
Spirits dwelling in us.
God promises to dwell in his people, 2 Cor. 6 16. And Christ is said, To
dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. All which are not to be understood
of any visible or local habitation, much less comprehensive, that we cold
comprehend God, for he is (as he said) one whose circumference is every where,
and center no where: The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; but it is meant
in a mystical and spiritual manner.

Now this phrase, To have the Spirit dwell in us, denotes, What to have the
Spirit dwell in us implies.


First, The propriety that it has to us, that we are his possession, as an
house is a man's own, where he is Lord and Master. And this is worthy of
consideration, That we who once were the Devils, he dwelt in us, He rules in
the hearts of the disobedient, Ephesians. 2. have now him expelled from us, and the
Spirit of God taking us for his possession. We pity persons bodily possessed,
that they foame and rore, and are thrown sometimes into the fire, and
sometimes in the water; but he who is a wicked man, the Devil possesses his
soul more dreadfully: he puts him upon anger, malice, upon unclean lusts, and
noisome filthy ways; and though many be of the Church visibly, yet in regard
of their own particular, they are thus possessed by the Devil, who has their
heart, their eyes, their tongues, their whole body; so that they seem to be a
walking Hell: So that herein is a wonderful change, when the Spirit of God
comes and takes possession of a people, who before were captives to Satan, and
led aside according to his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

Secondly, When it is said, The Spirit of God dwells in a people, it supposes,
That he does fashion and prepare them for himself: For every lodging is not fit
for so noble a guest; but as great men carry their rich furniture with them, to
have convenient lodgings; so also does the Spirit of God, raise up a people by
illumination, and sanctification to be a fit habitation for him: As they say,
Anima fabricat sibi domicilium; The soul^ makes the body so curiously organized
and diversified for it is self to be in: So much more does the Spirit of God put
spiritual life, and quicken up our dead hearts, that we may be prepared for the
enjoyment of him. It Is said, The Spirit of God moved upon those waters, Genes.
1. that covered the deep, when the earth was without form, or void. Thus the
Spirit of God does take us out of our natural confusion, and horrible
darkness, and makes us comely with those ornaments he puts upon us: So that as
it is impossible to have the Sun, but withal we must enjoy glorious light:
So we cannot have the Spirit of God, but withal many precious and heavenly
gifts will be bestowed upon us. Oh then, how few persons, how few Congregations
can endure the luster of this Doctrine? What heavenly or precious jewels have
they of Gods Spirit?

Thirdly, When it is said, The Spirit of God dwells in us, it denotes, The
familiarity and condescending Communion that God vouchsafes unto his children.
To dwell with one, is an act of communion. Hence 1 Peter 3.17. Husbands are
commanded to dwell with their wives. Our Savior expresses this familiarity by
John, I will come in, and sup with him, and he with me, Revel. 3.20 So that
what was spoken of Moses, as so rare a privilege, He spoke to God face to
face, as one friend speaks to another, in some kind of sense, though not
after the same manner, is true of every godly person. Hence the Spirit of God
is said to enable us to cry Abba Father, Galat. 4 6. which though it suppose a
filial reverential frame in us, yet also godly boldness and confidence: Hence
he is also said, To witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God,
Romans 8. So that children being admitted to sit at their Fathers Table, have
that bread, which dogs may not eat of. They have that Pearl, which must not be
cast to swine: But who are the people that God does thus honor? How few are
such favorites? How many are amongst us, that are not admitted with Moses to
come to the top of this Mount? They know not what Communion with God means,
what those filial cries of Abba Father are. Certainly, a rational man does not
more differ from a beast, than a spiritual man does from the best rational man
that is: That as a worm knows not what reason and arguments are the best; so
learned and able men without grace, do not know what this enjoying of Gods
Spirit and communion with God is; we speak, though not in an unknown tongue,
yet unknown matter to such men.

Fourthly, In that the Spirit of God is said to dwell, it denotes, A permanent
and constant abode in his people. For this you must know, The Spirit of God is
many times working, where yet he does not dwell. There is a great difference
between transient motions, and constant mansions of Gods Spirit. Hypocrites and
reprobates have the former, but not the latter. They that wrought miracles had
the Spirit of God moving in them, but not dwelling in them: Even Balaam in that
prophetical passage about Israel, had a transient motion, or a blast of this
Spirit; but the Spirit of God did not abide in him: Yea hereby Caiaphas, being
high Priest that year, was moved to say what he did, It Is expedient for one to
die for many; but yet he knew not what he said. So that there is a great
difference between the transient motion of Gods Spirit, and his constant
inhabitation. Thus many, not truly sanctified, have the common gifts of Gods
Spirit; they have abilities in prayer, enlargements, some joys, all which are
of Gods Spirit moving in them, not dwelling in them. And truly this is a
dangerous Rock, upon which many split themselves, taking transient gifts of
Gods Spirit for permanent graces; sometimes they are hardly discerned, as the
Rocks that are under water. But of this neccessary point more.

Fifthly, The Spirit dwelling in us, does denote, The intimatenesse and inward
efficacy it has. It does not only dwell with us, but in us, which denotes
great intimatenesse. Thus the Apostle often complains of the Law of sin
that dwelt in him, Romans 7. because of the inward natural power of it, that
whenever he would do good, evil was present with him: It was always at hand
to infect and pollute. So that by this is declared, how powerful and inwardly
efficacious the Spirit of God is in his people. Hence he is said To make
intercession with groans unutterable, Romans 8.26. which could not be without
a wonderful secret, and hidden deep working of the Spirit, even in the depths
and bottom of our souls.

Thus you have heard, what the phrase does imply. Now let us proceed to show,
How the Spirit of God dwells in his Church, and afterward, Wherein his dwelling
does manifest it self. For, as original corruption is always breaking out;
it is not a dull, idle sin; it is Peccatum actuosum, though not actuale: So the
Spirit of God is compared to fire, because of the powerful and active nature
it has in the people of God: Fire does assimulate every thing to it self: Thus
men filled with the holy Ghost, are made exceeding spiritual, endeavoring to
make all like themselves.

Now several ways we may consider of the Spirits dwelling in the people of God.

First, There is an essential dwelling, or a gracious dwelling, by a special
manifestation of more peculiar favors; we do not speak here of an essential
dwelling, for so the Spirit of God is every where, Whither can I fly from thy
presence? Psalm. 139.7. Thus he has the same divine Attribute, as God the
Father and the Son have. Thus he fills the whole world; But we speak of his
gracious presence. Now how to make a difference between his essential presence,
and his gracious presence, is impossible for men to express, because our
knowledge of God is only apprehensive, not comprehensive. We see all the
Schoolmen, laboring to this very day, to show how an Angel is present, and yet
they have not waded out of those deeps. Only thus much we may in sobriety say,
That though the Spirit of God be every where, yet he is said to be in his
Church, because of those peculiar and gracious operations, which he produces
in them, and no where else. Even as God is said to be in Heaven, though he be
in Earth, and no where else, because there is a peculiar manifestation of more
glory and power from him. Thus then we are first to conceive of his presence.
But.

Secondly, When the Spirit of God is said to dwell in his Church, it may not
only be understood of the gracious effects thereof, but also of his Person
likewise. And this indeed I find a very sublime and mysterious Dispute both
among Papists and Protestants, Whether believers are made partakers of the
Person of the holy Spirit, or only of his graces? According to many, all those
places, where we are said to receive the Spirit, or to be full of the holy
Ghost, they are extended no further than the gifts and graces of the holy
Ghost: But certainly, many places, as this in my Text, are to be understood of
the Person of the holy Ghost. For it is the Spirit (as we showed) that is the
same with God. Now the gifts and graces of the Spirit are not the same with
God: So we are said to be a Temple of this Spirit; and a Temple does relate to
a God, and to a Person, not to graces merely. So that we conclude, that opinion
to be far more true, and consonant to Scripture, which makes us partakers
even of the Spirit it self, as we also are of Christ himself, and not of the
benefits only that come by him: But the Scripture lays down this in a
transcendent and mystical manner, and it is by faith only. So that those who
have fancied a transubstantiation into the Godhead; To be Christed with
Christ, and Godded with God, or to be made the Spirit with the Spirit, have
thought of a physical and natural union; as if a drop of water were poured into
the sea, where as it is only a moral union; even as the wife is made partaker
not only of the husbands wealth, but the husband himself, yet not turned into
his nature; and this comparison the Scripture does often use.

Lastly, The Spirit of God dwells two ways in his Church: 1. In respect of
wonderful and miraculous operations. 2. In respect of saving and sanctifying
graces.


The former way the Church of Corinth was admirable, you may read 1 Cor, 14.
and alibi, of the plenty of gifts, and diverse operations amongst them; so that
they seemed herein to excel all other Churches, yet in respect of the
sanctifying graces, they seemed to be very defective; for the Apostle calls them
babes, and complains he could not speak unto them, as unto spiritual, so that
this later way of Gods Spirit (as formerly you heard) dwelling in us, is most
comfortable, and most to be regarded, though the other be more admired. The
former did especially belong to the Church in its first plantation. Hence Acts
2. we read of the accomplishment of that glorious Prophecy, Joel 2. To pour
out his Spirit, etc. but now these miraculous operations are ceased.

Use of Instruction. What Congregations, and what manner of persons we ought to
be. To be mere men comes far short of being spiritual men; we ought to be
above sense, and all humane principles. Take the most refined men for morality
and civility, the choicest for all humane abilities, yet without the Spirit of
God, they are no more than Adams body, till life was brethed into him, no more
than those bones in Ezekiel, till the Spirit of God gathered them together. Oh
that our Congregations consisted of spiritual men! Paul complained, He could
not preach to them, but as carnal. The Spirit of God would lift thee up to
other affections, other desires. As the Spirit took some men's bodies, and
lifted them up into the air; so would it do to the souls of men; they had the
Spirit of God, who said, Our conversation is in Heaven. They had the Spirit of
God, that did look for the coming of Christ: They had the Spirit of God, who
had prayed with groans unutterable, and who had joy unspeakable: But oh we
poor worms, and not spiritual men, cold clods of earth, destitute of Gods
Spirit!

And that the Spirit of God dwells in you.

We have heard, what this inhabitation of Gods Spirit in his Church does imply,
and how he may be said to dwell in us.

In the next place, let us consider the special Works and Effects of Gods
Spirit in his Church. For therefore partly has he the name Spirit, because of
that power and efficacy he has in the Church. Hence he came down in a mighty
rushing wind, and cloven tongues of fire. So that he is called the Spirit
internally, and externally; internally, for his personal character, whereby he
proceeds from the Father, and the Son; Externally, because of those admirable
effects, and demonstrations of his presence in the Church.

Now I shall not speak of these operations, which he has as God, The special
works and effects of the holy Spirit in his Church.
in creating and conservating of the world, but what are more peculiar to the
Church; in which sense he is called, The Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. because
Christ by his death did purchase such gifts and graces for his people, the
efficient whereof in an appropriated manner is the Spirit of God. And

First, The very ministerial functions and abilities to discharge them, are of
the Holy Ghost in the Church. For although, Ephesians 4.11. it is said, That
Christ after his Ascension and triumph over Death and Hell, Gave gifts unto
men: Even as great Emperors, when they ride in glorious triumph, after a final
Conquest over their enemies, use to distribute large favors and many
bountiful signs of honor, yet because upon his Ascension, he promised the
Spirit of God in his absence, as the divine Vicar of Christ; therefore 1 Cor.
12. we find all operations and diversities of them attributed to the holy
Ghost: And Acts 25. the holy Ghost is said, To make those overseers in the
Church of Ephesus: So that what Church Officers, or what Church-ordinances, or
order we have, and what Gifts and Abilities likewise there are to discharge
them. These are all of the holy Ghost, and of the holy Ghost three ways:

1. In respect of their Institution and being. For although it is by man, that
such and such persons are elected and ordained to this or that Office, yet the
Office of it self is of the holy Ghost. They are not the Institutions of men;
nor may men appoint some Church Officers, which God has not, because their end
is wholly supernatural: As it is said, 2 Cor. 12.28. God has set in his Church
such Officers, even as he has set the Sun and stars in the firmament: so
that all Officers lawfully called are of the holy Ghost, either immediately as
at the beginning; or else mediately, by the order and designation of the
Church. And as for their gifts, it is plain the extraordinary and miraculous
gifts in the primitive times were from Gods Spirit. The Scripture often
attributes them to it: Doubt.
Only now it may be doubted, Whether we can say, that the gifts and the
abilities that Ministers have now, are from the holy Ghost, because they are
got by humane study and industry: And is there any more required to understand
the Scripture, than any other humane Author, Plato or Aristotle? Those cursed
wretches Julian and Porphyrius, who wrote against the Scripture, they
understood what they were so invective against, yet it cannot be thought they
were enabled by the holy Ghost.

Now to answer this, Resolution.
even those natural abilities and humane indowments that men obtain by study,
are a gift of God; they are a blessing which we see God gives to some, and not
to other: It Is Gods mercy thou art not a natural fool, a mad man; but when thou
have more understanding, and better intellectual abilities than other, thou
have a greater gift from God than others. Hence in our very ordinary phrase, we
say, such an one has an excellent gift in his memory, in his elocution, etc.
And the Scripture is clear, James 1.17. Every good and perfect gift comes from
the Father of lights, which is to be understood universally both of naturals
and supernaturals; And what have thou, thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4. Hence
in the Parable, all abilities, whether gracious or natural are called Talents,
and are given by one Master. That is the first thing; even those excellent
abilities which the greatest Heretics and enemies to the Christian Religion
had, were of God, though the sinful use of them came from the Devil, and their
own corrupt hearts; They were talents of gold, and they made Idols of them.

2. As the gifts and abilities Church Officers have, are from God, so the right
understanding of the Scripture, and believing the sense contained therein, is
in a more particular manner a gift of Gods Spirit. For although the Spirit of
God does not give us the sense and meaning of the Scripture in an extraordinary
manner, viz. without the knowledge of the tongues, the comparing of places
together, etc. yet in and by these means the Spirit of God does help us to
understand the Scripture. I do not here speak of a saving knowledge of the
sense of the Scripture, but a mere literal knowledge of the meaning thereof.
This is plain by the Apostle, No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12 3 The very historical believing of Scripture truths is from
the Spirit of God. So that here is required a more peculiar and particular
assistance of Gods Spirit in ministerial abilities, for the opening of the
Scripture, then for any humane Author; because the matter for the most part is
spiritual and supernatural; and partly, because as the Prophets and Penmen
spoke or wrote, as they were moved by the holy Ghost, even to every syllable
and word; so the same Spirit of God is required, though not in such a measure
to the understanding of it. Hence the Spirit of God is promised, To lead us
into all truth, John 16.13. Alas the greatest men of parts and learning have
many times been the greatest Heretics, and most ignorant of the Scripture,
because destitute of the Spirit: Yet on the other side, you must not run into
another extremity, as if the Spirit alone, without those helps God has
required, would lead us into truth: for that were to tempt God, and to expect a
miracle. For give a Bible in Hebrew or Greek to a man, though enjoying Gods
Spirit, yet he is not able to understand this or that Text, without the
interpretation of the language. I have been more large on this, because it is
necessary to show, with how much prayer and earnest application to the throne
of grace the Ministers of God should address themselves to their work: without
the Spirit of God guiding and leading of them, they are the ship that wants a
wind; yea, though they have many excellent gifts, and much humane learning:
They are but as a swift horse without a rider, while they want Gods Spirit; and
the faster they run, the more they are out of the way. So then, put the
Spirit of God, and other helps appointed by him together, and then you will
never split at any Rock.

Secondly, As the gifts of the Ministry are thus efficiently from God, So
directively also they are from his Spirit. The guidance and ordering of the
whole Ministry is from the Spirit of God. When Paul was resolved to go to some
place to preach the Gospel, he was sometimes forbidden by the Spirit, and
directed to go to others, Acts 16.6, 9. Thus in the word of God, preached by
the Apostles, the Spirit of God did demonstrate it self, because the Jews are
said to resist it, Acts 7.51. therefore though it was first dispensed to the
Jews, yet upon their neglect it was transplanted to the Gentiles. And thus
truly every Congregation, every particular person, may wonderfully observe the
divine guidance of the Ministry, that it should come to such a people, and not
to such; that those who are unworthy, and trample upon it, as swine do the
pearl, should have it, and many a poor hungring and thirsting people, can never
enjoy have or such a Ministry, especially every godly hearer may observe a
divine guidance of the Word in the matter preached, how near and seasonably it
comes to him. The unbeliever that came to the Church ordinances, saw his heart
and thoughts so judged and discovered, that he cried out, Verily God is among
you, 1 Cor. 14.25. Thou sit and wonderest, how the Minister should fall on
such a point, how he should be directed to such a particular that does so
nearly concern thee; this makes thee say, Verily God is here.

Thirdly, Which is the last and greatest, The efficacy and spiritual benefit of
the Ordinances and gifts of Officers is wholly from the Spirit of God. Hence it
is called the holy Spirit, not only essentially, as the other Persons are, or
by way of opposition to the unclean spirit, the Devil; but effectively, because
by way of title and Office (as it were) it belongs to him, to sanctify the
gifts of the Minister, and to make them powerful in the hearts of the hearers.
So that although parts and abilities should be in the Officers choice and
power, yet the success and benefit is not: When Paul has planted, Apollo
watered, it is God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. And certainly, if the
Physician cannot give health; the Gardener cannot make any fruit, only
disposes and prepares in these things; much less can spiritual Officers in
the Church cause the Word to open the eyes of the blind, or soften the heart
of those that are hardened.

Thus we have seen how the Spirit of God dwells in the Church by reason of gifts
only, and to be more affected with this, (though that of Graces be more
excellent,) consider,

First, That the end of all these gifts thus vouchsafed by the Spirit, is only
to profit withal, as the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 12.7. They are not for vain
oftentation, neither are we to seek our selves by them, but they are to be
improved for edification. Now that cannot be called profit, which is only to
please the ear, to tickle the fancy, but what is to convince the conscience and
change the heart and lives of men. Oh that this were considered both by
Minister, and all people! It Is spiritual profit, that is to be looked at. Hence
the Word is compared to food, which is not for the eye, but the stomach. The
more useful and profitable the gifts of any are, either for instruction or
reformation, the nearer they come to their due end.

Secondly, Consider the plenty of these gifts under the New Testament. The
Spirit of God enabled to all those gifts and graces in the Old Testament; but
because they were in a little pittance or measure, therefore the Gospel is said
to be The time of the manifestation of the Spirit. So that it is a great shame
and sin, if both Ministers and people partake not more of the gifts of Gods
Spirit, than in the Old Testament, and that so much gross ignorance and
beastly profaneness does overflow, is a great reproach unto the times of the
Gospel.

Thirdly, The variety of them is also very admirable. The Apostle reckons up
the diversity of them. So that as it was an argument of Jacob's love to give
Joseph a party-colored coat: Thus it is of Gods favor to bestow such
diversity of gifts. This makes the Church indeed to be in imbroidered garments.

Fourthly, The wisdom of the Spirit is seen in that no one man has all. As
all men have not the same face, but some difference there is, which makes Gods
providence admirable in this particular: So all have not the same gifts, some
are for the word of Doctrine, some for the word of Exhortation; and all this
is, that there being a mutual excelling of one another, there might be no envy
or schism in the body.

Use of Instruction, What cause we Ministers, and you people have, to pray for
this Spirit of God, without which we preach in vain, and you hear in vain. As
Moses said to God, Unless thou go along with us, we will not go up. O Lord, if
the presence of thy Spirit be not with us, we cannot discharge those duties,
who is sufficient to preach? Who is sufficient to hear? Oh it should be like a
sword in our bowels, to think we feel no more of him in our Assemblies! Arise,
O North wind, and blow, O South (says the Church) that the spices may send
forth their smell, Cantic. 4.16. Oh that the Spirit of God would thus arise in
our hearts, that our gifts may be successful, that our graces may flourish!

And that the Spirit of God dwells in you.

The first sort of the Spirits inhabitation in us, viz. by Gifts has been
dispatched.

We now come to the more noble and excellent way, which does inseparably
accompany salvation, and that is the sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit. By
which indeed we may gather, That God dwells in us. For as when Daniel could so
wonderfully open and interpret the Kings dreams, they said, The Spirit of the
most high God was in him. So if you see a people heavenly, mortifying sin,
walking in close communion with God; you must needs conclude the Spirit of the
most high God is in that man. It Is not nature or moral virtues could raise him
up to such an high Pinnacle as this is. And before we come to the particular
effects of Gods in-dwelling after this manner, it is good to observe the
Emphatical expressions that the Scripture uses equivalent to this of dwelling
in us. As Romans 8. there it is called, Being in the Spirit, as here, The Spirit
is in us: So there, we are in the Spirit. Now that phrase is very emphatical,
and does denote, that all our lusts and sins, yea our very selves are (as it
were) swallowed up, and nothing but the Spirit of God works and moves in us.
To be in the Spirit, denotes the great efficacy and powerful dominion in us;
as men are said to be in sin, because they no longer live, but sin, nothing
but sin does appear: so it should be with the godly. The Spirit of God, not
flesh, not corruption, not carnal or worldly principles should appear in them.
As the Prophets in the time of their Prophecy, were said to be in the Spirit,
in an ecstasy, minding no earthly or worldly thing. Thus ought we to be emptied
of our selves, and filled with the Spirit of God. Therefore John 3. it is said,
Whatsoever is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, in the very abstract. We have also
( Gal. 4) pregnant expressions, To live in the Spirit, to walk in the Spirit,
to be led by the Spirit. Oh let such expressions as these make you ashamed to
see so much of a man, or carnal affections stirring in you! What believer has
these things in the full power thereof?

But to the Particulars:

First, The Spirit of God dwells in us after a saving manner, in the general, By
way of sanctification of the Spirit, soul and body, even the whole man, 1 Thessalonians. 5. This is the general. Every man is all over unclean, filthy, polluted,
full of enmity to what is holy. Now the Spirit of God that makes an universal
sanctification of all these. Hence by way of Office it is called, The Spirit of
sanctification, and the holy Spirit; as Creation is appropriated to the Father,
and Redemption to the Son, so Sanctification to the Holy Ghost. So then, as
Christ in respect of his body, is said to be conceived by the Holy Ghost; there
was a preparing and sanctifying of it for the Personal Union, and the work of
Redemption: So the Spirit of God sanctifies the soul of every godly man; it
makes every part and faculty, prepared for holy Duties in an holy man: for as
the soul is the life of the body, that can do no vital action without it; So
the Spirit is the life of the soul, and that can do no spiritual action
without it. Oh then consider this, all ye that hear, and ponder it in your
hearts! Have you thus been conceived, and borne of the Spirit of God? Thy other
birth will avail nothing, though borne rich or noble: Yea, Could thou be
borne a thousand times, in a natural way, thou would still be a miserable
wretched man. What is a good or ingenuous nature? What are excellent and choice
abilities, if thou art not sanctified by the Spirit of God? Do not think
these things are fancies and notions. The Spirit of God may as well be called a
fancy, as his operations, fancies.

But more particularly, The Spirit of God dwells in a saving manner,

First, By Illumination, and opening of the dark mind of every man. Every man
is darkness it self, he cannot discern of spiritual things revealed in the
Word, till the Spirit of God enlighten him. Therefore the work of Gods Spirit
is great upon the mind and understanding of a man, it convinces the soul of a
man of those things it never believed before, John 16.9. of sin, it makes a
man see the woeful and damnable estate he is in. It Is so plain, that he
cannot deny it; he believed and judged no such thing once in him; but now such
light shines in his breast, that he is a very dunghill, a very hell to
himself, and then he convinces of righteousness, (viz.) a
Gospel-righteousnesse by Christ. Now all his works, all his good duties are
dung and dross; all that Religion, he put confidence in, is abandoned by him,
the Spirit of God convinces him of a glorious righteousness without him,
which only is able to cover his nakedness.

Again, Another special work on the understanding is, To teach, to guide, and
lead into all truth. We cannot say, Jesus is the Christ without the Spirit, as
you heard, 1 Corinthians. 12.3. Spiritual things must have a spiritual ability to
discern them. It Is true, he leads in and by the use of means appointed; but
yet he only does efficiently dispell the darkness, and work faith to holy
Truths. So then we see, it is the special work of Gods Spirit, not humane
ability, to be directed into truth: And we must not only study Books, but pray
to God, and take heed of such sins, which may drive Gods Spirit from us; for
then we are as a wild horse without a rider; like a ship in the midst of the
sea, without a Pilot.

Secondly, The Spirit of God quickens and reviveth those graces, that by
Regeneration were infused to us; compared therefore to the wind, as the
blowing of that, makes the flowers of the Gardens to send forth their sweet
smells: So it is here. It Is not enough to have the habit and principles of grace
within us; but we need a fervent and vigorous actuating of them. And therefore
is the Holy Ghost compared to fire; and hence that phrase, To be filled with
the Holy Ghost, which is applied to the godly sometimes, does (as learned men
observe) denote some actual and vigorous impression upon their hearts: Their
graces were now put forth in a lively vigorous way. Oh this is a blessed life,
when a Christian is constantly filled with the Holy Ghost, that does actually
make his heart fervent, and burning in all its duties toward God! If this were
the life of the godly man, there would not be such complaints, such fears,
such doubts: Oh they cannot tell what to say to themselves! They are dull,
heavy, earthly. Alas! all this is, because the Spirit of God fills not thy
heart; if this were working, thou would be like Ezekiels wheels, that moved
so swiftly, because the Spirit was in them. Oh then, as she said, If thou had
been here, my brother had not died! So do thou, Oh Lord, if thy Spirit had
inlivened me, and moved in me, I had not ^ad such dead duties, such a dead
profession! Oh where is thy Spirit? When will it breathe heavenly life and
vigor into me?

Thirdly, The Spirit of God does enable us to kill and mortify sin. Rom 8.
If ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh. Through the Spirit.]
There is no sin so dear and beloved to thee, so strong and imbred in thee,
that is as thy own soul to thee; but by the Spirit of God thou may
mortify it. Never then be afraid of those great Anakims. Oh thou cryest out, I
cannot believe, I cannot be heavenly minded! Indeed thou can not; but the
Spirit of God does lift up his people to these things. Men by natural
conscience may leave many outward sins, but they do not, or cannot mortify
them; this is done by Gods Spirit only. As only by him they could cast out
Devils from the possessed; thus only by him can they subdue such sins. We
see then, why it is that so many resolve never to sin again, to be such
beasts any more, and and yet are overcome: Alas, they go out in their own
strength against these Goliahs. Oh therefore pray, and again pray for the
Spirit of God! O Lord! here is a lust* or a sin dwells in me, as the Jebusite
in Canaan, I know not how to be freed from it, gladly would I be heavenly, I
cannot; I would be believing, I cannot; give that holy Spirit of thine unto me.
Pray thus for the Spirit of God, more than for health, life, or any worldly
advantage whatsoever.

Fourthly, The Spirit of God does bestow a filial and ingenuous spirit upon
believers, whereby they are carried out upon Evangelical and Gospel grounds in
their obedience to God. And this is a most precious work, to be desired more
than all the world. An heart with slavish fears is an hell, where a man is a
tormenting Devil to himself, and the guilt of sin is a gnawing worm that
never dies; but Galat. 4.6. He has sent his Spirit in our hearts, whereby we
cry Abba Father; There is earnestness, and a Gospel holy boldness: Hence it
is called, The Spirit of Adoption: Now how admirable and desirable is this,
when we through fear were subject to bondage, to have this Evangelical
freedom of Spirit? The people of God should pray and seek for this Spirit of
Adoption, as well as of Sanctification. This would be oil to the wheel; this
would be wings and legs to thee.

Fifthly, The Spirit of God works comfort and joy in the hearts of the godly.
Hence he is called, The Comforter, John 15.26. As the Devil delights to keep
us in darkness and fears, therefore he had almost swallowed up the incestuous
person with immoderate grief, 2 Corinthians. 2. So the Spirit of God delights to
turn water into wine. Joy is a fruit of the Spirit of God, Galat. 5.22. Yea,
it is called, Unspeakable joy in the Holy Ghost. Do not therefore think, that
the Kingdom of Grace and Godliness lies in a dejected spirit, in a troubled
soul: No, it is in joy as well as in righteousness, Romans 14.17. Those doubts
and sad thoughts that do lie like a burden and load upon thee, came not from
the Spirit dwelling in thee.

Sixthly, That we may have this boldness and joy, the Spirit of God has
another effect, which is, To witness and seal unto our spirits, that we are
the children of God. Grieve not the Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed,
Ephesians. 4.30. The Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
sons of God, Romans 8.16. Oh what a blessed life is this, when all these works
of Gods Spirit go along together, teaching, sanctifying and comforting! This is
the Mount of Transfiguration, It Is good to be here. Do not think these things
are too great, and too good to be had in this life: For, if we be not wanting
to our selves, if we bring our cruises, he is ready to pour in his oil.

Seventhly, The Spirit of God works wonderful support, and even glorious
rejoicing in all afflictions and tribulations. Then, if ever, it is admirable to
see, what the Spirit of God does in believers, The Spirit of glory shall rest
upon you, 1 Peter 4.14. If you read of the Martyrs burning at the stake; if of
the persecutions and torments they did with such invincible joy and patience
endure, it was from the Spirit of glory resting on them. Alas, we think, if God
should exercise us with such straits, bring us into such troubles, we could
never bear them. Oh consider, there is Gods Spirit, as well as thy spirit.

Lastly, The Spirit of God does work the prayers of Gods people. Romans 8. It Is
a Spirit of prayer and mourning; he teaches what to pray, and how to pray for
spiritual and heavenly things, with zeal, faith and importunity; It helps our
infirmities, many sins and corruptions are apt to spoil our prayers, he helps
against them; yea he works groans unutterable; he moves the very foundations
of the soul; and those prayers cannot but speed, because the Spirit knows the
mind of God. All prayers are dead carcasses without the Spirit moving upon them.

Use of Examination. Try whether thou art one, who have the Spirit of God thus
dwelling in thee. Oh where is the man or woman that hears us, that knows
the meaning of these things! When Christ spoke about eating his body, the
Capernaites had a gross understanding therein; but says our Savior, The
flesh profits little, the Spirit gives life, John 6.63. If Christ said thus
of his own body, than how much rather may we say, parts, duties, an outward
Religion profits little? The Spirit gives life, Romans 8. Paul says, If any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Thou speak of Christ,
and thou hopest he died for thee; see what the Scripture says, If thou have
not his Spirit, thou art none of his.

Verse 17. If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy.
THe Apostle in this seventeenth verse aggravates that Argument, which before
he had propounded, viz. The temple of God, wherein the Spirit of God dwells,
ought to be kept pure, and not defiled by any corruptions of Doctrine or lives.
1So that the Apostle makes all false Doctrines and corruptions in Gods worship
to be a sacrilege. And therefore in this verse he does further amplify the
heinousness of this sin; wherein you have, 1. The malum culpae supposed, If
any man defile the temple of God. 2. The malum poenae proposed, Him will God
destroy.


For the sin supposed, If any man defile the temple. This is an allusive
expression to the custom among the Jews; If any man defiled their Temple, the
crime was capital; what accusations were brought against Paul, because he
brought in Greeks uncircumcised into the Temple. The Greek words are (...) and
(...), an elegant allusion. The sin and the punishment shall be both alike;
some have rendered it corrupt, some vitiate, others destroy. This of our
Translators is very good: For seeing the truths of God and his Ordinances are
pure, then it follows all errors and false Doctrines are a pollution; as if
you should put dross to gold, or cast mud into a pleasant spring. Some
Interpreters think the Apostle does intend to an higher sin, then he named
before: For (say they) verse. 15. he speaks of such false Doctrines that did not
overthrow the foundation, now such a man may be saved, though difficultly, but
verse. 17. he names such as strike at the very root, and destroy the very
Temple it self. So that they make this the meaning, If any man bring such
corruptions of Doctrine, as destroy the Temple of God, overthrow Religion, and
make it no Church, he shall not be saved at all. There is no fire to cleanse
him, but to consume him. Thus some. But it is more consonant to take the words
more general, and so they do better cohere. And this destruction spoken of is
to be understood, unless he repent, or pro subjecta materia, if it be only
hay and stubble, then the (...) is no more than (...) before, a destruction
partial, not total; but if they be damnable heresies, than they meet with a
total destruction. Observe,

Observe. Of defiling Gods Church with errors.
That those men who defile the Church of God with corrupt Doctrines, do highly
provoke God to punish them.

The Text is an Argument a minori ad majus: If the defilers of the material
Temple did not escape Gods punishments, as Athaliah for profaning the Temple,
and Belshazzar the holy vessels of the Temple; then much less shall they
escape, who pollute the Church of God by any such falsehoods: And we read that
our Savior did in this show his anger, and wrought a miracle by way of
indignation; and another particular, namely cursing the fig tree. In these two
cases did Christ's miracles tend to destruction or punishment; all the other
were full of mercy and healing. For when they had defiled the Temple, and made
it a den of thieves; twice our Savior made a whip, and scourged them out,
which Hierom does admire, as a greater miracle than any other our Savior did,
that a man unarmed and contemptible, should chase away such a multitude of men,
and in that matter of their profit, making no resistance, but barely asking, By
what power he did these things? No doubt the City of Jerusalem was then guilty
of many horrible and grievous crimes of injustice, adulteries; but Christ takes
no notice of that, but goes presently to the Temple, to reform there; and
this is attributed to the godly zeal that was in him, which did even eat him
up, John 2.17.

For the opening of the Doctrine, let us consider, Why errors are said to
defile Gods Church.
Why false Doctrines are a defiling, why they are called corruptions; For so in
the Old Testament Idolatry is often called; men are said to have corrupted
their ways by false worship; and this will be good, to take off that lovely
painting and alluring dress, which some would put upon their errors and
superstitions. Now they are called defilings and corruptions,

First, From the pure nature of Gods truth, and his worship, which falsehoods do
stain, and take away the glory of. You see the Apostle compares them to gold
and precious stone. Now to take these, and to throw them into the dirt, is a
debasing of them; Gods word is said to be more pure than gold seven times
refined; yea more to be desired than fine gold, Psalm. 19.10. Christ commends
his Doctrine under the notion of living water, John 4.10 the pure running
streams of the brook. Now all false Teachers they throw in mud and dirt to
these; as the Philistims did earth into those Wells that Isaac dug for his
cattle. Every pure thing is made impure, when mingled with any thing of a more
sordid and inferior nature, as gold with lead, wine with water, water with
mud So then, though men give glorious Titles and Names to their falsehoods, as
excellent Truths, glorious Lights; yet indeed they are no more than defilements
and pollutions. Oh then, how humble tender and careful ought men to be? Are
the Truths and Ordinances of God by institution, and in their original so pure?
Come not then with thy soul hands, to handle such precious things.

Secondly, They are called defilements and pollutions, Because the truths and
Church of God are not only pure, but dedicated and appropriated to him, as the
only object. So that they are holy as well as pure; and in this notion the
Apostle considers them. So that it is a sacrilegious defilement, to take the
Truths and Ordinances, or worship of God, and by thy carnal and sinful
imaginations to pervert them. And here we may say in another sense, Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? Thou that art against Popery,
against the Idolatry of the Mass, and other abominable things: Do thou
sacrilegiously pervert the holy Truths and Ordinances of God by sinful and
corrupt opinions? Certainly, if this were believed, men would not so profanely
dispute and dally in the holy things of God.

Thirdly, Errors and heresies may well be called defilements, Because they are
a disease, and so spread over the Church. The Scripture compares them not to
every kind of disease, but that which is most mortal and dangerous, even a
Cancer. Thus Paul of Hymenaeus and Philetus, Whose word eats like a canker, 3
Tim. 2.17. The Leprosy in the Old Testament, of which Levit. 13. there is so
much spoken, is acknowledged by Divines to typifie heresy and errors; and as
that did infect and make the very garments unclean, that they were to be washed
or burnt: so the Apostle alludes to this, Jude verse. 23. Hating even the
garment that is spotted by the flesh. See what thoughts we are to have of all
errors and heresies; we are no to touch the garment of the flesh, that is, we
are not to come near such, as it is said, Come out of Babylon, because of her
Church-corruptions, and touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. Thus you see, that
you are not only to take heed of def^^ng your selves with errors, but because
they are a Leprosy, a spreading filthiness; you are not to come near the
temptations; be as much afraid of such an one, as of one with a plague sore
running upon him. That very phrase, Whose word eats like a canker, should much
terrify women, who by seeming pretenses are apt to be misled: What a
dangerous thing is a canker in thy breast? But as soon as thou have received any
error, thou have got a canker in thy heart. So that if it were only a
pollution it was not so terrible; but here is a killing disease with this
pollution: If therefore thou love thy soul, flee from errors; and the more
difficult it is to know, when it is an error, the more art thou to be afraid:
In Levit. 13. you see it was a very hard matter to discern between the
Leprosy, and any other distemper; some had not the Leprosy, it was only a
scab; so some do not run into gross and damnable heresies, but yet they have
a scab, a loathsome distemper upon them. These things being the truths of
Scripture, and not the words of men pleading for their own interest and
reputation, should much prevail with you.

Fourthly, They are defilements, Because they pollute the conscience, mind,
heart, and whole life of a man. Hence you have that phrase, Men of corrupt
minds, 1 Timothy 6.5. and 2 Timothy 3.8. Destitute of the truth. Thus men's
consciences also are said to be defiled, Tit. 1.15. So that the corruption of a
man by errors is a Metaphore from the body, which through sickness or death
is corrupted, Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption, Act 2.17.
That as from the dead body worms and putrid vermin grow and live: So from
minds corrupted and destitute of truth, do flow these erroneous Doctrines. Thus
not only wickedness may denominate men to be dead, Let the dead bury the dead,
Mat. 8.22. And the wanton widow is dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6 but even
the erroneous and heretical mind is dead, while it seems to have much (...)
And truly bodily corruptions in some sense are not so great as the corruptions
of mind and conscience. The Apostle in the second Epistle, makes lustful and
libidinous ways to defile the body of a man, which is Gods Temple; but here,
you see errors and corrupt opinions defile the soul, that is the more noble
Temple of the Holy Ghost. So that these mind-defilements, make thy disease the
more ^^c^rable. This puts out the eye; this kills the spy and monitor of all
thy actions.

Lastly, Corrupt Doctrines are called defilements, to show how loathsome and
abominable they should be to us. To hear the Scripture say, That by false
Doctrines the Church is polluted and defiled, should make a man presently
abhor such ways. Thou can not abide dirt or vomit upon thy garments, and
can thou endure these deformities upon thy soul? Thou can not endure to see
a drunkard wallowing like a swine in the mire, but to see men stagger and reel,
and even be drunk with giddy and vile opinions, this should be a more loathsome
sight. Labor then for a Scripture judgment in these things, and do not thou
have more indulging thoughts toward errors, then the Scripture allows. I do
not forbid thy charity to some persons erring, but to errors. If a godly man
should be overtaken with drunkenness or uncleanness, thou would say, the
sins were abominable, though thou would pity the man, and pray for him;
so it is here.

Use of Instruction, Wherein lies the purity of Churches? Even in pure and
sound Doctrine, as well as in pure lives. Some, they cry out against purity in
lives, they love not such Puritans; they cannot endure such strictness:
Others, they love not this purity of Doctrine. The Remonstrants deride the word
Orthodox, as if it were a spell used by some Writers. Now in both ways we
overthrow the purity of Churches. To have pure Doctrine, pure Ordinances, and
yet men to be impure in lives, is a very doleful sight. Again, to have men
appearing with pure lives, yet impure Doctrines, is also very grievous to him
who is endowed with a sound Faith.

If any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy.

We have dispatched the sin supposed, we come to the punishment proposed; Him
shall God destroy. A terrible sentence, and that which may make all those who
grow wanton in the matters of Religion like Belshazer, to quake and tremble. In
the Greek, it is (...), the same word with defiling the Temple: They defile
Gods Temple, and God will defile them. This is the same with (...), in other
places, God will destroy: Now this is meant of eternal destruction without
repentance. The Scripture calls eternal punishment, destruction; not in the
sense of the Socinians heresy, as if both body and soul were totally
annihilated, for that cannot be called a torment, but rather a freedom from
torment; but because both body and soul are deprived of all comfort and
happiness, and so are exposed to all the curses, and the tormenting wrath of
God without ceasing. So that this Text does represent corruptions in the
Doctrine and Worship of God, How God will punish Heretics.
under as terrible a consideration as any great sins committed. For look upon
the threatenings against the vilest monsters of sinners, they can be no more
then this, Those will God destroy. And so it is here of such as defile the
Truths of God with errors; even as Nadab and Abihu were wonderfully and
terribly destroyed for offering strange fire upon Gods Altar, though men may
suffer them. Though the parties themselves may bless their condition, yet God
will destroy them, if they do not recover out of these snares of the Devil.

Now that God will destory eternally such as defile this Temple without
reformation, will most fully appear by 2 Pet. 2.3, 4. which Chapter should be
an Allarum to these times. For

First, Her fore-tels, that as in the Old Testament there were false Prophets,
so in the New Testament, notwithstanding all the light of the Gospel, and the
Truths of God revealed in his Word, there should be false Teachers; here you
see, it is expressly foretold, that it should be no stumbling block to us: we
should not be offended at the truth, nor at reformation out of Popery and
superstitions, because of such events.

Now these are described by their Actions, They shall bring in damnable
heresies: Connder that expression. All heresy is not innocent: It Is not
excusable, as the Remonstrants plead; for here are damnable heresies.

2. The Manner how, they shall privily bring in. There is great craft and
subtilty; there is underworking, as Moles do underground.

Then you have the consequent evil of this, They bring upon themselves swift
destruction. Here is more then in my text, not only destruction, but swift
destruction. That is two ways swift:

First, Because God will not delay: He is so provoked, that he cannot bear them
long. And then

Secondly, Swift in regard of their thoughts: It comes before they thought of,
or expected any such thing. And whereas it may be said, They prosper, they meet
with no such visible wrath of God, see verse 4. Whose judgment lingereth not,
and whose damnation sleeps not. All the while they are secure, their judgment
does but watch the time, the fittest time to make their destruction more
dreadful.

Now that still people may be afraid of errors and heresies, he instanceth in
three the most horride Examples of Gods vengeance; and argues thus, that if
God were so severe against them, let not such as bring in damnable heresies
expect better.

The first from the Angels, God spared not them, but did cast them down into
Hell, and bound them in chains of darkness. The Angels sins, were sins of
the mind, they were intellectual substances; and so heresies and their sins
are much alike. Do not then say, Heresy is no drunkenness, no whoredom, no
bodily profaneness, no more was the Angels sin; it was an intellectual
sin, and yet for that they are perpetually condemned.

2. The second instance of Gods Judgment, is, The Old World, which God drowned
with water. All mankind had perverted its ways, and even defiled the world,
and God washes it with the waters of his Judgments. So that the overflowing of
heresies, is like the corruption of the Old World.

Lastly, He compares them to the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, whose sins
were so great, that God did rain Hell out of Heaven, to be avenged on them. Who
then can excuse or plead for such defilements, the sinners wherein are compared
to those three, who received the greatest expressions of Gods wrath most
signally upon themselves? Thus this Chapter is a Comment upon my Text.

To open this Truth, viz. God will destroy such a defiler.

First, This is to be understood Conditionally; unless that man see and bewail
his errors, and forsake them. No doubt but Luther and many of the first
Reformers, who came out of Popery, were great defilers of the Temple of God;
but when God did open their eyes, and discover the truth, then none were more
zealous then they, to make the Church, that was a den of thieves, an House of
Prayer. How often did Luther bewail that blindness, and that damnable error
which was upon him in the time of his Popery, and Melan^tho^ also, yet
recovered from it? So that this threatening is to be interpreted as all other
places against any wicked man. Ezekiel. 18.21. If the unrighteous or wicked man
leave his sins, he shall live. God will not remember his former i^iquities:
Yea, God many times takes those who were once plunged into damnable ways, and
makes them great Instruments to publish his truths. As Paul, once a
blasphemous persecutor of Christianity, afterward a zealous prosecutor of it.
Austin once a damnable Manich^e, afterward escaping their snares, was greatly
instrumental to the Conversion of others from those damnable Opinions. So that
all those who lie in damnable heresies, are not therefore desperate and
hopeless, for the great Shepherd may reduce these wandering sheep.

A godly ma^n may fall into a damnable heresy.
Secondly, It cannot be denied, but that even a godly man may fall into ae
damnable heresy, and some time continue in it. They may not believe some
fundamentals in Religion for a while. Thus the Resurrection of Christ is a main
Pillar of Religion, take this away, and our resurrection and all our comforts
fall to the ground; yet many of the Apostles did not for a while believe it:
and generally they erred in this fundamental, they took Christ's Kingdom for a
temporal one, and looked for a temporal Restoration: but yet the godly, though
at any time thus plunged into a damnable way, have this difference from wicked
men who are turned aside.

How a godly man erring, differs from a wicked man.
First. There is a seed of grace within them, which though for a while it lies
asleep, yet at last will put forth it self. He cannot sin, because the seed
abides in him, 1 John 3. As the spirits of Wine will at last work out all
poison. So that as a man, who has reason in him, may be taught what he knew
not, when a bruit beast cannot, because there is the seed of Reason upon which
the teacher does work. So it is here; in a godly man there is the principle of
grace, and this spark will at last take fire, though for the present it be much
overwhelmed.

Secondly, The godly, though plunged into some damnable error, yet are under a
Promise to recover them, which will certainly take effect. As Moses exposed to
the water, had his Mothers eye upon him to see he should not be drowned; so
though a godly man be plunged deep in evil ways, yet there is Gods eye and
Gods hand ready to deliver him. If it were possible, they should deceive the
very Elect, Mat. 24. If it were possible, now what makes it impossible, not the
godly man himself: Alas, he has so much ignorance, pride, and corrupt
affections, that by what reason they are plunged into any foul error, by the
same they would always continue therein, and be for ever suffocated. It Is only
Gods gracious Promise, He will lead them into the truth; he will give them the
spiritual Unction.

Thirdly, The godly man's heart is not commonly so obstinate and seared, as the
wicked man's is. Those that brought in the doctrines of Devils into the Church,
are said to have a seared conscience, 1 Timothy 4.2. They felt nothing, they did
not doubt or suspect, [What if this be a damnable error that thou maintainest?
What if thou art a means, not only to damn thy self, but many others?] No; they
are commonly men of a reprobate mind. But the godly, though grievously seduced,
yet sometimes they have struglings, they have an holy jealousy over
themselves; they bewail their pronenesse to err. Even as it is in gross
sins, the godly man sins not with that hearty and full consent that others
do.

A third thing to open this point, Error and erroneous persons distinguished.
is to consider a difference between the defilements of the Temple by false
Doctrines. Some are only in accessory and less prinpall things, and such were
those who built bay and stubble; their errors were consistent with salvation:
He shall be saved, but so as by fire. But others are Fundamental, destroying
the very soul and essence of true Faith and true Piety. Now the latter are such
whom God will certainly destroy. I know it is that Question, which has kept so
many learned men, like Abraham's Ram, in the thickets, what are Fundamentals,
what points are necessary to Salvation, and what not: but though it be hard to
parcel out the number, yet that there are such, the Scripture is plain, in
that it calls them first Principles, and tells us of a Foundation which must be
laid: Of which formerly.

Fourthly, In defiling the Temple of God, here is great difference to be made
between those that are the Seducers and the Seduced. There was a vast
difference between the rebellion of Absalom the head of it, and such as
followed him in the simplicity of their hearts. Lyrinensis said, That the
Authors of many Heresies were damned, whose Disciples or followers might be
saved. The Apostle Jude does evidently make a distinction of persons that err:
Of some have compassion, making a difference, Jude verse. 22.

Fifthly, Church defilements make men further off, or nearer to perdition, as
they enjoy the means, and as they have opportunity to know better. The
Pharisees sins were so inexcusable, because they had light; insomuch that our
Savior says, If he had not come, they had not had sin, Joh. 15.24.
Therefore an Heretic, after the first or second Admonition, is to be
rejected, Tit. 3.10. Those then are nearest to perdition, who after Admonition
and Information, do still continue refractory.

Lastly, Of all those who defile the Temple, and are marked out for perdition,
Antichrist it is, and his party that are the great defilers of Gods Temple: He
is alled The man of Perdition, (2 These. 2.3.) both actively and passively:
Actively, because he is a means to destroy so many thousand souls; and
passively, because he is appointed by God to remarkable destruction. Take heed
therefore thou art not found in the number of that Antichristian society, which
is marked out by God for destruction. Come out of Babylon, least you be
partakers of her plague, Rev. 18.4.

If you ask why God should be thus provoked by corruptions in truth or worship,
Why God is so provoked with corruptions in Doctrine and Worship.
the Reason is plain; Because his Glory is more immediately interrested in
these things. Practical godliness and obedience are acceptable, but his truth
and his worship, are that which immediately relate to him. Herein his jealousy
is said to be drawn out.

Use of Admonition. Pray and take heed you fall not from your steadfastness,
and be led aside with the errors of the wicked: You see here is no dallyance,
no wantonness allowed in this matter; God will destroy. Art thou not afraid of
Gods wrath, of Gods vengeance? If it were but the anger of a man, or the
persecution of a man, it might be endured; but God, who is a consuming fire, he
will never bear this: He will not endure this. This Text would be like a
flaming sword to keep men from false and erroneous ways, if duly considered.
This is that which undoeth us, people are either very sottish and stupid, not
regarding any thing of Religion at all; or if they do, they do not with that
sobriety, that humility, that fear and trembling, address themselves to know
Gods truths as they ought to do. There is a profane, proud, unmortified frame
of heart upon us, and then then no wonder we defile his Temple.

Him shall God destroy.

This is the punishment threatened to the Temple-defilers, and though but two
words, God destroy, yet both have their weight. There are many evils and
calamities that yet are not a destruction, that is the utmost of all paenall
evils; and then, it is a destruction from God, whose wrath is like himself,
Incomprehensible: It Is not man, but God shall destroy.

Now what this destruction is, we have told you; not an annihilation of soul
and body, as Socinians would have it; not a Physical destruction, but moral,
viz. depriving the wicked man of all happiness and comfort. We have handled
this relatively already, as it is the Portion of the Temple-defilers, I shall
now consider it absolutely: Eternal wrath and damnation is described here under
the name of destruction, which is the reward of every wicked impenitent man,
whether his sins be intellectual or bodily. And the Doctrine I shall raise,
is,

Observe. Of Eternal Damnation.
That Eeternal Damnation is the Destruction of a man.

It Is the undoing of a man for ever. This Doctrine or Truth, has a sting in
it; and because men are generally so brutish and feared in their evil ways, I
do the rather pitch upon it, because truths that are of a more sublime nature,
do not so easily penetrate.

Let us then improve this, Eternal Damnation is the Destruction of a man. It Is
the eternal undoing of a man.

To clear this, consider,

First, That it is the Scriptures way to represent Hell and Damnation under all
those evils that are most terrible to sense, as on the contrary, Heaven is
described by such nams as do usually delight most men. Hence it is called a
Kingdom, and a Crown of Glory, and a City paved with precious stones. These are
condescending expressions to us, who are apt to apprehend nothing great and
admirable, but what is so to sense; and were not our natural corruption so
greatly prevailing over us, such Scripture baits would soon take us. As it is
thus for Heaven, so for the contrary, Hell and eternal damnation is described
by all such terrible Objects, that the very naming of them, should fill us with
great horror; and do not think these are vain scare-crows, no; these
expressions do no more represent to the full, the torment and pain of the
damned indeed, then a painted fire does a real burning fire. Whatsoever the
Scripture says of this destruction of wicked men, does not arise up in the
least manner, to the torment indeed. Therefore that the meditation and
preaching of this subject may be profitable, set Faith on work; believe there
is such a state of destruction coming upon impenitent men, that all the undoing
we can have in this life, is nothing to that eternal undoing. Let Faith warm
and heat thy heart with this, and it will work wonderfully to thy reformation.
If to die be a thing of terror, what is eternal death? What is eternal
destruction? If skin for skin, and all that a man has, he will give for his
life, how much rather for this eternal life?

Secondly, This destruction consists in two things, The good it is privative of.
And The evil it is positive of.


Schoolmen call it the punishment of loss, and the punishment of sense. The
Scripture brings in God inflicting both, in that terrible sentence at the Day
of Judgment, Depart from me, into eternal fire, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me,
there is the privation of all good; Into eternal fire, there is the position of
all evil and misery. Divines have disputed which is the greatest evil of these
two; but Chrysostom answers, The privation of Gods face, is far worse then
all the torments in Hell: That Depart from me, is more terrible then eternal
fire. Certainly, seeing such a destruction is coming, how much does it concern
all to watch and pray about it? Descendamus in infernum viventes, ne
descendamus morientes, (said Bernard) Let us descend into Hell while alive by
meditation, lest we really descend thither when we die. But singularia sunt
quae pungunt. Let us therefore consider What loss it is. First, that this
destruction does consist in: And

First, It Is the loss of God, in whom only is all happiness. Depart from me.
The punishment of loss.
At his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. To be with God, and
to enjoy him, is that happiness which eye has not seen, nor can the heart of
a man conceive: For such as God himself is, such is the enjoying of him. He is
the bonum in quae omnia bona, bonum quo nihil melius cogitari potest: The
Jehova. The beings of all created comforts that are scattered up and down, and
parcelled in creatures, with their several imperfections, are united and
conjoined in him in transcendent perfection only. To represent what God is, and
the enjoyment of him, would be to empty the Ocean with a shell. Then do we best
esteem of him, when we judge him inestimable. Now our destruction lies, in
being deprived of all that good which God would have been to us. Oh, with what
indignation and anger should a wicked man look upon his sins! You have deprived
me of God, and do you ask what I aile? My lusts, my wickedness, have taken God
from me, how can I then but rore out? Would these be as good as a God to me?
This should make thee cast off all sin, as Paul did the Viper, saying, Will thou be as good, as great, as all-sufficient to me as God would be if I do
serve him?

Secondly, This privative destruction, lies in the want of all comfort and
peace, and joy that might be in the soul. Take away the Sun, and there
remains nothing but horrible darkness; take God away, and the soul is full
of all darkness and horror. Hence in Hell are said to be gnawing worms, and
weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Dives desired but a drop of water
to cool his tongue, and but the top of his tongue, yet could not obtain it;
not a drop, and for the top of the tongue. This was to show that there could
not be the least comfort, the least ease, the least quietness of conscience;
and indeed this is the great part of Hell. Some have thought Hell to be nothing
but the torments and horror of conscience, but the Scripture cannot so be put
off Yet certainly, this is the Hell of Hell, the greatest part of destruction,
that the guilt of a man's sins shall perpetually gnaw and tear his
conscience, which will then be awakened, and will fall like so much scalding
Lead into the eye of a man. And if a good conscience be a continual Feast, that
tormenting disquieted conscience in Hell, will be a continual unspeakable evil.
Oh, we see but what the very drops of this torment has wrought upon men! Cain
went up and down trembling, all the pleasures, all the delights, and travils he
took, could not drive out that trembling. Judas, with what horror does he cry
out? He cannot bear his burden. And therefore the damned brought in, crying to
the mountains to cover them, and the hills to hide them, Rev. 6.16. Oh, is this
nothing to you, or a light matter, who sit and hear these things! Those gross
and foul sins, which now make no torment nor gripings in thy conscience; thou
can run into all beastly excess, and thou find no gnawing worms upon
thee: Oh, consider, and believe it, the time is coming when conscience will be
awakened, and not the least corner of thy soul will be freed from torments and
howlings! Go on then, and eat and drink, and care for none of these things; but
remember this, destruction will fall upon thee whether thou will or no. Oh,
that men would pity themselves! Or rather; Oh, that God would pity your
souls, and make you to consider the latter end of your sins! At last they
will bite like an Adder, and sting like a Serpent.

Thirdly, There is a loss of all outward help and comfort from others. Here in
this world, though we many times are in grievous losses, yet some comfort from
a friend, is like the pleasant showers to the parched ground; and though they
cannot deliver out of trouble, yet a word of comfort does much refresh. But
here the destroyed sinner is excluded from comforts and friends, and all. When
Absalom was shut out of David's presence, then there was a Joab to mediate for
favor again, but when this destruction is, then no Saint or Angel can either
comfort or help us: Yea, which is saddest of all, then that Mediatory Office of
Christ does cease. Then there is no Advocate to make Intercession; then the
Blood of Christ will do no good. In the midst of all that guilt and trouble for
sin we have in this life, there is still this hope, That Christ is a
Mediator to reconcile God and the sinner; but when this eternal destruction
shall come upon thee, then there is no more hope, or help by Christ, then
Christ is of no more use, or advantage to thee: So that the loss of all help,
and all hope through Christ, must needs make this destruction more terrible.

The pain of sense.
And as for the second part of this Destruction, which is Positive, That lies
in the accumulation and heaping up of all misery imaginable and possible, even
for a God to inflict, or the soul and body of man to receive. It Is (I say) in
the heaping up of all misery: For the state of blessedness lies not in any
one, or many comforts, but in the aggregation of all desirable mercies. So this
state of destruction lies not in the sustaining of one, or many miseries, but
the aggregation and conflux of all. Therefore the Scripture expresses it under
many names of terror: sometimes darkness, utter darkness; sometimes a
prison, and chains of darkness therein; sometimes fire and brimstone, eternal
fire; sometimes a place of weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth; sometimes
death, and everlasting death; sometimes judgment and condemnation. Now the
Scripture uses not these words in vain, but would hereby awaken and terrify
us, that we might at last cast away our sins, which are the only fuel for
this fire.

The aggravations of this destruction. Eternal.
In the next place, Let us consider, the Aggravation of this Destruction. And

First, It Is an Eternal Destruction; A destruction that is always destroying,
and yet the party is not extinguished. If the Socinian annihilation were this
destruction; or Origen's opinion for the salvation of men and Devils at last,
after thousands of years torments could prove true, here was some hope; but
it is a living death, and a dying life, it is everlasting fire, it is the worm
that never dies. In all earthly calamities, on this side Hell, this is a
mitigation, that they are not everlasting, they are but evil for a moment,
there will be an end. But here thou art kept alive to be tormented for ever. Oh
what a thunder bolt is that word for ever! Torment for ever! Horror for ever!
Fire for ever! yet so it is.

Secondly, It Is an Universal Destruction in a moral sense. Universal.
There is not the least mixture of any joy, of any hope. For as Heaven is a
state of unmixed happiness, there cannot a drop of gall fall into that ocean
of happiness: So here, there cannot a drop of honey fall into that ocean of
gall; we told you not a drop of water for the top of the tongue only could be
obtained, much less for the whole body.

Thirdly, It Is an Inevitable Destruction. God will destroy, Inevitable.
Who can stop Gods hand? Who can hinder his blow? If a little of Gods wrath be
kindled, Who can abide? How much less when he stirs up all his wrath? It is
the day of his wrath, when Kingdoms and Nations feel the day of his temporal
wrath, How sad has it been? Jerusalem had her day of Gods wrath, but these are
only drops to that ocean of his wrath.

Now manifold Uses may be made of this, but I shall instance only in one here,

Of Instruction. Here is a plain and evident discovery of the madness and
folly of wicked men, that will drink, swear, and walk in all their brutish
lusts. What have thou not heard of this destruction from God? What do thou
not believe that after all these pleasures of sin, God will destroy thee? We
would wonder what a senseless, brutish and irrational a creature a wicked man
is, that should be no more afraid of this destruction. Tell him of a temporal
undoing, he shall be undone in his estate, in his life, and you make his heart
as cold as a stone within him; but tell him soul and body shall be undone in
fire and brimstone, and that for ever, he makes no matter of it; And why is all
this? Either

First, Because of the Atheism and unbelief that is in men. Though Christ has
again and again threatened such a place of torment, yet they will not believe
it.O if we had but faith as a grain of mustard seed, it would remove these
mountains of sin! Or

Secondly, If men do believe it, yet because it is apprehended as a far off,
it is not present and imminent upon us, as many times temporal destruction is;
and therefore like bruit beasts they regard only the present: Give me to day
(say they) though to morrow I be damned for ever.

Thirdly, Men are either plunged in besotting lusts, or in the seducing
temptations of the world. Many men are become like beasts through sin. A
beast will as soon understand things of reason, as they of faith and salvation;
or else swallowed up in earthly cares and desires. Now when thus lusts are
within, they forbid any outward good counsel to enter the heart.

For the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are.

We now come to the Reason, Why God is so exceedingly provoked against Temple
defilers. The ground is, Because Gods temple is holy. Holy things are not to be
violated, they are to be handled in an holy manner, Sancta sancte sanctis. Holy
things belong to holy men, and are to be used in an holy manner by such.

2. There is the Explication and application of this Temple.

If they object, We have no such Temple as was at Jerusalem; there is now no
such thing under the Gospel as Gods temple. He interprets his meaning, This
Temple is not wood or stone, but ye believers, who worship and serve God after
his appointment, Ye are his Temple.

In the Greek, when he had said, The Temple of God is holy, then he adds,
(...), in the plural number, because it relates to the subsequent matter, not
Antecedent, which is usual among Relatives. Observe,

Observe. Of the Temple of God.
The holy Temple of God under the Gospel, is not any place, though never so
adorned or glorious; but persons believing and worshipping of him according to
his will.

This Doctrine has its great use. For once in Gods Church, while Popery and
her principles reigned, all the holiness spoken of, preached for, pleaded for
principally, was holiness of things, not persons; holy Temples, holy Altars,
holy Images; but real, personal holiness, which God commands, was despised
and opposed. The Kingdom of God does not come by observation, that is, we are
not to look for external sensible pomp and glory, but it is within you, says
our Savior, Luke 17.10. The Temple, the Church of God, are Persons believing.
The Image of God is righteousness and holiness in our lives.

To open this, consider,

Of the Jewish Tabernacle and Temple.
First, That God, while the people of Israel were unsettled, and their enemies
were not fully conquered, appointed an ambulatory Tabernacle for his worship.
This was the place to worship him in, and the Ark in it, was carried up and
down likewise, and none might carry it, but men, even the Levites. So that when
it was put on a Cart, and so carried, God was greatly displeased. The reason
(say some) why men only were enjoined to carry it, was, that it might not at
any time fall. For being a token of Gods presence and power, if that had
fallen, it would have been a reproach to the God of Israel. But when God came
to settle the people of Israel, and they had fully subdued their enemies, and
the Government of the Land was established; then God would have a Temple
settled. And though David had a desire to build it, yet because he had shed much
blood, not innocent blood (though he did Vriahs) but because he had fought many
battles, God would not have him do it, but Solomon, whose name signifies
Peace. No hammer, nor any noise might be heard in making the Temple: Thus
Christ was born in Augustus his time, when Janus his Temple was shut, and the
world at peace; though indeed in the second Temple, there they did build with
their tools in one hand, and their swords in the other, because of the
opposition they had.

Secondly, This Temple that was built, it was very magnificent and glorious,
and was accounted equal to the seven great wondrous buildings of the world. It
was a great building, and yet Solomon at the dedication of it removes all
carnal and low conceits from God, as if he were circumscribed within that
place: For, says he, The Heaven of Heavens do not contain thee, much less
this place, 1 King. 8 20. It was not therefore that God needed such an house,
or because he was contained in it, but because he was a great God full of
Majesty, as Solomon says; and therefore according to the Jewish Pedagogie,
which consisted in external and sensible Rites and Administrations, it was made
so glorious.

Thirdly, This Temple had a proper and peculiar holiness, a relative
holiness, being dedicated by Gods command unto his worship, and a typical
holiness. It was typically holy, because a type of Christ's body* Destroy this
Temple, said our Savior, and I will raise it up in thr^e days, John 2 19. Now
when Christ the fullness came, this Temple was to be destroyed, as the Altars
and Sacrifices with the Levitical Priesthood; even as the flower falls to the
ground, when the fruit comes in stead thereof. It was relatively holy from two
grounds:

1. Gods Institution: He commanded the building of it for his worship; and
every thing, though never so little, yet had it Gods command for it, as also
the Tabernacle had: They were to do nothing of their own heads, but according
to the pattern in the Mount. And then

2. It was relatively holy, Because of Gods special promise to be present
there. Hence because it was a prayer in that very place, there was more
acceptance of it with God; therefore they did use to pray, even their private
prayers in this place; as the Prophetess Anna, that departed not from the
Temple, but served God with fastings and prayers, day and night, Luke 2.37.
Yea, when they could not be bodily present, they did direct themselves toward
the Temple; as we read Daniel did, and though it was in danger of his life,
yet he would open his window, when he prayed, and look that way, Dan. 6.10.
though in the Text it be said only toward Jerusalem, and therefore it we
called an house of prayer. In Solomon's prayer, 1 Kings 8.48. the captives of
Israel carried into another Land, are supposed in their captivity to pray unto
God with their face toward the Land of Israel, and also toward the Temple.

Fourthly, But from this Temple, to argue for such holiness in our Churches:
Yea, and with Bellarmine, and others to plead for private praying in the
Church, more than in other places, as if there were more holiness therein, and
for the places sake, to have more acceptance, is unjustifiable by Scripture,
John 4.21, 24. The time is coming, when they shall not worship in this
mountain, or in Jerusalem, but they shall worship him in Spirit and truth.
There is no Jerusalem now, nor any place like Jerusalem; and now God would have
us in every place lift up holy hands in prayer, 1 Timothy 2.8. It Is therefore
unwarrantable by Scripture to pray in a Church for the places sake, to have the
prayer the more acceptable, as Bellarmine pleads. And indeed because there is
no such peculiar institution, nor no such peculiar promise, therefore there
cannot be such a relative holiness. Private prayers in the Church, though
pretended not to be done for the places sake, while we are at the public
Ordinances, are also incongruous and unwarrantable, partly, because they are
against the nature of private prayer prescribed by our Savior, When thou
prayest shut thy door after thee, Mat. 6.6. Private prayer must be done in a
private manner: and partly, because the Church is for public Ordinances. We
meet together in spiritual communion, and while the society is singing, for
thee to be privately praying, is unsuitable to the duty in hand, where there
ought to be one heart, one mouth and consent.

Fifthly, Because the Temple was so glorious, and Gods promise was in a special
manner made to it, therefore the Jews put all their trust and confidence in
this, though their lives were full of wickedness and gross impieties, yet
because they had the Temple, that made them think themselves happy. Hence the
Prophet severely reproves them for it, saying, Trust no more in lying words,
saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these, Jer. 7.4.
Hence at last God was so provoked, that he gave it up to idolatrous Heathens to
be destroyed, that a stone should not be left upon a stone. For Hadrian the
Emperor quite demolished it; and in stead thereof built a place with a new
name, calling it Aelia, and upon the gate set the Image of a Swine by way of
scorn and derision to the Jews, to whom that beast was unclean. And thus truly
God has done with many glorious spiritual Temples under the Gospel: Where are
the seven Churches of Asia? And where is the pure Church of Rome now? The
present Governors of that Church glory of their succession to their former
Worthies, Whose faith was spread over the whole world, but they succeed them as
vespae apibus, Wasps many times do Bees, or as night does the day.

Lastly, Our Churches therefore do not resemble the Temple, an holy place
dedicated to God, but their public Synagogues where they met together to pray
and read the Word, and have it expounded. Some find fault, that we call this
material building a Church; but use of speech does fully justify this. It Is an
ordinary figure to put the place containing for the thing contained. Thus it is
said, All Jerusalem went out: And, Oh Jerusalem that killest the Prophets, Mat.
23.77. which is meant of the Inhabitants thereof. Thus we call a City, or a
Town, the people of the Town. But of this we have spoken formerly. But though
there is no such relative holiness in these places, as was in the Temple;
neither are the duties regarded for the places sake, but the place for the
duties; yet there is a moral and civil decency, or respect to be had to them,
as we do unto places appointed for solemn meeting; and therefore are unfitly
compared to barns or stables, or to be polluted like them, not because of any
holiness in them, more than in other places, but from a civil respect. But
these things only occasionally by the way.

Believers joined in a Church way according to Scripture, are Gods temple.
The next main thing is, That believers joined in a Church way according to
Scripture, are Gods temple, and that requires these things:

First, Purity and an undefiled life from the wicked ways of the world. Though
they be in the world, yet not of the world. This is called pure Religion, to
keep a man defiled from the world, Jam. 1.27. And we must not be conformed to
the fashion of this world, Romans 12.2. We are to be as Lot in Sodom, so far
from having fellowship with it, that we are to grieve in seeing and hearing the
evil deeds of others. We are to be like the three Worthies in the midst of the
fire, and yet our hair not singed thereby. Do not thou then judge of thy self,
as the Temple of God, when thou art like a dunghill; thy heart is not a sacred
Temple, but an open Inn or Marketplace; all strange lusts may lodge in thee;
thou art to take Christ for an example, not the world.

Secondly, Dedication, and giving up our selves wholly unto God. Thy soul and
body are to be one Temple, only thy soul is the Saxctum sanctorum; there
should only be admitted choice and sanctified thoughts and intentions, Shall I
take (says the Apostle) the member of Christ, and make it the member of an
harlot? 1 Cor. 6.15. Shall I take the Temple of God, and make it a public stew
for all lusts? As they said of their Temples, Procul o procul este prophani: So
do thou of all noisome and filthy sins. As there were constant Porters to
watch the Temple: so do thou continually set a watch before thy heart and soul,
that no unclean thing enter in.

Thirdly, Here is implied. Union of the members of the Church together. The
Temple was not one stone, or a few stones scattered up and down, but exactly
and curiously joined together. The Churches are compared to a body, where there
are several organized members, and all useful one to another.

Lastly, Communion; Not only internal by faith and love, which we have with
Christ the Head, and so with all the members. For this communion is invisible,
but external in a visible society and fellowship one with another in the
public worship. Hence they are greatly reproved, That forsook the assembling
of themselves together, Heb. 10.15. Visible communion in Church-Ordinances
brings much glory to God, and great edification to our selves.

Use of Instruction, What kind of societies we should be, who are Gods temple
Gods house, Gods Church; What enjoyment of God? What effectual participation of
his presence? The body by its senslesnesse does quickly discover, whether a
soul be in it; and the soul will quickly manifest, whether God and Christ be in
it: if the Temple of God, What holiness and purity ought to be in our lives?
Oh this is the glory of the Church! Let us not do at upon a mere feigned and
invented holiness of things and places, but let us magnify personal moral
holiness; to this the promise is made. This is the true and blessed glory.
This makes us like Angels, and our Churches like Heaven.

Verse 18. Let no man deceive himself, if any man seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.
THe Apostle having sufficiently declared the sinfulness and punishment
attendant of those, who defile the Church of God by corrupt Doctrines, he does
begin in this verse to remove those obstructions in the way, that may hinder
the good use of what he had said. For though the food be never so good, yet if
the stomach be sick and undisposed, we cannot look for good nourishment.

Now the first stone, that was to be rolled out of the way (there could be no
sowing of this divine seed with hopeful success, till that was removed) was
the self-conceit of their own wisdom, and the admiring of the worldly humane
excellencies that they saw in their false teachers. Till this Goliath be killed,
the Apostle does not expect their obedience to what he had said. Hence in this
eighteenth verse, he begins to dehort from all self-conceit, and earthly
wisdom; and in the Text he declares a twofold pernicious and dangerous
effect thereof.

First, That it is a mere deceiving of a man's self, Let no man deceive himself.
That which the proud wise men of the world applaud for gold, will prove but
dross; he will see it was a mere empty swelling, not a man-child they
traveled with.

Secondly, The necessity of relinquishing and abdicating this wisdom, as the
great enemy to true and heavenly wisdom, which is the other dangerous effect,
Let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

So that this Text is an hammer to beat down all those high and lofty things
that are in our carnal understandings, and to lead all our thoughts and
apprehensions captive into the obedience of faith.

Now this Dehortation does belong both to the Teachers he had reproved, and to
the Auditors. For if ye ask, What made the Doctors defile the Temple with
errors and heresies? It was only humane wisdom, and proud understandings.
And, What made the Disciples so factiously prefer one above the other? But
still that doting upon humane and earthly wisdom.

Thus the Text is an excellent Antidote against the proud flesh; or rather
proud spirit, that may be either in teacher or hearer.

For the first Effect, A man's self-deceiving, that is coincident with the other
subject I am insisting upon; therefore I wave it, and come to the duty of
Abdication, and renouncing of this humane wisdom, If any man seem to be wise,
let him become a fool. This bunch upon the Camels back must be levelled, ere it
can go through the eye of a needle.

The first Doctrine, which is employed only, shall be,

Observe. Of humane wisdom, what an hinderance it is to the things of Christ.
That humane and earthly wisdom is a great enemy to all the heavenly things of
Christ.

The Kingdom of Heaven, and the Ministry of the Gospel, has not a greater
adversary in the world amongst men's corruptions, then this. This is the great
mountain in our way, Romans 8 7. A carnal man is enmity against God. A mind whose
thoughts, intentions and reasonings are wholly upon carnal motives, it is enmity
in the very abstract; it is as bad as the Devil; all that it has and is, is
nothing but enmity, and that against God, the only wise, the only great good,
the only God: What has thy earthy wisdom no other adversary to fall upon, but
the mighty wise God? Yea, it is not only actually rebellious against Gods Law,
but it has not the very power to be subject^ There is no actual or potential
subjection; it cannot be. Therefore our Savior to demonstrate how far such
wise men of the world, were from being his Disciples, he takes a little child,
and setting him in the midst of them, says, Unless a man become like this
child, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.2, 3. Now the holy
and heavenly things of Christ may be reduced unto three heads: 1. The
supernatural Matter and Doctrine to be believed. 2. The Manner of promulgation
of this in the holy Scriptures. 3. The holy and spiritual Duties that are
required of us.


In all these, you shall see, a man with no more than natural humane wisdom to
be the greatest adversary thereunto: yea, and the more parts, and the more
wisdom he has, the more indisposed subject he is to receive or believe
supernatural truths. Insomuch that wise men thought no man that had wisdom,
could ever acknowledge the Christian faith. So Tertullian said, the Heathens
would wonder, that such a man, a good, and a wise man would ever turn
Christian. Thus what Tertullian said excellently concerning Christ's
Incarnation, in regard of the humane wisdom of the world, That a God should be
made man, be crucified, etc. Prorsus credibile, quia impossible; and non
pudet, quia pudendum. It Is true of many others doctrinals and practicals in
Christ's kingdom; yet truly, Divinity does require of us no more than all
humane Arts, Discentem credere oportet. If a man does not believe before he
understands, he can never attain to knowledge: and so says Austin, in
Religion, Non intelligendum, ut credatis, sed credendum, ut intelligatis; We
must not understand to believe, but believe to understand.

Let us consider, First, What an enemy to the Doctrine believed, the fleshly,
humane wisdom of a man is. And

First, This humane wisdom puffs a man up with pride, that he will not
entertain such divine mysteries. And this swelling or puffing up is immediately
contrary to an act of faith: For faith has an obediential assent, namely,
because God says it; let my understanding cavil and argue never so plausibly,
yet faith makes it obedientially yield unto the testimony and authority of God.
Wonder not therefore, if humane wisdom be such an enemy to Christianity,
because faith and that are at immediate contrariety; faith bids the mind stoop
and yield; humane wisdom bids it lift it self up. Hence the Scripture calls it,
The obedience of (or to) faith, and it is the captivating of the understanding,
the beating down the (...) every high thing that exalts it self, 2 Cor. 10 5.
So that faith is a kind of mental martyrdom, it puts to death those high and
lofty thoughts men naturally have. Seeing then humane knowledge puffs up, and
fills a man with pride, this puts a man into an immediate contrariety unto
believing, which is the Christians knowledge.

Secondly, Humane wisdom, as it does immediately oppose faith in its
obediential assent; so also humility, which is the instrumental grace to
receive all the mysteries of Christ. Humility is not only a grace it self, but
a vessel to receive other graces. The humble and meek he will teach his way,
Psalm. 25.9. I thank thee, O Father, that thou have revealed these things to
babes, and hid them from the wise men of the world, said our Savior with much
hearty affection, Matthew. 11.25. The valleys they receive the drops of heaven,
and are more fruitful, than the mountains, though high, but barren. So that
humane wisdom is as great an hinderance, as humility is a furtherance. Lay
down then all high and conceited thoughts, when thou come into Christ's
school; yea unteach thy self all thy former opinions and arguments, and be like
an rasa tabula, as Aristotle said the soul was, for the Spirit of God to write
divine truths upon thy heart. Does not the Wiseman tell us, That he who is wise
in his own eyes, there is more hopes of a fool than him? Prove. 26.12. Therefore
says he, Lean not unto thy own understanding, Prove. 3.5. Oh this humility
would preserve against all heresies, all dangerous opinions! An humble man is
like the Tree planted by the waters side. God has two places (as it were) to
dwell in; Heaven is one, and the humble heart is another, Isa. 57.15. God by
the Prophet in that place, accounts of such an heart, like as unto his glorious
Throne in Heaven.

Thirdly, Humane conceited wisdom must needs hinder the entertainment of
Christ's truth, Because it sets it self on the Throne to be Judge, and to
determine truth or falsehood according to her own principles. It makes weights,
and a standard of its own, and will weigh even what God and the Scripture says
by its own self: yea humane wisdom does not only thus intrude into the throne,
but has her instruments, the Socinians, who plead to have her the Judge, and
the Determiner of all religious controversies. What from Scripture has by the
Orthodox been asserted to be, that these will put upon reason, making it the
rule of faith. Hence there is no Trinity with them, not three Persons and one
God, because it is against their reason. Christ is not truly and essentially
God, because against reason (say they) Christ was not a Mediator by his blood
as a Sacrifice to expiate our sins, because against their reason. Thus you
see what a direct adversary the reason of man, as of it self, is against divine
truths; whereas what the Apostle speaks of the woman, He did not permit her to
usurp Authority over her husband, or to speak in the Church, 1 Timothy 2.12. The
same ought to be applied to humane wisdom, not to usurp over faith, or to
speak authoritatively in the Church. It Is true, a man's reason or wisdom may be
considered two ways: 1. As corrupt and darkened through original sin; And in
this respect only we speak of it, as such an adversary to the mysteries of
Religion. 2. As enlightened and sanctified by the Word, and the Spirit of God.
Now in this later respect, though it be not a Judge, but is to be judged, yet
it is an excellent instrument to faith. When faith has first laid its
foundation, then reason and learning succeeding and building upon it, is
wonderful serviceable for the explication and confirmation of divine truths. I
speak as unto wise men (says Paul) Judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15. Thus
civil prudence, and all humane literature, while it is a servant, not a
Mistress, is of wonderful use; but when with Hagar it will pride over Sarah,
then cast it out of doors. That which some adversaries to learning object,
That learning is never sanctified, is contrary to the instance of Moses, who
was skillful in the Egyptians learning, which was the fountain and seminary of
all learning to the world. And thus the Apostle Paul, as he sanctified some
verses out of Heathen Poets, as Tertullian expresses it: So God had also
sanctified all his humane abilities. But herein earthly wisdom is so
repugnant, because it is apt to make it self judge. And although nothing in
Religion be against sound reason, yet many things are above it, such as it
cannot reach unto.


Fourthly, Humane wisdom is such an opposite to heavenly truths, Because of
its subtilty to find out cavils, and excogitate Arguments against the Truth.
Insomuch that the more learned and knowing men are, the greater difficulty it
is to believe; men who have less parts and learning, know not all those subtle
and specious Arguments, which Heretics, especially if learned and subtle, do
bring forth: They know not what the Socinians have to say against the Trinity,
against the Deity of Christ. What Arminians for Free Will. What the Papists for
many of their superstitious ways; and it is well they do not, not but that the
truth is evident against them, only it might shake and stagger their faith,
who are weak; whereas men of knowledge, exercising themselves in their Books,
that they may be able to confute them, meet sometimes with specious colors,
yea even some seeming Anakims in the way. Man's wisdom is far more able,
Destruere falsa, then probare vera; we can better object against truth, then by
faith assent to it; and then no wonder it be so apt to miscarry.

Lastly, The more wisdom and knowledge men have, the more busy the Devil is
to make them on his side. Because the Serpent was more subtle than other beasts
of the field, therefore the Devil used him, Ornari a te Diabolus quaerit, said
Austin to a great Scholar, whom he would gladly have converted. Most Heretics
have been men of great parts, of admirable eloquence to persuade and win men:
Good Elocution and Rhetorique is so apt to bear all down before it, that
Hercules was made the God of Eloquence by some Heathens, as if it had as much
strength as he.

Use. Then how much are men of parts and understanding to bewail themselves?
God chooses babes and simple ones rather than such. Study humility, renounce
thy understanding, become a little child. Oh it may be, that which thou art so
proud of, so confident of, will be the means to damn thee, as Absolom's hair
was his death!

If any man think himself wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

The Doctrine observed is, That humane and earthly wisdom is a great enemy to
the things of God.

In the matter of Doctrine to be believed, we have demonstrated it already.
Carnal wisdom an enemy to the Scripture.


The next thing in order is, The manner of Declaration and Publication of it in
the Scripture. And here we shall find worldly wisdom to be a great adversary:
But I shall instance in one thing only about that, and that is, The simplicity
and plainness of the style. That whereas there are two things that are
exceeding apt to take with the world; The one with Rational men; The other with
Affectionate men. The Scripture seems to be furnished with neither. For with
rational men, strong demonstrations and scientifical probations prevail
exceedingly; they lay, they are slaves to reason; bring a rational argument,
and this is such a cord, that the strongest Samson cannot break. Now many times
men of strong reason are no ways Rhetorical: As the earth, where mines of gold
are, is barren of grass and flowers. It Is as absurd (says Aristotle) to
expect moral discourses from a Mathematician, as mathematical demonstrations
from a Moralist. So then, some men are presently conquered by acute,
metaphysical argumentations. This the Scripture has not; for that dictateth,
not argues, which is indeed most suitable to the divine Scripture. Bradwardine,
who is called, The profound Doctor, professed of himself, while he was a
Christian, yet not thoroughly sanctified by grace, that he was weary of hearing
Paul's Epistles read in the Church: And why? Because Paul had not metaphysicum
ixgenium. Some then look for learned demonstrations; Others are ravished with
the sweet music of humane Rheto^^que And Austin confesses this great vanity
in himself, That he could not delight in the Scripture, because of the want of
that, as he thought: He looked for Tully's flowers there, and the Scripture
simplicity he disdained. It was the saying of an Atheistical Critic, That he
esteemed one of Pindar 's Od^s before all David 's Psalms. Thus you see, as it
was with Christ himself, many looked for an outward stately pompous Messiah;
and because he came in that outward way, he was a slumbling block to many.
Christ crucified, was foolishness to the learned Gentiles. In the like manner
it is with the Scripture, because it has not the Aristot^lical demonstrations,
or the Ciceronian persuasions; Therefore the Scripture is to them, as Jobs
white of the egg without any taste. But to remove this carnal prejudice.

First, For learned men, who expect demonstrations, consider, That it being the
Word of the most High God, it is most decent and graceful, that there should
no other Argument be used but Authority. And therefore if you do rightly
consider, Moses his relation of the Creation of all things, is of greater force
than all rational demonstrations. Kings use to say, Test meipso; and thus it
is most becoming the Majesty of God, to have his Penmen say no more; but God
said it, God did it. Therefore howsoever one Heathen said of Moses, Bexe dicit,
sed nihil probat, He speaks well, but proves nothing; yet another Heathen,
when he heard the relation of the Creation by Moses, said, I like this (says
he) he speaks like a God. All scientifical demonstrations are far inferior
to divine Authority. Therefore you see the greatest men of reason have been
wonderfully perplexed about the Creation. It Is said, Aristotle thought the
world was from eternity. Besides, that seems reason to one man, which is not
to another. And this seems to be a good reason, till a man of strong parts
comes to show the weakness of it. In that the Scripture then is only
assertory, and that in the main principles of our Religion, it therefore is
most consonant to Gods Majesty; and that holy confident relation by Moses
without so much as any attendance to go about to prove it, does evince the
Divine Authority of it.

Secondly, While learned men seek for such rational demonstrations, Let them
take heed, lest while they seek for Reason, they lose Faith. Christians are
believers, not Artists. Now, what is faith? A captivating of the understanding
to Gods testimony, 2 Cor. 10. It Is the evidence, or conviction of things not
seen, Heb. 11.1. By faith we understand the world was made, by faith we believe
there is a God, and that he is a rewarder of those that come to him. Faith is
not an argumentative Discourse but an obediential Assent. Thou therefore that
judge Arguments from Authority, though Divine, to be far inferior to
demonstrations; thou forgettest thy profession is to be a believer; yea, it is
the greatest reason in the world to believe Gods testimony: So that we may say,
Religio est summa ratio: There is greater reason to believe the Scripture, then
to assent to any demonstration. So that though Faith be not Reason, yet there
is the greatest Reason for Faith. And for those, who look for Rhetorical
flourishes, and fanciefull expressions, let them consider,

First, Some places of Scripture have strong and masculine eloquence; not
indeed that light and meretricious habit of humane Oratory, but a grave
M^tronlike clothing; such is the Prophecy of Isaiah, and other places: Yea,
even all those parts of the Scripture, where there is least of humane
Rhetorique, yet there is a grave and decent expression fit for such heavenly
matter ther^ revealed; and this is indeed the best and most genuine Rhetorique,
when the matter is so expressed, that not the words, but the matter does
appear, that the leaves do not hinder the fruit. It pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save those that believe, 1 Co. 1.21. If we have a
jewel or precious pearl, it is own native luster is better than any painting of
it. So divine matter the more plain and clear it is, the more admirable it is.
It Is the matter, not the words that do convince and convert. Words may please
the fancy, but it is matter that wounds the heart. Savanarola a man of great
piety, and acknowledged even to be a Prophet by Machiavel himself, relates
this of himself remarkably, that being Preacher at Florenc^; he thought to do
good by following the rule of Rhetorique, and industriously attempting humane
eloquence; but still his people they were as wicked as ever; then he tried to
preach in an high scholastical way, thinking by such sublime discourses to work
on them, but still his preaching wrought no good: At last he betook himself to
a powerful, plain preaching, according to the style and manner of the
Scripture: then his Net was presently full of F^sh: Then he made a very
earthquake, or rather an heart-quake among them, thereby so overturning Satan's
Kingdom, that the Devil was never quiet, till he had stirred up the
pharisaical and ungodly Monks and Friars to put him to death. Though
plainness of preaching be thus the readiest way to change the heart, and is
most becoming divine matter, yet we deny not* but Eloquence and Oratory, and
all other parts of Learning, are the good gifts of God, and may in a
subservient way be very useful. This is to borrow gold of the Egyptians, as
the Ancient said, and to help the Israelites with it. Qui dedit Petrum
piscatorem dedit Cyprianum Rhetorem. Thus Reason also to Faith, is like the Dew
that fell before the Manna, to preserve and keep it safely. Thus have we
dispatched the second.

Carnal wisdom an enemy to Christian duties.
The third remains, and that is, Earthly wisdom is a great enemy to those
spiritual and practical duties that God requires of us. And indeed if ever any
man be to become like a little child, it is in this respect. Hence we are
commanded to be Children in malice, to express such innocence, and
harmlesnesse, and humility, as they use to do.

Practical godliness has a great deal of seeming foolishness in the eyes of
the world. As

First, The whole Doctrine of self-denial is a very foolish thing to carnal
wisdom. Our Savior requires this, as the foundation in all those who are to
come to him. Now a man's self is to be denied two ways:

1. There is his sinful and unlawful self in the pleasures and profits of
sin. This must be totally renounced: But how absurd this is, appears, in
that it is Pulling out our right eye, and cutting off our right hand. But then

2. There is a lawful self, which is seen in our affections even to lawful
things. Now here also a man must-moderate himself; yea hate all, when it comes
in competition with Christ. If a man hate not father or mother for my sake, he
cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.26, Those that marry must be as if they married
not, 2 Corin. 7. If a Christian set himself to such a mortified, crucified
life, and not bid his soul take its ease, and be vainly merry with the world,
he is judged a simple foolish man for his labor.

2. The duty of faith in relying upon Christ only, and renouncing our own
righteousness, is the great Gospel-command, yet nothing is more foolish and
absurd to humane Reason than this. All the Philosophers thought of no other
righteousness, but that of works. The Pharisees, yea all the Jews, they
looked only for justification by the works of the Law. Paul till wholly new
molded by the Gospel, could not judge all things dung and dross for the
righteousness of Christ. This is the Rock at which many have splitted their
comforts. All Popery finds this a stumbling block, and it is so foolish a thing
judged by them, that they call it a putative imaginary righteousness, as
absurd a thing (say they) as if we should say a deformed Thersites was fair and
beautiful by another man's beauty: Therefore this way of faith is only by
revelation.

3. The duties of Humility and Meekness, especially forbearing of one another,
and loving our enemies, is esteemed high folly in worldly men's esteem. The
Heathens thought it a very justifiable thing to hate their enemies: Yea, the
Pharisees traditional Doctrine, was to hate their enemies. Therefore when
Christ came with his, But I say unto you, love your enemies, do good to those
that hate you, pray for them that despitefully use you, Mat. 5.44. This seemed
to make a man a fool in the world. More particulars we might instance in. But

Let the Use be to remove every thing that exalts it self against Christ, and
his ways. Thy carnal wisdom is the first enemy that must be destroyed. Do not
think thy self wiser than the Scriptures; submit to the dictates thereof: What
that says is to be believed; without further dispute, believe: What that faith
is to be done; without further cavils immediately obey, though it be thy right
eye, that it must be pulled out. If you ask, Why men do not mortify their
sins, and live more strictly? It is carnal wisdom that judges another life
more creditable. Thus it is also concerning every Gospel-duty.

If any man among you seem to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be
wise.

The Text persuades us to put out our right eyes, as Nahash the Ammonite did
David's Ambassadors; only that was for their hurt and reproach, this for our
great profit and honor. Humane and earthly wisdom is the great enemy to all
heavenly things. That Doctrine has been dispatched.

We come now to consider the Description of this humane wisdom, and the
Apostle has two diminishing limitations:

First, If any man seem to be wise, he does not say, if any be indeed wise, but
if he seem to be either to himself, through pride and vainglory, boasting of
that which is not in him, as the empty vessels make the most sound, and the
empty carts most rattling in the streets; if so, it is like another expression of
this Apostle, If any man thinks he knows something, he knows nothing as
he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2. Or else, if he seem to be wise in the opinion and
repute of others; and then this wisdom is like honor, more ^n the imagination
of those that repute him so, then in the person himself, Plus in h^^orante quam
honorato: But either way, you see it is but a seeming, (...), it is but a wisdom
(...), as the colors of the Rainbow, which are no colors indeed, but a mere
appearance by the Suns reflection, as some say; whereas the Scripture-wisdome
is so indeed and in truth, Let him become a fool, that he may be wise; he does
not say (as before) that he may also seem to be wise, but wise in truth.

The second diminishing limitation, is from the nature of it, If any man seem
to be wise in this world, it does not denote the place, where this wisdom is;
for so the Apostles wisdom was in this world, because they were men in the
world; but the Object and the Manner of tendency to it, is worldly. It Is about
the world, and rather a worldly manner; therefore in the next verse, he says,
The wisdom of the world, not in the world: So that this is a very debasing
restriction; it is the wisdom of the world; it does not at all further to
Heaven, or to eternal happiness, or to eternity, it is only about these fading
things, which live and die together almost. Observe

Observe. Humane wisdom nothing to Scripture-wisdome.
That all humane and earthly wisdom comes far short, and is but a mere
shadow and appearance in respect of Scripture wisdom.

Even the seven wise men of Greece, were but seven fools if they be brought to
the Scripture. Aristotle with all his syllogistical arguments, speaking of so
many fallacies, yet all his learning was but a fallacy. Here was no true and
solid wisdom, which might make them happy. Therefore the Apostle tells us of
the oppositions of science falsely so called. 1 Timothy 6. They were not Philosophi
(though Pythagoras out of humility assumed that name, acknowledging God only
to be (...),) lovers of wisdom, but of vanity. All that knowledge was a cloud,
a shadow; and they were as if an hungry man should open his mouth wide,
thinking to feed himself with air, and had no true food at all.

Scripture-wisdome excels speculative wisdom.
Now the wisdom of the world may be divided into two heads,

First, Their speculative and contemplative wisdom, which consisted in the
Liberal Arts, as they called them. In this they had great renown, and for this
they were admired, having many monuments and statues dedicated to them; as Rome
did to one great Rhetorician with this Inscription, Regina urbs, regi
eloquentiae. The Queen of Cities to the King of eloquence. This they called
Scientia.

Secondly, Their Political and Civil Prudence, or Moral, whereby as men and
societies they labor to make themselves happy, and to lead a pleasant life.
Socrates is commended for this, that he brought in moral Philosophy, reducing
all speculations to practice. Now answerable to both these, the Scripture
teaches us,

1. A way of believing, which far exceeds their contemplative science. And

2. A right motive of doing, whereby we may indeed be partakers of everlasting
joy, and this far surpasses all their morality.

First then, let us show, Wherein the faith of a Christian, commanded by the
Scripture, does far surpass all humane knowledge and science, which men by
nature do glory in. And

First, Faith does surpass all humane sciences in the dignity of the subject.
The matter about which a Christians faith is exercised does far transcend all
that about which humane knowledge does exercise it self: For the highest that
they could reach unto, is only to the knowledge of natural effects, produced by
natural causes. And if any could prove these by the former; this they called a
demonstration: Though some men say, No man ever yet gave a demonstration, a
priori quoad se, but quoad nos. So then, all the excellent wisdom of the world,
has been only to consider the nature of sublunary things, or to discourse
about the nature of the heavenly bodies, and their motions; and if they did
arise to consider of a God, the Maker of these, it was in a very uncertain,
doubtful way. Hence the Apostle speaks of them, Acts 17.27. that they were as
men in the dark, feeling after a thing to find it, as the Sodomites smote with
blindness felt for the door. This is all our humane wisdom can help us to,
but now by faith we have the supernatural mysteries of salvation revealed unto
us. The Scripture tells us, Of a God in Christ, reconciling man to himself; of
man's original misery; of Christ the Mediator. Alas, how poor and contemptible
are the highest notions even of Plato, though called Divine, when you come and
read Paul? There are such admirable and heavenly truths revealed in Gods word,
that all humane wisdom was no more able to find, or apprehend such things,
then a dwarf could reach to the Heavens. If we then consider the dignity and
worth of that subject which the Scripture reveals, and faith is exercised
about, dirt is not more inferior to precious pearls, than humane knowledge to
faith.

Secondly, Faith differs from all their humane science, in respect of the
excellency of the end. For the end of all Scripture wisdom is to bring us to
eternal life. The Scriptures are able to make us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy
3.15. The things of Christ are said to be written, That believing we might have
eternal life, John 20 31. There was never any humane knowledge could teach a
man to be eternally happy. Platoes Divinity, and Aristotle's Morality, though
they have the words of happiness, and have large discourses about it, yet
wanted the thing it self. Oh then let us bless God for Scripture-wisdome, for
the treasures of knowledge revealed there! Learn of David, How wonderfully was
he affected with Gods word? What light and wisdom did he attain unto thereby?
The Scriptures will teach thee such a blessedness, and such a way to
blessedness, that could not enter into thy heart to conceive, before the light
thereof came into thee.

Thirdly, Faith does surpass all humane knowledge in its certainty and
infallibility. A man that believes the truths of God revealed in the
Scripture, has more certain knowledge then all the more wise and learned men
of the world. For the object of faith being Gods testimony, and his Divine
Authority, it is as impossible for faith to be deceived, as it is for God to
lie. Hence it is called, The full assurance of hope, Heb. 10.22. And we believe,
therefore we speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. How could the holy Martyrs witness those
divine truths even to death, had they not been possessed with full and sure
knowledge of those things they died for? whereas if we look into all humane
knowledge, there is very little certainty: insomuch that some have expressly
affirmed, Nihil scitur: yea that that also was not known; and what little
certainty they have, appears by the contrary and different opinions in all
their main points.

Fourthly, Faith does more establish, settle and quiet the heart of men, then
all humane wisdom. Solomon observes a vanity and vexation of spirit, even in
all humane knowledge: but now faith does establish, settle and satisfy the
soul, Heb. 11.1. It is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen. Those that want faith, are said, to be double-minded men, Jam.
1. inconstant as the waves of the Sea. Oh the anxiety and perplexities that
mere humane knowledge has cast men into! And so those who have no other
bottom than the Authority of Church, or the power of men to believe, These are
reeds shaken up and down with every wind. Their faith is upon ambulatory and
moveable considerations; whereas faith makes a man like Christ, The same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

Lastly, The Christian faith is above all philosophical knowledge, Because of
the strong and mighty effects it has to convert the heart, and reform the
life. Acts 15 9. Purifying their hearts by faith. How can ye believe, when ye
seek glory one of another? said our Savior, John 5.44. Yet these humane
Gnostics did only aim at glory; though Philosophers call them the Liberal
Arts, yet they could not set them free from their lusts, whereas Christ, John
8.32. said, If my Word abide in you, you shall be free indeed. Never did humane
knowledge make such wonderful converts, and work so great a reformation, as
the Christian says has done. And although we have now too many, who say, they
do believe, and yet do such things, as many of the Gentiles would be ashamed
of; yet these men have not faith indeed, but the name and title of it; for as
much as faith, though but like a grain of mustard seed, would bid such
mountains of lusts be removed into the Sea.

Scripture wisdom excels the moral or practical wisdom of the world.
In the next place, The moral or practical wisdom of the world comes far
short of Scripture-wisdome, For

First, The most knowing men were ignorant of original sin, which yet is the
fountain of our calamity. The Heathens indeed bewailed the mortality and misery
of man; but they know not our natural pollution, the ground of all. Yea, we see
Paul himself, though a Pharisee, was not acquainted with that Law of sin
within him, till enlightened by the Word, Romans 7. Now if men know not their
disease, or the cause of it, they can never be cured. So that whatsoever
precepts about living well they delivered, yet they built on a sandy
foundation, they did not dig deep enough.

Secondly, All humane wisdom and prudence knows not how to mortify and
forsake sin upon true grounds, because they were ignorant of Gods Spirit.
Romans 8.13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify sin. They did not crucify
the body of sin, nor bewail it, because it was sin, but for humane
respects, as it did hinder the public, or as it was prejudicial to their
glory and fame, but they overcame one lust by another.

Thirdly, All earthly prudence comes short of this wisdom, because it is
circumscribed within the bounds of this world, and this life. It looks out no
further, whereas the Scripture gives directions for the world to come, and for
eternity. So that as a man's sense comes far short of reason, because sense
reaches only to the present objects, but reason can compare past and future
things together. So the best worldly reason comes short of Scripture-wisdome,
for that is limited only to the pleasures and profits of this world.

Use of Reproof, To all those who glory in their worldly wisdom, speculative
or practical. Thou art wiser in thy generation than the children of light; Thou
art wise to do evil, but to do good thou have no understanding: Who more crafty
and politic than thou art in matters of profit and worldly respects? But who
more ignorant and foolish in heavenly things? Oh that thou had the
Scripture-wisdome for all thy craft and parts, thou will die and be damned as a
fool: Boast not of thy self, for the Day of Judgment will discover who is
wise, and who not.

If any man seem to be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

We have considered the two diminishing expressions used by the Apostle
concerning earthly and mere humane wisdom.

Now let us consider the preceptive part of this Text, arising from the
affective. Seeing earthly wisdom does deceive a man, is but a seeming wisdom,
and a wisdom of this world only. Therefore the Apostle comes with this
command, Let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

To become a fool] is only in appearance, and in the judgment of the world; he
speaks by concession; the world will judge all true Scripture and heavenly
wisdom to be foolishness. So that as the worlds wisdom is a real folly, but a
seeming wisdom: So the Scripture-wisdome, is a real wisdom, but a seeming
folly. Let him be a fool, that is, as David said, I will be more vile still, 2 Samuel 6.22. It was a r^al honor and glory to David to dance before the Ark, but
a profane scoffing Michel, she calls it vileness and baseness. Thus it is
indeed the only true and sound wisdom, to believe and live according to
Christ's Rule; but with the world, this is only folly, they mock and deride it.
Observe,

That true Christian wisdom, Observe. True wisdom is but folly in the worlds
account.
is nothing but folly in the worlds account.

To believe Christ's Doctrines, to keep his Commandments, makes a man very
ridiculous and absurd in the worlds account. You see what Paul said of the
Apostles, who were the eminent stars in this Christian Heaven, They were the
offscouring of the world, and a spectacle to men and Angels, 1 Cor. 4.9. They
were as contemptible, as the dirt under the feet. But as the stars in Heaven
are of a glorious excellent nature, though they have those ugly names, of a Dog
and a Bear: So the Apostles, and all true Christians are the seed of God, and
shine as lights in a dark night, howsoever the dogs of the world do bark at
them.

To prosecute this, The things to be believed have these seeming follies
I shall remind you of Austin's division of the whole matter of Christian
Religion or Wisdom, viz. the Credenda, Speranda, and Agenda, Things to be
believed, hoped for, and practiced; and instance how all these particulars are
a mere folly and reproach in the world. And

First, For the things to be believed, there are these seeming follies:

First, The very way of Christianity, that it is not a knowledge but believing.
This be the great wits of the world, has been accused as a foolish thing.
Indeed one Hebrew word for a fool, comes from believing, because it is a simple,
childish thing to be too credulous; a fool believes every thing; and in
political wisdom, that is a famous Apophegme, (...), but in matters of
Religion. There cannot be any greater wisdom than to believe God speaking
concerning himself. For who can know any thing of God, but by God himself? As
we cannot see the Sun, but by the light of the Sun. Howsoever therefore the
great Heathen Philosopher called Christians, Credentes, by scorn; yet indeed
this is the most sure and infallible way. Julian that wretched Apostate, but a
great admirer of humane learning; Nazianzen says of him, he would brag, and
say, The Heathens had all the learning; but you Christians, Vestrum est
infantia and barbaries, nec quicquam aliud quam creed vestra est sapientia. See
what a fit instance this is; they said Christianity was infancy, childishness,
barbarism, and they had no other wisdom, but only believe. Nazianzen first
tells him, That the Pythagoreans would abhor that argument; for they said of
their Master, Ipse dixit, ulterius non est quaerend^m, but our belief is not in
men, but in the word of God, which truth was confirmed by signs and wonders. So
then, take heed of this sinful distemper; curiosity and pride in knowledge, to
be wise above what is written: It was Adams sin at first, to affect a
knowledge not vouchsafed him.

Secondly, The Matter believed, that has appeared a great folly to the wisdom
of the world, is, That God should be made man, that he should die, be
crucified, and by this means work salvation for the poor sinner. This whole
Systeme of Gods dispensation, seemed but an heap of foolish imaginations.
Lucian that profane dog, who (they say) was torn in pieces by dogs, by
derision, called Christ, The crucified God. Therefore Paul has that
expression, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1.15. He was not
ashamed of it, though the Heathens, the wise men of the world despised it; and
herein consider, the unreasonablenesse of the Heathens, that could and did
believe such monstrous things about their gods, even as those that committed
all wickedness. Hence Austin well speaking of Seneca's advice, to set some
wise grave man, as Cato before us, that we may not sin, said, He must propound
a man, not any of their gods, for every one of them was noted for some
filthiness, or other. Hence he in Terence encouraged himself to lusts, because
their gods did so. The Heathens (I say) that could believe such monstrous and
filthy things about their gods, and worship them, yet would deride at Christ
crucified, though risen with power, working many miracles, and teaching nothing
but admirable holy duties: But now in all this dispensation about Christ, God
showed his manifold wisdom, even far above that, which was in making the
world.

Thirdly, The Manner of propagating and spreading this faith through the whole
world, was very contemptible and foolish in the worlds account, though mighty
powerful and confounding the wise things of the world. At first Christ does
not raise an army of men, or legions of Angels, but only twelve men, and those
of a mean contemptible way, and these served to leaven the whole world. These
were the light and the salt of the earth. Here the mustard seed, less than
other seeds, grew bigger than any other. What Caesar's sword, or the
Philosophers knowledge could not do, that this plain preaching did effect. All
the power of men, and the gates of hell have been no more able to stop this
preaching in the powerful effects of it, than to bind the Sun in chains,
that it might not run its race. Now, though this is mighty and powerful, yet
it is very foolish and despicable in the worlds account. And thus you have the
first part.

The hope of a Christian foolish in the judgment of the world.
For the second, The Matter of a Christian hope, that also is very foolish. A
man must be the worlds fool that does part with all for this hope, even the
Resurrection of the dead to eternal glory. This was the incredible paradox, Why
should it seem incredible to you, said Paul, when he preached this
Resurrection? For this he was accounted a mad man. The Athenians, so famous for
knowledge, when Paul preached this, they called him (...), a babbler, a trifler,
or as others, a sacrilegious fellow. Indeed to prove this Article of Religion
by natural reason, or by examples in nature is impossible, though learned men
bring pleasant illustrations of it; but to those that denied it our Savior
said, They erred not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mat. 22.29
We see the Artificer can turn by his Art some kind of earth into curious
resplendant glass; and cannot God mueh rather make this vile, corruptible body
glorious and incorruptible? But

Thirdly, and that chiefly, The Duties required by Christ, The duties of
Christians foolish in the judgment of the world.
and all that practical way of godliness, which he enjoyneth, carries with it
a great show of folly. We shall instance in some things, that so we may not be
ashamed to be godly, though accounted the worlds fools and mad men. Many men
have knowledge; they are convinced that it is their duty to live a more strict,
precise life; but they are ashamed, they cannot abide mocks and derisions,
which the power of godliness will expose us unto. As

First, Christ requires of all his Disciples, to live contrary to the wicked
ways of the world. Christ's Disciples must live in a singular way to the world.
Pure religion is to keep a man unspotted from the world, Jam 1.27. especially
Romans 12.2. Be not transformed to the fashion of the world. See then, whether
these duties will not make a man the worlds fool: He must not swear, or curse,
as they do; be unclean, and run in excess of riot, as they do; be proud, and
earthly, and unjust in their dealings, as they are. Now there is no man, if he
be thus careful to avoid all the defilements of the world, but he shall be
like the Owl among other birds; they are so strict, so singular, and this they
deride, when it is no more than Christ has commanded. Who would put himself
upon the scorns and contumelies of others, were it not Christ's command? Take up
this principle, I must not live as most do, most men are damned, most men walk
in the broad way to Hell; there is therefore a narrow and strait way, that I
must strive to enter in at: The world lies in wickedness, has many wicked,
brutish, superstitious eustoms; it is the place, where the Devil reigns: And
therefore whatsoever wicked men say, do thou and thy family serve the Lord: Let
them make songs of thee, raise lies, and speak disdainfully, do thou still
persevere to be Christ's fool. Beza's name was Theodorus, and Genebrard the
Papist, he by scorn calls him (...), The fool of God; it may be he spoke, as
Caiaphas truly, though he did not mean so; for Beza desired rather to be a
fool in the worlds account, than be one of Romes wise men.

Secondly, It is a folly in the world to be so fervent, zealous and active in
matters of Religion. They like well enough a general profession of Christianity
a lukewarm obedience unto all the duties thereof; but this zeal is
forwardness, they cannot abide, that is rashness, indiscretion, that is
madness and wild fire. Now it is true, there may be an ignorant and a rash
zeal; but men are apt to judge so of any more powerful and forwarder practices
of holiness, than they themselves use. Whereas the Scripture is plain, That no
man can be saved, that does not make it his business, his work, his one thing
necessary, to do the work of God. The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. Do thou think then by thy
formality, coldness and lukewarm moderation ever to attain Heaven? Is not
Christianity compared to striving in a mastery, to running in a race? Do ye not
read of Paul's striving forward, and forgetting all things that are behind?
Phil 3 Did not the holy Ghost descend in the form of fire, with a mighty
rushing wind, to signify how active it is in those that are godly? Do thou
therefore cry out of this forwardness and this zeal? What is this, but to open
thy mouth against Heaven? On thy deathbed, it may be nothing will trouble thee
so much as thy slothfulness and barrenness, that thou wast not as active for
God, as for the world, thou would then wish thy soul might fare as theirs
shall, who made it their employment to serve God.

Thirdly, That part of Christianity seems a foolish thing, which presses the
life of faith, and not of sense. Thus the world knows not what to make of it.
That as the Heathens thought the Christians worshipped the clouds, because they
had no Idols or sensible Images, but looked up directly to Heaven: So worldly
men think the godly please themselves with fancies and imaginations, because
they talk of the promise, and living by faith, and not walking according to the
sensible principles of the world; yet the just shall live by faith, Romans 1.17.
A godly man like the earth is fastened upon nothing visible. When Habakkuk said,
Habak. 3.17. Though the fig tree did not blossom, etc. yet he would rejoice in
God his salvation. Would not worldly men think this was his folly, rather than
faith? So when Paul said, He was poor, yet making many rich, and as having
nothing, yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. Does not the world count this
folly? When Paul said to the believers, That all things were theirs, would they
not say like Festus, not much learning, but much ignorance had made him mad?

Lastly, To acknowledge Christ and his way, though to our outward undoing. This
seems great folly: our Savior therefore does so fortify his Disciples, That
they should not be offended at troubles, that they should be hated of all men,
that they should account it an happy thing to be persecuted for his sake. And
we see the Apostles and Martyrs choosing the greatest torments, rather than to
deny any of Christ's Truths. Now what a foolish thing does the world account
this, not to be any thing, to do any thing, to say, and unsay, to believe and
disbelieve, to save a man's estate, and his life? As the persecutour told Basil
the great, in this thing indeed great, Why would he lose his life for mere
neceties and words; it was but saying so and so, a little matter, and all
should be well? Thus the matter of Religion and godliness, is counted such a
nicety, or nothing, to a man's wealth, and outward accommodations, that he will,
as was said of one Bishop, sing Canticum novum, and yet never be out of tune,
because always serving the times.

Use of Admonition. If thou will be Christ's Disciple indeed, know the glory and
reputation of the world, and his commands practiced, are not consistent
together. Thou can not be judged a wise man, a discreet man, and yet a
violent man for the kingdom of Heaven; if you go faster, or beyond the common
formality of most men, you have lost your repute presently. As was said of
Naaman, He was a great man, a mighty man, but he was a Leper. Thus do thou
expect; a rich man, a good natured man, an honest man, but too forward, too
much for purity and preciseness. Oh that ever this should be among Christians!
The Jew loves the most zealous Jew; The Papist, the most devout Papist; but we
reformed Protestants, love not those whose tongues and lives do most protest,
both against Idolatry and all wickedness. Well, do not thou give over for all
that; for though they judge it folly, yet thou awest their conscience secretly.

Let him become a fool, that he may be wise.

The Preceptive part, or Duty enjoined has been considered, Let him become a
fool.

It Is pity to lose the least oar of this gold; and therefore I shall at this
time insist on the last particular, which is, the Effect or Benefit of this
Duty, That he may be wise, (...). There are two Greek words among others, which
the Scripture uses, (...), and (...). Now (...) seems to be larger; for that
comprehends not only the acts of the understanding, but of the will and the
affections; and this is called the wisdom after the flesh, Romans 8. because the
whole power of the soul is concerned therein; but this in my Text does chiefly
relate to the mind and understanding of a man; though Sapientia be a sapere, a
metaphor from the taste; as the palate discerns of meats, so does a wise man
of the nature of things. Now much dispute there has been among Heathens, What
wisdom is? and, Who is the wisest man? The wisest of the Heathens would not
arrogate to themselves to be (...), but (...), Lovers of wisdom. But we see
Paul in this Text tells us, where indeed wisdom is to be had, and that is only
from God, through the Scriptures; all the humane wisdom of the world being
indeed folly. Hence are Luthers propositions, Qui sine periculo velit in
Aristotele philosophars, necesse est ut ante been stultificetur in Christo. And
again, Nemo been philosophatur nisi stultus, id est, Christianus. Observe,

That only in the Church of God, Observe. That true wisdom is only in the
Church of God demonstrated.
or in Christianity is true wisdom.

As there is no salvation, so there is no wisdom out of the Church. That which
has the appearance of so much folly and absurdity, is indeed the only true
wisdom; and that will appear in several particulars, wherein I shall not take
wisdom in so strict a sense, as Aristotle sometimes does; for the knowledge
only of most excellent and admirable things. Nor, as others, making wisdom to
be only of divine things; science of natural things; and prudence of humane
things. But I shall take it as largely, as the Scripture, which under wisdom
comprehends the whole way of faith and godliness. That therefore only true
wisdom is in the Church of God, appears several ways:

First, Here we have the only Rule of wisdom, which is, the Scriptures; so
that all people without this sit in darkness, and want the star to bring
them to Christ or happiness David does in many places acknowledge this
excellent property of Gods Word, That it gives wisdom to the simple. Jer. 8
9. They have refused the word of God, and what wisdom can be in them? Thus you
see, that only Christians have the true Rule of wisdom, viz. Gods Word. But oh
the ingratitude and rebellion of many, who love their folly and their
darkness, when yet they may be thus spiritually wise! Who is there that
reads this Book, to believe accordingly, to inflame his affections, and order
his life accordingly? Who looks into this Glass, to dress himself, and
compose himself according to those commands? No folly, no cause of repentance
would be in us, could we keep exactly to this Rule. O me nunquam sapientem,
cried Tully, when deprived of all his hopes: But O me semper sapientem, may the
godly say, while keeping close to Gods Word. Though thou art no Scholar, no
learned man; though poor and contemptible, yet from the Scripture thou may
learn great and admirable wisdom.

Secondly, Only in the Church is true wisdom, because this comes from God
above, and is by divine infusion into us. Men may be moral wise men, and have
great political prudence, as Cato was called the Wise; but we Christians are to
expect a wisdom from above, or an heavenly wisdom, as the Scripture calls it,
Jam. 3, 17. Alas, every man naturally, though of never so much raised
intellectual abilities in humane things, is a very fool and mad man in heavenly
and spiritual things. Therefore this wisdom is a gift of God, and is the eye
or chief part of our godliness. If any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God,
Jam. 1. God indeed gave Solomon political prudence, and civil wisdom; but that
which is necessary for all, is wisdom for their souls, and to walk in such
ways that bring to happiness. This wisdom a poor despised Christian may have,
when a great learned Scholar may be without it.

Thirdly, In Christianity there is only true wisdom, because there is only
true godliness. Now in the Scripture phrase, To fear God, to live holily, to
mortify sin; this is wisdom, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, Pro. 1.7. and to depart from evil is a good understanding. Hence all
along in Solomon's Proverbs, we see godliness called wisdom, and the godly man
a wise man: As on the other side, a wicked man is the fool* and he that sins
is said to do foolishly. There is no Jewish piety, no Heathenish piety, only
Christian piety, There cannot be any godliness, but where the Spirit of God
sanctifies and regenerateth. So then, if thou would attain to true wisdom;
know that consists in the fear of God, and departing from all sin. Thou art
never more foolish and unwise, than when thou give way to any lust; such
things will cost thee a dear and bitter repentance: Do not say, this wisdom is
too high for thee, for by praying and seeking to God, thou may enjoy it.

Fourthly, Christianity teaches the true wisdom, because that only enstructeth
about the true and proper end of all our actions, which is happiness. How did
the wise men of the world stagger up and down like giddy men in this point? Or
like the blind Sodomites, went groping up and down for the door, and could not
find it; they knew not where, or what blessedness was? but the Scripture does
plentifully teach us, wherein all true happiness does consist, and that is, in
the enjoying God himself, his favor and love. It Is not riches, honors,
pleasures, no nor virtue it self, but only God, and a propriety in him, that
makes happy; He is the ocean, other things are but a drop; He is the Sun,
all creatures are but stars, deriving all light from him. Seeing then a great
part of wisdom lies in the propounding of the true and right end, then only
by godliness do we come to have true wisdom.

Fourthly, In Christianity, we have not only the true end propounded, but the
right means also, whereby we may attain it. For prudence lies in the choosing
of fit and conducible means to such an end: So that as in any art, no man can
by his art produce artificial operations without fit tools: So neither can we
in our actions as rational men, arrive to the true end. viz. happiness;
without those fit means appointed thereunto; and this is only by Christ, as the
meritorious cause, and by faith, as the instrumental; by Christ we have peace
with God, and by faith we are partakers of Christ. Now this whole order and
dispensation the world is altogether ignorant of; all the wisdom of man would
not pitch upon such a way as this, by Christ, and through faith in Christ. But
when Paul is made wise in an heavenly manner, He desires to know nothing, but
Christ crucified; and, He accounts all things dung and dross for the
righteousness which is by faith, Phil. 3.9.

Fifthly, By Christianity we are only taught to avoid that which causes
repentance and grief of mind after it is done. David said, by the Word of God he
was forewarned from sin, Psalm. 19. And, Then shall I not be confounded, when
I have respect unto all thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. Well does the Scripture
say, Psalm. 111.10. They have a good understanding, who do Gods Commandments;
because all wickedness, though sweet in the mouth, yet will prove wormwood in
the belly. We have done foolishly, say they, who repent of their sins,
Insipientis est dicere non putaram, fools use to say, I did not think such a
thing; Oh I did not believe the guilt of sin was so terrible! I did not think
the fury of God had been so overwhelming, I did not believe the sting of sin
had been so grievous! Thus all wicked men, they buy repentance and eternal
torments it may be in Hell at a dear rate, for the pleasures of sin, which
last for a moment. Oh then, what happy wisdom is it, so to live, and so to do,
that a man afterward shall have no cause to roar out for the guilt upon him!
that in the time of sickness, and hour of death thou may not cry out, Oh
foolish and wretched man that I am! Oh that I had been wiser! but now I fear it
is too late.

Sixthly, Christianity teaches this wisdom, not so much to regard the
present, as to provide for the future, to remember our later end, to provide
for eternity. Prudens (they say) is quasi porro videns, seeing afar off,
whereas wicked men are said to be like bruit beasts, that are carried away with
sensible objects, such as they, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
die: Such as Dives, as would have his goods in the life, and therefore he is
called a fool, because he did not consider, what would be after, Thou fool,
this night shall thy soul be taken from thee', Luke 12.20. But our Religion
teaches us better wisdom; Oh that they were wise (said God) that they would
consider their later end! Deuteronomy. 32.29 And certainly, this wisdom is of
admirable consequence: For what worlds of gold would the damned give that they
had had such wisdom, while they lived in this world? David prays for this,
Teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom, Psalm. 90.12.

Seventhly, Herein does Christianity teach us true wisdom, because thereby we
are enabled to improve the seasons and opportunities of grace. It Is accounted a
great piece of worldly wisdom, to know the fit seasons of buying and selling.
Now Paul directs us in heavenly things, Walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise, redeeming the time, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. What is a circumspect wise thing?
Even to redeem the time; we have spent much of our strength, of our time in the
service of sin, we have lost many an happy hour and opportunity; Oh then this
is wisdom, to redeem it, for the future to be more active, and that, because
the days are evil! There are many hindrances and oppositions to what is good.
The Ant, though a little creature, is commended for natural wisdom, That it
lays up in Summer; it knows the seasons to hoord up its corn: And this will
be our heavenly wisdom, to take the day of grace before the night come,
wherein none can work, John 9.4. Our Savior himself used this Argument, to
show, why he would not let slip that occasion of doing good on the Sabbath day.

Eighthly, Christian wisdom is seen in caution and circumspection, to refuse
all the snares and temptations of sin, and to find out all the Devils methods
and subtilties. For there are the depths of Satan, and the devices of Satan;
and sin has its pleasant baits and charms: So that unless a man have
wisdom given him from above, he cannot but give up all his strength into some
Dalilahs hands; then there is also the enmity of the world; we must be wise as
Serpents against that.

Ninthly, Herein Christianity gives wisdom, because it helps to conquer and
overcome all unruly passions, which while they rage, bereave us of all wisdom.
Anger is a short madness, Difficile est amare and sapere; Any affection
prevailing throws dust into the eye of the soul. Therefore Solomon says, He
that rules his own heart is greater than he that conquereth a City, Prove.
16.32. It teaches also a moderate use of all earthly comforts, to marry, to
buy, as if we did it not.

Lastly, It is excellent to instruct us to bear afflictions, and how to abound.
Only by that we can tell, how to be rich, and how to be poor, as Paul; I know
how to abound, and how to want; I am instructed (says he) as in a great
mystery: he uses that word, which the Heathens did of their religious secrets,
Phil. 4.12.

Use 1. Of Exhortation; Think you hear wisdom in the Scripture, and by the
Ministers, crying aloud to you, as in the Proverbs, Oh ye simple love
understanding! O ye foolish, why will ye pass by, and go on in sin! Though
thou had the knowledge and parts of an Angel; though thou had as much
political wisdom as Solomon, yet if thou have not this heavenly wisdom, thou
art still a fool. What though thou art wiser for the things of this world, yet
if foolish in heavenly things, that earthly wisdom cannot help thee? Say then
to thy self, Oh foolish and unwise sinner! Why do I take this moment of
pleasure, for an eternity of torment? Oh foolish and blind man! Why do I let
the day of grace, and the precious time of salvation pass away? Will not this
be bitterness in the later end?

Verse 19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, etc.
THis Verse is brought in as a Cause or Reason, why a man should renounce
earthly and worldly wisdom, because it is foolishness with God. See here the
different thoughts of God and man; the great admired worldly wisdom among men,
is but foolishness with God; and that which God calls true and real wisdom,
men account foolishness; but it is quickly decided, whose thoughts shall
prevail, Gods or man's.

The words of the Text being a Reason asserted in a Proposition, we may
consider, 1. The Subject. 2. The Predicate or Attribute.


The Subject is, The wisdom of this world; by that you heard was meant all the
knowledge, learning, and prudence which is attained in this world, by mere
humane industry. This is the choice and most excellent pearl that the world
has: if their wisdom be thus folly, what then is their folly?

2. There is the Attribute, It Is foolishness with God. Though the wise men of
this world have written several Books, as the Encomium hujus moriae, the praise
of this folly; yet God abhors and rejects it: It is foolishness with God,
who is the only wise God, who is only able to judge and discern what things
are. There are many wise, learned men in the world, whose naked propositions we
do more regard than other men's demonstrations But how much more should we
acquiesce in Gods assertions? We may justly call all humane wisdom mere
foolishness, because God does so.

Now when the wisdom of the world is said to be foolishness with God, that is
to be understood two ways,

First, Actively, it is only contriving, plotting and accomplishing foolish
things.

Secondly, Passively, God turns it all to foolishness, as David prayed, God
would turn Achitophels counsel into folly, 2 Samuel 15.31. And as 1 Cor. 1. He
has chosen foolish things to confound the wise things of the world. And this
passive sense is a great part of the meaning, as appears by the twofold
testimony taken out of the Old Testament, which are to show, that God does
befool and as easily destroy all the wisdom, and counsels of mere worldly men,
as we blow down the houses of clay, that little children make in sport. Observe,

That all the admired wisdom of a mere worldly man is nothing but contemptible
folly before God. Observe. All worldly wisdom is folly before God. And that
whether considered actively or passively. I. Active foolishness.


The worlds wise man is Gods fool; he whose words and counsels in worldly
matters, are as Achitophels in his days, like the oracles of God; they are by
God turned into mere foolishness.

I shall first begin with that active foolishness, demonstrating by several
particulars, That all worldly wisdom is mere folly. And

First, This is abundantly seen in all that Idolatry and superstition which the
wisest of men are prone unto, and wherein they do greatly applaud themselves.
What more foolish, ridiculous and absurd instances have we of folly, then of
the Idolatry and superstitious worship, that the Oracles of their days have
decreed? The Apostle Romans 1.21. speaks excellently to this purpose,
Professing themselves wise, they became fools; for their foolish heart was
darkened: And wherein was this seen? In turning the glory of the invisible God,
into an image of an Ox that eats hay. This does especially relate to the
Egyptians, who boasted of their great wisdom; and indeed they were the
seminary of learning, it is said to all the world; yet who more foolish in their
Idolatry than they, worshipping an Ox, yea Mice, and Cats, and Crocodiles? This
also might be demonstrated of the Grecians and Romans, while applauded for the
wise men of the world. How absurd and foolish were they in their worship?
Insomuch that Socrates was called an Atheist, merely because he derided their
many gods; and Austin relates a great deal of excellent discourse, which
Seneca has against the Idolatry and Superstition than in use, though that
Tractate be not now among his Works. But these are Heathens; and so no wonder
if we shall find even in the Church of God, when men have followed their humane
wisdom in prescribing the worship of God by that, they become vain and
ridiculous: witness all that heap of foolish and superstitious Ceremonies,
which Popery brought into the Church by degrees. That as the ridiculous
deformity of an Ape lies in imitating, or being like a man, and yet not a man:
So the absurd folly of all that superstitious worship did appear in the
affectation of Religion and Devotion, when indeed it was not so. Now this great
folly of Idolatry, the Scripture does often aggravate, They have eyes, and see
not, etc. And they that make them are like unto them. They are even such stupid
Idols, as their Idols are. And what holy derision does the Prophet Eliah put
upon Baals Priests, launcing and cutting themselves, crying, O Baal hear us, 1
King. 18.26. Especially the Prophet Isaiah, describes this brutish folly,
when he tells us of the workmen, that with one piece of wood, he makes a
fire, and with another a god, Isa. 44.19. If you ask then, Wherein the great
wisdom of the world is foolishness? I answer, in their Worship, in their
Religion. All the golden Images, all the curious ornaments and vestments in
worship, are but beggarly things, if compared with the pure spiritual worship
of God. Thus, when the Galatians apostatized from the pure Gospel Worship of
Christ, and turned to antiquated Ceremonies, he calls them, Foolish Galatians,
Chap. 3.1. We do not break Christ's command, when we call such fools, because
it is not from a causlesse anger, but a judicious zeal.

Secondly, Worldly wisdom is mere foolishness, because such men contrive and
plot, and think to accomplish all their counsels by their own strength and way.
Now this is a very foolish and absurd thing: for the thoughts of a man are in
some respect from man, but the ordering and disposing of all things is from
God. Jer. 10.23. I know Lord, it is not in man to order his own way. Thus you
see Achitophel was a mere fool in the issue. And thus the Prophet Isaiah cries
out, The princes of Zoan are fools, Isa. 19.11. even they that boasted in their
wisdom. We read of some Roman Emperors, and others, that did most foolishly
affect a Deity, especially Caius Caesar, for which some thought him the
Antichrist. Yea some of the Christian Emperors, did affect the attribute of
God, as Constantius the Arian, that denied Eternity to the Son of God, yet
would have men salute him with Aeternitas vestra. What blasphemous folly was
this for a man, who was to be worms meat presently? Now in some respects, all
the great wise men of the world do the like; they take upon them a kind of
Deity; they think to work and contrive all things by their own fortitude and
wisdom, as he in the Poet, Virtus mihi numen and ensis,
Quem te^eo. And another,
Ignavis est opus auxilio divino.
But (alas) in all these things, men are mere fools: for their very thoughts
and purposes are not in their own power, God fashioneth the hearts of men.
Laban had other thoughts; Esau other thoughts than they intended. And as their
thoughts are not in their own power, so much less are the accomplishments, or
performances of them. But as the stone, when once flung away, is no more in the
man's power; so neither is the performance of any thing under the command of
humane wisdom. Thus they are foolish in all their counsels, The Lord knows
the thoughts of the wise are vain, as it follows,

Thirdly, All worldly wisdom is folly, because it is only attentive to get the
good things of this world, and never looks to the world to come. Oh that the
worms of this world would see how foolish and brutish they are in this
particular! Luke 12.21. The Parable of the foolish rich man, who treasured up
all the good things of this life, see what a conclusion the Parable has from
him, So is every one that is rich in this world, and lays not up treasure
toward God. So is every one, that is, such a fool is every one: Yet how is
this folly praised for wisdom in this world? Give them the pleasures, the
profits, the contents of this world, and they never regard the world to come.
Oh foolish men and unwise! Will thy wealth avail thee in the day of Gods wrath?
Will thy pleasures of sin continue with thee, when the pangs and throbs of
death shall once surprise thee? Well, go on and applaud thy self in thy
pleasures, in thy greatness, in thy abundance, but know, that if abiding thus,
thou will die a fool, and be damned a fool.

Fourthly, They are actively foolish, because they are conceited of this
wisdom, and boast of it. This is a sure sign of a fool, to conceit himself
wise, and to put confidence in it; yea, he is more foolish than a fool; for
Solomon says, There is more hope of a fool than such a man, Prove. 26.12. Now
herein is manifested the folly of all earthly wisdom, that it does reject
sound counsel: It counts its own ways, and its own courses better, than what
Christ or his Ministers do advise unto. Therefore says Christ, Wisdom is
justified of her children, Mat. 11.19. None but the children of God are able to
approve and allow of the true Scripture-wisdome. You see Christ himself, the
wisdom of the Father, in whom were the treasures of wisdom, yet had all his
counsel rejected with scorn by the Pharisees. What flocking would there be to
hear one speak that was raised out of the grave? But Christ came from Heaven,
from the bosom of the Father; who would not readily assent to what he should
direct unto? Yet they would not hearken to his words; And why? Because they
were not of God, John 8.47. as Christ told them. Herein then the lamentable
folly of all earthly wisdom is discovered, that it regards her own corrupt
consultations, and the reasonings thereof more than Gods wisdom, or the
Ambassadors of Christ persuading them to the contrary. Thou art therefore to
unteach thy self, all thy former principles, all thy former conclusions before
thou can be taught by God.

Fifthly, It must needs be folly, because it is directly contrary unto God, and
his ways, which are only wise. Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God. This is enough to proclaim the folly and madness of it to all the
world. For can any man prosper that hardens himself against God? To oppose God,
to set against the ways of God, is called, Kicking against the pricks, Act
9.5. Is it not a mad and foolish thing to do so? Yet thus all earthly wisdom
does. It cannot agree nor comply with the holy Law, and holy will of God: and
therefore the Gospel, and the ways of Christ never had greater enemies and
adversaries than these, that were most famous for earthly wisdom. If you
consider the Heretics, they were most of them men of great earthly wisdom,
too wise to yield to the simplicity of the Gospel of Christ; if you consider
the great Statesmen and Pilots of Commonwealths; how difficultly do they become
fools that they might be wise, though indeed none ever proved greater fools
than such; for through opposing God and Christ, they have been forced to cry
out with Julian at last, Vicisti Galilaee. Take heed then of trusting in that
admired wisdom of thine, which God accounts foolishness, and will prove so in
the later end.

Sixthly, All humane and earthly wisdom is foolishness, because it makes a
man a sad loser in the later end. He that to enjoy his lusts, and his carnal
pleasures for a season, does lose his soul, and the favor of God; What a fool
will he be, when God shall condemn him, when he shall lie eternally tormented
in those everlasting flames? Then they roar out, We fools despised wisdom, and
hated instruction; That is wisdom then, which provideth for eternity, which
looks to the future, and no earthly wisdom does this, and therefore it is
mere foolishness.

Use of Instruction, To pull off that mask or painting which is put upon the
wisdom of the world. Who is accounted wise, but that man, whom God judges a
fool? And who is scorned as a fool, but that man whom God pronounces wise? And
truly we may take up that, All are become foolish and vain by nature. Thou that
by craft, dissimulation and injustice think to enrich thy self; thou
applaudest thy self for being so wise, when God will say, Thou fool, this night
thy soul shall be taken away. Is he not a fool that leaves a treasure of gold
for coals? Is not he a fool that forsakes a fountain to go to a broken
cistern? Is not he a fool that would be in great pomp and honor for one day,
to be a perpetual tormented slave for ever after? Yet thus foolish and unwise
are all wicked men. Pray then for wisdom from above; entreat God to deliver
thee from thy own earthly wisdom: There is no greater enemy to thy soul then
that; Christ revealed not himself to such; Gods election is not of such: Oh
then be afraid of thy self!

For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, etc.

You have heard, that this worldly wisdom is foolishness actively, I shall
now proceed to show its foolishness Passively; such which God befooleth or
turns to folly. So that there are no men whom God does more resist and set
himself against, then such proud, worldly wise men. He delights, wherein they
deal proudly, to be above them; and wherein they resolve to deal wisely, to
outwit them, as we say. So that as you see little Children, who have got a Bird
tied to a string, they make themselves sport with her, and when she thinks to
fly here and there, they pull her back again. Thus God has an overruling
wisdom, and an overruling power over all men, their counsels, and their
actions. Which made an Heathen call man (...), The Tennis-ball that the
Providence of God plays withal, and handeth hither and thither. Thus the
Scripture excellently expresses it, by putting an hook into men's nostrils, and
a bridle in their lips, Isa. 37.29. The Providence of God is the Rider or
Sessor upon all the wise men's counsels and actions, and they are overruled by
God, as we do our Horses, to turn them this way and that way, backwards and
forwards. And this is the chief scope of the Apostle in the words following, as
will then more particularly appear.

How worldly wisdom is foolishness in a passive sense. God turning all their
wisdom into folly.
First therefore, God makes this wisdom foolishness, in a passive sense, in
that he did not vouchsafe to use it as an instrument to propagate the Gospel.
He disdained to take the wise and learned Orators or Philosophers of the
world. Now wherein could a greater scorn be put upon the wisdom of the world,
then in this particular, that God would not so much as own it, or take notice
of it, in the plantation of the Gospel? Paul does often mention this, 1 Cor. 1.
It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save men, when the wise men
of the world would not acknowledge God by the creatures. And at another time,
Paul renounced the cunning and deceitful ways of humane wisdom; They did not
come in such words: And why? That their faith might be in the power of God, 1
Cor. 2.5. So then, if you regard what Instruments God did at first choose to
diffuse his Gospel truths, you will find he slighted and passed over the great
wise men of the world, and chose the poor, foolish, and contemptible
Instruments. Herein God did demonstrate his wisdom, that so all power and
greatness might be acknowledged to be in and from him only. What a reproach
did Haman account it, that all the Royal robes and honor should be put upon
Mordecai his great enemy, and he laid aside? No less did this inrage the wise
men of the world, to see, that by such contemptible Instruments, so great and
mighty changes should be wrought upon the hearts and lives of men. This is the
first instance. Yet this is not so to be understood, as if God did not
sometimes use the wise men of the world; for he chose Cyprian, Nazianzen,
Basil; to the latter whereof, Libanius, the great Scholar in those days, but
an Heathen, wrote, that he did so admire his judgment, that he did all over
sweet and tremble to think on that time when he should read his Epistle, and
pass his censure of it. But though God did use such wise men, yet this was not
the chief and principal thing whereby they propagated Faith, but rather the
Gospel simplicity. They did it not qua sapientes, qua Oratores, but qua
credentes: As Sampson wrought those great and wonderful things, not by the
strength of his arms, but by his hair, that so the effect might be attributed
to God, and not to Sampson.

Secondly, Herein God make it foolishness, that as he does not use it for the
enlarging of his Gospel, so he takes very few of such men to bestow on them
spiritual and soul saving graces. Few of such does he call, does he justify,
does he sanctify, does he reveal the mysteries of grace unto. Oh, what a
wonderful instance is this, of the foolishness of this worldly wisdom! There
are few of that rank to whom God will communicate grace and salvation. That
whereas of many profane and grievous sinners, he has chosen many to
salvation, of worldly wise men very few. The Apostle 1 Cor. 1.26. does
industriously take notice of this, Not many wise men after the flesh has God
chosen. Yea, Christ solemnly gave thanks to God, that he had not revealed
heavenly mysteries to the wise, but to babes, Mat. 11.25. So that there is
little cause for men to boast of their worldly wisdom and prudence, that they
are crafty and subtle in their generation; for this is both a cause and a sign
also, that thou art not one to whom God will reveal himself. Not that God
calls none of such, but not many, viz. comparatively to those of a more
contemptible way, whom he does set apart for himself. Take heed thou be not too
wise, too proud of thy parts, and therefore God will pass thee by.

Thirdly, Herein also God will make it appear to be folly, in that he takes the
foolish things of the world, and makes them confound the wise things. When
Pharaoh said, Let us deal wisely to suppress the Israelites, the foolish
Midwifes did confound him; so that he brought up one by his own bread, and at
his own charge, who should be his ruin, and deliver the Israelites. If we read
in the Scripture, you shall find nothing more ordinary, then God by foolish
things to confound wise, and by weak things to overcome strong. And well may it
be called the confounding of the wise: for certainly, there cannot be a greater
astonishing and confounding of men worldly wise, then by such foolish
instruments. As Abimelech was enraged at the heart, that it should be said, A
woman had killed him. Thus by Frogs, and Lice, and such contemptible vermin,
did God plague the great Pharaoh of Egypt

Fourthly, Herein does God make the wisdom of the world foolishness, because
all that wise men do, is a vain work They are not able to acomplish their ends,
to bring about their designs; especially those which are to overthrow the
Kingdom of Christ, and rooting out his Church and People. This has been often
attempted by the wise men of the world, but it has been a vain thing. Psalm. 2.
you see it was of old prophesied: Why do the Heathens rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing? It Is applied to the chief Priests, and other Grandees
among the Jews, but it was a vain thing: It could not be effected. And truly,
for many hundred years the Devil has been attempting this by all kind of
Instruments, and by all manner of ways, to root out the faithful ones of
Christ, his Truth and Gospel; but it has been to them, as God said to Paul in
the heat of his persecution, Thou kickest against the pricks. What wise man
would with his bare heels kick against the sharp points of iron? and yet all
the wise men of the world, that have set against Christ and Godliness, have
been such fools.

Fifthly, God makes the wisdom of the world foolishness, because what they
work is not only a vain work, but a deceitful work. They are wholly frustrated
in their expectation: They find the clean contrary to what they intended. Such
foolishness does God make the wisdom of the world. The wicked works a
deceitful work, (says Solomon) Prove. 11.18. Compared therefore to the spiders
web, that is of no defense or use, when a boistrous wind arises. Read over the
History of the Bible, and there you shall see, to that which the wise men of
the world intended, God brought about the clear contrary. Come (says Pharaoh)
let us deal wisely, and oppress the Israelites, (Exo. 1.10) lest they grow to
numerous: Now by that very means the people of Israel did more multiply. The
Pharisees thought, when they had crucified Christ, they had laid all
Christianity in the Grave with him, but by his Ascension, his power was the
more seen. When I am lifted up, (said Christ) viz. upon the Cross, I will draw
all men to me, Joh. 12.32. That, which in probability, would have driven all
men from him, by that he did efficaciously bring all unto him. Hence he
compares his death to the grain of Corn thrown into the ground, which until
it die, does not bring forth a great crop. So that the wisdom of man must
needs be made great folly, when it shall be forced to bring about those things
which it hates so much.

Sixthly, Herein the wisdom of the world is made foolishness, because it does
not only work a vain deceitful work* but also a destructive one to its self;
so that all the wisdom they have, is only to destroy themselves. Thus like
fools they run their swords in their own bowels. How often does David speak
this of his wise and potent enemies? Their feet were taken in their own snares,
and they were fallen into the pit they dug for others. Was not all Pharaohs
wisdom but to ruin himself and his Kingdom? The Jews that thought to be so
wise in crucifying Christ, thereby to prevent the Roman Caesar, yet for a
reward, had the Roman enemy come and utterly destroy them. Thus as they work a
spiders web in regard of the unprofitablenesse of them, so they are said to
hatch cockatrice eggs, because of the hurtful poisonous nature of them, even
to the owners.

Seventhly, The wisdom of the world becomes foolishness, because God many
times infatuateth and blasteth the parts and abilities of the wise men of the
world. He takes away their understanding from them. That as we read of
Nebuchadnezar, God bereaved him of his wisdom and judgment, so that he became
like a beast, and lived with beasts; so he does either in whole or in part
pervert and darken the thoughts and counsels of wise men. Hence he is said by
the Prophet, to pour a Spirit of giddiness upon them, and to make the
Diviner's mad, Isa. 44.25. as also Isa. 19.14. Et quos Deus vult perdere, prius
dementat; as we see in Haman, and in Belshazer, and in Herod, all these died as
fools, and were destroyed by their own foolish thoughts. Thus we read of Ely's
Sons and others, they would not hearken to the good counsel of the Lord,
because it was of the Lord to destroy them.

Eighthly, Herein God does also make their wisdom folly, because by their pride
and haughtiness they undo themselves God lets them prosper, and the wisdom
of the world seems to flourish a great while, but it is that their
destruction may be the greater. Thus Heb. 1.11. its said of Nebuchadnezar,
after all that great success which he attributed to himself, His mind should
change, and he should pass over and offend. Prosperity slays the foolish
one, (says Solomon) Prove. 1.32. And Psalm. 18. With the froward, that is, the
crafty worldly wise man, opposite to the pure and upright in heart, thou will
wrestle (as it were) and give a fall unto, according to the Hebrew. As the
wrestler lifts a man up from the ground, that he may throw him down with the
more violence; so does God give a man of the world his hearts desire, that he
shall attribute all to his wisdom and prudence, and this is to be his
overthrow. Thus we have the Prophet insulting over Egypt, and the wise men
thereof, as also over Tire and Zidon, that set their heart as God, and thought
she had the wisdom of Daniel, Ezekiel. 28.2.

A twofold humane wisdom, viz. good, evil.
Now to add one Caution, we must distinguish of a twofold humane wisdom: One
that is the same with true prudence, whereby men are able to manage public
places of trust, they do prae esse, ut prosint, for the public good; they
have the art of ruling well. And this the Text means not: For though it be
not a virtue, yet it is the eye to all a man's actions. It Is as necessary to
public affairs, as the Sun to the world; therefore God gave it Solomon as a
special mercy.

Secondly, Their humane wisdom, which originally comes from the corrupt
reason of man; and for the manner of it, is only according to worldly and
fleshly considerations, and tends only to worldly advantages. And lastly, For
its nature, it is opposite formally to all heavenly and Scripture wisdom. Of
this we speak*

Use 1. How vain a thing it is to trust in humane policy, and worldly wisdom?
Thou think by it, to raise and advantage thy self, but God turns it into
folly. Insomuch, that we may say, more have been undone by earthly wisdom,
then by mere simplicity. None have had such tragical and dismal ends as they.
Therefore uprightness and an holy fear of God, that is the best wisdom. And
although Christ himself, and the Martyrs, who abounded in this wisdom, did not
escape the miseries of the world; yet that comes from the wise and high
dispensations of God, who has ordered, that through many tribulations we must
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Use 2. To judge that only wisdom, which the wise God judges so. Who so is
wise and prudent, he will foresee the evil day of death, and judgment, and
accordingly prepare himself: He will lay up Treasure for the life to come He
lays that Principle as the chiefest of his Politiques. What will it profit a
man to win the whole world, and loose his own soul? Mat. 16.26.

For it is written, he takes the wise in their own craft.

That divine axiom asserted by the Apostle in the former part of this verse,
he now confirms by a twofold testimony. The one is from Job. 5.13. and this
we are to handle at this time. They are the words of Eliphaz to Job, who though
with the other Friends, they did err in the particular application of their
speeches to Job, yet the general matter taken in an abstracted sense, was full
of wisdom and truth. The words are worthy of all diligent consideration,
though I shall not insist long, hastening to the other matter that follows.
The Testimony is a Proposition, declaring Gods carriage and power to the
earthly wise men of the world. And 1. Let us consider Gods Efficiency. 2. The
Subject of this.


Gods Efficiency is described in that expression, (...): The Septugint has it
(...). The original word in the Hebrew, is used several ways, and very
applicable to this matter in hand.

1. It is used of taking any thing by force of arms, jure belli. Thus Castles
and strong holds are said to be taken, Numb. 21.32. And thus it denotes such,
who by their worldly craft lift up themselves, and grow insolent in their
counsels against God; such God does beseige, as it were, and straigthen them,
taking them at his pleasure.

2. The word is sometimes used in a judicial sense, to take men in their
sins, as Joshua 7. Acha^ is said to be taken in his theft. And thus God takes
the wise men of the world in all their hidden and secret counsels of malice,
and brings them to light to their confusion.

3. The word is sometimes applied to nets or fetters, in which Malefactors are
bound. Thus God he binds and ensnareth men by their own counsels and thoughts,
as so many chains that they cannot stir.

4. Some make it a Metaphore from Hunters, that use to lay snares and nets to
take their beasts in, Josh 44. Thus God lays snares and pits in the way,
which the most Argus eyed in the world do not see or escape. All these
expressions have their peculiar efficacy.

In the Greek, Erasmus makes the word properly to be used of the laying hold
upon one that is running away from us, and making him to turn back again. Thus
all he thoughts and purposes of crafty men, whereby they run from God and his
ways thinking to accomplish contrary to his will, God lays hold on them and
brings them back: whereby the things done contra voluntatem, are not yet preter.

Thus you have Gods Efficiency: the next thing is the Subject of this, The wise
in their craft; (...). Though the word sometimes be used in a middle or
indifferent sense, yet here it is in an evil one. It Is called (...), because
crafty subtle men turn themselves into all shapes and forms, and they are
commonly very active and busy; they sleep not till they have accomplished
mischief.

Now when he says, God takes them in their craft, that may be taken, either as
the matter in which God overpowereth them, and destroys them: Or it may be
taken instrumentally, as sometimes the word is; by their very craft and wisdom
God lays hold upon them, and overwhelmeth them. Thus you have the words
explained. Observe,

Observe.
That God delights to take the earthly wise men of the world in their own
craft.

These Spiders are hung in their own webs. See Isa. 19.13. a notable instance
of the wise men of Egypt.

Now many ways does God take the wise ones of the world.

How God takes the wise men of the world in their own craft.
First, In dissipating their counsels that they cannot attain their ends. They
attempt again and again, and are always repulsed. As 2 King. 46.11. the King
of Syria had many times intended to entrap the King of Israel in such a place,
and he was always disappointed, which made the heart of the King troubled,
says the text. It Is not as men's counsels or purposes are, but the counsel of
the Lord, that shall stand. The hearts of Kings, of the greatest of powers in
the world, are as the rivers of water, which the Husbandman does easily turn
into this channel or that channel. Julian's great purpose, was to root out
the Christian Religion; he would not have them named Christians but Galileans;
he would not have them brought up in humane learning; he put all the
discouragements upon them; would let them enjoy no benefits of the Law, or the
Courts of Justice: and yet he was taken in his own craft. He was so strangely
killed, that to this very day, Historians cannot tell the true manner of it.
Thus God scatters all their counsels and their plots, whereby they are
confounded.

Secondly, God when he does ruin them, he does it no other way but by their
own wisdom, by their own craft. And this is the greatest conquest that can be,
when God overcomes them by their own weapon, as it was said of Goliah's sword.
None like that, because by that he cut off Goliah's head, whose sword it was.
So there are no Providence of God so remarkable and glorious as those, which
make the very craft and wisdom wicked men have, to bring about their
confusion. We see this fulfilled first in the Devil, who is called the old
Dragon or Serpent, Rev. 12.9. because of his great subtilty, as well as
poisonous enmity. Now wherein was he overcome? by his own craft, even in this
respect. He used all the Instruments he had to bring Christ to be crucified: He
enters into Judas his heart, and he had filled the hearts of the Jews and
Priests before, and so at last obtains his plot; Christ is crucified, but
then he rises again, and is ascended, and thereby he conquers the Devil and
all his power. So that by that very death which the Devil so much labored for,
the works of the Devil were destroyed. We see this also in Joseph's Brethren,
how politic and crafty were they in their malicious designs against Joseph?
and all was, That he might not reign over them: And all those means they took
to hinder it, were ordained by God to further it.

Thirdly, He takes the wise men of the world so, that they are entangled in
their own counsels, and are brought to such snares, that they cannot go forward
or backward. Nullum magnum ingenium sine aliqua mixtura dementiae, There is no
great wit without some mixture of madness. Thus you heard the original did
imply; That they were taken in their counsels, as so many fetters and chains;
They were as a wild Bull in a net. Eliphaz speaks admirably to this, Job. 5.14.
They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope at noon day as at midnight.
See here, into what a wilderness and perplexity they are brought. And so Isa.
19.14. They are said to be drunk and reel up and down. Are drunken men fit for
to advise, to counsel, to carry on any work of consequence? and yet such are
the wise men of the world delivered up unto.

I might instance in more Particulars, but the next words will have the same
occasion; I come to answer an Objection.

How is this true, you will say, that God takes the wise in their craft?
Object.
Does not David often make mention of his bloody and deceilfull enemies? How
often does he complain of their lying in wait to shoot at the upright in heart?
And does not the experience of all Ages, both in profane and sacred Histories,
show that earthly, crafty, and wicked policy has accomplished many destructive
things, and that to Gods own Church and people? Has not Antichrist, by subtle
deceiveable ways, prevailed over the Church of God? Do not the crafty Foxes
and subtle Wolves, many times worry and devour the poor innocent Sheep? All
this must be granted, and yet the observation is true. For

First, This is many times done, and we through our ignorance, Answ.
take no notice thereof. The works of the Lord are great, and sought out of
those that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2. We many times take not such
delight in observing the works of God in the world; and so for want of
consideration, we come not to admiration. The Apostle, upon a serious
consideration of Gods power and wisdom, in the matter of electing some, and
leaving others, he cries; Oh the depths of the wisdom of God, how unspeakable
are his ways, and past finding out! Romans 11 33. Thus it is also in Gods
governing and ordering of the whole world. His ways are above our ways. He
takes wise men, besotteth crafty men, and we not being affected, or studious
to observe the motions of his Providence, take no notice of it. So that the
fault may be in us. But

Secondly, We limit God to time, and places, and persons; and so because he
does not at such a time, in such a way, as we think, therefore we are apt to
think God has forsaken the earth, and regards not what is done below. Now by
judging in such a narrow limited manner, we are prone to mis-judge of God. The
people of Israel are said to limit the holy One of Israel. Can he provide bread
in the wilderness? Psalm. 78.41. Thus we think, that if in such and such times
God does not confound the thoughts of the wise enemies to Gods Church, all is
undone But the wisdom of the Lord knows the best seasons, the most fit
opportunities. As he cannot do any thing but what is most perfect, so also what
is most wise. We should, both for particular and public things, resolve all
into Gods wisdom.

Thirdly, If God let worldly wisdom prevail and prosper a while, it is that
the overthrow and confusion of it may be greater. As Pharaoh was suffered to go
into the Sea, and the waters did not immediately overflow; it was dry land to
them as well as the Israelies for a while, but they were suffered to go so
far, that their destruction might be the surer. Jannes and Jambres did for a
while resist Moses, but at last their folly was made manifest. God therefore to
make their shipwreck the more remakeable* suffers them to go to the very Haven
almost, and there to be undone. Thus they are thrown from a Pinnacle, that their
downfall may be the more terrible. In the building of Babel, God suffered them
to go on a great way* and they built very high, but God came down before they
had finished it; and this made to their greater reproach and scorn: As we see
by that Parable of our Savior, men would by way of scorn say, This builder
began, and was not able to make an end, Luke 14.30. As Joshua did to the men of
Ai, gave them hopes, and made as if Israel did flee away; and all was, that
their overthrow might be the more universal. But not only the Scripture, even
Heathens gave some probable Answers to this Objection.

Come we then to show the ground, why God does thus delight to infatuate and
blast all earthly wisdom. And

First, It is that hereby his Sovereignty and ruling Power may be the more
manifest. When we see that wisdom and power, and earthly greatness does not
carry it, hereby we gather that God is therefore only to be trusted in, and
depended upon. That the Stars and Moon have no light of their own, at least
not conspicuous, makes more to the glory of the Sun that fills them all.
God will have these tall Cedars and high Oaks fall to the ground, that we may
look up to Heaven the better. These earthly great things, make that God is not
so great and excellent, and dreadful to us as he ought to be.

Secondly, God does it hereby to vindicate his own Glory, and Cause, and Name.
For all the worldly wisdom that ever was, has either mediately or immediately
set against God. As there was at first an enmity between the feed of the Woman
and the Serpent, so that has descended to all Generations; insomuch that all
the policy, wisdom, and craft of all men, has been one way or other against
God: therefore it is time for God to oppose such. Hence it is said, He
resists the proud, James 4.6. Such sinners more then others, because they
immediately oppose God, and God is, to speak with reverence, to defend his
Name, his Glory, his Church, his People, against them.

Use. How secure the People and Church of God may be. Though they be weak,
poor, and contemptible, yet they have the wisdom and power of God on their
side: and all earthly craft and power, that they are so apt to fear and dread,
is but so much folly and weakness to God. Our God will arise like Sampson, and
tare these green cords. Oh, it is sweeter then the Honey and Honeycomb, in the
midst of all confusions, troubles, and perplexities, to consider how wise God
is, and by Faith to comfort and inflame our hearts! It must not be a transient
thought, or a barren speculation; but let thy heart dwell upon Gods wisdom;
and this will be like David's Harp to drive out every evil spirit.

2. It Is of Direction, Not to fear any thing but God: for he is the only wise
God. How fearful was David to have Achitophel against him, because he was a
wise man? but it is more terrible to have Gods wisdom against us. And who has
that? even every wicked man, whosoever goes on in any impenitent way: He
provokes this wise God to be against him. He knows ways to torment thee: He
knows the times to make it more terrible: He knows all the secret and
hidden shifts and excuses of thy heart, therefore fear him.

Verse 20. And again, The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are
vain.
THis Verse contains a second Testimony, which the Apostle alleges, to
prove the foolishness of all earthly wisdom before God; It Is taken out of
Psalm. 94.11. where the Psalmist proving the Providence and Omniscience of God,
argues from his Efficiency of all things, He that made the eye to see, shall
not he see? Shall not the cause have more in it than the effect? God framed our
hearts, and therefore he must needs understand them. As he that makes a Clock
or Watch, must needs understand all the secret motions of them. Now says the
Psalmist, he does not only know the thoughts of men, but also, how vain,
foolish and unprofitable they are. So that the Apostle does pertinently allege
this place, to prove how vain and foolish all men's thoughts are, especially in
matters of Religion, though never so wise otherwise. Only here is one thing to
be taken notice of, The Psalmist speaks in the general, The thoughts of men,
but the Apostle mentions a particular, The thoughts of the wise; Does not the
Apostle here wrest the words to his own purpose? No, for if the Psalmists
universal be true, the thoughts of man, qua man, be vain, then of a wise man as
well as a fool: Yea, to speak properly, there is no real wise man, but the
godly man, whose mind is enlightened by grace, Or,

2. The Psalmist does there more especially intend the wise men of the world;
and therefore the Apostle expresses it. Now mark the aggravations, The Lord
knows, he that is the only wise God, he sees their thoughts to be vain: He
sees that Ahitophels, that Tullies, that Pharaohs thoughts, even when they
intend to deal wisely, are vain. Let men applaud them, yet God derideth them.

2. The Lord knows the thoughts, (...), their reasonings, their choicest acts
of the understanding, their best and most accurate Discourses; all their Logic
(as it were) to be a mere fallacy. And then

Lastly, To be vain, to be fruitless, to be empty; they make empty webs all
the day long. Domitian the Emperor is derided for spending time in catching of
flies, and yet as vain and foolish are all the thoughts and projects of every
natural wise man. So that what Motto the wise man would write upon every
creature, Vanity of vanity, all is vanity: So the same may be upon all the best
thoughts, meditations and counsels of the wisest men, and if a man's mind be
vain, every thing else in him must needs be vanity; for this is the salt that
seasons a man, and if that has lost its seasoning, (...), become a fool, all
is likewise foolish. Observe,

That the choicest and best thoughts of the wisest men are vain. Observe. Of
vain thoughts.


We may consider man in a threefold capacity: 1. Politice, as a political
creature endued with civil wisdom, and so is part of a society, and thus his
thoughts are vain. 2. Ethice, as he is to walk according to the Rules of
reason, In what sense the Scripture uses the word vain.
which sound and rectified nature does guide a man in, and thus he is vain. 3.
Theologice, as he is to look up to Heaven, to obey God, and to aim at
supernatural happiness. And in this sense especially he is a most vain empty
man, and to this the Apostle relates.


To open the Doctrine, let us consider, In what sense the Scripture uses the
word vain, and you shall see them fitly applicable to the wisest men's thoughts,
that what is said of man's body may also be true of his soul, Every man at his
best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. And

First, That is said to be vain, which is empty and void of that worth and
excellency which ought to be within. Thus a fool is called often a vain person,
because he is empty of that solid judgment and reason, which ought to be in a
man. Hence foolish persons are compared to empty straws that are blown up and
down with every wind, because they have no weight in them. Nabals name and his
nature agreed, he was a fool. The word comes of a root that signifies to
wither. As the withered branch has lost all its sap and juice: so a fool has.
And thus the thoughts of all men naturally are empty, void, and destitute of
true wisdom: They knew not wherein true happiness does consist, or what is
the way that looks to it; they do not provide for eternity; they consider not
that upon this moment depends eternity; they look not out to the best and
choicest things in the first place; all that inward juice and sap of spiritual
wisdom is taken from them.

Secondly, That is said to be vanity, which seems to have great happiness
and content in it, but indeed it is the clean contrary. A vain thing is, that
which has a goodly appearance, but inwardly has no profit. As those apples of
Sodom, so much spoken of. Thus Eve called her son Abel, vanity, because she
thought that before she had brought forth the man, the feed that should break
the Serpents head; but finding him to be without the Image of God, and devoid
of all holiness, subject to mortality, she called him Abel, as deceived in her
expectations. And thus it is with all the thoughts of the wisest in the world;
they think at first they have possessed a man, brought forth that which will
accomplish all their desires; but upon experience they see it is an Abel, it is
vanity. So that as Solomon tells us of a vanity in all earthly comforts, in
riches and pleasures, because though they have a goodly appearance, yet there
is indeed no substance, no solidity; like the thorns which have white flowers,
but thorns: Thus it is with the best and choicest thoughts, and projects of the
wisest men; they have a goodly luster; you would think such wise men could not
but be happy; their expectations are raised, but the issue does deceive them:
Call us not Naomi, but Marah, may they say.

Thirdly, Vanity in the Scripture is often applied to a lie. Every man speaks
vanity to his neighbor, that is a lie, Psalm. 12.2. And thus the thoughts of
the most wise are a lie, Let God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4. All
thy thoughts are so many lies. Now a man is a liar two ways: 1. To himself.
And then, 2. To others.


To himself all his thoughts are a mere lie. They promise such happiness,
glory and felicity to themselves; and in the mean while, they are very lies;
they prove as the Land-flood, as a reed a man leans on. The rich man that
said, Thou have many goods laid up, his thoughts were so many lies. Those proud
thoughts of Tire and Sidon, that set her heart as God, and said, No evil should
come near them, were nothing but lies And if this were only in temporal and
fading things, the deceit would not be so dangerous, but it is in spiritual
things also. All men's thoughts naturally are concerning the goodness of their
heart, the purity of their ways, the happiness of their condition, but in all
things they lie most damnably. What a dangerous lie was that of Laodicea, who
said, She was rich, and clothed, and wanted nothing, when indeed she was
naked, miserable, and wanted all things? Revel. 3.17. All the Pharisees
thoughts, whereby they trusted in their own righteousness, and justified
themselves, were nothing but lies. And thus John Baptist reproved the Jews for
their vain thoughts, Think not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to
our father, Mat. 3.9. The thoughts of men are never more dangerously vain,
than when they please themselves about their good condition, as to spirituals,
that all is well with them, that God loves them; these are lying vain thoughts.

Again, The thoughts of all men naturally are lies actively, in respect of
others. They are full of falsehood and dissimulation: there is no truth or
sincerity in men, as David complains, Psalm. 12. And the Prophet Isaiah
complains, Every one is an hypocrite, the best is a liar, Isa. 9.17. That as
the sheep runs to the briars to shelter her self in a storm, but they prove
a lie, because they tare her in stead of defending her. Thus it is with all
men; therefore he is said to be cursed that puts his trust in men, Jer. 17. For
unless men have godliness, and so are made sincere and unfeigned, there
cannot be any trust in them. Hence are those Rules of wise men, Nemini fidas,
in teipso spes tuas pone.

Fourthly, Vanity is often in Scripture used for that which is unprofitable,
without any benefit or success. Hence is that phrase, To labor in vain. And
thus the Philosophers also define vanity, A frustration of our intended end.
Now in every thing that a man does, till made wise in an heavenly manner, there
is nothing but vanity, there is no true profit or good success, but in all
things he labors with wind, and brings forth wind. The Prophet Hosea
expresses it well, They sow the wind, and reap the whirlwind, Hos. 8.7. If an
husbandman in stead of committing seed to the ground, should only cause a wind,
thinking to have a crop thereby, would it not be folly? but it is not folly or
loss only, it is destruction, he reaps the whirlwind, that is tempestuous and
violent things arise on a sudden. Oh this is a sad thing to consider, when thou
art dying, I have lived in vain, labored in vain, thought in vain, spoke in
vain; I have no true good abiding by me of all that ever I did!

Fifthly, Vanity is often used for that which is unstable, uncertain and
fading. And thus the thoughts of wise men are vain, subject to changes,
contradictions, and at last vanish into nothing: So that as our bodies are vain
bodies, and all the whole Creation is subject to vanity: Thus are all the
thoughts, counsels and purposes of the wisest men subject to uncertainty, only
the creatures they groan under this vanity, but so does not man. Do but observe
your own thoughts, Are they not as vain as the very dreams of feavourish men?
May thou not say, as the Prophet to the Church, How long shall vain thoughts
lodge in thee? Jerem. 4.14. The Psalmist says of some, That they and their
thoughts perish together. Go to the Graves and Tombs of the great men in the
world, who have been upon the earth, like Leviathan in the waters, and are not
all their purposes and projects laid in the dust, as well as their bodies?

Sixthly, They are vain, because they work nothing but vain and absurd things.
What do vain thoughts produce but vain words, vain gestures, vain attire and
fashions, vain discourse in communication, vain opinions, and a vain worship.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Mat. 15.19. They are the first sparks
that fly out of this forge, and from these vain thoughts comes all the vanity
that is in men's words, gestures, apparel, yea and their Religion* For in vain
do they worship me, says our Savior, Matthew. 15.9. And Idolatry is in a
particular manner called vanity. So that you see, these vain thoughts are
indeed ^he cause of all the outward vanity in the world: Though they be subtle
and insensible, yet they produce and end in gross actions. As the vapors of
the earth, they are very subtle, and hardly discerned, yet turn into gross and
gloomy clouds.

Lastly, They are vain, because they are wholly wicked. The imaginations of the
thoughts of the heart are only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. And thus indeed God
knows all the thoughts and imaginations of every man is only evil. That as
from the Spider and the Serpent come forth nothing but venom and poison; so
from every man flows nothing but filthiness; and the more wise he is, the
greater enemy to God. So that those thoughts of theirs are the irreconcilable
enemy and adversary unto God; they lift up themselves on high against him.

Use of Instruction, 1. That God does not only take notice of vain actions,
but vain thoughts; yea these are as the fountain, and the cause of all actions.
Thus Christ reproved the Pharisees for their thoughts, and reasonings in their
hearts. Oh think not then, that all wickedness lies in actions, in external,
gross sins! No, the thoughts of the heart are the womb to breed all thy wicked
actions. Do dot say, they are free, and none knows them, for God knows
them, and will judge thee for them.

2. Are all our thoughts vain? Learn then Scripture-wisdome, get
Scripture-thoughts. Alas, thy own thoughts about God, about Religion, about
salvation, are altogether vain. Lay them all aside; We are not able to think
one good thought of our selves. What miserable woeful and wretched creatures
are we, of all those millions of thoughts not one is good?

Verse 21. Therefore let none glory in men, for all things are yours.
THe Apostle in this Verse makes an heavenly and useful improvement of his
former doctrinal Discourse. He was before upon the Didactical and Argumentative
part; now he is upon the Practical and Exhortatory. The consequence is very
genuine and natural. Seeing all humane wisdom is thus earthly and vain,
abhorred so by God, Therefore let no man glory in men.

In the words you have, 1. A Duty enjoined. And 2. The Reason of the Duty.


Of the Duty at this time, which is expressed Negatively, and by way of
Prohibition, Let no man glory in men. Where you have 1. The Matter prohibited.
And 2. The Object of it.


The Matter prohibited is, Not to glory. What is implied in this, will appear
afterward. The word implies such a glory, that we make a boast and brag
thereby.

The Object of the Matter is, Not in men. The Apostle before treated of a
particular only, humane wise men; and his purpose is only concerning Doctors
and Teachers in the Church, yet he uses this general, that his Argument may be
the stronger, Let no man glory in any Teacher or Doctor in the Church, yea not
in any man, though never so great and so powerful.

If you object, that Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.14. That he was the Corinthians
rejoicing or boasting (for so the original word is) and they were his; yea,
that Paul often mentions his boasting of a people.

The Answer is, That their boasting was principally and originally in God;
only they rejoiced in men, as instruments by which God did accomplish many
comforts for them. It was not men, but God in men that was the motive of this
boasting.

The Reason follows, of which afterward. Observe

That it is a great sin to glory in men. Observe. Of glorying in men.


This sin is not often preached upon, yet no question Political and Civil
Idolatry, making men as gods to us, has done a great deal of hurt, as well as
Religious Idolatry. We may have in Heaven others beside God, as the Papists,
Saints and Angels; and we may have others in earth besides God; as when we put
our hopes and confidence in the great men of the world. I shall treat on this
subject as a General, 1. Not in men. Then 2. As a Particular, Not in the
Teachers of the Church.


Now these ways we glory in men,

First, When we join them with Christ as Mediators, and make them copartners,
as it were in spiritual effects as well as temporal. How many ways we may be
said to glory in men in the general.
This is to glory in men, even blasphemously. And this kind of Idolatrical
boasting reigns in Popery; Not only the Virgin Mary, but several other Saints
of the^r own canonizing are so exalted, that those great effects which belong
to Christ only, are attributed to such. What glorying in St. Francis by the
Franciscans, making the way to Heaven by him, easier than by Christ? What
glorying in Dominicus by the Dominicans, a man of a proud, superstitious bloody
disposition? So well did his mother prophecy, when she was big with him, that
she brought forth a Wolf, if I forget not the story. What boasting do the
Jesuits make in their Ignatius Loiola, the founder of their Society? It would
be infinite to tell you of the horrible and even blasphemous boasting, which in
Popery is made, not of Saints, but of some corrupt and sinful men deceased; as
if God had altered his purpose, My glory I will not give to another, let every
one take his glory from him. Will all their distinctions be any better than
mere cob-webs in this matter?

Secondly, We glory in men, when we make our own, or other good works
meritorious, and our sufferings satisfactory unto God. This is also to glory in
men, and Popery is big with this; for most of the^r Doctrines are the exalting
of man, and debasing of Christ, clean contrary to the Scripture, and the
Apostles, whose endeavors were to annihilate man, and o^ni^ie Christ. And this
is not in Popery only, but in every man, till humbled thoroughly by the Spirit
of God, he glories in his own works, he boasts of his alms, prayers,
fastings, as we see the Pharisees did. But the Apostle Romans 4.2. argues, That
not Abraham himself had wherewith to boast before God. Oh then, not only
profaneness and gross wickedness is to be abhorred, but this secret
boasting and glorying in the good works they do, and having confidence in them!
This Pharisee is a greater enemy to Christ, and further off from the Kingdom
of Heaven, than many Publicans.

Thirdly, We glory in men, when we rejoice in their favor, and are more glad
of that, then we are of Gods favor. This is a frequent wickedness in the
world; if we can have the favor and good will of those, who are great in this
world, then we insult, then we think our selves made, not considering how
happy and blessed it is for to have Gods favor. We see David, when through
sin, he made God displeased with him, Psalm 51. matters not his Kingdom, his
Victories, and all his earthly Greatness, but only applies himself to the
favor of God, and desires that, more than any earthly greatness. And at
another time, Psalm 4. Many say, Who will show us any good? but Lord lift thou
up the light of thy countenance upon us. Many seemed to desire the Devils
offer, If the Kingdoms of the world were proffered to them, they would fall
down and worship the Devil to obtain them, but David's choice was for the
better part.

Fourthly, We glory in men, when we desire to please them, and to accomodate
our selves to their humors, more than to please God, and to walk according to
his will. This sinful pleasing of men, is not consistent with a servant of
Christ's: If I should please men (says Paul, Galat. 1.10.) I were not the
servant of Christ. Hence we are exhorted, Not to be the servants of men, 1 Cor.
7.13. Take heed then to thy self; thou gloriest in men, when all thy study is,
how to please and comply with men, fearing their frowns more than Gods
displeasure. This ungodly fear Christ forbad, with an excellent reason, Because
God was able to destroy both soul and body in hell, Luke 12.5. What advantage
will it be, to have men pleased with thee, and God displeased? Who can give
peace, when he shall cause trouble? It Is a known speech of Cardinal Woolsey, If
he had served God, as he had done the King, h^ had not been so miserable and
forsaken.

Fifthly, We then glory in men, when we put our trust and confidence in them,
resting and hoping in them, and not depending on God only. As the ground of
divine Faith must be some divine Testimony and Authority: So the motive of a
divine hope must be only the promise and power of God. We may hope only in
him, in whom we may only believe. Hence we see the Scripture very frequent in
forbidding all our trust and confidence in men, yea not in Princes, and the
great ones of the world, Because they are lighter than vanity, Psalm 62.9. Yea,
Jeremiah, Chap. 17.5. pronounces a solemn curse upon all those, Who trust in
men, comparing them to the barren heath: As on the contrary, The man, who
trusts in God, shall be like unto a Tree planted by the waters side. We see
the Church of Israel, when truly repenting, then casting off all her carnal
confidence, Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon our horses, Hosea
14.3. It is a sin, that all are very prone unto, to trust in earthly power
and greatness, and not to eye God above all.

Lastly, We glory in men, when we boast in any thing that is humane or earthly,
any thing that belongs to man. Thus to boast of Beauty, Apparel, Riches,
Nobility, Parts and Learning; all this is a vain and sinful boasting. Charge
the rich men of this world, that they be not high-minded, but fear, says
Paul, 1 Timothy 6.15. Yet how hardly have we any of these humane excellencies or
comforts, and not boast of them? But the Prophet gives good counsel, Let not
the rich man boast in his riches, nor the great man in his greatness; but he
that glories, let him glory in this, that he knows God, Jeremy 9 23, 24. All
flesh is grass, and the glory thereof fades away. Yea, The rich man is to
rejoice that he is made low, James 1.10 These things are like too much blood,
apt to put us into a fever, and therefore we are to rejoice, when God (as a
wise Physician) takes some away.

In the next place, We are not to glory in the Doctors and Teachers we have,
which we do,

How many ways we may be said to glory in Doctors and Teachers.
First, When we are affected more with their parts, and gifts, and learning,
then with the powerful demonstration of Gods Spirit in them, and by them. When
we do not desire to hear them speak, as the Oracles of God, but as boasters of
their own learning. Thus Ezekiel was unto his hearers, as a love Song, but they
would do nothing, Ezekiel. 33.32. We deny not, but that humane Learning, and the
Arts, are necessary in a Minister of God, seeing all extraordinary gifts now
fail, yet that which the hearer should most of all be moved with, is the
powerful conviction and application of the Scripture, either for sin or duty
to the heart. This made Paul purposely avoid humane eloquence, that so their
faith might not be in the wisdom of men, but power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5.

Secondly, Then we glory in men, when we rest on the Ministry, and their
labors, thinking it enough to enjoy them, but never look up to God for
success, and a blessing. What is Paul, or Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye
believe? at the fifth verse. Therefore the principal work is from God; They
plant and water, but God gives the increase. Do not thou glory in the best
Ministry, and the most able Gifts in the world, so as not to depend on God,
and pray to him. For the best Ministry in the world, works no otherwise,
than God blesses it; and should thou every day hear Angels from Heaven
preach unto thee, yet if thy heart be not opened, and God give thee not to
understand, they are but like music to a deaf man. It Is not this Sermon, or
the other, though never so powerful that can raise thee from the dead, till
Christ give thee life.

Thirdly, Then we glory in men, when we have the persons of some Teachers in
such admiration, that whatsoever they say or maintain, without any search, or
dispute we believe. The Disciples of Berea are commended for their noble
disposition, That they would search the Scriptures, whether the things were so,
or no, Act. 17.11. Whereas to be addicted unto a man so, as ex persona probare
fidem, and not ex fide personam is blind obedience, and to offer a sacrifice
without eyes. Prove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. And, Try the Spirits, 1 John 4,
1. are rules given to all Christians. The Apostle reproves some erroneous
persons, for having their Teachers persons in admiration, Jude verse. 16. This
slavery has been always. Among the Jews there were the Disciples of Hillel
and Sammai. The Heathens have their Pythagoreans, Epicureans, Peripateticks, to
whom their Disciples were wholly captivated. And it is a very difficult thing to
set judgment on work, so as to be able to discern of things that differ.
Though there are many that abuse this privilege allowed them by Christ under
the pretense of trying. They therefore grow Scepticks, and because the Teachers
are not infallible, they believe themselves to be infallible.

Fourthly, Then we glory in men, when we prefer one before the other, so as
to make differences and schisms in the Church. And this was that especially
which Paul aims at in this place; some were for one Teacher, and some for
another; and by this means there were several factions, and rents made in the
Church.

Use of Admonition, To take heed of all humane boasting any kind of these
ways, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. Yea, says Paul, God forbid
I should glory in any thing, save in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14. Oh how
vain a thing and wicked is it to boast in riches, beauty, outward greatness,
and any of these fading things? David takes a better way, My soul makes her
boast of God always, Psalm. 34.2. Thou art high minded, and bear up thy self
from such and such earthly objects; Is not all this to glory in men? Did men
create thee? Can men save thee? Can men pardon thy sin? Why then do thou
not trust in God only? Cease you from man, Isa. 2.22. whose breath is in his
nostrils. It is quickly gone, and thy hopes are as quickly.

For all things are yours.

In this Verse (you heard) was the Duty inferred from the doctrinal matter
prescribed. The Apostle squeezes the honey from the honeycomb. And to the
Duty, we have the Reason or Ground adjoined, For all things are yours. On this
we are now to treat.

Take the words as an Argument, and they are very strong: None are to glory in
these things, that are inferior to them, that are servants to them, or below
them: But so are all things to the godly, but God himself: Therefore in God
only they must glory.


Thus as they are an Argument. But we shall consider them as an absolute
Proposition. Wherein take notice of, 1. The Subject. And 2. The Attribute.


The Subject is yours, that is, the Church, the godly, for those he means.
The place is like that, Romans 8 28. All things work to the good of those that
love God, and are called after his purpose.

2. The Attribute, in the Universality, All things are yours.

The Anabaptists in Germany did horribly abuse this place: for hence they
proved, That no Magistrate, if a wicked man, was a true Magistrate, and to be
obeyed; no rich man, no noble man, if he were not godly, had not any right to
their goods and estates. And they taking themselves to be the righteous ones,
and to judge who were wicked, killed many, dispossessed of their goods and
dominions.

The Papists charge Husse and Wickliff with this opinion. But we have just
cause to think, that they were but mere slanders and calumnies cast upon them.
There is a twofold Dominion:

1. A Political or Civil, which comes by the Laws of a Land, where a man
lives; as Austin says, Jure humano, haec villa est mea. And thus every man
that does not by theft or injustice obtain his estate, is a lawful and just
possessor. And that which he has thus by a Civil Right, he has also by
consequence with a Divine Right, because God by that Commandment, Thou shall
not steal, does approve all that Political and Civil distribution of meum and
tuum, which is by the Laws of a Land. But

2. There is a Sanctified Right, whereby a man does acknowledge God thankfully
in all that he has, and improveth all things graciously to the honor of God,
and his own salvation. And thus only a godly man has a sanctified right, or
rather use to all things. To show how a wicked man comes to have a lawful
civil right; when Adam by sin forfeited all; and wicked men not being in
Christ, have not their title again to the world restored to them, is a noble
point: But being not to my purpose, I must pass it by. And to speak the truth,
though some learned men bring in this Text, when they handle the point of
Dominion, whether it be founded upon Nature or Grace, yet indeed it is nothing
to that purpose.

Nor does the Apostle aim at any such thing. For all things may be said to be
the godly man's two ways: Either

1. (...), In respect of Dominion, Title and Possession. And now to this sense
the Apostle aims not, neither would it be to his purpose.

2. A thing may be said to be theirs, (...), In regard of the Use and End for
which they are. And thus all things are the godly man's; all things in kind, not
in the individuals; all things work to the good of a godly man; which the
Apostle does admirably enumerate; all Persons, or Officers in the Church; all
creatures in the world; all Conditions, and all Events. But we shall take the
sweetness of every particular, after we have handled the general. Observe,

That all things are for the spiritual good and advantage of the godly man.
Observe. All things are the Saints.


There is nothing in the whole world, nothing in the Church of God, nothing
that falls out, but one way or other the godly man may say, This is mine,
this belongs to me; this is for my good.

Now let us consider:

First, In how many respect, all things may be said to be the godly man's, In
what respects all things may be said to be the godly man's.
both in the Church, and the world. And

First thus, In that there is nothing, which would be for their good, that God
denies them. Whatsoever is in all the world, if it be good for the godly man,
he shall have it. No good thing will he withold from them that fear him,
Psalm. 84.11. Now the godly man's good is twofold; either that which is
Absolutely and Necessarily good, so that it cannot be evil, nor it cannot do a
godly man any hurt to have them, such as Christ is, Pardon of sin and Heaven;
and these are bestowed on all godly men. There is no man that fears God,
though he may say, I want riches, I want health, I am without this or that;
that can say, he is without Christ, and justification, and the Covenant of
Grace.

2. There is a limited Good, that which in its self is good, but does not make
good those that have it, yea it may be turned to evil. As wine is good, but
give it to the feavourish man, you hurt him. And thus it is with all the
temporal good things of the world; they do not make the possessours good, yea
they may be turned to sin, and increase thy corruption. And then, it is no
wonder if God out of his love to thee, with hold these things from thee. If
they were as necessary and as good, as Christ is, and Heaven is, thou were sure
to have them, Rom 8.32. If he has given us Christ, How shall he with him, but
give us all things else? Now this very particular should rebuke all the winds
and waves of fears and discontent within thee. Art thou repining and carnally
muttering, thou have not this, thou have not that? Oh look! Have thou
godliness? Have thou the fear of God in thy heart, than thou have all things,
because there is nothing that is good for thee that God keeps from thee? Do not
thou blame God, but thy own corruptions; if thou want such temporal mercies;
say rather, God sees I should make them a poison to my soul, I should grow
drunk with this sweet wine.

Secondly, A godly man may be said to have all things, Because he has a right
and a claim to the Covenant of Grace, wherein is a deed of Gift of all things
both spiritual and temporal. The Covenant of Grace lies in this, That God will
be our God, giving remission of sin, healing of our corruption, and blessing
us with all temporal blessings. This God made with Abraham, and so with all
believers, Therefore Godliness is said, to have the promise of this life, and
the life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. All heavenly and earthly things are by promise
made to the godly, only heavenly things absolutely, earthly things
conditionally, and with subordination and exception. So then, it is with thee,
as some man, who has all his estate lying in Bonds and Covenants, though for
the present he cannot command such a sum of money, yet he is rich in Bonds.
Thus the godly man has sure Bonds and Promises, even of Gods own making, who
cannot lie or deceive; and therefore he may be as much supported, as if he had
the things themselves. Hence arises that life of faith Habakkuk and godly men
have in their great extremities and necessities.

Thirdly, All things are the godly man's, Because he has God for his God, who
has all things. Qui habet habentem omnia, habet omnia; He that has the Sun
has the light of all the stars: He that has the Ocean, has all the
streams: Deus meus and omnia, as he said. Hence our happiness is said to be in
this, if we have the Lord for our God. David in all his exigencies, supported
himself with this, That God was his portion and his inheritance. Now he is such
a portion, that there is nothing else good beside; have him, and ye have all.
Though a child has not money and raiment at his command, yet because he has a
rich father, who can procure all these things, therefore he may be well said to
have them all. Thou shall not want, as long as God has it: If God have it,
thou shall have it; and what can be more desired?

Fourthly, A godly man may be said to have all things, Because godliness
works such an holy contentation and satisfaction of spirit, that in what
estate he is, he is as well pleased as if he had all things, as if he had the
whole world. Therefore it is called Godliness with content, 1 Timothy 6 6 viz.
which works and causes contentment, it is the proper effect and fruit of it.
Thus Paul, I have learned to be content in all conditions: I have all things, I
want nothing, Phil. 4 11, 12 That which pride and presumption puts some upon
to say, they wanted nothing, for which God severely reproves them; here true
grace puts the godly upon: Here is a godly Dives, that may say, Soul, take thy
spiritual ease, for thou have not many, but all good things laid up for thee.
Thus all things are theirs, because through contentation they have all things.

Fifthly, All things are the godly man's, Because they were made finaliter for
him. They are all for his spiritual use. If you regard the Offices and
Ordinances in the Church, they are all for the Church, either to begin,
increase or consummate grace, If you look upon the whole Creation, there is no
creature therein, but the godly thereby do, or ought to glorify God, and to
draw nearer thereby unto him. If every thing thou look upon, thou hear,
thou treadest upon, does not make thee more godly; thou losest the good use for
which they were made: Every gift is given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. And
every creature was also made to profit withal. At the first we see the whole
world, with all things therein, were made for man, which made the Psalmist
spend an whole Psalm, in the admiration of Gods goodness and bounty, What is
man, that thou art thus mindful of him? Psalm. 8.4. yet that was chiefly,
because the stars in Heaven, and the creatures on earth were made for him.
But with what praises may the mouths and hearts of Gods people be filled with,
in that not only the things of the world; but that all the Offices and
Ordinances of the Church are made for them. But this excellent point will be
more improved in the particular enumeration.

Why God made all things for the godly.
Let us now consider, Why God should make all heavenly and earthly things for
the godly. And

First, We need not wonder at it, if we consider, That Christ himself took our
nature upon him, and did undergo that shameful death, and those terrible
conflicts with Gods wrath for his Church, he gave himself for his Church. So
that Christ being theirs, no wonder if all things else be theirs. If ever God
would have denied any thing, would have withheld any thing, it would have been
his only Son, in whom he was so well-pleased: But this he parts with for his
Church: Yet we cannot say, Christ is ours, as Paul, and Cephas, and other
things; therefore he adds, We are Ghrists, and not Christ ours, because
though Christ was given for us, yet it was as a Mediator to work our peace,
that so thereby he might be exalted, and might have the pre-eminence in all
things. So that the Church is for Christ, not Christ for the Church.

Secondly, Because all things in the world are ordered by his providence only;
but the whole work of God about his children, is the effect of his
Predestination. Now Predestination is an act of his more immediate love, than
Providence is; and the Providence of God is subservient to his Predestination.
Therefore is Gods care and government over all things, that he may attain the
ends of his Predestination. Insomuch that there had been no Creation at first,
no world at all, nor would there still be any sustentation, or conservation of
it, were it not for the Churches sake.

Use 1. Of Exhortation to the godly, to live by faith on such principles. What
generous noble and heavenly dispositions would these thoughts breed. Scito te
Deum esse, said one, thinking the soul to be a beam of that Divine Essence; but
thou may truly say, God has made thee heir of all things. It Is not the
Devil, but God that does now show thee the glory of the world, and the Church,
and says, All these things are thine. Consider then, whether they be thine, by
that spiritual end they are intended for. Do all creatures, all conditions, all
events make thee more godly? Do they work such divine effects upon thy soul? Oh
do not thou be thy own adversary herein!

Use 2. Of Terror to wicked men; for it follows by way of contraries,
Nothing is yours, viz. for your spiritual good: The Ministry God gives, is not
for you: The mercies you have, they are not for your souls health. Oh the depth
of thy unspeakable misery! whether life, or death, all things help thee forward
to hell.

Having asserted a comfortable and rich Doctrine out of these words for the
godly: we proceed to make some Objections or doubts about it, which will be as
file to the iron; or like the Wine Press to the Grapes, to pr^sse out the
sweet Wine therein. And indeed, this truth seems Obnoxious to many
Exceptions; as in Religion there are many Doctrinal points which do amaze
humane reason, such as that of the Trinity, the Incarnation of Christ, the
Resurrection of the body, so there are also many Practical Positions which seem
contrary to all reason and experince; of which this in my Text is one, All
things are the godly man's. It seems to be an Idea, or mere fiction and
expression, if we consult with what befalls the godly.

Come we therefore to Answer some of the Objections. And

First, The doubt may be, Object.
How are all things the godly man's for his use and spiritual edification, when
many times we see the godly man gets no go^d by these? The Corinthians, who had
Paul and Apollo, and all those eminent Teachers for their use, yet by their
Divisions, and carnal Emulations, they made no spiritual improvement of them.
How many Sermons and Sabboths do even the godly let go, that there never
appears any footstep of them* as if they had never been? And then as for
their mercies and their afflictions, how many times do these draw out their
corruptions; and they seem to be the worse for them?

To Answer this,

First, We must distinguish between Gods intention in giving these, Answ.
and the godly man's actual improvement of them to that end. When the Apostle
says, All things are yours, his meaning is, on Gods part: His love is so
great, that for the godly only, all things in Heaven and Earth were created. If
so be therefore, at any time these things turn to thy hurt, blame thy self. The
Physician will tell the Patient sometimes, All these Potions, and all these
Cordials, they are yours; you are to take them; you may expect much good and
ease by them: But if the Patient be wilful, and disorder himself, it is his
fault, not the Physicians, that they do hurt. So that the meaning is, all
things in their creation and Institution were for the godly man's good. Therefore

Secondly, The godly man, through his weakness and sinfulness, not walking up
to Gods order, may make that an hinderance which God intended a furtherance. A
godly man may receive the Word and Ordinances sometimes in vain. Sometimes
afflictions may, for the present, make him more froward and passionate, and
mercies more presumptions and confident; as the Examples of David and others
show. So that our folly and corruptions, mingle bitter things with Gods sweet,
and then we complain this Text is not true. The foolishness of a man
perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord, Prove. 19.3. When
we do not our duty, we think God does not fulfill his Promise: Our ways are
unequal, and then we think Gods are not equal. So that you must understand
this Promise, All things are yours, in a well ordered use of the means, as all
other Promises are. It Is said, The Spirit will lead you in all truth, Joh.
16.13. Gods Word is promised to be accompanied with the fullness of the Lords
blessing to those that are his; But how? If we order and prepare our selves: If
we do not put in some bar and obstructions. For sin, that withholdeth good
things from us, that separates between God and us, as also between these
Promises and us.

Thirdly, Though the godly may for a while make these things against their end,
and not for it, yet this will not be always. Nay, God will so order it, that
this decay of theirs, or this disorder, shall likewise be turned to their good.
As those, who through mistake, may swallow down some strong Physic, though for
the present, they may be deadly sick; and worse then ever they were, yet
afterward, it may be, they are the better for such violent helps.

Fourthly, When we say all things are the godly man's, you must take them in
their Collective cooperation; as Romans 8. All things work together. This
particular, or that particular, may throw thee down, may make thee worse; but
then God brings about some other things that help altogether for thy good. As
they say of Egypt, All the venomous Herbs grow there, and also all the
Antidotes are to be had there. Where there is a Malady, there is also a Remedy.
And truly, thus Gods dispensations are with his Children. This or that
particular may hinder thee, this or that may prejudice thee, but God has
appointed other things to correct these. There is a benign influence with the
malignant, (as it were,) and both tempered together, advance speedily toward
Heaven.

Object.
The second doubt is this: If all things are for the godly, and only theirs
exclusively to the wicked, then this may seem to justify all the wickedness
and impiety of ungodly men? Why should they be blamed, if they get no good by
the Ordinances, if they profit not under the Ministry, for God did not intend
them for their good? and so if they abuse the creatures to all manner of
wickedness, they can do no otherwise: They had them for this end, to
accomplish sin thereby. If every thing works to their damnation, this may
make them sin the more desparately? But

Answ.
First, Divines have a good distinction about Gods Will. There is a will of
Complacency or Approbation; and there is his will of Efficiency, what he will
bring about, and none shall hinder.

Now it is the will of Gods approbation, that all things should be improved by
the wicked for their good. It Is his approving and commanding will, that every
Sermon should be received by Faith; that every mercy be improved fruitfully.
The goodness of God does invite such to Repentance. The afflictions and
scourges God brings on them, are to humble them, and make them to repent of
their sins.

But if we regard the will of Efficiency, so these things are the savor of
death to them that perish. The Apostle says this plainly, The Word was the
savor of life to such as are saved, and the savor of death to such as perish,
2 Cor. 2.15.

That their is such a will of God, will appear by that instance to Pharaoh, God
inflicted strange and miraculous judgments upon him; it was his approving and
commanding will, that by those Pharaoh should be humbled, and repent, and let
the people go. For this end, Moses and Aaron are sent to exhort him to this
duty. Yet if we respect Gods will of Efficiency, we see he told Moses, that
Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he would not let them go; and his heart grew
harder by these wonders. So then, Gods will of Approbation and Command, is,
That even the wicked, should make all things theirs, though Gods will of
Efficiency does not bring it about.

Secondly, If th^se things are poison to the wicked, and snares to them, they
may still blame themselves; for it is the corruption of their natures, not any
violence God offers them, that makes them turn every thing to their own
destruction. Thy perdition is of thy self, O Israel, Hos. 13 9. So that every
wicked man, having a corrupted nature, and this wickedness strengthened
through actual impieties, no wonder if every thing promote his damnation: But
still it is of himself. As you see poisonous creatures, Serpents and Toads, they
turn every thing they eat to poison, because of their venomous constitution: So
it is here; wicked men turn all good things into ill. Vnumquodque recipitur, ad
mo^um recipientes, Put the sweetest liquor into a noisome vessel, it will have
an ill tincture. Paul shows this evidently, The Law that was for life, he
found for death, Romans 7. The Law was good aand spiritual, yet it stirred up all
sin in him, because he was carnal. It Is that within thee, which defiles all
without thee. Wicked men sin as wilfully, and as industriously attend to
pervert all things to their damnation, as if there were no contracted necessity
upon them to offend against God in all things.

The third Doubt is, If all things be the Godlies, Why then are they so
uncomfortable, Doubt.
so dejected, complaining of wants, as if nothing were theirs? If this be true,
we would think, no godly man should ever be in a plunge; he may take up this
Text, and it would be an antidote against all fears and cares. It can be no
night with him, as long as this Sun shines.

Answ. It Is true, it should be so, but we are weak in faith, Answ.
we do not live upon Scripture-principles and privileges, but sensible; and
then we stagger and reel up and down. While we are clothed with the Sun, and
have the Moon under our feet, we walk in light and comfort. David, when his
faith is lively, then God is his shepherd, he shall want nothing; and he will
lay him down and sleep, because God takes care for him. But let him come from
this Mountain of faith, and look on the waters of afflictions below, his head
goes round, and he knows not where he is. Now a twofold faith is necessary
to bear up the head and heart, the one, Firmly assenting to the truth of the
things: The other, Fiducially applying them to our selves. If we have not the
first faith, we look upon such things as mere good words, as bare expressions:
Even as if a man should think he had such a Country, because he had the Map of
it. Oh this divine historical faith, strongly persuading our selves these
things are Gods truth; they cannot be a lie, they cannot deceive us, would
greatly establish us. And then, Fiducial application is the hand that takes
these things, making them to be ours. So that if you ask, How all present and
future things, life and death are ours? It Is by faith only. A quiet resting and
reposing of the soul upon Gods promise, puts us into the possession of all
these things.

Secondly, As they want faith, So an heavenly prudence and skill how to improve
them spiritually. Though all things be for their good, yet they must have
wisdom to know how to use all things. Therefore Paul, who said, He had all
things, says, He was instructed in it, as in a mystery, Phil. 4.11, Prescribe
the best medicines in the world, if men have not judgment rightly to order
them, they can never get good. What is a fountain sealed up, or a Book that
cannot be read, though it has never such admirable matter? Thus are all
things, though never so useful, if thou have not Christian wisdom. There is
no condition, affliction or event, but thou may say, if I had heavenly
wisdom, I might make excellent use of it.

Object.
The last Doubt is, How are all things the Godly man's, seeing for the most part
they are most wanting, they are in the greatest necessities? Had not Dives all
things, when Lazarus had not not so much as crumbs? Does not this Doctrine give
a mock-comfort, as those in Jam. 2.16. who bid, some be clothed and warmed,
but gave nothing?

Answ.
Answ. 1. This place does not so much speak of the possession of all things, as
the spiritual serviceablenesse of them. Those things which they have no
possession of, may yet serve for their souls good. He does not so much mean
what they have, as what tends to their good.

2. If the godly have not all things they would, that want is good for them The
want of any outward mercy may sometimes be better than the having of them. To
lose blood, when there is too much fullness, is healthful. So then, complain
not, saying, I have not this, or that good thing; the not having it is good.

3. Thou have what is best for thee, and that according to the wise Gods
ordering. Let this silence thee always. These afflictions, these exercises,
these wants are the best: The wise great God of Heaven does dispense them, and
they come from his hand.

4. Thou have better things, then any earthly thing thou want; thou have
Christ, thou have a title to Heaven and eternal glory.

Use of Reproof to the Godly, that walk in dejections and discouragements,
always complaining, they are many times cast down and disquieted. Be ashamed
of such a childish, weak disposition; think of this Text, carry it about thee*
in thy heart, in thy mind, in thy affections: Say, I will not disgrace the
promise, nor dishonor the goodness of God any more by these troublesome
complaints. You see David called himself a fool, and a beast for such things,
Psalm. 73.22.

But then secondly, Here is duty as well as privilege. Pray for spiritual
wisdom, how to make every thing thine in a godly manner: Get that excellent
art of profiting by every thing. Be not as the foolish Cock, that knew not what
to do with a pearl. How do you esteem an herb or a receipt of some special use?
I tell thee, Every thing is precious, thy time, thy health, the creatures; thou
may turn all things into gold.

Verse 22. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas.
FRom the General, the Apostle in this Verse descends to a particular
enumeration of the several things that are for the use of the godly man; He
gives us an Inventory of the Churches goods. And first, he begins with the
Officers, and their Gifts, and labors, Whether Paul, etc. He instanceth in the
chiefest and highest, If Paul, and such as were Apostles immediately called and
placed in the highest Offices, were not for themselves, but for the Church,
then much less meaner and lower persons; whether Paul that plants, or Apollo
that waters, or Cephas, that is Peter. Here you see he is placed after Paul,
and from hence is plainly inferred, That Peter had not such an universal and
absolute dominion over the Church, as the Papists dream of, but all for the
Church, not the Church for them.

Observe, That all Offices and Gifts, howsoever diversified, Observe. All
Offices are for the Church
are for the Churches of God.

The Churches edification is the end of their Institution. When God made the
world, he made it for himself. The world is for God, not God for the world. But
when Christ ascended on high, and set Officers in the Church, he made them for
believers, not believers for them. Thus before verse 5. What is Paul and Apollo?
but Ministers by whom ye believe. And so 2 Cor. 4.5. We preach not our selves,
but Jesus Christ, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. So that all the
offices, all the ministerial power and abilities that are, be wholly for the
Churches spiritual advantage. Even as the nurse of some great Emperors child,
all the dainty fare, and good provision she has, is only to cause milk, that
may be good nourishment for the child. Hence are they compared to light and
salt, which have their property for other things, and not themselves.

Now let us consider, In what sense the Ministers are not servants to the
Church, against Brownists.
1. In what sense this is not true, that all Officers are the servants of the
Church. 2. How it is true.


And first, When we say, Officers, and all their abilities, are for the Church,
The meaning is not, as if they had their power and office from the Church, or
from believers, so as that they should preach, and baptize, and dispense all
Ordinances in the Churches name; as the Brownists do earnestly contend, making
all power and dominion to be in the number of the Church. This is not so; for
the Officers and their power is of Christ. 1 Cor 2.28. God has set in his
Church. Ephesians. 4.11. Christ gave some Pastors, some Teachers. Acts 20.28. Over
which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers. Hence they are called, The
Ministers of Christ, and the stewards of God. By all which places it is clear,
That the Officers of the Church have their power and authority from God and
Christ, that they do all not in the Churches name, but Christ's name. They are
not the Churches stewards, nor the Churches Ambassadors, but Christ's. Indeed by
the Churches election or designation, such a man is received to be their Pastor
or Shepherd, but the Church does not give him his Office; but Christ or such
Officers, that Christ has appointed to do it. So that they are both the
Churches servants, and Christ's servants. The Churches servants, because the end
of their office is to benefit the Church. Christ's servants, because they come
in his Name, and have their Commission and Authority from him.

Secondly, In that they are wholly the Churches, the Apostle does not confound
or make void that order appointed in the Church between Officers, and those
they have a care over. He does not nullify the relation they are in of
Shepherds, Guides, Overseers, and such as rule over them, and watch for their
souls good. Nor does he take away that command of honor, reverence, love and
respect; yea that submission and obedience unto them, as other places do
require. There are those that would bring an Anarchy and confusion in the
Church, making no difference between Shepherd and Sheep, Guides and Overseers,
and those who are to submit to them: but the Scripture is very clear for this
distinction, and God is not the God of confusion, but of order: Is the whole
body an eye, or the whole body an head? says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.17. This
would make the body of Christ a deformed monster, In what sense they are the
Churches
and worse than any humane society.

But when he says, All these Officers are yours, it implies these things:

First, That the aim of all those who enter in any Church office, and all the
while they are in, should not be principally their own advantage, or earthly
accomodations, but the edification of the Church, the glory of Christ, and the
good of peoples souls. This is very difficult, when he says, Paul and Apollo
are yours; he thereby teaches all us Ministers, what should be the chiefest
aim of our souls, to feed, not to shear the sheep. Thus Peter is instructed,
Love thou me? Love thou me? then feed my sheep, feed my lambs, John 21.16.
Not but that Christ takes care for their maintenance, and they are lawfully to
look to that, but it ought not to be the principal, He that desires (1 Timothy
3.1.) the office of a Bishopric, desires a good work. It Is a work and labor
for the good of others. So that this teaches us, what sincere and public
intentions ought to be in us? What tender and compassionate bowels we ought to
have to the flock committed to our charge.

Secondly, It implies, That all our preaching, and the whole labor of our
Ministry must not be for ostentation, or self-advancement, but in the most
profitable and advantageous way we can, to better men's souls. 1 Cor. 12.7.
Every one has his gift to profit with all. The Apostle rejects all such
Questions as do not profit, 2 Timothy 2.14. So that all our care should be in our
preaching, in our study, so to handle the Word, that we may most benefit our
people; that our words may fall like the rain or dew upon the tender herb, as
Moses says, Deuteronomy. 32.2. that the meanest may be edified. The Apostles
arguments against speaking in unknown tongues, 1 Cor. 14. do fully reach to
this, Ministers may affect such obscure, unprofitable, and impertinent matter*
as that the people may no more be bettered, then if all things were done in
Latin. The Apostle had rather speak five words to edification, then five
hundred other ways. Insomuch that a powerful, profitable way of preaching is
a great gift of God, a special blessing unto a people: And though some
Ministers partake of it, more than others, yet all are to bend themselves for
the peoples profit. Si non vis intelligi, cur vis legi, said he, we may add,
cur vis audiri; we see the nurses care is to make the child's meat most
conveniently eatable, and fit for nourishment; and Ministers that do otherwise,
are such unkind fathers, that our Savior speaks of, as not possible, when
the children ask bread, they give them a stone; when they ask fish, they give
them a serpent.

Thirdly, In that all things are the Churches, is implied, That no Officers
have an absolute dominion over their peoples faith, neither may lord it over
them according to their lusts and ambitions, but to do all things for their
souls good. Paul, though an Apostle, would not assume such dominion, 2 Cor.
1.24. Not that we have dominion over your faith. And 1 Pet. 5.3. forbids all
lordship over Gods inheritance. They are Gods inheritance, they are his field
that they are to dress and till, not for themselves, but their Masters use.
The Pope of Rome with his Abettors, do infinitely transgress in this
particular, who, though he style himself Servus servorum, the servant of
servants, is yet the Lord of Lords; whatsoever they give us to eat, we must
swallow without choosing. All our Sacrifices must be without eyes; the more
ignorance in our faith, the more devotion. No, all the power and authority of
Church Officers, is not Magisterial, but Ministerial; we must come with, Thus
says the Lord, As it is written; That which we have received, that we are to
deliver; and when they keep to this, then, He that hears them, hears
Christ; and, He that despises them, despises Christ. No man may add to, or
detract from the last will of a man, much less Gods Testament, which is to be
the rule to the Church, while she is in this world.

Fourthly, In that all Officers are the Churches, there is implied, That not
only finis operantis, but operis also, not only the end of all Ministers, but
the end of the offices and gifts themselves, are for the Churches good. God
when he set Pastors and Teachers, he gave them for the perfecting of the
Saints, and completing their graces, and bringing them to a full stature in
Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

Now it is good to consider, the manifold ends, The end for which they are the
Churches.
why God has given such offices and gifts to his Church. And

First, It Is to multiply and gather in more to the Church, even the whole
number of the elect. Thus they are called fishers of men, Mat. 4.19. they cast
in the spiritual net of the Gospel, and out of the bitter waters of the world,
they take up many for Gods Kingdom. Many thousands were taken at the beginning
of the Gospel. Thus they are also called Fathers, because by the Word they
beget many to eternal life. So then, the Officers of the Church are yours, to
bring you home to God, of Wolfs to make you Lambs, of Beasts to make you
Saints. Oh consider, whether the Ministry has ever been yours in this sense,
or no! Has it removed those mountains, those high Towers of sin that exalt
themselves against Christ? Has it reformed thee of thy lusts, of thy
beastliness: Oh may you not say in a contrary sense to Paul, You have ten
thousand Instructers, yet no Fathers; you have had many preachers, but no
father; none has begot thee anew to a spiritual and heavenly life.

Secondly, It Is to convince and reprove, to trouble and disquiet the soul for
sin, and thus they are yours, though wretched man had rather be without them.
Paul was very sharp and severe against the errors and vices of believers. All
Ministers are commanded, To reprove and rebuke with all authority, Tit. 2.15.
To lift up their voices like a trumpet, and to tell Israel of their
transgressions. This is for your advantage more than all false and daubing
delusions. You see God himself would not spare Aaron or Moses, though never any
talked to God face to face, as he did, yet God reproved him for his rashness,
Because he did not sanctify him before the people, and therefore would not let
him enter into the Land of Canaan. Oh it is a good sign, when you can receive a
sharp reproof, and rebuking Sermons as yours, as profitable to you, desiring
not to be spared!

Thirdly, They are yours for quickening and increasing of grace. To bring us to
a full stature, as you heard the Apostle calls it. Desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that you may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. There is watering as well as
planting. Paul reproves these Corinthians as carnal, that he could not speak
to them as spiritual. And Heb. 6. he speaks terribly to those that are still
in their first principles, and are not carried on to further perfection.
Consider then, here is the Ministry, and all the gifts and Sermons you have
enjoyed for your benefit and profit: Is your understanding more enlightened,
your hearts more tender, your lives more reformed? Is your knowledge bettered,
your graces more quickened, and your whole conversation more fervent and
zealous?

Fourthly, They are for consolation and comfort unto the tender and broken
hearted for sins. Hence they are the Ministers of the Gospel, and they bring
the glad tidings of peace. We are sent to comfort and give rest to those that
are laden with sin. Oh that we could meet with a people that need this balm
of the Gospel, that want this oil of Gods grace in their wounds! There are
thousands of people, to whom we must not, we dare not dispense the comforts of
the Gospel; we cannot say, these glad tidings are to be published to you.

Lastly, Not only their gifts and office, but all events whatsoever do befall
them. Their honor, or disgrace; their life, or their death; their esteem, or
their persecution, is for the Churches good. 2 Cor. 5.13. Whether we be besides
our selves, or sober, it is for you, says Paul. And in another place he makes
one end of all his sufferings to be for the Churches sake, Col. 1.24. If the
Ministers of the Gospel run through good report, or bad report, life or
death, it is for the Churches good. And therefore Chrysostom understands that
life and death after mentioned of the Ministers: so that you are not only to
learn by their Sermons, but by all their mercies, or by all their sufferings;
not only their tongues, but all things else should teach you.

Use of Exhortation. Take heed that through thy unbelief, and other sins, the
Ministry, and all the abilities and gifts thereof be not against thee. Paul
said, He was the savor of death to some, (2 Cor. 2.15.) that perish. Oh
tremble, that this Ministry, this preaching should be for the good of others,
but not to thee! They can say, these are ours for conversion, quickening and
consolation; but I stand like a dead tree under all the rain, sending forth no
fruit at all. You would think it an heavy curse, to have your bread not yours
to nourish you; your clothes not yours to warm you; but this is more terrible,
the Word preached is not thine to convert thee, or reform thee. What? Shall God
out of his great love provide these mercies for thee, and thou go away with no
advantage at all? He is your Minister, and that is your Sermon, which is made
yours in your life and obedience: otherwise he is yours to accuse and condemn
you at the last day.

Use 2. Of Instruction. How precious and dear the salvation of men's souls is,
that God has appointed all things in the world, and in the Church for this
end: All the creatures of God would teach thee this: All the Ministers and
Ordinances are for this end: All thy mercies, thy afflictions, thy health, thy
sickness is for this: Why then do thou no more consider of it, and lay it
to heart?

Or the world, all is yours.

We proceed to the second enumeration of those Goods the Apostle gives an
Inventory of, and that is a very large and comprehensive one, the world, with
all things therein. The Devil once thought to tempt Christ, by promising him,
All the glory of the world; but here we see a gift made indeed of the whole
world to every believer.

First, All the things of the Church are given. Then, All the things of the
world. This is to have the fatness of heaven and earth together.

The word world, as for the nature of it is wide, so for the significations
thereof it is also very large. Sometimes we read it in the plural number, Heb.
1.2. Heb. 11.3. Christ is said to make the worlds, not as if that fancy of some
were true, That there are many worlds, but it supposes the world in all the
successive generations of it. Now the world is sometimes used for the mere
Fabric of this universe, with all things therein, Heb. 4.3. Since the
foundation of the world; sometimes it is used only for the Elect and godly; as
when it is said, John 12.47. I come not to judge the world, but save it. And
John 6.33. he is said To give life to the world; but this sense is very much
questioned, yet the Orthodox propugn it.

Lastly, The world is used for the wicked inhabitants thereof. Thus John 15.
the world is said to hate the Disciples of Christ. And 1 John 5.19. the whole
world is said to lie in darkness: And well may the world be put for wicked
men, because they are far the greater part; and therefore the world is used
in opposition to the Church, 1 Cor. 5.10. because believers are called out of
the world.

If you ask, In what sense world is taken here?

I answer principally in the first, for the fabric of the world, and all the
contents therein; the Cabinet, and all the treasure in it; this is a godly
man's, not in a political civil sense, but a spiritual sanctified way; And thus
he that has not where to lay his head, or set the sole of his feet, may yet be
said to have the whole world, as it was with Christ, and Abraham. Observe,

That the whole world with all things therein is for the spiritual advantage of
a Godly man. Observe.


He may say of the whole Universe, All this is mine, for the advantage of my
soul, one way or other. We have a pregnant place for this, Rom 4.13. where you
have a promise of being heir of the world; and to whom is this made? To Abraham
and his seed; What seed? verse. 12 Those that walk in the steps of the faith of
Abraham. So that you see, the inheritance of the world i^ made to Abraham, and
to all believers; which is not true of the civil possession of it, but of the
sanctified use of it. It Is true, Interpreters do much dispute* in what sense
Abraham, and so all believers can be said to be heirs of the world? But
certainly this Text is a good exposition of it.

Come we therefore to show in how many particulars we may say, In what sense
the world is said to be a godly man's.
the whole world is a godly man's, it is for his use. And

First, It Is the godly man's School or Academy, it is his study or library. The
Heavens and all things therein are so many books, whereby he admireth the
wisdom of God, Romans 1. If the very Heathens might make this use of the world,
How much rather the godly, who from Gods making of the world, do gather many
excellent and solid supports? As you may observe, David never encourages
himself more about Gods support of the Church, than from this Argument, That he
made Heaven and Earth: He that did so great a thing, what may he not do? Psalm.
19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, viz objectively, as an excellent
book declares the glory of the Author; but as he who would understand the
excellent sense of a book, must peruse it, and understand it: So he that would
make a true use of the world, for the exalting of Gods wisdom and power, must
diligently meditate on it. This is that, which one man says, the world is a
godly man's mentaliter in his mind, because by that he takes the occasion to
admire God, and to be affected in all love and fear. This is the right
consideration of the Heavens, not to prognostic future contingencies, which
God reserveth as a property to himself, but thereby to advance the wisdom and
power of God: Thus every herb, every creature is a tongue; yea the whole world
is but one great tongue, proclaiming aloud, that there is a God. Let then the
world be thy study, all the creatures so many books: Do ye look on a watch, or
some curious needle work, and admire the workmanship; and shall ye not much
more the world, as Gods work? Arianus Epictetus speaks well to this, though
an Heathen, condemning the negligence of men herein, How many go far (says
he) to see the workmanship of Phidias, and judge themselves unhappy, if they
die before they have seen that sight; and shall not we much rather admire this
world, that is made by God?

Secondly, The world is a godly man's, Because every thing therein is given him
for his necessary use. Though he has not every thing, yet he has as much as
is needful to him, Romans 8. If he has given us Christ, how shall he not with
him give us all things else? If you take a man into your house, and bid him
call for what he will, he may command every thing in the house, though he does
not call for all things, but what is for his use, that is, as if he had all.
And thus the whole world is for a godly man: What wealth, what honors, what
health is necessary and needful, he is sure to have. He that dwells by the
Ocean, he has all the water in the Sea for his use, though it is not necessary
he should make use of it all. He that has the use of any thing, has the
thing. Again, if a man have never so many things, and do not use them, he has
them not. As the great rich men of the world, Habent ne fruantur, non ut
fruantur, The having of them keeps them from enjoying of them, as he said, In
opem me copia fecit, and they are not theirs for use, because they are theirs
in possession.

Thirdly, The world is a godly man's, as his shop, and place of service. It Is
that wherein he works and labors for God. It Is the great shop for mankind to
do that work God has appointed them. It Is the great vineyard, in which God
has set every man to work. This is the via, the other is patria. This world is
for doing, the world to come for receiving. And our Savior spoke many Parables
to this purpose, that he gives all talents, he be ru^^eth every man with
several oportunities, and they must improve them; they must be merchants in
making the best for God. And we are the more to attend to this, because we have
but a day, the night comes, and none can work, Oh that this were considered by
us! The world is a working place for Heaven; all that is to be done must be
done here; when thou art taken out of this world, all thy work is done for
Heaven: Then thou art to receive a reward. Take heed either of spe^^ing thy
talent upon sin, and in the service of Satan, or hiding it in a napkin, to do
nothing with it. We see what toil and labor men take for the things of this
world, But labor for the meat (says our Savior) which perishes not, John
6.27. There are eternal riches and treasures. Oh that our hearts were more upon
these things! One thing is necessary; they choose the better part, who neglect
all things to enjoy God.

Fourthly, The world is a godly man's Inn or lodging place. It Is a provision
God makes for a season, till they are ripe for Heaven. Thus the godly are often
compared to pilgrims and strangers; and Abraham, Heb. 11. with the Patriarchs,
though they had the promise of the world, yet they were as pilgrims, and
declared it by all they did, That they sought for a City of Gods own making,
which abides for ever. So that the whole world is but a withdrawing room for
the godly. They are as travelers in an Inn, who are not inordinately affected
with the good things there, neither will they spend all they have there, but
still look to their homes. And truly this shows the excellent frame of godly
men, though they are in the world, yet not of the world, John 17. As we see the
vapors, though they arise out of the earth, yet they ascend and follow the
motions of the Heavens. Thus it is here, though the godly are in the world, yet
their affections, desires and motions of heart are according to heavenly
directions. The wicked are in the world, as their proper place, their center;
they would never go out of it; but the godly seek for another Country.

Fifthly, The godly have the world as the Stage or Artillary-yard, a place of
Exercise, wherein all their graces are to be drawn out, by the opposition
therein. Even as Paul, 2 Cor. 12. said, There was given him a thorn in the
flesh; and it is given to the godly to suffer, How is that? Because these
exercises and oppositions they are to discover and draw out the godliness and
power of believers. As some among the Romans were put to many fights and
exercises to prove their valor. Thus the godly is in the world, as a soldier
in the camp, or in the battle. Our Savior John 15.18. tells his Disciples of
the hatred and opposition, they shall meet with in the world, if they were such
as the world would have, the world would love them; but because they do not
conform to their ways, therefore they are persecuted and driven up and down.
Look upon the world, as a place of Exercise, do not think to find it otherwise
than an Egypt to thee. It will therefore be thy wisdom, to get the rich
spoils of it, as from an enemy. To be quickened to the height of all thy graces,
by how much more the comba^e and conflict thou have, is exceeding great. The
greatness of the tempest will discover the great art of the Pilot.

Sixthly, The world is a godly man's, Because all things therein are sanctified,
and made clean to his use. When Adam tell, we lost our dominion; and being our
selves unclean, every thing becomes unclean to us, Tit. 1.15. To the pure all
things are pure, but to the unbelieving all things are defiled You see then,
that to wicked men nothing is pure, though they have great estates, great
honors, yet nothing is clean to them: Though they have a civil right to such
things, yet wanting the sanctified use of them, every thing becomes defiled to
them. So that every thing they touch is pitch, every thing they eat is poison;
there is a spiritual leprosy upon them, Because without faith it is impossible
to please God. Oh, if there were no other sense then this, that all things to
the godly are sanctified and clean in their use, this were admirable! Having
faith, thou art reconciled to God, and so thy eating, thy drinking, thy buying,
thy selling, all thy actions are accepted of. Thus you see, how the world is a
godly man's.

The Objection then is, Why have the godly the least possession of it, Object.
if they have the sanctified use of it? Does not David complain, That wicked
men have the fatness of the earth? Did not Christ tell those who proffered
their service, That the Foxes had holes, and the Birds nests, but the Son of
man has not where to lay his head? Matthew. 8.20 And can the Disciple be above
his Master? Does not Paul tell us of his hunger, nakedness, and all kind of
straits? How are these promises any thing but golden delusions?

To answer this, you must know, That even those wicked men, Answ.
who are said to have the world at their will, yet they have not the world
indeed, they have it not as the godly men, The little that the righteous has,
is better than great treasures of the wicked, Psalm. 37.16. For,

First, Whatsoever the wicked man has, he has it in* wrath; it comes from
Gods anger. God is angry with the wicked all the day long. And Heb. 11. Without
faith it is impossible to please God. Those that are heirs of the world, have it
by walking in the faith of Abraham. Think you, Dives that fared so deliciously
every day* had all his wealth in a mercy? No, it was for his punishment, it was
for his eternal torment. They call such things the blessing of God, and so
indeed in themselves they are; but to wicked men they are curses. For, as the
godly man's afflictions come from Gods love, Whom he loves, he chasteneth* Heb.
12. so wicked men's mercies come from Gods anger. Had God loved thee, thou had
had (it may be) more afflictions, more wants and exercises.

Secondly, Wicked men have not the world, Because they are overcome by it; the
world has them rather. Therefore they are called (as you heard) the world, as
if their very souls, as well as bodies, were made of the dust of the earth;
whereas the godly have the world, as if they had it not; they have God, and the
world too; they have Heaven and Earth too; they do not pr^^ the worse; their
duties are not the more thin and distracted. As Abraham and David, these were
rich and great men in the world, yet if you read David's Psalms, you will
find his heart set on God above all these things.

Thirdly, Wicked men have not the world, Because they do not own and
acknowledge God as the giver of all; neither do they live to him, but the
things of the world are instruments to draw out their lusts, to make them the
more wicked. They take the good creatures of God, and abu^e them to
wickedness: Therefore Rom 8. The whole creation is said to groan under them,
as being weary of them: The very Air, the very Earth is weary of them; yea, the
timber in the house, and the stones of the wall do witness against them; they
are by the things of the world made more wicked.

Lastly, They have not the world, Because they have not an holy contentation of
mind. They are not quiet, or satisfied in their condition; they have no true
peace, notwithstanding all their abundance; and the reason is, because they
have not pardon of sin, and enjoyment of Gods favor with these; and they are
only blessed who are so, Matthew 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the earth. You see the whole earth is promised to a meek, humble, contented
spirit, whereas a wicked man is compared to the Sea, that is always foaming,
and never lies still.

The Use is twofold, 1. Of Comfort and Exhortation to the godly Comfort in
what distress and strait soever thou art in; Say not, I have not this, I want
this, I am poor and miserable, for thou have Heaven and Earth, only set faith
on work. This is the hand to receive those treasures; This faith is not a
fancy, it is not a foolish imagination, but a real investing of thee with all
things. But it is of Exhortation also, to have the world for thy spiritual use.
Take heed of the wickedness of it, We have not received the spirit of the
world, 2 Corin. 4. Oh it is an excellent thing, not to have the spirit of the
world, but of God!

Use 2. Of Instruction; To show the power and miserable estate of the richest
and greatest men in the world, that want godliness; none is so poor, so
miserable as they. Thou say, this is thine, and that is thine: Alas, because
Christ and the Promise are not thine, nothing is indeed thine: If they be
thine, they are thy poison, thy destruction, thy damnation; and thus they are
thine.

(Or Life.)

We proceed to the third thing in order, and that is, the several Conditions or
Estates we are in; Life is yours, and Death is yours.

Chrysostom, and Grotius after him, limit this to the life and death of the
Ministers in the Church: If they live enjoying their liberties, and outward
comforts, it is for you: If they die, if they lose their liberties and lives,
it is for the Churches sake. As Paul said, He was willing to be a Sacrifice
offered up for the Philippians faith, Phil. 2.17.

This is indeed a truth; but as the world is a general, so there is no reason,
but that we should take Life and Death in as General a sense. And indeed this
limited one, may well come under the first enumeration, Paul, and Apollo, all
are yours.

At this time, we shall treat of Life. The Scripture speaks of a threefold
Life: 1. Animal, which is in beasts. 2. Humane, belonging to men as rational.
And 3. Supernatural, or an heavenly life, which only deserves the name of it.
The other being but shadows and dying lives.

Now we shall especially speak of this humane life, being perfected with that
supernatural life. Observe,

That Godly men do only live, or, Observe. Godly men only live.
The Godly only do make a spiritual use of their life.

Life is only theirs, 1 Pet. 3.10. He that loves life, and would see good
days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, let him eschew evil and do good.
Here you see the only way to live, and to have good days, is to avoid all
evil, and embrace all good. Hence Christ, John 6. calls himself, The bread of
life, and he gives the water of life; none lives, till they be united to him.

We shall insist on these things: 1. That only godly men live. 2. That wicked
men, though in the midst of all their jollity, yet the Scripture does not
account of them, as living persons. And


First, The godly man only lives, Because he is united to God and Christ the
fountain of life. David does often style God, The fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9.
And in his favor there is life. And in the New Testament, especially by John,
Christ is made the Author of all life. He is therefore compared to the Head,
and to the Vine. If the members or branches be separated from these, they die
and wither presently, as John 15. This is so frequent an assertion, that we
need not dilate on it. If not a member of Christ, there is no life in thee. Aut
es in membris, aut in humoribus, said Austin. Thou art either among the members
or the humors of the body of the Church. Gal. 3.20. Paul said, He no longer
lived, but Christ in him; and the life he lived was by faith in the Son of
God. What did not Paul eat and drink, and enjoy the common Air, as we do?
Yes, this he does not call his life; Oh they live, who no longer live, but
Christ in them! Thy sense, thy carnal reason, thy corrupt affections, thy
worldly inclinations, these no longer live, but Christ in thee, and his graces.

Secondly, Only the godly man lives, Because he has a spiritual and a new
life added to his animal life. For as the soul is the life of the body; so
grace is the life of the soul. Hence our Savior calls all wicked men dead men.
Let the dead bury the dead, Matthew. 8.22. That is a strange expression, but very
true. No dead corpse is more destitute of life and apprehension, than their
souls are of any heavenly motions, any spiritual hungrings or thirstings. All
the merry and jolly men in the world, they are dead men, if living in their
sins. Therefore among the Pythagoreans, who kept strict Discipline amongst
themselves; if any of their company did commit any gross sin, they did cast
him out of their company, and provided a coffin for him; intimating hereby,
they looked upon him as a dead man. This heavenly, spiritual life, whereby a
man does all things by supernatural and holy principles, to holy and godly
ends, deserves the name of life. Hence Ephesians. 4.18. it is called, The life of
God; either because of the conformity and likeness of it to Gods life; or
because God is the Author and worker of this life in his children. Tell us not
then, that such a man lives richly and happily, having a great Estate, a
glorious Seat, large Revenues; he lives that lives this spiritual life; and
without it, as the Apostle says of those wanton widows, They are dead while
alive, 1 Timothy 5.6. Oh now, thou would weep over thy husband, thy child, if
they were corporally dead, why do thou not much more for their spiritual
death? We read of the Egyptians, what an outcry they made for the death of
one in every family? But how many families are there, that have none but dead
persons in them? Alas, thou must needs be dead, for thou see not with thy
eyes the beauty of spiritual things: Thou hear not with thy ears the lively
word of God, neither can thou walk with thy feet in the way to Heaven.

Thirdly, The godly man only lives, Because he only has the true
blessedness and comfort of this life. He only has true joy and peace of
conscience; and this not only the Scripture calls life, viz. a prosperous,
happy estate, as when they said, Live, o King, but the Heathens also, Vivamus
mi amica; vixit, dum vixit been; and vita non est vivere, sed valere. There are
some men who live this life; and yet Job says, they long for death: Their life
is a burden and a torment to them; when it is day, they wish it were night; and
when it is night, they wish it were day. This God threatens as a curse to every
one, that shall not keep the Law. Now the godly man, he only lives, so as to
have true joy, real happiness, because his sins are pardoned; God is only
his portion and delight, At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore, said
D^vid, Psalm. 16.11. And although the godly may sometimes through their own
sin, or for their exercise be deprived of this joyful and blessed life, yet
that is for their good; as Lazarus's death was, that his Sisters faith, and
Gods glory may be the more magnified. And besides, as Christ's body, so their
souls shall not always be kept under the cords of this death. This is
therefore by accident. The promise to godliness is joy and gladness of heart;
They are called upon to do it, they are commanded to it. Lay this then down
for a sure Rule, That thou do not live, thou have not a prosperous, joyful
and happy heart, till thus sanctified.

Fourthly, The godly only live, or life is theirs, Because they only know how
to improve the days of their life for God They make the right u^e of their
life and time here, which is to provide for eternity, to glorify God, and save
their souls. When Paul could say, I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, 2 Timothy 4 7. This was an argument he lived Our Savior spoke many
Parables, to show, how we should improve our Talents, and be always gaining,
till our Master come; whereas if thou spendest thy time on thy losts and
pleasures of sin; if thou art idle and negligent, thou have not lived.
Idleness is the burial of a man alive. We do not account our time of sleep so
properly part of our life, because we do nothing then. And this is a full
proof, that only godly men live, because they only make honey, while the Summer
shines; they only husband their time, while it is day, calling upon God; They
only accomplish that work and errand for which God sent them into the world.
Remember this, he lives that is active for God in his generation, that moves
continually for the good of his soul. Let it not be said of thee, as Seneca of
one, who kept close in his house, Hic situs est Bascia, as if he were buried
there.

Fifthly, Life is only the godly man's, Because he has an interest, in eternal
life. John 5.24. He has passed from death unto life. He shall never die that
lives this life. Now (alas) this temporary, natural life, does not deserve the
name of a life. The very Heathens thought so; and the Scripture calls it but a
shadow, not a substance. What are a few evil days here, and full of misery?
Shall we judge it a life? No surely, eternal life deserves only that name,
where there is no fear of a change, where no power or violence can overcome,
where mortality is swallowed up in immortality. This is the life that the
Scripture inviteth all unto. Did Dives live, though he boasted good things were
stored up for him? No, This night, thou fool, thy soul shall be taken away.
Will thou call this a life, to have a few pleasures of sin for a season, and
then to go into eternal torments. Do not the damned in hell wish, they had
never been born, that this natural life had never been bestowed upon them? Do
not thou then matter this moment, but set thy heart upon eternity. Is not this
life a vapor, a bubble, but the life to come that must make me happy? When God
promised several outward mercies to Abraham, O (says Abraham) that Ishmael
might live before thee! All these outward things are nothing, if he live not
this spiritual and eternal life.

Sixthly, The godly man only lives, Because he takes his life from God, and
refers it to his glory. Whether we live, we live to the Lord, said Paul,
Romans 14.8. They receive their life thankfully from God, and they live to his
glory. Now we say, he has a thing, that knows how to make the right use of
it; and thus, because the godly know how to receive their life from God, and to
return it again to him. Therefore it is that they have life; yea they have it,
because they can readily part with it, at Gods Command, I die daily, said Paul,
1 Cor. 15.31. And this is our Saviors sure Rule, Luke 17.23. He that will lose
his life shall save it, and he that will save it shall lose it. You see the way
to have life, is to part from it; he has it, that has it not; as the Martyrs,
who as willingly laid down their lives, as we our garments.

Seventhly, The righteous only live, Because they mortify and subdue those
sins that kill our bodies, that take away our lives. Wrath and quarrelling
that depriveth a man of the peace of his life; now he refraineth his tongue, he
is of a meek spirit; whereas anger is like a fire burning in the bowels; and so
grief is a waster of the very bones; Worldly sorrow works death, 2 Cor. 7.
the godly therefore take heed of it, as that which murders the body. So
inordinate and worldly cares; we see how such do even devour men; they have so
many thorns in their flesh; and what life do such live? Impatience is a sudden
Devil possessing a man's soul, In patience possess your souls, Luke 21.19. A
man does not possess himself, he is not master over his own spirit that is
passionate and furious: So that men in such sins, they live but as those that
have been thrown to wild beasts or serpents to be devoured by them.

Lastly, The godly man only lives, Because even in the last breathings of this
life, his hopes and comforts do most remain. The righteous has hope in his
death, Prove. 14.32. And this hope is called, A lively hope* yea the godly die
not at all, because all live to God; their very dead bodies, if you regard the
Covenant of Grace, and Gods power are alive, Luke 20 38. At that moment, when
all a wicked man's hope perishes, his life fails him, his comforts, his
friends, all forsake him; then are the godly to lift up their heads, for their
redemption draws nigh. Though they were dead they shall live. Dives had the
good things of this life, but does he not lose all with his soul at his death?
Lazarus may say, Soul, take thy ease, when dying; which Dives could not. But

In the second place, How can it be said, that the wicked do not live, In what
respects it is true, that the wicked do not live.
when they are said to have their portion chiefly in this life? And David by
many Psalms informs us, they do not only vivere, but valere, not only
live, but flourish, Their eyes stick out with fatness, yet they do not live,
because

1. They are dead in their sins: And hereby their faith, their Religion, their
Christianity is all dead, as you heard.

2. They do not live, Because they are in a condemned estate, they are
appointed to wrath. As Adam is said to die in the day he did eat of the
forbidden fruit; and as the Scripture calls some the sons of death, or dead
men, because appointed thereunto. Oh this should enter deep into thy heart! As
long as thou live in thy sins, thou art a dead man, a damned man, as the
malefactor condemned to die is a dead man, though he live a day or two before
execution.

3. They do not live, Because all their time is lost, so all the time of a
man's unreg^neracy is no life. All those days were lost, those duties lost, all
that time lost.

4. They make every thing an instrument of death. Their health, their wealth,
their honors are all deadly herbs in the pot; their tongue speaks the words of
death; their hands work the works of death.

Use of Instruction to the Godly, so live, that your life may appear to be
yours, not the Devils, not sins, that thou do not live to the world; Let
thy mouth be a Well of life; Be thou a tree of life, Prove. 11.20. as Solomon
speaks of the righteous. Do not thou only live, but cause others to live Let
thy life put life in others, as one candle lightens another, one candle
kindles another.

Use 2. Of Terror to wicked men. You live not, you rejoice not, you have no
true mirth or gladness. False joy is real misery. A man that has an estate of
brass for gold is not rich; thou art a dead man as yet, even condemned to
Hell, every day the sentence may be executed on thee; and it is plain, thou art
dead, because thou feel not, thou complainest not under this heavy burden.

(Or Death) all things are yours.

We are upon the third part of the Apostles Enumeration, and that is the
different conditions which are in the world, expressed under those two titles,
Life and death Not only life is yours, but death also. And in this later lies
the greater wonder. For how Death, which was inflicted at first as a curse and
punishment for sin, and is the period of all outward comforts in this life,
should be for our advantage, is hard to imagine; and then, that two contraries
should meet in the same issue, both life and death produce the like effects,
makes it still the greater paradox. But the more unlikely and impossible it is
to humane reason, the easi^r it is to a divine faith.

In the Scripture, Death admits of several senses,

1 Sometimes it is taken for the spiritual death of the soul in sin. Thus men
are often said to be dead; and well may this want of grace be called Death,
because such a man is like Lazarus buried, and even putrified in the grave of
sin. There is no sense, no motion; there is nothing but loathsomeness; they
are putrefying carcasses, and not living men, though never so externally
glorious in the world.

2. There is an eternal Death often mentioned in the Scripture, as the reward
of every sin, who though they live, yet it is a dying life.

3. There is the natural Death, viz. the dissolution of those two dear friends
the soul and the body.

Lastly, Death is put for any great extremity and misery; in which sense God is
said to raise the dead, 2 Cor. 1. And the Israelites captivity is expressed
under the similitude pf dead men, dead bones, and their restoration is a
resurrection, or living again, Ezekiel 37.1.

In these two later considerations we may take it, as death comprehends all
outward afflictions and miseries, as also the separation of soul from body.
Observe,

Observe. The generation of death.
That even Death, which in it self is so terrible, yet is for a godly man's
advantage.

It Is his mercy, it is his gain, as well as life is. He may call it his death in
a comfortable sense, as well as he may call any mercy his.

To open this, consider,

First, That God created man at first after his own Image, in righteousness
and true holiness, and thereby he was immortal. Not as God, who is absolutely
immortal, and therefore said, Only to have immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. Now as the
Angels, who are immortal from their intrinsecal constitution, having no
corruptible principles, only God can annihilate them; but he was made immortal
conditionally; had he continued in that state of integrity, he had not been
capable of death, as appears by the commination, In the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall die, Genesis 2.16. And the Apostle Romans 5. concludes, That by
sin death reigned over the world; where by death is not only meant actual
death, but potential also, or a state of mortality. Now the original of death,
or how it came into the world, was not known by the Heathens; They called it a
tribute, that all must pay to nature; but why men should die, and how it came
about at first, that they were ignorant of.

Secondly, Upon Adam 's fall, In quo uno omnes peccarunt, whose sin was the
sin of all mankind, as Rom 5. Death was inflicted as a punishment upon all.
So that if we consider death in the abstracted nature of it, it is a curse, a
punishment, and so can be no more for good, then hell and damnation can be.
Insomuch that to the wicked man, death and hell, are both alike, they are of
the same nature. He can take no more comfort from one then from the other; when
death is approaching, then also is hell and everlasting torments: This is
decreed immutably for every man once to die. It was a vain boast of Paracelsus
to think, That if he had had the ordering of himself from his birth, he could
have preserved his life always. These are mad delusions: Where sin is, there
death follows; and it would be an excellent Antidote against sin, to
consider what follows it; When thou entertainest any sin, thou biddest
death also come in at the door; as pleasant and as delightful as it is, yet it
brings death.

Thirdly, Though death be in it self thus a curse, and comes as a punishment
to wicked men, yet unto the godly it is of a clean contrary nature. The guilt
and curse of it is taken away. It Is no more the execution of that dreadful
sentence, Thou shall die, but the chastisement of a loving Father; because God
loves his children, therefore they die; death is made like Jacob's Chariot, as
the old man rejoiced when he saw that, because it would carry him to see
Joseph, whom he so much longed for. Thus does death to the godly man: It Is the
glad messenger that comes to carry him to his Father, to eternal glory. It Is
true, the godly man dies as well as the wicked, he has the same diseases, the
same pains; but the Nature of them is far different; one is a curse to the
wicked, a beginning of hell and torments. The other is, a mercy to the godly,
and a passage to eternal glory. Even as the afflictions which befall the godly,
they come from Gods love, Whom I love I chasten, Heb. 12. Thus it is also with
death it self.

Lastly, The ground why death is thus altered to the godly man, why he should
thus differ from the wicked men, is wholly from Christ and his death, as
appears 1 Cor. 15.54. O death, where is thy sting! Death is swallowed up. You
would think the grave swalloweth up the godly man, but his body swalloweth up
the grave. The sting of death is sin; if that be taken away, the Snake cannot
hurt, now the guilt of sin is removed by Christ. Do not then think it
impossible that ever such a terrible thing as death should be made lovely, and
the thoughts of it sweet and comfortable: Yes, by Christ, all the terror is
done away. As death had no power over him, so neither shall it have over the
godly.

These things premised, In how many particulars death is a godly man's.
Let us consider in how many particulars death is a godly man's; it is for his
benefit and comfort. And

First, In this respect, Because by death he gains, he is invested with
greater glory, joy and happiness than this world can afford. All the while a
godly man lives in this world, he is a loser, he is kept from his best
treasures, he is not enjoying his best blessings, which will be vouchsafed to
him. This the Apostle you have admirably expressing, Phil. 1.23. Paul is there
in a great strait, he knows not how to be content to live, he can hardly
satisfy himself to be kept from Christ so long; To die is gain (says the
Apostle) and to depart and to be with Christ is far better. Paul is willing
to live for the Churches good, but yet that is not so good to him, as to die.
Oh, if a godly man could raise up his heart to such faith, as Paul had, he
would even think this world an Egypt, this life a prison, it is to my loss to
be here, I might have better company, better glory, better joy, every thing
transcendently better! Indeed we read of Elisha and Jonah desiring death from
impatiency, because of the vexations upon them, but that was sinful. But to
long for, and hasten the coming of Christ, to be above the love of life, and
all outward comforts above the fear of death, because of the heavenly
affections the soul is transported with to Christ, this is admirable Oh then,
that we were not such worms, but like Larks could rise out of the earth, and
soar up into Heaven with holy joy, and delight of spirit, then death would be
as a gain to us, and life as a loss! Yet this is not so to be understood, as
if death in it self were to be desired, or to be prayed for, for in it self it
is a natural evil, and so is only to be submitted to patiently, not desired;
but the consequent of it, viz. eternal glory, this is to be prayed for, as the
Apostle does fully express it, 2 Cor. 5.4. We would gladly be clothed with
immortality, yet to put off this mortal body is grievous; as little children
cry for their new garments, and yet cry while they are putting them on.

Secondly, Death is a godly man's, Because it puts a period to all those
miseries and troubles he was here exercised with. It Is the haven, after all the
tossings he had in this world. If we had hope only in this life (says Paul, 1
Cor. 15.) we were of all men most miserable; therefore death is that which
makes them happy. Alas, were it not for death, their reproaches would be
eternal, their persecutions would be everlasting: Insomuch that death must be
as welcome to them, as the divisions of the waters of Jordan were to the
Israelites, to come out of Egypt. Mat. 24. Lift up your he^d, for your
redemption draws nigh. And Christ's coming, not only at the Day of Judgment,
but at the particular death of every godly man, is the coming of the
Bridegroom; Then all tears are washed from their eyes: Their happiness does
not begin, till death arrests them. Now in this world, for the most part, the
godly have the bitter things thereof. Dives had the good things of this life,
when Lazarus had the bitter. Besides, the hatred and opposition in the world,
They groan under the guilt of sin, under the power of sin. Now death puts a
stop, not only to worldly troubles, but all spiritual diseases. This flux of
blood will run no more; they shall have no more pride, no more unbelief, no
more doubting about the pardon of sin; in a moment their souls will be made
like a paradise, like the upper region, no clouds, no fears at all.

Thirdly, Death is theirs, Because it is the finishing of all their work and
serv^ce, and by that they come for their wages. How does the laboring man long
for the end of the day, or the week, that he may come to receive his wages?
Thus is death, God puts all his children on work* he gives them all
talents, and he takes them not away, till they have done their work, for which
he appointed them. Thus Moses Gods servant dies. Thus David served in his
generation. Thus Paul finished his course. When they have done all their work,
then they die to receive their wages. And this certainly is very comfortable to
all the children of God, especially Ministers, that God will give them their
liberties and lives, till they have done their work. No man can stop Gods way
and power, no more than they can hinder the Sun in running its race. Why
should death then be grievous to thee, when God has no more for thee to do
here, when thou can be no more useful to promote his glory?

Fourthly, Death is the godly man's, Because the meditation and thoughts of it
are sanctified to him. He lives as one that expects it daily. And although
every one knows he must die, yet we cannot have the sanctified knowledge of
it without Gods grace. Teach me to number my days (says the Psalmist, Psalm.
90.) that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. And Paul, I die daily. Thus the
Scripture bids us not put confidence in future things, what we will do, or
whither we will go, because our life is a vapor, Jam 4 13. Oh it is great
proficiency in Christianity to live as a mortal dying man! Alas, such an one
will provide for eternity, not account any thing in this world can make him
truly happy, his heart is weaned from all worldly comforts and delights. Thus
that there is such a thing as death, it is a great argument to the godly man,
to live with all heavenly and holy affections.

Fifthly, Death is the godly man's, Because he only knows how to d^e well: as
we told you, Life was his, Because he only could tell how to live: So death is
his, because he only knows how to die. Simeon says, Luk^ 2.29. Now Lord let
thy servant depart in peace, when he had taken Christ in his arms, and seen his
salvation. Thus they only by faith lay hold on Christ; they only have oil to
their lamps; they only are prepared to give up their accounts. Oh it is an art
of arts to die well! Few are so prepared and disposed, that at what hour soever
the Master shall come, he shall find them doing his will. It Is true, many
wicked men are not afraid to die, they flatter themselves, and can bid death
welcome; but it is their ignorance, their boldness makes them thus: they know
not what it is do die, upon what terms to appear before God, and therefore do
suddenly drop into hell.

Sixthly, The godly man has death as an advantage, if you respect the time and
season of his death. His death is not only mercy, but the time of his death is
mercy. The term of every man's life is appointed by God, To him belong the
issues of death, Psalm. 68.20. Now God in great wisdom and mercy has determined
the time of thy death. And although we cannot always see how it is a mercy to
die at such and such a time, yet it is so. The righteous is gathered from the
evil to come, Isa. 57.1. as jewels, when the house is on fire, as cattle are
driven into a refuge before the storm begins. Hezekiah must not live to see
all that public ruin, which was coming on Israel. Thus though they die in
their younger years, it is a mercy. Hence the death of righteous men is
accounted a sad prognostique of future calamities.

Lastly, Even the violent death of Martyrdom, which comes by the cruel and
bloody oppression of implacable enemies, that is theirs. It Is a mercy, a gain,
and honor. The Apostles rejoiced, that they were accounted worthy to lose what
they had for Christ's sake. To you it is given not only to believe, but to
suffer, Phil. 1, 19. If any man suffer as a Christian, blessed is he, for the
spirit of glory shall rest upon him, 1 Pet. 4.14 It Is the greatest honor that
can be put upon thee: Though it be matter of scorn and reproach with the world,
yet God and the holy Angels approve such. As Christ is said to be exalted, and
glorified by dying; so it is with his children.

Use of unspeakable Consolation to the godly in their temptations and fears
about death. Oh that is terrible to thee, thou know not what to do! But why
so? If thou art one of the members of Christ, who by faith art ingraffed in
him; this should be matter of joy: Then, and never till then, do thou
begin to be happy; then thy bridegroom comes to meet thee; then the gates of
Heaven are set open to give thee glorious entertainment; if yet these things do
not raise thee, it is because thou art not heavenly, thou do not by faith
live on Scripture arguments.

Use 2. Of Terror to wicked men, who must die, and yet to die is only loss
to them. They lose their wealth, their friends, their greatness, all the mirth
they had, and then begins thy eternal woe. Oh the very name of death and
mortality should strike terror into thee; for this is the beginning of hell,
it puts an end to all the comforts of this life.

Or things present, or things to come.

We are now come to the last Enumeration of those several things, which belong
to the Churches treasure; and that is, all kind of events, distributed
according to their time, either things present, or future.

By present things, some understand those gifts in the Church, which were
extraordinary of healing, and such like cures; and by future things, the gift
of revelation concerning things to come. But this is too much restrained.

We rather take the largest sense, and by present things understand all those
events which for the present do befall us: And by future, whatsoever may in
time come upon us.

So that this Text is a sovereign cordial to the godly; whatsoever falls out,
they are sure to be gainers by. Nothing comes amiss; they are in a sure Ark,
while others float on the waters. Observe,

Observe.
That whatsoever falls out for the present to a godly man, it is for his good.

Every day is in travel, and brings forth some new thing or other. Now as often
as there is any new event, so often is there a new mercy. Our Savior, Matthew.
6.34. says, Sufficient to the day, is the evil thereof; implying thereby, that
every day has a womb (as it were) and it brings forth some affliction, some
evil or other; and it is sufficient to the day, we need not trouble our selves
aforehand, Qui dolet antequam necesse est, dolet plusquam necesse est, yet the
evil of the day, is the good of the day to the believer. A godly man may say,
he never had an ill day since his regeneration. As we read of a devout man,
who being wished a good day, he said, He never had an ill one in all his life:
And being asked, How that could be? He answered, Every morning he labored to
conform his will to Gods will, that what pleased God, should please him; and by
this means every day was a good day to him.

Now the things which fall out may be divided into two contrary heads; and you
shall find both of them meeting in this, they bring good to the godly man. And
1. There are happy and prosperous events. Or, 2. Adverse and afflicting ones.
And


For the first, What ever mercies, or good things come about, they are the
godly-mans, in these respects:

First, They are for his necessary use and supply. They come as so many gifts
immediately given by God for thy necessities. And when I say use; I mean a
sanctified use. All the food, raiment and wealth he has, are sanctified in
their use to him; and this the Scripture speaks of, as a property to the godly
only. Wicked men may abound in wealth, honors, greatness; but they are a
curse to them, they have them not from God, as intending good to them thereby:
But as the Rule is, Corpora impura, quanto plus nutrias* impuriora reddis. The
more you nourish unwholesome bodies, the better food they have, the more does
their disease increase. So these worldly mercies draw out the lusts of wicked
men the more. Take notice of these two Texts, Tit. 1.15. and 1 Timothy 4.5. There
we may see a curse is upon every creature; It Is unclean to a wicked man; though
he has a civil right to his estate and comforts, yet he can make no sanctified
use of them, for their own persons are not pure and sanctified, and so nothing
belonging to them is pure. Seeing therefore there is a curse by Adams fall upon
every creature; Thy food, thy raiment, thy goods, thy estate, they nee^
^anctification by the Word and prayer: Therefore the godly only have the
sanctified use of them, because they are humble in prayer for the cleansing of
them. But how atheistical are the men of the world? They labor to have this
state, and that state, still more and more, not at all enquiring, whether this
come sanctified to them, or not. Does not health, wealth, and all outward
mercies come with the curse upon them they had at first? The Devils, Have not
they a life? Are not they preserved in their being? Yet this is no mercy to
them And thus it is with all wicked men. We see what Paul says, Romans 11.9. Let
their table be made a snare and a trap, and a stumbling block. It Is a terrible
place. A man's table, his dainties, his greatest pleasure, may be made a snare
to thee. Would thou receive the richest goods that are brought into thy
house, if the plague or infection were on them? Could thou endure to have one
at thy table to lay a snare to catch thee in thy words, to bring thee in
temporal danger? And art not thou afraid thy house, thy estate, thy wealth, may
be made by God a snare to thee? But how happy are the godly, that how great
soever the outward mercies are, yet they are pure and sanctified to them? The
danger is taken off by Christ's death.

Secondly, These prosperous things are not only in a sanctified way to the
godly, but God al^o requires, that with joy and gladness we should make use
of them for his glory. It Is lawful for them to eat and drink, and enjoy the
good mercies they h^ve with a cheerful, joyful spirit. I speak not of carnal
and sinful joy, which quickly ends in terror and trembling, and is like the
crackling of thorns, that make a blaze, but immediately go out. No, but of a
well-ordered gladness, and joy in the good things God bestows on them. For
God does not call his people to a worldly dejected sorrow, which works death,
but to a godly sorrow, which causes great joy, and serenity of spirit.
Insomuch that Scripture speaks of it, as a provoking sin, if we do not serve
the Lord with joy and and gladness of spirit, when he bestows these outward
mercies upon us. Deuteronomy. 28 47. Many terrible curses are there threatened to
Israel, Because they did not serve God with joyfulnesse and gladness of heart
for the abundance of all things. If therefore God gives thee plenty of outward
things, and thou do not serve him with joyfulnesse and thankfulness of
heart, it is a provoking sin. God does not only love a cheerful giver, but a
cheerful receiver also of his mercies. So then, when prosperous things befall
thee, thou may with great joy of heart make use of them.

Thirdly, These prosperous things are not only sanctified to them, but they are
also made sanctifying of them. God gives them those good things of the body,
to make their souls better. Abraham had many outward mercies, but these also
were helpful to his graces: he was rich in faith, as well as in cattle and
great substance. Thus, Godliness has the promise of this life, and the life
to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. To have the good things of the world, and not the gracious
things of the Gospel, and the glorious things of Heaven, is to have a cistern,
but to be without the fountain; to have a star, but to want the Sun. Art
thou drawn near to God, more improved in holiness, by all the merciful things
thou have? Then art thou beloved of God. God has chosen the poor of this
world, rich in faith, Jam. 5. And, The poor receive the Gospel. Be afraid lest
wealth and greatness make thee reject the Gospel. When thy outward mercies are
sanctified, then art thou happy.

Fourthly, These prosperous present things are theirs, Because they know how to
make the present use of them for Gods glory. As life was theirs, and death
theirs, because they only could live well and die well; so present riches,
present death, present comforts are theirs, because they know how to make the
present improvement of them. The Scripture still presses, While we have
opportunity to do good, to lay hold on it, and while it is called to day, 2
Heb. 3.15. Do good with thy present wealth, improve thy present strength, thy
present health; for who knows how long thou may enjoy it? especially of
all present things, the present time is a godly man's. Redeem the time, Ephesians.
5.16. And now is the acceptable time, 2 Cor. 6.2. This is a great part of
wisdom, to make the present time ours, even now to turn to God, now to reform
and amend. One Heathen complained, that his friends were fures temporis, the
thieves of his time; they stole that precious jewel away from him by their
visits. Oh take heed, that no lusts, no pleasures, no enticements and worldly
delights steal away thy present time; it is all thou have, and it is but a
moment, yet on this moment depends eternity. Well therefore is it for the
godly, who knows how to make the best improvement of all prices put into his
hand. A Christian is not called to ease, but labor, to a spiritual
merchandise, to make profit of every thing. And thus it should be with every
godly man; there is nothing befalls thee, no good comes to thee, but thou
should bethink thy self, how can this be improved for God? How may I make
heavenly advantages of these things? Thus be like the Be sucking honey out of
every herb.

Fifthly, Present good things are a godly man's, Because they are accompanied
with the love and favor of God, which is infinitely more than the good things
themselves. Non tam donis quam a Deo datis. That all these good things are the
effects of Gods favor and gracious reconciliation through Christ, this makes
them ours in an eminent manner. When God gave Abraham such large worldly
revenues, and withal said, He himself would be his great reward, Genesis 15.1.
This was the fullness of happiness. And so you may see David accounting it,
when he esteems more of Gods favor, the light of his countenance, and
justification of his person, more than all his victory and success which he
had. To have these good things and Christ also; to have these mercies, and the
light of Gods countenance, is to have the fullness of earth and Heaven also.
And this is the reason, why a little that a righteous man has, is better than
great treasures of the wicked, because he has Gods favor, and his love with
it. A good conscience is a continual feast. Now no man has a good conscience,
but he who is reconciled with God through Christ, and does enjoy the pardon of
his sins, which is evidenced by his repentance, and forsaking of them; but no
wicked man is thus; he may have a stupefied conscience, not a good conscience,
he may be at ease, not be tormented and disquieted within, but yet have no
solid joy.

Lastly, These prosperous events are theirs, Because God gives contentation of
spirit. The blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it,
Prove. 10.22. Many men have these outward mercies, but then many thorns grow up
with them. There is so much gall in their honey, that all the sweetness is
gone. This contentation is also accompanied with a faithful dependence and
steadfast trusting in God for present provision. Hence we are directed to pray
for our daily bread, which implies a present provision fit for us in every
state.

We come now to the second sort of present events, and those are tribulations
and afflictions. There are none of these present troubles upon thee, though
grievous and burdensome, but it is for thy good. Though the Apostle says, No
affliction for the present seems joyous but grievous, Heb. 12.11. Yet truly
for the very present, though not to thy sense, yet to thy judgment it ought to
be joyous. Hence Jam. 1. we are commanded To count it all joy, when we fall
into diverse temptations. Now they may well be called ours:

First, Because they come from Gods gracious love to us. That same love which
is the fountain of all thy earthly comforts, is also the cause of all thy
earthly afflictions. It Is the same hand that does stroke thee and strike thee.
What a comfortable passage is that Heb. 12.6. Whom I love I chasten? and if ye
were without chastisement, ye were bastards, and no children? David also
affirms, Ps. 119.15. Out of very faithfulness thou have afflicted me. So
that in this dead Lion thou may find honey: Even out of this Rock may come
refreshing waters. What a stay should this be to thee? Why art thou dejected?
Why do thou cry out, that none is like thee? Thy trouble, thy blackness,
thy tribulations are for thy advantage, as much as all the mercies thou ever
enjoyedst. Go to the fountain from whence they came, and that is nothing but
precious love.

Secondly, They are thine for the blessed and heavenly effects they work on the
godly, so that they could not be so well without them. Now of many excellent
effects, Consider, 1. They are to humble us for sin, to make us feel how
bitter it is to go out of Gods way. And is not this lesson of great
consequence? Mich. 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. And I opened not my mouth, because thou Lord did it, Psalm
39.9. So that the bitterness of sin makes it terrible and grievous to them.
Now they cry out, What have I to do with sin any more? What profit have I of
such sins that now do so wound me? 2. Another end is, To make us more vigilant
for the future, to preserve us against future temptations. We have been burnt
already, the rod of the Almighty has been already on our backs, and can we
entertain such stinging vipers again? Oh they remember the wounds, the
desolation and darkness of soul they were plunged in!


Thirdly, These afflictions are ours, Because they are exercises to draw out
our graces, our faith, our patience, our heavenly mindedness, and thereby our
crown of glory is greater. Thus the Apostle says, These light and momentany
afflictions work an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And afflictions are
called The precious trial of our faith, 1 Pet. 1.7. As gold to the fire, as
winnowing to the corn, as washing and rinsing to the foul clothes, the same are
tribulations to a godly man. These are the file to get off all their rust.
These are the waters of Noah to raise the Ark up higher to Heaven. Thus you see
the bitterest event every day is thy good and happiness, thou art blessed
full, and blessed empty, blessed laughing, and blessed mourning, blessed having
all things, and blessed having nothing.

Use of Terror to wicked men. They are in such a state, that whatsoever befalls
them, makes them more sinful, and so more miserable. Thy good things, thy evil
things, they all tend to make thee more evil. It Is like drink to the Dropsy.
It Is like oil to the flames, if God give thee plenty and abundance of these
things. Oh then, judge not your selves happy by having these things, but by the
sanctified use of them! Every night thou may make up thy accounts, and say,
my soul is the worse for this, and that to day. Wicked men will not believe
that all things are thus a snare to them, but the event will show it.

Use 2, Of Comfort, and again of comfort to the godly. Whatsoever is come upon
thee, though never so sudden, never so great and terrifying, this is from love,
and with love.

Or things to come, all are yours.

We now come to the last particular in the last Enumeration, [Or things to
come.]

By things to come] Some we told you understood, the Revelations and Prophesies
that were about things to happen in after ages. But we are to take it as
largely as the words bear. Now the things to come are of two sorts:

First, What is to come in this life. For no man knows what may befall him
ere he dies, or at death: which made the Heathen say, that knew not this Text,
Ante obitum nemo foelix, etc. Or else they may be future things in the world to
come. For God does keep the best wine till the last. The godly have but
clusters of grapes here, they come into the Land of Canaan it self hereafter.

Now of both these future things we are to speak; and for the things that are
to come in this life, they are of two sorts: Either 1. Merciful and good
things. Or, 2. Grievous and sad things. For God can quickly turn a fair day
into thunder and tempest. Job felt a sudden alteration upon himself, which was
from the richest in the East, to become the poorest in a moment.


Now both these kinds are the godly man's mercy. No evil that is truly so, can
befall him.

But I shall not pursue these particulars, for that will coincide with the
former matter. I shall therefore treat of it in a more general way. Observe,

Observe.
That all things which are to come, or may fall out hereafter, are a godly man's
mercy and advantage.

This Doctrine speaks the height of happiness and comfort to the godly; for
there is no greater temptation we are subject unto, then to be tormented about
what may fall out hereafter. Though for the present it be never so well, yet we
forethink our possible miseries, as David, One day I shall fall by the hand of
Saul, 1 Samuel 27.1. So that many times needless troubles about what is to come,
takes away the enjoyment of the present mercies we have. But here we see the
Text giving such a cordial to the godly, that he may go and take his rest,
wholly relying upon the Lord; for come what can come, or will come, nothing can
come amiss, it will be a mercy, an advantage to him.

Now that this Doctrine is true, I may prove a posteriori, from such signs and
effects, that do evidently demonstrate, the people of God are quietly to sit
down with this conclusion. Though the Lord only knows, what will come upon
me, yet I know it will be only for my good. For

First, It appears by this, The Scripture commands the godly to avoid all
distrustful and distracting cares about what will be; that he should quietly
compose himself, committing all to his heavenly Father, who knows all he has
need of. So that as little children are cheerful and play, never troubling
themselves, how they shall subsist, and what if such miseries arise? Thus ought
the godly, Matthew. 6.34. Take no thought for to morrow, for the morrow shall
take thought for the things of it self, (q.d.) God will then provide, when
other conditions, other exercises come. Do not thou distract thy self, God will
then upon any new trial, or exercise, come in upon thee to help and deliver.
See here then the blessed estate of a godly man, he is commanded to shut out
all distrustful cares for the future; he is to cast his burden upon the Lord,
whatsoever shall befall, it will be well with him.

Secondly, They are to persuade themselves, that nothing shall fall out, that
can separate from Gods love. And what a support is this? Romans 8. Paul there is
triumphing, and that not for himself, but for all the people of God, who are
justified; What shall separate us from the love of God in Christ? Shall things
present, shall things to come? verse. 38. Is not this to bring the people of God
up into the Mount of transfiguration? Whatsoever shall befall thee before thou
die, yet nothing shall separate between Gods love and thee. Though it should
come about, that no friend love thee, none in the world will own thee, yet God
will own thee. Certainly, this may rejoice the heart of the godly, if any thing
hereafter might divide between God and thee, might deprive thee of God, and
part thee from him; then thou might tremble and quake, fearing the worst is
not past; but when all is thus provided aforehand; that thou art sure to be in
Gods love, be thy estate never so disconsolate, this may keep up thy heart.

Thirdly, The godly concerning all future things, may thus also conclude, That
there is no evil, no temptation that shall fall upon them, but he will give
strength to bear, and give a way to escape. You have a Text more precious than
the gold of Ophir to this purpose, 1 Cor. 10.13. God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that you are able; but with the temptation will
make a way to escape. Does not this Text speak to the heart of some godly
people? Oh they lie under sad temptations, heavy exercises are upon them, such
as the world knows not, and they are afraid; these will overwhelm them, they
shall never get out, it will undo them! But what says the Text? God will not
suffer you to be tempted above measure, and he will make a way to escape. See
then thy fears, thy unbelief makes thee go contrary to the Text. Thou say,
thou shall never be able to bear it, God says, I will lay no more upon thee,
then thou art able. Fear says, I shall never escape this, never overcome this;
Faith says, he will make a way to escape. Now whether will thou believe God,
or thy own fearful heart? Oh then, let the godly that are tempted, and lie in
deep waters, that are like Jonas swallowed up in the whales belly, take this
Text, and hide it in their heart, so they will not fear what will be to come!

Fourthly, For things to come, they have this promise, That in all outward
things, God will never leave them, nor forsake them. Thus things to come are
theirs, for they have this promise. And Heb. 13.5. the Apostle urges this
against covetousness, and to be content with what they have, God will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee. Now this temptation many times troubles (at
least) some godly persons; they are afraid, they, or their posterity may be
brought to wants; they fear poverty may come upon them as an armed man;
especially they know not, what they shall do in old age, if God should let them
live, till they should lose their sight, or their limbs, or their parts, what
should become of them? To live a burden to themselves or others. Aristotle has
a wicked Position, That all decrepit old men should be thrown down a steep hill
headlong, and be killed, as being a burden to a Commonwealth. Old people are
many times a burden to wicked young people. Therefore God commands us, Not to
despise our mother when she is old, Prove. 23.22. Now we shall see David himself
tempted about his old age, Psalm. 71.19. When I am old and gray headed, forsake
me not. Thus you see what wants or straits, especially what decays of grace
the godly may fear; they shall not have the same vigor and strength, not the
same memory and judgment. But the Scripture gives a good promise, Psalm. 92.14.
They shall bring forth fruit in old age. So Isa. 46.4. To your old age, I am
he, and even to hoary hairs I will carry thee. He will have as much care of
thee, as a mother of a child in her arms. Well then you see, in that God has
said, he will never leave or forsake us, we need not fear poverty, want, the
diseases, and miseries of old age, for these things are ours.

Fifthly, The people of God may be persuaded of their perseverance in the state
of grace, that they shall never totally and finally fall off from the favor of
God. For this is the greatest thing that might be feared; not the loss of
riches, honors, or our estates, but the loss of grace is to be feared. Oh, if
left to my self, I may prove a Prodigal, become destitute of all holiness!
There is nothing should more make the godly afraid than this. Hence they are
commanded to have a godly trembling about it. He that stands, let him, take
heed, that he do not fall, 1 Corinthians. 10.12. Works out your salvation with
fear and trembling, Philip. 2.12. Blessed is he that fears always, Prove.
28.14. Now, though there be such a godly fear required, yet the godly at the
same time are to be persuaded, that what grace God has begun, he will
perfect; and therefore this fear is promised as a means to preserve them, Jer.
32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
So that we have many glorious promises for our continuance and steadfastness in
the way of God, that neither the subtle devices of false prophets shall be able
to deceive them, nor open and violent persecutions shall take them out of
Christ's arms, for they must be stronger than Christ that can do this.

Lastly, Death, which is surely to come upon every one, even about that the
godly need not be troubled. You heard, it was their gain, it was the time of
their redemption, it was Jacobs Chariot. Now although it be so, yet the most
godly have trembling thoughts about it. Christ himself as he was a man, had a
natural fear of death; and many of Gods children are tempted about it, lest
they should have no comfort, be filled with despair, or not able with
readiness and willingness to resign themselves into Gods hands. But the
Scripture does excellently fortify against this, The righteous has hope in
his death, Prove. 14.32. And 1 Cor. 15.55. O death, where is thy sting? And
Psalm. 4.15. see what an expression there is, The Lord will strengthen him on
the bed of languishing, and the Lord will make all his bed in his sickness.
All his bed] Do not then fear to be left comfortless at that hour. This must
come, and it will come blessed unto thee. And as for the things to come in the
world to come, they are so theirs, that they are prepared only for them. Here
riches and honors, the good have them, and the bad have them, but there only
the godly do possess the good things of that life. Now, what tongue of men or
Angels is able to speak of them? The Scripture calls it, Life, eternal life,
Glory and immortality, The Kingdom of Heaven, A Crown that never withers;
nay, whatsoever may be said of it, comes short, because it may be said, Then we
rightly esteem of it, when we account it inestimable. Now this everlasting
glory is so sure, though to come, that they are said to have it already, He
has already passed from death to life, 1 John 3.14. He is already set down
with Christ in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.6. And Heb. 1. They have faith, which
is the substance and evidence of things not seen. So that were the godly for
the present to lie under all imaginable misery, yet that which is to come,
would make amends for all. Thus Paul, We account these light afflictions not
comparable to that eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. It Is no matter what is
for the present, so that what is to come be so glorious.

Now let us pass from the Mount of Blessing to that of Cursing. Let us see how
it is with the wicked man in respect of what is to come. And

First, How rich, and pleasant, and full their condition is for the present,
yet they may expect fullness of wrath to come upon them every day. Jam. 5.1. Go
to now ye rich men, howl and weep for the miseries that are to come upon you.
God storeth up vengeance, he has a treasure of it; and the ungodly may tremble
every hour, lest it fall upon them. Therefore thou that art now jolly and
confident, fear what is to come, what the next day may bring upon thee. Sodom
had a fair morning, but fire and brimstone quickly fell upon them. In Deuteronomy. 28.
we have the curses of a wicked man described, That in the morning he should
wish for evening, and he should be in continual fear of what may come upon
them. Even as Cain went up and down fearing every one would kill him. So that
all the curses in the Word, all the wrath of God may justly be feared by thee
every day thou arisest or walk abroad.

Secondly, Although they have the good things of this life, yet they are rather
to tremble, then to be confident thereby. For the Parable of Dives and Lazarus,
instructs us of Gods proceedings herein, Luke 16. Abraham told Dives, He had
received the good things of this life, and therefore was to have the evil
things of the life to come. As Ishmael had part of the earthly possessions of
this world, but nothing of Canaan or the promise: Thy misery and confusion
hereafter will be the greater, by how much the rather thou have been accustomed
to ease and pleasures; and the longer God keeps off his wrath, the more heavy
and weighty will it be, when it shall come.

Use 1. Of Instruction. He only is happy, who shall be so in the world to come.
Judge not of a man's blessedness by this moment; our lives are shadows that
pass away, what shall thou be to all eternity? Say that to thy soul, Oh
profane Atheist, that cries, Give me the present, and let others take the
future! Thou do not believe the great things coming, therefore thou think
and speak so. Oh what a vast difference will there be between thy laughing
here, and thy roaring in hell, thy pleasures here, and thy torments there! Oh
that this eternity coming, that this world to come should not be more in your
minds and hearts!

Use 2. Of Consolation to the godly, who may say, Soul, take thy spiritual
ease: If they may not, who may lay themselves down and sleep, if not such; for
whatsoever falls out, it shall be well with them. They have a promise for the
future, and therefore it is their weakness and unbelief; if they torment
themselves, saying, what if this be, and that be? How shall I do, if such
things come upon me? What shall not such promises as I have named quiet thee?
May thou not trust God upon his Word?

Use 3. Of Terror to the wicked. Do not with Agag rise up comfortably, and
walk delicately, saying, The worst is past: No, God reserveth his bitter gall
to come. All the grief, pain and misery thou have had in this life, is nothing
to those dregs thou must drink up hereafter. Break off thy sins quickly by
repentance; think, what will those cost me hereafter? How do the damned in hell
think of those wicked ways, which have brought them thither? Do they not curse
and blaspheme the day they were born, and that ever they hearkened to Satan's
temptations.

Verse 23. And ye are Christ's.
WE shall now come down from this Text, this Mount of Transfiguration,
concerning which every believer might say, It is good to be here; and pursue
the other matter that is behind. Where we may observe the Apostle in a Climax
rising higher, All things are yours, you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. So
that the highest round in this ladder reaches to Heaven, as Jacobs did, and
the lowest one is in the earth. So that you may observe the Apostle now
changing his speech; before all things are yours; all in the Church, and in the
world, is yours. Now he does not also say, Christ is yours, but you are
Christ's; whereby we see, that as the former things spoken of were not for
themselves, but the godly; so neither are the godly for themselves, but Christ.

Thus we have the Apostle mixing water with wine, lest it should be too much
drunk off, and so make giddy, All things are yours, there is your Privilege;
but you are Christ's, there is your Duty; even to see that what ever you are, or
can do, it be in reference to him. Even as at the first God created all the
world, with the creatures therein for man, but man for himself, so all things
are for the godly, and the godly is for Christ.

We may then observe the difference in this expression and sense between the
former and the later:

First, When he said, All these things were the godly man's, he meant it of
spiritual use only, not of dominion and power; but when he says, We are
Christ's, the meaning is, We are wholly his creatures, he has absolute dominion
and sovereignty over us. And then,

Secondly, All the things are a godly man's, he is the end of them; but he is
finis indigentiae, he needs them, and wants them, he could not tell what to do
without them, but Christ is Finis assimilationis, they are for him, not that he
needs them, but that he might make them more perfect in communicating his grace
and holiness unto them. Observe then,

Observe.
That a godly man in all that he is, or can do, is wholly Christ's.

Ye are Christ's.] The Apostle drives it to this, that therefore they should
glory only in him. They are not Paul's or Apolloes, but Christ's; and therefore
in him only must they glory and judge themselves complete.

In what respects a godly man is Christ's
To understand this, Let us consider in what respects the godly man is Christ's.
And

First, He is bought and purchased by his blood, so that he owes all his
being, comforts and privileges only to Christ. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not
your own, for ye are bought with a price. So then, well may the godly man be
said to be Christ's, for he comes to be his at a dear rate. Never did King yet
subject, or master a servant at so dear a prize, as Christ obtained thee. He
did undergo all that agony and shameful death, to free thee from the bondage
thou were in, and to make thee his: For you must know, the clean contrary was
true of the godly; before made Christ's, they were the Devils; they were wholly
his, Of him, and through him, and to him, they lived from him; all their
thoughts, affections and actions were from him, who ruled in their hearts, and
they were to him, because they wholly did his work, and advanced his kingdom.
But now, Oh wonderful and happy change, they are brought out of the dark
prison they were in; all the chains and fetters upon them, are taken off, and
now they have the robes of Christ put upon them, and are made free indeed!
Consider then, how the godly become Christ's, it is by shedding his blood: we
were Satan's captives before, and now made Christ's. Oh then, why should the
godly live to sin or Satan, or the world any more? Were they crucified for
thee? Have they obtained thee at so dear a price, as Christ has?

Secondly, The godly they are Christ's, Because by his Spirit they are made new
Creatures. They have a new being. For it cannot be, that any should be Christ's,
who live in the flesh, and are carnally minded. Therefore the Spirit of Christ
communicates unto them a new being, gives them an heavenly nature, enables
them to mortify sin in all the lusts thereof. For this is a true Rule,
Christ's merit, and Christ's Spirit go together; Where his death is effectual,
his Spirit is efficacious. None can say, they are Christ's by his death for
them, that may not say, they are Christ's by his Spirit forming and fashioning
of them. Hence they are said, To have his Spirit, to be in the Spirit, to walk
in the Spirit, to be led by the Spirit. Oh then, let carnal and earthly men
stand aloof off! This matter, as it does not belong to them, so they understand
it not. If thou art Christ's, his Spirit dwells in thee, leads thee, guides
thee, enables thee, quickens thee: So that there are very few who can challenge
an interest in Christ after this manner. Are not most men destitute of Christ's
Spirit? For the Apostle Romans 18. says, That if the Spirit of Christ be in
us, then as that raised up Christ from the grave, so it would raise us from
sin.

Thirdly, They are Christ's, Because he is the Alpha and Omega, the first and
the last, the beginning and the end. He is the Alpha, he is the AUTHOR and
FOVNTAIN of all the spiritual good we have; compared theerefore to the Head,
that gives of its fullness to every Member; and to the Vine from which every
Branch deriveth its nourishment. And the Apostle calls him, The Author and
finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. It Is he that gives life and motion, and all
spiritual strength to us. Now every effect is more the causes, then it is its
own. Seeing therefore thou have no good, but what thou have received from
Christ, thou art wholly to depend on him, as the stream is on the fountain, as
the light is on the Sun; for take them away, and these immediately perish.
Thus he is the Alpha, and he is also the Omega and end. We are not to live to
our selves, but to him. Paul says, Gal. 3.20. He does not live, but Christ in
him. All our graces are to carry us out of our selves to Christ, our faith in
Christ, our love and affections to be pitched on Christ: If we preach, it is to
set up Christ; if we eat, or drink, it is thereby to strengthen us, that we
may the better serve him; if what ever we do, or what ever we suffer, it is to
promote the glory and honor of Christ.

Fourthly, We are Christ's, in that all our Christian compleatnesse is in him.
Colos. 1.19. It pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. And
again, Ye are complete in him, Colos. 2.10. So Christ is said, To be made unto
us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. Seeing therefore that in Christ is all fullness, and in us nothing but
sin and emptiness; no marvael if we be his more than our own. Now this is of
admirable comfort to the godly, as well as it infers duty. For seeing thou
art Christ's, the Question is not in matter of Justification, What thou art?
but, what Christ is? Not what sin thou have; but what righteousness Christ
has? Therefore if the Law come and demand perfect obedience, say, I am
Christ's: If thy conscience accuse thee, say, I am Christ's: If the Devil tempt
thee, and arraign thee, still say, I am Christ's. To be Christ's must needs
answer all Objections. Who shall impeach Christ? Who shall accuse Christ? So
that it is an excellent evangelical life, when we can by faith fill our souls
with this assurance, We are Christ's. Then, as far as the fullness and
sufficiency of Christ will bear us out, and bear down all oppositions, so long
may we be confident. This is a great Gospel sin, that we live in our selves,
and upon our selves in our works, in our righteousness; or are slavishly
dejected, because of sins, when humbled for them, whereas we should live by
faith in Christ, as Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, so we should dwell in
him. How is the Apostle ravished always with the grace that comes by Christ.
The privileges of Justification, and Adoption, and Sanctification, that we
have by him, are to be more than meat or drink unto us.

Fifthly, We are Christ's, Because we are wholly to be disposed by him in all
conditions, in all exercises and temptations For Christ being made a Lord and
King over us, he orders us in all things, he rules and governs us according
to his will. Sometimes he calls us to labor, and work for him; sometimes to
suffer for him. Now in what ever condition or exercise we are in, this should
teach us patience and submission, we should not think much of suffering for his
Name, Truth and Glory. Our Savior does not think such a Disciple worthy of
him, that does not love his father, mother, and life it self less than him.
Thus we see the Apostles, and all the Martyrs, because they were Christ's, their
bodies, their estates, all they had they did not grudge to give all to him,
when he called for them. Seeing therefore we are Christ's, he is our Lord, all
is in reference to him, we should not repine at any labor or suffering for
him. Thou art worth ten thousand of us, (said the people to David) thou shall
not any more endanger thy self in battle. Thus should thou say, Christ's
Name, his Truth, his Glory is ten thousand times better than all my wealth, or
life it self. But as we see God has made all things for men, the beasts of the
field and the birds of the air are killed for man, and there is no pity
therein, because they were created for this end; and this is their perfection:
So are we made for Christ, our wealth, our health, our estates, our parts, they
are all to be sacrificed for Christ; and this is the proper perfection of them;
this is the best improvement; They do then attain that glorious end for which
they were given us. Oh how would this make us deny our selves, and prefer
Christ more, that as God has given him the pre-eminence in all things, so we
should!

Characters of such as are Christ's.
Now in the next place, let us consider, Some Characters or Properties of such
as are Christ's. And

First, They desire more knowledge of him, more acquaintance with him; they
prize him above all worldly things. Paul, Phil. 3.8. accounts all things dung
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ. The Church in the Canticles is
inamoured with his beauty; all which Song is to be understood spiritually of
that spiritual fullness and excellency which is in him. Hence the godly are
said, To have their conversation in Heaven, because there is Christ, whom they
look for, Phil. 2.31. Thus faith represents the Lord Christ in all loveliness
and excellency: So that the voluptuous man is not more taken up with the love
of pleasures, than the Christian is with Christ. There are the treasures of
wisdom and grace in him, all which the godly soul is searching into.

2. Those that are Christ's, they abhor and have no communion with any sin
or wickedness, because that only Christ hates. Though we be poor and
miserable, Christ may love us, but if sinful then Christ abhors us, 2 Cor.
6. What concord between Christ and Belial? What agreement between light and
darkness? Christ indeed conversed with sinners, but it was as the Physician
with diseased persons, to make them better, even to heal them; and thus may we,
But no fellowship of approbation are we to have with the works of darkness,
but rather to reprove them. You may read then in the very forehead and life
of many, whether they belong to Christ or no. For would Christ defile himself
with such ungodly ways? Oh blasphemy to think so! Now he that is Christ's, he
labors to be like him, he has his Image upon him. They are said, to put on
Christ, as men do a garment, nothing but Christ appears in them, and on them.

3. Those that are Christ's, they live not to themselves, but to him. They
please not themselves or others in a sinful way. If I should please men, I
were not the servant of Christ, Gal. 1.10. Thou can not give content to the
world, please them, and please Christ too. And therefore as Christ, so
Christians are always hated, opposed by the world. It does not look upon them
as their own, for then they would love them. The Disciple must not think to be
above his Master. And truly no wonder at this, for if Christ sought not his own
glory and greatness, but humbled himself in that despicable way of a servant,
how much more ought we not to exalt our selves, but to be debased, that he may
be magnified?

Use of Exhortation to those who are Christ's, to be self-denying, to take up
Christ's cross, to love him more than all they have: for Christ is not for
thee, but thou for Christ; as man was not for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for
man; and therefore the duties of that day were to yield to man's necessity: so
Christ and his Truth, and his Gospel, they are not for thy life, or thy credit,
but these are for them. Let then the less give place to the greater. It Is not
so necessary that thou should be rich, great and honored in the world, as
that Christ and all things of Christ should be preserved. How ungodly then is
it to pretend Christ, or make use of the Name of Christ for thy carnal
advantages? This is to make the head be under the feet.

Use 2. Of Terror to all those who live in the constant practice of
wickedness: they are none of Christ's, and so they have no portion in his blood,
no share in his mediation. How miserably did Esau cry out, because he was shut
out of his fathers blessing? But this is far greater to be shut out of
Christ's prayers Christ's intercession, and Christ's expiation. Thou can not
retain sin, and Christ too: Thou can not love the world, and Christ too.
What hope then and refuge remains for thee? If Christ cast thee off, Is there
any other remedy left? Can any Angels help thee? Are there any more Christ's?
No, thy case is altogether desperate, who art cast off by him; yet men sit and
hear these things without fear or trembling.

And Christ is Gods.

We are now come to the last round in the Ladder, a primo ad ultimum; we are
now at the last step, we cannot go further, to say, God is any thing else
beside himself, for he is of himself, and to himself. All the other particulars
may well be received without any difficulty; but this seems to be a pill
hardly taken down. In what sense Christ can be said to be Gods
The expression seems hard, Christ is Gods; as if Christ were not God, but
made for God, as the world is for the godly. But Chrysostom says well, Though
the words be the same, yet the sense is much different. The world is ours, as
being made for us; we are Christ's, as being his creatures purchased; but Christ
is Gods, as his most beloved Son. This is true; but yet this is not fully the
Apostles meaning. Therefore Christ is considered two ways: Either,

First, As an absolute God, in which sense, he is said, To think it no robbery
to be equal with God, Phil. 3.6. And thus, though he be the Son of God, yet
he is equal with God. Or,

Secondly, As a Mediator, consisting of two Natures, Divine and Humane. Now if
we consider Christ in respect of his Humane; so that is a creature, and wholly
to be referred to God. Or if we consider him as a Mediator, thus he is in
reference to God the Father. For a Mediator is to bring us to him, who is at
distance from us. Thus Christ both as a man, and as a Mediator in his whole
Mediatory Office, is not for himself, but for God the Father, as it is 1 Cor.
15.24. When the Son shall give up the Kingdom, that God may be all in all.
We have two places like this, 1 Cor. 11.3. The head of the woman is man, and
the head of Christ is God; that is not in respect of his Divine Nature; for the
first Person cannot be said to be the Head, or cause of the second, but the
beginning, but in respect of his Mediatory Office. So John 14.28. My Father is
greater than I, in respect of his Manhood, and his Mediatory Office.

I shall not enter into these sublime Disputes about Christ as a Mediator,
Whether that be Divine Worship that belongs to him, as so? And if Divine, How
there can be a primary Object of Religious Worship, as God the Father, and a
secondary Object, as Christ the Mediator? This, though a noble Question, yet
because not so practical, I wave; only some positive things I shall deliver in
the point. Observe,

Observe.
That Christ as man, and as a Mediator, is wholly Gods.

His Office and work, as a Mediator, is to reconcile us to God the Father. He
is called, The Savior, and the Mediator. The Savior, in respect of the end,
which is salvation, that he obtains for believers; and Mediator, in respect
of the means and way by which this is accomplished.

To open this take notice,

Of the Natures and Person of Christ, and of the hypostatical Union.
First, That Christ is a Person consisting of a Divine and Humane Nature, not by
mixtion, or confusion, or by mere inhabitation, but by a Personal Union, which
is commonly called Hypostatical. I shall not tell you how much that word
Hypostasis troubled the Church. The Latin Church having a clear contrary
thought about the word to the Greek Church. So that when they both agreed in
the same thing, yet the words and phrases they condemned in one another, as
heretical. But the Scripture is very clear, both that Christ was God, and also
man, yet but one person, not making two Christ's; and this is one main
fundamental Article of Religion. The Devil in former ages always endeavored
to rob him of one of these Natures, and some have raised these monstrous and
damnable heresies again from hell; but this foundation and pillar stands sure.

Secondly, By reason of this Personal Union, though there be not a real
communication of the Properties of each Nature, yet there is a verbal one in
the concrete, both things are predicated of Christ. As for example, though the
Divine Nature is not passible, but the Humane Nature only, nor the Humane
Nature omnipotent and omniscient, but the Divine only, yet of Christ we
predicate, that he suffered, that he died, that he is omnipotent and
omniscient, though this be true in respect of one Nature only.

Thirdly, Christ being thus a Person, that he may be our Redeemer, he is
clothed with those three Offices, which fit him fully for our Redemption. He
is first Medius, in respect of his Person, God and man: Then he is Mediator,
in respect of his Office. His Office is threefold, a Prophet, a Priest, and a
King. This makes him the Trismegist, the ter maximus. Now we must not judge
these things metaphysical curiosities: No, These are the Articles of our
Christian Religion; these are to be received by a divine and firm faith. Yea
in believing Christ's Person, and his Office, lies all the comfort and treasure
of a Christian. It Is Christ, that should be our study, our meditation day and
night, Quis sit, and qualis? Who he is, and what he is?

Now the Doctrine speaks of Christ, both in respect of his Humane Nature, How
Christ as a man, and as a Mediator is Gods.
and as he is a Mediator, not as God. Let us see then, How Christ as a man,
and as a Mediator is Gods. And

First, His Incarnation, and coming into the world, it was not for himself, but
for God. He therefore took our Nature upon him, that he might bring to God the
Father his Elect people. God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten
Son. John 3.16. And, To us a Son is borne, to us a Son is given, Isa.
9.6. So that this work of Incarnation, this coming into the world from the
bosom of the Father, which is so stupendous a mystery, is originally from the
Father. It was to do Gods work, to obey his will; and therefore Christ is
called Gods servant, Isa. 52.13. Not that Christ came into the world against
his own will; or as if this were against his own desire, but God the Father is
the original of all.

Secondly, That Christ is Gods appears, in that he acknowledges his Doctrine
and Truth not to be his, but his Fathers, taking all off from himself, and
making himself only a Minister, or Ambassador coming in his Fathers Name, and
revealing his will. See this notably, John 8 26, 28. I speak those things which
I heard of him, I do nothing of my self, but as my Father has taught me. I
speak these things. So verse. 42. I came not of my self, but he sent me. But
especially John 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me; he that
speaks of himself seeks his own glory. Here you see Christ acknowledging,
that the Doctrine he preached as a Minister and Mediator was not his. Yea, if
we speak of his humane Nature that invented it not, because that was a finite
creature, though united personally to an infinite Person. Oh what an admirable
instance is this of modesty! Christ speaks not, preaches not of his own, but
from the Father. How should we Ministers then not preach our own fancies, our
own imaginations, but the Doctrine delivered in Scripture? How would this
bridle up a deal of bold ignorance now in the world? Men would not be so
forward to teach before they have well learned themselves; Christ speaks nor
of himself. And consider that connection, verse. 18. He that speaks of himself,
seeks his own glory. When we are not contented with Scripture-doctrine, with
truths delivered there, but bring of our own, it is only to seek vain glory, and
applause in the world.

Thirdly, That Christ is wholly Gods, appears, in that, as the Doctrine he
preached was the Fathers, So he sought not his own glory, did not exalt
himself, but the Father. John 8 29. I do always those things that please him
And verse. 54 If I honor my self, my honor is nothing. So John 17.4. I have
glorified thee on earth. Thus in all that Christ did and suffered, it was only
to glorify and advance God his Father. For alas, in respect of himself, he was
of no reputation: Under what reproach, contempt and scorn did he live? So that
all might easily see, it was not his own glory he looked at, but the glory of
the Father. And this also is an excellent President for humility, and modesty,
and self-denial. The Apostles also when they did work wonders, so as the people
were ready to make Gods of them, They rend their clothes, because of such
blasphemy, and say, It is not they, but Christ who enabled them to do these
things, Act. 14.11. Yes how ready are we to say, these are our parts, our gifts?

Fourthly, That Christ is wholly Gods, appears, In that obediential
resignation of himself to do Gods will. Let I come to do thy will, O God. And
he would be baptized, because hereby he would fulfill all righteousness. And
John 17.4. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. Insomuch that
Christ is said to become under the Law. So John 6.38. I came down from Heaven,
not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me. Therefore John 18.18.
Gods will laid upon him to die for his people, he calls it a Commandment. And
John 12.49. He gave me a Commandment. So that we see the duty of a Mediator to
do and suffer what was required of us, was laid on Christ by Commandment, and
it was truly and properly Obedience, that which he did in fulfilling of it.

Now in all this truth, there are these things admirable:

First, The love of God, and the love of Christ. God so loved the world. So]
The Apostle could not give an How, it was such a So, that could not be
expressed. When Abraham offered his only son for a Sacrifice, God said, Now I
know thou love me. How much rather, when we see Christ dying and suffering
all those agonies and miseries for us may we say, now we know God loves us?
Shall the Psalmist so admire Gods love, in giving man the beasts of the field,
that he cries out, What is man that thou art so mindful of him? Psalm. 8.4.
How much rather may man stand astonished at this love of God in giving Christ?
Well may God be said to be love it self, for he is the fountain of all this
honey. Who may, if repenting, though a Blackmoor sinner, doubt of Gods love in
pardoning, when he has done the greater? Which is greater to give a Christ, or
to pardon sin? And then, The love of Christ is no less admirable, for him to
give his life for us sinners and enemies: herein he did (...), set forth his
love in a most exemplary manner. Jonathans love to David is much commended, but
what is that spark to this flame? Oh how can the poor doubting and unbelieving
sinner question forgiveness, doubt whether Christ will accept of him, or no,
when he sees Christ do so much for him already! Fear not the worst of death,
and hell is over.

Secondly, In this admire the self-denial of Christ, that he lays aside the
exercise and manifestation of all that divine glory he had, and became
contemptible, of no reputation for us. The Apostle aggravateth this, Phil. 2.
When it was no robbery to be equal with God, yet he became such a worm, and no
man for us. This is so great a mystery, viz. Christ's condescension for our
good, that the Angels, though he be not their Mediator, though he took not
their Nature on him, yet they desire to look, (1 Pet. 1.12.) and search into
this truth, as being ravished with it. Oh what an example is here for us of
self-denial and preparedness to part with all at his command!

Lastly, In this it is admirable, The humble and ready obedience of Christ. Does
Christ any way gainsay this commandment of God? Does he murmur at it? Does he
begin to repent of his undertaking? No, but in all things gives up himself to
be a willing Sacrifice, he bids the Law in its curses, and the wrath of God in
all the effects fall upon him. As Saul run his Spear at David, but missing
him, it stuck in the wall. Thus the anger and wrath of God emptying it self
violently, misseth us, and falls on Christ. What a willing expression is that,
Lo, I, come to do thy will, O God! Heb. 10.9.

Use 1. Is Christ thus Gods? Then we see, that the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ
is for a further end, it is that at last God may be all in all. Not but that
Christ shall always remain God and man, and all glory shall be given to
Christ, who has brought us into Heaven; but this actual administration shall
then cease. The damned in Hell can no more plead Christ; they cannot urge his
death any more; for now that gracious dispensation is ceased; there is no more
oil, no more water to refresh. It Is now as desperate, as if there never had
been a Christ; thy estate and the Devils is now both alike. Oh then, let wicked
men that need Christ, awaken and look about them, while a Christ may be had,
while a Christ is ready to do good; the time will be when he shall not actually
as a Priest, or Prophet, or King, dispense such mercies any more.

2. Is Christ thus wholly Gods? Then what self-denial, what humility and
modesty should we learn hence? Shall Christ not seek his own glory? Shall not
he seek to please himself? Shall not he exalt his own will? Why then are we so
apt to magnify our self-glory, our own will, our own advantage? It should
shame us to follow such a Christ, to be called by the name of this Christ; How
ill do such an Head, and such members agree together? Think of Christ, when
pride, vainglory, self-will, stirs in thee: If Christ had been thus, there
had been no pardon, no salvation for me.

FINIS.
THE GODLY MAN'S CHOICE, COMPARED WITH The Natural Man's, AND Found to be
Incomparably the Best.

Preached from Psalm 4th. Verse. 6, 7, 8. and now published.

By Anthony Burgess Pastor of the Church of Sutton-Coldfield.

LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller for Thomas Underhill at the Sign of the
Anchor and Bible in Paul's Churchyard, M. DC. LIX.

TO THE READER.
THe Psalms are noted to have this peculiar Excellency in them, that they are
the experimental breathings of a gracious heart, exercised under various
temptations; so that what is doctrinally, and in the Idea delivered in other
places of the Scripture, is here practically, and in Subjecto, visibly
expressed: so that none can understand them, unless he bring the same spirit
with him, that breathed in David, while he composed them. This is David's
spiritual Harp, driving away all the evil and malignant affections, that may at
any times rise up in us. That Poetical one of Orpheus, though said to tame
Beasts, is not comparable to this. Now as face answers face, so does the
heart of a godly man answer David's in his respective agonies of his soul; when
grace works, when corruption works, he does observe by the like
transactions in his own soul. Among other particulars, I have selected this 4th
Psalm in the three last verses to discourse upon, because therein is declared,
what is the choice of a natural man, what is his summum bonum, and what of a
godly man, wherein I am more large; so that an heavenly heart, and the
enjoyment of the light of Gods countenance is chiefly the Subject of this
Treatise; sublime and high matter comparatively to our dull, lumpish and heavy
hearts. For this end does God many times exercise his people with sad
temptations, that they may experimentally say, Gods loving kindness is better
than life. For Job and many others have lived, yet desired death. The damned in
Hell live, yet annihilation would be welcome to them. So that he only lives,
who enjoys the favor of God. As for the greatest worldly pleasures, they are
but like the fancies of distracted men. So that as some who have persuaded
themselves in such pleasing delights, and apprehending themselves masters of
such great revenews, when cured of this delirium by Physicians, have been
displeased thereat, saying, they never enjoyed a better time, then under those
deluded imaginations. Such a folly and dream does possess all natural men,
while destitute of the light of Gods countenance, they are unwilling to be
awakened out of this dream, and to be cured of this folly. But with David, we
call upon thee, to taste and see how good God is, and then thou will cry out
with Austin, Sero te amavi Domine, even mourn, because thou wast not acquainted
with him any sooner. And that thou may be quickened up hereunto, be diligent
in meditating of these holy Psalms, wherein is contained flamnigera Theologia,
for hereby thou will find thy self as it were in Eliahs fiery Chariot carried
up to Heaven.

ANTHONY BURGESS.
March 18. 1658.
THE NATURAL MAN'S CHOICE: SHOWING That no unregenerate Man can ascend any
higher in his Choice and Desires, then the Creature.
Psalm 4.6. There be many that say, Who will show us any good?


THe Divine Psalmist, at the second Verse, does in a pathetical manner, reprove
all his ungodly Enemies, who were also Enemies to God and his Church, as well
as to him; and his Reproof is full of Reasonings. As

1. That all the earthly good and advantage they seek after, is a vanity, it is
a lie: They will never find it to be that to them which they expect: They are
but a shadow, which is nigrum nihil, a black nothing.

2. Their attempts against the godly, will be frustrated, for God sets a
part the godly man for himself: This is his Treasure, this is his Apple of his
eye, which he will certainly defend. Thereupon he exhorts them to Repentance,
which is accomplished, by communing with their own hearts on their beds. They
are to take the solemnest and most serious time to consider of their ways; for
all their wickedness was committed for want of consideration. Intellectus
cogitabundus, is principium omnis boni, Oh consider this ye that forget God!

This Repentance presupposed, he presses two Duties.

1. To offer the Sacrifices of righteousness; To be diligent in the Worship
and Ordinances of God: and that with an holy and godly cleansing of their lives
from all impiety.

2. To put their trust in the Lord. Even Bellarmine on this place, confesses
this is added, That they might not presume in their own works, or in their best
religious performances, but must rest their souls wholly on the grace of God in
Christ.

Now the Psalmist, having given this spiritual counsel, he informs us of two
different dispositions, or two sorts of men: For although there be various
Interpretations and conjectures about the place, yet I pitch on that as most
genuine.

The first is, The Natural and Carnal disposition which is in the spirit of
every unregenerate man; Who will show us any good? They despise the counsel
given; they think that these religious duties, are for no good at all;
therefore they manifest their desires after some terrene and worldly happiness.

Secondly, There is the Charectar of a gracious and regenerate man; Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. Thus this text, like Rebecca's
Womb, has a profane Esau, who esteemed a morsel of meat above his
Birthright, and a holy Jacob striving within it.

I shall begin with the first, wherein you have represented, What is the
heart-wish, and souls desire of every man, till sanctified; even to go no
higher, then to have happiness in the enjoyment of some creature, and not God
himself. So that in the former part, you may observe,

1. The number of those who have this distempered palate, many; even every man,
till by Regeneration, he is enabled to set his affections on things above.

2. Their ardent affection, They say; that is, both internally, in their
affections and desires, as the fool said, There is no God; and also with the
tongue externally, manifesting this corrupt heart within.

3. There is the object which their whole heart is carried out unto, To show us
any good; that is, any good or content of the creature: For, it is spoken
oppositely to God, as appears by the words following. They do, as it were,
desire the Devils offer, which he made to Christ, That the glory of the world
might be showed them; and they will worship the Devil, and commit any sin,
that they might enjoy it. And although it is true, that the things of this world
are but a show, the Devil does bu^ show the worlds glory; yet to show here, is
to give to enjoy; to make them to partake of it. As Psalm. 60.3. Thou have
showed thy people hard things: which was the making of them to drink the Wine
of astonishment. Even as to see Heaven, to see death, is to partake of them.
Observe,

That no Natural or Unregenerate Man, can lift up his heart any higher, then
unto a worldly Happiness and content in the Creature.
When you have in the most powerful and moving manner, discovered spiritual
duties, and the necessity of Conversion to God, yet they matter it not; they
will say, Who will show us any good? That as it is with the Swine, though
Pearls and precious Flowers be thrown unto her, yet she trampleth them under
her feet, and desires her draffe, and the loathsome mire; so it is with them.

To bring this coal of fire into your bosom, let us consider several
Propositions.

First, The general Character of the godly and the wicked.
That herein lies the general Character of those two Citizens which Austin
speaks of, one who builds up Babylon, and the other who builds up Jerusalem.
That the one does frui utendis, and uti fruendis, but the other is clean
contrary. The whole world consists of two sorts of men, the one who are of the
world, the other, though in the world, yet not of it. As John 17. Believers are
said to be given to Christ, out of the world. As a man may be in England, who
is not yet an Englishman; he cannot speak the language, he cannot conform to
the custom and manners of the Nation. Thus it is here; the godly, they are
indeed in the world, and are of it also in respect of natural propagation, but
not by divine Regeneration. As the Fowls, though at first God created them out
of the waters, yet they fly up into the Heavens, and delight to be soaring in
the air. Thus it is with the Regenerate man; he is now made a new creature, old
things are past away, and his affections are set upon things above: This earth
is turned into fire. But the wicked man, he like our body of the earth, is
earthly; even his very soul is in a spiritual sense so, and their love to the
creature, is the predominant quality, and so like a stone he falls into this
center. Now Austin of old, did fully express the contrary inclination of these
two: That the wicked man does frui utendis; that is, he does enjoy as his
utmost end, and terminateth his appetite in such things as his utmost
happiness, which only he is to use as means to a further end. As if the
Israelite should have made the Wilderness instead of the Land of Canaan to
him. This is the crooked and perverse inclination of the soul, wholly contrary
to that Image of God, which man was made in. So that the very Heathens could
observe, that though God made man with a countenance caelumque tueri, yet they
cried out, O curvae in terris animae and caelestium inanes: The body is
upright, but the soul is bowed down, like the bodies of beasts, like worms and
Serpents that crawle on the ground. And therefore the wicked are the Serpents
seed, not only because of enmity to the godly, but because they lick up, and
live upon the dust of the earth, even upon earthly things. Every wicked man, he
makes some creature or other to be as a God, and so the ultimate end to him.

To clear the heinousness of this wretched temper, consider

Secondly, That all the good things, which the creatures do afford unto us, All
good the creature affords, should lead us to God the universal good.
they are but as means to carry us to a further end. They are but as the
rounds of the Ladder, not to stand upon, but thereby to ascend higher, even to
Heaven. So that as the world is a Glass, to represent the invisible Attributes
of God, his Wisdom, Goodness, and Power; thus all the comforts we can have by
any creature, they are to be as so many mement^es that there is a better and
more universal good, and that we have the creatures to use only, not to enjoy.
Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. They that buy, as if they bought not; they that use
the world, as not abusing it. Some expound abuti, as it is sometimes taken for
valdo uti: but howosoever, he abuses it, that does not use it, as if he used
it not, with an holy weaned affection from it. Hence then, to enjoy any
creature, setting it in Gods room, in the heart, is a direct breach of that
first Commandment, Thou shall have no other gods besides me. And for this
reason, covetousness is called Idolatry, Col. 3 5. Insomuch, that every
natural man, has one thing or other, on which he commits Idolatry, and
therefore does as highly offend God, as he that worships stocks and stones,
giving divine adoration to them. The Scripture calls that, The abominable thing.
Thus it is, when the heart of a man is fastened upon any creature, as the
ultimate scope and end of his desires; we may say to him, Oh do not this
abominable thing! Yea, this Idolatry is more dangerous, by how much it is the
more secret and hidden in the heart. And as the Papists have invented a world
of subtle distinctions to make their Idolatry lawful, no less subtle is the
heart of man in this soul Idolatry.

Thirdly, Take notice that there is an higher and grosser sort of unregenerate
men, then happily this expression will comprehend, and that is those, who make
such things as are formally and expressly evil, the good things they would have
showed to them. Such are all gross and profane sinners, who live in the daily
practice of some loathsome sin: These are a degree higher in wickedness then
those in my text, (though they may be reduced to them;) for here the Psalmist
speaks of such things as are lawful and good in themselves. Honors, Wealth,
humane greatness, comfortable Relations, these are good things in themselves;
and to say, Who will show us them? in a mortifyed and subordinate manner to
God, had been no sin: But when they come in competition with Gods favor, they
had rather have them then Gods light of his countenance, this demonstrateth
impiety. But as for the profane man, his appetite is more corrupted, for he
calls evil things good; he loves those things excessively, which he is not to
love at all. The other loves Honey, but he eats too much of it, and that
kills him; this eats Poison, and feeds of that, one drop whereof is
immediately mortal. But to these, I shall not enlarge my self.

Fourthly, Consider this, That the Schoolmen do well place in every sin, a a
twofold respect; There is the Aversion from God, and the Conversion to the
creature. For seeing the soul cannot like the earth, hang upon nothing, but it
must have some Object or other to satiate it self with, if it has not God, it
has the creature: Now, as soon as ever it turns to the creature, it turns
its back upon God. I speak of the sinfulness of man in this respect, that he
turns to the creature too much, leaving God. Now as there is this in our
corruption, so in our Conversion or Regeneration, there is the clean contrary;
there is aversion from the creature, and conversion to God, It does not only
make a man cast away his sins, but also all creatures, so far as they
hinder the love of God; for now they are risen with Christ. And as if a worm
should be made a man, it would no more crawle and creep on the ground; thus
when a divine Nature, or a Nature from above, is bestowed upon us. Not only
love to sin, but love to Father, Mother, or life it self, is inconsistent
with the grace of God in our hearts, when it is excessive.

All naturally desire felicity.
Fifthly, It is acknowledged by all, that there is imbred in a man, an appetite
or desire after felicity and happiness. This Aristotle and others, do
abundantly confirm. Man by nature, has such a capacious heart, and the souls
appetite is so vast, that it is more then the Horseleech, or the Grave, that
says always, Give. The soul has a Sheoll, that is always asking, and never
satisfied. Now then, if there were a good regulated desire after this ultimate
good, where and in whom it was, this were to be encouraged. If the meaning of
these in my text, had been, Who will show us that which is indeed the chiefest
and most real good? they might have been encouraged, like those that asked
what they should do to be saved. But though there be in the general, an
inclination to such a blessedness, yet woeful and dreadful is the
misapprehension and blindness of all men naturally about it; so that mistaking
the main end for which they came into the world, it is no wonder if at last they
fall into the pit irrecoverably. There were above an hundred Opinions amongst
the Heathens, in what true Felicity did consist; but though some were not so
gross as others, yet all come short of the true end: That knowing of the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, in the knowledge of whom is
eternal life. Neither are many Christians much better then the Heathens in this
respect: for although they know that God is the chiefest good, in the enjoying
of whom, through Christ, is only blessedness; yet practically, in respect of
their hearts and lives, some place their happiness in Riches, some in Honors,
and some in Pleasures; and these to whom David speaks here, that did love
vanity, that cried out for earthly comforts: they were not Heathens destitute
of the knowledge of the true God, but such who lived in the Church of Israel;
only they were destitute of the sanctifying power of God within. There is then
acknowledged in all men, some innate appetite, whereby they would have a full
and chief good, which might completely satiate and fill the soul.

Sixthly, The persuasion of what is the best good, The perswasi^ of what is the
best good and which is chiefly to be desired, is wonderfully diversifyed
according to the several inclinations, humors, and conditions of men.
and which is chiefly to be desired, is wounderfully diversifyed, according to
the several inclinations, humors, and conditions of men. So that some place it
in one thing, and some in another: One says, Give me this good, there is none
like that; Another says, Give me that good, there is none like that. So that
these many in the text, do not all desire the same; yea, one matters not that,
which another would go through fire and water to obtain. The voluptuous man, he
does not matter wealth or riches, let him enjoy his pleasures, and he envyeth
no rich worldling; the earthly worldly man, he matters not honor and credit,
let him get riches, and he regards not a good Name. Populus me sibilat, at mhi
plaudo. The Apostle is thought to bring all that an earthly heart can desire,
into these three heads, 1 John 2.15, 16 17. For speaking there terribly against
the disposition of these in my text, that they should not love the world, he
brings an Argument from the contraries, The love of the Father cannot be in
such an one; They can be no more together, then Dagon and the Ark: The hand
filled with dirt and stones, cannot at the same time, be filled with precious
Pearls: He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit with him; and he that is
joined to the earth, is made earth with it. Si terram amas terra es, said
Austin. And hereupon the Apostle gives some examples and instances of the
things of this world, that are like Jaels milk to Sisera, fairly enticing, but
afterward mortally wounding: and although some think there is not an exact and
full partition, yet others do judge so. And by the lust of the flesh, they
understand, all pleasures and delights; by the lust of the eye, all earthly and
covetous desires, as Achan saw the Babylonish garment, and wedge of gold, which
made him sinfully covet it; and the pride of life, that is, all ambition, all
proud and high desires after the great things of this world.

Haec tria pro trino numine mundus habet.

This is the worlds Trinity, and there is no man inordinately addicted to any
creature comfort, but it may be comprehended under one of these three heads.
Now when the Apostle had given us an Instance of these things, he gives
another Argument against immoderacy after them; This world passes away. They
will rot in the grave, when holiness will abide for ever.

Seventhly, That the preferring of the creature above God, though it be the
sin of all mankind, and as large as Original sin it self, yet like that,
How hardly this sin is discerned, until a man be enlightened by Gods Spirit.
it is hardly discerned and discovered. It Is almost unperceivable, unless we
are enlightened by Gods Spirit, when we set up the creature above him. It Is
true, there is a gross manifest and palpable way, which is seen in every
covetous and ambitious, or lustful man: these do so plainly make either their
belly their god, or their gold their god, or their preferment their god, that
all men can easily condemn them for it; because what is in their heart, empties
it self into foul and shameful practices. But then there is the mental, and
soul deifying of the creatures, when the heart is secretly stolen away, and
does insensibly depend on, or excessively love such a thing; and this is hardly
to be discerned. No doubt, but the third kind of hearers, and so Demas, were
far from thinking that they loved the world more then God. So that as the
nature and operations of the soul are in their Physical consideration little
known, much less in their Theological. Now although the tendencies of the soul
may be various and multiforme, some to one Object, some to another, yet self is
that great Diana, self is the Beelzebub; all things in Religion, even God
himself, is referred to self, till a man be sanctified. So that the heart being
herein thus desperately deceitful, we are often and often to commune with our
own selves, whether self be renounced, whether self be subordinated to God;
whether we can say as Mephibasheth to David, Let Ziba take all, so that the
King be safe. Thus let honors, creatures, self and all perish, so that God and
Christ be exalted. Every man, even he that seems to be the best, has cause
to search, whether he be yet above creatures, as well as sin.

The Demonstrations of this Truth, that no man Unregenerate, can ascend any
higher, then to some earthly content and Happiness.
All have lost the Image of God, which alone did elevate the soul.
And first, This will palpably evidence it, that every man by nature, has lost
the Image of God, which only did elevate man, and made him qualified for the
enjoyment of God, as his suitable Object. God made man after his Image, which
was righteousness and true holiness: so that as he made a woman like man, for
man to delight in, so man was made like God, to delight in him. Then Adam
desired no other good but God: While he continued, he was above the creatures
in his affection, as well as in dominion. He that had power given him to rule
over all creatures, could also rule over all his affections. He did not
over-love any creature, or delight in it, but subordinately to God. Oh glorious
and blessed estate! But now we have lost all this; this Image is defaced: Now
Sampson has lost his hair: Now the Bird is deprived of her wings: Now we are
not able to lift up our hearts to him. Hence is that expression of Jehoshaphat,
2 Chronicles. 17.6. His heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord. You see even a
regenerate man, has much ado to raise up his dull, frozen, and earthly heart,
to enjoy God in Christ. He does, like the Artificer, that with some Engine, and
great drawing, gets a piece of timber up to the top of that House he is a
building, such heaving, and pulling, and tugging, is a godly man forced to use,
to get his heart up to God. An unregenerate man then, who has nothing of this
Image of God repaired in him, no wonder if he has an heart like Nabal's, even
a very stone, that sinketh down heavily within him. This loss of Gods Image,
is that which beats downward, and makes the earth to swallow us up, as it did
Dathan and Abiram. As the body deprived of the soul, presently falls flat to
the ground, and there it lies; thus does every man destitute of Gods Image.

And Original corruption is come in the room of it.
Secondly, This Image of God being thus lost, in the room thereof, succeeds
Original pollution: For this light, comes an universal darkness and
confusion. Now this native pollution, that is a depravation of the whole power,
and all the faculties of the soul, puts the soul off its hinges; it takes off
the Chariot Wheels: It makes man love, where he should hate; rest where he
should move: It makes Princes go on foot, and Servants ride. In a word, the
soul is now turned upside down. God the Object, whom he should with all his
soul and might delight in, now he loves not at all; and what he is allowed to
love in measure, and subordination, that he does over-love. So that who so does
duly consider, what disorder and confussion Original sin has put the heart
into, he will see it cannot be, that God should be duly honored and esteemed
by a natural man. This curious Watch is now broken all in pieces. And as you
see, a Paralitical hand is weak and quaking, not able to fasten upon any thing,
so is now the soul of man toward God. Insomuch, that Ambrose complained of it,
as our great misery, that (Cor nostrum non est in nostra po^estate) our heart
is not in our own power, but is carried hither and thither, up and down, as the
force of original corruption does drive it. How abominable then are those
Doctrines that advance the power of nature? Some determining, that a man is
able by nature to love God above all things, and that it is as easy to do
things in reference to God, as the creature. If (says Molina, no mean Jesuit)
I have power to throw my money into the Sea, why cannot I as well give it to a
poor man, out of love to God. Such presumptuous Doctrines as these, arise from
the ignorance of that horrible confussion and disorder which is now upon all by
nature.

Thirdly, If a godly man, though regenerated, and partaking of the Divine
Nature, If the godly man is yet conflicting with this sin, then it must needs
reign in an unregenerate man.
do yet grapple and conflict with this sin, of creature affection above God,
then certainly an unregenerate man is over-mastered with it. For this we may
conclude on, that what all the regenerate men are combating with, that is
victorious and predominant over all natural men. It Is true, the regenerate men
differ in their fightings and conflicts; some do find it a greater difficulty
to loose and wean their affections from one thing more then from another; and
so the natural man, one is more easily captivated to one earthly good then
another: yet in the general; As ^here is no unsanctifyed man, but one creature
or other reigns or rules in his heart; so there is no godly man, but
something or other it is, that he can hardly mort^fie, some secret and subtle
motions of soul he has. So that did not grace check and with^tand that
creature, that object would damn him at last. If Eve, though in a state of
Integrity, could be tempted by an object alluring sense, how easily then may we
be ensnared? You read, when our Savior spoke that amazing sentence, That a
Cammel might as well go through the eye of a needle, as a rich man be saved;
they made this unversal exclamation, Who then can be saved? What rich man,
might have been a proper consequence, but they say in the general, Who then?
implying, there is no man, no not a godly man, but if God should not keep down
that Cammels bunch, he would have some creature or other to be as
affectionately and prejudicially to his salvation, carried out unto, as the
rich man to his wealth. I then, the godly man can so hardly say, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and in earth, in comparison of thee? no wonder if the earthly
man fall down to the ground, as the Egyptians, like a stone into the Sea? That
which is fighting and active in a regenerate man, must needs be conquering in
an unregenerate.

Fourthly, That sinfulness which cannot be rooted out The common gifts and
graces of Gods Spirit, never cures this evil.
and conquered by those things that are above nature, and are in the next
degree to grace, that certainly will abide prevalent till grace it self come.
That which Elisha's Servant, nor his Staff will do, but El^sha must come
himself, that is hardly cured. Now thus it is; an unregenerate man, may have
great abilities, may have the common gifts and graces of Gods Spirit; he may be
admirable in the whole way of Religion; and yet this man who has God and
Christ so often in his mouth, may have the world and creatures more in his
heart. So that he may in his heart, say, Who will show me any good? when yet at
that time, he may say, Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance. For, this
latter is not desired heartly, nor is he indeed weaned and set loose from other
things. The New Testament is full of such sad Instances. Take Judas, a famous
Apostle, eminent in Gifts and Miracles, often in communion with Christ, yet he
never got his heart above the bag; all the Sermons, all the Prayers, all the
conference with Christ, did not make him ascend higher. So that a man's duties
and expressions may be high, even when his heart is as low as the earth; yea,
when corrupt ends may put a man upon zeal and fervency: It Is a creature that
gives fire to all this heat. Thus the third kind of hearers, that received the
word with joy, it was the deceivablenesse of the creature that undid them.
Demas cleaves to the present world, and that makes him forsake Paul, either
totally, or in some special service. If then, an immoderate heart to the
creatures, may consist with duties, gifts, and many inlargements, and much
asistance in holy duties; if these are not able to cast out these Jebusites, no
wonder the natural man cannot.

The point is proved from the nature of Conversion.
Fifthly, That a natural man cannot set his heart higher then upon some
creature, appears in the true nature of Conversion: For that is not only
turning from sin but the creature also. Excessive love to lawful things;
otherwise, is no more consistent with grace, then to unlawful things: For, if
any thing have thy heart but God, let it be what it will be, thou art yet a
natural man When the Apostle ( Col. 3.) discovered that the godly are risen
with Christ* he makes these Inferences: First, Set your affections on things
above, and not on things below. And then, Mortify your members which are upon
the earth: reckoning up several sins. No man then, is converted, till he
goes out of all sins, yea, and all creatures; and cleaves to God himself.
Therefore the Command is, to turn to God, even to God; he only is the terminus
ad quem of our Conversion. If a man leave off his gross sins, take upon him
a religious Profession; yet if he be not lifted above the world, as well as his
former sins, he is not Converted. It Is not to God, even to God. So that a man
must be undone, not only in respect of his sin, but all worldly hopes; he
must with the Prodigal, begin to account the whole world but an husk; as that
which will do him no good, if God be not his Father. Therefore those in the
Parable, though invited to the Feast, yet refused to come, it was not any
gross sin hindered them, it was not unlawful lusts that did outwardly
entangle them, but those creatures which might have been lawfully enjoyed, and
yet they have gone to the Feast also. I have bought a Farm; I have married a
Wife: These were not inconsistent with godliness, but in the immoderate desire
after them. Oh, is not this the Millstone about many a man's neck; I have a
Shop, I have a Trade, and I cannot come! Oh then, set this home upon thy self!
Has thy Conversion taken thee off from all creatures, as well as thy sins,
thou dare not love Husband, Wife Houses, or life it self more then God? Thou
do esteem the favor of God, and the light of his countenance, above all
these things: Thou can truly say with David, as it follows, Thou have put
more gladness in my heart, then they have had when their best things
increased. Many a man steppeth from his sins, but into the world, and so
falls short of Heaven. The right understanding of true Conversion, makes it
plain, that no natural man can go beyond the creature.

And from the restless and unquiet heart of every natural man.
Sixthly, It may be demonstrated from the restless and unquiet heart of every
natual man, that does like the Be, fly from flower to flower to get some
Honey, but stays not long on one place. So that these in the text, will every
day complain, Who will show us any good? Should God grant them their desire,
and give them the good they would have, yet that would not satifie, still they
would be craving; still they desire something more. As you see Haman, though he
had never so much honor, yet the want of something still he desired, made him
tormented within himself. Solomon writes an whole Book, to show that all these
things are vanity and vexation of spirit; and though he set himself on purpose
to find out happiness in the creatures, yet he grew weary of all. Now
certainly, if a natural man could center his heart upon God, could put into
that Haven, he would never suffer himself to be tossed up and down in tempests
and storms, as he is, never having any rest. There is no natural man that is
contented with any creature he enjoys. Let him propound to himself such and
such a condition, if he had such and such advantages; when he has them, he is
as far from solid contentment as at first. Zacheus his shoe can never fit
Goliah's foot. As a man would think that the Heavens seem to touch the earth at
such a distance, and if he should ascend such high mountains, he could go no
further, but when he comes there, he sees the Heavens as far from him as
before. And therefore the godly man, whose heart is united, and has taken God
for his Portion, for his Shepherd, for his all, as David professes, he can lie
down and sleep; he can take his rest, fearing nothing in the world. So that
godliness drawing the heart to God, is the best Antidote against all
discontents whatsoever. He that can say, God is better then ten Husbands, then
ten thousand creatures, he is not disquieted, but is the same in all
conditions; because his God, his Father, his Portion is always the same. As he
in the Ecclesiastical Histiory, when one brought him word, his Father was dead,
he said, Desine blasphemias loqui, Pater enim meus immortalis est. So thy
Husband, thy Wealth, thy Friend, thy Portion, is the immor^al God, who cannot
die: but it is not thus with the ungodly. He is like a tree in the wilderness,
and like the dust blown with every wind. So that the troublesome, restless,
and discontented thoughts of every natural man, argues that he does not, and
cannot ascend up to God.

Seventhly, It Is demonstrated thus, that if at any time natural men make their
applications to God, those very approaches do declare, Their very approaches to
God, demonstrate that they prefer something before him.
that they love something more then God. For it might be an Objection, Why
cannot a natural man be above the creature? Do they not in distresses, in times
of calamity, seek unto God? May they not fast and humble themselves? It Is
granted; but even these duties demonstrate, they have only a natural carnal
heart, making use of God only to satisfy their earthly desires. Hos. 7.14. God
there by the Prophet complains, that they did not cry unto him, when they
howled on their beds: They assemble themselves for their corn and wine. You
see, they were as carnal and as earthly in their Fast-daies, and public
Humiliations, as in their worldly affairs; and therefore he compares their
cries in Prayer, to the howling of Beasts, that want food, and are ready to
famish. Such are like Noah's Raven, that came to Noah only while she wanted
food, but when she had provision, never came to him more. Thus natural men,
they approach to God, but it is wholly because their hearts are inordinately set
upon the creature; it is not because they delight in him.

Eighthly, This is evident, In that no natural man can truly desire the coming
of Christ, and the putting of an end to the fashion of this world: Whereas this
is made the Character of the godly, to look for, and to hasten the Kingdom of
Christ. The Church cries, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. They have enough of
the world. It Is to their loss to be kept so long from Heaven. As the godly
Patriarchs counted themselves Pilgrims, and did look for a better Country.
This is, or ought to be the frame of every godly man. But now the natural man
can no more reach this heavenly frame, and desire that Kingdom of Glory might
come, then he can touch the bodily Heavens with his finger. Hence the going out
of this world, that they shall not enjoy the comforts and creatures they have
had, is the greatest fear they are daily in bondage unto. It Is true, a godly
man has a great part of this unwillingnesse in him also; but that arises,
partly from the natural fear of death, or spiritual doubts about his condition;
or because earthly things are yet so much in heart: but he desires to have it
otherways.

The Sinfulness and Woeful Aggravation of this Estate, to be in the Number of
these Votaries, as it were, in the Text.
The creature is unable to help us in our greatest exigencies.
And first, This is a very dreadful and dangerous estate, viz. not to be able
to lift up our selves above the creature, because of the insufficiency and
utter inability that is in it, to help us in our greatest exigencies. Then when
the soul has most need, then it fails. As it is with Land-floods in
Wintertime, then they come, when there is water enough, and none needs them;
but when in Summer, the greatest drought is, and there is most necessity, then
they appear not. Thus every creature seems comfortable and helpful, when we
are in our glad and merry condition; but in those times, when, if ever, they
should be a solace to us, then they utterly forsake us.

Now we may take notice of three choice times wherein (if ever) the soul may be
in the greatest necessity. As

First, At such times, when God shall set home the guilt of sin upon our
conscience, and make us to find the sting of it at our very hearts. In such
agonies, and soul bitterness, bring him all the glory, profit, and pleasure,
of the creatures squezed together; bring the quintessence of them, and they
will do no good. Oh, now the sense of Gods wrath, the scorching guilt within,
cannot be allayed by such applications! Whereas one smile of Gods favor, would
presently command all the waves to be still. Psalm. 39.11. When thou with
rebukes does chasten man for sin; thou make his beauty (or that which is
desirable in him) to consume like a moth. Oh what a change is then made! His
honors, his friends, his greatness can do him no good at all. And this was
experimentally true in Judas, when the guilt of his sin began to smart and
torment him, see in what a woeful agony he is; and those thirty Pieces, he so
greedily coveted, (alas) now he dares not keep them, he throws them away:
and his great Confederates, they never pity him, when he cried out, I have
sinned in betraying the innocent blood; for they said, What is that to us, look
thou to it? Thus all the creatures will leave thee, when God shall be angry. Oh
look thou to it! We cannot help you; You might have been wi^er; We did not
force you. Thus thou will find every creature to be a lie in the greatest time
of thy anguish.

Secondly, Another great straight thou will be put upon, is the time and hour
of Death. For then (if ever) as we are in the greatest want, so the creature we
have loved, should most appear for us; but the Scripture tells us, We came naked
into the world, and we shall carry out nothing with us. There is not any
creature thou have inordidately desired, that can accompany thee any longer:
All must leave thee. Now what a sad condition is this, to be stripped naked of
all? The good things thou have embraced, cannot be enjoyed any longer. Oh what
would the soul now give for the light of Gods favor! Now a world for some
evidence of his love: Now he cries out, as that Cardinal once did, If he had
pleased God as the King, or if loved God as the creature, he had not been in
that desolate estate. So that it is not to be mattered, what content and comfort
thou find in the creature, while thou art in health and mirth, but when thou
art breathing the last, when thou shall see the face of creatures no more: Oh
then, think how much better had it been, if I had spent my time and strength
for God, which I did for the creature!

Thirdly, Another great time of exigency is, When we shall be arraigned at the
Tribunal of God, to be judged by him for every evil and wicked way. This is a
time of the greatest terror and horror. Then Christ as a Judge is before thy
eye: Then the Devils thy Accusers are all standing by: Then the torments of
Hell are before thee, and that burning Lake of Brimestone, in which thou art
ready to be cast. Oh, now which of all the creatures thou trustedest in, can
give thee any help! Call now to any of those that were thy props, and see wat
good they can do to thee. Where is Dives his great wealth, that could not help
him to a drop of water? Oh, at such a dreadful time, would not the loving
favor of God, be more then all the world to thee! Then if God should say, Come
ye blessed, would not this be more comfort then ever thou had all thy life?
And if on the other side, God shall say, Depart ye cursed, can any thing
withstand it? Can any creature say, Lord, he shall not go, I will save him;
I Will deliver him? These things then being thus, that there are such times, when
all the creatures of the world are not able to quench the fire that will
consume thee; what folly and wickedness is it to mind that which will then
deceive thee, and not to regard the savor of God, which will then be most
precious and ready to help in this day of adversity, that will most be seen?

Secondly, Take heed of immoderacy to the creature, Immoderate love of the
creature is inconsistent with the love of God.
for the immoderate love of that is not consistent with the love of God. Thou
may speak much, and profess much to the contrary, but the inordinate love
of the creature cannot stand with the love of God; yea, it is emnity to God.
Does not God require, we should love him with all our might, all our strength?
So that he will not allow any love to any thing else but him. Indeed, when we
desire any creature in subordination to him, as a means of glorifying him, and
thereby brought nearer to God; this is not aagainst God. The Schoolmen say,
That it is the same gracious habit of love, that carries us out to love God,
and our neighbor because of him; and so it is of every creature else. As we
say, such a great House, is such a man's: Now, though he have many servants
dwelling there, yet we say, it is his House, not the Servants, because they are
for and under him. Thus if God do chiefly dwell in our hearts, then (though we
love other things, yet because this is wholly in reference to God) we may truly
say, We love none but him. But now, when the love of the creature opposes God,
makes us contrary to him, or makes us love him or holy duties the less, then
we are to conclude, That this cannot stand with godliness. So that not only
gross sins practiced, but any creature habitually and excessively delighted
in above God, is also incompatible with it.

Thirdly, Take heed of this estate, because it is a woeful snare and temptation
to thee. He that is inordinately affected with any earthly comfort, Is's a
woeful snare and temptation.
this will upon all occasions, bring him into the foulest sins that can be
imagined. He will do any thing; damn his soul over and over, to obtain it: As
Judas, because he was immoderately set upon gain, he betrayeth Christ; though
he was admonished of it, though he was told in particular he was the man:
Though heard what a fearful condition such a man was in, that should betray
Christ, yet nothing can stop him, but he will satisfy that corrupt appetite of
his. Oh then, take heed again and again, of such an inordinrate appetite! It
will be thy poison and damnation: It will one time or other put thee upon such
horrrible actions, as will make the hearts of others to tremble, when they hear
it; yea, such as thou will abhor, before they are committed. As it was in
Hazael, Am I dog (said he) that I should do so? And truly, it is very sad, when
God, by his Providence, shall suffer such advantages for thy lust to fall out;
us Judas had a bag, Hazael a Kingdom; all which were like spa^kes to that
tinder. The Devil finds the room then garnished and swept for him, Let a man
profess never so much love to God, and be never so forward in Religion, yet if
he be not mortifyed to every creature, there will come a fire from without, and
consume this bramble.

The Word is unprofitable to a man, while he preferres the creature.
Fourthly, This is a fearful estate, because the word of God, though preached
never so powerfully, and pressed over and over again, yet it cannot do any
good, while such a temper is on thee. This is the Dalilah that will always
entice thee. Intus existens prohibet alienum. You see, even in our Savious
preaching, though none ever taught as he did; Though this was accompanied with
astonishing Miracles, yet the Pharisees, who loved the world, and the glory of
men, they der^ded him. Yea, our Savior told the very Disciples themselves,
Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe, if ye seek glory of one another? And therefore,
at another time, he took a little child, setting him before them, that if they
did not become like such, they could never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. As
long therefore, as any thing sits too close to our hearts, we cannot be Christ's
Disciples. You see those hearers, that went so far as to receive the Word
with joy, and to bring forth some fruit, yet it was the deceivablenesse of
riches, that did choke all. Never then expect, that any Ministry, or any
Preaching should ever do good to thee, while this or that creature is so
enammouring of thee.

It is a tormenting sin.
Fifthly, Take heed of this creature-affection, because it is a tormenting sin.
It is not only a sin, but a torment, and vexation withal. Some sins bring
a sweetness with them, though they leave an Hell hereafter; but this sin,
for the most part, brings an Hell with it. What man is there, inordinately
afected to any thing, that you may not call the Devils Martyr, he endures and
suffers so much? He is under many vexations, and through many tribulations he
goes to Hell In what a fiery Furnace was Haman, though exalted so high above
others? And does not Solomon, the wise man, pen an whole Book, to inform of
this, that all is but vexation of spirit? And what the Apostle speaks of one
particular, is true of all, 1 Timothy 6.9. Those that will be rich, they fall into
many temptations, and pierce themselves through with many cares. They are as
one Martyr in Gods cause, that was by his Scholars stabbed all over, to death,
by Penknives. Thus (...). Insomuch, that if you could see the naked soul of any
man, inordinately affected to the creature, you would see it all over wounded
and scourged, full of tormenting cares and fears; never in any quiet or safe
content at all. Oh then, consider what an enemy thou art to thy self!
Godliness would be great gain to thee; It would make thee glad and rejoice in
the Lord; It would teach thee how to have all things, and how to want: but
while thy heart is vassalized thus to the creature, no quietness can be in thy
bones. And what a folly is this, to be miserable here, and miserable hereafter?

All the things thus affected, are vanities.
Sixthly, They are miserable, who are thus craving after worldly good things,
because the Scripture represents all these things but as vanity; As that which
is a mere lie; Called therefore often a Shadow, which the foolish child
catches at, as some real substance, when it is but (as was said) a black
nothing. Therefore you see Solomon expostulating after this manner, Why do
thou set thy eyes upon that which is not, Prove. 23.5. That which at another
time, the wise man says, It answers all things, and calls it a defense; yet
here he says, It is not: Even as the whole Creation may be said to be non ens,
comparatively to God. And therefore God is called Jehova: He is said to be, I
am what I am: All creatures have not a being comparatively to him. If then the
best and most useful of creatures, be such a nothing to God, even whole
Nations, are but as a drop, or dust; yea, they are said to be less then
nothing; Isa. 40.17. What folly is it, to leave the Fountain of all happiness,
and to catch after the shadow? Oh then, let the godly soul, which enjoys God,
when tempted by the creature to immoderate love, say, as the Fig Tree and
Olive Tree, Shall I leave my sweetness! Shall I part with my happiness and
blessedness I have in God, and go and tear my self with briars? For so indeed,
when we seek to the creatures for refuge in any distress, we do with the
sheep, run into briars, that consume more then shelter. 1 Cor. 7. the Apostle
calls it, The fashion of the world, not the substance; and he says, it
passes away: Whereas God is said to be always the same* and to abide from
everlasting to everlasting. Therefore if thy heart were wise, thou would see
the vanity of these things.

Seventhly, This must needs be an heinous sin, It Is direct Idolatry.
because it is a breach of the first Commandment; it is direct Idolatry. Worse
then when we worship the true God, after a false and unlawful manner; yet how
severely does God punish this kind of Idolatry? How often do the Prophets
threaten, because of this? But now thou, who give thy heart license to
delight in these things below, thou sinnest against the first Commandment:
Thou errest in the Object of thy worship, and not in the manner. And is God
only zealous of outward worship, not of inward? Is he angry only when men bow
the body to wood and stones, and not when the soul is prostituted to the
creature? May thou not justly expect, that as God said to those Idolaters,
They should call and see if their Idol gods would hear and deliver them? So the
Lord may bid thee call to those creatures, to see if they will save thee; if
they will deliver thee from Hell. Do not then wonder at the folly of Micha, who
cried, They have taken away my gods. If gods, Why did they not save themselves?
And thus here it is, death takes away thy gods: The fire may take away thy
gods. Oh, that men would at last be awakened out of there blindness and folly
herein*

Eighthly, This creature affection is a woeful condition, because it is a
debasing of a man's self, and making of him a slave to that which he should rule
over. It Is a debasing of a man.
All the creatures, they are made for his use. God, out of his rich abundance,
has provided the^e things liberally for thee, but they are given thee only to
use. As the belly is for meats, and meats for the belly; but God will destroy
both the one and the other. So all these creatures that are corruptible, they
are for thee who art also corruptible; but God will destroy both the one and
the other. Therefore thou sinnest against that noble End why God made thee: It
was to enjoy him. He did not give a reasonable immortal soul, and made thee the
master piece of his visible creatures, that thou should crawle on the dust.
Say rather with Austin, Fe^^sti domine cor nostrum, and irrequietum est, Thou
made our heart, and it is restless till it come to thee again.

Use of Admonition, to every unregenerate man, to inform himself thoroughly of
his wretched and undone estate. Thou can not go beyond a creature, and
therefore shall never partake of that infinite eternal happiness which is in
God himself. Do thou not plainly see, the vanity and uncertainty of all other
things? Can any creature say, I will justify thee; I will glorify thee?
Consider how greatly it is to thy loss, to leave the Sun, and go to the
Stars: To forsake the Ocean, and take up a drop. Oh, will these things be
ever as good as a God to thee. And then in the next place, Consider how dearly
the enjoying of these things will cost thee. Does not our Savior say, What
will it profit a man to win the whole world, and loose his soul, Mat. 16.26?
If now, the whole world thou gainest, would be no advantage; thou would be a
wretched looser for all that: Oh think, I get a finite good, and loose an
infinite! I loose an eternal good, for a temporary; a particular, for an
universal. This will be thy complaint in Hell to all eternity, for thy madness
herein.

Antidotes and Means against this Creature-Affection.
I shall now conclude this first Doctrine, with giving several directive
Antidotes and means against this creature-affection, that so being loosened
from the world, our hearts may be fixed on God. And

Such as prefer the world before God, cannot Pray.
First, Let this consideration move you, That you cannot address your selves
unto God in Prayer, while thy heart is not above the world. Does not our
Savior in that direction of his to Prayer, give God that description, of a
Father in Heaven? And why so, but that we should lift up our hearts and
affections thither? So that as in Antiquity, the Deacon cried, Sursum corda;
that they should not rest upon the element in the Sacrament, but look up to
Christ himself. Thus also in every duty and performance, a Sursum corda, a lift
up your hearts, is necessary. Therefore upon this ground it it, that we may
truly say, No natural man did ever pray in his whole life; did ever perform any
one holy duty since he was born; because he could never truly lift up his heart
to God. Prayer is called, Ascensio mentis ad Deum* Now a natual man can no more
ascend upwards toward God, then the earth can have an ascending motion. Every
creature that did creep upon the earth, it was unclean. And thus all thy duties
and religious performances, which creep and crawle upon the ground, which soar
not up high, they make thee unclean and abominable before God. Now should not
this Argument be like a sword in thy bowels: What? live such a life, wherein
thou can not pray; no Prayer will do any good? Continue in such an estate,
wherein thou art not able to draw nigh to God, but art the Bird tied by the
snare, that would fain fly up, but is pulled back again? Thus thou have some
sighs, and some desires, but presently thou art pulled down again with those
clogs of creatures that are upon thee.

The heart is too noble for the creature.
Secondly, Consider, Thy heart^ it is the choicest and chiefest Treasure about
thee: It is too noble for any creature. Thou do dishonor thy self, in
making it serve the creature. We see God himself, calls for the heart of a man
as the best Sacrifice. My son, give me thy heart, Prove 23.26. And Prove. 4.23.
Keep thy heart with all diligence. So that as the heart naturally considered,
is the principle of all life; and nature has placed a wonderful defense about
it. Thus the heart spiritually also considered, is the chief fountain of all
our happiness and misery. Therefore it is sure destruction, to let thy heart
run out upon the creature; that is, to make the chiefest of thy soul
subordinate to that which is far inferior. It Is as if thou shoudest let
swine, or such unclean creatures, come into thy choicest Chamber. It was a sad
calamity to Pharaoh, when the frogs and lice crept up into his Chamber, and he
could not be quiet in his most retired room; no less, yea, far greater an
evil it is, when thou suffer these fading creatures to get into the heart.
Keep that for God alone: Nothing is to possess that place, but God himself. He
that fills Heaven and earth, and makes that his dwelling place, does also
require thy heart. Hence it is, that the Apostle James calls those, who love
the world, Adulterers and Adulteresses, Jam. 44. For the heart of a man, should
be kept as the chaste Wife to Christ, and love no other but him. Therefore when
it lets loose her desires to the creatures, then it becomes guilty of Adultery;
then God is jealous. Oh then, make more account where thy heart is placed! Look
to that more diligently: for it is not fit any creature should be placed nearer
to that, then God himself. Does not our Savior say, He that loves Father, or
Mother, or life it self, more then me, cannot be my Disciple?

Thirdly, Meditate on this, That all those, who ever loved the creature
immoderately, Consider that all that have over-loved the creature, have
experienced the vanity of it.
have at last, found the vanity and unprofitablenesse of it. They have been
wearied, and glutted with it. As he said to that Tyrant, Satia te sanguine,
quem sitiisti, He gave him blood enough at last. So commonly, God in anger does
give thee abundance of such things as thou desire, but they are for thy hurt.
Thou desire them as the hydropical man water, or as the feavourish man Wine;
which things, if they obtain, their disease is the more increased, and they
become the more dangerous. The wise man observes it of riches, Eccles. Chap.
5.13. he calls it a sore evil; That riches are kept for the owners thereof, to
their hurt. Now then, is not this very dangerous to thee, to place thy heart
upon that which will be poison and bane to thee? This is true of honors,
preferments; any creature, if excessively desired, will do a man hurt: It Is
like surfeiting upon Honey. And this is the reason why God keeps his own
children in so many streights and difficulties; he does not give them the
things they desire: Yea, commonly God does cross them in all their earthly
affections and undertakings: so that they cannot have those mercies they would
have. And the Lord is herein very merciful to them; for that which is
inordinately desired, would be also immoderately possessed; and so like too
much blood, it would quickly breed mortal diseases in thee. So that that very
consideration, which often makes thee grudging and discontented, may justly put
thee upon thankfulness: Thou may bless God that he does these things for
thee, which are ad Sanitatem, non ad voluptatem: It Is Gods goodness, that I
have not the mercies I would have; for then I should be undone. And that even
the godly are apt to seek immoderately after these earthly comforts, appears
in that reproof to Baruch, Jer. 45.5. Seek thou great things for thy self?
Seek them not. Baruch an eminent man in godliness* even in those days, when
there was nothing but destruction universal threatened; even then he was apt to
seek great things for himself. Yea, the Apostle complains of the whole Church
of God almost at Philippi, Phil. 2.22. For all seek their own, and not the
things of Jesus Christ. This disposition being thus in the godly, did not the
Lord both quench the fire within, by sanctifying grace, and remove the fuel
from without, he would quickly be all in a flame.

Fourthly, Consider that therefore it is, Consider the re^s^^ why God mingles
gall with the Honey of every creature.
God has mingled gall with the honey of every creature; That therefore it is,
every thing is obtained with difficulty, and possessed with cares, that so we
might not rest upon the creature. As God made Egypt a place of oppressiion and
misery to the Israelites, that so they might willingly go out, and seek for
Canaan. Thus the Lord has made the world a valley of tears: He has caused
every relation, every conditon, to have its great exercise, that so God might
be all in all. That as you see, out of the same root grows both the Rose and
the Prickels about it; so likewise out of same creature, out of the same
condition, comes both Honey and a sting: both that which is comfortable, and
that which is molesting. Now Gods end in this, is to make thee not with Peter,
to say, It Is good to be here; but to seek out for a better good. Thou must
therefore be very foolish, and brutish, if this experience does not teach
thee. Has not Solomon made this Motto upon all the creatures, That they are
vanity and vexation of spirit? Not only vanity, but vexation. Will thou
therefore lay thy self down to sleep, when there are so many briars and thorns
under thee. Oh say, This is not my rest! Here is not all good: There is a
better place then this world; and a greater happiness, then the enjoying of
the creature. Even the wisest, the richest, and most potent in the world, have
not had their content, but thorns have been in their sides, and their has
been two drops of gall to one of Honey. That Star called wormwood, has
fallen into our waters, and made them bitter. What then should we learn from
this, but that it is our best wisdom, and our safest undertaking to look up
unto God as the fountain of all happiness? As of him, in whom we shall not
have any occasion of weariness. There will never be cause to complain, that I
find not God so full of comfort and blessedness to me, as I expected. Yea, God
will be unto us above all that we can expect: For, it cannot enter into the
heart of a natural man, to conceive the fullness and excellency of God, And
therefore the natural men of the world, are commanded to taste, and see how
good God is. It Is for want of this spiritual and heavenly experience, that we
are so apt to be affected too much with the creature, and nothing at all with
God.

Consider how insufficient they are of themselves to help and comfort us.
Fifthly, Remember, That these creatures, whatsoever they are for comfort, they
are not originally and of themselves so, but are only Instruments and
Conduit-Pipes. And therefore they are defective in these Particulars.

1. They cannot give them any comfort or content of themselves: They are not
able to satisfy and quiet the heart. For how many have been under the greatest
mercies in the world, and have enjoyed all the outward abundance that their
hearts could desire, and yet for all that, have an unquiet discontented spirit?
And the reason is, because it is God only that fashioneth the heart; It Is he,
that forms the spirit. And therefore under the saddest afflictions that can
possibly befall: we see God made David of a quiet and satisfied spirit; he
could lie down, and tak^ his rest, when his own Son was up in arms against
him, and ready to deprive him both of life and Kingdom at once. So it is said,
David encouraged himself in his God, when he was in that sad distress at
Zicklag. So that it is not the conditions without, but the framing of the heart
within, that makes miserable or happy. Is it not then folly as well as sin,
to look after this or that creature inordinately, which of it self cannot add
one Cubit to thy contentation? Thou may be in a Prison, yea in Hell, while
thou live in a vast and large Palace; and all this is, because it is not the
creature, not the Condition, but God himself that forms and frames the soul
in a right manner.

2. As the condition cannot effectively work upon th^e, so neither can they
fill themselves with any comfort objectively, any further then God puts into
them. These are streams that have water no longer then the Spring fills
them. That as it is with all creatures, even man himself, that he has no
longer a being, or existence then God gives it to him; if he withdraws his
arm, the strongest man falls immediately to dust. Thus it is with all
creatures; they do not comfort or originally help of themselves, but as enabled
by God. The bread does not nourish, but as bles't by God: The fire could not
burn, when God restrained it; and even the garments and shoes of the
Israelites, did not wax old or consume, while Gods blessing was upon them. Thus
then it is, no creature has any thing of it self to refresh us with, but as
God puts into it; even as the Conduit-Pipe, runs water or Wine, as it is poured
into it. And thus do all creatures communicate mercies and comforts, as they
are quickened thereunto by God.

Lastly, The creature in being but an instrument, and having all from God, does
thereby demonstrate how much blessedness is in enjoying God himself. If a drop
be so sweet, how much more is an Ocean? If a Star be so welcome, how much more
is the Sun? Therefore thou should say thus to thy self, If such a relation;
such a creature be so comfortable and good to me, what may God himself be, who
is so full of all good? Si tanta pulchritudo in creatura, quanta in creatore,
as the Ancient said? Heaven and glory cannot be obtained without a preement and
transcendent affection to all other things.
If thy heart were spiritual, it would ascend thus by the creature to God.

Sixthly, Lay this above all things to heart, that Heaven and glory cannot be
obtained, without a preeminent and transcendent affection to all others things.
You cannot intend the heart and affection to other things, and to salvation
likewise. Mat. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force. Hence it is also, that God requires we should love him with
all our soul and might. These things then being attained only with the highest
and chiefest affections and desires of the soul, how can thy heart be for
Heaven and the world also? Hence also are those Commands, that we must seek the
Kingdom of Heaven in the first place; that we must not labor for the meat that
perishes. And hence those, who endeavor after Heaven, are compared to a
traveller; to one that runs in a race; to one that combats with an enemy:
Now, none can effectually mind these things, and other things also. Can a man
that runs in the race look to the Apples or fruit that grows upon the tree,
and seek to gather them? Is not this the way to make him certainly lose the
Crown? No less ought our intention, industry and labor to be after Heaven,
lest we loose the Crown of Glory. Certainly this false persuasion of obtaining
the Crown of Glory so easily, and that Heaven may be had upon so easy terms,
is that which damneth thousands. For how can it be, that thou should so
eagerly attend to these things? Did thou think, there is a greater and more
necessary good, which will require greater affections? Shall the food of my
body be got with the sweat of my brows, and not much rather eternal Glory
hereafter?

Seventhly, Neglect not this Meditation, What Heathens and superstitious
persons have done in a misguided way for some notable end. Consider how ^ some
Heathens and superstitious persons have trampled upon earthly things, to attain
a notable end.
How have they trampled all earthly things under their feet? Who has not heard
of Crates the Thebane, that parted with all his wealth to give himself to
Philosophy? And how greatly will the wilful poverty of some misguided Zealots
in Antiquity condemn us herein? I speak not of that wilful renouncing of
earthly wealth in Popery that now is; for they do thereby provide a better
temporal provision for themselves: but I speak of the old Hermites, and
Anchorets, who mistaking many places of Scripture, as not only in preparation
of spirit, when God should require, they did command a leaving of these things,
but also actually to throw away all things, did thereby denude themselves of
all that wealth, and of all those earthly enjoyments that otherwise they had;
thinking that they could never be saved, if they did enjoy these things. Now
this actual abdication of all things, is not a duty; therein they were
misguided with a prep^^^^rous zeal; but yet in preparation of spirit, we ought
to part with all the earthly comforts of this world: and when there may be
special Commands, or particular occasions, then we are actually to leave all;
as you see the Disciples and Martyrs did. Oh then, do thou blame thy self for
all immoderate affections to these things! Think how will Heathens and
superstitious Persons rise up to thy condemnation.

Eighthly, If Christ has reproved those who were godly, for their external
cares, when yet notwithstanding it has been in the root of it, from all good
affection to himself; how much rather will he condemn those who are
immoderately addicted to these things, and that from a principle of averseness
to him, and wearisomenesse in his service? Now for this reproof, you have a
notable Instance, Luke 10 40, 41. where Martha, out of her abundant affection
to entertain Christ, did not as her sister, sit at Jesus his feet, and hear his
Word, but was careful about the entertaining him; but Christ says, Thou art
troubled about many things, one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen the
better part. You see Christ preferring a diligent attending to the means of
grace, before all kind entertainment of himself. Hence also it is, that the
Disciples were not allowed to have an inordinate affection even to his humanity
and bodily presence. They are reproved for their grief and sorrow, when he was
bodily to leave them, because this hindered his spiritual presence. If then, we
may not in these cases be excessive in our affections, how much less in mere
earthly things?

THE GODLY MAN'S CHOICE: SHOWING That a gracious heart does more esteem the
favor of God, and the light of his Countenance, then any earthly thing
whatsoever.
Psalm 4.6. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us.


WE are now come to the second part of the Text, and in that we have the spirit
of David, and all godly men expressed, and that is contrary to the desires of
earthly men, while they thus earnestly long after some earthly good. He shows
what is that, which his soul does most thirst after, and that is, The light of
Gods favor.

For the right understanding of the words, there is some difference amongst
Interpreters: Some Popish Expositors, render it assertively, not imperatively;
Signatum est super nos, the light of thy countenance is sealed upon us. Thus
Bellarmine, and generally the Schoolmen; They bring it to prove, That there is
something of Gods Image left in every man, whereby he is able to discern good
and hate evil. As if the sense of the Psalmist was this; Why do the men of the
world seek thus after earthly good things, and are so uncertain in their
affections; for God has placed the light of reason and conscience in every
man, whereby he is able to know there is the chiefest good? Now although we do
not refuse this interpretation, upon Illyricus his Reason, that there are no
implanted principles of knowledge about God; yet the context does more evince
the latter, that it is by Prayer-wise to God. And although Bellarmine says,
the Hebrew may be pointed, so as to make Signatum est, and that the Septuagint
know better then the M^sorites; yet because it is ordinary to put Samech for
Sin, and He for Alph, as here Nesah for New; we take it to signify to lift up.
And although it should be from nes vixillum, that could not overthrow the
sense. And the Septuagint, (...), does not signify an impression of any thing
in us, but a manifestation: As in that place, 2 These. 3.14. Note such a man by
an Epistle. We therefore understand it of David's Prayer, That God would give a
manifestation of his gracious love to him. A Metaphor taken from men, who when
reconciled, do willingly turn their face, and look pleasantly upon those whom
they delight in. Observe,

That a gracious heart does more esteem the favor of God, and the light of his
countenance, then any earthly thing whatsoever.

This light of Gods countenance, is often spoken of by David, Psalm. 44.3. The
original of all the mercies God vouchsafed to Israel, is said to be Gods power,
and the light of his countenance, because he had a favor to them. So Psalm.
99.15. Blessed are they that know the joyful sound, they shall walk in the
light of thy countenance. This favor of God, is that which makes a glad and
joyful heart. Hence in Antiquity, it was a proverbial speech to express an
happy man by, Deus vidit, God has looked on such a man.

Though the light of Gods countenance, does sometimes signify only his bare
knowledge and omniscience, as Psalm. 90.8. Thou have put our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance: as Gods face is sometimes upon a man for good,
and sometimes it is said to be against man, for his hurt: but the sum is, That
as it is with a man, when he is pleased with another, he turns his face to
him, looks pleasantly and cheerfully: as Job says of himself, Job 29.24.
Thus when God is pleased with a man, then the Believer apprehends nothing but
love and favor from God: He sees not frowns, but smiles in his face: And he
sees God to be to him, by the eye of Faith: As Esau's face was to Jacob,
pleasing; and therefore said to be like the face of God.

Let us consider what this phrase does express. And

First, It supposes that all our iniquities and sins, they are pardoned and
blotted out. For as long as our guilt is upon us, and God sees that, What this
phrase, to lift up the light of Gods countenance upon a man, implies.
he turns his face from us; He is an angry Judge: He is of purer eyes, then
to behold such things. Your iniquities divide between you and me. Hence, when
sin is said to be pardoned, the expression is, that it is covered, Psalm. 32.
implying, that sin of it self, is loathsome and abominable to his eyes. Not
but that he sees sin in every Believer, only it is pardoned in Christ, and so
not imputed to the Believer: And though God see it, so as to chasten for it,
yet not to adjudge to eternal destruction. And this is so great a blessedness,
that David, Psalm. 32. does only call this so: Blessed is the man (not whom God
makes great, rich, and honored in this world, but) to whom he imputes no
sin at all. This the humbled soul counts a mercy, and in its sad agonies,
prays for the light of Gods countenance: All the world does him no good: All
the creatures that would comfort him, do but as those that would give Christ
vinegar and gall to drink. David himself ( Psalm. 5 1.) when in his great
conflicts, because of his sin, minds not his Kingdom, or honors, but
prays, that God would have mercy upon him, according to his loving kindness.
Those tender mercies of God, he flies unto. Till therefore sin be removed,
Gods anger and wrath belongs unto us.

Secondly, In this is employed Gods favor and love toward us; that he is
pleased, and become reconciled with us. If the wrath of a King be so terrible,
how much more is the wrath of God? But when the light of his countenance is
toward us, then he is gracious; then his eye, his face, are all pleasant and
reviving. When David is reconciled to Absalom, then it is no longer commanded,
that he should keep from his presence, but his Fathers bowels long to see him
him again. Can there be a greater good in the world desired, then that Gods
face should be pleasant to us? Then that he should become reconciled with us?
For as it is better to undergo all the wrath of all the most cruel Tyrants in
the world, then to lie under Gods displeasure; so it is better to enjoy the
favor and love of God, then the advantage of all second Causes. Genesis 4.14 Cain
speaks of this as the height of his misery, That he should be hid from the face
of the Lord. To be in Hell, it would not be a torment, but because Gods face is
hid. Wheresoever God hides his face, there is the inlet of all woe and misery.
Then on the contrary, when the face of God does shine upon a Believer, as David
prays for this often, then is that man's estate blessed and happy: God is then
at peace with him: God is then reconciled. Now as the Apostle argues, Romans 8.
If God be for us, who shall be against us? When the Sun shines, there may
arise many black and thick clouds, there may be sad and gloomy days; but when
the face of God does shine on his children, then no darkness, no tempests, no
sad temptations whatsoever, can hinder a man from having the beautiful beams
of Gods favor. He can make the Sun shine in the dark night. If he gives
peace, none can hinder it.

Thirdly, This phrase does imply the original, and cause of all Gods gracious
mercies in time. It Is because of the light of his countenance, that any good
comes to us. For as the damned in Hell, who are totally cast out from his
face, cannot receive so much as a drop of water; so on the other side, where
the favor of God is toward a man, there is a Treasure of all the goodness he
can desire. Therefore when David prays here, he does (as I may so say) ask
the whole Kingdom of God: Have this, and have all, if it be necessary for us.
When David prays for the light of Gods countenance, he does not ask for a
single mercy: It is not for one particular comfort he beggeth, but for the
Treasury: To have this, is to have the Ocean, not streams: To have this, is to
have the Mine, not some fragments of gold. Oh then, is it any wonder if this
light of Gods favor be thus to be preferred, seeing it is the Treasury of all
the comforts we have! God then says, Ask of me, though it be to the whole
Kingdom, yet I will not deny thee. I mean in this sense; That there is not one
mercy in all Gods Storehouse; there is no choice dainty in his Cellars, but
thou have the Key to open it, when thou please.

For in the fourth place, This phrase does imply, That God has a peculiar
respect unto his Children: That he regards them with a more special favor
then all the world. For the face of God, to speak after the manner of men, is
over the whole world: There is nothing hid from it. But then this shining of
his face; this propitious and extraordinary favor, it is only to those that are
his: All the people of God, they are his favorites. And as Pharaoh regarded
Joseph in a far other manner, then he did his other Subjects, he makes all
the Land to be his. Thus does God to his own Children; He gives them Heaven
and Earth; He makes them Heirs of all the glorious Promises that are made in
the Gospel. So that Gods face toward them, is in an extraordinary manner: It
denotes a peculiar respect to them. Hence it is, that they have liberty to
come with boldness unto him: They have the secrets of God manifested unto
them. These are admitted into the holiest of holies, whereas others are
commanded to be in the outward Court only.

Fifthly, This phrase of the light of Gods countenance upon a man, implies the
Efficacy and powerful Effects thereof. For as the Sun by its beams does
enlighten the whole earth, and gives life and motion to every thing; thus also
does God where he favors. Where he is pleased, there he does communicate all
those necessary and precious comforts, which he vouchsafes unto his Children.
None ever seeks the face of God in vain. It Is not a vain thing, to have the
favor of God: For, his love is active; and he does communicate himself unto
such, to the greatest of their expectations. Whence is it, that God in time
does sanctify his people, does justify them, does pardon sin, and heal their
corruptions? Is not all this, because his countenance shines upon them? Well
therefore may David pray for this above all earthly advantages whatsoever: For,
if he does enjoy the face of God, then there cannot any thing be denied him.
It Is from this, that he may press for forgiveness, for holiness: It Is from
this, that he may importune for any spiritual benefit he stands in need of. As
she said, If thou love me, how can thou deny this, and that to me? So, if
thou love me, if thy face be toward me, why is this or that mercy denied
unto me? If I have the Sun, how comes that to withhold its beams from me?
And indeed, this is mainly intended in Prayer, that it should be the light of
his countenance acting, and operating: That it should be putting it self forth
upon his soul.

Sixthly, This acting of Gods face in reference to the godly, implies it self
two ways.

First, In respect of outward and temporal mercies. It Is from this favor of
God, that his people have any outward comfort in mercy toward them. For
although wicked and ungodly men, they may have abundance of these outward
things, yet it does not come from Gods loving kindness to them: They have them
in his anger, and they use them to their own perdition. But it is not thus with
the godly; Every mercy, though never so little, comes from the light of his
face toward them. So that though they have never so little, if they have no
more then Lazarus crumbs; yea, they cannot get them; yet they are better then
those who have the greatest portions of the world: for these have the favor of
God with it. Which made David say, A little that the righteous has, is better
then great abundance of the wicked. In this consideration, as well as in
others, that he has it with the peace and favor of God, he is the child, and
the friend of God, in all this. If he said, he did not rejoice so much in Dono
uam ab te dato. This is much more applicable to the people of God; What they
have they do not so much rejoice in it, as that it comes from the favor of
God.

Again, The light of Gods countenance, shows it self in spiritual mercies:
And these are a certain and sure effect, demonstrating of it. Whosoever can
find the least degree of Gods grace in his heart, that has the experience of
any humiliation for sin, of any heavenly-mindednesse; though these things are
but smoking, yet he may conclude that the light of Gods countenance is lifted
up upon him. Oh then, whosoever thou art, that find grace in thy soul,
rejoice not so much in that, as of what it is a sign of, what it does so
palpably demonstrate! Alas, even our very graces, as they are inherent in us,
can afford us little comfort in themselves; for they are subject to many
imperfections and weaknesses: We have many sighs and discouragements because
of them. Only as they are Evidences and Demonstrations of Gods favor, that
from them we may certainly conclude, the face of God shines upon us: So they
afford unspeakable joy. And therefore this is one reason, why a man may more
rejoice in the least degree of grace discovered in himself, then in the
greatest outward mercies whatsoever. For we may have the wealth of Solomon, the
long life of Methusalem, and yet for all that, have not the least of Gods
loving kindness to us. But on the other side, though afflicted, though
persecuted, though opposed, though shut up in dark dungeons; yet the discovery
of grace within us, does make us to conclude, that the gracious eye of God is
upon us. So then, it is the light of Gods countenance, that is the efficacious
cause of all the mercies we do enjoy. As Christ, when he looked upon Peter,
that made him go out, and w^e^ bitterly. Thus it is Gods gracious eying and
looking upon us, that makes us go forth into any expression of grace.

Seventhly, This phrase of the light of Gods countenance shining upon a man,
does imply, the notice and knowledge of this: For so Gods light is often called
that knowledge which he gives of him. And indeed, though the face of God do
shine upon a man, yet if he be blind, or in sad darkness of heart, that he is
not able to behold it; then it is all one to him, as if did not shine at all. So
that David prays, that he might have the knowledge and sense of this upon the
soul. Solomon says, L^ght is sweet, but it is to those that do behold it. The
darkest ^ight, and day, are all one to a blind man. And thus now, when a godly
man sits in darkness^, and has no light which he perceives, he cannot but be
greatly dej^cted So it is here; when the favor of God is not apprehended, but
we rather apprehend his frowns and anger against us, then, though we be
Children of light, yet we walk in darkness. David does often pray, that Gods
face might shine upon him; and yet even then it did shine upon him, while he
prayed for it: otherwise he could not have had a praying heart, neither could
he be sensible of the want of it: But he wanted the knowledge and the assurance
of it. So that although it be Gods gracious favor that put^ us into a stare of
blessedness, yet it is the assurance of it, that makes us to rejoice in it.
When David had more joy and gladness in his heart, then all the voluptuous and
earthly men of the world, yet this could not be, without the assurance pf Gods
favor. So that Gods gracious love, is better then the whole world. It is that
which preserves from sin and hell; It is that which keeps off all
condemnation: But yet all the while, till we know this, our souls may conflict
with sad agonies. And this is the case of all the people of God, who are in sad
temptations, and lie under heavy defections. For these, though under the favor
of God, yet not being assured of it, apprehend God as an angry Judge,
continually against their souls.

Lastly, Where the light of Gods countenance is, there is employed the love and
delight the Lord takes in such. The eyes of the Lord, are often said to be on
the godly, as being a pleasant and delightful Object: He is never willing to
turn his face from them. It is true indeed, there may be such a time with the
godly, they may either walk so negligently, or commit such grievous sins,
that God may for a while turn his face from them, but yet this will not be for
ever: God he will bring them to repentance, to self-abhorrency; so that they
shall with the Prodigal, be brought to see his face again. But the constant
course of a godly man being to love God, and to avoid all sin, hence it is,
that the ways of the upright are pleasing to the Lord, and his gracious eye is
always upon them. Protection, direction, sanctification, preservation, all
these are daily communicated unto them. What great encouragement is the Fathers
eye to his Child, the Commanders to a Soldier? but how much more should the
light of Gods countenance put life into us?

The Qualifications or Characters of those who do value and desire Gods favor
above all things else.
Having discussed what is comprehended in that expression of Gods lifting up
his countenance upon a man, I shall now proceed to give such Qualifications or
Characters, that are necesseary to such who do earnestly desire Gods favor. And

First, They are such who have a deep and true sense of the guilt of their
sin; who are wounded in heart, and lie under their iniquities, as their
greatest burden. Such as have this foundation laid, they cannot have any rest
or quietness; nothing can satisfy their souls, till God look graciously upon
them. We see this in David, Psalm. 32. and 51. there, when he lay groaning under
the weight of his sins, and was ready to roar out because of God anger; What
is it that he so earnestly begs for, but that sin may be covered, that joy
might be restored to him? That God would take away those sins, which make
such a sad distance between him and his soul. Now David had many earthly and
worldly refuges to fly unto; he might have solaced himself with all kind of
comforts; but nothing could quiet his heart, if he has not Gods favor. As all
the Stars, though they shine together, are not able to dispell the darkness
of the night, it must be the light of the Sun that can do that: Thus, it is
not any creature, any comfort, any content from them, that can quiet and
compose the troubled soul; it must be the light of Gods favor shining into
their dark hearts. If therefore you a^k, What is the reason why so many crave
earthly things, but as for this favor of God, they prize it not; they pray
not, or wrestle for it? The answer is, Most men are secure in their sins;
they have hardness of heart, and a spiritual stupidity upon them. Hence it is,
that they know not what stings are in sin; they know not what a wounded
spir^t means: They have never been in the Whales belly, (as it were) nor in
the deep waters of the soul, feeling themselves ready to fall into Hell and
damnation; therefore it is that they judge all is well enough. This full
stomach needs not the Honey-combe. On then, till sin be more bitter in thy
conscience, the favor of God cannot be esteemed by thee!

Secondly, Such as esteem the light of Gods countenance, are many times those
that are afflicted, persecuted, and of great exercises in this world. For this
is the wretched corruption of our natures, that while we can take any delight
in the creature, we run not out to God* While we can have but the light of a
candle, we care not for the Sun. Therefore it is, that God takes from us all
our comforts. He removes this mercy, and that mercy, that so we may seek after
God. Thus God says, Hos 5 15. he would go from them, they should not have the
mercies they used to have: But to what end does God this? That they may seek to
him early in their affliction. As Children, while there is any day, they love
to be playing and sporting, and will not come home till the dark night drive
them. Those then that are often ^ffl^cted and chas^ened, commonly such do
highly regard the face of God. Thus the Church of God ( Psalm. 80.3.) being in
great extremities, God feeding them with the bread of tears, and giving them
tears to drink in great measure; yea, angry with their very Prayers: What does
it beseech for in this great straight? Verse 3. Turn us again, and cause thy
face to shine upon us, and we shall be saved. A^ the Sun is most esteemed after
sad, black, and gloomy weather: Thus is the favor of God most regarded, when
we find troubles to compass us about on every side. Hence it is, that those
whom God loves, he often chastens. And nothing is more unhappy, then constant
happiness; because abundance and fullness of outward mercies, does take us
from seeking the face of God. Let not then the godly mourn away under any
chastisements they lie under; for if these are so sanctified, that thereby the
favor of God is more indeared to thee, thereby thou can rejoice in his
presence more, these are the greatest mercies that can befall thee. And indeed,
at such times the light of Gods countenance is more necessary then ever. The
less of the creature, the more need to be filled with God.

Thirdly, Those can only desire the light of Gods countenance, that do renounce
their own righteousness: That do not justify themselves, or put confidence in
their own righteousness. Commonly there are none more ignor^nt and stupid
about this glorious privilege, then the civil, pharisaical and formal men, who
places all their trust, in the good works they do. Those affections, and that
hope, which should be placed on God, they are apt to put upon their own seeming
righteousness. Hence ( Mat. 5.3.) our Savior pronounces those blessed, that
are poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven And the Virgin Mary
magnifieth God in her Song, Luke 1.53. He has filled the hungry with good
things, and the rich he has sent empty away. Not only the profane man, who
trampleth this Pearl under his feet, but even the formal civil man is a great
stranger to this petition. This favor is wholly a strange thing to him, and
all because he is full of himself: He makes his good heart, his good works, a
god, a savior to him; and so no wonder if he seek not up to Heaven, and desire
light from thence. Yea, in godly men it is thus, that the more debased and self
emptyed they are, the more is their fellowship with God: The more do they place
their happiness in beholding of him. As you see it was with Paul, Who labored
more then he? yet, Who undervaluing all his graces more then ^e? And all this
was, that Christ might be wholly exalted. Oh then know, that there is nothing
does so much bolt out this glorious light from shining into thee, as
self-confidence, as self-righteousnesse. And this is the reason why God does so
many times withdraw his gracious presence from his own Children, that they are
in the dark, and cannot see any grace, and the least spark of heavenly fire
within themselves; and all because they are apt to be lifted up. They must have
these thorns in the flesh, else they would depend too much upon their own
strength, and their own graces. And when they have been thus humbled, then at
last they come to esteem Gods favor more then ever; as Paul's passengers,
after a stormy black time, rejoiced to see the Sun, more then ever.

Fourthly, Such only can esteem the light of Gods countenance, who are a
spiritual and an heavenly people, who have the holy Image of God repaired in
them. He that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks earthly things, (Joh. 3.)
but he that is of Heaven, is heavenly. Such as we are in respect of our
spiritual constitution, such are our operations, and our inclinations. No
wonder then, the natural man desires not the favor of God; for he is in a
corrupt and sinful estate, and so can desire nothing but what is suitable
thereunto. Whereas on the otherside, he that is made heavenly, he that has an
holy frame of heart, the motions of his soul ascend upwards still. As you see
by David, How often does he profess the breathings, the longings and
thirstings of his soul after God? He cries aloud, that he has nothing in
Heaven and Earth, but God: He makes God his Portion, his Shepherd, his Refuge,
his Hope, his all things unto him. Whence is David thus carried out to the
favor of God, but because of an heavenly heart within? There could not come
such sweet fragrant smells, but because his heart was like a spiritual Garden.
You see all like, desires and delights in that which is like: And if a godly
man love to see the face, and have the company of another godly man, how much
more must he desire God himself? Oh then, complain of that heavy, lumpish,
earthly heart of thine! that does not often say, My heart breaks for the
longing after God at all times. As the Heart desires the waters, so pants my
soul after thee, O God. If thou complainest that thou have affections for every
thing but God, thy heart is taken with every comfort but him: Oh, bewail this
dull and sinful frame! Thou want heavenlynesse; Thy heart and conversation
is not in Heaven.

Fifthly, Such only pray for the light of Gods countenance, as live by Faith,
and are affected with things, as revealed by the Scripture. It Is as impossible
for a man* living wholly by sense, and upon worldly Principles, to rejoice in
the favor of God, as a worm that crawleth on the ground, to delight in the
Sun. Faith is that noble grace, which is like Wings to the soul, to make it
fly up to Heaven. We see it in Paul: What was that which so raised up his heart
to Christ? What is that which made him to sit with Christ in heavenly places?
What is that which is the substance of things hoped for, to every Believer, but
Faith? We are all lame cripples, till Faith heal us. And this is the reason why
all worldly men have no more sense of this divine Benefit, then the very bruit
beasts, because they are wholly strangers to the life of Faith. For it is not
the bodily eye, that can see the face of God; neither has God any bodily face
or eyes, but these things are wholly spiritual. And therefore, as the deaf ear
cannot be affected with melodious music; so neither can a natural heart
discern of this light of Gods favor. Oh then, acquaint thy self with Faith!
This is a Prospective-Glasse, that will discover such Objects to thee, that of
thy self thou could not apprehend. Faith makes us to behold the glory of Gods
favor: We are stark blind, till Faith open our eyes.

Sixthly, Such onl^ can esteem the favor of God, who have had the experience
of the sweetness and excellency of it. A man that has not tasted Honey,
knows not how sweet it is. Therefore David calls upon the men of the world,
to taste and see how good God is. If the natural man ever had any experimental
feeling of Gods favor, and his love, then he would quickly have another heart,
be of another mind: Then he would sell all to get this Pearl. But all the while
men are unregenerate, they know no other good then that of the creature: It
has never entered into their hearts, to conceive what it is to have the face of
God shine upon his people. Insomuch, that all the invitations and allurements
are in vain, until God be pleased to come into the soul, and discover his
sweetness, and consolations to him. The experienced Christian, that has often
drank of this Wine, still remains thirsty, and desirous after more. For whereas
the having of earthly things does satiate, and at last nauseate a man's heart,
so that he has enough; in this heavenly enjoyment of God, he never has
enough, but the more he has tasted of it, the more hungery he is still:
Always praying with David, Oh, when will he come to me! When those in the
Canticles asked the Church, which was so ravished with Christ, preferring him
above ten thousand, What is thy beloved more then others? it was an Argument
they had never seen him; they had never known him: If they had, they would have
been enammoured with him, as well as the Church. And thus, when natural men
wonder; saying, Why do these men thus pray, thus mourn, thus long after God?
Why is it that they are never satisfied, but in him? It Is a demonstration, that
this experimental work has never been upon thy heart: If it had, the spirit
of Prophecy (as I may so say) would fall on thee also: Thou would admire the
favor of God, as well as they.

Seventhly, Such only can desire the light of Gods countenance, who have the
Spirit of God working in them: It Is that which makes the soul go upwards. We
being like that man, bowed down, that Christ healed, till the Spirit of God
thus raise us up. The holy Ghost came down in fire, which denoteh the activty
of it. When fire assimilateth any thing into it self, it makes it ascend
upwards: And thus, when the Spirit of God converts and sanctifies a man's soul,
it gives it a contrary motion to what it had before. Then it made provision
for the flesh, then it minded earthly things; but now the Spirit of God has
raised it from the death of sin. That as you see it is the mighty power of
God, which will make these bodies, that are now corruptible, heavy, and
pressing downwards, to be immortal, spiritual, and so agile, that they shall
meet the Lord in the air: Even these bodies will be so transformed, that they
shall move in the air like Birds. No wonder then, if Gods Spirit is able so to
work upon our hearts, that they shall be constantly inclining to God. And
indeed, none are to rest, till they find God thus mightily prevailing upon
them. This excellent frame, may be given by the Spirit, and the Spirit is
promised to such as ask for it, Mat 6. Especially, the Spirit of God, as
adopting, enab^ling us to call God Father, rebuking legal slavish fears, and
filling us with a filial and evangelical frame of heart.

Eighthly, Therefore another Property of such, who do thus highly esteem Gods
favor, is, That they are diligent in Prayer, and fervent in approaches to God.
Prayer is the ascending of the heart to God, who is in Heaven. The eyes lifted
up, argue what the heart should be. Now Prayer is of this excellent advantage,
if spiritually and fervently performed, that it carries up the soul to God,
and thereby God also manifests his loving kindness to his people. Even as
Moses, upon his Communion with God, had his face shine so gloriously, that the
people could not behold it; and Christ himself, upon Prayer, had his
countenance changed, that his face did shine like the Sun, and his garments
were white as snow. So that such who esteem of Gods favor, they are instant in
Prayer. They perform that duty with watching and attending thereunto; which if
so discharged, then many consolations, many irradiations of his favor, are
communicated to them. So that a man diligent in Prayer, is like the tree by the
water side, whose leaf will never fade. Hence we have that encouragement, No
man seeks Gods face in vain: And no sooner did God command this, but
immediately David's heart yielded to it, Psalm. 7.8. Thy face Lord will I seek.
We cannot have it, without seeking for it; as that which is most precious, and
a very infinite Treasure. And withal, you see the encouragement, God bespeaks
it; he says, Seek ye my face.

Lastly, Such as prize the light of Gods countenance, they walk closely with
God, and keep up strict Communion with him. Slothful and careless walking,
will never be blessed, with this glorious advantage. You read, the Church was
but once careless and negligent, when Christ proffered himself, and
immediately Christ withdraws: so that though she run up and down much
perplexed, to see the face of her Beloved again, yet it cost her dear, ere she
could obtain it. David began to have but some proud and presumptuous thoughts,
Psalm. 301.7. And God bid his face, and then he was troubled. You see, a little
thing, a word, a thought may do it. Therefore those, who desire to enjoy it,
they walk circumspectly, lest they should do any thing, that may make him angry
with them.

Use 1. Of Exhortation to Gods Children, To keep up a tender mollified heart;
to take no rest till the light of Gods countenance shine upon thee. Let not
lusts, passions, or any thing be an eclipse between this glorious Sun and
you. How can you live without this? May not the Devil come with seven more
tormenting Devils then ever, if thou provoke God to withdraw his gracious
presence? To whom are woes? To whom are sad terrors and perplexities of
spirit? but to such who cry out, God frowneth on them. Oh, they feel his anger
consuming of them!

Use 2. Of Admonition, to natural and unregenerate men, To know there is a
better good then ever yet they tasted. Oh that thou could desire God, as thou
do wealth and pleasures! Is not the pleasant smiling face of some great
Potentate, a reviving to thee? What endeavors for the favor of a great man,
who yet is mortal? Will not this condemn thee at the Day of Judgment? Oh, how
will the face of God be then esteemed of!

A Consideration of some false Grounds, of a Persuasion of Gods Love.
We have declared already the Characters of such who can truly esteem the light
of Gods favor; let us now consider the condition of such who are mistaken
herein, and take that for Gods favor which is not. And

First, There is the rich, earthly, or great man of the world. I. Riches.
He who abounds in all Prosperity, and needs nothing, this man thinks
that Gods face is toward him in mercy. They gather from all the mercies they
enjoy, that therefore God loves them, but this is a very dangerous mistake. For

1. In the Scripture, we read, That chastisements and afflictions, are
sometimes an argument of Gods love, and that God is never more angry, then when
he lets a man's ways be smooth, and prosperous: As it was with Moab, because he
was not moved often, therefore he was settled upon the Lees. And thus in Hosea,
when God is angry in the highest manner, then he threatens, He will not punish
their sons or daughters any more, Hos. 4.14. They therefore have little cause
to boast in this, That they are not afflicted as other men; they are not in
such bonds as others are: For David ( Psalm. 73.6.) did of old observe this,
That whereas the wicked of the world, had all encouragements, they had all
temporal increase, yet the godly were bowed down all the day long; and that in
those times when Promises of temporal abundance were in a larger way proposed
to them. If then the godly man had this measure in the Old Testamant, no wonder
if he meet with it much more in the New Testament; where tribulations are made
the Red Sea to go through, into the Land of Canaan. Hence the Apostle does
directly argue from Gods love, to chastisements, Heb. 12.6. which is again
mentioned, Romans 3.19. Insomuch, that thou who art never afflicted, have greater
cause to fear lest Gods wrath be upon thee. The Physician administers no
Physic to such who are incurable. Oh the wonderful and blessed effects which
the godly find by afflictions, when sanctified! Does not David say, Before he
was afflicted, he went astray, Psalm. 119.67.?

2. If it should be granted, that these temporal mercies thou aboundest with,
come from the light of his countenance, yet it is only in temporal things. If
we do suppose that they from Gods love to thee, yet this is but a common and
general love: It does not at all make to thy peculiar happiness, neither does
it tend to the special favor of God. It may not be denied, but God from a
common love to men, who have been just and diligent in their ways, may bestow
some outward mercies, as a temporal reward. Thus Austin thought the Romans had
that great Dominion given them, because of their justice. And so the Scripture
says, A diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 10.4. But what is this common love
without a special? What is it for God so to love thee, as to make thee strong,
healthy, wealthy, and not to give Christ and Heaven to thee? Oh, therefore rest
not in the enjoying of these outward mercies, but look to that which is the
chiefest of all! If thou have grace, pardon of sin, and Christ, thou can
not be damned; but if thou have the great things of this world, thou may
have also the great torments of Hell hereafter. As Ismael had of Abraham, some
rich gifts, but not the Inheritance: As Luther said, of the great Turkish
Empire, which God has given to wicked and ungodly men, it is but mica canis, a
crum that the dog may have, but not the Childrens Bread.

yet it is withal from Gods anger and hatred, if you do regard them in a
spiritual consideration. For, they are not sanctified to them; they are not
thereby made more holy, or drawn nearer to God. They do become snares and
occasions of sins to them: so that they will at the Day of Judgment, even
curse the day that ever they had such abundance. They will cry out, Oh that
they had been poor, miserable, deformed! That they had been under any calamity,
then that they had such abundance; for that has made Hell seven times hotter:
That has been like oil poured into the flame, which has made the fire burn
more terribly. That which Solomon observed of wealth, ( Eccl. 5.13.) is true of
all other outward mercies, Beauty, Strength, Honors; How often are they given
to the hurt of them that have them? Thus David's imprecation is fulfilled in
them, Let their Table become a snare unto them. As too much blood indangers the
body: especially these outward mercies, are sure to be a snare to them; because
they hinder and oppose all those Christian Qualifications which are absolutely
necessary to every Disciple of Christ. Thus it is required, that a man must love
Christ more then Father or Mother, or life it self; that he must deny himself,
and take up his Cross. All which cannot be, because of immoderate love to
these outward mercies. This is the Camels bunch; This is that which choakes the
Word. The Pharisees, because they were covetous, derided Christ. If then, you
comfort your selves, because God has given you all outward fullness; examine
how these are sanctified to you. What spiritual effects do these mercies bring
upon you? Do you not pray the worse, hear the worse? Are not your hearts the
more distracted and divided? Does not the earth make you forget Heaven? Oh
then, be afraid and tremble at these things, rather then confidently rejoice in
them! Did not Abraham tell Dives, He had received good things in this life? but
for eternity, he was not to receive so much, as a drop of water. Pray unto God,
that all thy good things be not given thee here, and thou have nothing
hereafter.

II. An untroubled Conscience, is no Argument of Gods countenance.
A second sort of persons, who mistake about the light of Gods countenance, is,
Such who have a quiet, untroubled, and eased Conscience. They commonly argue
thus; God loves them, for they have no trouble in their hearts; they have no
fear or disquietnesse in their souls, but they put their whole trust in Christ.
Such as these, that die as a Lamb, (so people express it) they make no doubt
but this is the favor of God. They thank God, God loves them, and they love
God: They never doubted of Gods love to them: They are fully assured of it.
Thus they take a secure, and sometimes a scared conscience, for that which is
quieted, and made peaceable through the blood of Christ. And this is the
condition of very many; they do even rejoice in this, That they never doubted.
They think, the godly, who have often fears and doubts, who are in sad
temptations, to be the worst of men; and that it is for their wickedness they
are so. Even as the wicked thought Christ to be smitten for his own sins; and
that God did in such a peculiar manner, bring him to that accursed death, for
his high impiety. Thus do the profane men of the world, censure the generation
of the godly, who have many times sad dejections of spirit, and walk without
any sense of Gods favor at all: yea, ready to cry out, They are damned, and
that God has forsaken them.

But to search into the bottom of this Disease, which is Epidemicall:

First, Consider, There is a great difference between a stupid senseless
conscience, 1. An untroubled Conscience, may be a stupid seared Conscience.
and a serene conscience made so by the light of Gods countenance shining upon
it. This is not a quieted conscience by the Promise, and through Christ, but a
stupefied one; which the Apostle calls a seared one, that cannot feel; that
cannot apprehend. It is with thee as mad men, that conceit such and such great
things to themselves, when (alas) it is for want of their wits and sobriety,
that they have such foolish imaginations. Thus when thou presumest of Heaven,
and salvation: Oh thou art sure thou shall go thither! Whence is all this, but
because thou have no spiritual life or feeling within thee? Oh, if thou were in
thy spiritual senses; if thou did understand aright, thou would quickly cry
out, and tremble at that cursed condition thou art in! Who were more abominable
to God then the Pharisees, yet who justified themselves more? Who put more
trust and confidence in the works they did? Therefore do thou search into thy
heart more. Whence come thou to be thus secure and confident? Is it not
because thou art delivered up to a reprobate sense? Is it not because thou art
dead in sin? And as dead men cannot feel any pain or torment, so neither
can thou. Therefore if you see men that lived wickedly, yet die peaceably and
confidently, this is not the light of Gods favor upon them; it is their
senslesnesse; It Is their stupidity. You cannot see a more miserable object then
such are.

Secondly, This quiet and comfortable conscience they boast of, 2. And may be
accompanied with gross sins.
is not from the light of Gods countenance, because it is for the most part
accompanied with many gross and wicked sins. As it was with the Jews, though
they committed such abominable practices, that even the light of nature did
condemn, yet they will come and cry, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the
Lord. For this the Prophets of old had such great Controversies with the
people, that though they gave themselves up to all kind of wickedness, yet
they would stay themselves upon God; and like the whorish woman, would wipe the
lip, and be as confident as if they had done no evil thing. Oh then, let such
be awakened out of their spiritual madness! What? Thou an enemy to God, by all
the profaneness thou art in all the day long? Do thou come boldly to God?
Do thou say thou put thy trust in him? Remember, that God is a consuming
fire to such as thou art. It Is not for thee to cast thy eye upon the Promise as
yet, but upon the terrors and threatenings of the Law: It Is for thee to hearken
and hear how the Law curses thee: That abroad and at home, thou art under the
condemnation of it. Conclude therefore this to thy self, that all the
confidence thou have in Gods mercy, if accompanied with a profane and
impenitent life, is but a rotten post; which though it shine in a dark night,
yet when the Sun arises, it is discovered what it is. The Apostle John
speaks terribly to this, 1 John 3.20. If our hearts condemn us, God is greater
then our heart, and he knows all things. If then, thy own natural conscience
accuse thee for such and such miscarriages, know that God who is omniscient, he
knows more evil by thee, and will much more condemn thee.

3. And without taking Gods way for the obtaining and preserving of it.
Thirdly, This quieted heart is thus lulled asleep, because it has not taken
Gods way, either to obtain or preserve quietness. For the light of Gods
countenance is not like the light of the Sun, which shines upon the just and
unjust, and comes upon all men; even the Thief and the Adulterer, he, has
this light of the Sun to accomplish all his wickedness: but the light of
Gods favor is with much difficulty obtained, and with as much difficulty
preserved. For in the obtaining of the light of Gods favor, there must be a
necessary Humiliation for sin, and sense of our utter perishing in our
selves. Come unto me, ye that are heavy laden, (says Christ) and you shall
find rest for your souls. And thus the poor in spirit, (Mat. 5.) they are
called blessed. How did Paul come to triumph so confidently in the love of God
through Christ? Was not this foundation first laid, that ( Romans 7.) he
perceived the Law to be a killing Messenger to him? He saw; that made sin out
of measure sinful. And thus being undone in himself, he is directed to esteem
highly of the grace of Christ. So that there is a vast difference between
Paul's confidence and good persuasion, while a Pharisee, and when converted:
For while a Pharisee, he was very zealous, and says, He had a good conscience;
he did not walk against the checks of that; he had much comfort and
consolation, in pursuing these dictates: But when converted, he cries out of
all these; he was a Blasphemer, a Persecuter the greatest of all sinners. And
thus it will be with thee; Thou go on in thy way with all presumption; thou
pursuest thy superstitions, thy will worship, and have unspeakable content in
thy conscience for doing thus. But oh, when God shall shake the foundations of
thy soul! when he shall discover thy very originals, then thy soul will be in
woeful agonies; then the very rottenness of all will begin to appear within
thee. The light of Gods countenance: comes after trouble for sin. God is
known by this property, (2 Cor. 1.) That he brings light out of darkness,
even as at first, out of a Chaos he made light. Thus it is here; From the
confusions and disorders of the soul, because of sin, there arises
afterward the greatest tranquillity of spirit. It Is true, this trouble about
sin, is in some more, in some less; but yet there is an absolute necessity
of feeling sin so far a burden, that it finds it self eternally perishing
without this. Again, for the Introduction of this light into the soul, there
must not only be a deep sense of sin as a burden, but earnest hungerings and
longings after the righteousness revealed by the Gospel. Judas and Cain felt
the burden of their sins upon them; they had weight more then they could
bear, but they despair under this; they have no breathings and desires after
the grace of God. Now Christ will not vouchsafe this precious Pearl to swine
that trample it under their feet; That they shall have it, who care not for it.
But the soul is prepared by many inlargements and strong desires; Oh, that I
might have but a glimpse of this light! Oh, that I had but a drop to cool, not
the tongue, but the whole soul, that is scorched with the guilt of sin! Go
then, and consider thy self; Thou speak much of Gods favor, but has thy
soul been in agonies; in breaking of heart for it? Never did a man, weary of
the night, more desire to see the day, then thou do the gracious light of
his countenance to thee? If upon these terms salvation has come to thy House,
then there is some hope. As the light of God is thus obtained at first, so it is
with no less difficulty preserved. For

Causes of the eclipse of Gods face to the godly.
1. Formal and negligent profession of our love to God, will cause a dark night
to arise. Though thou do not prove a direct Apostate; though thou do not
give over all praying, and all duties, but keep up the form of them in thy
Family, and in the Public; yet this dullness will Eclip^e the favor of God.
The Church in the Canticles, she did not forsake Christ her Beloved; she did
not become an Adulteress, and seek out another Husband, only she was lazy and
negligent, when Christ knocked at the door: And this only was the cause of so
much sadness to her afterward.

2. Even the distempers of the heart within, though not breaking forth into
gross evil, may make God withdraw his face. Those glorious Angels, were they
not cast out from Gods face, and chained up in darkness, for nothing but proud
and lofty thoughts? Yea, David a good man, he began to have some secret secure
thoughts within him, to think his mountain was well settled, but God immediately
hid his face, and he was troubled. This mountain begins to skip like a Lamb for
fear. Take heed then of secret, close, and insinuating thoughts of pride and
self-fulnesse; for this makes God, as the Father to the Child, that is
presuming of it self, to withdraw from thee.

3. Too much inordinate affections and desires, even to lawful things; this
makes God jealous: And for this thou shall not have the comfortable light of
his countenance. The Church appeared with the Moon under her feet. All
sublunary things, ought to be under the heart of a godly man: But as the Sun
is sometimes eclipsed, by the interposition of the Moon; so is the favor of
God too often obscured by minding these earthly things. You see then, how
difficult a thing it is, to keep this fire always upon the Altar: To keep this
Lamp from going out. Therefore the profane man, who never watches to these
things, who does not seek the Kingdom of Heaven in the first place, cannot have
this light of Gods favor.

Lastly, Thy quiet and peaceable conscience is not from Gods favor, but
because never assulted by the Devil; never checked by doubts and oppositions
from within. David had the comfortable beams of Gods favor shining upon him,
but he had also sad wrestling within. How often did he chide and rebuke his
soul, for being so inordinately cast down within him? It Is a saying
acknowledged by all Divines, He that never doubted, never believed. O Lord, I
believe, help my unbelief. Though doubts are not a duty, yet they will be
necessary companions; as corruptions to our graces.

Of the Joy of Saints, in God and heavenly things, as one Effect of the Light
of Gods Countenance: The Nature of it, and the Preeminences of it comparatively
to all other Pleasures whatsoever.
PSALM. 4.7. Thou have put more gladness into my heart, then they have had, when
their Corn and Wine increases.


THis text declares a Reason, why David desires the light of Gods countenance
above any earthly things; why his wish is contrary to those of the world. And
the Reason is deduced from that blessed and admirable effect of it upon David's
heart, God being reconciled, put more gladness into his heart, then all the
pleasures of the world could amount unto.

So that in the words, we are to consider the Benefit or Privilege it self,
Gladness. It Is a rule, That (Omnis vita est propter delectationem) all life,
yea all operations, are for delight. So that Gladness and Joy, is the soul in
its highest felicity: It Is the action of the soul in flourishing Characters:
It Is the soul in its glory: It Is Arras unfolded and spread open.

2. There is the Original and Efficient Cause of it, God: Thou have put. Gods
comforts and joy, they are like himself, infinite, pure, unmixed; there is no
fear or sorrow accompanying such.

3. There is the manner of participation, Thou have put it into my heart. This
shows the efficacy and irresistibleness of Gods comfort, He puts it into the
heart, men cannot: They can only suggest, they cannot put into the heart. If
God puts comfort in, all the troubles and sad temptations which arise in the
soul, cannot be able to withstand it, no more then the night can hinder the day
from dispelling of it.

4. There is the Subject or Vessel receiving it, My heart. The worlds joy is
but in the mouth, or in the fancy; this is in the heart.

Lastly, There is the aggravation of it, by a comparison with all earthly joy;
and that the greatest which can be: More then when their Corn and Wine
increases. Judea was a Land that abounded with Corn and Vineyards: And the
Scripture, when it would express a great joy, calls it the joy of Harvest: Yet
David's joy is greater then this.

Now though the text instanceth in these two, yet we are to understand all kind
of joy. The joy of the rich man, of the great man, of the voluptuous: Let the
joy be what it can be in any earthly thing, an heavenly heart has from God a
better joy. It Is true, some Interpreters make this the sense; as if David did
here profess his joy, because his enemies whom he reproved in the beginning of
his Psalm did thus increase. As if he would say, Though they hate and oppose
me, yet I am so far from bearing ill will to them, that I rejoice in their
abundance. Yea, some Popish Interpreters, make a mystical meaning, as if here
were a Prophecy of the delight of Gods people; because of the Sacrament
consisting of Bread and Wine: Yea, Oil is added in some Copies of their
Translations, as if their extreme Unction were also intended. But this is
indeed, to make the Scripture a Nose of Wax, as they call it sometimes.
Therefore the Hebrew Preposition Min, though it sometimes signify Of, yet in
many places, it is to be interpreted comparatively, For rather: And thus it is
here. Observe,

That the godly have more joy from God, and heavenly things, then all the men
of the world can have in their earthly delights.

If a wicked man did but know what the comfort and consolation is, that does
accompany an holy life, he would judge all his earthly pleasures, to be like
the Prodigals husk. He would cry out of his madness; Oh foolish and unwise,
that have left this spiritual joy, to partake of humane and worldly! 1 Pet.
1.8. It Is called unspeakable joy, and full of glory. Such a joy, that it can
never be expressed: As a Father, or a Mother, cannot express their natural
affections. It Is a joy, which the godly that feel it, cannot declare unto
another; but when they have said all they can, still they feel more. Though out
of their abundance the heart speaks, yet it cannot speak all it is abundance.
And as a godly man cannot express it, so neither can a natural man believe any
such thing; he cannot be persuaded that there is such joy in it. As he that
has not tasted Honey, cannot judge how sweet it is: Neither can a blind man
think, what a glorious creature the Sun is.

Let us therefore first open the absolute nature and dignity of this Joy, then
speak of it comparatively.

And in the first place, The glory and dignity of this joy, is from two
particulars in the text.

First, It is from the Original. As there is a wisdom which comes from above,
The nature of this joy.
that is heavenly; and a wisdom fleshly and devilish: so also, there is a joy
which comes from above, that is pure and excellent; and there is a joy, that is
of the world, and the flesh, and this is indeed devilish. But the joy, which a
godly man receives, it is from Heaven, from God himself; and so has a pure and
choice excellency in it. It differs from worldly joy, as the elementary fire
from the culinary. The elementary fire, needs no pabulum, no wood to maintain
it, it will not perish; but the kitchen fire, that must have wood or coals, it
will not last any longer then this fuel. Thus all worldly joy, that must have
daily sticks and coals put to it. If Friends die, if Wealth be lost, Pleasures
denied, this joy is gone: but this joy from above, abides, the same. As long as
God abides in Heaven, so long that continues; unless we by our sins, provoke
God to take it away. All the world cannot give such a joy as this is. Therefore
Gal. 5.22. it is called the fruit of Gods Spirit; and often, Joy in the holy
Ghost. Hence the Spirit of God is called the Comforter: And God is styled (2
Cor. 1.3.) the God of all consolations, because it is he alone that works it.
Men may create the world as well, as of themselves get such a joy as this.
Hence the people of God walk many times mournfully for the want of it; And
there is no Samaritan can put this Oil into their wounds. David cannot always
say, God put such joy in his heart: Yea, he professes the clean contrary
sometimes, That his soul was bowed down; that he watered his bed with tears.
And Joh. was almost like a damned man in Hell. But of the Reason of this
desolatenesse, we may speak hereafter; It Is enough that this demonstrateth God
to be the Author of all our joy: And that as all the men in the world cannot
make the Sun arise in the morning, did not God appoint it that natural
course; so neither are any able to bring this joy into their hearts.

Therefore in the second place, The second discovery of this joy is from the
manner of working it; Thou did put it into my heart: That is an excellent
expression. It shows what dominion and sovereignty God has over the heart:
He can as easily put joy into thy soul, though afflicted, though tempted,
though grieved with sin, as thou can pour Wine into a Bottle. He can with a
word, command waters to become Wine. So that as the Orthodox maintain, That
Gods grace in converting the heart, is irresistible; it is insuperable: The
heart cannot resist it with final prevalency. For a nullo duro cord
respicitur; quippe ad hoc datur ut tollat cor durum. So it is true also in
spiritual joy; The grieved heart, the sad heart cannot reject it, because it is
given to take away the sad heart. Hence we read of the people of God, the
Martyrs and others, that they have rejoiced under their tribulations, more then
their Persecutors did under all their abundance. How was this possible, but
that God did so fill their hearts, that no outward or inward misery could have
any room there? This should teach the people of God to walk so exactly, that
they may not on the contrary say, God has put more bitterness into their
heart, then any can have in their worldly miseries. For as the joy of God is
more then all earthly joy, so the sense of Gods anger and wrath, causes more
sorrow and anguish of spirit, then all outward calamities can do. A wounded
spirit, who can bear?

Thirdly, This Joy which God puts into our hearts, follows upon a true godly
sorrow and mourning for sin. All the joy of thy heart, which does not flow
from humiliation and deep sorrow for sin, it is but a blaze; it is like the
crackling of thorns. And this is necessary to be observed; for the Hypocrite,
who never had any true sound grace, yet he may have some transitory joy. So
Mat. 13. They received the Word with joy: And some rejoiced in John Baptists
light; but it was for a season only. And thus many in some fits, yea in some
holy duties, find a gladness and inward joy upon their hearts; but this never
had a true sorrow go before. Before Paul was admitted into Gospel joys, he was
stricken to the ground, and had a deep sense of his former guilt. Therefore the
Promise is, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall rejoice, Mat. 5.
Therefore as the Psalmist speaks concerning afflictions, it is true also of
godly sorrow; They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Many desire joy; they
are willing to hear of a Sermon that may cause gladness in their hearts; but
then they cannot endure the preparatory unto it: They do not love the Law
should wound them, before the Gospel heal them. But this is the nature of all
heavenly joy, it is a daughter to godly sorrow. Verus paenitens de peccato
doler, and de dolor gaudet. And this is it which makes godly joy so welcome
and so precious, because the heart was mourning, and humbled before, thinking
it self unworthy of any joy in the least manner: Though others might rejoice,
yet not they. This then is the method God takes; First the Spirit of God is a
Spirit of Supplication and mourning, then it is a Spirit of Joy and consolation.

Fourthly, This joy which God puts in the heart, it is from spiritual and
heavenly motives. Therefore the duty is so often called for to Rejoice in the
Lord: And it is called Joy in the holy Ghost. It arises from Gods favor, from
Gospel-Priviledges; because God is reconciled; because sin is pardoned;
because we are justifica through the blood of Christ. So that the joy of a
godly man, and of a natural man, differ as much as Heaven and Earth. For what
makes thee rejoice at any time? Is it some worldly pleasure? Is it not some
earthly content? Is it not because such and such earthly advantages befall
thee? Thy heart is never cheerful and merry, but from such considerations.
Now, how different, and poor, and contemptible are these to this heavenly Joy?
For the gladness of their heart, arises from the love of God; from an
Interest in Christ; from the consideration of eternal glory. These sublime and
spiritual Objects, do ravish the godly soul. So that the delights of a beast,
are not more inferior to the delights of a man, as a rational man, then the
delights of a man are to him, as a Christian. What the Apostle speaks
concerning the thoughts and words of a Child, comparatively to a man, the same
is true also in respect of joy, 1 Cor. 13. Children have their joy; they laugh
as Children; they rejoice in their Babies as Children: but when they come to be
men, they cannot rejoice as Children; they cannot delight to play as they did,
when little Boys. Thus when thou art once made godly, and have tasted of more
excellent Joy, thou can not delight in the pleasures of sin, nor in the
greatest advantages of the world: They are below thee. Thou say to thy self,
when inordinately rejoicing in these things, as she did, but falsely, to David;
Thou have made thy self like one of the vile fellows to day. The godly man's joy
comes from an higher Spring, then the worlds does.

Fifthly, Hence in the next place, No man can have this spiritual joy, but such
who are regenerated, and born of God: Who have a spiritual and supernatural
life. We see in nature, that according to the several kinds of life, so there
are several delights, and proportionable thereunto, the natural and animal
life, the rational life, the sense has its delights, and reason has its
delght. Thus when a man is born again, he has his joy and his delight. Do not
ye read often of David, that professes the Word of God, was sweeter then the
honey or the honeycomb to him? Does he not say, That his heart panted after
God, like a parched wilderness, and more then the heart does after waters? And
whence is all this, but because David is a man after Gods own heart? And
indeed, it is wholly impossible that a man should rejoice in any spiritual
Object, till he himself be made holy. As our Savior told his Disciples, He had
other meat to eat of, then they knew of. So has every godly man, other joys,
other delights, then any natural man can conceive. Therefore do not keep off
from godliness, for fear of loosing thy joys; do not think that is to bid
farewell to all cheerfulness and gladness of heart: but rather, thou never
yet did know what true joy means; as yet thou art a stranger to it; for none
but a regenerate man can enter into this Joy.

Sixthly, This joy which God puts into the hearts of his people, it is
unspeakable and unexpressible. Like that new Name, and hidden Manna, which none
knows, but he that has it. Prove. 14.12. A stranger does not intermeddle with
this joy. There are some things that are so experimentally perceived by us,
that a man cannot express them: He feels them, and is fully persuaded of
them, yet he cannot tell how to express this to another. As life, a man does
feel and know he lives, yet who can tell another what his life is? Job was in
bitterness and sorrow, and it was above his expression; his Friends censured
him, but says he, If your souls were in my stead, you would judge otherwise.
If you felt what I feel, you would be of another mind. And thus it is in regard
of spiritual joy; You are apt to condemn the generation of the godly; Why will
they be so strict and precise? Why will they not run into the same excess of
sin, and enjoy the ungodly pleasures of the world as others do? Oh know, you
speak foolishly in this thing! If your souls were in a godly man's stead; if you
had ever felt what they feel; if you had ever perceived upon your souls that
which they have done, you would quickly change your minds, and your
conversation also. You would then say, An hour of this Joy, is more then a
thousand years of the worldly joy: That a drop of this, is more then an Ocean
of carnal pleasures. This made David call upon wicked men, to taste and see how
good God is. If you would taste; if you would set your selves to try what this
Joy is, you would then quickly perceive a difference: But none knows this,
save those who have the experience of it.

Seventhly, The nature of this joy, is to put a man upon all holy actions: Upon
active and serviceable ways for God. And thus in regard of its Effects and
Operations, it differs from worldly joy, as much as Heaven from Earth; or Gold
from dross. For when the heart of a wicked man is merry, what does it put him
upon, but ungodly practices? Then they must go to their cups, to their sports,
then they must go to their frolic and wanton plays: Thus their joy makes them
very wicked; whereas this godly joy puts a man upon praising and blessing of
God- Is any man merry let him sing Psalms, Jam. 5.13. It puts him upon more
servent and cheerful praying, hearing; and no Christian is so active and
lively as he that is joyful, Neh 8.10. The joy of the Lord is said to be their
strength. There needs not then any great labor to discern the godly man's
mirth and the wicked man's: For the wicked he increases his sin thereby, he
is more hardened to do wickedly. This joy is like the Devil to the herd of
swine, which were hurried violently to hell; they would never do that in a
sober sad spirit, they do then.

We have declared the nature of this heavenly gladness absolutely; Let us now
consider the aggravation of it comparatively to all other pleasures whatsoever;
that so all unregenerate men may see they live to their loss, and that one day
in godliness affords more true solid comfort, then the whole life of a wicked
man, though he should live Methusalem's age. And

How it exceeds all worldly Joy.
First, Spiritual joy exceeds all wordly, in regard of the purity of its nature.
It is an unmixed joy, there is nothing adhering to it, to make an abatement, or
put a check to it; whereas all wordly joy has gall as well as honey; there is
no Rose grows without its pricks. Look over all the wordly comforts that
every where are enjoyed, see if they have not a But in them; as was said of
Naaman the Syrian, He was a great man, an honored man, a rich man, but he was
a Leper, that took off from the rest: So of every unregenerate man, He has
such an estate, such friends, such advantages to delight in; but there is such
a sin, and such a sin, which if rightly considered would mar all his
comfort. Do not thou therefore set thy soul to rejoice and to take its ease,
for there is either the commission of such sins, or the omission of such
duties, that would quickly wound thy heart, and take thee off from all thy
jollity; whereas now come to this heavenly joy, there is joy, and no cause of
sorrow joined with it. This is like the upper region, where there are no
Meteors: Look round about thee, Think of God, of Christ, of eternity, of death,
yea of sins, and thou have cause to rejoice; for all these things work for
thy good. It Is true, there is a time when the godly are called to mourning,
when they are to fast and humble themselves; but consider, this holy mourning
does not oppose, but increase heavenly joy. The more thou can mourn for thy
own sins, or the sins of the Nation, the greater is thy joy in the Lord: So
that such mourning does make thee abate of thy natural and earthly comforts,
but not at all of thy heavenly comforts: So that heavenly joy is of such a pure
nature, that it is better then gold, it cannot have any dross mixed with it;
it is like the pure flames of the fire, which cannot receive any mixture with
it. Therefore do then consider over all thy worldly delights. Was there ever
any that did afford mere matter of comfort? Is there not some occasion of
grief, of vexation, of discontent as well? whereas all heavenly things afford
only delight, and no trouble at all.

Secondly, Spiritual joy is more cordial and substantial; it does more inwardly
possess a man, then any earthly joy can do: Disce gaudere, said Seneca: Thou
have put it into my heart, says David, Psalm. 33.21. Our heart shall rejoice in
him, and Psalm. 3.5. My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation. Hence you heard it
was called unspeakable joy; and the peace of God, which is the cause of this
joy, is said to pass all understanding. Therefore our Savior prays, Joh. 17.
that this joy might be filled is them; a notable expression to declare that the
comfort Gods people have, is of a far more solid and real nature, then what
men of the world have: They are never heartily and truly joyful, for there is
either the sting of some sin, the guilt of conscience, or the fear of some
danger, that does greatly check their joy: Insomuch that many times the ungodly
of the world, they put the best face upon things they can; they would bear it
out, as if they had peace, and they had comfort, when God knows, and their
own heart, feels many tormenting fears within them. Solomon speaks fully to
this of a wicked man, Prove 14.13. Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; his
meaning is, that a wicked man in the midst of all jollity, and a carnal mirth,
yet he has but a sad heart, and why? There is guilt with him, there is a
conscience secretly repining in him, and though he striveth to bear it down,
and would make a greater noise then that, yet these whisperings, and secret
accusations do greatly weaken their joy; for it is enough that conscience
accuses thee, though none in the world else can witness against thee, Quid
proder it tibi non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam? What will it avail
thee to have thy conscience accusing thee, though there be no witness conscious
with it? Was not Belshazzar in the midst of all his jollity and excessive riot?
Yet the appearing of an handwriting made him quake, and his knees to tremble.
Why might not he have thought it had been some good Angel, or there was some
writing for him to increase his kingdom? No, but before ever he can tell what
it is, he is afraid, and trembles, his heart was guilty, Semper praesumit saeva
mala conscientia. Thus take the most wanton, loose, and jolly sinner that is,
his heart being guilty, he always thinks and fears the worse; now the Lord
remembers such and such sins: So that it is not the laughing, and ranting, and
singing of merry Songs, that demonstrate a joyful heart; no, there may be
sadness and terror within for all that; whereas this spiritual joy fills up
the heart of a godly man, whatsoever presents it self, he can rejoice. At this
time, when David professes his joy, it was outwardly a most sad time with him.
For Expositors judge, he was now pursued by Absalom his own son, who rises
against him, his people forsake him, Shimei raileth at him, tells him, God
had now avenged the blood of Saul upon him; and all this was occasioned by his
own wickedness; yet in the midst of all these sad circumstances, he had so much
joy in his heart: So that the godly even while he weepeth and mourns, has
joy, and the wicked even while he laugheth and rants it, yet has gnawing worms
within him.

Thirdly, Heavenly joy is rational, settled upon sound and solid grounds. If you
see any godly man rejoice, and walk with a cheerful spirit, it is well done,
there is cause for it; who may do it if not he? Whereas take any natural
unregenerate man, he has not the least cause of the least smile: If he did as
he should do, he would roar and cry out, he would go and weep bitterly, he
would smite upon the breast and the thigh, saying, What shall I do? Oh my
sins, my sins! Now this is greatly to be considered, who has the true
cause of rejoicing and who not. Tell not me, such a man lives a jolly merry
life, such a man is at his hearts ease, he lives in his pleasures all the week
long: Oh but what reason, what cause has he to do so! If he did rightly
consider himself, if he did lay his sins to his heart, he would mourn and
weep, and bewail himself all the day long; for what joy can thou have, as
long as thy sins are not pardoned, as long as God is angry with thee, as long
as thou may tumble into hell every moment? Is it for such an one as thou to
be glad, and laugh, and take thy ease? No, our Savior Luk 6.25. pronounces a
woe to you, for you shall mourn, though now you will not: There is no peace
says my God to the wicked man; it is the speech of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 48
22. Stand off then, joy does not belong to thee, it is the godly man's portion;
none may, or has cause to walk cheerfully but he, for the favor of God is
upon him, God is not angry with him, his sins they are forgiven, death and
the day of Judgment can do him no hurt, whether poor or rich, whether well or
ill, whether living or dying, he has cause to rejoice, Phil 4 4. Rejoice in
the Lord always, and again I say rejoice: Rejoice always. There is no time
wherein thou may not rejoice. Do not say, I have this affliction, I have
this sad trial upon me: It Is no matter, says the Apostle: Let it be how it
will be with thee, Rejoice always; and indeed let the wicked and ungodly
tremble; let them cry out with horror, those that have the guilt of their
sins upon them, those that every moment may be adjudged to hell; let them
mourn and tremble: But for a godly man, he has no cause at all, but to rejoice
in the Lord always.

Fourthly, Joy from the Lord will have a good end, there will be no sad
reckoning for it afterward: There will be no cause to repent of it; but all
wordly joy though it does please thee for a time, yet there is a sting in the
tail of it there will be a bitter account to be made at the day of Judgment,
and this certainly you should rightly consider of: These pleasures, this carnal
delight of mine, will it not cost dear hereafter? Will not all this honey turn
into choler? Will not my torments be according to my pleasures? What says
Solomon to his young man that is most given to follow his delights, Eccles.
11.9. Rejoice O young man, and walk in the ways of thy heart, pursue thy
lusts, care for nothing, trample Gods word under thy feet, but know thou, that
for all these things God will bring thee to judgment; and is not this like an
handwriting in the wall? The thoughts of what will be hereafter, may justly
strike out all thy present delights: I am merry now, laughing now: But shall I
do thus when death comes? shall I laugh when at the day of judgment I shall
stand arraigned at his Tribunal? Oh do not admire such pleasures, that will
cost so dear at the latter end! But for the godly man's joy, that will never
shame him, that will never grieve him, but as the Apostle speaks about
repentance, it is a repentance never to be repented of. Thus here is a joy that
is always to be joyed in, a joy that will never trouble thee hereafter,
whereas for all this wordly joy thou must mourn again; it has been the time of
thy sinning, and of thy rebelling against God, and therefore all this will turn
into bitterness at the latter end; If these pleasures would not turn into
torment, then it were something; but as these have abounded, so will thy
torments and troubles also abound. Thou can not say with Agag, the bitterness
of death and hell are past: What is the sad end of all Dives his joy? Yea
sometimes they are destroyed in the very midst of all their pleasures, as the
Philistimes, and as Nabal were.

Fifthly, The joy and gladness of a godly man is stable and perpetual, because
the ground and cause of it is unchangeable: God never cease to be his Father,
he shall never be cast out of the state of Justification, he shall never lose
his interest in Heaven; now this rock always abiding, their joy must also be
immovable. It Is true, though the godly have cause always to rejoice, yet they
do not so actually; for the present they may mourn and be in bitterness, but
that many times is caused by their own sin and weakness; or else God to give
them more comfort, afterward does suspend present comfort, as the Sun is
most welcome after a tempestuous black storm; but though this be, yet the
foundation of their joy remains sure, there is the same cause why they should
rejoice always. Oh but thus it is not with the unregenerate man, all his joy
is but a blaze, and all the cause or ground of it is very uncertain. Every
creature and condition they rejoice in, is it not mutable? To day laughing, to
morrow crying: To day cheerful because thou have it, to morrow mourning
because thou have lost it. Thus in Job, Chap. 20.5. Zophar says, The
triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of an hypocrite for a moment:
The oil to this lamp will quickly fail, thy honors, thy life, thy wealth,
these things will not last always. Oh then should it not be thy wisdom to lay
up for such joy, that will abide continually, that will never leave thee! Is it
not evident folly to take thy delight in that, which may be lost the next hour?
As Jonah took great content in his Gourd, and within a day a worm breeds
therein, and consumes all. Therefore say of thy worldly joy, as thou may of
thy life it self; It is but a buble, a vapor, here to day and gone to morrow;
if thou could preserve all this delight continually, and death it self could
not rob thee of it, then go on, and make much of it: But to thy terror thou will find the instability of it, as with the Sodomites, The morning was fair
and pleasant, but fire and brimstone was upon them before night. For ought thou
know, thou may go from laughing here, to eternal roarings in hell the
next moment.

Sixthly, Spiritual joys transcend earthly, because the soul can better
perceive them, they are of a more spiritual and penetrating nature and
efficacy: The soul can receive them as the sponge does water, or the iron does
fire, the soul may be filled with it: but all bodily delights and joy, they are
more gross and thick: This reason give the Schoolmen, why all soul delights are
above the body, and much more if they be spiritual and heavenly: As those
sins which are immediately seated in the soul, they are more deep and inward
then bodily sins; so that joy and delight which enters immediately into a
man's soul, is far more soaking and pressing, then that which is upon the body
primarily: For bodily joys are like the Sunne-beames, which come in at a
cranny, or little hole; but foul delight is as when the Sun comes in at a
window, or at a great door, there is capacity enough to receive it.

Seventhly, All earthly joy is to be moderated, we may sin in it, we may go
too far, we may over-joy: Therefore the Psalmist exhorts, Psalm. 2. to rejoice
with trembling. While we take any joy in these earthly things, we are to do it
with trembling, for then is a temptation to sin, then are we in greatest
danger, in the midst of heat we are subject to take cold. Hence the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 7. Those that rejoice, must be as if they did not rejoice: So
great a care are we to have that our joy be moderated, we do not say it is
unlawful to take delight, and joy in the creatures, the Scripture commands to
eat and drink with joy of heart, only we must not joy excessively, we may
quickly let this joy overflow the banks; and certainly the carnal and
immoderate joy that men take even in lawful things, is no little part of their
iniquity: For why is it that thy heart can rejoice in outward mercies, thou
can take delight in these creatures, but have none at all in heavenly things?
A Fair, a Market is thy delight, when thou can not call the Sabbath a
delight: Is not all this, because thy heart over-joyeth in these things.

Use of Exhortation, not to be disheartened at godliness, as if it were a sad,
melancholy, mopish life: Oh know, thou never come to have true joy, til thou
live the godly, exact, and precise life! The closer thou walk with God, the
more fearful to commit any sin, the more unspeakable and solid is thy joy.
Oh call not that laughter and mirth of the wicked man, joy! Solomon says, it is
not joy, it is madness: Do not ye see mad men; they will laugh, and hoot, and
leap with jollity, when they are bereft of reason, and lie in chains bound up
in a dark Dungeon? Such is all the worlds laughter: They die laughing, They go
to hell laughing, and is not this madness? Yet who can persuade men to leave
their carnal jollity, and to taste how good and pleasant the ways of God are?
Well, go on and take thy delights, thou will have laughing enough one day: for
Prove. 1. God will laugh at thy destruction, and mock when thy fear comes.

Of the Godly Man's Holy Security, and Admirable quietness of Spirit, as
another Effect of the Light of Gods Countenance.
PSALM. 4.8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, for thou (Lord) only
make me dwell in safety.


WE have heard of one glorious Effect of the light of Gods countenance upon
David, viz. A gladness surpassing all the joy that can be in the world; now in
this verse, we have a second, and no less noble Effect of the same cause. For
as the Sun has many several and notable effects upon the earth; it does not
only enlighten or comfort, but makes fruitful, and abounds also in many
other effects. Thus the favor of God, where that is perceived, it is not one
or two, but many glorious consequents flow from thence. And this in the text,
is an holy security, and admirable quietness of spirit, free from all sinful
distempers, let his danger be never so great. So that this heavenly
tranquillity, is a fruit of that Faith which he had in God, at this time,
though so greatly tempted.

Therefore in the words, you have David's godly security, a fruit of his Faith,
expressed in two actions, as a manifestation of it; with the Reason, and the
Cause of it.

The Actions demonstrating his quiet spirit, are, 1. His lying down in peace.
2. His sleeping.


His lying down; that denotes, He would not be interrupted in his natural
actions, and ordinary course of life; he would eat, and drink, and go to bed
for all that.

But because many go to bed, and though they put of their clothes, yet cannot
lay aside their tormenting and vexing cares, whereby, though they ly down, yet
are restless and sleeplesse, tos^^ng from one side to another: Therefore
secondly, he adds, I will take my sleep. All that danger and trouble he was
in, should not break his sleep; he would take his rest as sweetly as over he
did in the midst of his Prosperity.

Now certainly, if you do consider in what a temptation and danger David was
in, you will say it is impossible; or rather, that Faith which makes us depend
on God, in such streights, with the effects of it, are no less admirable, then
miraculous Faith. It Is generally concluded on by the best Interpreters, that
this Psalm was made upon the same occasion which the immediate one going before
was; and that appears by the Inscription, to be composed when David fled from
Absalom. So then, David says, He will lie down and sleep: Take his sweet rest,
when he was in that flight of his, pursued by Absalom. And if you would know,
how grievous that was, consult 2 Samuel 15. the whole Chapter, especially verse
30. there you will find, that Absalom by fair pretenses of Justice and
Religion, had stolen the hearts of all the people to himself, against David his
Father; whereupon he makes War, raises a great Army. The conspiracy was
carried on with great pride and policy, insomuch that David is forced to fly
from Jerusalem, and to run whithe^ he can for his safety; all the people did
generally forsake him: So that he with some few, went up to Mount Olivet; and
as he went, he wept, and covered his face, and went barefoot, and all the
people went with him, and wept also. What a sad sight was this, to see David,
so Religious a King, so potent, who had conquered so many Enemies, to be
brought into this extremity? Yea, his estate was so despicable, that one man
Shimei, Chap. 16. came out and cursed him, railed on him; Come out thou bloody
man, Thou man of Beliall; and threw stones and dust at him. By all this, you
see his misery was great enough. But add to this; That at this very time,
David knew God brought this evil upon him for his Adultery, and Vriahs
business; the Prophet had threatened him thus. So that both God and man seem
against him; he is forsaken of all, and his conscience tells him for what this
is: He can easily tell the sins that make it thus with him. Yet for all this,
see his admirable Faith, in the powerful effects of it; I will lay me down and
sleep. Would you think, that David could make such a Psalm as this, and speak
after this manner, even when he went barefoot and weeping in that direful
manner? This is so incredible, that some have thought it could not be literally
true of David, and have made mystical applications of it to Christ; but upon
very weak grounds.

Yet lest you should think this came from some stupidity, or fool-hardinesse,
or from Stoical Apathie (for David does in a high manner, that which the
Stoics so highly commend, but could never themselves practice) he adds the
reason of it; by which you may see, it was not carnal security, but holy
confidence.

The Reason is taken from Gods Protection and care: He does not thus securely
take his rest, because though generally forsaken, yet some mighty men of valor
did cleave to him, and he had old Soldiers, whereas the Conspiratours were
many of them inexpert: Nor does he think that he had outwitted them, by sending
his faithful Friend Hushai into Absolom's Court, to undermine him, while he
pretended to serve him, but all is from God; Thou alone make me dwell in
safety. It was God, and he only, that could protect and defend him.

In the expression of David's security, I will both lay me down and sleep; the
Hebrew word Juchdan, has troubled Interpreters: The Septuagint translate it,
(...): Some Simul, some Pariter. Austin makes in id ipsum to be God: He would
rest in God, who only is, I am, that I am: But that is ignorance of the Hebrew.
Some relate it to David's enemies; He would lie down with them, though they
were millions about him, as Psalm. 3. Others relate it to his own company, that
did faithfully adhere to him in this his temptation. But they seem to take it
most genuinely, that relate it to the actions; I will both lie down and sleep:
One as well as the other, to demonstrate the fiducial frame of his spirit. From
this Explication, Observe,

That Faith depending on God, in a lively and vigorous manner, The wonderful
Effects of Faith in quieting the soul in Afflictions.
does so comfort and quiet the heart, in the midst of great streights, as if
there were none at all.

Certainly, David could not have spoken more securely and quietly at that time,
when all the people had made him King, h^^ Enemies vanquished, and he settled in
his Kingdom. Therefore to say this, when he was in imminent danger of all, and
when he was so pursued, that he could not tell where he should lie down, or
where he should sleep; this is wonderful. Oh, how may the very naming of this
Doctrine, shame the best and choicest of Gods Children! For little afflictions,
that are not to be named to David's, they disquiet thee; they make thee toss
up and down, and thou art restless in thy spirit. Oh, do thou shame thy self,
and thy troubled heart for ever, by this President which David has set thee!
And lest you should think this was but a sudden flash and lightning in David,
you may find, that this fire did always warm his breast. For look to the third
Psalm made by him, while he was in his flight, he says there the same thing,
only in the Prterperfect-tense: What he here says he will do, you may there
see he had done. Oh, you would think David had little occasion to make Psalms,
to be proclaiming his confidence in God! rather to have had his whole soul
taken up with his military affairs; but thus Faith does put on spiritual
Armory upon his soul. And that you may not think, only David could do this, see
the like secure and holy confidence in the Prophet Habbakuk, Hab. 3.17, 18.

The Doctrine xplain ed.
But let us explicate the Doctrine by several Propositions. As

First, What is meant by Faith depending and adhering to God? To know this, you
must understand, that the Scripture attributes three Acts to Faith; and so
Faith is described Synecdochically by one of them, for its whole Nature. Thus
Faith is sometimes knowledge; sometimes it is assent to the Truths revealed; and
sometimes it is a fiducial and confident resting upon God, or Christ: and this
is indeed the most noble and excellent Act of Faith: Even as reason and
understand are the chiefest acts of man, though he can also sentire. Faith as
it does thus rely on Christ, it Justifies. But not only in matter of
Justification, does it thus depend on God, but also in all outward calamities
and streights, it in ableth the soul to rest and lean on the Lord. This is
that trusting, which David does so often exhort to, in the Psalms. For as a
man cannot walk without legs, or a Bird fly without wings: so the soul of a
man, being wholly unable and impotent, cannot subsist of it self, but it must
have something to lean upon. It Is like Ivy, that cannot grow of it self. Now if
the heart of man be corrupt, his trust is wholly carnal; he bears up his
heart, and supports himself with some bladders or stilts that the world affords
him. But if his heart be sanctified, then he does solely depend upon the Power
and Promise of God. Now this trusting in God, is a special duty; and David many
times uses this Argument, why God should help him, because he trusted in him.
We cannot in an higher manner glorify God, then by trusting in him: For,
hereby we acknowledge God to be the Jehovah; that he alone does all things.
Insomuch, that this is one of the chiefest duties required in the first
Commandment. The grace then of Faith, has this peculiar effect upon a man,
that it lifts up the soul to God, and makes it rest, and solely depend on
him It Is true, even in natural men, there seems to be a trust in God; but
that does as much differ from this holy confidence, as light from darkness:
For, no natural man can put his trust in God, there being as much grace
required to put forth this, as any other holy duty.

Secondly, This trusting in God, has

Its general Object. And

Its more special and adaequate Object.

The general Object, is, Any good thing that we stand in need of. So that
whatsoever the soul wants, or the body wants: Whatsoever thy necessities are,
thou art to depend on God for the supply. This our Savior insinuates, Mat. 6.
to his Disciples, when he tells them, they should not be doubtful and
distrustful, what they should eat or drink, but rest satisfied wholly in Gods
provision, who is an heavenly Father. And therefore there is not any grace,
has such a peculiar property to allay the tempests, and rebuke the storms of
the soul, as this has. This is David's Harp, to chase away the evil spirit.
Whence are all those soul dividing and tormenting cares, but from want of trust
in God? It were not possible thy heart should be so disquieted and tossed up
and down, if thou did thus rest on him: For, this trusting in God, it is a
Catholocum; it is a general Remedy to all Exercises, to all Dejections. And
hence, when the Prophet Habbakuk says, The Just shall live by Faith; the great
Act of Faith in that place, is dependence on God.

But then, Faith as it is trusting and relying on God, has a more special and
noble Object; and that is, Christ our Mediator. In the sense of all our guilt
and unworthiness, we are to throw our selves on him: And this is like the
looking on the Brazen Serpent, by which we are healed. It Is not working, or
laboring, but resting of our souls on Christ that justifies. And indeed, if
we can trust on him for our Justification, for our salvation, what a shame is
it, we cannot depend on him for supply of all outward necessities? Does not the
Apostle argue with the highest reason that can be? Romans 8. If he has given us
Christ, how shall he not with him give all things else? Will not this shame all
thy distrustful and dividing thoughts, when thou shall say, I believe in God
for the salvation of my soul, yet I cannot trust him with my Children, my
health, or any other straight I am in?

Thirdly, The Motives to trust in God in the midst of all Exercises, are
twofold:

Gods Promise. And

Gods Power.

For as our Savior said, concerning those who did not believe the Scripture,
They erred, because they did not know the Scriptures, nor the power of God.
Thus it is here; All thy dejected and repining thoughts arise within thee,
because thou art ignorant of his Truth, his power.

First, There must be Gods Promise, otherwise it is not trust in God, but carnal
presumption. If a man should neither work, nor eat, or drink, yet say, He
trusts in God for his life, this would be desperate presumption; for there is
no Promise made to such. Therefore whatsoever thy heart is born up with, be
sure thou have a Promise for it: And if there be a Promise, then know Heaven
and Earth will sooner fail, then that Promise. It Is true, in the Old Testament
dispensation, there were particular Promises made for many mercies, so that
they might the more boldly confide in God. As David in this very particular, he
had a peculiar Promise that the Kingdom should be established to him; and
therefore he was assured, that this Conspiracy of Absalom should not prevail.
Now although we have not such peculiar Promises made to us, that God will
remove such a calamity, take away such an affliction, yet we have a general
Promise for every good thing; and that all things shall turn to our good. Which
may make every Believer say, I know, either God will take this affliction away,
or it will be for my good: That it is better for me to have it, then to be
without it. And is not here ground of quietness enough within thee? This makes
the Apostle James give such a Proviso to all our Petitions; Let him ask in
Faith, nothing doubting, (Chap. 1.) for if he doubts, let him be assured, he
shall have nothing.

Now how must a Christian in every Prayer about temporal things, pray without
doubting?

I shall not say as some do, That even in all temporal mercies, we are to pray
with the same assurance as for spiritual; That temporal things are as
absolutely promised as spiritual: And therefore if any temporal mercy be not
vouchsafed to us, it is wholly for want of Faith and Confidence. But I rather
join with those that say, He must not doubt of Gods Truth and Goodness to
help, neither must he doubt, whether he shall not have that or the equivalent:
This he must assure himself of. And truly, if a Christian would proceed thus
far, he would find a world of ease, and quietness in his mind.

And as Gods Promise, so his Power also; that is a second Motive for this trust
in God. For if we do not believe God is able to raise up the dead, to call
things as are not, as if they were; If we think the temptation too great, the
affliction too desperate, then we cannot put any assurance in God.

Fourthly, We add in the Doctrine, that Faith depending upon God; but that is
not absolutely considered: For the Devils cannot trust ^n him, neither may
wicked men; yet God is able to help them, to save them: but relatively as a
Father, as reconciled. Therefore Christ ( Mat. 6.) makes this the ground of all
the trust his Disciples must have, because their heavenly Father is in Heaven.
So that till we have these persuasions of God as a Father, we are but as so
many vagabond Children, that know not where to have relief. The Child, because
he has a Father, never takes care what he shall eat or drink, or put on,
because his Father will provide all these for him.

Fifthly, We add, That this Faith must depend on God, in a lively and strong
manner, as David's was at this time; or Abraham's, when he considered not the
dead Womb, or did so much as stagger within himself. For if thy Faith be weak;
if it be fainting and languishing, though thou may have support, yet not such
prevalent peace within thee: Thou art in a Combat, not in a Triumph. David at
another time, is like Sampson without his strength; he says, All men are
liars. He thinks God had forsaken him. So that unless Faith be very vigorus,
though thou may be preserved in thy afflictions, they shall not quite
overwhelm thee, yet thou will not have this peaceable frame. Now the Children
of God, should think it not enough to rub through their troubles with agonies
and Combats, but with joy and quietness. Grieve because thy heart is so much
as disquieted; say, Oh weak wretch that I am, that I cannot be as much at ease,
as if I had no affliction at all!

There remain two more Propositions to explicate this Doctrine. And

First, When we say, Faith does thus quiet and compose the soul, you must take
two Cautions to season this.

First, That Faith does not this principally of it self; for that is but a
grace or habit, created and infused into the soul: And therefore as all other
graces needs the continual quickening and asistance of Gods Spirit, so likewise
does Faith. Hence our Savior prayed for Peter, that his Faith might not fail:
Implying, that grace of it self would wither and decay, as well as any other,
if God did not preserve it. Therefore the Apostle Peter does fully express the
manner of Faiths Influence into this Perservation, 1 Peter 1.5. It Is the power
of God, that does principally, and efficiently keep us, only it is through
Faith. We are not then to conceive, as if Faith of it self had such an inherent
efficacy, that by it is sole jurisdiction, it would command the soul, and say as
God did at the first, Let there be light, and there shall be light. No: Faith
it self needs the daily quickening of Gods grace, as well as other graces. Yea,
this grace would sooner decay then others; because of the hearts contrariety to
it, making a man to live above the Principles of sense and common reason.
Insomuch, that it is no wonder to see a man love God, be patient in afflictions;
these though not wrought by the power of nature, yet have a conviction from the
light of nature; but so has not Faith.

The second Caution is, That we do not think, as if we could believe it our
selves: as if by our own humane strength, we could obtain such a peaceable
frame of heart. No: If it could be so, then David at other times, and that it
may be in far less extreamities, would not have been dejected, as he
acknowledges himself to be. Neither would that man have prayed to Christ, to
Help his unbelief, if he could have helped it himself. And the experience of
the godly does abundantly confirm this, in what agonies they are plunged; how
grievously tormented: Oh, how desirous to quiet their hearts! They Pray, they
Meditate, they Read; and all cannot compose their souls. Now if their hearts
were subject to their power, as the Winds and Waves are to Christ, they would
never endure such Conflict within. This argues therefore, that it is not in
man's power to put forth such strong vigorous Acts of Faith, no more then we can
command the Heavens to give rain: It Is God that must both plant and water, and
give the increase.

Lastly, The truth of this Doctrine, does extend even to those great
Afflictions and Calamities we are in, and that because of our sins. We can
evidently see what sins they are, that have provoked God to give such a
bitter stroke; our own hearts testify unto us, and this argues the greater
work of Faith. For happily it might be granted, That in such Afflictions and
Temptations which befall us for Gods cause, and for righteousness sake, we may
be full of such joy and sincerity, as the Apostle says, James 1. Count it all
joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. And thus the Martyrs, they could and
did with David, lay themselves down to sleep in their dark Dungeons, and that
the very night before they were to burn at the Stake.

But you will say, How can this joy and confidence hold in such Calamities as
fall upon us wholly, because of our sins, we behold Gods anger and our folly,
has brought this on us?

Now in such troubles, If we humble our selves unto the Lord for our sins,
and bewail them, we may have such Calmes of spirit: For this was David's case;
The Prophet had told him aforehand, that this should fall out: Because of his
Adultery and Murder, his conscience cried aloud in the midst of his military
noise; yet for all that, he could thus set himself to his quiet rest.

How the vigorous Actings of Faith do quiet the Heart.
These things premised, Let us consider, How these vigorous actings of faith,
do thus quiet and appease the heart. And

First, In that faith does in the first place carry us out to rely on Christ as
a Mediator, whereby all our iniquities and sins are done away: If then sin
and guilt be removed out of the way, there cannot be any trouble. For as if
there had not been sin, the earth would not have brought forth briars and
thorns: So neither were it not for iniquity eating into the conscience, there
would not be the least fear and trouble upon the heart. This is the wind that
makes so dreadful an earthquake at last. Wonder not then, if David's faith did
compose his soul in respect of that outward danger, for it had before removed a
greater evil; the guilt of sin was now blotted out, David is not in that
case, as when he cried out, that his bones were broken, and that God sets his
sins before him. Oh that is a woeful condition, when the guilt of sin and
afflictions both meet together, when outwardly we have no hope, and inwardly no
hope! But this faith does in the first place. It obtains reconciliation with
God, it sees Pharaoh and his great host drowned in the sea; and then it does
easily overlook other afflictions, for the favor of God is able to sweeten
all calamities. Thus it was with Paul, he tryumphs over all imaginable
adversaries; but why is he thus confident? Because there is no condemnation to
such as are in Christ Jesus. If then the Sun arise, the dark night will be
quickly dispelled; and so if the light of Gods favor does arise, the fears
and troubles which arise from outward exercises are quickly dissipated. If then
thou complainest thy strength is so small, every temptation is ready to blow
thee down; as certainly the least puff will hurl a man down, if faith be not
lively, the Damsels charging of Peter to be of Christ's company, made him curse
and swear, and fearfully apostatize; here was no such great cause, he was not
arraigned, imprisoned, sentenced to die; but this temptation blew down a strong
Oak: which teaches us, that a little calamity may throw us to the ground, if
faith be not lively; and a great one cannot, if faith be vigorous. If (I say)
thou complainest of thy weakness, thy fears; Let faith in Christ as a
Mediator be more powerfully put forth.

Secondly, Faith does quiet and compose the spirit by impetration, or obtaining
of God such a spirit. For as you heard, seeing it lies not in the power of
man, to give himself such a sweet blessed frame: No, he would give a world for
it, if it lay in his power; it can only be obtained by application unto God:
Now that which most prevails with God is faith, Whatsoever you ask believing,
you shall have it: It Is faith only that makes the omnipotent God work for thee
and in thee; so that when we say faith makes the heart thus still and quiet,
you must not think it comes from faith as a natural cause, as the fire burns;
but morally by prevailing with God. This is the grace that God does so honor;
if we trust on him, if we rest on him, then God promises to give rest and
peace to our souls: Insomuch that it is a Christians duty above all things to
keep up the grace of faith, to attend to that, lest the whole kingdom be lost,
when that is lost; for God is to us as we believe, so God works for us as we
trust in him; so that our distrust makes God to be as no God, or as an
Idol-god, having eyes not to see us, or hands not to help us. Gods power will
not communicate it self but upon believing; as Christ told Mary, Said I not
unto thee, if thou would believe thou should see the glory of the Lord?
That glory was to make Lazarus, dead your days, and stinking in the grave to
live again: Now no less glorious alterations, and changes will God work upon
thee if thou trust in him; for hereby Gods fidelity, goodness, and power is
engaged, and he will never deceive those, that wholly rely upon him. You see
then, why faith put forth in a lively manner, can thus quiet the soul: Because
it is the condition to which God does make glorious promises.

Thirdly, Faith does instrumentally compose the soul, because by it other
graces are also set a work, and so the more purified and cleansed the soul is
from all corruption, the clearer the heart is: As the clearer the spring is,
then though it be moved and stirred, yet for all that the streams will be
pure. Thus it is with a godly man, when his heart is sanctified, cleansed, and
adorned with grace; then though he is plunged into tribulations, instead of
discontent, impatience, grudgings and murmurings, instead of dejections and
disquietness there is joy* thankfulness, and heavenly mindedness; as if Juniper
or sweet herbs be thrown into the fire, the fi^e draws out their sweet smell;
or as the wind blowing upon the sweet flower, makes it smell more fragrantly.
Thus also when afflictions fall upon the godly, faith having purified their
hearts, there do run forth admirable and sweet breathings of the soul. That
faith exciteth other graces, appears Heb. 11. Where all those glorious acts
of grace, which those Worthies abounded in, are attributed unto their faith.

Lastly, Faith lively exercised must thus serene the heart of a man, The
Arguments by which Faith quieteth the Soul.
because it does suggest many noble and excellent arguments, which do
abundantly quiet and establish the soul. Faith is argumentative, it is very
ingenious to find out all those Considerations, which the Scripture affoards.
Now the Scripture is like the Apothecaries shop, that can furnish with all
cordials. As

First, Faith argues from Gods giving of Christ, every thing else that is as
necessary for us as Christ is. Thus the Apostle, Romans 8. If he has given us
Christ, how shall he not with him give all things else? He does not say some
things, but all things; and then the expression how shall he not? implies that
it is a most absurd and irrational thing to think otherwise. Now then faith
does thus quiet the soul. Be not afraid or troubled; the God that afflicts
thee, is he that has given Christ to thee. Now if ever God would have refused
thee, it would have been in this: Know then, that these afflictions, these
troubles, they are good for thee, they are necessary to humble thee, to make
sin bitter, they are as necessary in their kind, as Christ was in his kind.
It cannot be want of love, that these exercises are upon thee, for is not
Christ the great pledge of Gods love to thee? Therefore faith turns the heart
of a man from that which is grievous and vexing, to that which is pleasing and
comfortable. Though God gives not this or that outward mercy, yet he gives
Christ, the fountain and original of all.

Secondly, Faith represents God out of his word in some Attributes chiefly
above others, insomuch that the heart of a man being thereby lifted up to
heaven to God himself, it cannot be disturbed by things below. As the Bird
while soaring aloft in the heavens, is not skared with this fear and that
noise; so while faith bears up the heart to God, and makes abode with him,
it is not disquieted: It Is the looking upon the waters that make giddy; if we
look up to the heavens, they cannot disturb the brain. Now these things in God
does faith powerfully improve.

First, The wisdom of God; that whatsoever the Lord does, it cannot be done
wiser: Therefore he is called the only wise God. Now what wonderful comfort
may be suggested from hence? That there is no affliction, no temptation, though
never so heavy, but it comes and is ordered by infinite wisdom. If thou had
the disposing and ordering of all things, it could not be done more wisely then
it is; nay thy own love to thy self, if wise, would order this affliction to
come upon thee. For do not you see a man, whose parts of body are gangreend;
yet because he is wise, though he loves his ease, yet willingly resigning
himself to have those parts cut off, for the good of the whole: So that is one
of the most comfortable considerations which faith supplies the heart with,
that whatsoever temptation is fallen upon thee, the wise God has ordered it;
so that to repine or to be discouraged, is to say in effect, Why is not God
wiser? Why does he not order things with more perfect knowledge? Oh but as long
as faith works, as long as that puts forth it self, so long it beholds matter
of wisdom and admiration in all Gods proceedings.

Secondly, It represents the tender love and bowels of God as a Father, so that
all those strokes they come from love. It Is his very pity for a while to break
and bruise them, that they may be healed more effectually. Is the Artificer
angry with his plate when he breaks it, and throws it into the fire? No,
it is for to make it more complete: If so be that we were wholly without
corruption, if we could walk without sin, then God would no more afflict us
here on earth, then he does the glorified Saints and Angels in heaven; but our
corruption is such, that God did not love us or regard us, if he did not
chastise us.

Thirdly, Faith represents the sovereignty and supreme dominion, which God has
over the hearts of his children; therefore he is called the Father of Spirits.
Now neither man himself, nor all the Angels of heaven, are able to give such a
composed frame. As God only knows the hearts of men, so he only fashioneth
and frames them. If you ask, How is it possible that David should be thus
immovable? What could keep in his corruption and flesh from repining and
disturbing? I answer, it is God with whom all things are possible: It is this
that faith suggests, though thy heart be impatient, though thou can not
command the waves thereof to be still, yet God in heaven can. Oh it is easily
confessed, that it is not flesh and blood that can make such quiet calmness of
soul! No, it must be an omnipotent work of the great God. Did not God put
terror into Cain's heart, that though he had built Cities, though he did all
he could to allay his spirit, yet still he trembles, and cannot but tremble?
Thus on the contrary, God he puts joy into the heart of a believer, he bids it
lie down and be content; and although never so many Hornets come buzzing to
sting him, yet faith keeps them off: ^o that that very frame of heart, which
even a godly man thinks it impossible for himself ever to have, that he finds
sometimes, and wonders how it should be so* it is God that either lays load on,
or takes burdens off from the spirit: So that the very same sins and
temptations which formerly they could not apprehend without even faintings and
swoundings of the soul, now they can remember, and bless God with joy for the
pardoning of them.

Use 1. of Instruction, to distinguish between carnal security and godly
confidence. You have many a profane man will say the words in my Text, I will
lie down and sleep; it may be at the very Sermon time, howsoever under the
apprehension of their pleasures and profits, they will with Dives, bid their
soul, take its ease. But can they say, for the Lord takes care of thee? No,
but it may be, this night the Devils will fetch thy soul: It may be this night,
thou must be arraigned at Gods Tribunal. Oh how many are sick of this spiritual
lethargy? How many men lie down securely to sleep, that may awake in hell? But
the godly man's confidence arises from spiritual Motives; insomuch that though
death and the day of Judgment appear, yet he may and ought to be thus affected.

The Difference between Carnal and Gracious Confidence.
We have heard, that it is the property of faith depending on God in a vigorous
manner, to compose and quiet the heart in the midst of all calamities, as if
there were none a^ all. Now because even in wicked men, there is a carnal
senseless spirit; that though the anger of God be upon them, though their
sins have found them out, yet they can take their ease and pleasures, and lay
nothing to heart, and this is an Epidemical disease. It is good therefore to
search into the bottom and difference of a gracious confidence, from a carnal.

Now there are two sorts of these carnally confident and secure men under their
troubles.

First, There is the Stoical man, of whom Senecae and others of that sect, The
Stoical Security.
do much boast: They speak great and swelling words, about that man who shall
fully have received their principles, and confirm himself therein: They
commend in such a man an indolency and an impassibility; that let him be dashed
upon by never so many decumane waves, yet for all that he stands immovable
like a rock, and is not troubled. Hence is that speech of theires so famous,
that their wise man, if he were burning in Phalaris his Bull, he would cry out,
Dulce est, and ad me nihil pertinet. Thus the Stoical Philosophy, would serve
to set forth as admirable and composed a spirit under tribulations, as the
Christian Religion. But

Let us discover the sinfulness of such a Stoical stupid spirit. And

First, Although the Stoics did thus Thrasonically boast in their Books, and
Seneca speaks high and transcendent speeches in this matter, yet when they
came to practice, they were feeble and effeminate: So that they were nothing
but words, and empty expressions; witness that Stoic, who in his health had
maintained that pain was nothing; it was but a fancy when he was grievously
tormented with the Gout, cried out of his error, acknowledging when he said
so, he did not know what pain meant. But now if we look upon the godly in the
midst of their exercises, we shall find, they did really put forth such calm
and joyful spirits, under the heaviest pressures. David (you heard) said, he
had done thus, as well as he would do so, and the Apostles went out rejoicing
from the Council, where they had been persecuted, because they were accounted
worthy to suffer for the name of Christ, Act. 5.41. And thus the many thousands
of Martyrs; they did, though not in Phalaris his Bull, yet in as great
torments, cry out, Oh how sweet and comfortable is this! So that no sect in
Philosophy, the Stoics nor none else are able to bring such a multitude of
Martyrs, as the Christian Religion has: Therefore it is only Gods Word, and the
Spirit of God, that can enable us to rejoice, and take our rest under sad
afflictions.

Secondly, The Stoical discipline did teach a brutish stupidity and senslesness
under miseries: They would destroy the very passions of grief and fear from a
man. Thus they make a man to be no better then a stock or a stone, that is
sinking under the hammer and axe that comes upon it; but Christian Religion
does not take away affections, but it moderateth and orders them. David you
see, though thus calm in his spirit, yet he is affected with his calamity; he
goes bare foot, covers his head, and weepeth as he goes, and Christ himself
wept at Lazarus his death. It Is the Scriptures rule, neither to despise the
affliction of God, nor yet to sink under it, Heb. 12.5. We do then preach, that
when God brings into streights, we should not profanely slight them, and not
humble our selves under Gods hand; or that we should become like bruit beasts,
and be void of an holy fear and grief under his chastisements: But we are so to
be affected, as yet not to be sinfully disquieted. The heart is to be moved,
but not to be disturbed.

Thirdly, This Stoical senslesness is not a gracious calmeness, because it does
wholly depend upon their own strength and power. It was from some pretnded
innocence and men^al abilities in themselves, that they would bear it out so
resolutely against all dangers. We may see by S^necae's expressions, that those
sublime affectations did arise from self-presumption; but the Christian
confidence has its cause wholly from without: They are most diffident in
themselves, even when most confident. You see David here and in other places,
whenever he proclaims exceeding quietness in his heart, it is still from
God, not from himself, because the Lord takes care for him, because the Lord is
his strength and his helper; insomuch that if we consider the motive and
original of these two confidences, we shall find them as distant from each
other, as the East from the West; we shall find that the one comes from within,
the other from without; and therefore that the one is a mere puff, and inflated
tumor of the soul, a mere buble, which of it self would break, but the other
solid and enduring, being the strength of God himself who is omnipotent; for
Gods strength is vouchsafed to a godly man, and Christ shows forth his power
in them, 2 Cor. 12.10. When I am weak, then I am strong. Whereas the proud
Philosoper, when he was strong, then he was weak: Yea Paul finds a kind of
omnipotency in himself, but not of himself, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me.

Lastly, This Philosophical boldness is only for carnal and vain ends; it was
for vain glory, it was to please their own humors; it was not to glorify God,
to set up his power and goodness. You see David's Psalms breathing forth praise
and honor to God continually, you see there is nothing owned but Gods power;
whereas whatsoever these Apes of fortitude and courage did, it was for vain
applause, and to set up themselves. The Martyrs were so humble and sensible of
their unworthiness, even under their greatest joy and support, that they
refused the name of Martyr, as too great a word: They said Christ only deserved
to be called so; for the Scripture gives him that name: So that the wonderful
strength and consolations, wherein the Martyrs did abound, were accompanied
with deep apprehensions of their own unworthiness, at that very time.

The Mirth and jollity of most wicked men under Gods Judgments: How it differs
from a gracious Confidence.
In the second place, Let us come more closely to the general disease of all
people almost; and that is of such, who though afflicted, though stricken with
diseases, and ready to give up the ghost, or though the hand of God be against
them several ways; yet they will say, I will lay me down and sleep, yea I will
set my self down, and drink, and make my self merry, singing not care only, but
all godly sorrow away. Is not this the general corruption of most men, who when
under the sad passages of Gods providence toward them, they run to merry
company? They do all they can to chase away any sorrowful thoughts, and think
their only remedy to be carnal pleasures. But let not the profane jolly and
secure man boast in this; for hell does not more differ from heaven, then this
disposition of the godly man, from carnal confidence. For

First, This arises from a mere brutish stupidity. There hearts are hardened,
and are like a Stone or Adamant; so that as these melt not into water by any
art, so neither will these stupid sinners apprehend the danger they are in,
though never so afflicted. Though a fool be pounced in a mortar, yet his folly
will not depart from him. He does no more learn under afflictions, then the
bruit beasts. Do not call this man's his confidence, but his sottishness; his
stupidity. It Is with him, as the Drunkard Solomon speaks of, Prove. 23.34, 35.
who when he is in as great danger as one that lies down in the Sea, or that
lies upon the top of a Mast, yet he fears not: They have stricken him, but
he felt it not. So that what a miserable creature a senseless sottish Drunkard
is, tumbling in the Streets, and trampled upon, yet feeling nothing at all,
such miserable wretches are these benumbed sinners; even like the wanton Calf,
that leapes up and down, while prepared for the slaughter: Whereas holy
confidence is accompanied with an exact tenderness and heavenly feeling, as of
their own infirmities, so also of Gods power and grace.

Secondly, This profane security, as it comes from sottishness and stupidity,
so from desperate ignorance and blindness. If they did know what curses might
every moment fall upon them; if they did but apprehend the wrath of God ready
to devour them; Oh, how quickly would their jollity be turned into mourning,
and their laughter into howling! Stupidity and ignorance commonly go together;
yea, one is the cause of the other. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. Their understandings were
darkened through the blindness upon them, and then they were past feeling. The
blind man does not see the deep ditch, and dangerous holes he is ready to fall
into. And therefore observe those, who in time of affliction, disease or
dangers, have such security upon them, and see if they be not miserable, poor,
and ignorant men, that know nothing of sin; the damnable nature and guilt of
it: That consider not what it is, to lie roaring in hell torments to all
eternity. So that all the ease they have, is because they are a blind ignorant
people. But now the godly man's confidence arises from spiritual knowledge; and
the more his understanding is enlightened, the more holy security he has. And
therefore Paul prays, that Believers might grow in the knowledge of Gods love,
the depth and breadth of it, Ephs 1.5, 3. Because the more this is known, the
more confident and quiet they are. And this is the reason why Gods people at
first, while the apprehensions of sin are fresh and terrible upon them, while
the Law is powerful in its operations, they have not such a calm and serene
spirit: It is for want of that Scripture knowledge of God. The more they know
the Promise, and the nature of God and Christ revealed, the greater boldness
and confidence they have.

Thirdly, The security that wicked men have, arises from an immoderate desire
to take their pleasures while they may have them, being desperate for the
future, expecting no good hereafter. And truly, this is the condition of many;
their hearts are filled with a desperate fool-hardinesse, that they will take
their pleasures and jollity while they may; They expect little in the world to
come. So that these very considerations which should take them off from such
security, through their corruptions they further themselves in. See this
notably described Esa. 22 12, 13. When God called to weeping and mourning,
there was eating flesh, and drinking wine, the clearn contrary: And what moved
them? even the sad condition they were in: Let us eat and drink, for to morrow
we shall die. Oh, why not rather, Let us mourn and humble our selves, for we
shall die! But they are desperate; They will take their pleasures while they
may, they know not how soon they may be deprived of them. Such as these are
filled up with desperate profaneness. That as Saul and his Armour-bearers did
desperately throw themselves upon the Spear, to kill themselves: Thus do these
men laugh and drink, and will have their pleasures, though they know death will
deprive them of all. Such men are said to make a league with hell and the
grave; They will do well enough for all this. Or rather, they think they shall
be damned; their conscience secretly whispers that to them; therefore they will
have their pleasures while they can. O miserable and wretched men, woe be to
such that ever they were born.

Fourthly, This profane security differs from spiritual confidence, in
respect of the Author and efficient cause: For it is plain who gives David this
holy quietness; it is God that makes him dwell confidently; it is God that
commands rest and ease to the soul; whereas this carnal security comes wholly
from the Devil: It Is he that lulle^h them asleep. Our Savior discovered this
in that parable, when he said, While the strong one kept the house, all things
were in quiet. You would wonder to see a man curse and swear, and follow all
the pleasures of his heart; yet that he can lay himself to sleep; that he
should not think his chamber would be as ^ull of Devils, as Pharaoh's was full
of frogs: That he should not cry out, Oh, I dare not sleep, for fear this night
the Devils fetch my soul to hell. Now all this carnal security in his spirit,
arises from the Devil, who is said to reign in the hearts of the children of
disobedience: It Is he that fills the soul with spiritual madness. As when he
possessed the bodies of men, he threw them into the fire and water, and made
them cut and lance their bodies, without any grief at all; the like he does
upon the souls of men, hurrying them into beastly, wicked, and ungodly ways;
and by that means, even into hell it self, as he did the Herd of Swine, when
he entered into them, carrying them violently into the Sea. What was it that
made Judas so desperately betray innocent blood, though he had so much warning;
so many admonitions to the contrary? Though some were stricken down with
amazement, yet nothing will stop him; The Devil did drive him: The Devil had
entered into his heart, even as he did also fill Ananias his heart. So that as
you see it is with godly men, when filled with the holy Ghost, they would boldly
confess Christ, though they endured all torments for it: Thus when the Devil
has possession of men's hearts, and the Lord leaves them to his temptations,
then they are mad and obstinate; they scoff and mock at the Day of Judgment. As
the Apostle Peter tells us of such profane mockers; Where is the day of his
coming? Are not all things as they were, 2 Pet. 3 4. Thus like Leviathan, they
laugh at the Spear; and as the Prophets hearers, because he so often preached
the burden of the Lord, therefore they took it up by way of scoff; The burden
of the Lord, The burden of the Lord. Thus do they about hell and damnation.

Fifthly, Carnal security differs from this heavenly confidence, in respect
of the Concomitants and Companions. For though David had this great quietness
of soul, knowing God would help him, yet he does carefully use all the means
God has appointed: He does not presume or tempt God, but he prays to God,
and flies for his safety, and gets all the possible succor he can. So in
that grand assurance and confidence which the people of God have about their
eternal happiness, there is also an holy fear and trembling. Therefore the
Apostle exhorts to work out their salvation with fear and trembling. And Paul
himself, who had so much confidence, as to say, Who shall separate us from the
love of God in Christ? yet he kept under his body, lest when he had preached to
others, he himself should become a reprobate, 1 Cor. 9.27. But as for the
wicked careless man, he promises himself all happiness and future good,
though he sit still, and stir not a foot toward Heaven; yea, though he go in
the contrary path, yet he flattereth himself, as if that were the way to
happiness.

Use of Terror and we, To all those Laish and Laodicean spirits, who sit at
ease, and say, They are rich, and want nothing; when indeed, they are poor and
miserable, and want all things. Oh, turn your joy into sorrow! Go out with
Ephraim, and let God see you smite upon the breast, and strike upon the thigh,
crying out, Oh, what have I done! Oh, mad wretch that I am! merry and jolly,
when in the Devils dungeon; when in the chains of darkness; when upon the very
borders of Hell? It may shortly be no more said, such an one is eating and
drinking, but his body rotting in the Grave, and his soul roaring in Hell.

The Reason of the Saints Confidence, is, That God alone is their Preserver.
Showing also the Ways and Means by which he does Preserve them.
PSALM. 4.8. For thou alone do make me dwell in safety.


IN these words, we have a Reason why David has such confidence; it is not from
any carnal and outward Motive, but only from divine consideration. For in this
also, might be showed the difference between carnal security, and holy
quietness: The one, is a fruit of a godly and diligent obedience to the Law of
God, and so is a fruit of the Promise: as Prove. 3.23, 24. You may see there a
notable Promise for rest, safety, and sleep, to such as follow Wisdoms Advice.
And D^v^^ found God faithful in his Word, Psalm. 127. For so thou give thy
Bel^v^^ sle^p. But all earthly security, arises from some temporal hopes they
lo^^ at in their dangers; and therefore while they look for peace, God makes
calamity to arise on the sudden: as 1 These. 5.3. When they say peace and
safety, then sudden destruction shall arise, as of a woman with Child, and
they shall not escape. Suddenly, in the midst of their mirth and jollity, will
their inevitable destruction arise.

David therefore has a more firm and immovable Rock, and that is Gods Power
and Preservation: Which is expressed in The Effect of it. And The solitary
Efficiency of it.


The Effect is, To dwell in safety. David though now in banishment, and had no
House of his own to lay his head in, yet is as confident, as if he had been at
rest in his dwelling place. But because all that dwell, are not secure;
especially in times of violence and war, therefore he adds safety. Some
translate the word in Spe, in Hope; and so it may denote both the outward
condition, and his inward disposition.

Lastly, Here is the solitariness of this Efficiency, It Is God alone. It Is not
David's own care, nor the asistance of others, but God alone: All the glory is
to be ascribed solely to him. Indeed, some relate the word to David, as if
David though alone, God made him dwell in safety: He can keep one man securely,
in the midst of all enemies. Thus God promises to Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.28. Israel
shall dwell in safety alone. But we rather take it as attributed to God: And
thence Observe,

That it is God alone, who does preserve in safety. God alone preserves in
safety.


Did he withdraw his protection, every stone in the street, every tile on the
House, might be an Executioner. If we consider how many ways man is subject to
death and dangers, we must acknowledge it even a Miracle, that we rise safe,
and go to bed in safety. It Is good to suggest this truth to you; for who is
there that does acknowledge God in these common mercies? That blesses God for
preserving him daily in his wits, in his senses, in bodily health and dangers?
For although these be bodily mercies, and we delight in them as such, yet we do
not look up to God the Giver of them; whereas that Petition, Give us this day
our daily Bread, does not only extend to nourishment, but Protection also. It Is
God gives every crum of Bread: It Is God gives thee breath, every time thou
breathest. The Psalmist ( Psalm. 127.1, 2.) does extend this safety, not only to
particular persons, but Families, and Nations, and Cities: All care in a
Family, all military power in a City is in vain, if God does not guard it. Thus
Solomon shows, that it is not any outward thing in the world that can defend
a man, even those things that we are most apt to trust in, Prove. 21.31.
compared with Psalm. 33, 17.

To open this Doctrine, consider these Particulars.

I.
First, That the Hebrew word that was h^nted before, does denote two things.

1. An inward disposition of hope and undaunted courage.

2. External safety and quietness: For these two are ^eparable. God may keep a
man in a quiet courageous hopeful disposition, even when dangers do inviron
round about; as it was with David in the former Psalm: Though ten thousand
should compass him about, he would not be afraid. Yea, in this, he ^aith in
another place, he would be confident. And certainly, herein God is much to be
praised, that he keeps the heart from fears, and the understanding and senses,
in their regular operations. How easily can God make a man a Cain, a
Magor-Missabib? it is a curse that God threatens the wicked Israelites with,
Deuteronomy. 28.66. Such a cursed miserable life every man might live. And so for our
understanding and senses, and imagination, who is it that preserves thee? What
a woeful, dreadful thing is it, to have the fantasy disturbed? Some think
that wonderful work upon Nebuchadnezar, that God struck him into, was only a
melancholy disturbance of his fantasy. It Is said, The wicked flees, when no
man pursues; (Prove. 21.1.) and he fears, where no fear is. Now thus, God
might deliver thee up to a deluded imagination, to a terrible fantasy; he
might deprive thee of senses and understanding; or thou might go up and down,
with a fearful spirit, which shall impetuously and tyrannically ^^quiet thee:
so that in no outward danger, yet thou shall create danger to thy self. But God
gives this inward confidence.

2. There is external safety; a condition of freedom and quietness, which is
also Gods gift only.

II. God preserves principally.
Secondly, God preserves thus in safety Principally, and appoints his
creatures Instrumentally.

Principally: Therefore he is called the Lord of Hosts, as having supreme
dominion over all creatures, to use them as Instruments, either of vengeance or
mercy. Hence he is called in Job, The Preserver of men, Job. 7.20. No creature,
though wise and strong; yea, though working as natural Agents, can put forth
their strength for our preservation, unless the true Word of God, which gives
a command to their being, give also a command to their operation. So that it is
God, who by men or other creatures, does preserve, nourish, and comfort thee.
Jacob's Ladder, reaching up to Heaven, is said to represent the Providence of
God, whereby he works in the governing of all things, through Instruments.

And by creatures instrumentally. 1. Irrational.
Now the Instruments whereby God does preserve his in safty, are sometimes the
Irrational creatures, sometimes the Rational.

By a Raven, which is the most greedy and devouring Bird, yet God preserved the
life of Elijah. And it is a remarkable History of a godly Martyr, who having
hid himself in a hole of the house for safety, immediately a Spider made a
large web over the hole; so that when the Pursuers came to enquire after him,
and one of them moved to search in that hold, No; says the other, none has
gone in their lately, you may see by the cob-webs: And thus that holy man
escaped their fury.

By Rational creatures: Thus God stirs up many to preserve those that are
appointed to die. Esther was a means to save her whole Nation, 2. Rational men.
the people to preserve Jonathan. For as God in just and wise Providence does
raise up many times one man to be the destruction of another: Which made
Habbakuk complain, Why Lord, have thou made man to be like the fishes of the
Sea, the greater to devour the less? So on the other side, he does in great
mercy, raise up some men to be a safeguard to others. Thus Obadiah hid many
Prophets, by fifty in a Cave, from J^zabels fury.

As men so Angels are notably used by God for the preservation of his people.
Angels.
Insomuch, that some godly men have greatly blamed Christians, that they are no
more thankful to God for those Guardes he has appointed them. Not that we are
to pray unto Angels, or that there is a peculiar Tutelar Angel vouchsafed to
every man; though not only the Papists, but even some of the Ancients, and of
later Orthodox Divines, have been of that Opinion, though abhorring all
Angel-worship. Not (I say) to determine that; yet in the general it is plain,
that the Scripture makes the Angels to be our helps and defenders. Insomuch,
that by them as Instruments, we are preserved from those falls and dangers
which otherwise would come upon us. Psalm. 91.11. God is there said to give his
Angels charge over us. Yea, They shall bear thee up in their hands, as a tender
Nurse bears a young Child; that the godly do not so much as dash a foot
against the stone. Here you see the Instrumental serviceablenesse which is
vouchsafed to the godly by Angels. And so you have a full place to this
purpose, Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth about those that fear him.
Oh, how many preservations, how many Providence do we constantly receive, and
never take any notice of!

Thirdly, Gods Providential Preservation is twofold; either General, III
which extends to all creatures, or special and Particular, that reaches in a
peculiar manner to the godly.

The general Preservation, is in respect, even of Beasts themselves. Therefore
Psalm. 36 6. David takes notice of Gods hand, that preserves man and beast.
Hence ( Mat 6.) A sparrow (so inconsiderable a Bird, yet) does not fall to the
ground, without Providence. It has indeed, been the Opinion of some, yea some
Fathers; That the Providence of God does not extend to minute and particular
things: But the Scripture is clear in this. So that the least fly cannot move
it self, or the worm creep, without Gods Providence. It Is God then, that
preserves the irrational creatures, and that without any derogation to his
Majesty; for he cannot but do it, because of his supreme Perfection.

But then for the Preservation of man, especially of Believers; there his care
is more singular and peculiar. In this sense some expound that place, The
Savior of all men, especially those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. Gods care to
his people, is notably discovered by our Saviors expression, Luke 21.18. where
he says, Not one hair of our head shall fall to the ground: Compared with Mat.
10.30. The very hairs are numbered. So then, the least danger cannot befall us,
without the Providence of our heavenly Father.

Fourthly, Hence it is that all the dangers, yea and death it self, comes by
Gods appointment: No sooner or later, nor no other ways then he has decreed.
IIII.
Thus David comforted himself, that though his enemies plotted against him, yet
his times were in Gods hand; and to God do belong the issues of death, Psalm.
68.20, So that it lies not in the power of all thy enemies, to kill thee when
they will. David did often acknowledge this, That it was God, who did preserve
him in all his trouble. For you must know, that this is a truth in Divinity,
howsoever Arminians and others, have arraigned it for false-hood; That God has
set the term of a man's life immovable, beyond which he cannot live, and to
which he shall attain: As also, All the means bringing it about; Even those
things that seem to be the most casual and accidental. Job speaks this truth
evidently, Chap. 14.5. God had appointed his months, and his days, so that he
cannot pass the boun^s. Yet this is not to be understood, as if hereby a fatal
necessity were introduced, that if he be sick, he need not use Physic to
prolong life. Not upon that ground which the Stoic said, Si fatale est ut
convalescat, fatale etiam est ut medicum adhibeat: If it be the destiny to be
well, it will be the destiny to call for the Physician; but because Gods Decree
does include in it the means. So that we must say, God has appointed in the
use of means, to prolong such a man's life, viz. Hezekiah's nineteen years
longer. It Is true, the Scripture says, The wicked shall not live out half
their days; but that is in respect of their hopes and expectations, as also in
respect of the ordinary course of nature. Many men by their wickedness do
shorten their days, in respect of second causes. Therefore do not sinfully
fear this or that will kill thee, for thy times are in Gods hand, and he has
appointed the period of any godly man's life in much mercy, because they have
done their work; and to preserve them from great evils to come.

The several ways by which God preserves his people in safety.
These things premised, let us consider the several ways by which God
preserves his people in safety.

And one remarkable way, is, By restraining and keeping them from such
counsels or actions that may bring death and danger. Do we not see rashness,
especially drunkenness and other vices, which make men bold, are the cause of
many a man's death? God therefore keeps his people in a sober and wel-advised
way. Why is it said, That wicked men shall not live out half their days, but
that the ungodliness of men does bring them to untimely deaths? Yea, we read
of that good King Josiah, whose death was so much lamented, that he brought it
upon him by rashness, and foolish temerity; for he would unnecessarily go and
fight with Pharaoh King of Necho; and though he was so seriously advised to the
contrary, yet he would adventure to his ruin, 2 Chronicles. 35. David himself, by
his own unbelief and sin, did bring himself into danger. And in the matter of
Achish, when he was forced to feign himself mad; but always while he was in
Gods way, every thing prospered with him. Therefore Gods mercy is especially
seen to the godly, in that he makes them keep within their calling and bounds;
and that is a safe way. If you observe, you shall find the greatest dangers
befall men out of their Calling. They go beyond their bounds, and then they
smart for it. The Bird is safest, while she is on her Nest. Therefore when the
Devil tempted our Savior to throw himself down the Pinnacle of the Temple, he
answered, Thou shall not tempt God, Mat. 4 7. The Devil left out that passage,
Thou will keep him in all his ways. A man must be in his Calling, and doing
his duty. It Is true ind^ed, God for wise and just ends, may bring sudden
exercises upon his own people, while doing their duty: And God does not always
keep them in safety; violent death, and other dangers have befallen them as
well as the wicked; but even then God does order those passages for their good.

Secondly, God preserves them from those casual and accidental evils, which
arise so unexpectedly, that no man's wisdom can prevent them. God has the
supreme ordering and governing of all things; even those things that we judge
the greatest casualty and chance, they are wisely determined by God. In that
passage where a man is supposed to be cutting of a tree with an Axe, and the
^elve fall of, and kill a man, that accident is said to come from God, and he
is said to give such a man into his hand, Exodus 21.13. compared with Deuteronomy. 19
5. Now consider how many thousand casualties happen in the world, of killing of
men, of Houses and Towns burnt: and herein we must acknowledge the goodness of
God to us; for that which has befallen another, might as well befall thee, but
that God prevents it.

Thirdly, God preserves wonderfully, in changing and altering, or working upon
the h^a^ts of man; so that though otherwise they would, yet God so binds up
their hearts, that the^ shall not do thee any mischief. Did not Saul for many
years together, study to take away David's life, yet he could not do it? Was
not Esau also purposed to kill Jacob, yet God wholly changed his heart, and
that when he had a fair opportunity? And how remarkable is that passage of
Jehoshaphat, who when in the Battle was taken by his enemies, and they ready
to kill him, yet he cried unto the Lord, and God moved their heart to depart
from him, 2 Chronicles. 18.31. So in the thievings and robberies in the world, it is
God that diverts men from designing and doing mischief to such Families. While
the people of Israel wen^ up to keep their Feast at Jerusalem, he ordered men's
hearts so, That none should desire their Land, Exo 34.24.

Use of Thankfulness to God in all these common Preservations: Every day,
every morning and evening, thou have cause to wonder at his Power and Goodness
under all thy temptations: What befalls another, God tells thee, what might
come to thee. Oh, therefore do not take thy life and health God gives thee,
and spend it upon the Devils service! Remember, Thou live upon Gods mercy, if
he withdraw for a moment, any sudden evil may fall upon thee. *

FINIS.
An ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
Admiration. OF Admiration of Ministers Persons, when sinful p. 48
Afflictions. How Afflictions effect good in a man p. 179, 181 Agreement. The
Motive of Agreement, is Godliness p. 33 Agreement among the wicked easily
broken, does not always denote a true Church p. 41 Protestants Agree in
Fundamentals p. 41
B
Babes. BAbes in Christ p. 5 Babes directed p. 8 Backbyting. Of Backbyting p.
35 Building. Gods people are his Building p. 118 The Scripture is the
foundation of this Building p. 141 Of a twofold Building upon the foundation
p. ibid. How a Minister must take heed how he builds on the foundation p. 142
Of their Building Gold, Silver, Precious Stones p. 157 Boasting. Of Boasting in
men p. 265 See Glorying.
C
Carnal. Carnal, its several significations p. 5 In what sense a godly man
may be said to be Carnal p. 21 Ceremonies. Of Ceremonies p. 11 Causes. Causes
of Grace, Principal and Subordinate p. 59 Principal, the Ministry p. 68
Efficient, the Spirit of God. ibid. Church. The Churches Duties p. 20 Of
Church Government p. 84 Of the Holiness of Churches p. 118 The matter of a
Church ibid. The Church of God is his Temple p. 193 The Churches Privileges,
Relations and Titles, should be a spur to duty ibid. The Churches Riches
enumerated p. 270 Christ. Christ justly exalted p. 30 As the Foundation p. 21,
145 Christ may be sinfully set up, and how p. 58 What it is to preach Christ p.
145, 153 The Godly, and all they can do, are Christ's p. 294 Christians.
Christians should ^^ve as those that are more then mere men p. 42 Contention.
Contentions argue men to be so far carnal p. 33 Contentions are twofold,
Good* ^vil p. 34, 36, 37 The cause of sinful strife p. 34 The Effects of it,
in Civil, Religious Matters p. 35, 36 The Aggravations of this sin p. 36
D
Damnation. OF Damnation p. 222 Death. Death, the godly man's advantage p. 282
Deacon. Deacon, the word used diversely p. 66 Defile. Defilers of Gods Temple
with corrupt Doctrine p. 216 Difference. Difference between Christian and
Christian, in respect of their Knowledge and Graces p 5.22. Discipline.
Discipline, how severe in the Primitive times p. 7 Divisions. The sad Effects
of Divisions p. 99 Direction for Times of Division ibid. Difficulty. The
difficulty of the salvation of those that are most godly p. 192 Divinity.
Divinity contains a twofold Matter: 1. Fundamentals; and 2. Conclusions from
them.
E
Increase. THe Increase and success of preaching from God p. 86 Ends. Of
corrupt Ends in a Minister, and good Ends p. 63, 64 Envy. Envy, the word used
in a good sense, and in a bad sense p. 25 It Is a fruit of the flesh p 25 Its
Degrees p 26 Its Object p. 27 Its Subject p. 28 Its Aggravations p. 29 Its
Remedies p. 32 How differenced from zeal. p. 32 Error. Error, Considerations
about it p. 142, etc. Errors are Hay and Stubble, though not Fundamental p.
161 Men may be erroneous, and not know it 161 Errors, Greater, Lesser p. 121,
161 Why called Hay and Stubble Its secret ways shall be made manifest p. 169
May endanger salvation p. 189 Its Causes p. 169 Defile Gods Church p. 217
Erroneous times sad times p. 174 How God will punish the erroneous p. 186, 219
How far a godly man may err, and how a godly man erring, differs from a
wicked man p. 220 The Difference between Error and Heresy p. 190 See
Doctrines. Eternal. Of Eternal Damnation.
F
Family. OF Family Duties p. 3 See Relations. Wickdnesse p. 3, 4, 13 Such as
they are, such is the Commonwealth p. 14 Faith. Faith, Its eminency p. 70
Nature and Acts p. 71 Its Foundation, viz. the Scripture p. 126 Effects p. 72
Knows its ground why* though it comprehend not the matter believed p. 71 Is
the Instrument of Sanctification, as well as of Justification p. 72
Fundamental. Of Fundamentals p. 2 The ignorance of them, lamentable p. 2
Reduced to several Heads p 14 Are easy p. 15 Knowledge of them necessary ibid.
Foundations. Foundations in Religion carefully to be laid p. 125 Four
unquestionable Scripture- Foundations I. The Matters to be believed, viz. The
Scripture is the only Foundation of our Faith p. 125, 126. How careful
Ministers should be to build truth upon that Foundation p. 141 Four rotten
Foundations: The Authority of the Church, Magistrate, Enthusiasme, Mere humane
Reason p. 127 II. The Worship and necessary Service of God p. 129 How necessary
it is ibid. It must have a Divine Command p. 131 Three rotten Foundations in
Worship ibid. III. The things to be done by us p. 125 This Foundation of
Practice, consists in 1. It Is Directory, Gods Word. 2. The Justification of our
Persons. 3. A receiving power from Christ. 4. A renewed and sanctified Nature
p. 133 The necessity of this Foundation p. 134 Four rotten Foundations that men
build upon, in reference to practice p. 135 How Christ is the Foundation p.
145, etc. How the Apostles the Foundation p. 145, etc. Fool. Wise men after the
flesh, are fools p. 229
G
Glory. THe Degrees of Glory p. 101, 105 Of Glorying in men: The sinfulness of
this sin p. 261 And how many ways that is done ibid. See Boasting. Godly.
Their Characteristical Privileges p. 155, 265 Of Godliness in the power of it
p. 42, 105 Grace. Free Grace to be exalted and praised, and how p. 121 Why the
godly are so sensible of free Grace p. 123 Impediments of this duty p. 124
Gospel. Gospel, how great a mercy to a people p. 79 Government. Of Government
in the Church p. 120 Growth in Grace. Growth in Grace and Knowledge, pressed p.
1^, 91 Intensive, Extensive ibid. Grounds of Religion. See Principles, and
Fundamentals.
H
Hay. OF building Hay and Stubble p. 161 Hell. Of Hell p. 222 Heresy,
Heretics. How God will punish Heretics p. 220 Hide. How vain and sinful to
Hide our sins p. 166, etc. Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is God, and a Person p.
201, etc. Why called a Spirit. ibid. Heaven. Heavens Happiness p. 108
Houshold-Duties. See Family. House. Gods People are his House p. 113 Of the
Material House of God p. 117 See Churches. Husbandry. Gods People are his
Husbandry p. 113 What that Implies ibid.
I
Ignorance. HOw the ignorance of people hinders the Ministry p. 2 Ignorance
lamented and reproved p. 4, 5, 13, 16, 17, 71, 83, 90, 151 The Effects of
Ignorance 16 Illumination. Of the Illumination of the Spirit p. 90 Inconstancy.
Inconstancy in Religion reproved p. 18 Inducements. Inducements to Holiness p.
193 Infirmities. Of the Infirmities of the Saints p 22, 23 And why they are not
quite freed from them p. 23, 24
K
Key. OF the Key of Knowledge p. 9, 10. Knowledge. Knowledge of Principles
necessary p. 15 Knowledge of the meaning of Scripture, a gift of the Spirit p.
210 The duty of Growth in Knowledge p. 83
L
Love. LOVE praised p. 30 The only Motive of Love and Agreement, is Godliness
p. 33 Its Cause and End ibid. Live. Godly men do only live p. 279 Wicked men do
not live p. 281
M
Ministers. MInisters hindered by the incapacity of the People, from Preaching
many excellent sublime Truths p. 2, 3 Wickedness, how hurtful to the Church
p. 54 What Prudence is requisite in their Preaching p. 9, 10 In reference to
the capacity of the Hearers p. 2, 3, 4. Work is twofold, viz. Teach, Govern p.
9, 10 Must divide the Word aright p. 9 Are not sinfully to be admired, and how
that is done p. 48 What hurt Satan does by bad ones p. 54 In what cases they
may praise themselves p. 137 Must preach no new Doctrine p. 139 Must preach
Christ the Foundation p. 145 How Servants to the Church, and how not p. 271
Faithful seek not to win people to themselves, but to Christ p. 63 May preach
from a corrupt end, or a good end ibid. And what those ends are ibid. Must not
only plant, but water p. 83 Cannot work grace p. 86, 94 That is faithful has
grounds of comfort under successelesse labors p. 89 Co-workers with God p. 109
How careful they should be to lay a good foundation in the hearts of their
hearers p. 125 How they should build upon the foundation p. 126, to 161
Ministry. Ministry, The ends and use of it p. 3, 17, 18, 140 The great respect
due unto it p. 46 Its success from God p. 86, etc. 94 Sufficient in its kind,
to effect its end ibid. The appointed Instrumental cause of Faith p. 67 How it
is such a Cause p. 68 How not p. 67 The Properties of it, as such a cause p. 69
How all are obliged to attend it. ibid. How to profit by it p. 77 How blessed
with increase by God p. 86 Is to continue to the end of the world p. 69 Why God
will make use of it ibid. Ministerial Gifts. Ministerial Gifts, Why all not
gifted alike p. 76 Though diversity of gifts, yet all should agree in one p. 97
Whether from the Holy Ghost or no p. 209 The end of them p. 211 Merit. See
Reward. Members. Members of the visible Church, who p. 6. Distinguished ibid.
Man. Man according to man, several significations of that phrase p. 42 To live
as men, what that implies p. 43 Means. Means of Grace always needful to all
p. 84 Manifest. Manifest: All sin, though never so secret, shall be made
manifest p. 165
N
Name. NAme: Of peoples being called by the Names of eminent men in the Church
p. 50 The Names that Christians have been called by in several Ages 50, etc.
What hurt the Devil does the Church by the Names and esteem of men p. 54 New.
New: No New Doctrine to be expected
O
Order. See Government Ordinances. ORdinances: The sin of neglecting them p.
61 Officers. See Ministers.
P
Papists. PApists as such, have but a humane blind Faith p. 53 Perfection.
Perfectionists Confuted p. 8, 22 Prayer. Prayer for Gods Directing Ministers p.
12 Praise. Praise: In what cases Ministers or others may praise themselves p.
137 Preaching. Preaching: One manner of preaching censured, and another
commended p. 10 Presence. Presence: Of Gods presence with his Church p. 200
Pride. Pride: Of pride p. 34 Principles. Principles of Religion first to be
laid p. 13 Reduced to several heads p. 14 Are easy p. 15, 17 Necessary p. 15
Privileges. Privileges of the Church, and every Believer p. 265 Are
Obligations to duty 193 Profit. Profit: Rules or helps to profit by the
Ministry p. 77, 88, 93, 96, 112 Protestant. Protestants agree in Fundamentals
p. 41 Whence so called p. 51 Providence. Providence: All Providence for the
good of the godly p. 286 Prudence. Prudence requisite in a Minister, in
preaching such matter, and in such a manner as is for the peoples good p. 9
Planting. Planting the Gospel p. 80 Punishment. Punishment of Loss, and of
Sense p. 223, 224 Purgatory. Purgatory, An Argument against it from the great
Text brought for it p. 177
Q
QUarreling. See Contention.
R
Reformation. REformation of the Church p. 81, 175 Reigning-sinne.
Reigning-sinne, That word explicated p. 23 Right. Right or Title twofold p.
264 Relation. Relation-Duties p. 3 Reproof. Reproof, How to be performed p. 11
Riches. Riches: The Churches Riches ennumerated p. 265 Reward. Reward twofold,
of Debt and Promise p. 101 Of works p. 102 Essential and Accidental p. 105
Lawful to encourage our selves in good Works, from the promise of the Reward
p. 150 Reward of Godlidesse in this life p. 106 In the life to come p. 107 The
greatness of the Heavenly Reward, and the vast disproportion that is between
the Reward and the work p. 108 Respect. Respect: Of Respect to the Ministry p.
46, 47, 48 And how it may degenerate into sinful Admiration p. 48
S
Saints. SAints, How all things are theirs p 265 Secret. Secret: The most
secret sins shall be brought to light p. 165 The Aggravation of secret sins
p. 168 Self. Self-seekers: A lawful self-seeking p. 105 Self-seeking in a
Minister, what p. 64, 65 Sin. Sin: Of the sins of the godly p. 12
Schism. Of Schism and Division, Civil, Ecclesiastical p. 38 Its Nature and
Ingredients p. 39 Its Causes p. 40 Slothfullness. Of Slothfullness in Religion
p. 13 Spirit. Spirit, How it works by and with the Word and the Ministry
thereof p 86 The signification of the word when attributed to God p. 201 Its
dwelling in the Saints p. 205, 212 Its Effects in the Church p. 209, 212 See
Holy Ghost. Spiritual. Of a spiritual man p. 7 Strife. Strife. See Contention.
Strictness. Strictness in Conversation, how despised by the wise men of the
world p. 241 Vindicated p. 241 Scripture. Scripture: A plea for its simplicity
p. 233 Its sufficiency. p. 139 The only Foundation of our Faith p. 126
Stedfastness. Stedfastness in the Faith p. 83
T
Temple. TEmple: The use of the word, and its signification p. 197 Of Gods
spiritual Temple p. 197, 226 Compared to the material one p. 198 Believers
joined in a Scripture way, are Gods Temple p 228 Of the Holiness of the
Material Temple p. 199, 226 See Church. Thoughts. Thoughts not free p. 166 Evil
thoughts shall be brought to light p. 166 Truth. Truth of Christ precious p.
157 Compared to Gold etc. ibid. Truth twofold, Increated, and Created. p. 182
The Effects of Divine Truths p. 183
V
Vanity. VAnity, How the word used in Scripture p. 158 Unity, Union, Disunion.
Unity, not a sure mark of a Church p. 41 In Ministers pressed, in Doctrine
fections p 98 The sad Effects of the contrary in Ministers p. 99 What people
should do, when Ministers are divided ibid*
W
Watering. WAtering by the Word, what p. 82 Wisdom. Wisdom Humane, an enemy
to the things of Christ p. 230 But a shadow, compared with Scripture Wisdom p.
247 Contemptible folly before God ibid. True Wisdom but folly in the worlds
account p. 239 Things to be believed, hoped for, and to be done, are foolish to
humane Wisdom p. 239 True Wisdom, only in the Church or Christianity p. 243
Wise men. Wise men: How God delights to take wise men of the world in their own
craft p. 254 The best of their thoughts vain p. 257 Wicked. Wicked people
spoken to p. 8, 19, 20, 46, 47, 70, 77, 104, 166, 167. Wicked works, though
never so secret, shall be brought to light p. 165 Works. All should do good
works p. 102 Doing good works twofold ibid. What to do a good work that God
will accept and reward p. 103 Workers. How Ministers are Workers with God p.
110 Why God will make use of them ibid. Worship. Of the Worship of God p. 129
Word. Word of God, how that reclaims from sin and error p. 179 Of a durable
nature p. 182 World. World, How it is the godly man's p. 275
Z
Zeal. FAlse Zeal p. 15
FINIS.
A CATALOGUE Of the Chiefest of those Books, as are Printed FOR THOMAS
UNDERHILL.
By Col. Edw. Leigh Esquire.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises, in Five Books. The Saints Encouragement in
Evil Times. Critica Sacra, or Observations on all the Radices or Primitive
Hebrew words of the old Testament, in order Alphabetical. Critica Sacra, or,
Philological and Theological Observations upon all Greek words of the
New Testament, in order Alphabetical.
By Samuel Got Esquire.
Novae Solymae, Libri sex, Sive Institutio Christiani. 1. De Pueritia. 2. De
Creatione Mundi. 3. De Juventute. 4. De Peccato. 5. De Virili Aetate. 6. De
Redemptione Hominis.
Essays concerning man's true Happiness. Parabolae Evangelicae Latin redditae
Carmine Paraphrastico varii generis.
Morton. His Touchstone of Conversion. Mr Hezekiah Woodward.
Of Education of Youth, or, The Child's Patrimony. The Lives and Acts of the
good and bad Kings of Judah. A Treatise of Fear. A Thank-offering.
Mr Samuel Fisher. A Love-Token for Mourners, being two Funeral Sermons with
Meditations preparatory to his own expected Death, in a time and place of great
Mortality. Mr Herbert Palmer, and Mr Daniel Cawdry.
A Treatise of the Sabbath, in 4 parts. Memorials of Godliness and
Christianity, in seven Treatises. 1. Of making Religion ones Business, With an
Appendix applied to the Calling of a Minister. 2. The Character of a Christian
in Paradoxes. 3. The Character of visible Godliness. 4. Considerations to
excite to Watchfullness, and to shake of spiritual Drowsiness. 5. Remedies
against Carelessness. 6. The Soul of Fasting. 7. Brief Rules for daily
Conversation, and particular Directions for the Lord's Day.
His Sermon entitled, The Glass of Gods Providence toward his faithful ones.
His Sermon entitled, The duty and Honors of Church-Rest.
Mr William Barton.
His Psalms. His Catalogue of Sins and Duties, implied in each Commandment, in
verse.
Mr Vicars Chronicle in four parts. Mr Samuel Clark.
A general Martyrology, or, A History of all the great Persecutions that have
been in the world to this time. Together with the Lives of many eminent Modern
Divines. His Sermon as the Warwickshire men's Feast, entitled, Christian Good
Fellowship.
Mr Kings Marriage of the Lamb. Mr Shorts Theological Poems. The French
Alphabet. Jus Divinum Ministerii, by the Provincial Assembly of London. Mr
Thomas Blake.
His Answer to Blackwood, of Baptism. Birth-Priviledge.
Mr Cook, His Font uncovered. Dr John Wallis, His Explanation of the Assemblies
Catechism. Mr Austin's Catechism. Mr Vicar's Catechism. Mr John Pagit's Defense
of Church Government, by Presbyterial, Classical and Synodal Assemblies. Mr
Tho. Pagit, A Demonstration of Family Duties. Mr Anthony Burgess.
Vindiciae Legis, or, A Vindication of the Law and Covenants, from the Errors
of Papists, Socinians and Antinomians. A Treatise of Justification, in two
Parts. Spiritual Refining, Part 1. or, A Treatise of Grace and Assurance:
Handling the Doctrine of Assurance, the Use of Signs in Self-examination; how
true Graces may be distinguished from counterfeit; several true Signs of Grace,
and many false ones; The Nature of Grace under diverse Scripture Notions, viz.
Regeneration, the New Creature, the heart of Flesh, Vocation, Sanctification
etc. Spiritual Refining, the Second Part, or, A Treatise of sin, with its
Causes, Differences, Mitigations, and Aggravations, specially of the
Deceitfulness of the heart, of Presumptions and Reigning Sins, and of
Hypocrisy and Formality in Religion. All tending to unmask Counterfeit
Christians, Terrify the ungodly, Comfort doubting Saints, Humble man, and
Exalt the Grace of God. His CXLV. Sermons upon the whole 17th Chapter of St
John, being Christ's Prayer before his Passion. The difficulty of, and
Encouragements to Reformation, a Sermon upon Mark. 1. verse 2, 4. before the
House of Commons. A Sermon before the Court Marshal. Psalm. 106.30, 31. The
Magistrates Commission, upon Romans 13.4. at the Election of a Lord Mayor. Remes
Cruelty and Apostasy, upon Revel 19.2. preached before the House of Commons on
the 5th of November. The Reformation of the Church to be endeavored more then
the Commonwealth, upon Judge. 6.27, 28, 29. preached before the House of Lords.
Public Affections, pressed upon Numb. 11.12. before the House of Commons.
Self-judging, in order to the Sacrament, with a Sermon of the Day of Judgment.
A Treatise of Original Sin. An Exposition with Practical Observations on the
third Chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians. The Godly
man's Choice compared with the Natural man's, and found to be transcendently the
best, and both being Characterized by their Desires and Delights, this is
clearly evinced, That the Godly man, is the only happy man, even in this world.
Held forth in XIII. Sermons upon Psalm. 4. verse. 6, 7, 8.
Mr Richard Baexter.
Plain Scripture Proof of Infant Baptism. The Right Method for getting and
keeping Spiritual Peace and Comfort. The unreasonableness of Infidelity, in
four Parts. 1. The Spirits Intrinsic witness to the truth of Christianity,
with a Determination of this Question, Whether the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles do oblige those to believe, who never saw them? 2. The Spirits
Internal witness of the truth of Christianity. 3. A Treatise of the Sin
against the holy Ghost. 4. The Arrogance of Reason against Divine Revelation
repressed.
The Christian Concord, or, The Agreement of the Associated Ministers of
Worcestershire, with Mr Baxters Explication of it. A Defense of the
Worcestershire Petition for the Ministry and Maintenance. The Quakers
Catechism. An Apology against Mr Blake, Dr Kendal, Mr Lodovicus Molineus, Mr
Aires, and Mr Crandon. His Confession of Faith. The Saints Everlasting rest.
The safe Religion, a piece against Popery. His present Thoughts about
Perseverance.
Mr Lukin. The Practice of Godliness. Mr Langly.
His Catechism. A Treatise of Suspension.
Dr Teate. His Sermon at the Funeral of Sr Charles Coote. Mr Dury. The desires
of foreign Divines, of a Body of Divinity from English Divines, with an Essay
of a Model.

