Solomon's Temple Spiritualized OR GOSPEL LIGHT Fetched out of the TEMPLE AT
JERUSALEM, To let us more easily into The GLORY of New-Testament-Truths.

By John Bunyan.

Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. Thou Son of Man, show the House to the House of Israel --
show them the Form of the House, and the Fashion thereof, and the Goings out
thereof, and the Comings in thereof, and all the Forms thereof, and all the
Ordinances thereof, and a^l the Forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof.
LONDON, Printed for, and Sold by George Larkin, at the Two Swans without
Bishopgate. 1688.

TO THE Christian READER.
Courteous Christian Reader,
I Have, as thou by this Little Book may see, adventured, at this time, to do
my endeavor to show thee something of the Gospel-Glory of Solomon's Temple.
That is, of what it, with its Utensils was a Type of; and, as such, how
instructing it was to our Fathers, and also is to us their Children. The which,
that I might do the more distinctly, I have handled Particulars one by one, to
the number of threescore and ten; namely, all that of them I could call to
mind, because, as I believe, there was not one of them but had its
signification, and so something profitable for us to know.

For, though we are not now to worship God in those Methods, or by such
Ordinances as once the Old Church did: Yet to know their Methods, and to
understand the Nature and Signification of their Ordinances, when compared with
the Gospel, may, even now, when themselves, as to what they once enjoined on
others, are dead, may minister Light to us. And hence the New Testament
Ministers, as the Apostles, made much use of Old Testament-Language, and
Ceremonial Institutions, as to their signification, to help the Faith of the
Godly in their preaching of the Gospel of Christ.

I may say, that God did in a manner tie up the Church of the Jews to Types,
Figures and Similitudes, I mean to be butted and bounded by them in all
external parts of Worship. Yea, not only the Levitical Law and Temple, but as
it seems to me, the whole Land of Canaan, the Place of their Lot to dwell in,
was to them as Ceremonial, or a Figure. Their Land was a Type of Heb. 3.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. Levit. 19.23. chap. 26.34, 35. Exodus 12.15. Levit. 6.17. chap.
23.17.
Heaven, their passage over Jordan into it, a similitude of our going to Heaven
by death. The Fruit of their Land was said to be uncircumcised, as being at
their first entrance thither unclean, in which their Land was also a Figure of
another thing, even as Heaven was a Type of Sin and Grace.

Again, The very Land it self was said to keep Sabbath, and so to rest a holy
rest, even then when she lay desolate, and not possessed of those to whom she
was given for them to dwell in.

Yea, many of the Features of the then Church of God, were set forth, as in
Figures and Shadows, so by Places, and things in that Land.

1. In general, she is said to be beautiful as Tirzah, ( Song 6.4.) and to be
comely as Jerusalem.

2. In particular, Her Neck is compared to the Tower of David, builded for an
Armory, ( Song 4.4.) Her Eyes to the Fishpools of Heshbon, by the Gate of
Bethrabbim. ( chap. 7.4.) Her Nose is compared to the Tower of Lebanon, which
looks toward Damascus, ( chap. 4.1.) Yea, the Hair of her Head is compared
to a flock of Goats, which come up from Mount Gilead: And the Smell of her
Garments to the smell of Lebanon, ( verse. 11.)

Nor was this Land altogether void of Shadows, even of her Lord and Savior.
Hence, He says of Himself, I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilie of the
Valleys; (Song 2.1.) Also She, his Beloved, says of him, His Countenance is as
Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, (chap. 5.15.) What shall I say? The two
Cities, Sion, and Jerusalem, were such as sometimes set forth the two Churches
( Gal. 4.) the True, and the False, and their Seed Isaac and Ishmael.

I might also here show you, that even the Gifts and Graces of the True Church
were set forth by the Spices, Nuts, Grapes, and Pomgranates that the Land of
Canaan brought forth. Yea, that Hell it self was set forth by the Valley of the
Sons of Hinnom, and Tophet, places in this Country. Indeed the whole, in a
manner, was a Typical and a Figurative Thing.

But I have, in the ensuing Discourse, confined my self to the Temple, that
immediate place of God's Worship; of whose Utensils in particular, as I have
said, I have spoken, (though to each with what brevity I could) For that none
of them are without a Spiritual, and so a Profitable Signification to us.

And here we may behold much of the Richness of the Wisdom and Grace of God;
namely, That he, even in the very place of Worship of old, should Ordain
Visible Forms, and Representations, for the Worshippers to learn to Worship him
by. Yea, the Temple it self was, as to this, to them a good Instruction.

But in my thus saying, I give no encouragement to any now, to fetch out of
their own fancies, Figures or Similitudes to worship God by. What God provided
to be an help to the weakness of his People of Old, was one thing, and what
they invented without his Commandment was another. For though they had his
Blessing when they Worshipped him with such Types, Shadows, and Figures, which
he had enjoined on them for that purpose, yet Exodus 32.35. 2 King. 17.16, 17,
18. Act. 7.38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
he sorely punished and plagued them when they would add to these, Inventions
of their own. Yea, he in the very act of instituting their way of Worshipping
him, forbad their giving, in any thing, way to their own Humors or Fancies,
and bound them strictly to the Orders of Heaven.

Look, says God, to Moses, their first great Legislator, That thou make all
things, according to the pattern showed to thee in the Mount, (Exodus 25.40.
Heb. 8.5.)

Nor does our Apostle but take the same measures, when he says, If any man
thinks himself a Prophet, or Spiritual: Let him acknowledge that the things
that I write unto you, are the Commandments of the Lord, (1 Cor. 14.37.)

When Solomon also was to build this Temple for the Worship of God, though he
was wiser than all men, yet God neither trusted to his Wisdom nor Memory, nor
to any immediate Dictates from Heaven to him, as to how he would have him build
it. No, he was to receive the whole Platform thereof, in writing, by the
Inspiration of God. Nor would God give this Platform of the Temple, and of its
Utensils, immediately to this Wise Man, lest perhaps by others, his Wisdom
should be idolized, or that some should object, that the whole Fashion thereof
proceeded of his Fancy, only he made pretentions of Divine Revelation, as a
cover for his doings.

Therefore, I say, not to him, but to his Father David, was the whole Pattern
of it given from Heaven, and so, by David, to Solomon his Son, in writing, Then
David, says the Text, gave to Solomon, his Son, the Pattern of the Porch, and
of the Houses thereof, and of the Treasuries thereof, and of the Upper Chambers
thereof, and of the Inner Parlors thereof, and of the place of the Mercy-Seat,
(1 Chronicles. 28.11.) And the Pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, of the
Courts of the House of the Lord, and of all the Chambers round about, and of
the Treasuries of the House of God, and of the Treasures of the Dedicated
Things, (ver. 12.) Also for the Courses of the Priests and Levites, and for all
the work of the service of the House of the Lord, and for all the Vessels of
service in the House of the Lord. (ver. 13.)

Yea, moreover, he had from Heaven, or by Divine Revelation, what the
Candlesticks must be made of, and also how much was to go to each; the same
Order and Commandment he also gave for the making of the Tables, Flesh-hooks,
Cups, Basins, Altar of Incense; with the Pattern for the Chariot of the
Cherubims, etc. ver. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. All this, said David, the Lord
made me understand by writing by his Hand upon me, even all the Work of this
Pattern, (Ver. 20.) So, I say, He gave David the Pattern of the Temple, so
David gave Solomon the Pattern of the Temple, and according to that Pattern did
Solomon build the Temple, and no otherwise.

True, all these were but Figures, Patterns, Heb. 8.5. Chap. 9.8, 9, 23. Chap.
10.1.
and Shadows of things in the Heavens, and not the very image of the things:
But, as was said before, if God was so circumspect, and exact in these, as not
to leave any thing to the dictates of the godly and wisest of men; what! Can we
suppose he will now admit of the Wit and Contrivance of men in those things
that are, in comparison to them, the Heavenly things themselves.

It is also to be concluded, That since those Shadows of things in the Heavens,
are already committed by God to Sacred Story; and since that Sacred Story is
said to be able to make the man of God perfect in all things, (2 Timothy 3.15, 16,
17.) It is duty to us to leave off to lean to common understandings, and to
enquire and search out by that very Holy Writ, and naught else, by what, and
how we should worship God. David was for enquiring in his Temple, (Psalm. 27.4.)

And although the old Church way of worship, is laid aside as to us, in
New-Yestament-times. Yet since those very Ordinances were Figures of Things,
and Methods of Worship, now; we may, yea, we ought to search out the spiritual
meaning of them, because they serve to confirm and illustrate matters to our
understandings. Yea, they show us the more exactly how the New and Old
Testament, as to the spiritualness of the worship, was as one and the same;
only the Old was clouded with Shadows, but ours is with more open Face.

Features to the life, as we say, set out by a Picture, does excellently show
the skill of the Artist. The Old Testament had the shadow, nor have we but the
very Image; both then are but Emblems of what is yet behind. We may find our
Gospel clouded in their Ceremonies, and our Spiritual Worship set out somewhat
by their Carnal Ordidinances.

Now because, as I said, there lies, as wrapped up in a Mantle, much of the Glory
of our Gospel-matters in this Temple which Solomon builded; therefore, I have
made, as well as I could, by comparing Spiritual Things with Spiritual, this
Book upon this Subject.

I dare not presume to say, That I know I have hit right in every thing, but
this I can say, I have endeavored so to do. True, I have not for these things
fished in other men's Waters, my Bible and Concordance are my only Library in my
writings. Wherefore, Courteous Reader, if thou find any thing, either in
word or matter, that thou shall judge does vary from God's truth, let it be
counted no man's else but mine: Pray God also to pardon my fault; do thou also
lovingly pass it by, and receive what thou find will do thee good.

And for thy easier finding of any particular in the Book, I have in the leaves
following, set before thee the chief Heads, one by one; and also in what page
of the Book thou may find them.

Thy Servant in the Gospel, John Bunyan.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
1. WHen the Temple was builded Page 1 2. Who Built the Temple. 2 3. How the
Temple was built. 3 4. Of what the Temple was built. 5 5. Who was to fell the
Trees, and to dig the Stones with which the Temple was built. 6 6. In what
Condition the Timber and Stones were, when brought to be laid in the building
of the Temple. 9 7. Of the Foundation of the Temple. 12 8. Of the richness of
the Stones which were laid for the Foundation of the Temple. 14 9. Which way
the Face of the Front of the Temple stood. 16 10. Of the Courts of the Temple.
19 11. Of the great Brazen Altar that stood in the Inner Court of the Temple.
23 12. Of the Pillars which were before the Porch of the Temple. 26 13. Of the
height of these Pillars, that thus stood before the Porch of the Door of the
Temple. 29 14. Of the Chapiters of the Pillars of the Temple. 31 15. Of the
Pomgranates adjoining to the Nets on the Chapiters 33 16. Of the Chains that
were upon these Pillars that stood before the Temple. 35 17. Of the Lilie-work
which was upon the Chapiters, that were upon these Pillars of the Temple. 35
18. Of the Fashion of Temple. 40 19. Of the outward Glory of the Temple. 44 20.
Of the Porch of the Temple 46 21. Of the Ornaments of the Porch of the Temple.
49 22. Of the Ascent by which they went up into the Porch of the Temple. 52 23.
Of the Gate of the Porch of the Temple. 54 24. Of the Pinacles of the Temple.
57 25. Of the Porters of the Temple. 59 26. Of the Charge of the Porters of the
Temple more particularly. 61 27. Of the Doors of the Temple. 64 28. Of the
Leaves of this Gate of the Temple. 66 29. What the Doors of the Temple were
made of. 69 30. How the Doors of the Temple were adorned. 70 31. Of the Wall of
the Temple. 75 32. Of the Garnishing of the Temple with Precious Stones. 78 33.
Of the Windows of the Temple. 81 34. Of the Chambers of the Temple. 83 35. Of
the Stairs by which they w^nt up into the Chambers of the Temple. 86 36. Of the
Molten Sea which was in the Temple. 89 37. Upon what the Molten-Sea stood in
the Temple. 92 38. Of the Lavers of the Temple. 96 39. Of the Tables in the
Temple. 99 40. Of the Instruments wherewith the Sacrifices were slain, and of
the Four Tables they were laid on in the Temple. 102 41. Of the Candlesticks of
the Temple. 106 42. Of the Lamps belonging to the Candlesticks of the Temple.
109 43. Of the Shewbread on the Golden Table in the Temple. 111 44. Of the
Snuffers belonging to the Candlesticks and Lamps of the Temple. 114 45. Of the
Snuff-dishes that were with the Snuffers of the Temple. 117 46. Of the
Golden-Tongs belonging to the Temple. 121 47. Of the Altar of Incense in the
Temple. 125 48. Of the Golden Censers belonging to the Temple. 129 49. Of the
Golden Spoons of the Temple. 133 50. Of the Bowls and Basins belonging to the
Temple. 137 51. Of the Flagons and Cups of the Temple. 142 52. Of the Chargers
of the Temple. 145 53. Of the Goings out of the Temple. 148 54. Of the Singers
belonging to the Temple. 152 55. Of the Union of the Holy, and most Holy
Temple. 156 56. Of the Holiest or Inner Temple. 159 57. Of the Vail of the
Temple. 162 58. Of the Doors of the Inner Temple. 166 59. Of the Golden Nails
of the Inner Temple. 170 60. Of the Floors and Walls of the Inner Temple. 173
61. Of the Ark of the Covenant, which was placed in the Inner Temple. 178 62.
Of the Placing of the Ark in the Holiest, or Inner Temple. 185 63. Of the
Mercy-Seat, and how it was placed in the Holy Temple. 188 64. Of the Living
Waters of the Inner Temple. 192 65. Of the Chains which were in the Oracle, or
Inner Temple. 195 66. Of the High Priest, and of his Office in the
Inner Temple. 198 67. Of the High-Priest's going into the Holiest alone. 204
68. Of the High-Priest's going in thither but once a year. 206 69. Of the
Cherubims, and of their being placed over the Mercy-Seat, in the Inner Temple.
210 70. Of the Figures that were upon the Walls of the Inner Temple. 213
ERRATA.
PAge 101. line 13. for see, read go. p. 114. l. 15. leave out if. p. 157. l.
17. for invincible, r. innumerable. p. 158. l. 25, for did, read dye.

The Glory of the Temple: OR, Solomon's TEMPLE, And all the Materials thereof,
SPIRITUAIZ'D.
I. Where the Temple was Built.
THE Temple was built at Jerusalem, on Mount Moriah, in the Threshing-floor of
Arnon the Jebusite. Whereabout Abraham offered up Isaac, there where David met
the Angel of the Lord when he came with his drawn Sword in his hand, to cut off
the people at Jerusalem, for the sin which David committed in his disorderly
numbering the people. Genesis 22.3, 4, 5. 1 Chronicles. 21.15. Chap. 22.1. 2 Chronicles. 3.1.

There Abraham received his Isaac from the dead. There the Lord was entreated
by David to take away the Plague, and to return to Israel again in Mercy: from
whence also David gathered, That There Gods Temple must be built. This (said
he,) is the house of the Lord God, and this is the Altar of the Burnt-Offering
for Israel. 1 Chronicles. 21.28. Chap. 22.1. Chap. 3.1.

This Mount Moriah therefore, was a Type of the Son of God, the Mountain of the
Lords house, the Rock against which the gates of Hell cannot prevail.

II. Who built the Temple.
THe Temple was builded by Solomon, a man peaceable and quiet; and that in
Name, by Nature, and in Governing. For so God had before told David, namely,
that such a one the Builder of the Temple should be.

Behold, says he, a Son shall be born unto thee, who shall be a man of Rest;
and I will give him Rest from all his Enemies round about; for his Name shall
be called Solomon, and I will give Peace and Quietness to Israel in his days:
He shall build an house for my Name, and he shall be my Son, and I will be his
Father. 1 Chronicles. 22.9, 10. Psalm. 72.1, 2, 3, 4.

As therefore, Mount Moriah was a Type of Christ, as the Foundation: So Solomon
was a Type of Him, as the Builder of his Church. The Mount was signal, for that
thereon the Lord God before Abraham and David, did display his Mercy. And as
Solomon built this Temple, so Christ does build his House; Yea, He shall build
the Everlasting Temple, and He shall bear the Glory. Heb. 3.3, 4. Zach. 6 12,
13.

And in that Solomon was called Peaceable, it was to show with what peaceable
Doctrine and Ways Christ's House and Church should be built; Isa. 9.6. Mich.
7.2, 3, 4.

III. How the Temple was Built.
THe Temple was built, not merely by the Dictates of Solomon, though he was
wiser than Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, and all men, 1 King. 4.31.
But it was built by Rules, prescribed by, or in a written Word; and as so,
delivered to him by his Father David.

For when David gave to Solomon his Son, a charge to build the Temple of God;
with that charge, he gave him also the pattern of all in Writing; Even a
pattern of the Porch, House, Chambers, Treasuries, Parlours, etc. And of the
place for the Mercy-seat, which pattern David had of God: nor would God trust
his Memory with it. The Lord made me, said he, understand in Writing, by his
hand upon me, even all the Work of this Pattern. Thus therefore David gave to
Solomon his Son, the pattern of all; and thus Solomon his Son built the House
of God. See 1 Chronicles 28. from Verse 9. to Verse. 20.

And answerable to this, Christ Jesus the Builder of his own House, whose House
are We, does build his holy Habitation for him to dwell in; even according to
the Commandment of God the Father. For says he, I have not spoken of my self,
but the Father which sent me, He gave me a Commandment, what I should say, and
what I should speak. And hence it is said, God gave him the Revelation, and
again That he took the Book out of the hand of Him that sat on the Throne, and
so acted, as to the building up of his Church. John 12.40, 41. Rev. 1.1. chap.
5.5.

IV. Of what the Temple was built.
THe Materials with which the Temple was built, was such as were in their own
Nature common to that which was left behind. Things that naturally were not fit
without art to be laid on so holy a house. And this shows that those of whom
Christ Jesus designs to build his Church, are by Nature, no better than others:
But as the trees and stones of which the Temple was built, was first hewed and
squared before they were fit to be laid in that house; so sinners of which the
Church is to be built, must first be fitted, by the Word and Doctrine, and then
fitly laid in their place in the Church.

For though, as to Nature, there is no difference betwixt those made use of to
build Gods house with, yet by Grace they differ from others; even as those
trees and stones that are hewed and squared for building, by Art are made to
differ from those which abide in the Wood or Pit.

The Lord Jesus therefore, while he seeks Materials wherewith to build his
house, he finds them, The Clay of the same Lump that he rejects, and leaves
behind. Are we better than they? No, in no wise: Romans 3. Chap. 9. Nay, I think,
if any be best, it is they which are left behind: He came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance; Mark 2.17. And indeed, in this he does
show both the greatness of his Grace and Workmanship. His Grace, in taking
such; and his Workmanship, in that he makes them meet for his Holy Habitation.

This the current of Scripture makes manifest: wherefore it is needless now to
cite particulars: Only we must remember, that none are laid in this Building,
as they come out of the Wood or Pit: But as they first pass under the Hand and
Rule of this great Builder of the Temple of God.

V. Who was to fell those Trees, and to dig those Stones with which Solomon
built the Temple.
AS the Trees were to be felled, and Stones to be dug, so there was for that
matter, Select Workmen appointed.

These were not of the Sons of Jacob, nor of the house of Israel: they were the
Servants of Hiram King of Tire, and the Gibeonites, namely, their Children that
made a league with Joshua, in the day that God gave the land of Canaan to his
People, Josh. 9.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 1 King 5. 2 Chronicles. 27, 28.

And these were Types of our Gospel Ministers, who are the men appointed by
Jesus Christ to make Sinners by their preaching meet for the house of God.
Wherefore as he was famous of old, who was strong to lift up his Axe upon the
thick boughs, to square Wood for the building of the Temple: So a Minister of
the Gospel now, is also famous, if much used by Christ for the converting of
Sinners to himself, that he may build him a Temple with them, Psalm. 7.4, 5, 6.
Romans 16.7.

But why, may some say, do you make so homely a Comparison? I Answer, because I
believe it is true; for it is Grace, not Gifts, that makes us Sons, and the
beloved of God. Gifts make a Minister; and as a Minister, one is but a servant
to hew Wood, and draw Water for the house of my God. Yea Paul, though a Son, yet
counted himself not a Son but a Servant, purely as he was a Minister: A Servant
of God, a Servant of Christ, a Servant of the Church, and your Servant for
Jesus sake, Tit. 1.

Romans 1.1. 2 Cor. 4.5.

A man then is a Son as he is begotten and born of God to himself, and a
servant as he is gifted for work in the house of his Father: And though it is
truth, the servant may be a Son, yet he is not a Son, because he is a servant.
Nor does it follow, that because all Sons may be servants, that therefore all
servants are Sons; no, all the servants of God are not Sons; and therefore when
time shall come, he that is only a servant here, shall certainly be put out of
the house, even out of that house himself did help to build. The servant
abides not in the house for ever: The servant, that is, he that is only so.
Ezekiel. 46.16, 17. John 8.35.

So then, As a Son, thou art an Israelite; as a Servant, a Gibeonite. The
Consideration of this made Paul start; He knew that Gifts made him not a Son, 1
Cor. 12.28, 29, 30, 31. Chap. 13.1, 2.

The sum then is, A man may be a servant and a Son; a servant as he is
employed by Christ in his house for the good of others: And a Son, as he is a
partaker of the Grace of Adoption: But all servants are not sons, and let this
be for a Caution, and a Call to Ministers to do all acts of service for God,
and in his house, with Reverence and godly Fear. And with all Humility, let us
desire to be partakers our selves of that Grace we preach to others, 1 Cor.
9.25.

That is a great saying, and written, perhaps to keep Ministers humble; And
Strangers shall stand and feed your Flocks, and the Sons of the Alien shall be
your Plowmen, and your Vine-dressers, Isaiah 61.5.

To be a Plowman here, is to be a Preacher; and to be a Vine-dresser here, is
to be a Preacher. Luke 9.59, 60, 61, 62. and 1 Cor. 9.27. Matt. 2.1, 2, 3, 4,
8. Chap. 21.28. 1 Cor. 9.7.

And if he does this Work willingly, he has a Reward; if not, a Dispensation of
the Gospel is committed to him, and that is all; 1 Cor. 9.17.

VI. In what condition the Timber and Stones were, when brought to be laid in
the building of the Temple.
THe timber and stones with which the Temple was builded, was squared and hewed
at the Wood or Pit; and so there made every way fit for that Work, even before
they were brought to the place where the house should be set up. So that there
was there, neither Hammer, nor Axe, nor any Tool of Iron heard in the house
while it was in Building, 1 King 6.7.

And this shows, as was said before, that the Materials of which the House was
builded, were (before the hand of the Workman touched them) as unfit to be
laid in the building, as was those that were left behind; consequently that
themselves none otherwise but by the Art of others, were made fit to be laid in
this building.

To this our New-Testament-Temple answers. For those of the Sons of Adam, who
are counted worthy to be laid in this building, are not by Nature, but by Grace
made meet for it; not by their own Wisdom, but by the Word of God. Hence, He
says, I have hewed them by the Prophets. And again, Ministers are called Gods
Builders and Laborers, even as to this Work, Hos. 6.5. 1 Cor. 3.10. and 2 Cor.
6.1. Col. 1.28.

No man will lay Trees, as they come from the Wood, for Beams and Rafters in
his house; nor Stones, as dug in the Walls. No, the Trees must be hewed and
squared, and the Stones sawn and made fit, and so be laid in the house.

Yea, they must be SO Sawn, and SO Squared, that in coupling they may be joined
exactly; else the Building will not be good, nor the Workman have credit of his
doings.

Hence our Gospel Church, of which the Temple was a type, is said to be fitly
formed, and that there is a fit supply of every joint for the securing of the
whole, 1 Pet. 3.5. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. Chap. 4.16. Col. 2.19.

As they therefore build like Children, that build with Wood, as it comes from
the Wood or Forest; and with Stones as they come from the Pit, even so do
they, who pretend to build God an house of Unconverted Sinners, unhewed,
unsquared, unpolished. Wherefore Gods Workmen, according to Gods advice,
prepare their Work without, and make it fit for themselves in the Field, and
afterward build the house, Prove. 24.27.

Let Ministers therefore look to this, and take heed, lest instead of making
their Notions stoop to the Word, they make the Scriptures stoop to their
Notions.

VII. Of the Foundation of the Temple.
THe Foundation of the Temple is that upon which it stood, and it was twofold:
First the hill Moriah, and then those great Stones upon which it was Erected.
This Hill Moriah, as was said before, did more properly typify Christ. Hence
Moriah is called The Mountain of the house, it being the Rock on which it was
built: those great Stones called Foundation-Stones, were Types of the Prophets
and Apostles, Matt. 16.18. Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Heb. 11.10.

Wherefore, These Stones were Stones of the biggest Size, Stones of Eight
Cubits, and Stones of Ten Cubits, 1 King 7, 10.

Now as the Temple had this double Foundation: so we must consider it
respectively and distinctly. For Christ is the Foundation one way, the Prophets
and Apostles a Foundation another; Christ is the Foundation personally and
meritoriously, but the Prophets and Apostles by Doctrine Ministerially. The
Church then, which is Gods New Testament Temple, as it is said to be builded on
Christ the Foundation: SO none other is the Foundation but He, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12.
But as it is said to be Builded upon the Apostles: So it is said to have Twelve
Foundations, and must have none but they, Rev. 21.14.

What is it then? Why we must be Builded upon Christ, as he is our Priest,
Sacrifice, Prophet, King, and Advocate; and upon the other, as they are
Infallible Instructors and Preachers of him; not that any may be an Apostle
that so shall esteem of himself, nor that any other Doctrine be Administered,
but what is the Doctrine of the Twelve; for they are set forth as the chief and
last. These are also they, as Moses, which are to look over all the Building,
and to see that all in this House be done according to the Pattern showed to
them in the Mount, Exodus 39.43. John 20.21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 3.9. Chap. 4.9.

Let us then keep these distinctions clear, and not put an Apostle in the room
of Christ, nor Christ in the place of one of those Apostles. Let none but
Christ be the High Priest and Sacrifice for your Souls to God; and none but
that Doctrine which is Apostolical be to you as the Mouth of Christ for
Instruction to prepare you, and to prepare materials for this Temple of God,
and to Build them upon this Foundation.

VIII. Of the richness of the Stones which were laid for the Foundations of the
Temple.
THese Foundation Stones, as they were great, so they were costly Stones. Tho
as I said, of themselves, of no more worth then they of their nature that were
left behind. Their costliness therefore lay in those additions which they
received from the Kings charge.

First, In that labor which was bestowed upon them in Sawing, Squaring, and
Carving. For the Servants, as they were cunning at this work, so they bestowed
much of their Art and Labor upon them, by which they put them into excellent
form, and added to their Bigness, Glory and Beauty, fit for Stones upon which
so goodly a Fabric was to be builded.

Secondly, These Stones, as they were thus wrought within and without, so, as
it seems to me, they were inlaid with other Stones, more precious than
themselves. Inlaid, I say, with Stones of diverse colors. According as it is
written, I will lay thy Foundations with Saphires, Isa. 54.11. not that the
Foundations were Saphires, but they were laid, inlaid with them: or as he says
in another place, They were adorned with goodly Stones and Gifts, Luke 21.5.

This is still more Amplified, where it is written of the New Jerusalem (which
is still the New Testament-Church on Earth, and so the same in substance with
what is now) The Foundations of the Wall of the City, says he, were garnished
with all manner of precious Stones, Revel. 21.19. True, these there are called,
The Foundations of the WALL of the City, but it has respect to the matter in
hand, for that which is before called a Temple, for its comparitive smallness,
is here called a City, for, or because of its great Increase: And both the
Foundations of the Wall of the City as well as of the Temple, are the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb, Rev. 21.14.

For these Carvings and Inlayings, with all other Beautifications, were types
of the extraordinary Gifts and Graces of the Apostles. Hence the Apostle calls
such gifts, signs of Apostleship, Romans 15.19. 2 Cor. 12.21. Heb. 2.4. For as
the Foundation Stones of the Temple were thus garnished, so were the Apostles
beautified with a Call, Gifts and Graces peculiar to themselves. Hence he says,
First Apostles, for that they were first and chief in the Church of Christ, 1
Cor. 12.28.

Nor were these stones only laid for a Foundation for the Temple, the great
Court, the inner Court, as also the Porch of the Temple, had round about them
three rows of these stones for their Foundation, 1 King. 7.12.

Signifying, as it seems to me, that the more outward and External Part, as
well as that more Internal Worship to be performed to God, should be grounded
upon Apostolical Doctrine and Appointments, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11, 12. 2 These. 2.15.
Chap. 3.6. Heb. 6.1.2, 3, 4.

IX. Which way the Face or Front of the Temple stood.
1. THe Temple was Builded with its Face or Front toward the East, and that,
perhaps, because the Glory of the God of Israel was to come from the way of the
East unto it, Ezekiel. 43.1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 47.1. Wherefore in that its Front
stood toward the East, it may be to show that the true Gospel Church would
have its Eye to, and Expectation from the Lord. We look said Paul, but whither?
We have our Conversation, said he, in Heaven, from whence our Expectation is,
2. Cor. 4.18. Phil. 3.20, 21. Psalm. 62.5.

2. It was set also with its Face toward the East, to keep the People of God
from committing of Idolatry, to wit, from worshipping the Host of Heaven, and
the Sun whose rising is from the East. For since the Face of the Temple stood
toward the East, and since the worshippers were to worship at, or with their
Faces toward the Temple, it follows, that both in their going to, and
worshipping God toward that place, their Faces must be from, and their Backs
toward the Sun. The thus Building of the Temple, therefore was a Snare to
Idolators, and a proof of the Zeal of those that were the true worshippers: As
also to this day the true Gospel instituted worship of Jesus Christ is: Hence
he is said to Idolaters to be a Snare and Trap, but to the Godly a Glory, Isa.
8.14. Chap. 60.19.

3. Do but see how God caught the Idolatrous Jews by this means in their
naughtiness; And he brought me, said the Prophet, into the inner Court of the
Lords House, and beheld at the Door of the Temple of the Lord, even between the
Porch and the Altar, were about five and twenty men with their Backs toward
the Temple of the Lord, and their Faces toward the East, Ezekiel. 8.16.

It was therefore, as I said, set with its Face toward the East, to prevent
false Worships and detect Idolaters.

4. From the East also came the most Blasting Winds, Winds that are destructive
to Man and Beasts; to Fruit, and Trees; and Ships at Sea, Exo. 10.13. Job
27.21. Ezekiel. 17.10. Chap. 19.12. Psalm. 48.7. Ezekiel. 27.26.

I say, The East Wind, or that which comes from thence, is the most hurtful;
yet you see, the Temple has set her Face against it, to show that the true
Church cannot be blasted or made turn back by any Affliction. It Is not East
Winds, nor none of their blastings, that can make the Temple turn about. Hence
he says, That Jacobs Face shall not wax pale. And again, I have made thy Face
strong against their Faces, and that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. Isa. 29.22. Ezekiel. 3.8. Mat. 16.18.

5. It might be also built with its Face toward the East, to show that the
true Church looks, as before I hinted, for her Lord and King from Heaven,
knowing that at his coming he will bring healing in his Wings: for from the
East he will appear when he comes the second time without Sin unto Salvation,
of which the Sun gives us a Memento in his rising there every Morning. For as
the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the West; So shall also
the coming of the Son of Man be, Mal. 4.2. Heb. 9.28. Col. 3.3. 2 Pet. 11.12,
13, 14. Mat. 24.27.

6. Christ, as the North Pole, draws those touched with the Lodestone of his
Word, with the Face of their Souls toward him, to look for, and hasten to his
coming. And this also is signified by the Temple standing with his Face toward
the East.

X. Of the Courts of the Temple.
I perceive that there was two Courts belonging to the Temple. The first was
called the outward Court, Ezekiel. 40.17. Chap. 46.21.

1. This was that into which the People of Necessity first entered, when they
went to worship in the Temple, consequently that was it, in and by which the
People did first show their desires to be the worshippers of God. And this
Answers to those badges and signs of love to Religion, that People have in
face, or outward appearance, Matt. 23.27. 2 Cor. 10.7.

2. In this, though there may sometimes be truth, yet oftener Lies and
Dissimulation; wherefore commonly an outward appearance is set in opposition to
Faith and Truth, as the outward is in opposition to the inner Court, and
outward to the inner Man; and that is, when it is by it self, for then it
profits nothing, Romans 2.28. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 5.12.

3. Hence, though the outward Court was something to the Jews, because by
outward Bodies they were distinguished from the Gentiles; yet to us it is
little, For now he is not a Jew who is one only outwardly. Therefore all the
time of the Beasts Reign, this Court is given to be trodden under foot; for as I
said, outward show will avail nothing, when the Beast comes to turn and toss up
Professors with his Horns, Rev. 11.12.

4. But as there was an outward, so there was an inner Court, a Court that
stood nearer to the Temple, and so to the true practical part of worship, then
that outward Court did, Ezekiel. 10.13. Chap. 46.1. 1 Kings 6.36.

5. This inner Court is that which is called the Court of the Priests, because
it was it in which they boiled the Trespass-Offerings, and in which they
prepared the Sin-Offering for the People, 2 Chr. 4.9. Ezekiel. 46.20.

6. This Court therefore was the place of practice and of preparation to appear
before God, which is the first true token of a sincere and honest mind.
Wherefore here, and not in the outward Court, stood the great Brazen-Altar,
which was a type of Christ, by whom alone the true worshippers make their
approach with acceptance unto God. Also here stood the great Brazen-Scaffold,
on which the King kneeled when he Prayed for the People, a type of Christ's
Prayers for his, when he was in the world, 1 Kings 8. 2 Chro. 6.13. John 17.

7. Wherefore this Court was a type of practical worship, and so of our
Praying, Hearing, and Eating before God. There belonged to this Court several
Gates, an East, a South, and a North Gate; and when the People of the Land went
into this Court to worship, they were not to go out at that Gate by which they
came in, but out of the Gate over against it, to show that true Christians
should persevere right on, and not turn back, what ever they meet with in the
way. He that enters in by the way of the North Gate to worship, shall go out
by the way of the South Gate: And he that enters in by the way of the North
Gate, he shall not return by the way of the Gate whereby he came in, but shall
go forth over against it, Ezekiel. 46.9.

8. These Courts were places of great delight to the Jews, as both feigned and
sincere profession is to those that practice therein. Wherefore when the Jews
did enter into these, they did use to do it with Praise and Pipe; as do both
Hypocrites and sincere ones. So then, when a man shall tread in both these
Courts, and shall turn what he seems to be, into what he should be in reality;
then, and not till then, he treads them as he should. For then he makes the
outward Court, and his treading there, but a passage to that which is more
inward and sincere. But he that stays in the outward one, is but such an one
as pleases not God, for that he wants the practice of what he Professes with
his Mouth.

XI. Of the great Brazen Altar that stood in the inner Court of the Temple.
1. IN the Inner Court stood the great brazen Altar which Solomon made. This is
evident, for that when he kneeled upon the Scaffold there to Pray, he kneeled
before this Altar, see Exodus 40.6, 29. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. 2 Kings 16.14. Joel 2.17.

2. This Altar seems to be placed about the middle of this Court, over against
the Porch of the House; and between it and the Temple was the place where
Zachariah was slain. This Altar was called the Altar of burnt Offering, and
therefore it was a type of Christ in his Divinity. For Christ's Body was our
true burnt Offering, of which the bodies of the Sacrificed Beasts was a type:
now that Altar upon which his Body was offered, was his Divinity or Godhead.
For that, and that only, could bear up that offering in the whole of its
Suffering, and that therefore, and that only, was to receive the Fat, the
Glory. Hence it is said, He through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without
spot to God, Heb. 9.14.

3. For Christ is Priest, and Sacrifice, and Altar, and All. And as a Priest he
Offered, as a Sacrifice he Suffered, and as God he supported his Humanity, in
that suffering of all the pains it underwent, Gal. 1.4. Chap. 2.20. 1 Pet.
3.18. Heb. 9.14.

4. It was then Christ's Godhead, not the Tree, that was the Altar of burnt
Offering, or that by which Christ Offered himself an Offering and a Sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling Savor.

5. That it was not the Tree, is evident; for that could not Sanctify the Gift,
to wit, his Body; but Christ affirms, That the Altar Sanctifies the Gift:
And by so saying, he affirms, That the Altar on which he Offered his
Offering, was greater then the Offering it self, Mat. 23.19.

Now the Body of Christ was the Gift; for so he says, I give my Flesh for the
Life of the World, John 6.

But now, What thing is that which is greater then his Body, save the Altar,
his Divinity, on which it was Offered? The Tree then was not the Altar which
Sanctified this Gift, to make it of Virtue enough to make Reconciliation for
Iniquity, John 6.51. Chap. 17.19. Heb. 9.14. Col. 1.19, 20, 21.

Now since this Altar of burnt Offering was thus placed in the inner Court, it
teaches us several things:

First, That those that come only into the outward Court, or that rest in a
bare appearance of Christianity, do not, by so doing, come to Jesus Christ; for
this Altar stands not there. Hence John takes notice only of the Temple and
this Altar, and them that worship therein, and leaves out the outward Court,
and so them that come no further, Rev. 11.1, 2.

Secondly, This teaches us also, that we are to enter into that Temple of God,
by blood. The Altar, this Altar of burnt-offering, stood as Men went into the
Temple, they must go by it: Yea, there they must leave their offering, and so
go in and worship, even as a token that they came thither, by Sacrifice and by
Blood.

Thirdly, Upon this Altar Solomon at the dedication of the Temple, offered
thousands, both of Oxen and of Sheep; to signify surely the abundant worth,
and richness that would be in the blood of Christ to save, when it should be
shed for us. For his blood is spoken of with an how much more. For if the blood
of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, [how much more] shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
Purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. 2
Chro. 7.5, 6, 7, 8. Heb. 10.1 -- 12.

Let us then, not dare to stop, or stay in the Outward Court, for there is not
this Altar. Nor let us dare when we come into this Court, to be careless
whether we look to this Altar or no. For it is by Blood we must enter; for
without shedding of Blood is no Remission. Let us always then when we come
hither, wash our Hands in Innocence, and so compass this Holy Altar: For that
by Christ who is the Altar indeed, we are reconciled to God. This is looking to
Jesus; this is coming to God by him, of whom this Altar and the Sacrifice
thereon was a Type.

XII. Of the Pillars that were before the Porch of the Temple.
THere was diverse Pillars belonging to the Temple: But in this place we are
confined to speak of only two; Namely, Those which stood before the Temple.

These Pillars stood before the Porch, or entrance into the Temple, looking
toward the Altar, the Court, and Them that were the Worshippers there: Also
they were a Grace and a Beauty to the Front of the House.

1. These Pillars stood one on the Right Hand, and the other on the Left, at
the door of the Porch of the Temple, and they had Names given them (you may be
sure) to signify something. The Name of that on the Right Hand was called
Jachin; (God shall Establish:) And the Name of that on the Left Hand was Boaz,
(in it is strength) 1 King. 7.21. 2 Chronicles. 3.17.

2. These two Pillars were Types of Christ's Apostles, of the Apostles of
Circumcision, and of the Uncircumcision. Therefore, the Apostle Paul also
calls them Pillars, Gal. 2. And says, That that Pillar on the Right Hand was
a Type of himself, and his Companions, who were to go to the Uncircumcised and
teach the Gentiles the way of Life. When James, Cephas, and John says, He who
seemed to be PILLARS, perceived the Grace that was given unto me, They gave
unto me and Barnabas the Right Hand of Fellowship, that we should go unto the
Heathen, and they unto the Circumcision. Gal. 2.9.

So then, These two Pillars were Types of these two Orders of the Apostles in
this their diverse Service for God.

3. And that Paul and Barnabas was signified by those on the Right Hand, To
wit, To be the Apostles of the Gentiles, He shows again, where he says, I am
the Minister of Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the Grace of God, that the
Offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy
Ghost. Romans 11.13. chap. 15, 16.

4. And since the Name of this Pillar was Jachin (God shall Establish) as it
shows that Opposition shall attend it; so also, That God would bless his Word
Preached by them to the Gentiles, to the Conversion of Numbers of them, Mauger
all the Opposition of the Enemy.

5. This is further employed, for that they were made of Brass; as he says of
the Prophet, I have made thee a fenced brazen Wall, an Iron Pillar; And their
fighting against thee shall nothing at all prevail. Wherefore Paul says of
himself, I am set for the Defense of the Gospel, That the Truth thereof might
continue with you, Phil. 1.17. Gal. 2.5.

XIII. Of the Height of these Pillars, that thus stood before the Porch of the
Door of the Temple.
THE Pillars were eighteen Cubits high a piece, and that is as high, yea as
high again, as the highest Giant that ever we read of in the Word: for the
highest of which we read, was but six Cubits and a span.

True, the Bedstead of OG was nine Cubits long, but I trow, the Giant himself
was shorter, Deuteronomy. 3.11. 2 Chronicles. 3.15. But put the longest to the longest, and
set the one upon the shoulders of the other, and yet each Pillar was higher
than they.

We have now, as I know of, but few that remain of the remnant of the Giants,
and though they boast, as if they were higher than Agag, yet these Pillars are
higher than they.

These Pillars are the highest, you may equal them; and an inch above, is worth
an ell below. The height therefore of these Pillars is, to show us what high
dignity God did put upon those of his Saints, whom he did call to be Apostles
of the Lamb: For their Office and Call thereto, is the highest in the Church of
God. These Men, I say, were made thus high by their being cast in such a mould:
of that which added yet further to their height, we will speak anon: we only
speak now of the high Call, by which they, and only they were made capable of
Apostolical Authority. The Apostles were sent immediately, their Call was
extraordinary, their Office was Universal, they had alike power in all
Churches, and their Doctrine was infallible, Acts 26.16. 1 Cor. 9.1. Gal. 1.1.
1 John 1.1, 2, 3. John 2.23.

And what can our pretended Giants do, or say, in comparison of these? The
truth is, all other Men to these are dwarfs; are low, dark, weak, and beneath,
not only as to Call and Office; but also as to Gifts and Grace. This sentence,
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, drowneth all. What now are all other titles of
grandeur and greatness, when compared with this one sentence.

True, the Men were but mean in themselves, for what is Paul, or what Apollo,
or what was James or John? Yet by their Call to that Office, they were made
highest of all in the Church. Christ did raise them eighteen Cubits high, not
in conceit, for so there are many higher than they, but in Office, and Calling,
and Divine Authority.

And observe it, these stand at the door, at the entering into the Temple of
God, at which they enter that go in thither to worship God, to show that all
right worship, and that which will be acceptable to God, is by, or according to
their Doctrine.

XIV. Of the Chapiters of the Pillars of the Temple.
THere was also two Chapiters made for the Pillars of the Temple: for each,
one; and they were five Cubits high apiece. These were for the adorning of the
Pillars, and therefore were Types and Shadows of that abundance of Grace which
God did put upon the Apostles after the Resurrection of our Lord. Wherefore, as
he says here the Chapiters were upon the Pillars; so it says, that great
Grace was upon all the Apostles, Acts 4.33.

These Chapiters, had belonging to them a bowl made Pumil-fashion, and it was
placed upon the head of them, perhaps to signify their aptness to receive, and
largeness to contain of the dew of Heaven, that shadow of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which Doctrine the Apostles, as the chief, were to receive, and hold
forth to the World for their conversion. Hence, as the Bowls were capable to
receive the dew of Heaven, these are said to receive grace and Apostleship for
obedience to the faith among all Nations, for his name, Romans 1.5. 1 King. 7.16,
42. 2 Chro. 4.33. Deuteronomy. 32.1. Romans 15.29.

There was also upon these Chapiters a Network or Nets like unto Checker-work,
which still added to their luster. These Nets were they which showed for what
intent the Apostolical Office was ordained; namely, that by their preaching
they might bring many Souls to God. And hence Christ calls them Fishermen,
saying, Ye shall catch men, Matt. 4.19. Mar. 1.17. Luke 5.10. and 2 Cor. 12.16.

The World is compared, to a Sea; Men, to Fishes; and the Gospel, to a Net.
Ezekiel. 47.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Matt. 13.47, 48, 49, 50. As therefore Men catch
Fish with a Net, so the Apostles caught Men by their Word, which word, as I
told you, to me is signified by this Network, upon the top of these Pillars.
See therefore the mystery of God in these things.

XV. Of the Pomgranates adjoined to these Nets on the Chapiters.
THere was also joined to these Nets upon the top of these Pillars, Pomgranates
in abundance, four hundred for the Network: Pomgranates, you know are
beautiful to look on, pleasant to the palate, comfortable to the stomach, and
chearing by their Juice, 1 King. 7.42. Song 4.3. chap. 8.2. chap. 4.13. chap.
6.11. chap. 7.12. There was to be two rows of these Pomgranates, for one
Network, and so two rows of them for the other.

And this was to show that the Net of the Gospel is not an empty thing; but is
sufficiently baited with such varieties, as are apt to allure the world to be
catched by them. The Law is BUT a sound of words, but the Gospel is not so:
that is baited with Pomgranates; with variety of excellent things. Hence it is
called the Gospel of the Kingdom; and the Gospel of the Grace of God; because
it is, as it were, baited with Grace and Glory, that sinners may be allured,
and may be taken with it to their Eternal Salvation, Matt. 24.14. Acts 20.24.

Grace and glory, grace and glory! these are the Pomgranates with which the
word of the Gospel is baited, that sinners may be taken and saved thereby. The
argument of old was, Milk and Honey, that was, I say, the alluring bait, with
which Moses drew six hundred thousand out of Egypt, into the Wilderness of old,
Exodus 3.8. But behold we have Pomgranates, two rows of Pomgranates: grace and
a kingdom, as the bait of the holy Gospel; no wonder then, if when Men of skill
did cast this Net into the Sea, such numbers of Fish have been caught, even by
one Sermon, Acts 2. They baited their Nets with taking things, things taking to
the eye and taste.

Nets are truly instruments of Death, but the Net of the Gospel does catch to
draw from Death, wherefore this Net is contrary, Life and Immortality is
brought to light through this. No marvel then, if Men are so glad, and that for
gladness they leap like Fishes in a Net, when they see themselves caught in
this Drag of the holy Gospel of the Son of God. They are caught from Death and
Hell, caught to live with God in Glory.

XVI. Of the Chains that were upon these Pillars that stood before the Temple.
AS there were Nets to catch, and Pomgranates to bait, so there were Chains
belonging to these Chapiters on these Pillars. And he made Chains, as in the
Oracle, and put them upon the head of the Chapiters, 2 Chr. 3.16.

But what were these Chains a type of? I answer, They were (perhaps) a type of
those bonds which attend the Gospel, by which Souls taken, are tied fast to the
horns of the Altar. Gospel Grace, and Gospel Obligations, are ties and binding
things: They can hold those that are entangled by the Word. Love is strong as
death, bands of love and the cords of a Man, and Chains take hold on them that
are taken by the Gospel, Hos. 11. Song 8.6.

But this strength to bind, lies not in outward force, but in a sweet
constraint, by virtue of the displays of undeserved love. The love of Christ
constrains us: 2 Cor. 5.14. Wherefore as you find the Nets, so the Chains had
Pomgranates on them. And he made an hundred Pomgranates, and put them upon the
Chains, 2 Chr. 3.16. The Chains then had baits, as well as the Nets, to show
that the Bands of the Gospel are unresistible goodnesses: such with which men
love to be bound, and such as they pray they may be held fast by. He binds his
Foal to the Vine, his Saint unto this Savior, Genesis 49.11.

By these Chains there is therefore showed what strength there is in Gospel-
charms, if once the Adder does but hear them; never Man yet was able to resist
them, that well did know the meaning of them. They are mighty to make poor Men
obedient, and that in Word and Deed.

These Chains were such, as was in the Oracle, to show that Gospel-bonds are
strong, as the Joys of Heaven, and as the glories there, can make them Chains
as in the Oracle, as in the most holy place. It Is Heaven that binds sinners on
Earth, to the Faith and Hope of the Gospel of Christ.

XVII. Of the Lilie-work which was upon the Chapiters, that were upon these
Pillars of the Temple.
THese Pillars were also adorned with Lilie-work, as well as with Pomgranates
and Chains. The Chapiters also which were upon the top of the Pillars were of
Lilie-work: so was the work of the Pillars finished. See 1 King. 7.19, 20.

This Lilie-work is here put in on purpose, even to show us how far off those
that were to be the true Apostles of the Lamb, should be from seeking carnal
things, or of making their prevailing a stalking-horse to worldly greatness,
and that preferment. There was Lilie-work upon them: That is, they lived upon
the bounty and care of God, and was content with that glory which he had put
upon them. The Lilies, says Christ, they toil not, neither do they spin, and
yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these, Matt. 6, 28,
29. Luke 12.28, 29.

Thus therefore these Pillars show, that as the Apostles should be fitted and
qualified for their work: They should be also freed from cares and worldly
cumber, they should be content with God's providing for them, even as the
goodly Lilies are. And, as thus prepared, they were set in the front of the
House, for all Ministers to see and learn, and take example of them how to
behave themselves as to this World, in the performing of their office.

And that which gives us further light in this, is that this Lilie-work is said
by divine Institution, to be placed over against the belly, the belly of the
Pillars, a type of ours: 1 King. 7.20.

The belly is a craving thing; and these things, says the Text, were placed
over against the belly, to teach that they should not humor, but put check
unto the haveings and cravings of the belly, or to show that they need not do
it, for that he that calls to his work will himself provide for the belly. It Is
said of the Church, that her belly is as a heap of Wheat set about with Lilies,
Song 7.2. To show that she should without covetousness have sufficient, if she
would c^st all her care upon God, her great Provider; This the Apostles did,
and this is their glory to this day.

So was the work of the Pillars finished. To live Lilie-lives, it seems is the
glory of an Apostle, and the completing of their Office and Service for God.
But this is directly opposite to the belly, over against the belly, and this
makes it the harder work. But yet so living is the way to make all that is done
sweet-scented, to those that be under this care. Covetousness makes a Minister
smell frowish, and look more like a greedy Dog, than an Apostle of Jesus
Christ. Judas had none of this Lilie-work, so his name stinks to this day. He
that grows like the Lilie shall cast forth his scent like Lebanon, his branches
shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell as
Lebanon.

Thus lived Christ, first; and thus the Apostles, next; nor can any other, as
to this, live like, or be compared to them. They coveted no Man's Silver or
Gold, or Apparel. They lived like Lilies in the World, and did send forth their
scent as Lebanon.

Thus you see of whom these Pillars were a shadow, and what their height, their
Chapiters, their Bowls, their Nets, their Chains, their Pomgranates, and
their Lilie-work did signify, and how all was most sweetly answered in the
Antitipe. These were Men of the first rate, the Apostles, I mean, were such.

XVIII. Of the fashion of the Temple.
1. OF the length and breadth of the Temple, I shall say nothing: But as to the
height thereof, there methinks I see something. The Temple was higher then the
Pillars, and so is the Church then her Officers; I say, consider them singly as
Officers (though inferior as to gifts and office) for as I said before of
Ministers in general, so now I say the same of the Apostles, though as to
office they were the highest, yet the Temple is above them. Gifts and Office,
make no Men, Sons of God; as so, they are but Servants: though these were
servants of the highest form. It Is the Church as such, that is the Lady, a
Queen, the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, and Prophets, Apostles and Ministers, etc.
are but Servants, Stewards, Laborers, for her good, Psalm. 45.9. Revel. 19.7. 1
Cor. 3.5. chap. 4.1, 2.

As therefore the Lady is above the Servant, the Queen above the Steward, or
the Wife above all her Husband's Officers, so is the Church, as such, above
these Officers. The Temple was higher than the Pillars.

2. Again, as the Temple was highest; so it enlarged it self still upward: for
as it ascended in height, so it still was wider and wider: even from the lowest
Chambers, to the top.

The first Chambers were but five Cubits broad, the middle ones were six, but
the highest were seven Cubits (1 King. 6.5, 6.) the Temple therefore was round
about above, some Cubits wider then it was below: For there was an enlarging
and ascending about still upward to the side Chambers; for the winding about
was still upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the House was
still upward, and so increased from the lowest Chambers to the highest by the
midst, Ezekiel. 41.7.

And this was to show us that God's true Gospel-Temple, which is his Church,
should have its enlargedness of heart still upward, or most for Spiritual and
Eternal things; wherefore, he says, Thy heart shall fear and be enlarged; that
is, be most affected with things above, where Christ sits on the right hand
of God, Isa. 60.5. Colos. 3.2, 3. Indeed, it is the nature of Grace to enlarge
it self still upward, and to make the heart widest for the things that are
above.

The Temple therefore was narrowest downwards, to show that a little of Earth,
or this World, should serve the Church of God. And having food, and raiment,
let us be therewith content.

But now, upwards, and as to heavenly things, we are commanded to be covetous,
as to them, and after them to enlarge our selves, both by the fashion of the
Temple, as by express words, 1 King. 4.29. Isa. 60.5. Philip. 3.14. 1 Cor.
12.31. 1 Timothy 6.8. Psalm. 119.32.

Since then the Temple was widest upward, let us imitate it, and have our
conversation in Heaven. Let our eyes, our ears, our hands, and hearts, our
prayers, and groans be most for things above. Let us open our mouths, as the
ground that is chapt, does for the latter rain, for the things that are
eternal, Job 29.23. Psalm. 81.10.

Observe again, that the lowest parts of the Temple were the narrowest parts of
the Temple: So those in the Church who are nearest, or most concerned with
earth, are the most narrow spirited, as to the things of God. But now let even
such an one be taken up higher, to above, to the uppermost parts of the Temple,
and and there he will be enlarged, and have his heart stretched out. For the
Temple you see was widest upwards, the higher, the more it is enlarged. Paul
being once caught up into Paradise, could not but be there enlarged, 2 Cor. 12.

One may say of the fashion of the Temple, as some say of a lively Picture, it
speaks. I say, its form and fashion speaks, it says to all Saints, to all the
Churches of Christ, Open your hearts for Heaven, be ye enlarged upwards.

I read not in Scripture of any house, but this that was thus enlarged upwards,
nor is there any where, save only in the Church of God, that which does answer
this similitude.

All other are widest downward, and have the largest heart for earthly things:
The Church only is widest upward, and has its greatest enlargements toward
Heaven.

XIX. Of the outward glory of the Temple.
I Do also think, that as to this, there was a great expression in it. I mean,
a voice of God, a voice that teaches the New Testament Church to carry even
conviction in her outward usages, that I say might give conviction to the World
And besides, this of its enlarging upwards, there was such an outward beauty
and glory put upon it, as was aluring to beholders: The stones were curiously
carved, and excellently joined together; its outward show was white and
glittering to the dazzling of the eyes of beholders; yea, the Disciples
themselves were taken with it, 'twas so admirable to behold. Hence it is said
they came to Christ to show him the building of the Temple: Master, said they,
see what manner of stones, and what buildings are here, Matt. 24.1. Mark 13.1.
Luke 21.5.

And hence it is said that Kings, and the mighty of the earth, were taken with
the glory of it. Because of thy Temple at Jerusalem, shall kings bring presents
unto thee: as it is, Psalm. 68.29, 31.

Kings; Gentile kings, they shall be so taken with the sight of the outward
glory of it; for they were not suffered to go into it: no uncircumcised were
admitted in thither. It was therefore with the outward glory of it, with which
the beholders were thus taken.

Her enlarging upward, as that was to show us what the inward affections of
Christians should be, Col. 3.1, 2, 3. So her curious outward adorning and
beauty, was a Figure of the beauteous and holy conversation of the godly. And
it is brave when the World are made to say of the Lives and Conversations of
Saints, as they were made to say of the Stones and outward building of the
Temple, Behold what Christians, and what goodly Conversations are here! I say
it is brave, when our light so shines before men, that they seeing our good
works shall be forced to glorify our Father which is in Heaven, Matt. 5.16.

Hence this is called our adorning wherewith we adorn the Gospel, and that by
which we beautify it, Tit. 2.10.

This, I say, is taking to beholders, as was this goodly outside of the Temple.
And without this, what is to be seen in the Church of God? Her inside cannot be
seen by the World, but her outside may. Now her outside is very homely and
without all beauty, save that of a holy Life; this only is her visible
goodliness. This puts to silence the ignorance of foolish men. This allureth
others to fall in love with their own Salvation, and makes them fall in with
Christ against the Devil, and his Kingdom.

XX. Of the Porch of the Temple.
WE come next to the Porch of the Temple, that is commonly called Solomon's.

1. This Porch was in the Front of the House, and so became the common way into
the Temple, 1 King. 6.3. 2 Chronicles. 3, 4.

2. This Porch therefore was the place of reception in common for all, whether
Jews or religious Proselites, who came to Jerusalem to worship, Acts 3.11.
chap. 5.12.

3. This Porch had a Door or Gate belonging to it, but such as was seldom shut,
except in declining times, or when Men put themselves into a rage against those
better than themselves, 2 Chronicles. 29.7. Acts 21.28, 29, 30.

4. This Gate of this Porch was called Beautiful, even the beautiful gate of
the Temple, and was that at which the lame man lay, to beg for an Alms of them
that went in thither to worship, Acts 3.1, 2, 10.

Now then, since this Porch was the common place of reception for all
worshipers, and the place also where they laid the Beggars. It looks, as if it
were to be a type of the Churches bosom for Charity. Here the Proselites were
entertained, here the Beggars were relieved, and received Alms. These Gates
were seldom shut, and the Houses of Christian compassion should be always open.
This therefore beautifed this Gate, as Charity beautifies any of the Churches.
Largeness of heart, and tender compassion at the Church-door, is excellent. It
is the bond of perfectness, 1 Cor. 12. ult. chap. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 13.1, 2.
3 John 5, 6, 7. Col. 3.14.

The Church Porch to this day is a coming in for Beggars, and perhaps this
practice at first was borrowed from the Beggars lying at the Temple-gate. This
Porch was large, and so should the Charity of the Churches be. It was for
length, the breadth of the Temple, and of the same size with the Holiest of all,
1 King. 6.3. 2 Chronicles. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

The first might be to teach us, in Charity we should not be nigardly, but
according to the breadth of our ability, we should extend it to all the House,
and that in our so doing the very emblem of Heaven is upon us, of which the
Holiest was a Figure. As therefore we have opportunity, let us do good to all,
etc.

It is a fine ornament to a true Church, to have a large Church Porch, or a
wide bosom for reception of all that come thither to worship. This was
commanded to the Jews, and their glory shone when they did accordingly. And it
shall come to pass in what place the stranger sojourneth, there shall ye give
him his inheritance, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 47.23.

This Porch was as I said, not only for length, the breadth of the Temple, and
so the length and breadth of the Holiest: But it was, if I mistake not, for
height, far higher then them both. For the holy place was but thirty Cubits
high, and the most Holy but twenty: but the Porch was in height an hundred and
twenty Cubits. This beautiful Porch therefore was four times as high as was the
Temple it self; 1 King. 6.2, 20. 2 Chronicles. 3.4.

One excellent ornament therefore of this Temple was, for that it had a Porch
so high. Hence he says, This house that is high, that is so famous for height:
so high as to be seen afar off. Charity, if it be rich, runs up from the Church
like a Steeple, and will be seen afar off; I say, if it be rich, large, and
abounds. Christ's Charity was blazed abroad, 'twas so high no Man could hide
it, and the Charity of the Churches will be seen from Church to Church, yea,
and will be spoken of to their commendations in every place, if it be warm,
fervent, and high; Mark 7.36. 2 Cor. 8.24. chap. 9.2, 13, 14.

XXI. Of the Ornaments of the Porch of the Temple.
THere were three things belonging to the Porch, besides its height, that was
an Ornament unto it.

I. It was over-laid within with Gold. II. It had the Pillars adjoined unto it.
III. It was the inlet into the Temple.
First, It was over-laid with Gold. Gold oft-times was a type of grace, and
particularly of the grace of love. That in Solomon's Chariot called Gold, is
yet again mentioned by the name, Love: Song 3.9, 10. As it is in the Church,
the grace of Love, is as Gold: It Is the greatest, the richest of Graces, and
that which abides for ever; Hence they that show much love to Saints, are said
to be rich; 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. And hence Charity is called a treasure, a
treasure in the heavens, Luke 12.33, 34. Love is a golden Grace, let then the
Churches, as the Porch of the Temple was, be in-laid with love, as gold.

Secondly, It had the Pillars adjoined to it, the which, besides their
stateliness, seem to be there typically to teach example. For there was seen by
the space of four Cubits, their Lilie-work in the Porch, 1 King. 7.19.

Of their Lilie-work, I spoke before; now that they were so placed, that they
might be seen in the Porch of the House, it seems to be for example to teach
the Church, that she should live without worldly care, as did the Apostles, the
first Planters of the Church. And let Ministers do this: they are now the
Pillars of the Churches, and they stand before the Porch of the House, let them
also show their Lilie-work to the House, that the Church may learn of them to
be without carefulness, as to worldly things, and also to be rich in love, and
charity toward the brethren.

A covetous Minister is a base thing, a Pillar more symbolizing Lot's Wife,
then an holy Apostle of Jesus Christ, let them, since they stand at the door,
and since the eyes of all in the Porch are upon them, be Patterns, and Examples
of good works; 1 Timothy 6.10, 11, 12. Tit. 2.7.

Thirdly, Another Ornament unto this Porch, was, that it was an inlet into the
Temple. Charity is it which receives Orphans, that receives the poor and
afflicted into the Church; worldly love, or that which is carnal, shuts up
bowels, yea and the Church-doors too, against the poor of the Flock: wherefore
look that this kind of love be never countenanced by you. Crave that rather
which is a fruit of the Spirit.

O Churches, let your Ministers be beautified with your love, that they may
beautify you with their love, and also be an Ornament unto you, and to that
Gospel they minister to you, for Jesus Christ's sake.

XXII. Of the Ascent, by which they went up into the Porch of the Temple.
1. THis Porch also had certain steps, by which they went up into the House of
the Lord. I know not directly the number of them. Though Ezekiel speaks
something about it, Ezekiel. 40.38, 39. Hence when Men went to worship in the
Temple, they were said, To go UP into the house of the Lord, Isa. 38.22.

These steps which were the ascent to the Temple, were SO curiously set, and
also so finely wrought, that they were amazing to behold. Wherefore when the
Queen of Sheba, who came to prove Solomon's wisdom, saw the house which he had
built, and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the Lord, she had
no more spirit in her. She was by that sight quite drowned, and overcome; 1
King. 10 4, 5.

2. These steps, whether Cedar, Gold, or Stone, yet that which added to their
adornment was, the wonderment of a Queen. And whatever they were made of, to be
sure they were a shadow of those steps, which we should take to, and in the
house of God. Steps of God, Psalm. 85.13. Steps ordered by him, Psalm. 37.23.
Steps ordered in his Word, Psalm. 119.133. Steps of faith, Romans 4.12. Steps of
the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.18. Steps of truth, 3 John 4. Steps washed with butter,
Job 29.6. Steps taken before, or in the presence of God. Steps butted and
bounded by a Divine Rule. These are steps indeed.

3. There are therefore no such steps as these to be found any where in the
World. A step to honor, a step to riches, a step to worldly glory, these are
every where; but what are these to the steps by which Men do ascend, or go up
to the House of the Lord?

He then that enters into the House of the Lord, is an ascending man; as it is
faid of Moses, he went UP into the Mount to God. It is ascending, to go into
the House of God. The World believe not this, they think it is going downward to
go up to the house of God, but they are in a horrible mistake.

The steps then by which Men went up into the Temple, are, and ought to be
opposed to those which Men take to their lusts and empty glories. Hence such
steps are said, not only to decline from God, but to take hold of the path to
death, and hell, Psalm. 44.18. Prove. 2.18. chap. 55. chap. 7.25, 26, 27.

The steps then by which Men went up to the House of the Lord, were
significative of those steps which Men take, when they go to God, to Heaven,
and Glory, for these steps were the way to God, to God in his holy Temple.

But how few are there, that as the Queen of the South, are taken with these
goodly steps? Do not most rather seek to push away our feet from taking hold of
the Path of Life, or else lay snares for us in the way? But all these
notwithstanding, the Lord guide us in the way of his steps, they are goodly
steps, they are the best.

XXIII. Of the Gate of the Porch of the Temple.
1. THE Porch, at which was an ascent to the Temple, had a Gate belonging to
it. This Gate, according to the Prophet Ezekiel, was six Cubits wide. The
Leaves of this Gate was double, one folding this way, the other folding that;
Ezekiel. 40.48.

Now here some may object, and say, Since the way to God by these doors were so
wide, why does Christ say the way and gate is narrow?

Answer, The straightness, the narrowness, must not be understood of the Gate
simply, but because of that cumber that some Men carry with them, that pretend
to be going to Heaven. Six Cubits! What is sixteen Cubits to him who would
enter in here with all the World on his back? The young Man in the Gospel, who
made such a noise for Heaven, might have gone in easy enough; for in six
Cubits breadth there is room, but poor Man, he was not for going in thither,
unless he might carry in his Houses upon his shoulder too, and now the Gate was
strait: Mark 10.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Wherefore he that will enter in at the Gate of Heaven, of which this Gate into
the Temple was a type, must go in by himself, and not with his bundles of trash
on his back, and if he will go in thus, he need not fear, there is room. The
righteous Nation that keeps the truth, they shall enter in; Isa. 26.2.

2. They that enter in at the Gate of the inner Court must be clothed in fine
Linen, how then shall they go into the Temple, that carry the clogs of the
dirt of this World at their heels. Thus says the Lord, No stranger
uncircumcised in heart, or uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my
Sanctuary; Ezekiel. 44.9.

3. The wideness therefore of this Gate is for this cause here made mention of,
to wit, to encourage them that would gladly enter thereat, according to the
mind of God, and not to flatter them that are not for leaving of all for God.

4. Wherefore let such as would go in remember that here is room, even a Gate
to enter in at, six Cubits wide. We have been all this while but on the
outside of the Temple, even in the Courts of the House of the Lord, to see the
beauty and glory that is there. The beauty hereof made Men cry out, and say,
How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs, yea faints
for the Courts of the Lord; and to say, A day in thy Courts is better then a
thousand; Psalm. 84.1, 2, etc.

XXIV. Of the Pinacles of the Temple.
1. THere was also several Pinacles belonging to the Temple. These Pinacles
stood on the top aloft, in the air, and were sharp, and so difficult to stand
upon: what men say of their number and length, I wave, and come directly to
their signification.

2. I therefore take those Pinacles to be types of those lofty, airy Notions,
with which some Men delight themselves, while they hover like Birds, above the
solid and godly truths of Christ. Satan attempted to entertain Christ Jesus
with this type, and antitype, at once, when he set him on one of the Pinacles
of the Temple, and offered to thrust him upon a false confidence in God, by a
false and unsound interpretation of a Text, Matt. 4.5, 6. Luke 4 9, 10, 11.

3. You have some men cannot be content to worship IN the Temple, but must be
aloft, no Place will serve them, but Pinacles, Pinacles; that they may be
speaking in and to the air, that they may be promoting their heady Notions,
instead of solid truth; not considering that now they are where the Devil would
have them be, they strut upon their points, their Pinacles, but let them look
to it, there is difficult standing upon pinacles, their Neck, their Soul, is in
danger. We read, God is IN his Temple, not upon those Pinacles, Psalm. 11.4.
Hab: 2.20.

4. It Is true, Christ was once upon one of these, but the Devil set him there,
with intent to have dashed him in pieces by a fall, and yet even then told him,
if he would venture to tumble down, he should be kept from dashing his foot
against a stone. To be there, therefore, was one of Christ's temptations,
consequently one of Satan's stratagems, nor went he thither of his own accord,
for he knew that there was danger, he loved not to clamber Pinacles.

5. This should teach Christians to be low, and little in their own eyes, and
to forbear to intrude into airy and vain speculations, and to take heed of
being puffed up with a foul and empty mind.

XXV. Of the Porters of the Temple.
1. THere were Porters belonging to the Temple. In David's time their number
was four thousand Men: 1 Chronicles. 23 5.

2. The Porters were of the Levites, and their work was to watch at every Gate
of the house of the Lord. At the Gate of the outward Court, at the Gates of the
inner Court, and at the Door of the Temple of the Lord, 2 Chro. 35.15.

3. The work of the Porters, or rather the reason of their watching, was to
look that none not duly qualified, entered into the House of the Lord. He set,
says the Text, Porters at the Gates of the house of the Lord, that none which
was unclean in any thing should enter in, 2 Chro. 23.19.

4. The excellency of the Porters, lay in these three things; their
watchfulness, diligence, and valor, to make resistance to those that as unfit
would attempt to enter those Courts, and the house of God, 1 Chronicles. 26.6. Mark
13.34.

5. These Porters were types of our Gospel Ministers, as they are set to be
Watchmen in and over the Church, and the holy things of God. Therefore as
Christ gives to every Man in the Church his work, so he commands the Porter to
watch, Isa. 21.11. Ezekiel. 3.17. Chap. 33.7. Acts 20.17, 28, 29, 30, 31. 2 Timothy
4.5. Revel. 3.2, 3.

6. Sometimes every awakened Christian, is said to be a Porter, and such at
Christ's first knock open unto him immediately, Luke 12.36, 37, 38, 39.

7. The heart of a Christian is also sometimes called the Porter, for that when
the true Shepherd comes to it, to him, it, this Porter, opens also, Joh. 10 3.

8. This last has the Body for his Watch-house, the Eyes, and Ears, for his
Port-holes: the Tongue therewith to cry, Who comes there? as also to call for
aid, when any thing unclean shall attempt with force and violence to enter in,
to defile the house.

XXVI. Of the charge of the Porters of the Temple more particularly.
1. THE charge of the Porters was to keep their Watch in apiece, even
round about the Temple of God. Thus it was ordained by David; before him by
Moses, and after him by Solomon his Son, 1 Chronicles. 9.24. Numb. 3. 2 Chro. 23.19.
chap. 35.15.

2. The Porters had, some of them, the charge of the Treasure-chambers, some of
them had the charge of the ministering Vessels; even to bring them in and out by
tale. Also the opening and shutting of the Gates of the house of the Lord, was
a part of their Calling and Office.

1. I told you the Porters were types of our Gospel Ministers, as they are
Watchmen, in, and over the house of God; and therefore in that they were thus
to watch round about the Temple, What is it, but to show, how diligent Satan
is, to see if he may get in somewhere, by some means to defile the Church of
God. He goes round and round, and round us, to see if he can find a Hog-hole
for that purpose.

2. This also shows that the Church of it self, without its Watchmen, is a
weak, feeble, and very helpless thing; What can the Lady, or Mistress do, to
defend her self against Thieves, and sturdy Villains, if there be none but she
at home? It Is said when the Shepherd is smitten, the sheep shall be scattered.
What could the Temple do without its Watchmen?

3. Again, in that the Porters had charge of the Treasure chambers (as it is, 1
Chro. 9.26) It is to intimate, that the Treasures of the Gospel are with the
Ministers of our God; and that the Church next to Christ, should seek them at
their mouth. We have this Treasure in earthen Vess^ls; says Paul, and they are
stewards of the manifold mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor. 4.7. 1 Pet. 4.10.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

4. These are God's true Scribes, and bring out of their Treasury things new
and old: or as he says in another place, At our Gates, that is, where our
Porters watch, are all manner of pleasant fruit, which I have laid up for thee,
O my beloved; Mat. 13.52. Song 7.13.

5. Further, some of them had charge of the ministering Vessels, and they were
to bring them in and out by tale, 1 Chro. 9.28.

1. If by ministering Vessels you understand Gospel Ordinances, then you see who
has the charge of them, to wit, the Watch men and Ministers of the Word; Luke
1.12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. 2 Timothy 2.2.

2. If by ministering Vessels, you mean the Members of the Church, for they are
also ministering Vessels, then you see who has the care of them, to wit, the
Pastors, the Gospel Ministers. Therefore obey them that have the rule over you,
for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may
do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you; Romans
9.23, 13, 17.

3. The opening of the Gates did also belong to the Porters, to show that the
power of the Keys, to wit, of opening and shutting, of letting in and keeping
out of the Church, does ministerially belong to these Watchmen, Matt. 16.19.
Heb. 12.15.

4. The Conclusion is, Then let the Churches love their Pastors, hear their
Pastors, be ruled by their Pastors, and suffer themselves to be watched over,
and to be exhorted, counseled, and if need be, reproved, and rebuked by their
Pastors. And let the Ministers not sleep, but be watchful, and look to the
Ordinances, to the Souls of the Saints, and the Gates of the Churches.
Watchman, Watchman, watch.

XXVII. Of the Doors of the Temple.
NOW we are come to the Gate of the Temple; namely to that which let out of the
Porch into the holy place.

1. These Doors or Gates were folding, and they opened by degrees. First a
quarter, then a half, after that three quarters, and last of all the whole.
These Doors also hanged upon Hinges of Gold, and upon Posts made of the goodly
Olive Tree: 1 King. 6.33, 34. Ezekiel. 41.23, 24.

2. These Doors did represent Christ, as he is the way to the Father, as also
did the Door of the Tabernacle, at which the People were wont to stand, when
they went to enquire of God. Wherefore Christ says, I am the door, (alluding
to this) by me if any man enter he shall be saved, and shall go in and out and
find pasture; Exodus 33.9, 10. Chap. 38.8. Chap. 40.12. Levit. 1.3, 4. Chap.
8.3, 4, 13: Chap. 15.14. Numb, 6.13, 18. Chap. 10.3. Chap. 25.6. Chap. 27.2. 1 Samuel 2.22. Joh. 10 9.

1. I am the Door. The Door into the Court, the Door into the Porch, the Door
into the Temple, the Door into the Holiest, the Door to the Father. But now we
are at the Door of the Temple.

2. And observe it, this Door by Solomon was not measured, as the Door of the
Porch was: for though the Door into the Court, and the Door into the Porch were
measured, to show that the right to Ordinances, and the inlet into the Church,
is to be according to a prescript Rule, yet this Door was not measured; to show
that Christ, as he is the inlet to saving grace, is beyond all measure, and
unsearchable. Hence his grace is called unsearchable riches, and that above all
we can ask or think, for that it passes knowledge: Ephesians. 3.8, 19, 20.

3. It is therefore convenient that we put a note upon this, that we may
distinguish rule and duty, from grace and pardoning mercy; for, as I said, though
Christ, as the Door to outward Privileges, is set forth by rule and measure:
yet, as he is the Door to grace, and favor, never creature, as yet, did see
the length and breadth of him, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19.

4. Therefore, I say, this Gate was not measured, for what should a rule do
here, where things are beyond all measure?

5. This Gate being also to open by degrees, is of signification to us, for
'twill be opening first, by one Fould, then by another, and yet will never be
set wide, wide open, until the Day of Judgment. For then, and not till then,
will the whole of the matter be open. For now we see through a Glass darkly, but
then face to face; now we know in part, but then shall we know even as we are
known, 1 Cor. 13.12.

XXVIII. Of the Leaves of this Gate of the Temple.
THE Leaves of this Gate or Door, as I told you before, were folding, and so,
as was hinted, has something of signification in them. For by this means, a
Man, especially a young Disciple, may easily be mistaken; thinking that the
whole passage, when yet but a part was open, whereas three parts might be yet
kept undiscovered to him. For these Doors, as I said before, were never yet set
wide open, I mean in the antitype; never man yet saw all the riches, and
fullness which is in Christ. So that, I say, a new comer, if he judged by
present sight, especially if he saw but little, might easily be mistaken,
wherefore such for the most part are most horribly afraid, that they shall
never get in thereat.

How say thou, young comer, is not this the case with thy Soul? So it seems
to thee that thou art too big, being so great, so Tun-bellied a sinner. But O
thou sinner, fear not, the Doors are folding-doors, and may be opened wider,
and wider again after that; wherefore when thou come to this Gate, and
imaginest there is not space enough for thee to enter, Knock and it shall be
wider opened unto thee, and thou shall be received, Luke 11.9. Joh. 9.37. So
then, whoever thou art, that art come to the Door, of which the Temple-door was
a type, trust not to thy first conceptions of things, but believe there is
grace abundance: Thou know not yet what Christ can do, the Doors are
folding-doors. He can do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think:
Ephesians. 3.20.

The Hinges, on which these Doors do hang, were, as I told you, Gold, to
signify that they both turned upon motives, and motions of love, and also that
the openings thereof were rich. Golden Hinges the Gate to God does turn upon.

The Posts on which these Doors did hang, were of the Olive Tree, that fat and
oily Tree; to show that they do never open with lothness, or sluggishness, as
Doors do, whose Hinges wants Oil. They are always Oily, and so open easily
and quickly to those who knock at them: Hence you read, that he that dwells in
this House, gives freely, loves freely, and does us good with all his heart.
Yea, says he, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them
in this Land assuredly with my whole heart, and with my whole soul; Jer. 3.12,
14, 22. Jer. 32.41. Revel. 21.6. Chap. 22.17.

Wherefore the Oil of Grace, signified by this Oily Tree, or these Olive-posts,
on which these Doors do hang, do cause that they open glibly, or frankly to the
Soul.

XXIX. What the Doors of the Temple were made of.
1. THE Doors of the Temple were made of Firr, that is so sweet-scented, and
pleasant to the smell: 1 King. 6.34.

2. Mankind is also often compared to the Firr-tree, as Isa. 41.19. Chap.
55.13. Chap. 60.17. and Chap. 14.8.

3. Now since the Doors of the Temple were made of the same, does it not show,
that the way into God's house, and into his favor, is by the same nature which
they are of, that thither enter, even through the vail, his flesh? (Heb. 10.)
For this Door, I mean the Antitype, does even say of himself, I am as a green
Fir Tree, from me is thy fruit found, Hos. 14.8.

4. This Fir Tree is Christ, Christ as man, and so as the way to the Father.
The Doors of the Temple are also as you see here, made of the Fir Tree: even of
that Tree which was a type of the Humanity of Jesus Christ. Consider, Heb. 2.14.

5. The Fir Tree is also the house of the Stork, that unclean Bird, even as
Christ is a harbor and shelter for Sinners. As for the Stork, says the Text,
the FIR TREE is her house; and Christ says to the Sinners, that see their want
of shelter, Come unto me, and I will give you rest. He is a refuge for the
oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble, Deuteronomy. 14.18. Levit. 11.19. Psalm.
104.17. Psalm. 84.2, 3. Matt. 11.27, 28. Heb. 6.17, 18, 19, 20.

He is, as the Doors of Firr of the Temple, the inlet to God's House, to God's
presence, and to a partaking of his Glory. Thus God did of old by similitudes
teach his People his way.

XXX. How the Doors of the Temple were adorned.
AND Solomon carved upon the Doors Cherubims, Palm Trees, and open Flowers, and
overlaid them all with Gold, 1 King. 6.35. Ezekiel. 41.15.

He carved Cherubims thereon; These Cherubims were Figures, or Types of Angels,
and for as much as they were carved here upon the Door, it was to show,

First, What delight the Angels take in waiting upon the Lord, and in going at
his bidding, at his beck. They are always waiting like Servants at the Door of
their Lord's house.

Secondly, It may be also to show how much pleased they are to be where they
may see sinners come to God. For there is joy in the presence of the Angels of
God over one sinner that repents and comes to God by Christ for mercy, Luke
15.10.

Thirdly, They may be also placed here to behold with what reverence, or
irreverence, those that come hither to worship, do behave themselves. Hence
Solomon cautions those that come to God's House to worship, that they take heed
to their feet, because of the Angels. Paul also says, Women must take heed that
they behave themselves in the Church as they should, and that because of the
Angels; Eccles. 5.1, 2, 6. 1 Cor. 11.10.

Fourthly, They may also be carved upon the Temple Doors, to show us how ready
they are, so soon as any poor Creature comes to Christ for life, to take the
care and charge of its conduct through this miserable World: Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for those which shall be heirs of
salvation? Heb. 1.14.

Fifthly, They may also be carved here, to show that they are ready at Christ's
command, to take vengeance for him, upon those that despise his People, and
hate his Person. Hence he bids the world take heed what they do to his little
ones, for their Angels behold the face of their father which is in heaven, and
are ready at the Door to run at his bidding, Matt. 18.10.

Sixthly, Or Lastly, They may be carved upon these Doors, to show that Christ
Jesus is the very Supporter and Upholder of Angels, as well as the Savior of
sinful Man: For, as he is before all things, so by him all things consist;
Angels stand by Christ, Men are saved by Christ, and therefore the very
Cherubims themselves, were carved upon these Doors, to show they are upheld,
and subsist by him, 1 Cor. 8.6. Col. 1.17. Heb. 1.3.

Secondly, Again, as the Cherubims are carved here, so there were Palm Trees
carved here also. The Palm Tree is upright, it twisteth not it self awry; Jer.
10.5.

1. Apply this to Christ, and then it shows us the uprightness of his heart,
word, and ways with sinners. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will be
teach sinners in the way, in at the Door to Life; Psalm. 25.8. Psalm. 92.15.

2. The Palm or Palm Tree is also a token of victory, and as placed here, it
betokens the conquest that Christ the Door should get over Sin, Death, the
Devil, and Hell, for us; Romans 7.24. chap. 8.37. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56. Revel.
7.9, 10, 11.

3. If we apply the Palm Tree to the Church, as we may; For she also is
compared thereto, Song 7.8, 9, 10. Then the Palm Tree may be carved here, to
show, That none but such as are upright of heart and life, shall dwell in the
presence of God. The hypocrite, says Job, shall not come before him. The
upright, says David, shall dwell in thy presence, Job 13.16. Psalm. 24.3, 4.

They are they that are clothed in white Robes, which signifies uprightness of
life, that stand before the Lamb with Palms in their hands; Revel. 7.9.

Thirdly, There was also carved upon these Doors open Flowers. And that to
teach us that here is the sweet scent and fragrant smell, and that the coming
Soul will find it so in Christ, this Door. I am, says he, the Rose of Sharon,
and the Lily of the Valleys; And again, * His Cheeks are as Beds of Spices and
several Flowers, his Lips like Lilies drop sweet smelling myrrh, Song 2.1.
chap. 5.13.

Open Flowers: Open Flowers are the sweetest, because full grown, and because,
as such, they yield their fragrancy most freely. Wherefore, when he says, upon
the Doors are open Flowers, he sets Christ Jesus forth in his good favors,
as high as by such similitudes he could. And that both in Name and Office. For
open Flowers, lay, by their thus opening themselves before us, all their beauty
also most plainly before our Faces. There are varieties of beauty in open
Flowers, the which they also commend to all observers. Now upon these Doors,
you see are open Flowers, Flowers ripe, and spread before us, to show that his
Name and Offices are savory to them, that by him do enter his house to God his
Father, Song 1.1, 2, 3, 4.

All these were over-laid with fine gold. Gold is most rich of all Metals, and
here it is said the Doors, the Cherubims, the Palm trees, and open Flowers, were
overlaid therewith. And this shows that as these things are rich in themselves,
even so they should be to us.

We have a Golden Door to go to God by, and golden Angels to conduct us through
the World: we have golden Palm Trees, as tokens of our victory, and golden
Flowers to smell on all the way to Heaven.

XXXI. Of the Wall of the Temple.
THE Wall of the Temple was cieled with Firr, which he over-laid with fine
gold: and set thereon Palm Trees, and Chains; 2 Chro. 3.5, 6, 7.

The Walls were as the Body of the House, unto which Christ alluded, when he
said, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up, Joh. 2.19, 21.

Hence to be, and worship in the Temple, was a type of being in Christ and
worshipping God by him. For Christ, as was said, is the great Temple of God, in
the which all the Elect meet, and in whom they do service to, and for his
Father.

Hence again, the true Worshipers are said to be in him, to speak in him, to
walk in him, to obey in him: (2 Cor. 2.14. chap. 12.19. Col. 2.6.) For as of
old all true Worship was to be found at the Temple, To now it is only found
with Christ and with them that are in him. The promise of old was made to them
that worshipped within these Walls. I will give, says he, to them in my house,
and within my walls, (to them that worship there in truth) a place, and a name,
better then that of Sons and of Daughters, Isa. 5.6, 5.

But now in New Testament times, all the promises in HIM are yea, and in HIM
Amen, to the glory of God by us; 2 Cor. ^.20.

This is yet further hinted to us, in that it is said these Walls are cieled
with Firr; Which, as was showed before, was a figure of the humanity of Jesus
Christ.

A Wall is for defense, and so is the humanity of Jesus Christ. It Is, was, and
will be our defense for ever. For it was that which underwent, and overcame the
curse of the Law, and that in which our everlasting righteousness is found. Had
he not in that interposed, we had perished for ever. Hence we are said to be
reconciled to God in the body of his flesh through death, Col. 1.19, 20. Romans
5.8, 9, 10.

Now this Wall was overlaid with fine gold, Gold here is a figure of the
righteousness of Christ, by which we are justified in the fight of God.
Therefore you read that his Church as justified, is said to stand at his right
hand in Cloth of Gold. Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in Gold of
Ophir. And again, her clothing is of wrought gold, Psalm. 45.9, 13. This the
Wall was overlaid with, this the body of Christ was filled with. Men, while in
the Temple, were clothed with Gold, even with the gold of the Temple: and Men
in Christ are clothed with righteousness, the righteousness of Christ.
Wherefore this Consideration does yet more illustrate the matter.

In that the Palm Trees were SET on this Wall, it may be to show, that the
Elect are fixed in Jesus, and so shall abide for ever.

Chains were also carved on these walls, yea, and they were golden Chains;
there were Chains on the Pillars; and now also we find Chains upon the Walls,
Philip. 1.12, 13.

1. Chains were used to hold one Captive, and such Paul did wear at Rome, but
he calls them his Bands in Christ.

2. Chains sometimes signify great afflictions, which God lays on us for our
sins, Psalm. 107.9, 10, 11. Lam. 1.14. chap. 3.7.

3. Chains also may be more mystically understood, as of those Obligations
which the love of God lays upon us, to do and suffer for him, Acts 20.22.

4. Chains do sometimes signify beauty and comely Ornaments; Thy Neck, says
Christ to his Spouse, is comely with Chains of Gold: And again, I put Bracelets
upon thy hands, and a Chain about thy Neck; Song 1.10. Ezekiel. 16.8, 9, 10, 11.
Prove. 1.9.

5. Chains also do sometimes denote Greatness and Honor, such as Daniel had,
when the King made him the Third Ruler in the Kingdom, Dan. 5.7, 16, 29.

Now all these are Temple-chains, and are put upon us for good, some to prevent
our ruin, some to dispose our minds the better, and some to dignifie, and to
make us noble. Temple-chains are brave Chains. None but Temple-worshipers must
wear Temple-chains.

XXXII. Of the garnishing of the Temple with precious Stones.
AND he garnished the House with precious Stones for beauty; 2 Chronicles. 3.6, 7.

1. This is an other Ornament to the Temple of the Lord; wherefore as he says,
it was garnished with them; he says, It was garnished with them, for beauty.
The Line says garnished, the Margent says, covered.

2. Wherefore, I think, they were fixed as Stars, or as the Stars in the
Firmament, so they were set in the cieling of the House, as in the Heaven of
the holy Temple.

3. And thus fixed, they do the more aptly tell us, of what they were a figure,
namely, of the Ministerial Gifts, and Officers in the Church. For Ministers, as
to their Gifts and Office, are called STARS of God, and are said to be in the
hand of Christ, Revel. 1.20.

4. Wherefore, as the Stars glitter, and twinkle in the Firmament of Heaven: So
do true Ministers in the Firmament of his Church; 1 Chro. 29.2. Joh. 5.35. Dan.
12.3.

5. So that it is said again, these Gifts come down from above, as signifying
they distill their dew from above: And hence again, the Ministers are said to
be set OVER us in the Lord, as placed in the Firmament of his Heaven to give a
light upon his Earth. There is Gold, and a multitude of rubies, but the lips of
knowledge are a precious Jewel, Prove. 20 15.

Verily it is enough to make a Man in this house, look always upward: since the
cieling above head does thus glitter with precious Stones.

Precious Stones, all manner of precious Stones; Stones of all colors: For
there are diverse gifts, differences of administrations, and diversities of
operations: but it is the same God which works all in all; 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6.

Thus had the cieling of this house a Pearl, here; and there, a Diamond; here a
Jasper, and there a Sapphire; here a Sardius, and there a Jacinth; here a
Sardonix, and there an Amathist. For to one is given by the Spirit the Word of
Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge; to one the gift of healing, to
another faith; to this man to work miracles, to that a spirit of prophecy; to
another the discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues, 1 Cor.
12.8, 9, 10, 11.

He also over-laid the House, Beams, Posts, Walls, Doors, etc. and all with
Gold. O what a beautiful House the Temple was, how full of glory was it! And
yet all was but a shadow, a shadow of things to come, and which was to be
answered in the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, by
better things than these.

XXXIII. Of the Windows of the Temple.
AND for the House, he made Windows of narrow Lights, 1 King. 6.4. There was
Windows for this House, Windows for the Chambers, and Windows round about;
Ezekiel. 4.16, 22, 23, 24, 25, 29, 33, 36.

These Windows were of several sizes, but all narrow, narrow without, but wide
within, they also were finely wrought, and beautified with goodly stones; Isa.
54.14.

1. Windows, as they are to an house, an ornament, so also to it they are a
benefit. Truly the light is good, and a pleasant thing it is for the eye to
behold the Sun; Eccles. 11.7. The Window is that which Christ looks forth at,
the Window is that which the Sun looks in at; Song 2.9.

2. By the light which shines in at the Window, we also see to make, and keep
the House clean, and also to do what business is necessary there to be done. In
thy light we see light; light to do our duty, and that both to God and Man.

3. These Windows therefore were figures of the written Word, by and thorough
which Christ shows himself to his, and by which we also apprehend him. And
hence the Word of God is compared to a Glass, thorough which the light does
come, and by which we see not only the beams of the Sun, but our own Smutches
also, 2 Chronicles. 3.18. Jam. 1.23, 24, 25.

4. The Lights indeed were narrow, wherefore we see also through their antitype
but darkly, and imperfectly. Now we see through a glass darkly, or as in a
riddle, now we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12.

5. Their Windows and their light are but of little service to those that are
without; The World sees but little of the beauty of the Church by the light of
the written Word, though the Church by that light can see the dismal state of
the World, and also how to avoid it.

XXXIV. Of the Chambers of the Temple.
IN the Temple Solomon made Chambers, 1 King. 6.5.

1. The Chambers were of several sizes; some little, some large; some higher,
some lower; some more inward, and some outward.

2. These Chambers were for several services, some were for rests, some to hide
in, some to lay up treasure in, and some for solace and delight; 2 Chro. 3.9.
Ezekiel. 40.7. Chap. 41.5, 9, 44. 2 Chro. 31.11, 12. 2 King. 11.1, 2, 3. Ezra 8.29.

1. They were for resting places. Here the Priests and Porters were wont to
lodge. 2. They were for hiding places. Here Jehoshebath hid Joash from Athaliah
the term of six years. 3. They were also to lay the Temple-Treasure, or
dedicated things in, that they might be safely kept there for the Worshippers.
4. And some of them were for solace and delight; and I must add, some for
durable habitation. Wherefore in some of them, some dwelt always, yea their
Names dwelled there when they were dead.
1. Those of them which were for rest, were types of that rest, which by faith
we have in the Son of God, Matt. 11. and of that Eternal rest which we shall
have in Heaven by him; Heb. 4.3.

2. Those Chambers which were for hiding, and security, were types of that
safety which we have in Christ from the rage of the World; Isa. 26.20.

3. Those Chambers which were for the reception of the Treasures, and dedicated
things, were types of Christ, as he is the common storehouse of believers. For
it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, and of his fullness
we all receive, and grace for grace; John 1.16. Col. 1.19.

4. Those Chambers that were for solace and delight, were types of those
retirements, and secret meetings of Christ with the Soul, where he gives it his
embraces, and delights her with his bosom and ravishing delights. He brought
me, said she, into his Chambers, into the Chamber of her which conceived me;
and there he gave her his love; Song 1.4. Chap. 3.4.

5. The Chambers which were for durable dwelling-places, were types of those
Eternal dwelling-places, which are in the Heavens, prepared of Christ and the
Father, for them that shall be saved; Joh. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

This it is to dwell on high, and to be safe from fear of evil. Here therefore
you see are Chambers for rest; Chambers for safety, Chambers for Treasure,
Chambers for Solace, and Chambers for durable Habitations. O the rest and peace
that the Chambers of God's high house will yield to its Inhabitants in another
World. Here they will rest from their labors, rest upon their beds, rest with
God, rest from sin, temptation, and all sorrow; Revel. 14.13. Isa. 57.1, 2. 2
These. 1.7.

God therefore then shall wipe all tears from our eyes, even when he comes out
of his Chambers as a Bridegroom, to fetch his Bride, his Wife, unto him
thither, to the end they may have Eternal solace together.

O these are far better then the Chambers of the South.

XXXV. Of the Stairs, by which they went up into the Chambers of the Temple.
THere was Stairs, by which Men went up into these Chambers of the Temple, and
they were but one pair, and they went from below to the first, and so to the
middle, and thence to the highest Chambers in the Temple; 1 King. 6.8. Ezekiel.
41.7.

1. These Stairs were winding, so that they turned about that did go up them.
So then, he that assayed to go into these Chambers, must turn with the Stairs,
or he could not go up, no, not into the lowest Chambers.

2. These Stairs therefore were a type of a twofold repentance. That by which
we turn from nature to grace, and that by which we turn from the imperfections
which attend a state of grace, to glory. Hence true repentance, or the right
going up these turning Stairs, is called repentance to salvation; for true
repentance stopeth not at the reception of grace, for that is but a going up
these Stairs to the middle Chambers, 2 Cor. 7.10.

Thus therefore the Soul, as it goes up these Stairs, turns and turns, till it
enters the Doors of the highest Chambers.

It groans, though in a state of grace, 'cause that is not the state of glory. I
count then that from the first to the middle Chambers, may be a type of turning
from nature to grace. but from the middle to the highest, these Stairs may
signify a turning still from the imperfections and temptations that attend a
state of grace, to that of immortality and glory; 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9.

For as there are turning Stairs, from the lowest to the middle Chambers, so
the Stairs from thence still turn, and so will do, till you come to the highest
Chambers. I do not say that they that have received grace, do repent they
received grace; but I say, they that have received grace, are yet sorry that
grace is not consummate in glory. And hence they are for going up thither still
these turning Stairs; yea, they cannot rest below, as they would, till they
ascend to the highest Chambers. O wretched man that I am; and in this we groan
earnestly, is the language of gracious Souls; Romans 7.20. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3.

True, every one does not do thus, that comes into the Temple of God, many rest
below Stairs, they like not to go turning upward. Nor do I believe that all
that bid fair for ascending to the middle Chambers, get up to the highest
stories, to his Stories in the Heavens: Many in Churches, who seem to be turned
from nature to grace, have not the grace to go up turning still, but rest in
that show of things, and so die below a share in the highest Chambers.

All these things are true in the Antitype, and, as I think, prefigured by
these turning stairs, to the Chambers of the Temple. But this turning, and
turning still, displeases some much, they say it makes them giddy: but I say
there is no way like this, to make a Man stand steady: steadfast in the faith,
and with boldness in the day of Judgment. For he has this seated in his heart,
I went up by the turning Stairs, till I came to the highest Chambers. A strait
pair of Stairs, are like that Ladder by which Men ascend to the Gallows, they
are the turning ones, that lead us to the heavenly Mansion-houses. Look
therefore, you that come into the Temple of God to worship, that you stay not
at the foot of these turning Stairs, but go up thence; yea, up them, and up
them, and up them, till you come to the view of the Heavens; yea, till you are
possessed of the highest Chambers. How many times has God by the Scripture called
upon you to TVRN, and told you you must Turn or Die: and now here he has added
to his Call, a Figure, by placing a Pair of turning Stairs in his Temple, to
convict your very senses, that you must TVRN, if you mean to go up into his
holy Chambers, and so into his Eternal Mansion-houses: and look that you turn
to purpose. For every turning will not serve. Some turn, but not to the most
High, and so turn to no purpose.

XXXVI. Of the molten Sea that was in the Temple.
THere was also a molten Sea in the Temple, it was made of brass, and contained
three thousand baths; 2 Chro. 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

This Sea was for the Priests to wash in, when they came into the Temple, to
accomplish the Service of God: to wash their hands and feet at, that they might
not when they came thither, die for their unpreparedness. The Laver also which
was in the Wilderness, was of the same use there; Exodus 28.

1. It was, as may be supposed, called a Sea, for that it was large to contain,
and a Sea of brass, for that it was made thereof. It is called in Revelations a
Sea of glass, alluding to that in the Wilderness, which was made of the brazen
Looking-glasses of the Women, that came to worship at the Door of the
Tabernacle; Revel. 4.6. Chap. 15.2. Exodus 28.8.

2. It was also said to be molten, because it was made of that fashion, by
fire, and its Antitype therefore said to be a Sea of glass mingled with fire;
Revel. 15.2.

1. This Sea was a figure of the Word of the Gospel, in the cleansing virtue of
it, which virtue, then it has, when mingled with the fire of the Holy Ghost.
And to this Christ alludes, when he says, Now ye are clean through the Word,
which I have spoken unto you, Joh. 15.3.

2 It was a figure of the Word, without mixture of Men's inventions: Hence it is
called, pure water. Having your Bodies washed with pure water: And again, He
sanctifies and cleanses his Church with the washing of Water by the Word;
Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5.

All these Places are an allusion to the molten Sea, at which of old they
washed, when they went into the Temple to worship. Therefore, says he, being
washed, let us draw near to God; Heb. 10.22.

3. This Sea from brim to brim was complete ten Cubits, perhaps to show, there
is as much in the word of the Gospel to save, as there is in the ten words to
condemn.

4. From under this Sea round about appeared Oxen, ten in a Cubit did compass
it round about, 2 Chro. 4.3. Understand by these Oxen, Ministers, for to them
they are compared in 1 Cor. 9.9. And then we are taught whence true Ministers
come, to wit, from under the power of the Gospel, for this Sea breeds
Gospel Ministers, as the Waters breed Fish.

5. It Is also said in the Text, that these Oxen were cast when the Sea was
cast: insinuating that when God ordained a word of grace to save us, he also in
his Decree provided Ministers to preach it to us to that end. Paul tells us
that he was made a Minister of the Gospel, according to God's eternal purpose
which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord; Ephesians. 3.9, 10, 11. Col. 1.25.

6. This Sea is said to have a brim like the brim of a Cup. To invite us as
well to drink of its grace, as to wash in its Water. For the Word and Spirit
when mixed, has not only a cleansing, but a saving quality in it; 2 Chro. 4.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 15.1, 2.

7. This brim was wrought with Lilies: or was like a Lily-flower; To show how
they should grow and flourish, and with what beautiful Robes they should be
adorned, who were washed, and did drink of this holy Water: Yea, that God would
take care of them, as he also did of Lilies, and would not fail to bestow upon
them, what was necessary for the Body, as well as for the Soul; Matt. 6.28, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33.

XXXVII. Upon what the molten Sea stood in the Temple.
1. THis molten Sea stood upon the backs of twelve brazen Bulls, or Oxen, 2
Chro. 4.4.

2. These Oxen, as they thus stood, looked three toward the North, three
toward the West, three toward the East, and three toward the South.

3. These twelve Oxen, were types of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, who, as
these Beasts, stood looking into the four corners of the Earth, and were bid to
go Preach the Gospel in all the World.

4. They were compared to Oxen, because they were clean, for the Ox was a
clean beast. Hence the Apostles are called Holy. They were compared to Oxen,
because the Ox is strong; and they also were mighty in the Word, Prove. 14.4. 2
Cor. 12.12.

5. The Ox will not lose what he has got by drawing; He will not let the
Wheels go back: So the Apostles were set to defend, and not let that Doctrine
go back, which they had preached to others, nor did they, they delivered it
pure to us.

6. One of the Cherubs of which you read in the Vision, had a face like an Ox,
to show that the Apostles, these Men of the first order, are most like the
Angels of God; Ezekiel. 1.10.

7. In that they stood with their Faces every way, it was as I said, to show
how the Apostles should carry the Gospel into all the World: Matt. 28.19. Mark
16.

8. And observe, Just as these Oxen were placed looking in the Temple every
way, even so stand open the Gates of the new Jerusalem, to receive those that by
their Doctrine should be brought into it. And they shall come from the East,
and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down
in the Kingdom of God; Revel. 21.13, 14. Luke 13.29.

9. These Oxen bear this molten Sea upon their back, to show that they should
be the foundation Workmen of the Gospel, and that it ought not to be removed,
as was the molten Sea of old from that Basis to another.

10. It is also said concerning these Oxen, that thus did bear this molten Sea,
that all their hinder parts were inwards, that is, covered by that Sea that was
set upon their backs. Their hinder-parts, or as the Apostle has it, our
uncomely parts: 1 Cor. 12.23, 24.

11. And indeed it becomes a Gospel-Minister to have his uncomely parts covered
with that grace, which by the Gospel he preaches unto others. As Paul exhorts
Timothy to take heed unto himself, and to his doctrine; 1 Timothy 4.6.

12. But alas, there are too too many, who, can they but have their heads
covered with a few Gospel-notions, care not though their hinder parts are seen
of all the World. But such are false Ministers, the Prophet calls them the
Tail. The Prophet that speaks lies, either by word or with his feet, he is
the tail; Isa. 9.15. Prove. 6.12, 13.

13. But what a shame is it to hide his head under this molten Sea, while his
hinder parts hang out. Such an one is none of Christ's Oxen, for they with
honor to their Master, show their heads, before all the World, for that their
hinder parts are inward, covered.

14. Look to thy hinder parts, Minister; least while thy mouth does preach the
Gospel, thy nakedness and shame be seen of those which hear thee.

For they that do not observe to learn this Lesson themselves, will not teach
others to believe the Word, nor to live a Holy Life: They will learn of them to
show their shame, instead of learning to be Holy.

XXXVIII. Of the Lavers of the Temple.
BEsides this molten Sea, there was ten Lavers in the Temple. Five of which
were put on the right side, and five also on the left: 2 Chro. 4.6.

1. Of their fashion, and their furniture, you may see 1 King. 7. These Lavers,
as the molten Sea, were Vessels which contained Water, but they were not of the
same use with it. True, they were both to wash in; The Sea to wash the
Worshipers, but the Lavers to wash the Sacrifice. He made the ten Lavers to
wash in them such things as they offered for burnt offering, but the Sea was
for the Priest to wash in: 2 Chro. 4.6.

2. The burnt-offering was a type of the body of Christ, which he once offered
for our sins, and the fire on which the Sacrifice was burned, a type of the
curse of the Law which seized on Christ, when he gave himself a ransom for us.
For therefore that under the Law was called the burnt-offering, because of the
burning upon the Altar; Levit. 6.8.

But what then must we understand by these Lavers, and by this Sacrifice being
washed in them, in order to its being burned upon the Altar.

I answer, verily, I think, that the ten Lavers were a figure of the ten
Commandments: In the purity and perfection of Christ's obedience to which, he
became capable of being made a burnt-offering, acceptable to God for the sins
of the People. Christ was made under the Law, and all his acts of obedience to
God for us, was legal, and his living thus a perfect legal life, was his
washing his offering in these ten Lavers, in order to his presenting it upon
the Altar for our sins. The Lavers went upon Wheels, to signify walking feet,
and Christ walked in the Law, and so became a clean offering to God for us. The
Wheels were of the very same as was the Lavers; To show that Christ's obedience
to the Law was of the same, as to length and breadth with its commands, and
demands to their utmost tittle and extent. The inwards and legs of the
burnt-offering was to be washed in these Lavers, Levit. 1.9, 13. 2 Chro. 4.6.
To show that Christ should be pure and clean in heart and life.

We know that obedience, whether Christ's, or ours; is called a walking in the
way, typified by the Lavers walking upon their Wheels. But I mean not by Christ
his washing of his offering, that he had any filthiness cleaving to his nature
or obedience: Yet this, I say, that so far as our guilt laid upon him, could
impede, so far he wiped it off by washing in these Lavers. For his offering was
to be without blemish, and without spot to God. Hence it is said, he sanctified
himself, in order to his suffering; And being made perfect, he became the
Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him; Joh. 17.19. Heb. 5.6, 7,
8, 9, 10.

For, albeit, he came holy into the World, yet that holiness was but
preparatory to that by which he sanctified himself, in order to his suffering
for sin. That then which was his immediate preparation for his suffering, was
his obedience to the Law, his washing in these Lavers. He then first yielded
complete obedience to the Law on our behalf, and then as so qualified, offered
his washed Sacrifice for our sins without spot to God.

Thus therefore he was our burnt-offering washed in the ten Lavers, that he
might, according to Law, be accepted of the Lord.

And he set five of the Lavers on the right side of the house, and five of them
on the left. Thus was the ten divided, as the Tables of the Law, one showing
our duty toward God, the other our duty toward our Neighbor: in both which
the burnt-offering was washed, that it might be clean in both respects.

They might also be thus placed, the better to put the People in mind of the
necessity of the Sanction of Christ, according to the Law, in order to his
offering of Himself an Offering to God for us.

XXXIX. Of the Tables in the Temple.
HE made also ten Tables, and placed them in the Temple, five on the right
hand, and five on the left, 2 Chro. 4.8.

Some, if not all of these Tables, so far as I can see, was they on which the
burnt-offering was to be cut in pieces, in order to its burning.

These Tables were made of Stone, of hewn Stone, on which this work was done;
Ezekiel. 40.40, 41, 42, 43, 44.

Now since the burnt-offering was a figure of the Body of Christ, the Tables on
which this Sacrifice was slain, must needs, I think, be a type of the heart,
the stony heart of the Jews: For had they not had hearts hard as an Adamant,
they could not have done that thing.

Upon these Tables therefore, was the death of Christ contrived, and this
horrid murder acted, even upon these Tables of Stone.

In that they are called Tables of hewn Stone, It may be to show, that all
this cruelty was acted under smooth pretenses, for hewn stones are smooth. The
Tables were finely wrought with Tools, even as the hearts of the Jews were with
hypocrisy. But alas they were stone still, that is, hard and cruel, else they
could not have been an Anvil for Satan to forge such horrid Barbarism upon. The
Tables were in number the same with the Lavers, and were set by them, to show
what are the fruits of being devoted to the Law, as the Jews were, in
opposition to Christ and his holy Gospel: there flows nothing but hardness, and
a stony heart from thence. This was showed in its first writing, it was writ on
Tables of stone, figures of the heart of Man, and on the same Tables or hearts
was the death of Jesus Christ compassed.

One would think that the meekness, gentleness, or good deeds of Jesus Christ,
might have procured in them some relentings, when they were about to take away
his life; but alas, their hearts were Tables of Stone. What feeling, or
compassion can a Stone be sensible of? Here were stony hearts, stony thoughts,
ston^ counsels, stony contrivances, a stony Law* and stony hands: and what
could be expected hence, but barbarous cruelty indeed? If I ask you, said
Christ, you will not answer me, neither will you let me see; Luke 22.68.

In that these stony Tables were placed about the Temple, it supposes that
they were Temple-men, Priests, Scribes, Rulers, Lawyers, etc. that were to be
the Chief, on whose hearts this murder was to be designed, and by them inacted
to their own Damnation, without Repentance.

XL. Of the Instruments wherewith this Sacrifice was slain, and of the four
Tables they were laid on in the Temple.
THE Instruments that were laid upon the Tables in the Temple, were not
Instruments of Music, but those with which the burnt-offering was slain.

And the four Tables were of hewn Stone for the burnt-offering: whereon also
they laid the instruments wherewith they slew the burnt-offering and the
Sacrifice; Ezekiel. 40.42, 43.

1. Here we are to take notice, that the Tables are the same, and some of them
of which we spoke before.

2. That the Instruments with which they slew the Sacrifice, was laid upon
these Tables.

The Instruments with which they slew the Sacrifices, what were they, but a
bloody Ax, bloody Knives, bloody Hooks, and bloody Hands? For these we need no
proof, matter of fact declares it.

But what were those Instruments a type of?

Answer, Doubtless they were a type of our sins. They were the bloody Ax, the
Knife, and bloody Hands, that shed his precious blood. They were the
meritorious ones, without which he could not have died. When I say ours, I mean
the sins of the World. Though then the hearts of the Jews were the immediate
Contrivers, yet they were our sins that were the bloody Tools, or Instruments
which slew the Son of God.

He was wounded for our transgressions, he died for our sins; Isa. 53. 1 Cor.
15. Gal. 1.

Oh these Instruments of us Churls, by which this poor Man was taken from off
the Earth! Isa. 32.7. Prove. 30.14.

The Whip, the Buffetings, the Crown of Thorns, the Nails, the Cross, the
Spear, with the Vinegar and Gall, were all nothing in comparison of our sins.
For the transgressions of my people was he stricken; Isa. 53. Nor were the
flouts, taunts, mocks, scorns, derisions, etc. with which they follovved him
from the Garden to the Cross, such cruel Instruments as these. They were our
sins then, our cursed sins, by, with, and for the sake of which, the Lord
Jesus became a bloody Sacrifice.

But why must the Instruments be laid upon the Tables?

1. Take the Tables for the hearts of the murderers, and the Instruments, for
their sins, and what place more fit for such Instruments to be laid upon? It Is
God's command, that these things should be laid to heart, and he complains of
those that do not do it; Isa. 42.25. chap. 57.11.

2. Nor are Men ever like to come to good, until these Instruments with which
the Son of God was slain, indeed be laid to heart. And they were eminently
laid to heart even by them, soon after; the effect of which, was the
conversion of thousands of them; Acts 2.36, 37.

3. Wherefore when it says these Instruments must be laid upon the stony
Tables, he insinuates that God would take a time to charge the murder of his
Son home, upon the Consciences of them that did that murder, either to their
conversion or condemnation. And is it not reason that they who did this horrid
villainy, should have their doings laid before their faces upon the Tables of
their heart: That they may look upon him, whom they have pierced, and mourn;
Zech. 12.10. Revel. 1.7.

4. But these Instruments were laid but upon some of the Tables, and not upon
all the Ten, to show that not all, but some of those, so horrid, should find
mercy of the Lord.

5. But we must not confine these Tables only to the hearts of the bloody
Jews, they were our sins for the which he died. Wherefore these Instruments
should be laid upon our Tables too, and the Lord lay them there for good, that
we also may see our horrid doings, and come bending to him for forgiveness.

6. These Instruments thus lying on the Tables in the Temple, became a
continual Motive to God's People to Repentance, for so often as they saw these
bloody and cruel Instruments, they were put in mind how their sins should be
the cause of the death of Christ.

7. It would be well also, if these Instruments were at all times laid upon our
Tables, for our more humbling for our sins in every thing we do, especially
upon the Lord's Table, when we come to eat and drink before him. I am sure the
Lord Jesus does more than intimate, that he expects that we should do so, where
he says, When ye eat that Bread, and drink that Cup, Do this in remembrance of
me: In remembrance that I died for your sins, and consequently, that they were
the meritorious cause of the sheding of my blood.

To conclude, Let all Men remember, that these cruel Instruments are laid upon
the Table of their hearts, whether they see them there or no. The sin of Judah
is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, upon the Tables
of their heart; Jer. 17.1.

A Pen of Iron will make Letters upon a Table made of Stone, and the Point of a
Diamond will make Letters upon Glass. Wherefore in this saying, God informs us,
that if we shall forbear to read these Lines to our Conversion, God will one
day read them against us unto our Condemnation.

XLI. Of the Candlesticks of the Temple.
AND he made ten Candlesticks of gold, according to the form, and he set them
in the Temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left; 2 Chro. 4.7.

1. These Candlesticks were made of Gold, to show the worth and value of them.

2. They were made after the form, or ex^ct according to rule, like those that
were made in the Tabernacle, or according to the Pattern which David gave to
Solomon to make them by; observe, there was great exactness in these, and need
there was of this hint, that Men might see, that every thing will not pass for
a right ordered Candlestick with GOD; Exodus 25.31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. 1 Chro.
28.15, 16.

These Candlesticks are said sometimes to be ten, sometimes seven, and
sometimes one. Ten here, seven Revel. 1. and one in Zech. 4. Ten, is a note of
a multitude, and seven, a note of perfection, and one, a note of unity.

Now as the precious stones with which the House was garnished, were a type of
Ministerial gifts: so these Candlesticks were a type of those that were to be
the Churches of the New Testament. Wherefore he says, The Candlesticks which
thou saw are the seven Churches; Revel. 1.12, 13, 20.

1. The Candlesticks were here in number ten, to show that Christ under the New
Testament would have a many Gospel Churches. And I, if I be lifted up from the
Earth, says he, will draw all men unto me; that is, abundance: For the
Children of the desolate, that is, of the New Testament Church, shall be many
more then they of the Jews were; Joh. 12.32. Gala. 4.27.

2. In that the Candlesticks were set by the Lavers and stony Tables, it might
be to show us, that Christ's Churches should be much in considering, that
Christ, though he was righteous, yet died for our sins: Though his Life was
according to the holy Law, yet our stony hearts caused him to die. Yea, and
that the Candlesticks are placed there, it is to show us also that we should be
much in looking on the sins by which we caused him to die, for the Candlesticks
were set by those Tables, whereon they laid the Instruments, with which they
slew the Sacrifice.

3. These Candlesticks being made according to form, seems not only to be exact
as to fashion, but also as to work. For that in Exodus with its furniture, was
made precisely of one Talent of Gold, perhaps to show, that Christ's true
Spouse is not to be a grain more, nor a dram less, but Just the number of God's
Elect. This is Christ's compleatness, his fullness, one more, one less, would
make his Body a Monster.

4. The Candlestick was to hold the light, and to show it to all the House, and
the Church is to let her light so shine, that they without may see the light,
Mat. 5.15, 16. Luke 8.16. Chap. 11.33. Chap. 12.35.

5. To this end the Candlesticks were supplied with Oil-olive, a type of the
supply that the Church has, that her Light may shine, even of the Spirit of
Grace.

XLII. Of the Lamps belonging to the Candlesticks of the Temple.
TO these Candlesticks belonged several Lamps, with their Flowers, and their
knops; 2 Chro. 4.21.

1. These Lamps were types of that profession, that the Members of the Church
do make of Christ, whether such Members have saving grace, or not; Matt. 25.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

2. These Lamps were beautified with Knops and Flowers, to show how comely and
beautiful that Professor is, that adorns his Profession with a suitable Life
and Conversation.

3. We read that the Candlestick in Zecharias had seven Lamps belonging to it,
and a Bowl of Golden Oil on the top, and that by Golden Pipes this Golden Oil
emptied it self into the Lamps, and all doubtless, that the Lamps might shine;
Zech. 4.

4. Christ therefore who is the High Priest, and to whom it belongs to dress
the Lamps, does dress them accordingly. But now there are Lamp-Carriers of two
sorts, such as have only Oil in their Lamps, and such as have Oil in their
Lamps and Vessels too, and both these belong to the Church, and in both these
Christ will be glorified. And they should have their proper places at last.
They that have the Oil of Grace in their hearts, as well as a Profession of
Christ in their hands, they shall go in with him to the Wedding; but they who
only make a Profession, and have not Oil in their Vessels, will surely
miscarry at last: Matt. 25.

5. Wherefore, O thou Professor! Thou Lamp-Carrier! Have a care and look to thy
self, content not thy self with that only, that will maintain thee in a
Profession, for that may be done without saving grace. But I advise thee to go
to Aaron, to Christ, the trimmer of our Lamps, and beg thy Vessel full of Oil
of him, (that is grace) for the seasoning of thy heart, that thou may have
wherewith, not only to bear thee up now, but at the day of the Bridegroom's
coming, when many a Lamp will go out, and many a Professor be left in the
dark, for that will to such be a woeful day; Levit. 24.2. Matt. 25.

Some there are, that are neither for Lamps nor Oil for themselves, neither are
they pleased if they think they see it in others. But they that have Lamps, and
they that have none, and they which would blovv out other folks light, must
shortly appear to give an account of all their doings to God. And then they
shall see, what it is to have Oil in their Vessels and Lamps; and what it is
to be without it in their Vessels, though it is in their Lamps; and what a
dismal thing it is to be a Malignant to either; but at present let this suffice.

XLIII. Of the Shewbread on the Golden Table in the Temple.
THere was also Shewbread set upon a Golden Table in the Temple: 1 Kings 7.48.

The Shewbread consisted of twelve Cakes made of fine Flovver, Two tenth deals
was to go to one Cake, and they were to be set in order in two rows upon the
pure Table; Exodus 29.33. Levit. 8.31. Chap. 24.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

1. These twelve Loaves, to me, do seem to be a type of the twelve Tribes
under the Law, and of the Children of God under the Gospel, as they present
themselves before God, in, and by his Ordinances, through Christ. Hence the
Apostle says, For we being many are one bread, etc. 1 Cor. 10.17. For so were
the twelve Cakes, though twelve, and so are the Gospel Saints, though many. For
we being many are one body in Christ; Romans 12 5.

2. But they were a type of the true Church, not of the false. For Ephraim, who
was the head of the Ten Tribes in their Apostasy, is rejected, as a Cake not
turned. Indeed he is called a Cake, as a false Church may be called a Church:
but he is called a Cake not turned, as a false Church is not prepared for God,
nor fit to be set on the Golden Table before him; Hos. 7.8.

3. These Cakes or Shewbread, was to have Frankincense strewed upon them, as
they stood upon the Golden Table, which was a type of the sweet perfumes of the
Sanctifications of the Holy Ghost. To which, I think, Paul alludes, when he
says, The offering up of the Gentiles is acceptable to God, being sanctified by
the Holy Ghost: Romans 15, 16.

4. They were to be set upon the pure Table, new, and hot: to show that God
delights in the Company of new and warm Believers. I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth: when Israel was a child, I loved him. Men, at first
conversion, are like to a Cake well baked, and new taken from the Oven, they
are warm, and cast forth a very fragrant scent, especially when, as warm, sweet
Incense is strewn upon them, Jer. 2. Hos. 11.

5. When the Shewbread was old, and stale, it was to be taken away, and new
and warm put in its place, to show that God has but little delight in the
service of his own People, when their duties grow stale and moldy. Therefore,
he removed his old, stale, moldy Church of the Jews from before him, and set
in their Rooms upon the Golden Table, the warm Church of the Gentiles.

6. The Shewbread by an often remove, and renewing, was continually to stand
before the Lord in his House, to show us, that all ways, as long as Ordinances
shall be of use, God will have a new, warm, and sanctified People to worship
him.

7. Aaron and his Sons were to eat the old Shewbread, to show that when Saints
have lived in the World as long as living is good for them; and when they can
do no more service for God in the World: they shall yet be accepted of Jesus
Christ, and that it shall be as Meat and Drink to him to save them from all
their unworthinesses.

8. The new Shewbread was to be set even on the Sabbath before the Lord. To
show with what warmth of love and affections God's servants should approach his
Presence upon his holy day.

XLIV. Of the Snuffers belonging to the Candlesticks and Lamps of the Temple.
AS there were Candlesticks and Lamps, so there were Snuffers also prepared for
these in the Temple of the Lord. And the SNVFFERS were Snuffers of Gold; 1
King. 7.50.

1. Snuffers: The use of Snuffers is to Trim the Lamps, and Candles, that their
Lights may shine the brighter.

2. Snuffers, you know are biting, pinching things, but use them well, and they
will prove, not only beneficial to those within the House, but profitable to
the Lights.

Snuffers, you may say, of what were they a type?

Answer, If our snufs are our superfluities of naughtiness; our Snuffers then
are those righteous reproofs, rebukes, and admonitions, which Christ has
ordained to be in his House for good; or as the Apostle has it, if for our
edification; and perhaps, Paul alludes to these, when he bids Titus to rebuke
the Cretians sharply, that they might be sound in the faith, Tit. 1.12, 13.

As who should say, thou must use the Snuffers of the Temple, to trim their
Lights withal, if they burn not well. These Snuffers therefore are of great
use in the Temple of God, only, as I said, they must be used wisely. It Is not
for every fool to handle Snuffers, at, or about the Candles, lest perhaps,
instead of mending the light, they put the Candle out. And therefore Paul bids
them that are spiritual, do it; Gal. 6.1.

My reason tells me, that if I use these Snuffers as I should, I must not only
endeavor to take the superfluous snuff away, but so to do it, that the light
thereby be mended; which then is done, if, as the Apostle says, I use
sharpness to edification, and not for destruction, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 Cor. 13.10.

Are not the seven Churches in Asia called by the Name of Candlesticks? And why
Candlesticks, if they were not to hold the Candles? And Candles must have
Snuffers therewith to trim the lights. And Christ who is our true Aaron, in
those rebukes which he gave those Churches, alluding to these SNVFFERS did it,
that their lights might shine the brighter, Revel. 2, and 3. Chapters.

Wherefore as he used them, he did it still with caution to their light, that
it might not be impaired. For as he still thus trimed these Lamps, he yet
encouraged what he saw would shine, if helped. He only nipt the snuff away.

Thus therefore he came to them with these Snuffers in his hand, and trimed
their Lamps and Candlesticks, Revel. 2, 4. ver. 20. chap. 3, 2. ver. 15.

This should teach Ministers, to whom it belongs, under Christ, to use these
Snuffers well. Strike at the Snuff, not at the Light, in all your rebukes and
admonitions, snuff not your Lamps of a private revenge, but of a design to
nourish grace and gifts in Churches. Thus our Lord himself says he did, in his
using of these Snuffers about these Candlesticks. As many, says he, as I love,
I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore, and repent: Revel. 3.19.

To Conclude, Watchman, watch, and let not your snuffs be too long, nor pull
them off with your Fingers, or carnal reasonings, but with godly admonitions,
etc. Use your Snuffers graciously, curb Vice, nourish Virtue, so you will use
them well, and so your light will shine to the glory of God.

XLV. Of the Snuff-dishes that were with the Snuffers in the Temple.
AS there were Snuffers, so there were also Snuff-dishes in the Temple. And
they were also made of gold, Exo. 25.28. cha. 37.23. Numb. 4.9. The
Snuff-dishes were those in which the Snuffs were put, when snuffed off, and by
which they were carried forth of the Temple. They therefore as the Snuffers
are, are of great use in the Temple of God.

1. By them the golden Floor of the Temple is kept, from being daubed by the
Snuffs.

2. By them also the clean hands of those that worship there, are kept from
being defiled.

3. By them also the stink of the Snuffs is soonest suppressed in the Temple,
and consequently the tender Noses of them that worship there, preserved from
being offended.

Snuffs, you know are daubing things, stinking things, nautious things:
therefore we must take heed that they touch not this Floor on which we walk,
nor defile the hands which we lift up to God, when we come to worship him. But
how must this be done, but as we take them off with the Snuffers, and put them
in these Snuff-dishes?

Some are for being at the snuffs with their fingers, and will also cast them
at their feet, and daub the Floor of God's holy House, but usually such do
burn, as well as defile themselves. But is it not a shame for a man to defile
himself with that vice which he rebukes in another? Let us then, while we are
taking away the snuffs of others, hate even the garment spotted by the flesh,
and labor to carry such stink with the Snuff-dishes out of the Temple of God.

Snuff-dishes, you may say, what are they?

I answer, If sins, are the snuffs and rebukes, and admonitions the Snuffers:
Then methinks, repentance, or in case that be wanting, the censures of the
Church should be the Snuff dishes.

Hence Repentance is called, a Church-cleansing grace, and the Censures of the
Church a purging out of old leven, and making it a new Lump, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor.
7.11.

Ah! were these Snuff-dishes more of use in the Churches, we should not have
this Man's snuff, defile that Man's fingers as it does. Nor would the Temple of
God be so besmeered with these snuffs, and be-daubed, as it is.

Ah, Snuffs pulled off, lie still in the Temple-floor, and there stink, and
defile both feet and fingers; both the callings and conversations of
Temple-worshipers, to the disparaging of Religion, and the making of religious
worship but of low esteem with men. And all, I say, for want of the due use of
these Snuffers, and these Snuff-dishes, there.

Nay, are not whole Churches now defiled with those very Snuffs, that long
since were plucked off, and all for want of the use of these Snuff-dishes,
according to the Lord's Commandment. For you must know that reproofs and
admonitions are but of small use, where repentance, or Church- censures, are
not thereto annexed. When Ministers use the Snuffers, the People should hold
the Snuff-dishes.

Round reproofs for sin, when they light upon penitent hearts, then brave work
is in the Church: Then the Snuff is not only pulled away, but carried out of
the Temple of God aright, etc.

And now the worship and worshipers shine like gold. As an ear-ring of gold,
and an ornament of fine gold: so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear, Pro.
25.12.

Ministers, it appertains to you to use the Snuffers, and to teach the People
to hold the Snuff-dishes right, Acts 20.20, 21. 1 Timothy 4.2. We must often be
snuffed with these Snuffers, or our light will burn but dimly, our Candle
will also waste: Pray therefore, O men of God, look diligently to your
People. Snuff them as you see there is need, but touch not their Snuff with
your WHITE Fingers, a little Smutch on you will be seen a great way. Remember
also that you leave them no where, but with these Snuff-dishes, that the
Temple may be cleared of them.

Do with the Snuff, as the neat House-wife does with the Toad, which she
finds in her Garden. She takes the Fork, or a pair of Tongs, and therewith does
throw it over the Pales. Cast them away, I say, with fear, zeal, care,
revenge, and with great indignation: (2 Cor. 7.11) And then your Church, your
Conversation, your Fingers, and all will be kept white and clean.

XLVI. Of the Golden Tongs belonging to the Temple.
THere was also Tongs of Gold used in the Temple of old, 1 King. 7.49.

1. These Tongs was used about the Altar, to order the fire there.

2. They were used too, about the Candlestick, and are therefore called HIS
Tongs.

3. Perhaps there was Tongs for both these Services, but of that the Word is
silent.

But what were they used about the Candlestick to do?

Answ. To take holy fire from off the Altar to light the Lamps vvithal. For the
fire of the Temple was holy fire, such as at first, was kindled from Heaven,
and when kindled, maintained by the Priests, and of that the Lamps were
lighted, Levit. 9.24. 2 Chro. 7.1.

Nor was there, upon pain of death, any other fire to be used there, Levit.
10.1. These Tongs therefore was used to take fire from off the Altar, to light
the Lamps and Candlesticks withal. For to trim the Lights, and dress the Lamps,
was Aaron's work day by day, Exodus 40.24, 25. Levit. 24.2, 3. Numb. 8.3. He
shall light and order the Lamps upon the pure Candlestick before the Lord, and
Aaron did so: he lighted the seven Lamps thereof, as the Lord commanded Moses.

What is a Lamp or Candlestick to us, if there be not light thereon; and how
lighted without fire, and how shall we take up Coals to light the Lamps
withal, if we have not Tongs prepared for that purpose?

With these Tongs fire also was taken from off the Altar, and put into the
Censers to burn svveet Incense with, before the Lord. The Tongs then were of
great use in the Temple of the Lord.

But what were the Tongs a type of?

The Altar was a type of Christ, the fire, of the Holy Ghost; and these Tongs
were a type of that holy hand of God's grace, by which the COALS, or several
dispensations, and gifts of this Holy Ghost are taken and given to the Church,
and to her Members, for her work and profit in this World.

Tongs, we know, are used instead of fingers, wherefore Aaron's golden
Tongs, were a type of Christ's golden fingers: Song 5.14:

Isaiah says, That one of the Seraphims flew to him with a live Coal in his
hand, which he had taken with the Tongs from off the Altar. Here the type, and
antitype, to wit, Tongs, and hand, are put together: ( Isa. 6.) But the Prophet
Ezekiel treating of like matters, quite waves the type, the Tongs, and speaks
only of this holy hand. And he spoke to the man clothed with linen, and said
go in between the wheels under the cherub, (where the mercy-feat stood, where
God dwelt, Exodus 2. Psalm. 80.1.) and fill thy Hand with Coals of fire from
between the Cherubims, Ezekiel. 10.2.

Thus you see our golden Tongs, are now turned into a golden hand; into the
golden hand of the man clothed in linen, which is Jesus Christ, who at his
ascension received of God the Father the Spirit in all fullness, to give, as his
Divine wisdom knew was best, the several Coals or Dispensations thereof unto
his Church, for his praise, and her edification; Matt. 3.11. Acts 2.

It Is by this hand also, that this holy fire is put into our Censers. It Is this
hand also that takes this Coal, therewith to touch the Lips of Ministers, that
their Words may warm like fire: And it is by this hand that the Spirit is given
to the Churches, as returns of their holy prayers; Luke 11.1, 2. Romans 8.26.
Rev. 8.5.

'Twas convenient that the fire in the Temple should be disposed of by golden
Tongs, but the Holy Ghost, by the golden hand of Christ's grace, for that can
wittingly dispose of it, according as Men and things are placed, and to do and
be done in the Churches. Wherefore he adds, And one Cherub stretched forth his
hand from between the Cherubims, unto the fire that was between the Cherubims,
and took thereof and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with Linen,
who took it and went out, Ezekiel. 10.7.

By this hand then, by this man's hand, the Coals of the Altar are disposed of,
both to the Lamps, the Candlesticks, the Censers, and the Lips of Ministers,
according to his own good pleasure. And of all this was the Tongs in the Temple
a Type.

XLVII. Of the Altar of Incense in the Temple.
THE Altar of Incense, was made first for the Tabernacle, and that of Shittim
Wood, but it was made for the Temple of Cedar, and it was to be set before the
Vail, that is, by the Ark of the Testimony, before the Mercy-Seat; that is, at
the entering of the Holiest, but not within. And the Priest was to approach it
every Morning, which, as to the holiest, he might not do. Besides, when he went
in to make an Atonement, he was to take fire from off that Altar, to burn his
Incense within the Holy Place: Exodus 30.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Levit. 16.18.

1. It was called the golden Altar, because 'twas over-laid with pure gold.
This Altar was not for burnt-offering, as the brazen Altar was, nor for the
meat offering, nor the drink offering, but to burn Incense thereon, ver. 7.
which sweet Incense was a type of the grace of prayer: Psalm. 141.2.

2. Incense, or that called Incense here, was not a Simple, but a Compound,
made up of sweet Spices, called Stacte, Onycha and Galbanum: These three; and
may answer to these three parts of this duty, to wit, Prayer, Supplication, and
Intercession: Exodus 30.34, 35, 36, 37. Chap. 37.29. 1 Timothy 2.1.

3. This Incense was to be burned upon the Altar every Morning, upon that
Altar, which was called the Altar of Incense, which was before the Vail, to
show, that it is our duty every Morning to make our Prayer to God by Jesus
Christ, before the Vail: that is, before the Door of Heaven, and there to seek,
knock, and ask for what we need, according to the word; Luke 11 9, 10, 11, 12.

4. This Incense was to be kindled every Morning, to show how he continues
interceeding for us, and also that all true praise of Men to God is by the
work, the renewed work of the Holy Ghost upon our hearts, Romans 8.26.

5. Incense, as you see, was made of sweet Spices, such as were gum, and so,
apt to burn with a smoke, to show, that not cold and flat, but hot and fervent,
is the Prayer that flows from the spirit of faith and grace: Zech. 12.10. Jam.
5.16.

6. The smoke of this Incense was very sweet and savoury; like pleasant
perfume: to show how delightful and acceptable, the very sound and noise of
right Prayer is, unto the Nostrils of the living God, because it comes from a
broken heart; Psalm. 51.17. Song 2.14.

7. This Incense was to be offered upon the golden Altar, to show us that no
Prayer is accepted, but what is directed to God, in the Name of his Holy and
Blessed Son, our Savior: 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 13.15.

8. They were commanded to burn Incense every Morning upon this Altar, to show
that God is never weary of the godly Prayers of his People. It also shows,
that we need every day to go to God for fresh Supplies of grace to carry us
through this evil World.

9. This Altar, though it stood without the Vail, to teach us to live by faith,
and to make use of the Name of Christ, as we find it recorded in the first
Temple; yet was placed so nigh unto the Holiest, that the smell of the smoke
might go in thither, to show that it is not distance of place, that can keep
the voice of true Prayer from our God, the God of Heaven: but that he will be
taken with what we ask for according to his Word.

It stood, I say, nigh the Vail, nigh the Holiest, and he that burnt Incense
there, did make his approach to God. Hence the Psalmist, when he speaks of
praying, says, It Is good for me to draw nigh unto God: Psalm. 73.20. Heb. 10.22.

10. This Altar thus placed, did front the Ark within the Vail; To put us in
mind, that the Law is kept therein from hurting us: To let us know also, that
the Mercy-Seat is above, upon the Ark, and that God does sit thereon, with his
Pardon in his hand to save us. O! What speaking things are types, shadows, and
parables, had we but eyes to see, had we but ears to hear!

He that did approach the Altar with Incense of old, aright, (and then he did
so, when he approached it by Aaron, his High Priest) pleased God: how much more
shall we have both Person and Prayers accepted, and a grant of what we need, if
indeed we come as we should to God by Jesus Christ.

But take heed you approach not to a wrong Altar, take heed also that you come
not with strange fire, for they are dangerous things, and cause the Worshipers
to miss of what they would enjoy. But more of this in the next particular.

XLVIII. Of the golden Censers belonging to the Temple.
THere were also golden Censers belonging to the Temple: and they were, either
such as belonged to the Sons of Levi in general, or that were for Aaron, and
his Sons, in special; as Numbers 16.6, 17, 18.

The Censers of the Levites were a type of ours, but the Censer of Aaron, was a
type of Christ's.

The Censers, as was hinted before, were for this use in the Temple, namely to
hold the holy fire in, on which Incense was to be burned before the Lord;
Levit. 10.1.

These Censers then were types of hearts. Aaron's golden one, was a type of
Christ's golden heart, and the Censers of the Levites, were types of other
Worshipers hearts.

The fire also which was put therein, was a type of that Spirit, by which we
pray, and the Incense that burnt thereon, a type of our desires.

Of Christ's Censer, we read, Revelations the viii. which is always filled with
much Incense, that is with continual Intercessions, which he offers to God
for us: and from whence also there always goes a cloud of sweet savor,
covering the Mercie-seat, Levit. 16 13. Heb. 7.25. Revel. 8.3, 4.

But to speak of the Censers, and fire, and Incense of the Worshipers. For
albeit they were all put under one rule, that is, to be according to Law, yet
often times, as were the Worshipers, such was the Censers, Fire, and Incense.

1. Hence the two hundred and fifty Censers with which Corah, and his Company
offered, are called the Censers of sinners. For they came with wicked hearts,
then to burn Incense before the Lord: Numb. 16.17, 37.

2. Again, as the Censers of these Men were called the Censers of sinners,
showing they came at that time to God with naughty hearts, so the fire that was
in Nadab and Abihu's Censers is called strange fire, which the Lord commanded
them not: Levit. 10.1.

3. This strange fire, was a type of that strange spirit, opposed to the spirit
of God, in and by which, notwithstanding, some adventure to perform Worship to
God.

4. Again, as these Censers are called the Censers of sinners, and this fire
called, strange fire, so the Incense of such is also called strange, and is
said to be an abomination unto God; Exodus 30.9. Isa. 1.13. Chap. 66.3.

Thus you see that both the Censers, Fire, and Incense of some, is rejected,
even as the heart, spirit, and prayer of sinners, are an abomination unto God:
Hos. 7.14. Chap. 4.12. Chap. 5.4. Prove. 28.9.

But there was besides these, true Censers, holy fire, and sweet Incense among
the Worshipers in the Temple, and their service was accepted by Aaron their
High Priest: For that was done thorough the faith of Christ, and these were a
type of our true Gospel-Worshipers, who come with holy hearts, the holy spirit,
and holy desires before their God, by their Redeemer. These are a perfume in
his Nose. The Prayer of the Upright is his delight. David's Prayers went up
like Incense, and the lifting up of his hands, as the Evening Sacrifice, Pro.
15.8. Psalm 141.2.

Let them then that pretend to worship before God in his holy Temple, look to
it that both their Censers, Fire, and Incense: Heart, Spirit, and Desires, be
such as the Word requires. Left instead of receiving of gracious returns from
the God of Heaven, their Censers be laid up against them, left the fire of God
devours them, and their Incense becomes an abomination to him, as it happened
to those, made mention of before.

But, it is said the Censers of Gorah and his Company was hallowed.

Answer, So is God's Worship, which is so his by his Ordination, yet even that
very Worship may be spoiled by Man's transgression. Prayer is GOD's Ordinance,
but all Prayer is not accepted of God. We must then distinguish between the
thing commanded, and our using of that thing. The Temple was GOD's House, but
was abused by the irreverence of those that worshipped there, even to the
demolishing of it.

A golden Censer is a gracious heart, heavenly fire is the Holy Ghost, and
sweet Incense the effectual fervent Prayer of Faith. Have you these? These God
expects, and these you must have, if ever your Persons or performances be of
God accepted.

XLIX. Of the golden Spoons of the Temple.
1. THE Golden Spoons belonging to the Temple, were in number, according to
Moses, twelve; answering to the twelve Tribes. But when the Temple was builded,
I suppose they were more, because of the number of the Basins: Numb. 7.14, 20,
26, 32, 38, 40, 50, 56, 62, 68, 74, 80, 86.

2. The Spoons, as I suppose, were for the Worshipers in the Temple to eat that
broth withal, wherein the Trespass-offerings were boiled: For which purpose
there were several Cauldrons hanged in the corners of that Court called the
Priest's, to boil them in: 1 Samuel 2.13, 14. Ezekiel. 46.19, 20.

3. Now in that he says here were Spoons, what is it, but that there are also
babes in the Temple of the Lord. There was Broth for Babes, as well as Meat for
Men, and Spoons to eat the Broth withal.

4. True, the Gospel being more excellent then the Law, does change the term,
and instead of Broth, says, there is Milk for babes. But in that he says
Milk, he insinuates that there are Spoons for Children in the Church.

5. I could not, says Paul to them at Corinth, speak to you as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk and
not with meat, for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye
able, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.

6 See, here were need of Spoons, milk is Spoon-meat; for here were those which
could not feed themselves with Milk, let them then that are Men eat the strong
Meat, For every one that uses milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness,
for he is a babe. For strong meat belongs to them that are of full age, who
by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil;
Heb. 6.13, 14.

7. Spoons, you know are to feed us with weak and thin food, even with that
which best suteth with weak stomachs, or with a babish temper. Hence as the
strong man is opposed to the weak, so the milk is opposed to the strong meat.

8. So then, though the Babe in Christ is weaker then the Man in Christ, yet is
he not by Christ left unprovided for: For here is milk for babes, and spoons to
eat it with. All this is taught us by the Spoons, for what need is there of
Spoons, where there is nothing to eat but strong Meat?

9. Babes, you know, have not only babish stomachs, but also babish tricks, and
must be dealt withal as Babes; their Childish talk, and frompered Carriages,
must be born withal.

10. Sometimes they cry for nothing, yea, and count them for their foes which
rebuke their childish toys and ways. All which the Church must bear, because
they are God's Babes; yea, they must feed them too; For if he has found them
milk and spoons, it is that they may be fed therewith, and live: Yea, grown
Ministers are God's Nurses, wherefore they must have a Lap to lay them in, and
Knees to dandle them upon, and Spoons to feed them with.

11. Nor are the Babes, but of use in the Church of God, for he commands that
they be brought to cry with the Congregation before the Lord, for mercy for the
Land; Joel 2.16.

12. Incense, I told you, was a type of Prayers, and the Spoons in the time of
Moses, were presented at the Temple full of it. Perhaps to show, that God will
with the Milk which he has provided for them, give it to them as a return of
their crying to him, even as the Nurse gives the Child the Teat and Milk.

13. You know the Milk is called for, when the Child is crying, as we say to
stop its mouth with it. O Babes, did you but cry soundly, God would give you
yet more Milk.

14. But what were those golden Spoons a type of?

I answer, If the Milk is the Juice, and Consolations of the Word, then the
Spoons must be those soft sentences, and golden Conclusions, with which the
Ministers feed their Souls by it. I have fed you, said Paul, with the Milk of
the Word; says Peter, even as you have been able to bear it. Compare these two
or three Texts; 1 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 3.2. 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.

15. And this is the way to strengthen the weak hands, and to confirm the
feeble knees. This is the way to make them grow to be Men, who now are but
as Infants of days. Thus a little one may become a thousand, and a small one a
strong Nation. Yea, thus in time, you may make a little Child to Jostle it
with a Leopard, yea, to take a Lion by the beard; yea thus you may imbolden
him to put his hand to the hole of the Asp, and to play before the Den of the
Cockatrice. Isa. 11.6, 7, 8. Chap. 60.22.

Who is most stout, was once a Babe, he that can now eat meat, was sometimes
glad of Milk, and to be fed with the Spoon. Babes in Christ therefore must not
be despised, nor over looked: God has provided them Milk, and Spoons to eat it
with, that they may grow up to be Men before him.

L. Of the Bowls and Basins belonging to the Temple.
AS there were Spoons, so there were Bowls and Basins belonging to the Temple:
Some of these were of Gold, and some of Silver: and when they were put
together, their number was four hundred and forty. These you read of, Ezra 1.10.

The Bowls, or Basins were not to wash in, as was the Sea and Lavers of the
Temple, they were rather to hold the Messes in, which the Priests at their holy
Feasts, did use to set before the People. This being so, they were types of
that proportion of faith, by which, or by the measure of which, every man
received of the holy food, for the nourishment of his Soul. For, as a Man, had
he a thousand Messes set before him, he eating for his health, cannot go beyond
what his stomach will bear: So neither can the Child of God, when he comes to
worship in the Temple of God, receive of the good things that are there, beyond
the proportion of his faith, or, as it is in another place, according to the
ability which God gives, Romans 12.6. 1 Pet. 4.11.

And hence it is, that at the self same Ordinance, some receive three times as
much as others do: for that their Bowl, I mean their faith, is able to receive
it. Yea, Benjamin's Mess was five times as big as was the Mess of any of his
Brethren; and so it is with some Saints, while they eat with their Brother
Joseph in the House of the living God.

There are three go to the same Ordinance, and are all of them believers, who
when they come home and compare notes, do find their receivings are not of the
same quantity.

One says, I got but little; to 'ther says, 'twas a pretty good Ordinance to
me; the third says, I was exceeding well there. Why, to be sure, he that had
but little there, had there but little faith, for great faith in him would have
received more. He had it then according to the largeness of his Bowl, even
according to his faith, even as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith, Romans 12.3. Mark, faith is a certain measure, and that not only as to its
degree, but for that it can receive, retain, or hold what is put into it.

So then, here it is no matter how much Milk, or holy Broth there is, but how
big is thy Bowl, thy Faith. Little Bowls hold but little, nor can thou
receive, but as thy faith will bear: (I speak now of God's ordinary dealing
with his People) For so he says in his Word. According to thy Faith be it unto
thee; Matt. 9.29.

If a Man goes to the Ocean Sea for Water, let him carry but an Egg-shell with
him, and with that he shall not bring a Gallon home. I know indeed that our
little Pots, have a promise of being made like the Bowls of the Altar; but
still our Mess must be according to our measure, be that small, or be it great.
The same Prophet says again, The Saints shall be filled like Bowls, as the
corners of the Altar: which, though it supposes an enlargement, yet it must be
confined to that measure of faith, which is provided for its reception; Zech
9.15. Chap. 14.2. And suppose these Bowls should signify the Promises; though
the Saints, not the promises, are compared to them, because they, not promises,
are the Subjects of Faith: Yet it is the Promise by our measure of Faith in
that, that is nourishing to our Souls.

When Ahasuerus made a Feast to his Subjects, they drank their Wine in Bowls.
They did not drink it by the largeness of the Vessel, whence they drew it, but
according to their health, and as their stomachs would so receive it, Esth. 1.

Thy Faith then is one of the Bowls, or Basins of the Temple, by, or according
to which, thou receivest thy Mess, when thou sit feasting at the Table of
God.

And observe, All the Bowls were not made of Gold, as all Faith is not of a
saving sort. It Is the Golden Faith that is right, the Silver Bowls were of an
inferior sort, Revel. 3.18.

Some, I say, have golden Faith, all faith is not so. Wherefore look to it,
Soul, that thy Bowl, thy faith, be golden faith, or of the best kind. Look, I
say, after a good faith, and great, for a great faith receives a great Mess.

Of old, Beggars did use to carry their Bowls in their Laps, when they went to
a Door for an Alms: Consequently if their Bowls were but little, they oft-times
came off by the loss, though the Charity of the Giver was large. Yea, the
greater the Charity, the larger the loss, because the Beggar's Bowl was too
little. Mark it well, it is oft-times thus in the matters of our God.

Art thou a Beggar, a Beggar at God's Door, be sure thou gettest a great Bowl,
For as thy Bowl is, so will be thy Mess. According to thy faith, says he, be
it unto thee; Matt. 9.29.

LI. Of the Flaggons and Cups of the Temple.
THE next thing to be considered, is, the Flaggons and Cups of the Temple: Of
these we read, 1 Chro. 28.17. Jer. 52.19.

These were of great use among the Jews, especially on their Feasting-days; as
of their Sabbaths, New Mons, and the like; Levit. 23.13. Numb. 28.7. 1 Chro.
16.3. Isa. 25.6. chap. 62.8, 9.

For Instance, The Day that David danced before the Ark, he dealt among all the
People, even to the whole Multitude of Israel, as well to the Women as to the
Men, to every Man a Cake of bread, a good piece of Flesh, and a Flaggon of
Wine. 2 Samuel 6.19. 1 Chro. 16.3.

In this Mountain, that is, in the Temple typically, says the Prophet, shall
the Lord of Hosts make unto all People a Feast of fat things, a feast of Wine
on the Lees, of fat things full of marrow, of Wine on the Lees well refined;
Isa. 25.6.

These are Feasting-times: The times in which our Lord used to have his Spouse
into his Wine-Cellar, and in which he used to display with delight his Banner
over her Head in love; Song 2.5.

The Church of Christ, alas, is of her self a very sickly puely thing, a Woman,
a weaker Vessel, but how much more must she needs be so weak, when the custom
of Women is upon her, or when she is sick of love. Then she indeed has need of
a draught, for she now sinks, and will not else be supported; Stay me with
Flaggons, says she, and comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love, Song
2.4, 5.

These Flaggons therefore were types of those Feastings, and of those large
draughts of Divine love, that the Lord Jesus draws for, and gives to his
Spouse in those days that he feasteth with them. For then he says, Drink, yea
drink abundantly, O Beloved. This he does to cheer her up under her hours of
sadness and dejection: For now new Corn makes the young men cheerful, and new
Wine the maids; Pro 31.6, 7. Psalm. 116.13. Jer. 16.7. Song 5.1. Zech 9.17.

As there were Flaggons, so there were Cups, and they are called Cups of
Consolation, and Cups of Salvation, because as I said, they were they by which
God at his Feastings with his People, or when he suppeth with them, gives out
the more large draughts of his love unto his Saints, to revive the spirits of
the humble, and to revive the hearts of the contrite ones. At these times God
made David's Cup run over. For we are now admitted, if our faith will bear it,
to drink freely into this grace, and to be merry with him; Psalm. 23.5. Luke
15.22, 23, 24. Song 5.1. chap. 7.11, 12. Joh. 14.23. Revel. 3.20.

This is that to which the Apostle alludeth, when he says, Be not drunk with
Wine, wherein is excess, but be ye filled with the Spirit; speaking to your
selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in
your hearts unto the Lord.

For the Cups, as to their use in the general, understand them, as of the Bowls
made mention of before. For assurances are the blooms, and flowers of Faith,
not always on it, though usually on Feasting days, it is so. So the degree of
the one, is still according to the measure of the other; Ephesians. 5.18. Jam. 5.
Romans 15.13.

LII. Of the Chargers of the Temple.
IN the Tabernacle they had but twelve of them, and they were made of Silver,
but in the Temple they had in all a thousand and thirty. The thirty were made
of Gold, the rest were made of Silver; Numb. 7.84.

These Chargers, were not for uses common or profane, but, as I take it, they
were those in which the Passover, and other Meat Offerings were dressed up, when
the People came to eat before God in his holy Temple.

The meat, you know, I told you was opposite to milk, and so are these
Chargers, to the Bowls, and Cups, and Flaggons of the Temple.

The Meat was of two sorts, roast, or boiled. Of that which was roast, was the
Passover, and of that which was boiled, was the Trespass offerings. Wherefore
concerning the Passover, he says, Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all in
Water, but roast with fire, his head, with his legs, and with the purtenance
thereof; Exodus 12.

This roast meat, was a type of the body of Christ, as suffering for our sins,
the which when it was roast, was, and is, as dressed up in Chargers, and set
before the Congregations of the Saints.

But what were the Chargers a type of?

I also ask, in what Charger our Gospel-Passover is now dressed up, and set
before the People. Is it not in the four Evangelists, the Prophets, and
Epistles of the Apostles? They therefore are the Chargers, and the Ordinance of
the Supper; in these also is the Trespass-Offerings, with what is fried in
Pans, mystically prepared for the Children of the highest.

And why might they not be a type of Gospel-Sermons?

I answer, I think not, so fitly, for alas! the best of Sermons in the World,
are but as thin slices cut out of those large dishes. Our Ministers are the
Carvers, good Doctrine is the meat, and the Chargers in which this meat is
found, are the holy Canonical Scriptures, etc. Though, as I said, most
properly, the New Testament of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

In these is Christ most truly, lively, and amply set before us as crucified,
or roast at the fire of God's Law for our sins, that we might live by him
through faith, feeding upon him; 2 Cor. 3.12. Gal. 3.1, 2. Acts 3.18, 19, 20,
21. Chap 13.4. Chap 26.22. 1 Pet. 1.10. Acts 7.42. Chap. 15.15. Chap. 28.23
Romans 16.26. Revel. 10.7.

There is in these Chargers, not only meat, but sauce (if you like it) to eat
the meat withal. For the Passover there is bitter herbs, or sound repentance:
and for other, as the thank-offerings, there is holy cheerfulness and prayers
to God for grace. All these are set forth before us in the holy Scriptures, and
presented to us thereby, as in the golden Chargers of the Temple. He that will
scoff at this, let him scoff. The Chargers were a type of some thing, and he
that can show a fitter Antitype then is here proposed to consideration, let him
do it, and I Will be thankful to him.

Christians, here is your Meat before you, get your Carvers to slice it out for
you: and this know, the deeper you dip it in the sauce, the better it will
relish. But let not unbelief teach you such manners, as to make you leave the
best bits behind you. For your liberty is to eat freely of the best, of the
fat, and of the sweet.

LIII. Of the goings out of the Temple.
AS to the comings into the Temple, of them we have spoken already; namely, of
the outer and inner Court, as also of the Doors of the Porch, and Temple. The
coming in was but one strait course, and that a type of Jesus Christ, but the
goings out were many: Joh. 10.9. Chap. 14.6.

Now, as I said, it is insinuated, that the goings out are many, answerable to
the many ways which the Children of Men have invented to Apostatize in from
God. Christ is the way into, but sin, the way out of the Temple of God. True, I
read not of a description of the goings out of this House, as I read of the
comings in. Only when they had Athalia out thence, She is said, To go out by
the way by which the Horses come into the King's Stables, and there she was
slain; as it were upon the Horse-dunghil; 2 King. 11.16. 2 Chronicles. 24.15.

When Vzziah also went out of this House for his transgression, he was cast out
of all Society, and made to dwell in a kind of a Pesthouse, even to the day of
his death; 2 Chro. 26.20, 21.

Thus therefore, though these goings out are not particularly described, the
Judgments that followed them, that have for their transgressions been thrust
out thence, have been both remarkable, and tremendous. For, for to die upon a
dunghill, or in a Pesthouse, and that for wicked actions, is a shameful, a
disgraceful thing. And God will still be spreading dung upon the faces of such,
no greatness shall prevent it; Yea, and will take them away with it; Mal. 2. I
will drive them out of my house, says he, I will love them no more; Hos. 9.15.

But what are we to understand in Gospel-days, by going out of the house of the
Lord, for, or by sin?

I answer, If it be done voluntarily, then sin leads you out, if it be done by
the holy compulsion of the Church, then it is done by the Judicial Judgment of
God; That is, they are cut off, and cast out from thence, as a Just reward for
their transgressions; Levit. 20.18. Chap. 22.3. Ezekiel. 14.8. 1 Cor. 5.13.

Well, but whether do they go, that are thus gone out of the Temple or Church
of God?

I answer, Not to the Dunghill with Athalia, nor to the Pest house with Vzziah,
but to the Devil, that is the first step, and so to Hell, without repentance.
But if their sin be not unpardonable, they may by repentance be recovered, and
in mercy tread these Courts again. Now the way to this recovery, is to think
seriously what they have done, or by what way they went out from the House of
God. Hence the Prophet is bid to show to the rebellious house, first the goings
out of the house, and then the comings in. But, I say first, he bids show them
the goings out thereof; Ezekiel. 43.10, 11.

And this is of absolute necessity, for the recovering of the sinner. For until
he that has sinned himself out of God's house, shall see what danger he has
incurred to himself, by this his wicked going out, he will not unfeignedly
desire to come in thither again.

There is another thing, as to this point, to be taken notice of. There is a
way, by which God also does depart from this House, and that also is by sin, as
the occasion. The sin of a man will thrust him out, and the sin of men will
drive God out of his own house. Of this you read, Ezekiel. 11.22, 23. For this, he
says, I have for saken mine house, I have left mine heritage, I have given the
dearly beloved of my Soul into the hand of her Enemies; Jer. 12.7.

And this also is dreadful: The great sentence of Christ upon the Jews lay much
in these words, Your house is left unto you desolate; that is, God has left you
to bare Walls, and to lifeless Traditions.

Consider therefore of this going out also. Alas, a Church, a true Church, is
but a poor thing, if God leaves, if God forsakes it. By a true Church, I mean
one that is Congregated, according to outward rule, that has sinned God away,
as she had almost quite done, that was of Laodicea; Revel. 3.

He that sins himself out, can find no geod in the World, and they that have
sinned God out, can find no good in the Church. A Church that has sinned God
away from it, is a sad Lump indeed. You therefore that are in God's Church,
take heed of sinning your selves out thence; also take heed that while you keep
in, you sin not God away, for thence-forth, no good is there: Yea, woe unto them
when I depart from them, says God, Hos. 9 12.

LIVE. Of the Singers belonging to the Temple.
HAving thus far passed through the Temple, I come now to the Singers there. The
Singers were many, but all of the Church, either Jews, or Proselites. Nor was
there any, as I know of, under the Old Testament-worship, admitted to sing the
Songs of the Church, and to celebrate that part of Worship with the Saints, but
they, who, at least, in appearance, were so. The Song of Moses, of Deborah, and
of those that danced before David, with Others that you read of, they were all
performed, either by Jews by nature, or by such as were proselited to their
Religion; Exodus 15.1. Judge. 5.1, 2. 1 Samuel 18 6. And such worship then was
occasioned by God's great appearance for them, against the power of the
Gentiles, their Enemies.

But we are confined to the Songs of the Temple, a more distinct type of ours
in the Church under the Gospel.

1. The Singers then were many, but the chief of them in the days of David,
were David himself, Asaph, Jeduthan, and Heman, and their Sons. 2. In David's
time the chief of these Singers were two hundred threescore and eight; 1 Chro.
25.
These Singers of old were to sing their Songs over the burnt-offering, which
were types of the Sacrificed Body of Christ, a Memorial of which Offering we
have at the Lord's Table, the Consummation of which, Christ and his Disciples
celebrated with a Hymn; Matt. 26.30.

And as of old, they were the Church, that did sing in the Temple, according to
Institution, to God; So also they are by God's appointment to be sung by the
Church in the New. Hence, 1. They are said to be the redeemed that sing. 2. The
Songs that they sing, are said to be the Songs of their Redemption; Revel. 5.9,
10. 3. They were and are Songs, that no man can learn, but they.


But let us run a little in the Parallel.

1. They were of old appointed to sing, that were cunning and skilful in Songs.
And answerable to that, it is said, That no Man could learn our New Testament
Songs, but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from
the Earth; 1 Chro. 15.22. Revel. 14.3.

2. These Songs were song with Harps, Psalteries, Cymbals, and Trumpets; a type
of our singing with spiritual Joy, from grace in our hearts; 1 Chro. 25.6. 2
Chro. 29.26, 27, 28. Col. 3.16.

3. The Singers of old were to be clothed in fine Linen, which fine Linen,
was a type of Innocence, and an upright Conversation. Hence the Singers under
the New Testament, are said to be Virgins, such, in whose mouth was no guile,
and that were without fault before the Throne of God; 1 Chro. 15.27. and Revel.
14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. See also Chap 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Psalm 33 1.

4. The Songs sung in the Temple, were new, or such as were compiled after the
manner of repeated mercies, that the Church of God had received, or were to
receive, and answerable to this, is the Church to sing now, new Songs, with new
hearts, for new mercies; Psalm. 33.3. Psalm. 40.3. Psalm. 96. Psalm. 144 9. Revel.
14.3.

New Songs, I say, are grounded on new matter, new occasions, new mercies, new
deliverances, new discoveries of God to the Soul, or for new frames of heart.
And are such as are most taking, most pleasing, and most refreshing to the Soul.

5. These Songs of old, to distinguish them from Heathenish ones, were called
God's Songs, the Lord's Songs; because taught by him, and learned of him, and
enjoined to them to be sung to his praise. Hence David said, God had put a new
Song in his mouth, even praises to our God; 1 Chro. 25.7. Psalm. 47.6, 7. Psalm.
137.4. Psalm. 40.3.

6. These Songs also were called the Songs of Sion, and the Songs of the
Temple; Psalm. 137.3. Amos 8.3.

And they are so called, as they were theirs to sing there, I say, of them of
Sion, and the Worshipers in the Temple: I say, to sing in the Church, by the
Church, to him who is the God of the Church, for the mercies, benefits, and
blessings, which she has received from him. Sion-Songs, Temple Songs, must be
sung by Sion's Sons, and Temple-worshipers.

The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with Songs, and
everlasting Joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness; and
sorrow and sighing shall fly away. Therefore they shall come and sing in the
height, or upon the Mountain of Zion: and shall flow together, thither, to the
goodness of the Lord. Break forth into singing ye Mountains, and let the
Inhabitants of the ROCK sing; Isa. 44.23. Chap. 42.11.

To sing to God, is the highest Worship we are capable to perform in Heaven;
and it is much if sinners on Earth, without grace, should be capable of
performing it, according to his Institution, acceptably. I pray God it be done
by all those that now a days get into Churches, in spirit, and with
understanding.

LV. Of the Union of the holy and most holy Temple.
THat commonly called the Temple of God at Jerusalem, considered as standing of
two parts, was called the outward, and inward Temple, or, the holy, and most
holy place. They were builded upon one, and the same foundation, neither could
one go into the Holiest, but as through the holy place, 1 King. 3.1. Chap. 6.1.
2 Chro. 5.1, 13. Chap. 7.2.

The first house, namely, that which we have been speaking of, was a type of
the Church- militant, and the place most holy a type of the Church triumphant.
I say, of the Church- triumphant, as it is now.

So then, The house standing of these two parts, was a shadow of the Church
both in Heaven and Earth. And for that they are joined together by one and the
same foundation, it was to show, that they above, and we below, are yet one and
the self-same house of God. Hence they, and we together, are called, The whole
Family in Heaven and Earth, Ephesians. 3.14, 15.

And hence it is said again, that we who believe on Earth, are come to Mount
Zion, to the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to an
invincible company of Angels. To the general Assembly, and Church of the first
born, which are written in Heaven, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect,
and to God the Judge of all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and
to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel: Heb.
12.22, 23, 24.

The difference then betwixt us, and them, is, not that we are really two, but
one body in Christ, in diverse places. True, we are below stairs, and they
above; they in their holy day, and we in our working-day clothes: they in
harbor, but we in the storm; they at rest, and we in the Wilderness: They
singing, as crowned with Joy; we crying, as crowned with thorns. But I I say,
we are all of one house, one family, and are all the Children of one father.

This therefore we must not forget, lest we debar our selves of much of that,
which otherwise, while here, we have a right unto. Let us therefore, I say,
remember, that the Temple of God is but one, though divided, as one may say,
into Kitchen and Hall, above stairs and below; or holy and most holy place. For
it stands upon the same foundation, and is called, but one, the Temple of God;
which is builded upon the Lord our Savior.

I told you before, that none of old, could go into the most holy, but by the
holy place, even by the Vail that made the Partition between; Exodus 26.33.
Levit. 16 2, 12, 15. Heb. 9.7, 8. chap 10.19.

Wherefore, they are deceived, that think to go into the holiest, which is
Heaven, when they did; who yet abandon, and hate the holy place, while they
live.

Nay Sirs, The way into the holiest, is through the holy place; the way into
Heaven, is through the Church on Earth; for that Christ is there by his Word to
be received by faith, before he can by us in Person be received in the beatical
Vision. The Church on Earth, is as the house of the Women, spoken of in the
Book of Esther, where we must be dieted, perfumed, and made fit to go into the
Bridegroom's Chamber, or as Paul says, made meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light; Esth. 2. Col. 1.12.

LVI. Of the Holiest or Inner Temple.
THE most holy place was, as I said, a Figure of Heaven it self: consequently,
a type of that where the most special presence of God is; and where his face is
most clearly seen, and the gladness of his countenance most enjoyed; Heb. 9.23,
24. Exodus 25.22. Numb. 7.89.

The most holy place was dark, it had no Windows in it, though there was such
round the Chambers; the more special presence of God too, on Mount Sina, was in
the thick Darkness there; 1 King. 8.12. 2 Chro. 6.1 Exodus 1^.9. chap. 20.21.

1. This Holiest therefore being thus made, was to show that God as in Heaven,
to us on Earth, is altogether invisible, and not to be reached otherwise than
by Faith. For I say, in that this House had no Windows, nothing therein could
be seen by the highest light of this World. Things there were only seen by the
light of the fire of the Altar, which was a type of the shinings of the Holy
Ghost; 1 Cor. 2. chap. And hence it is said, notwithstanding this darkness, He
dwells in the light, which no man can approach unto; none but the High
Priest, Christ; 1 Timothy 6.16. 1 Pet. 3.21, 22.

2. The Holiest therefore was thus built, to show how different our state in
Heaven will be, from this our state on Earth. We walk here by one light, by the
light of a written word; For that is now a light to our feet, and Lanthorn to
our Path. But that place, where there will be no written Word, nor Ordinances
as here, will yet to us shine more light and clear, then if all the lights that
are in the World were put together to light one Man: For God is light, and in
him is no darkness at all; 1 John 1.5. And in his light, and in the light of
the Lamb immediately, we shall live, and walk, and rejoice all the days of
Eternity.

3. This also was ordained thus, to show, that we while in the first Temple,
should live by faith, as to what there was, or as to what was done in the
second. Hence it is said, as to that, we walk by faith, not by sight; 2 Cor.
5.6, 7, 8.

The things that are there we are told of, even of the Ark of the Testimony,
and Mercy-Seat, and the Cherubims of glory, and the presence of Christ, and of
God; we are, I say, told of them by the Word, and believe, and are taken
therewith, and hope to go to them hereafter: but otherwise we see them not.
Therefore we are said to look, not at the things that are seen, but at the
things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are temporal, but the
things that are not seen are eternal; 2 Cor. 4.18.

4. The People of old were not to look into the Holiest, lest they died, (Numb.
17.13.) save only their High Priest, he might go into it: To show that we,
while here, must have a care of vain speculations, for there is nothing to be
seen by us while here, in Heaven, otherwise then by faith in God's eternal
Testament: True, we may now come to the Holiest, even as nigh as the first
Temple will admit us to come; but it must be by blood and faith, not by vain
imagination, sense, or carnal reason.

5. This Holiest of all was four square every way, both as to height, length,
and breadth. To be thus, is a note of perfection, as I have showed elsewhere;
wherefore it was on purpose thus built, to show us, that all fullness of
blessedness is there, both as to the nature, degree, and duration. So when that
which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away; 1 Cor.
13.8, 9, 10. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.

LVII. Of the Vail of the Temple.
THE Vail of the Temple was a Hanging, made of blue and purple, and crimson,
and fine linen, and there were Cherubins wrought thereon; Exodus 26.31, 32.

1. This Vail was one partition 'twixt the holy and most holy place. And I take
it, it was to keep from the sight of the Worshipers, the things most holy, when
the High Priest went in thither, to accomplish the service of God; Exodus 26.33.
2 Chronicles. 3.14. Heb. 9.8.

2. The Vail was a type of Two things.

1. Of these visible Heavens, through which Christ passed, when he went to make
Intercession for us. And as by the Vail, the Priest went out of the sight of
the People, when he went into the Holiest of all: So Jesus Christ when he
ascended, was by the Heavens, that great and stretched-out curtain, received
out of the sight of his People here. Also by the same Curtain, since it is
become as a Tent for him to dwell in, he is still received, and still kept out
of our sight: For now we see him not, nor shall, until these heavens be rouled
together as a Scrole, and pass away like a thing rouled together, Isa. 40.22.
Acts 1.9, 10, 11. Chap. 3.19, 20, 21. 1 Pet. 1.8.

2. This is that Vail, through which the Apostle says, Jesus is, as a
Fore-runer for us, entered into the presence of God. For by Vail here also,
must be meant the Heavens or out-spread Firmament thereof. As both Mark and
Peter says, He is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God; Mark
16.19. 1 Pet. 3.22.

3. The Vail of the Temple was made of blew, the very color of the Heavens. Of
purple, and crimson, and scarlet also, which are the colors of many of the
Clouds: because of the reflections of the Sun. But again,

4 The Vail was also a type of the body of Christ. For as the Vail of the
Temple, when whole, kept the view of the things of the Holiest from us, but
when rent, gave place to Man to look in unto them: Even so the Body of Christ
while whole, kept that of the things of the Holiest from that view, we, since
he was pierced, have of them. Hence we are said to enter into the Holiest, by
faith, through the Vail, that is to say, his flesh; Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.

But yet, I say, all is by faith; and indeed the renting of the Vail that Day
that Christ was crucified, did loudly preach this to us. For no sooner was the
body of Christ pierced, but the Vail of the Temple rent in twain from the top
to the bottom: And so a way was made for a clearer sight of what was there
beyond it, both in the Type and Antitype, Mat. 27.50, 51, 52, 53. Heb. 10.19,
20.

Thus you see that the Vail of the Temple was a type of these visible Heavens,
and also of the body of Christ; of the first, because, he passed through it unto
the Father; of the second, because, we by it have boldness to come to the
Father.

I read also of two other Vails, as of that spread over the face of Moses, to
the end the Children of Israel should not steadfastly behold, and of the first
Vail of the Tabernacle; But of these I shall not in this place speak.

Upon the Vail of the Temple there was also the figures of Cherubims wrought,
that is, of Angels; to show that as the Angels are with us here, and wait upon
us all the days of our Pilgrimage in this World: so, when we die, they stand
ready, even at the Vail, at the Door of these Heavens, to come, when bid, to
fetch us, and carry us away into Abraham's bosom; Luke 16.22.

The Vail then thus understood, teaches us first where Jesus is, namely, not
here, but gone into Heaven, from whence we should wait for him. It also teaches
us, that if we would even now discern the Glories that are in the Holiest of
all, we must look through Jesus to them, even through the Vail, that is to say,
his flesh. Yea, It teaches us, that we may by faith through him, attain to a
kind of a Presence, at least of the beauty and sweetness of them.

LVIII. Of the Doors of the Inner Temple.
1. BEsides the Vail, there was a Door to the inner Temple, and that Door was
made of Olive Tree; And for the entering in of the Oracle, he made doors of
Olive Tree. The two Doors also of Olive Tree, and he carved upon them
Cherubims, and Palm Trees, and open Flowers, and over-laid them with Gold, and
spread Gold upon the Cherubims, and upon the Palm Trees; 1 King. 6.31.

2. These Doors were a type of the gate of Heaven, even of that which lets into
the Eternal Mansion House that is beyond that Vail. I told you before, that the
Vail was a type of the visible Heavens, which God has spread out as a Curtain,
and through which Christ went, when he ascended to the right hand of the Father.

3. Now beyond this Vail, as I said, I find a Door, a Gate opening with two
Leaves, as before, we found at the Door of the outward Temple. These are they
which the Psalmist calls to, when he says, Lift up your heads, O ye Gates,
even lift them up ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall come in;
Psalm. 24.7, 9.

4. The Doors of the Temple were made of Fir, but these, as you see, were made
of Olive; To show us by that fat Tree, that rich type, with what glory we shall
be met, who shall be counted worthy to enter at these Gates. The Olive Tree has
its name from the Oil and fatness of its nature, and the Doors that let into
the Holiest were made of this Olive Tree.

5. Cherubims were also carved upon these Doors, To show, that as the Angels
met us at the Temple-door, and as they wait upon us in the Temple, and stand
also ready at the Vail, so even at the Gate of the Mansion House, they will be
also ready to give us a welcome thither, and to attend us into the
Presence Chamber.

6. Palm Trees also, as they were carved upon the Temple-doors, so we also find
them here before the Oracle, upon the Doors that let in thither. To show, that
as Christ gave us the Victory at our first entering into faith, So he will
finish that victory, by giving of us Eternal Salvation. Thus is he the Author
and finisher of our faith. For as sure as at first we received the Palm-branch
by faith, so surely shall we we^r it in our hands, as a token of his
faithfulness in the Heaven of Heavens, for ever; Revel. 7.9.

7. Open Flowers, are also carved here; To show, that Christ, who is the door
to glory, as well as the door to grace, will be precious to us at our entering
in thither, as well as at the first step we took thither-ward in a sinful
miserable World. Christ will never lose his sweet-scent in the Nostrils of his
Church. He is most sweet now, will be so at Death, and sweetest of all, when
by him we shall enter into that Mansion House prepared for us in Heaven.

8. The Palm Trees, and open Flowers may also be a type of the precious ones of
God, who shall be counted worthy of his Kingdom: The one, of the uprightness of
their hearts; the other, of the good savor of their lives. The upright shall
dwell in thy presence; and to him that orders his conversation aright, I will
show the salvation of God; Psalm. 140.13. Psalm. 50. ult.

9. Thus sweet in Earth, sweet in Heaven: And he that yields the fruit of the
Gospel here, shall find it for himself, and his Eternal Comfort, at the Gates
of Glory.

10. All these were over-laid with gold, as you may say, and so they were at
the Door of the first House. True, but observe, here we have an addition. Here
is gold upon gold. Gold laid on them, and then gold spread upon that. He
over-laid them with gold, and then spread gold upon them. The Lord gives grace
and glory, Psalm. 84.11. Gold, and gold. Gold spread upon gold. Grace is gold in
the leaf, and glory is gold in plates. Grace is thin gold, glory is gold that
is thick. Here is gold laid on, and gold spread upon that. And that both upon
the Palm Trees and the Cherubims. Gold upon the Palm trees, that is on the
Saints; Gold upon the Cherubims, that is upon the Angels. For, I doubt not, but
that the Angels themselves shall receive Additional Glory for the Service which
they have served Christ and his Church on Earth.

11. The Angels are GOD's Harvestmen, and doubtless he will give them good
Wages, even Glory upon their Glory then; Matt. 13.38, 39. Chap. 24.31. Joh.
4.36.

12. You know Harvest men use to be paid well for gathering in the Corn, and I
doubt not but so shall these, when the great Ingathering is over. But what an
entrance into Life is here? Here is gold upon gold at the Door, at our first
step into the Kingdom.

LIX. Of the Golden Nails of the Inner Temple.
I Shall not concern my self with all the Nails of the Temple, as of those made
of Iron, etc. 1 Chronicles. 22.3. but only with the Golden ones, of which you read 2 Chronicles. 3.4. where he says, And the weight of the nails was fifty Shekels of
Gold: These Nails, as I conceive, were all fastened to the place most Holy, and
of form most apt to that of which they were a Figure.

1. Some of them represented Christ Jesus our Lord, as fixed in his Mediatory
Office in the Heavens; wherefore in one place, when the Holy Ghost speaks of
Christ, as he sprang from Judah to be a Mediator, says, Out of him came the
Corner (the Cornerstone) out of him the Nails, Zech. 10.4.

Now since he is here compared to a Nail, a golden Nail, it is to show, that as
a Nail, by driving, is fixed in his place; so Christ by God's Oath is made an
everlasting Priest, Heb. 7.25. Therefore as he says again, The Nail, the
Aaronical Priesthood, that was fastened in a sure place, should be removed, be
cut down, and fall: So he who has the Key of David, which is Christ ( Revel.
3.7.) shall by God, as a Nail, be fastened in a sure place, and abide; therefore
he says again, And he shall be for a glorious Throne, or Mercy-seat, to his
Fathers House: And moreover, That they shall hang on him (as on a Nail) all the
Glory of his Fathers House, the Offspring, and the Issue, all Vessels of small
quantity, from the Vessels of Cups, even to the Vessels of Flagons. According
to that which is written, And they sang a new Song to the Lamb that was slain,
saying, Thou art worthy, etc. Isai. 22.20, 22, 23, 24, 25. Rev. 5.9* 12.

And therefore it is again, that Christ under the similitude of a Nail, is
accounted by Saints indeed, their great Pledge or Hope, as he is in Heaven, of
their certain coming thither: Hence they said of old, God has given us a Nail
in his holy place: A Nail, says the Line, a Pin, a constant and sure abode,
says the Margin, Ezra 9.8. Now this Nail in his holy place, as was showed
before, is Christ; Christ, as possessed of Heaven, and as abiding and ever living
therein for us.

Hence he is called, as there, our Head, our Life, and our Salvation; and also
we are said there to be set down together in him, Ephesians. 1. ult. Col. 3.3.
Ephesians. 2.5, 6.

2. Some of these Nails were types of the holy words of God, which for ever
are settled in Heaven. Types, I say, of their Yea, and Amen. Hence Solomon in
another place compares the Words of the wise God, To goads and nails, fastened
by the Masters of the Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd; Eccles.
12.11.

They are called Goads, because, as such prick the Oxen on in their drawing, so
God's Words prick Christians on in their Holy Duties. They are called Nails,
to show, that as Nails, when fastened well in a sure place, are not easily
removed: So God's Words by his will, stand firm for ever. The Masters of the
Assemblies are, firstly, the Apostles. The one Shepherd is Jesus Christ. Hence
the Gospel of Christ is said to be everlasting, to abide for ever, and to be
more steadfast than Heaven and Earth; Isa. 40.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 1.24, 25. Heb. 13
20. Revel. 14.6. Matt. 24.35.

The Lord Jesus then, and his Holy Words are the Golden Nails of the Temple,
and the fixing of these Nails in the Temple, was to show, that Christ is the
same to day, yesterday, and for ever: and that his words abide, and remain the
same for ever and ever. He then that has Christ, has a Nail in the Holiest, he
that has a promise of Salvation, has also a Nail in Heaven, a Golden Nail in
Heaven.

LX. Of the Floor and Walls of the inner Temple.
1. THE Floor of the Oracle was overlaid with Cedar, and so also was the Walls
of this House. He built twenty Cubits on the sides of the House, both the Floor
and the Walls with boards of Cedar. He even built for it within, for the
Oracle, for the most holy place; 1 King. 16.

2. In that he does tell us with what it was cieled, and does also thus repeat,
saying, for the Oracle, for it within, even for the most holy place; it is
because he would have it noted, that this only is the place, that thus was done.

3. Twenty Cubits, that was the length, and breadth, and height of the House:
So that by his thus saying, he teaches that thus it was builded round about.

4. The Cedar is, if I mistake not, the highest of the Trees; Ezekiel. 31.3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8.

Now in that it is said the House, the Oracle, was cieled round about
therewith. It may be to show, that in Heaven, and no where else, is the height
of all perfections.

Perfection is in the Church on Earth, but not such as is in Heaven.

1. There is a natural perfection, and so a Penny is as natural Silver, as is a
Shilling.

2. There is a comparative perfection, and so one thing may be perfect and
imperfect at the same time; as a half Crown is more than a Shilling, yet less,
than a Crown.

3. There is also that which we call the utmost perfection, and that is it
which cannot be added to, or taken from him: and so God only is perfect.

Now heavenly glory is that which goes beyond all perfection on the Earth, as
the Cedar goes beyond all Trees for height. Hence God, when he speaks of his
own excellency, sets it forth by its height. The high God, the most high, and
the high and lofty one: and the highest; Psalm. 97.9. Psalm. 138.6. Genesis 14.19,
20, 21. Dan. 3.21. Chap. 5.18. Psalm. 18.13. Psalm. 85.7. Luke 1.32. Chap. 6.35.
Isa. 57.15. Psalm 9.2. Psalm. 56 2. Psalm. 92 1. Isa. 14.14.

These terms also are ascribed to this House, for that it was the place where
utmost perfection dwelt.

I take therefore the Cedar in this place to be a note of perfection; even the
Cedar with which this House was cieled.

For since it is the Wisdom of God to speak to us, oft-times by Trees, Gold,
Silver, Stones, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Spiders, Ants, Frogs, Flies, Lice, Dust,
etc. and here by Wood; how should we by them understand his Voice, if we count
there is no meaning in them.

And the Cedar of the house within was carved with knops, and flowers, all was
Cedar: There was no stone seen; 1 King. 9.18.

Knops and Flowers, were they with which the Golden Candlestick was adorned, as
you read, Exodus 25.33, 35. Chap. 37.19, 21.

The Candlestick was a type of the Church, and the Knops, and Flowers a type of
her Ornaments. But what! Must Heaven be hanged round about with the Ornaments
of Saints! with the fruits of their graces? Well, it is certain, that something
more than ordinary must be done with them, since they are admitted to follow
them into the holy place; Revel. 14.13. And since it is said they shall have a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory bestowed on them for them in the
Heavens; 2 Cor. 4.16, 17.

All was Cedar, there was no stone seen. Take stone in the type for that which
was really so, and in the antitype, for that which is so mystically, and then
it may import to us, that in Heaven, the antitype of this holiest, there shall
never be any thing of hardness of heart in them that possess it for ever: All
imperfection arises from the badness of the heart, but there will be no bad
hearts in glory. No shortness in knowledge, no crosness of disposition, no
workings of lusts, or corruptions will be there, no not thoroughout the whole
Heavens. Here alas they are seen, and that in the best of Saints, because here
our light is mixed with darkness, but there will be no night there, nor any
stone seen.

And the Floor of the House was over-laid with gold; 1 King. 6.30. This is like
that of which we read of the new Jerusalem, that is to come from God out of
Heaven, says the Text, The street of the City was pure Gold; and like that, of
which you read in Exodus, They saw under the feet of the God of Israel, as it
were a paved work of a Sapphire stone, and as it were the body of Heaven in its
clearness; Revel. 21.21. Exodus 24.10:

All the Visions were rich, but this the richest, that the Floor of the House
should be covered, or overlaid with Gold. The Floor and Street, are walking
Places, and how rich will our steps be then! Alas! here we sometimes step into
the Mire, and then again stumble upon blocks and stones. Here we sometimes fall
into holes, and have our heel often caught in a snare: but there will be none of
these: Gold, gold, all will be gold, and golden perfections, when we come into
the holy place. Job at best took but his steps in butter, but we then shall
take all our steps in the Gold of the Sanctuary.

LXI. Of the Ark of the Covenant, which was placed in the inner Temple.
IN the Word, I read of three Arks, to wit, Noah's Ark; That in which Moses was
hid; and the ARK of the Covenant of God; Genesis 6.14. Exodus 2.3, 5. But it is the
Ark of the Covenant, of which I shall now speak.

The Ark was made of Shittim Wood, two Cubits and an half was the length
thereof, and a Cubit and an half the breadth thereof, and a Cubit and an half
the height thereof. It was over-laid with pure gold within and without, and a
Crown of gold was made for it round about, Exodus 25.10, 11.

1. This Ark was called the Ark of the Covenant, as the first that you read of
was called Noah's, because, as he in THAT was kept from being drowned: So the
Tables of the Covenant was kept in this, from breaking.

2. This Ark, in this, was a type of Christ. For that in him only, and not in
the hand of Moses, these Tables were kept whole. Moses brake them, the Ark
keeps them.

3. Not only that wrote on two Tables of Stone, but that also called the
Ceremonial, was put into the Ark to be kept. The two Tables were put into the
midst of the Ark, to answer to this, Thy Law is within my heart to do it. But
the Ceremonial was put into the SIDE of the Ark, to show, that out of the side
of Christ must come that which must answer that. For out thence came blood, and
water: Blood to answer the blood of the Ceremonies, and water to answer the
Purifyings and Rinsings of that Law.

The Ceremonies therefore were lodged in the side of the Ark, to show, that
they should be answered out of the side of Jesus Christ; Exodus 25.16, 17. Deuteronomy.
10.5. Chap. 31.26. Psalm. 40.8. Joh. 19.34. Heb. 10.7.

4. The Ark had the Name of God put upon it; yea, it was called the strength of
God, and his glory, though made of Wood. And Christ is God both in Name and
Nature, though made flesh; yea more, made to be sin for us: 2 Samuel 6.2. 2 Chro.
6.14. Chap. 13.6. Joh. 1.14. Romans 9.5. 2 Cor. 5 21.

5. The Ark was carried upon Men's shoulders this way and that, to show how
Christ should be carried and preached by his Apostles and Ministers, into all
parts of the World: Exodus 25.14. 1 Chro. 15.15. Matt. 28.19, 20. Luke 24.46, 47.

6. The Ark had those Testimonies of God's presence accompanying it, as had no
other Ceremony of the Law: and Christ had those Signs and Tokens of his
Presence with him, as never had Man either in Law or Gospel. This is so
apparent, it needs no proof. And now for a few Comparisons more.

1. 'Twas at that that God answered the People, when they were wont to come to
enquire of him: And in these last days, God has spoken to us by his Son: 1.
Chro. 13.3. 1 Samuel 14.18. Heb. 1.1, 2: Joh. 16.23, 24.

2. At the presence of the Ark the Waters of Jordan stood still till Israel,
the ransomed of the Lord, passed over from the Wilderness to Canaan: And it is
by the power and presence of Christ, that we pass over Death: Jordan's antitype
from the Wilderness of this World to Heaven; Jos. 3.15, 16, 17. Joh. 11.25.
Romans 8.37, 38, 39. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56 57.

3. Before the Ark the Walls of Jericho fell down, and at the presence of
Christ shall all high Towers, and strong Holds, and hiding Places for sinners
be razed, and dissolved at his coming; Isa. 6.20. Chap. 30.25. Chap. 2.1, 2,
13, 14, 15, 16. 2 Pet. 3.10. Revel. 20.11, 12, 13.

4. Before the Ark, Dagon fell, that Idol of the Philistines; and before Christ
Jesus, Devils fell, those gods of all those Idols. And he must reign till all
his Enemies be put under his feet: And until they be made his foot stool; 1 Samuel 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Mark 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.25. Heb. 10.13.

5. The Philistines were also plagued for meddling with the Ark, while they
abode uncircumcised, and the wicked will one day be most severely plagued for
their meddling with Christ, with their uncircumcised hearts; 1 Samuel 5 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 50 16 Matt. 24.51. Chap. 25.11, 12. Luke 13.25, 26, 27, 28.

6. God's blessing was upon those that entertained the Ark as they should; and
much more is, and will his blessing be upon those that so embrace and
entertain his Christ, and profess his name sincerely; 2 Samuel 6.11. Acts 3.26.
Gal. 3.13, 14. Matt. 19.27, 28 29. Luke 22.28 29.

7. When Vzza put forth his hand to stay the Ark, when the Oxen shock it, as
despairing of GOD's protecting of it, without a humane help, he died before
the Lord: even so will all those do (without repentance) who use unlawful means
to promote Christ's Religion, and to support it in the World; 1 Chro. 13.9, 10.
Matt. 26.52. Revel. 13.10.

8. The Ark, though thus dignified, was, of it self, but low; but a Cubit and a
half high: Also Christ, though he was the glory of Heaven and of God, yet made
himself of no reputation, and was found in the likeness of a man; Exodus 25.11,
12. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

9. The Ark* had a Crown of Gold round about upon it, To show how Christ is
crowned by his Saints by faith, and shall be crowned by them in glory, for
all the good he has done for them, as also how all Crowns shall one day
stoop to him, and be set upon his Head. This is shevved in the type, Zech.
6.11, 14. and in the Antitype, Revel. 4 10. Chap. 19.12.

10. The Ark was over-laid with gold within, and without. To show, that
Christ was perfect in inward grace; and outward life; in spirit, and in
righteousness; Joh. 1.12, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 2.22.

11. The Ark was placed under the Mercy Seat, to show that Jesus Christ, as
Redeemer, brings and bears, as it were upon his Shoulders the Mercy of God to
us, even in the body of his flesh, thorough death; Exodus 25.21. Ephesians. 4.23.
Chap. 5.1, 2.

12. When the Ark was removed far from the People, the godly went mourning
after it; And when Christ is hid, or taken from us, then we mourn in those
days; 2 Samuel 7.2. Mark 2.19, 20. Luke 5.34, 35. Joh. 16.20, 21, 22.

13. All Israel had the Ark again, after their Mourning-time was over: And
Christ, after his People have sorrovved for him a-vvhile, will see them again
and their hearts shall rejoice; Joh. 16.1, 2, 3, 20, 21, 22.

By all these things, and many more, that might be mentioned, it is most
evident, that the Ark of the Testimony was a type of Jesus Christ; and take
notice a little of that which follows; namely, that the Ark at last arived to
the place most holy; Heb. 9.3, 4.

That is, after its Wanderings, for the Ark was made, first to wander like a
Non-inhabitant, from place to place; now hither, and then thither, now in the
hands of Enemies, and then abused by friends; yea, it was caused to rove from
place to place, as that of which the World was weary. I need instance to you
for proof hereof, none other place, than the 5th, 6th, and 7th Chapters of the
first Book of Samuel: And answerable to this, was our dear Lord Jesus posted
backvvards and forwards, hither and thither, by the force of the rage of his
Enemies:

1. He was hunted into Egypt so soon as he was born; Matt. 2.

2. Then he was driven to live in Gali^^e, the space of many years.

3. Also when he showed himself to Israel, They drove him sometimes into the
Wilderness, sometimes into the Desert, sometimes into the Sea, and sometimes
into the Mountains, and still in every of these places he was either haunted,
or hunted by new Enemies.

And last of all, the Pharisees plot for his life, Judas sells him, the Priests
buy him, Peter denies him, his Enemies mock, scourge, buffet, and much abuse
him: In fine, they get him condemned, and crucified, and buried; but at last
God commanded, and took him to his place, even within the Vail, and sets him to
bear up the Mercy-Seat, where he is to this very day, being our Ark to save us,
as Noah's did him, as Moses did him: Yea better, as none but Christ does save
his own.

LXII. Of the placing of the Ark in the Holiest, or Inner Temple.
1. THE Ark as we have said, and as the Text declares, when carried to its
rest, was placed in the inner Temple, or in the most Holy Place, even under the
Wings of the Cherubims. And the Priests brought in the Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord unto his place, to the Oracle of the house, unto the most holy place,
even under the Wings of the Cherubims; Exodus 26.33. Chap. 39.35. 1 King. 8 3. 2
Chro. 5.7.

2. Before this, as was said before, the Ark was carried from place to place,
and caused to dwell in a Tent, under Curtains, as all our fathers did. To show
that Christ, as we, was made for a time to wander in the World, in order to his
being possessed of glory; 2 Samuel 7.1, 2, 6. Heb. 11.9. Jo. 1.10. Chap. 16.28.
Chap. 3.13.

3. But now, when the Ark was brought into the Holiest, it is said to be brought
into its place. This World then was not Christ his place, he was not from
beneath, he came from his father's house; wherefore while here, he was not at
his place, nor could, until he ascended up where he was before; Joh. 8.23.
Chap. 16.28. Chap. 6.62. Chap. 3.13.

4. Christ's proper place therefore is the Holiest. His proper place, as God,
as Priest, as Prophet, as King, and as the Advocate of his People. Here, with
us, he has no more to do, in Person, as Mediator. If he were on Earth, he
should not be a Priest, etc. His place and work is now above with his Father,
and before the Angels; Acts 5.31. 1 Pet. 3.22. Heb. 4.14. Chap. 8.4. Chap.
9.24. 1 John 2.1, 2. Revel. 1.1, 2.

5. It Is said, the Ark was brought to the Oracle of the House. Solomon was not
content to say, it was brought into the Holiest: but he says, his place was
the Oracle, the holy Oracle, that is, the place of hearing. For he, when he
ascended, had somewhat to say to God on the behalf of his People. To the
Oracle, that is, to the place of revealing: For he also was there to receive,
and from thence to reveal to his Church on Earth something that could not be
made manifest, but from this holy Oracle. There therefore he is with the two
Tables of Testimony in his heart, as perfectly kept; he also is there with the
whole fulfilling of the Ceremonial Law in his side, showing and pleading the
perfection of his Righteousness, and the Merit of his Blood with his Father,
and to receive and to do us word, who believe in him, how well pleased the
Father is, with what he has done in our behalf.

6. Into the most holy place. By these words is shevved, vvhither also the Ark
went, when it went to take up its rest. And in that this Ark was a type of
Christ in this, it is to show or further manifest, that what Christ does now in
Heaven, he does it before his Father's face. Yea, it intimates that Christ even
there makes his appeals to God, concerning the worth of what he did on Earth,
to God the Judge of all; I say, whether he ought not for his sufferings-sake,
to have granted to him his whole desire, as Priest and Advocate for his People.

Will thou, said Festus to Paul, go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
these things before me? Acts 25.9. Why, this our blessed Jesus was willing when
here, to go up to Jerusalem to be judged; and being misjudged of there, he made
his appeal to God, and is now gone thither, even into the holy place, even to
him that is Judge of all, for his Verdict upon his doing; and whether the Souls
for whom he became undertaker, to bring them to glory, have not by him a right
to the Kingdom of Heaven.

7. Under the Wings of the Cherubims. This does further confirm our Words; for
having appealed from Earth to Heaven, as the Ark was set under the Wings of the
Cherubims, so he in his interceeding with God, and in pleading his Merits for
us, does it in the presence and hearing of all the Angels of Heaven.

And thus much of the Ark of the Covenant, and of its antitype: We come next to
speak of the Mercy-Seat.

LXIII. Of the Mercy-Seat, and how it was placed in the holy Temple.
THE Mercy-Seat was made in the Wilderness, but brought up by Solomon, after
the Temple was builded, with the rest of the holy things; 2 Chro. 5.2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.

The Mercy-Seat, as I have showed of the Ark, was but low, Two Cubits and a
half was the length, and a Cubit and a half the breadth thereof. But the height
thereof, was without measure.

1. The length and breadth of the Mercy-Seat is the same with that of the Ark:
perhaps to show us that the length and breadth of the Mercy of God to his Elect,
is the same with the length and breadth of the Merits of Christ; Exodus 25.10.17.

Therefore we are said to be justified in him, blessed in him, even according
to the purpose which God purposed in him.

2. But in that the Mercy-Seat is without measure, as to height, it is to show,
that, would God extend it, it is able to reach, even them that fall from
Heaven, and to save all that ever lived on Earth, even all that are now in
Hell. For there is, not only breadth enough for them that shall be saved, but
bread enough and to spare; Luke 15.17.

And thou shall, says God, put the Mercy-Seat above upon the Ark. Thus he said
to Moses, and this was the place which David assigned for it; Exodus 25.21. 1
Chro. 28.11.

Now its being by God's Ordinance placed thus, does teach us many things.

1. That Mercie's foundation to us is Christ. The Mercy Seat was set upon the
Ark of the Testimony, and there it rested to usward. Justice would not, could
not have suffered us to have had any benefit by Mercy, had it not found an Ark,
a Christ to rest upon. Deliver him, says God, from going down into the Pit, I
have found a ransom; Job 33.24.

2. In that it was placed above, it does show also that Christ was of Mercies
ordaining, a fruit of Mercy. Mercy is above, is the Ordainer; God is love, and
sent of love his Son to be the Savior, and propitiation for our sins; Joh.
3.16. 1 John 4.10.

3. In that the Mercy-Seat, and Ark, was thus joined together, it also shows,
that without Christ, Mercy does not act. Hence, when the Priest came of old to
God for Mercy, he did use to come into the holy place with blood; yea, and did
use to sprinkle it upon the Mercy-Seat, and before it seven times. Take away
the Ark, and the Mercy-Seat will fall, or come greatly down at least: So take
away Christ, and the Flood-gate of Mercy is let down, and the current of Mercy
stopped. This is true, for so soon as Christ shall leave off to Mediate, will
come the Eternal Judgment.

4. Again, In that the Mercy-Seat was set above upon the Ark, it teaches us to
know, that Mercy can look down from Heaven, though the Law stands by, and looks
on; but then it must be in Christ, as kept there, and fulfilled by him for us.
The Law out of Christ is terrible, as a Lion, the Law in him is meek as a Lamb.
The reason is, for that it finds in him enough to answer for all their faults,
that come to God for Mercy by him. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness, and if that be true, the Law for that can look no further,
whoever comes to God by him. The Law did use to sentence terribly, until it was
put into the Ark to be kept: But after it was said it is there to be kept, we
read not of it as before; 1 King. 8.9. 2 Chro. 5.10. Romans 10.4.

5. Let them then that come to God for Mercy, be sure to come to him by the
Ark, Christ. For grace, as it descends to us from above the Mercy-Seat, so that
Mercy-Seat does rest upon the Ark. Wherefore sinner, come thou for Mercy that
way: For there, if thou meetest with the Law, it can do thee no harm: nor can
Mercy, should thou elsewhere meet it, do thee good.

Come therefore, and come boldly to the Throne of Grace, this Mercy-Seat, thus
born up by the Ark, and obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need,
Heb. 4. ult.

Wherefore the thus placing of things in the Holiest, is admirable to behold in
the Word of God. For that indeed is the Glass, by, and through which we must
behold this glory of the Lord. Here we see the reason of things: Here we see
the reason of things: Here we see how a just God can have to do, and that in a
way of mercy, with one that has sinned against him: It is because the Law has
been kept by the Lord Jesus Christ. For as you see the Mercy-Seat stands upon
the Ark of the Covenant, and there God acts in a way of grace toward us; Exodus
25.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

LXIV. Of the Living Waters of the Inner Temple.
ALthough in the holy Relation of the Building of the Temple, no mention is
made of these Waters, but only of the Mount on which, and the Materials with
which the King did Build it: Yet it seems to me, that in that Mount, and there
too, where the Temple was Built, there was a Spring of Living Water. This seems
more than probable by Ezekiel. 47.1. where he says, He brought me to the Door of
the House, and behold, Waters issued out from under the Threshold of the House
Eastward, for the forefront of the House stood toward the East, and the
Waters came down from under, from the right side of the House, at the South
side of the Altar.

So, Again, Joel 3.18. And a Fountain shall come forth of the House of the
Lord, and shall Water the Valley of Shittim. Nor was the Spring, wherever was
the first appearance of these holy Waters, but in the Sanctuary, which is the
holiest of all ( Ezekiel. 47. v. 12. where the Mercy-seat stood; which in
Revelations is called, The Throne of God, and of the Lamb, Chap. 22.1, 2.

This also is that which the Prophet Zechariah means, when he says, Living
Waters shall go forth from Jerusalem, half of them toward the former Sea, and
half of them toward the hinder Sea, etc. Zech. 14.8. They are said to go forth
from Jerusalem, because they came down to the City from out of the Sanctuary
which stood in Jerusalem.

This is that which in another place is called a River of Water of Life,
because it comes forth from the Throne, and because it was at the head of it,
as I suppose, used in and about Temple Worship. 'Twas with this, I think, that
the Molten Sea and the Ten Lavers were filled, and in which the Priests washed
their Hands and Feet when they went into the Temple to do service; and that
also in which they washed the Sacrifices before they offered them to God: Yea,
I presume, all the washings and rinsings about their Worship, was with this
Water.

This Water is said in Ezekiel and Revelations, to have the Tree of Life grow
on the Banks of it, Ezekiel. 47. Rev. 22. and was a type of the Word and Spirit of
God, by which, both Christ himself sanctified himself, in order to his Worship,
as high Priest: And also this Water is that which Heals all those that shall be
Saved; and by which, they being Sanctified thereby also, do all their works of
Worship and Service acceptably, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This Water therefore is said to go forth into the Sea, the World, and to Heal
it is Fish, the Sinners therein: Yea, this is that Water of which Christ Jesus
our Lord says, Whosoever shall drink thereof, shall live fer ever, Ezekiel. 47.8,
9, 10. Zech. 14.8.

LXV. Of the Chains which were in the Oracle or Inner Temple.
AS there were Chains on the Pillars that stood before the Porch of the Temple,
and in the first House: so, like unto them there was Chains in the Holiest,
here called the Oracle.

These Chains were not Chains in show, or as Carved on Wood, etc. but Chains
indeed; and that of Gold: And they were prepared to make a Partition before the
Oracle within, 1 King. 6.21. 2 Chronicles. 3.16.

I told you before, that the Holiest was called the Oracle, not because in a
strickt sense the whole of it was so, but because such answer of God was there,
as was not in the outward Temple; but I think that the Ark and Mercy-seat, was
indeed more specially that called the Oracle; for there will I meet with thee,
said God, and from above that will I commune with thee. When David said, I lift
my Hands toward thy holy Oracle; he meant not so much toward the Holiest
House, as toward the Mercy-seat that was therein. Or as he says in the Margin,
Toward the Oracle of thy Sanctuary, Psalm. 28 2.

1. When therefore he says before the Oracle, he means, These Chains were put
in the most Holy place, before the Ark and Mercy-seat, to give to Aaron and his
Sons to understand, that an Additional Glory was there: For the Ark and
Mercy-seat were preferred before that holy House it self, even as Christ and
the Grace of God is preferred before the highest Heavens. The Lord is high
above all Nations, and his Glory is above the Heavens, Psalm. 113.4.

So then, the Partition that was made in this House by these Chains, these
Golden-Chains, was not so much to divide the holy from the place most holy, as
to show that there is in the Holiest House, that, which is yet more worthy then
it.

The Holiest, was a type of Heaven, but the Ark and Mercy-seat were a type of
Christ, and of the mercy of God to us by him; and I trow, any man will
conclude, if he knows what he says, that the God and Christ of Heaven are more
excellent, then the House they dwell in. Hence David said again, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee? For thou art more Excellent then they, Psalm. 73.25.

For though that which is called Heaven, would serve some; yea, though God
himself was out on it, yet none but the God of Heaven will satisfy a truly
Gracious Man: It Is God that the Soul of this Man thirsts for: It Is God that
is his exceeding Joy, Psalm. 42.2. Psalm. 63.1. Psalm. 143.6. Psalm. 17. ult, Psalm.
43.4.

These Chains then, as they made this Partition in the most holy Pla^^ may
teach us, that when we shall be glorified in Heaven, we shall yet, even then,
and there, know that there will continue an infinite Disproportion between God
and us. The Golden Chains that are there, will then distinguish the Creator
from the Creature.

For we, even we which shall be saved, shall yet retain our own Nature, and
shall still continue finite beings; yea, and shall there also see a
disproportion between our Lord, our Head, and us; for though now we are, and
also then shall be like him, as to his Manhood; yea, and shall be like him
also, as being glorified with his glory; yet he shall transcend and go beyond
us, as to Degree and Splendour, as far as ever the highest King on Earth did
shine above the meanest Subject that dwelt in his Kingdom.

Chains have of old been made use of as notes of Distinction, to show us who
are bond men, and who free: Yea, they shall at the Day of Judgment be a note of
Distinction of bad and good; even as as here they will distinguish the Heavens
from God, and the Creature from the Creator. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Mat. 22.13.

True, They are Chains of Sin and Wrath, but these Chains of Gold; yet these
Chains, even these also, will keep Creatures in their place, that the Creator
may have his Glory, and receive those acknowledgments there from them, which is
due unto his Majesty, Rev. 4. and Chap. 5.11, 12, 13, 14.

LXVI. Of the High Priest, and of his Office in the inner Temple.
WHen things were thus Ordained in the House most Holy, then went the high
Priest in thither, according as he was appointed, to do his Office, which was
to burn Incence in his Golden Censer, and to sprinkle with his Finger the blood
of his Sacrifice, for the People, upon and above the Mercy-seat, Exo. 30.7, 8,
9, 10. Levit. 16.11, 12, 13, 14.

Now for this special work of his, he had peculiar preparations.

1. He was to be washed in Water. 2. Then he was to put on his holy Garments.
3. After that, he was to be Anointed with holy Oil. 4. Then an Offering was to
be Offered for him, for the further sitting of him for his Office. 5. The Blood
of this Sacrifice must be put, some of it, up on his right Ear, some on the
Thumb of his right Hand, and some on the great Toe of his right Foot.
This done, some more of the Blood, with the Anointing Oil, must be sprinkled
upon him, and upon his Garment; for after this manner must he be Consecrated to
his work, as high Priest. Exo. 29. Chap.

His being washed in Water, was to show the Purity of Christ's Humanity.

His Curious Robes was a type of all the Perfections of Christ's Righteousness.

The holy Oil that was poured on his Head, was to show how Christ was Anointed
with the holy Ghost unto his work, as Priest.

The Sacrifice of his Consecration was a type of that Offering Christ Offered
in the Garden, when he mixed his Sweat with his own Blood, and Tears, and
Cries, when he prayed to him that was able to save him, and was heard in that
he feared; for with his Blood, as was Aaron with the Blood of the Bullock that
was slain for him, was this Blessed One besmeared from Head to Foot, when his
Sweat, as great drops or clodders of Blood, fell down from his Head, and Face,
and whole Body, to the ground. Luke 22.44. Heb. 10.20.

When Aaron was thus prepared, then he Offered his Offering for the People, and
carried the Blood within the Vail. Levit. 16. The which Christ Jesus also
answered, when he Offered his own Body without the Gate, and then carried his
Blood into the Heavens, and sprinkled it before the Mercy-seat, Heb. 13.11, 12.
Chap. 9.11, 12, 24.

For Aaron was a type of Christ; his Offering, a type of Christ's Offering his
Body; the Blood of the Sacrifice, a type of the Blood of Christ; his Garments,
a type of Christ's Righteousness; the Mercy-seat, a type of the Throne of
Grace; the Incense, a type of Christ's Praise; and the sprinkling of the Blood
of Christ upon the Mercy-seat, a type of Christ's pleading the virtue of his
Sufferings for us in the presence of God in Heaven.

Wherefore holy Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly Calling, consider the
Apostle and high Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus: And seeing we have a
great high Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let
us hold fast our Profession; for we have not an high Priest, which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all points tempted as
we are, yet without Sin. Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace,
that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need: For every
high Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men, in things partaining to
God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for Sin, who can have
Compassion on the Ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that he
himself also is compassed with infirmity.

This then is our high Priest; and this was made so not after the Law of a
Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life: For Aaron and his
Sons were made Priests without an Oath, but this with an Oath, by him that said
unto him, The Lord Swear, and will not repent; Thou art a Priest for ever,
after the Order of Melchisedec.

By so much was Jesus made the surety of a better Testament; and they truly
were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of
death; but this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood. Wherefore he is able to save them to the utter most that come to
God by him, seeing he ever-liveth to make intercession for them.

For such an High Priest became us, who is Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, Separate
from Sinners, and made higher than the H^avens; who needs not daily, as those
Highpriests, to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own Sins, and then for the
Sins of the People; for this he did once, when he offered up himself. For the
Law makes men Highpriests which have Infirmities; but the word of an Oath
which was since the Law, makes the Son, who is consecrated for evermore.

Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum; We have such an
High Priest who is set down on the right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty in
the Heavens. A Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the New Tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched and not man. For every High Priest is ordained to offer
Sacrifices, wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to
offer. For if he were on Earth, he should not be a High Priest, seeing that
there are Priests that offer Gifts according to the Law. Who serve unto the
Example, and Shadow of Heavenly Things; as Moses was admonished when he was
about to make the Tabernacle: For see, says he, that thou make all things
according to the Pattern showed to thee in the Mount.

But Christ being come an High Priest of good things to come; by a greater and
more perfect Tabernacle; that is to say, not of this Building: Neither by the
blood of Bulls and Calves, but by his own Blood he entered in once into the Holy
Place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. For if the Blood of Bulls and
Goats, and Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the Unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the Flesh: How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through
the Eternal Spirit offered himself without Spot to God, purge your Consciences
from dead works, to serve the living God.

For Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made with hands, which are the
figures of the true: But into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of
God for us. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, (...) the High Priest
entered into the Holiest every year with the blood of others, for then must be
often have suffered since the foundation of the World. But now once in the end
of the World has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And
as it is appointed unto men, once to die; and after this, the Judgment: So
Christ was once offered to hear the sins of many: And to them that look for
him, shall be appear the second time without sin, unto Salvation. Heb. 3.1, 2.
Chap. 4.14, 15. Chap. 5.1, 2. Chap. 7.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28. Chap. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Chap. 9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

LXVII. Of the High-Priest's going into the Holiest alone.
AS it was the Privilege of the High Priest to go into the Holiest alone; so
there was something of mystery also; to which I shall speak a little: There
shall, says God, be no man in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, when Aaron
goes in to make an atonement in the Holy Place, until he comes out, and have
made an atonement for himself, and for his Households and for all the
Congregation of Israel. Lev. 16.17, etc.

The Reason is, For that Christ is Mediator alone; He trod the Wine Press
alone, and of the People there was none with him, to help him there, Isa. 63.3.
1 Timothy 2.5.

Of the People there was none to help him to bear his Cross, or in the
management of the first part of his Priestly Office: why then should there be
any to share with him in his executing of the second part thereof. Besides, he
that helps an intercessor, must himself be innocent, or in favor, upon some
grounds not depending on the worth of the intercession. But as to the
Intercession of Christ, who I can come in to help upon the account of such
Innocence or Worth? Not the Highest Angel; for there is none such but One,
wherefore he must do that alone. Hence it is said he went in alone, is there
alone, and there interceeds alone. And this is manifest, not only in the Type,
Aaron: But in the Antitype, Christ Jesus? Heb. 6.19, 20. Chap. 9.7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 23, 24.

I do not say that there is no man in Heaven but Jesus Christ, but I say, he is
there to make intercession for us alone. Yea the Holy Text says more:

I go, says Christ, to prepare a place for you; and if I go and prepare a
place for you: I will come again and take you to my self, that where I am,
there ye may be also, John 14.1, 2, 3, 4.

This Text seems to insinuate that Christ is in the Holiest, or highest Heavens
alone; and that he there alone must be until he has finished his work of
Intercession: For not till then, he comes again to take us to himself.

Let us grant Christ the pre^ieminency in this, as also in all other things;
for he is Intercessor for his Church, and and makes it for them in the Holiest
alone. It Is said he is the Light that no man can approach unto?

LXVIII. Of the Highpriests going in thither but once a year.
AS the High Priest went into the Holiest, when he thither went, alone: So to
do that work, he went in thither but once a year. Thou shall not come at all
times, said God to him, (...) the Holy Place, within the Vail, before the
Mercy-Seat, which is upon the Ark, that thou die not, Levit. 16 2.

And as he was to go in thither but once a year, so not then neither, unless
clothed and adorned with his Aaronical Holy Robes. Then he was to be clothed,
as I hinted before, with the Holy Robes, the Frontlet of Gold upon his
Forehead, the names of the twelve Tribes upon his Breast, and the Jingling
Bells upon the Skirts of his Garment; nor would all this do, unless he went in
thither with Blood, Exodus 28. Levit. 16

Now this once a year, the Apostle takes special notice of, and makes great
use of it, Once a year, says he, this High Priest went in thither: once a
year, that is, to show that Christ should once in the end of the world, go into
Heaven it self to make intercession there for us. For by this word, year, He
shows the term and time of the world is meant, and by once in that year, the
means once in the end of the world.

Not, says he, that he should offer himself often: as the High Priest entered
into the Holy Place every year with the Blood of others: for them must the
often have suffered, since the foundation of the World. But now once in the end
of the World, has he appeared to put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself,
Heb. 9.

And having thus once offered his Sacrifice without the Vail, he is now gone
into the Holiest to perfect his Work of Mediation for us: Not into the Holy
Places made with Hands, which are the Figures of the True, but into Heaven it
self; Now to appear in the presence of God for us.

Now if our Lord Jesus is gone indeed, Now to appear in the presence of God for
us: and if this now be the once a year, that the Type speaks of: The once in
the end of the World, as our Apostle says; then it follows, that the People of
God should all stand waiting for his Benediction, that to them he shall bring
with him, when he shall return from thence. Wherefore he adds, Christ was once
offered to bury the sins of many, and to them that look for him shall he appear
the second time without sin unto Salvation.

This therefore shows us the greatness of the work that Christ has to do at the
Right Hand of God, for that he stays there so long. He accomplished all the
first part of his Priesthood in less then forty Years, if you take in the
making of his holy Gaaments and all; but about this second part thereof, he has
been above in Heaven above sixteen hundred years, and yet has not done.

This therefore calls for Faith and Patience in Saints, and by this he also
tries the World; so that they in mocking manner begin to say already, Where is
the Promise of his coming? (2 Pet. 3.4.) But I say again, We must look and wait.

If the People waited for Zacharias, and wondered that he stayed so long,
because he stayed in the holy place somewhat longer than they expected: No
marvel, if the Faith of the World about Christ's coming, is fled and gone long
ago; yea, and that the Children also are put to it to wait, since a Scripture
little while does prove so long: For that which the Apostle says, Yet a little
while, does prove to some to be a very long little; John 16. Heb. 10.37.

True, Zacharias had then to do with Angels, and that made him stay so long. O
but Jesus is with God, before him, in his presence, talking with him, swallowed
up in him, and with his Glory, and that is one Cause he stays so long. He is
there also pleading his Blood for his tempted Ones; and interceeding for all
his Elect, and waits there till all his be fitted for, and ready to enter into
Glory: I say, he is there, and there must be till then: And this is another
reason why he does stay the time we count so long.

And indeed it is a wonder to me, that Jesus Christ our Lord should once think,
now he is there, of returning hither again, considering the ill treatment he
met with here before. But what will not Love do! Surely he would never touch
the ground again, had he not a People here that cannot be made perfect, but by
his coming to them. He also is made Judge of quick and dead, and will get him
Glory in the ruin of them that hate him.

His People are as himself to him. Can a loving Husband abide to be always from
a beloved Spouse? Besides, as I said, He is to pay the Wicked off, for all
their Wickedness, and that in that very plat, where they have committed it.
Wherefore the day appointed for this is set, and he will, and shall come
quickly to do it.

For however, the time may seem long to us, yet according to the reckoning of
God, it is but a little while since he went into the holiest to interceed. A
thousand years with the Lord is but as one day, and after this manner of
counting he has not been gone yet full two days into the holiest. The Lord is
not slack concerning his Promise, as some men count slackness; he will come
quickly, and will not tarry, 2 Pet. 3. Heb. 10.37.

LXIX. Of the Cherubims, and of their being placed over the Mercy-seat in the
inner Temple.
THere was also Cherubims in the most holy place, which were set on high above
the Mercy-seat. See 1 Kings 6.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

1. These are called by the Apostles, The Cherubims of Glory covering the
Mercy-seat, Heb. 9.5.

2. These Cherubims were Figures of the Angels of God, as in other places we
have proved.

3. It Is said these Cherubims were made of Imagework, and that in such manner,
as that they could, as some think, move their Wings by Art: Wherefore it is said
they stretched forth their Wings; the Wings of the Cherubims spread themselves;
and that the Cherubims spread forth their Wings over the place of the Ark, and
the staves thereof above, 1 Kings 6.27. 2 Chronicles. 3.13. Chap. 5.8.

4. I read also of these Cherubims, that they had Chariots and Wheels; by which
is taught us how ready and willing the Angels are to fetch us when commanded,
unto the Paradise of God; for these Chariots, were types of the Bosoms of the
Angels; and these Wheels, of the quickness of their motion to come for us when
sent. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the
Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place, 1 Chronicles. 20.28. Ezekiel. 16.9,
15, 16, 18, 19, 28. 1 Kings 6.17. Psalm. 68.17. 2 Kings 2.11. Dan. 9.20.

5. What difference, if any, there is between Cherubims and Seraphims, into
that I shall not now enquire; though I believe that there is a diverse Order
and Degrees of Angels in the Heavens, as there are Degrees and diverse Orders
among men in the World. But that these Cherubims were Figures of the holy
Angels, their being thus placed in the holy Oracle, does declare; for their
Dwellingplace is Heaven, though they, for our sakes, are Conversant in the
World; Heb. 1.

6. It Is said, that these Cherubims in this holy place, did stand upon their
Feet. To show,

1. That the Angels of Heaven are not fallen from their Station, as the other
Angels are.

2. To show also that they are always ready at Gods bidding, to run with
swiftness to do his pleasure.

3. To show also that they shall continue in their Station, being therein
Confirmed by Jesus Christ, by whom all things consists; Col. 1.

7. It Is said, their Faces were inward, looking one to another, yet withal,
somewhat ascending, to show that the Angels both behold, and wonder at the
Mysteries of Grace, as it is displayed to Usward, from off the Mercy-seat. The
Faces of the Cherubims shall look one to another; toward the Mercy-seat shall
the Faces of the Cherubims be. Exo. 25.20. 2 Chronicles. 3.13. 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesi.
3.10.

1. Toward the Mercy-seat: They are desirous to see it, and how from thence (I
say) Mercy does look toward us.

2. They look one toward another, to show that they agree to Rejoice in the
Salvation of our Souls, Luke 15.10.

3. They are said to stand above the Mercy-seat (perhaps) to show that the
Angels have not need of those Acts of Mercy and Forgiveness as we have, who
stand below, and are Sinners. They stand above it, they are Holy. I do not say,
They have NO need that the goodness of God should be extended to them, for it is
by that they have been, and are preserved: but they need not to be forgiven,
for they have committed no Iniquity.

4. They stand there also with Wings stretched out, to show how ready, if need
be, the Angels are to come from Heaven to Preach this Gospel to the World; Luke
2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

5. It Is said in this, their thus standing, their Wings did reach from Wall to
Wall; from one side of this holy House, to the other, to show, that ALL the
Angels within the boundaries of the Heavens, with one Consent, and one Mind,
are ready to come down to help, and serve, and do for God's Elect at his
Command.

It Is said also that their Wings are stretched on high, to show that they are
ONLY delighted in those Duties, which are enjoined them by the high and lofty
One, and not inclined, no not to serve the Saints in their Sensual or Fleshly
Designs. It may be also to show that they are willing to take their Flight from
one end of Heaven, to the other, to serve God and his Church for good; Mat.
13.41, 49. Chapt 24.31. Chap. 25.31. 2 These. 1.7, 8.

LXX. Of the Figures that were upon the Walls of the inner Temple.
THe Wall of the inner Temple, which was a type of Heaven, was, as I have
already told you, Cieled with Cedar from the bottom to the top. Now by the
Vision of Ezekiel, it is said, this Wall was Carved with Cherubims and
Palm Trees, So that a Palm Tree was between a Cherub and a Cherub; and every
Cherub had two Faces: So that the Face of a man was toward the Palm Tree on the
one side, and the Face of a young Lion toward the Palm Tree on the other side.
It was made through all the House round about; from the ground to above the
door, were the Cherubims and the Palm Trees made; Ezekiel. 41.17, 18, 19, 20.

1. As to these Cherubims and Palm Trees, I have already told you what I think
them to be Figures of. The Cherubims are Figures of the holy Angels, and the
Palm Trees of Upright Ones: We therefore here are to Discourse only of the
placing of them in the Heavens.

2. Now you see the Palm Trees in the Holiest are placed between a Cherub and a
Cherub, round about the House, w^^th methinks should be to signify, that the
Saints shall not there live by Faith and Hope, as here, but in the immediate
Enjoyment of God; for to be placed between the Cherubims, is to be placed where
God dwells; for holy Writ says plainly, He dwells between the Cherubims, even
where, here it is said, these Palm Trees, or Upright Ones are placed; 1 Samuel
4.4. 2 King 19.15. 1 Chronicles. 13.6. Psalm. 80.1. Isa. 37.16.

The Church on Earth is called God's House, and HE will dwell in it for ever;
and Heaven it self is called God's House, and WE shall dwell in it for ever:
and that between the Cherubims. This is more then Grace, this is Grace and
Glory; Glory indeed.

3. To dwell between the Cherubims, may also be to show that there we shall be
equal to the Angels. Mark, Here Is a Palm Tree and a Cherub, a Palm Tree and a
Cherub. Here we are a little lower, but there we shall not be a whit behind the
very Chief of them. A Palm Tree and a Cherub, an Upright One, between the
Cherubs, will then be round about the House: we shall be placed in the same
rank, neither can they die any more, for they are equal to the Angels, Luke
20.36.

4. The Palm Trees thus placed, may be also to show us, that the Elect of God
shall there take up the vacancies of the Fallen Angels; they for sin were cast
down from the holy Heavens; and we by Grace shall be caught up thither, and be
placed between a Cherub and a Cherub. When I say their places, I do not mean
the fickleness of that state, that they for want of Electing Love did stand in
while in Glory; for the Heavens, by the Blood of Christ, is now to us become a
purchased Possission; wherefore, as we shall have their place in the Heavenly
Kingdom, so by virtue of Redeeming Blood, we shall there abide, and go no more
out, for by that means that Kingdom will stand to us unshaken; Heb. 9.12. Chap.
12.22, 23, 24, 28. Revel. 3.12.

5. These Palm Trees, I say, seem to take their places, who for Sin were cast
from thence. The Elect therefore take that place in possession, but a better
Crown for ever. Thus Israel possessed that of the Canaanites, and David, Saul's
Kingdom; and Mathias, the place, the Apostle-ship of Judas, Acts 1.20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26.

6. Nor were the Habitations which the Fallen Angels lost, excepting that which
was excepted before, at all inferior to theirs that stood; for their Captain
and Prince is called Son of the Morning, for he was the Antitype there; Isa.
14.12.

7. Thus you see they were placed from the ground, up to above the door; that
is, from the lowest to the highest Angel there. For as there are great Saints
and small ones in the Church on Earth, so there are Angels of diverse Degrees in
Heaven, some greater than some; but the smallest Saint, when he gets to Heaven,
shall have an Angels Dignity, an Angels Place: from the ground, you find a
Palm Tree, between a Cherub and a Cherub.

8. And every Cherub had two Faces, so here; but I read in Chap. 10. that they
had four Face apiece: The first, was the Face of a Cherubim: The second, the
Face of a Man: The third, the Face of a Lion: And the fourth, the Face of an
Eagle.

9. They had two Faces apiece, not to show that they were of a double heart,
for their appearance and themselves was the same, and they went every one
straight forward; Ezekiel. 12.22.

These two Faces then was to show here the quickness of their apprehension, and
their terribleness to execute the Mind of God. The Face of a Man, signifies
them Masters of Reason: The Face of a Lion, the terribleness of their presence,
1 Cor. 13.12. Judge. 13.6.

In another place I read of their Wheels; yea, that themselves, their whole
bodies, their backs, their hands, their wings, and their wheels, were full of
Eyes round about, Ezekiel. 1.18. Chap. 10.12.

And this is to show us how knowing and quicksighted they are in all
Providence and dark dispensations, and how nimble in apprehending the
mischievous Designs of the Enemies of God's Church, and so how able they are to
Undermine them; and for as much also as they have the Face of a Lion, we by
that are showed how full of power they are to kill and to destroy, when God
says go forth and do so.

Now with these we must dwell, and co-habit, a Palm Tree and a Cherub; a
Palm Tree and a Cherub, must be from the ground, to above the door, round about
the house; the Heavens.

So that the Face of a Man was toward the Palm Tree on the one side, and the
Face of a young Lion toward the Palm Tree on the other side.

By these two Faces may be also showed, that we in the Heavens shall have Glory
sufficient to Familiarize us to the Angels. Their Lyon-like looks, with which
they used to fright the biggest Saint on Earth, as you have it, Genesis 32.30.
Judge: 13.15, 22. shall then be accompanied with the Familiar Looks of a Man.
Then Angels and Men shall be Fellows, and have to do with each as such.

Thus you see something of that little that I have found in the Temple of God.

FINIS.

