A LETTER to a LORD upon his happy Conversion from Popery to the Protestant
Religion.
By G. Burnett, D. D.
Right Noble Lord,
WHen I consider seriously these words of St. Paul* Brethren, you see your
calling, that not many noble, not many wise, according to the flesh, not many
mighty are called: but has chosen the foolish things of this world to confound
the wise, and weak things to confound the mighty, and base things in the world,
and things not accounted of, and things that are not, to bring to naught things
that are* When, I say, I consider of these words so often, I admire at that
rare blessing of God, which he has vouchsafed to you a Noble and mighty Man;
namely, that he should grace you with that true and incomparable Nobility,
which is attained by true Faith in Christ Jesus, and a holy life. As much
greater as this blessing is, so much the more holy and sincere ought your life
to be, and so much the more upright are you to walk with your God; less that
your thorns (that is, Riches, Pleasures, and Honor) should choke the seed of
the Gospel which is sown in you.

For* this I am sure of, that God has begun some great work in you, which he
will finish to the glory of his own name, and will bring to pass, that as
heretofore you had care so to live a Nobleman amongst Noblemen, that you
might observe the decorum, and maintain the dignity of Nobility: so hereafter
that you may employ your whole self in this, that you may defend and uphold the
honor and dignity of the Protestant Religion; and in this life upon the earth
to resemble that holy and heavenly life which you shall lead in the world to
come. Call to mind continually (my Lord) in all your words and deeds, that we
are graced with this honor to be made the sons of God by Jesus Christ: for
that meditation will by the help of the holy Ghost, work this care in us, that
we never commit any thing unworthy of that holy name of Christ, by which we are
called. And yet alas, such is our estate, as that if we endeavor to please
Christ, we are sure to displease men, and must be content to contemn the
vainglory of the world, that we may enjoy heavenly and eternal glory with God;
for it is impossible (as Christ says) for him to believe in God which seeks
the honor and praise of men. I mean of the men of the world, which as the
Kingly Prophet says, are lighter and vainer than vanity itself. And therefore
their judgment is little worth, and less to be esteemed: but rather the
judgment of God, who sees not all our actions only, but even our most hidden
thoughts and purposes. Which being so, were it not folly and madness to
displease such a God, to please so fond a world? It were a shameful thing, if a
wife should endeavor to please other men, rather than her Husband. How much
more then unworthy is it, if our souls should rather aim to please the vain
world, than their most holy Spouse Christ Jesus? If the only Son of God was
content not only to be reviled, yea and scourged, but even to die upon the
Cross as a cursed malefactor, and all for us: why should not we much more bear
patiently the taunts and mocks, yea even the slanders of Gods enemies? Let us
therefore arm our selves as it were with a holy pride, and (in a sort) scorn
and laugh at the mocks of the Roman Catholics; and putting upon us mercy and
pity as the feeling members of Christ, let us bewail so great blindness in
them, and let us entreat the Lord for them, to pull them out of that palpable
darkness into his true and mavelous light, lest Satan bind them to himself in
his everlasting Apprentiship* and so being his bondslaves, and hired sworn
servants of his black-guard, do send them out to prosecute Jesus Christ in his
members. Which when they have done all they can, and all that the Devil their
Master can teach them, though the Devil himself should burst with malice, and
they for anger grind their teeth; yet shall it all tend to the magnifying of
Gods glory which they labor to obscure, and to the furtherance of their
salvation, whom they so disdained: yea, to the increase of their glory in a
better world, whom in this world they thought worthy of nothing but disgrace:
and surely (my most honorable Lord) he that is possessed with the certainty of
this faith, will without doubt make open War with the corrupt affections of his
own nature, and with all the world, yea even with the Devil himself; and will
not doubt but in time to overcome them all. Therefore let us humble our selves
to our God and Father everlasting, that he would increase that faith in us, and
bring forth in us those most blessed and sweet fruits of faith in our hearts
and lives, which he uses to work in them whom he has elected; that so our
faith may appear not a fained, but a true faith; not a dead, but a living
faith; not a humane, but a divine work in us; that so it may be to us an
infallible pledge of our salvation to come. Let us labor to show our selves the
legitimate and undoubted children of God in seeking above all things, that his
most holy Name may be sanctified in our selves and others; and in imitating his
admirable love and gentleness, which makes his Sun to shine on good and bad,
Let us worship his heavenly Majesty in spirit and truth; and let us yield up
the temple of our hearts to Christ Jesus as an acceptable sacrifice unto him;
yea, let us show our selves members of the heavenly High Priest Christ Jesus,
in sacrificing to God our bodies, and in crucifying the flesh with the
Affection and Lusts thereof; that sin being dead, God may create in us a
spiritual life, whereby Christ Jesus may live in us. Let us dye to sin, and dye
to our selves, and to the world, that we may live blessedly to God and Christ
Jesus; yea let us acknowledge and show by our lives that we were once dead, but
now are raised to the life of grace, by the power of Christ Jesus. Let our
conversation be heavenly, though we live on the earth; let us begin that life
here, which we hope to lead in heaven; let the Image of God shine bright in us;
let us disgrace and wear out the old Image of Sin and Satan* and labor to
renew the Image of Christ Jesus, that all that see us may acknowledge Gods Image
in us. Which holy Image of grace, as it is beautiful and glorious, in all Gods
Saints, so in you (my good Lord) it shall be so much more glorious, in as much
as you go before others in Birth, Nobility, Honor, and high Place. O what a
pleasant sight is it to all true Christian men, yea to the Angels; yea how
acceptable to the Lord himself, to behold a man of your place and estate so far
to forget the world and deny himself; so deeply to consider the frailty of his
own Nature, and the vanity of all temporal things, as to say with (...) a worm
and no man; and to cry out with David, Turn thy face to me, and have mercy upon
me, for I am desolate and poor: O happy and true rich man, which has attained
to this spiritual and heavenly poverty, and can give a farewell to himself and
the world, and all things that he has for Christ's sake; and can freely
renounce and forsake carnal reason, human learning, company, and counsel of
Friends, wealths, honors, lordships, pleasures of all sorts, delight of the
Court, high places and preferments, dignity, and offices; yea, favor of
princes; yea, his own self! How welcome shall he be to Christ, which can deny
all those for Christ's sake? Such a one may go for a Fool in the World, but he
shall be of the Almighty's counsel; such a man knows that felicity consists
not in any thing that this world can afford, and therefore in the midst of all
his wealth and abundance, he cries out to God as tho he had nothing, even out
of the feeling of his heart, Give us this day our daily Bread. Such a man
prefers the rebuke of Christ, before the honor of the world and the
afflictions of Christ's Religion, before the pleasures of the world: and because
he despised all things in respect of Christ and his righteousness, and is
possessed and grounded with God's spirit, therefore he sings with true joy of
heart with the kingly Prophet; The Lord is my Shepherd, therefore I can want
nothing, neither will I feel hunger, or any outward thing; he feeds me in green
pasture, and leads me forth beside the water of comfort. This man distrusts
himself and all the creatures in the world, that he may trust and cleave only
unto God; neither aims he at any pleasure, any wisdom, any honor, any riches,
any credit or estimation, but such as comes from God himself; and therefore
professes with the same Prophet: I have none in Heaven but thee alone, and
none in the earth do I desire but thee, my flesh consumes with longing after
thee, and thou Lord art my heritage and portion for ever. He that spoke thus
was a wealthy and mighty King, yet suffered he not the eyes of his mind to be
blinded or dazzled with the glittering glory of riches, pleasures, or honor, or
ought else that a kingdom could give; for he knew well that they all came of
God, and were held under God, and must all be used to his glory, and that he
that gave them has far better things to give his children. And therefore that
King and Prophet makes his heavenly proclamation before all his people, Blessed
art thou, O Lord God our Father, for ever and ever: thine O Lord is greatness,
and power, and glory, and victory: all that is in Heaven and Earth is thine,
thine is the kingdom, Lord, and thou excellest as head over all: riches and
honor come of thee, and thou art Lord of all: in thy hands is power, strength,
and honor, and dignity, and Kingdoms are in thy disposition: therefore we give
thee thanks, O God, and we extol thy great and glorious Name. But who am I, and
what is my people, that we should promise such things to thee? For we are
Strangers and Sojourners as all our fathers were; our days are like a shadow
upon the earth, and here is no abiding.

See how David cannot content himself in abasing himself, and extolling the
LORD; and in how many words his affections utter themselves. This was David's
meditation, and let this be your Looking-glass; in this Looking-glass look once
a day, and pray daily, that God would still open your eyes to behold your own
vileness, and his incomprehensible power and love to you, that with King David
you may humble your self under the mighty hand of his Majesty, and acknowledge
all power and glory to belong to God alone, that so you may be made partakers
of those heavenly graces which God bestowed, not on the proud and lofty, but on
the humble and (...). Remember that ordinance of the eternal God that says*
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength*
or the rich man in his riches, but let him that glories glory in this, in that
he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which do mercy and justice
on earth; for these things please me, says the Lord. Therefore (my good Lord)
if you list to boast, boast not as the world does, that you are rich, or that
you are of noble birth, or that you are heir apparent of a rich Marquesdom, or
that you have married so noble a woman; leave this kind of boasting to them,
who have their minds glewed to the World, and therefore have no better things
to boast on; whose portion being here in this life, they can look for nothing
in heaven. But rather rejoice you are entered into the kingdom of Grace; glory
in this, that the King of Kings has had mercy on you, and has drawn you out
of the misty darkness of the errors of the Romish Religion, has given you to
feel his endless love and mercy in Christ, has made you of a child of wrath,
his own son; of a servant to sin and the Devil, an heir of heaven; and of a
bondslave to Hell, a free Denison of the heavenly Jerusalem; and glory in this,
that even Christ Jesus himself is given you, and made your own, and with him
all things else. So that as Paul says, all are yours, whether the world, or
life, or death, things present or things to come, all are yours in and by
Christ, who is the only felicity of our souls: and therefore whosoever have
him, have with him all things else. This is the true glory, and the sound
boasting of Christianity; for hereby is God's mercy extolled, and man's pride
troddon under foot, by which a man trusting too much to himself, rebelleth
against God* This glorious boasting makes us humble even in our highest
honors, and modest and meek in prosperity, patient and quiet in adversity; in
troubles strong and courageous, gentle toward all men, joyful in hope, fervent
in prayer, full of the love of God, but empty of all love of our selves, or
ought in the world* yea, it makes us Christ's true Beadsmen, and his sworn
servants, and make us yield up our selves wholly to imitate and follow Christ,
and to esteem all things else as frail and vain, yea dung and dross that we may
win Christ.

Right honorable and my good Lord, you see that I am so willingly employed in
this service of writing to your Honor, and in conferring with you of heavenly
matters, that I have forgot my self, or rather your Honor, in being so tedious,
which in the beginning I purposed not. I am privy to my self of my own
ignorance, and guilty of my own insufficiency, as being sitter to be a Scholar
than a teacher; and to hear and learn my self, rather than to teach others; and
therefore I crave pardon of your Honor: Farewell. The most reverend E. S.
desires in his heart he had occasion to testify indeed, that true good will
which in his soul he bears you: in the mean time he salutes you, and so does
the illustrious Prince, and all other the honorable Personages which are with
me; all which rejoice for this good work of God in you, and in all kindness do
kiss your hands; and they do earnestly entreat the Lord for you, that he that
has begun so great a work in you* would accomplish the same to the end; and
the richer you are in temporal Goods, in Lands, and Lordships, that he would
make you so much the more poor in spirit* that so your spiritual poverty may do
that which your worldly riches and honors cannot; namely, bring you at last to
eternal and never-fading riches of the world to come: Amen.

Your Honors most humble and obedient Servant, G. B.

Printed in the Year 1688.


