THE HISTORY OF The Persecution OF THE VALLEYS OF PIEDMONT. CONTAINING An
ACCOUNT of what has passed in the Dissipation of the Churches and the
Inhabitants of the VALLEYS, which happened in the Year 1686.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Newborough, at the Golden Ball in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDC LXXX VIII.

THE HISTORY OF THE PERSECUTION OF THE Valleys of PIEDMONT.
IT is not my design at present to make a large and particular Relation of all
that has happened on account of this sad and lamentable Dissipation, since I
hope to treat of it more amply hereafter. Nevertheless, I shall observe all
that is necessary to make it appear that there never was a Persecution more
cruel nor more unjust, than that which has been put in execution this last
time against the Churches and the Inhabitants of the Valleys of Piedmont; that
their Religion has been the only cause of this Persecution, and that those who
have escaped from it do well deserve the compassion and charity of all good
Christians.

The Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont, or of the Waldenses, as they are
commonly called, were the most ancient of all those that derive their Original
from the Apostles, whose Doctrine they have always followed and taught. They
stood in no need of a Reformation, by reason that they never were partakers of
those gross Errors and Idolatries with which the Church of Rome and Popery have
infected Christendom. The purity of their manners has corresponded so well
with their Doctrine, that their very Enemies have not stuck to avouch, That
their moderation, and the exemplariness of their Lives, have contributed much
to the establishment of their Religion. They have not been content only not to
enter into an idolatrous and superstitious Communion, but they have always
openly declared and protested against those Abuses and against the Papal
Tyranny; insomuch, that neither Luther nor Calvin, nor any other of our
Reformers, have pleaded more strongly or more boldly in confutation of the
Heresies of the Roman Church: as also the aforesaid great Men have given their
approbation of the Doctrine of the Churches of the Waldenses, as Orthodox and
Apostolical.

It is not at all to be wondered at then, that these Churches have always been
the object of the hatred and rage of the Papists; that Popes have caused
Croisades to be published, and engaged a part of Europe against them; that
diverse famous Inquisitors have at several times made use of all that cruelty
and subtilty that rage and malice could invent for the extermination of the
Waldenses; and that particularly the Council de propaganda fide and extirpandis
Haereticis has left no stone unturned to effect their utter destruction: But
we cannot sufficiently admire that special and peculiar Providence with which
it has pleased Almighty God always to protect the Churches and the Inhabitants
of the Valleys of Piedmont, since notwithstanding so many violent Persecutions,
notwithstanding the perfidious Treasons with which their Enemies have always
repaid their Fidelity, notwithstanding seven or eight and twenty Wars, which
their Religion has drawn upon them, and notwithstanding the Massacres which
have so often as a torrent overflowed the Valleys with the blood of the
Waldenses, this great God has preserved them by continual Miracles of his
Providence.

All Historians, even they of the contrary party, are agreed, That these
Churches have continued in an immemorial possession of the exercise of their
Religion, before they fell under the Dominion of the Dukes or Counts of Savoy,
which came not to pass till the Year 1233, when Thomas Count of Savoy made
himself Master of the City of Pignerol and of the Valleys of Piedmont, under
pretense that the Race of the Princes of Piedmont was extinct. It is also
certain that the Waldenses never submitted to the Counts of Savoy (from whom
his Royal Highness is descended) but on condition that they should be
maintained in their Privileges. In fine, it is upon this Foundation that the
said Counts being become Princes of Piedmont, have defended and confirmed the
Waldensian Churches in the exercise of their Religion, and in their other
Rights and Privileges. They have granted unto them upon this account, from time
to time, several authentic Concessions, particularly in the years 1561, 1602,
and 1603; which being enacted and enrolled in the Senate and in the Chamber of
the Accounts of Turin, in the year 1620, on consideration of a great sum of
money which the Waldenses paid thereupon, as appears by the Act of Enrollment,
these Concessions thus passed in form of an irrevocable Transaction and of a
perpetual and inviolable Law, the execution whereof was ordained by several
solemn Decrees of the Dukes of Savoy in the years 1638, 1649, 1654, and 1655.

The Council de propaganda fide, which is obliged by its Establishment, by its
Title, and by its Oath, to procure the ruin of those whom it brands with the
Name of Heretics, observing with great regret the peaceable and quiet State
which the Waldenses enjoyed under the protection of these Laws, put every thing
in execution that might tend to the disturbance thereof. To this end it was
that this Council which was then composed partly of the Principal Ministers of
State of the Court of Turin, taking advantage of the minority of Charles
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, caused to be published in the month of January 1655, an
Order which obliged all the Inhabitants of the Valleys to quit the Plain within
three days, and to retire into the Mountains, upon pain of death, in case they
did not make proof that they were turned Catholics. The Waldenses obeyed this
Order, as unjust and cruel as it was. But this their obedience that took away
all pretense from their Enemies, could not secure them from that horrible
Massacre in the year 1655, of which all Europe has been informed and
astonished at, and of which Posterity will speak as of an Action the most
inhumane, the most perfidious, and the most infamous that ever was committed in
the World. This Massacre seemed in all appearance irrecoverably to have
destroyed the Waldenses; but there were many, who having escaped the fury of
these Butchers, resolved to defend their Lives to the last gasp. They executed
this their Resolution with that brave force and undaunted Courage, that they
had defeated in several Rencounters a considerable party of their Enemies, when
all the Protestant Princes and Estates interessed themselves in behalf of the
Waldenses. These generous Protectors having been informed of this dreadful
Massacre, were not content only to open to them the bowels of their Charity and
Benevolence, but they continually solicited the Duke of Savoy by their
Intercessions. The reformed Cantons of Suitzerland among the rest, sent on this
account four Ambassadors to the Court of Turin. These Ambassadors joining
themselves to that of France, who had already made himself Mediator or
Arbitrator in this Affair, in the name of his Master, labored together to
procure a Peace, and obtained for the Churches and Inhabitants of the Valleys,
a Confirmation of their Privileges definitively and irrevocably, by a solemn
Patent which the Duke of Savoy gave the 9th of August 1655, enrolled in due
form in the Senate, and in the Chamber of Accounts of Turin.

One would think that after a Patent of this nature, that carries the title and
character of a perpetual and inviolable Law, granted in the presence and at the
mediation of the Ambassadors of France and Suitzerland, and of which the King
of France was declared Garantee, as shall be made appear hereafter; one would
think, I say, that the Waldenses might have enjoyed the fruits of a Peace which
they had purchased with the blood of more than six thousand of their Brethren;
but all this was not capable to cover them from the Insults of their Enemies.
The Council of Propagation violated this Patent in its most essential points,
and persecuted the Waldenses by diverse unjust and violent means. But since they
opposed their Persecutions only with complaints, their Enemies took their
patience for sloth; and believing that they could oppress them without
resistance, they employed again once more Fire and Sword, and renewed in 1663.
the mischiefs and the violences that they had caused in 1655. The Waldenses
knowing by experience that to stand in their own defense was the only way to
save themselves, were constrained to take up Arms; and defended themselves so
well, that they had re-established their Affairs about the end of the year
1663. It was at this time that the reformed Cantons sent again Ambassadors to
the Court of Turin, to render themselves Mediators of the Peace: these
Ambassadors being joined as the former to that of France who resided with the
Duke of Savoy, they procured again for the Waldenses a solemn, perpetual, and
irrevocable Patent in the month of February 1664, confirming the precedent, and
enrolled likewise in the Senate, and in the Chamber of Accounts.

But this Patent was not executed with better faith than the former, though the
Duke had engaged with the Reformed Cantons in a Letter bearing date the 28th of
February 1664, to cause it to be punctually observed. It would not be easy to
represent the Artifices which the Council of the Propagation made use of to
render this Patent useless to the Waldenses: It may suffice to say, that it
were impossible for them to defend themselves against so much subtilty, and so
much malice, if God, who holds the hearts of Kings and Princes in his hands,
had not changed in their favor that of Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy. This
Prince on the other side, examined the conduct of the Waldenses; knew that it
was without reason, that they had rendered them odious to him, and calling to
mind the Zeal which they had shown for his service on several occasions,
particularly in the years 1638. and 1640. when they so vigorously opposed his
Enemies, whilst the greatest part of his Estates had revolted against him, he
resolved for the future to treat them as Subjects, who well deserved his love
and protection.

The War which he had with the Genoeses in the year 1672. mightily confirmed
him in the favorable opinion he had conceived of the Waldenses. They served
him in this War with so much Zeal and Courage, that this Prince not satisfied
witch commending their Valor and Fidelity in a Letter which he wrote to them
for this purpose, gave them continually assured marks of his protection and
good will toward them ever to his Death. The Duchess, his Widow, after his
example, treated them not only with abundance of gentleness and goodness, but
likewise engaged with the Reformed Cantons in a Letter dated the 28th. of
January 1679. to maintain the Waldenses in the exercise of their Religion, and
in their other Privileges.

I have touched but lightly on these matters, lest I should go beyond the due
limits I have set my self, but I thought it not convenient to suppress them.
For besides that, they serve for to show that the Rights and Privileges of the
Waldenses were eshablished on immovable foundations, and to show that their
Enemies have always violated the most solemn and the most authentic
Engagements, and have exercised nothing but Cruelty, Injustice, and
Perfidiousness toward them; they serve also to justify the conduct which the
Waldenses have at last taken, which is properly the subject of this Relation.

The Waldenses flattered themselves, that under the Government of the Duke of
Savoy that now reigns, they might enjoy some Tranquillity. They had rendered
him very considerable Services in the year 1684. in the War of the Banditi of
Mondovi. This Prince has given them authentic assurances of his satisfaction
and good will, in a Letter that he caused to be written to them on this
occasion, and the beginning of his Reign seemed to promise for the future, that
in rendering unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, they should have the liberty
to render to God that which is God's. They were disappointed of that hope, when
the Governor of the Valleys of Piedmont caused to be published, about the end
of the year 1685. an Order which forbad all Foreiners to go and inhabit these
Valleys, and to remain there above three days without his permission, and the
Inhabitants to lodge or entertain them, under severe Penalties. The Waldenses
had already heard of the Violencies which were used in France, to compel people
to change their Religion: They had also heard that the King of France had made
void the Edicts of Nantes, and they judged well that the prohibition that was
given them not to further the retreat of their Brethren, might be of dangerous
consequence to them. But they foresaw not the mischiefs that happened to them,
whether it were by reason that men naturally love to flatter themselves, or
because their Enemies took all the care they possibly could to deceive them,
and to drive from them all thoughts that fear might inspire them withal, to the
end that they might take no precaution.

They were in this condition when the Order of his Royal Highness, dated the
31st. of January 1686. was published in the Valleys, which prohibits the
exercise of their Religion in general, upon pain of Death, the confiscation of
their Goods, condemns all the Churches to be demolished, and all the
Ministers to banishment, ordains that the Children that shall be born, shall
be baptized and educated in the Romish Religion, under penalty that their
Fathers shall be sent to the Galleys, and contains almost the same things with
the Declaration of the King of France, that annuls the Edict of Nantes. It is
impossible to express the fears and grief with which the Waldenses were seized
at the sight of an Order so surprising, so unjust and so rigorous, as also so
much more terrible than the preceding, that had produced such tragical effects.
For the former tended only to lock them up within streighter bounds, and to
take from them the right of inhabiting the Plain which they had enjoyed time
out of mind: But the Order of the 31st. of January, deprives them entirely of
the exercise of their Religion, and of the Liberty of Conscience. They saw
themselves at one stroke precipitated into a dreadful abyss of misfortunes
without perceiving any means of recovery, and they found themselves exposed
either to see the light of the Gospel extinguished in the Valleys, that had
shone so bright there for so many Ages, or to see those cruel Massacres
renewed, that had sacrificed so many of their Brethren: Nevertheless, since
they were persuaded that this Order was got by surprise, and that their Enemies
had imposed on the equity of their Prince, they had recourse to complaints and
supplications, according to their usual custom, and presented four Petitions to
the Duke of Savoy, to implore the revocation of this Order. But since they
could obtain nothing but some adjournment to prepare themselves for its
execution, they saw that their misfortune was without remedy; they were yet
more certain of it when they understood that the King of France, who for
reasons of State and Polity had hitherto protected them, and who was also
declared Garantee of the Patents aforesaid, had not only obliged the Duke to
put forth this Order, but further, that his Majesty had caused his Troops to
advance into Piedmont for the execution of it. Then it was that the Waldenses
seeing themselves insulted over by the Papists of their neighborhood, took
some Precautions to defend themselves, and to preserve their Lives from the
danger that threatened them.

In the mean time the Reformed Cantons having been informed of this order, and
of the measures that they had taken for the execution of it, thought that they
ought not to abandon a People persecuted for their Religion, and that they
ought to appear on this occasion as they had before appeared on others of the
like nature. They were resolved then, in an Assembly held at Baden, in the
month of February 1686, to send again Ambassadors to the Duke of Savoy to
intercede for the Waldenses. These Ambassadors arrived at Turin in the
beginning of March, and made their Propositionstending to the revocation of the
Order of the 31th of January. They made it appear that the Reformed Cantons
were interessed in this Affair, not only as Brethren of the Waldenses in the
Communion of one and the same Faith, but also by reason that the Patents of
1655 and 1663. which that Order destroyed, were the fruits of their Mediation,
and they backed their demands with many cogent and solid Considerations. The
Court of Turin disputed not these Reasons, and contented it self to cause it to
be told the Ambassadors, That the Engagements wherein the Duke of Savoy had
entered with the King of France, opposed the Success of their Negotiation. This
obliged the Ambassadors to represent in a Memorial which they gave for that
purpose, that the Predecessors of his Royal Highness having engaged their royal
word to several Sovereigns, and particularly to the Reformed Cantons, for the
execution of the Patents granted to the Waldenses, he could not renounce
Engagements so formal and so authentic, whether because these Patents are not
simple Tolerations, but perpetual Concessions, and inviolable Laws, or because
these Patents were granted at the intercession of several Sovereigns, and
according to the Law of Nations they are everlasting Monuments of the public
Faith; or lastly, because the words of Sovereigns ought to be sacred and
inviolable. They alleged also many reasons of Polity that ought to oblige the
Duke of Savoy to maintain the Waldenses in their Privileges; and the rules of
Justice and Clemency did not permit him to carry Fire and Sword, Blood and
Slaughter into his own Dominions, nor to destroy a People that implored his
grace and mercy, and who had done nothing to draw upon themselves this severe
Order which was the cause of their despair. But neither the Reasons of the
Ambassadors, nor their pressing Solicitations, nor the Letters of Intercession
that many Protestant Princes wrote besides on behalf of the Waldenses, produced
any effect, but served only to confirm the Ambassadors in the assurance of the
Engagements wherein the Duke of Savoy had entered with the King of France, for
the extirpation of the Religion in the Valleys.

The Waldenses in the mean time were ignorant of that which passed at Turin:
they had not heard of the departure of the Ambassadors, for they had taken and
stopped two men on their Passage who went to carry the News into the Valleys. It
is true that they had heard at length by a common report, That these
Ambassadors were at Turin to demand a Revocation of the Order of the 31th of
January; but they knew nothing certain of the success of their Negotiation.
They could not go so much as to inform themselves; for besides that none of
them durst go to Turin since the adjournment that was granted them from the
execution of the Order was expired, the Court had moreover refused a safe
conduct that the Ambassadors had demanded of them, that the Deputies of the
Valleys might come and defend their Rights, as has been practiced in the
preceding Negotiations: but however things went, in expecting the event of
this, the Waldenses had fortified themselves in their own Country with certain
Entrenchments, and stood upon their guard to hinder the entry of the Troops,
the most part of which were already encamped at the foot of the Valleys.

The Duke of Savoy returned an Answer to the proposition of the Ambassadors by
the Marquess of St. Thomas, one of his Ministers of State, who has the
management of foreign Affairs, and who swore to them that the Duke could not
revoke his Order, by reason he was not the Master of it. He protested to them
also, on the part of his Royal Highness, that provided the Order were executed,
he would not refuse to enter into some Expedients. He gave them also to
understand, that upon their account he would not refuse to give the Waldenses
permission to depart out of his Dominions, and to dispose of their Goods. The
Ambassadors were persuaded, that the Waldenses, having neither a Commander nor
regular Troops, could not sustain a War against the King of France, and the
Duke of Savoy, who were united for their Destruction. They thought therefore,
that to avoid the storm with which the People were threatened, the best way
would be to procure a Retreat for them, with the disposition of their Goods.
But because before they entered into this Negotiation, it was necessary for them
to consult the Opinion of the Valleys, the Ambassadors took measures with the
Court of Turin to make a Journey thither; and the Duke of Savoy also gave them
a Letter to this effect for the Governor of the Valleys. The Ambassadors
arrived there the 22th of March, and caused the Communities to be assembled by
their Deputies the next day, to whom they declared what they had done. They
told them, that the condition of the Waldenses being such, that they were
destitute of all hopes of relief, they had no more to do but to consider of a
Retreat, in case they could obtain it with leave to sell their Goods; and that
if they would embrace this Proposition, they would relate this their
disposition to it as coming from them. The Deputies of the Commons being much
surprised to understand, that they might not expect any succor in an occasion
wherein they thought that all the Reformed part of Europe ought to be
concerned, told the Ambassadors that they were persuaded that they could not do
better than to follow their advice, but that to take deliberation in an Affair
of so great importance, it was necessary to call a General Assembly.

The Orders being given for this, the Ambassadors returned to Turin, they
informed the Marquess of St. Thomas of the Success of their Journey, who
assured them that this Negotiation was very agreeable to the Court. They
demanded, at length, a safe Conduct, that some of the Inhabitants of the
Valleys might have liberty to come, and bring the Deliberations that should be
taken in this Assembly: but it was refused upon these two Pretenses; one was,
That the Duke of Savoy would not permit that any Waldenses should appear at the
Court; the other was, That he designed to do nothing in this Affair but only
for the sake of the Ambassadors. They were forced then to send the Secretary of
the Embassy into the Valleys to fetch these Deliberations. This Secretary found
the Communities assembled at Angrogne the 28th of March, very much unresolved
what course to take; for on one side they saw the lamentable consequences of
War, on the other side the dangers, and the almost unsurmountable difficulties
in the execution of their Retreat; besides, although they might depart without
danger, they could not behold, but with extreme regret, the hard necessity of
being forced to abandon their Goods and their Native Country to go into a
foreign Land to lead a miserable, disconsolate, and a vagabond of a life. At
last they took a Resolution to send a Memorial to the Ambassadors, concerning
the dangers and difficulties that obstructed their Departure, and to write a
Letter to them signed by nine Ministers and eight Laymen, in which, after
having entreated them to reflect on these Obstacles, they should declare, That
they would refer the whole to their Prudence and Conduct. Upon this Letter the
Ambassadors made it their business to obtain a permission for the Waldenses to
retire out of the Estates of Piedmont, and to make sale of their Goods; but the
Duke of Savoy, to whom this Proposition was referred, gave it out, That before
he would return any Answer thereto, he expected that the Communities of the
Valleys should send Deputies to him, with full power to make those Submissions
that were due to him, and to beg leave to depart out of his Territories, as a
peculiar favor that they should implore of their Prince. The Ambassadors had
reason to be surprised at these Preambles. They had denied them the safe
Conducts that they had demanded for the coming of the Deputies of the Valleys
to Turin. They had assured them several times, that if they should grant to the
Waldenses leave to retreat, it was only upon the account, and at the
intercession of the Ambassadors: nevertheless, they would by no means have it
said that the Ambassadors desired a permission for them to depart, on their own
behalf; but on the contrary, that it was the Waldenses themselves that made
this Request. This alteration was not made without cause, and it was not for
nothing that they took measures altogether different from their former. The
Council of the Propagation who managed this Affair, had without doubt respect
to these two several regards; one was, That they would not have the Ambassadors
named in the permission of departure, to the end that they should have the less
right to demand the execution of those things that should be promised to the
Waldenses; the other, That the Waldenses themselves desiring this Permission as
a favor, they might be at liberty to impose on them what conditions they
pleased; and lastly, That the Waldenses making those Submissions that the Duke
required of them, must needs be in the state of Supplicants, and would by
consequence be forced to lay down their Arms; otherwise they could not be in
the condition of Petitioners. But however it were, the Ambassadors being
willing to take away all pretenses from the Enemies of the Waldenses, took a
safe Conduct to bring the Deputies whom they had demanded: they sent this safe
Conduct into the Valleys by the Secretary of the Embassy, who caused the
Communities to be assembled to nominate their Deputies. But as on the one hand,
there were many who were never engaged in the design of departing; and that on
the other, the new Marches of their Enemies appeared suspicious, the
Communities were not all of one mind, nor the Orders they gave to their
respective Deputies conformable one with another. For the tenor of some, was to
beg leave to depart and sell their Goods; and others required the maintenance
of the exercise of their Religion and their other Rights. These Deputies being
arrived at Turin, the Ambassadors thought it not convenient for them to appear
at Court thus divided; but sent them back into the Valleys to endeavor a Union
between themselves, and labored in the mean time to obtain a Truce for them.

Their Enemies heard with a great deal of satisfaction, that the Communities
were divided amongst themselves upon the point of departing; they were so well
persuaded that this division would be an infallible means to destroy them, that
they caused it to be carried on and fomented ever since, in those parts, by
perfidious persons whom they had gained for that purpose. It is also to be
presumed, that they never had proposed the expedient of departing, but with a
prospect that it might be the occasion of the disunion of the Waldenses. To
make advantage then of the variable dispositions of the Communities, their
Enemies changed their minds once more. They had lately declared, That they
expected, in the first place, that the Waldenses should themselves desire a
permission to depart, and should make their Submissions thereupon. The
Waldenses had not made this Request nor these Submissions: several of the
Communities were not of the opinion to retire: the Ambassadors did not solicit
any longer a permission to depart, but a Truce, as appears by a Letter that
they wrote to the Marquess of S. Thomas, the 8th of April, 1686. In the mean
time, notwithstanding all this, to accomplish absolutely the division of the
Waldenses, and consequently to ruin them with the greater ease, they published
forthwith, and unknown to the Ambassadors, an Edict dated the 9th of the same
Month of April, granting to the Waldenses an Amnesty, and a permission to
retire out of the Estates of Piedmont. For the better judging of the design of
the Council of the Propagation, I have inserted a Copy of this Edict,
translated from the Italian.

DIvine Providence, in establishing Sovereigns above the People, has granted
unto the first the distribution of Rewards and Punishments, to the end that the
hopes of the one may invite the good, and that the fear of the other may
restrain the wicked. The last of these ought to fall from our revenging hand on
our Subjects of the Valleys of Lucerne, who make profession of the Protestant
Religion, sinee it is notorious, that they have not only opposed, with great
obstinacy, our Order of the 31st of January last, but they have also hardened
themselves in their crime, and have fallen into the excesses of an enormous and
consummated Rebellion: nevertheless, our natural Clemency surpassing their
Crimes, and not suffering us to be content with that paternal forbearance, with
which we have so long time in vain waited for their Repentance; it is our good
pleasure again to leave it to their will, that has hitherto followed evil
counsel, the choice of a happy or a miserable condition, and to open to them
this last time the gate of our Grace, to the end that they may make their best
advantage thereof in manner following; which if they do not accept by a ready
obedience, they cannot but impute to their rashness the chastisements which
they shall deserve, and which they shall receive from our exasperated patience.

Wherefore, in the first place, for the confirmation of our Order of the 31st
of January last, in regard that it shall not be contrary to this, we have by
virtue of these Presents, of our certain knowledge, full power and absolute
authority, by the Advice of our Council, ordained, That all our Subjects of the
Valleys of Lucerne making profession of the Protestant and Reformed Religion,
shall lay down their Arms, and retire into their Houses within the time herein
afterward prescribed.

We command them also to make no Associations nor Assemblies in any manner
whatsoever, to the end that following our direction, the Judges of those places
may have free access, and that the Fathers Missionaries, and other religious
Orders, may return into the Churches from whence they have been forced to
depart, and that the Catholics, and those that have turned Catholics, may
possess the houses that they have abandoned.

And forasmuch as it is not reasonable that the Religious Missionaries,
Catholics and made Catholics, should suffer by so many damages that they have
received from the Protestant Religion; we will, require, and ordain, that the
necessary sums to indemnifie them, shall be levied without distinction, and
generally upon the Goods of the said Professors of the Protestant Religion, so
far as shall be justified and summarily made appear before the Chevalier
Monroux, Intendant of Justice in the Valleys; declaring nevertheless, that in
proving by the said Religious that the damages they sustained were caused by
private Persons, they shall have their Redress and Satisfaction from the said
private persons.

And to demonstrate to our said Subjects how great our Clemency is toward
them, we give permission to those that shall think fit to go out of our
Estates, to do it within the term and upon the conditions hereafter prescribed.

But by reason that their ill disposition is but too manifest by their past
carriage and conduct, and that several may cloak their wicked designs, under a
false pretense of obedience, we do reserve, besides those that shall go out of
our Estates of their own accord, to order such others as we shall think fit,
and as we shall find it most expedient to ascertain the repose of those who
shall remain, unto whom we shall prescribe such rules as they shall observe for
the future.

And for an augmentation of our Favors, we grant as well to those who shall
retire voluntarily, as to those who shall depart by our orders, power to carry
away with them what movables and Effects they please, and to sell their Goods
and Effects that they shall leave behind; nevertheless after the manner
hereafter prescribed.

The same shall be understood of Foreigners and those descended from
Foreigners, who shall conform themselves to the last Article but one of the
Order of the 31st of January abovementioned.

The abovesaid sale of Goods shall be made to Catholics and those that are
converted Catholics: But because it may happen that there may not be found
Buyers enough within the term hereafter mentioned, and since we are not willing
that the Religious, who shall go out of our Estates, should be deprived of the
benefit of our present concession, it shall be lawful for them to agree with
four or six persons to whom they shall give their Commissions, and who shall
remain, by our permission, in Lucerne, with all freedom, during three months,
to treat and negotiate with any, and to sell the Goods of those that are
retired, to whom it shall be permitted to prescribe in their Commissions the
precautions with which they would have their Goods sold for their greater
security, and to receive the price of them where they have a mind to have it
sent them, without fraud or malversation of the appointed Commissioners, over
whom the Chevalier and Intendant Monroux shall have the charge to inspect.

They who have a mind to retire, shall be obliged to appear respectively on the
days and places hereafter specified, to be ready to depart without Firearms by
the way that shall be marked out for them, either by Savoy, or by the Valley of
Aoste: To this effect a Pasport and a free safe Conduct shall be given them on
our part, to the end that they may not receive any evil treatment or hindrance
in our Estates; but on the contrary, that they may receive all aid and
assistance; and because, that being in great numbers, they may be exposed to
some inconveniences in the roads and in the places through which they must
pass, being overloaded, they shall be formed into three Brigades, after this
manner. The first that shall be composed of those of the Valley of Lucerne,
shall rendezvous at the Tower, to depart immediately the day after the term
hereafter appointed, viz. the 21st. of the month of April. The second Brigade
composed of these of the Valley of Angrogne, S. Bartholomew, Rocheplate, and
Prurustin, shall rendezvous at S. Second, and shall depart the day following,
viz. the 22d. of this month. And the third and last Brigade formed of those of
the Valley of S. Martin, and about Perouse, shall rendezvous at Miradol, and
shall depart the third day, viz. the 23d. of this month.

The term limited wherein our said Subjects of the Protestant Religion
inhabiting the Valleys of Lucerne, shall be obliged to lay down their Arms,
after the manner expressed in the first Article of this present Order, is eight
days after that it shall be published in the place of Lucerne, during which
they must obey the Contents of the same Order, to enjoy the fruits of our
Clemency, the motions of which we follow as well as those of a paternal
affection, with which we regard our said Subjects, notwithstanding the
heinousness and enormity of their Crimes. And provided all that is above said,
be punctually observed, we grant our grace, pardon, remission, abolition, and
an ample oblivion to our said Subjects, of all the excesses, defaults, crimes,
and other things that they may have committed since the publication of our
Order of the 31st. of January last, as well in general as in particular,
insomuch that they may never be called to an account under any pretense
whatsoever, prohibiting all Judges, Fiscals, and others to whom it may
appertain to make any enquiry thereinto. But because if they should render
themselves unworthy of such grace, in not observing every point as is above
said, within the time prescribed, it would be of too pernicious a consequence
to delay any longer the chastisement that they have deserved, after we have
been so prodigal of our favors to them, and have waited so long time for their
repentance, we will put in execution those means that God has put into our
hands to reduce the obstinate to their duty, and cause them to undergo the
punishment of their unheard of rashness.

We deliver it to our Senate, etc. Given at Turin the 9th. of April 1686.
Enrolled the 10th.

This Edict was published in the Valleys the 11th. of April, the same day the
Ambassadors wrote a Letter to the same effect to some of the Communities to
know their resolution. In the mean time they gave a very pressing Memorial to
the Marquess of S. Thomas, to have some assurance that the Troops should not
enter into the Valleys, and to obtain for the Waldenses certain Conditions more
favorable than those of the Edict: But the Court of Turin certified them that
there was nothing to be expected for the Waldenses, till they had laid down
their Arms, of which the Ambassadors gave advice to the Deputies of the Valleys
who had been at Turin, by a Letter dated the 13th. that they wrote to them on
that subject. The 14th. the Communities held a general assembly at Rocheptate,
wherein after having examined the terms and conditions of the Edict, they were
of opinion, that their Enemies thought of nothing less than in reality to
permit their departure, which they seemed to grant to them, and that this Edict
was nothing but a snare that they had laid to entangle them, and to destroy
them with more ease: They resolved then not to accept of it, but to follow the
example of their Ancestors, and to refer the event of it to Providence.
Insomuch that this Edict which was designed altogether to divide them, wrought
a quite contrary effect, and served to unite them all in the same judgment.

The principal reasons that hindered them from accepting this Edict, were,
First, That since it ordains the entire execution of the Order of the 31st. of
January, that condemns all the Churches to be demolished, they must of
necessity demolish all the Churches within eight days, because the Edict
declares expressly, that if all that is contained in it be not executed within
the space of eight days, they are deprived of and forfeit those favors that
are granted in it. It must follow then, that for the execution of the Edict,
either that the Waldenses themselves should demolish their Churches, or that
their Enemies should do it. The Waldenses could not resolve to demolish them
themselves, they would have sent then Troops, that under the pretense of this
demolishing, would have infallibly oppressed the Waldenses. Secondly, If they
designed to permit them to retire without disturbance, why did they not defer
the execution of the Order of the 31st. of January, till after their departure?
Why should they oblige them to demolish their Churches within the eight days
that were given them, to prepare themselves to abandon for ever their native
Country, were it not to render their retreat impossible? Thirdly, This Edict
requires further, that they should lay down their Arms, and that they should
open their Country to Monks, Missionaries, and Catholics. Now it is plain,
that if they had thrown away their Arms, and opened their Country before their
departure, they would have been exposed to the mercy of their Enemies, and to
the fury of Troops who would not have failed to enter into their Country, to
oppose the retreat of the Waldenses, and to torment them till such time as they
had changed their Religion, as has been practiced elsewhere: But their fear
was so much the more justifiable on this occasion, in regard that they gave
them no assurance that their Troops should not enter into the Valleys.
Fourthly, The Waldenses are also obliged to retire in three separate Brigades,
and to rendezvous in those places, where the Troops being encamped, they must
consequently surrender themselves to the discretion of the Soldiers, and
deliver themselves up to be butchered. Fifthly, The permission that the same
Edict gives to the Waldenses to sell their Goods, was altogether useless to
them. For besides that the sale could not be made till after their departure,
to Catholics, and by the management of Commissioners, they were bound out of
the price of the same Goods, to indemnifie the Monks, the Missionaries, the
ancient, the modern, and the future Catholics, from those damages and
interests which they should pretend, which they would have enhanced above the
value of their Goods. Sixthly, The Edict also orders, that besides those that
shall go out of the Valleys of their own accord, the Prince should reserve to
himself a power to banish whom he shall think fit, for the securing the repose
of those that remain, which supposes not only that the conditions of the Edict
were so disadvantageous, that there would be many Waldenses, who would not
accept them, nor depart out of their Station; but also that their departure
ought not to be looked upon as a Favor, but as a Punishment that they intended
to inflict on several Waldenses, since they reserved to themselves a power to
banish those who should have a mind to stay. Seventhly, The Ambassadors were
not named in the Edict, and the Waldenses had no security for the execution of
those things that are therein contained. They had good reason then very much to
mistrust these proceedings, since the many sad experiences that they had made
on several occasions, how ill their Enemies kept their word, especially in this
juncture, when they had broke the most inviolable Laws, were but too just a
ground for their suspicions. Lastly, Since the Duke of Savoy had declared that
he was not the Master of this affair, because of the engagements that he had
taken with the King of France, it was not to be presumed that his Majesty, on
whom this matter depended, would take any other measures, in respect of the
Waldenses, than those he had taken with regard to his own Subjects. The
Waldenses had also several other reasons grounded on the impossibility of their
departure in so short a time, and upon other obstacles.

The Communities sent their resolution to the Ambassadors, who used all the
diligence imaginable, to procure for the Waldenses Conditions more certain and
more advantageous than those that are contained in the Edict; but neither their
reasons nor their solicitations produced any effect. They were always told,
that as long as the Waldenses were in Arms, they could not agree to any thing,
nor so much as promise any thing positively. As also the Waldenses being
persuaded that they would not disarm them, but to destroy them without trouble
and without resistance, would by no means yield to it, and persisted in their
resolution to defend themselves, if they came to attack them.

There happened a thing that served much to confirm them in this resolution.
Two or three days after the publication of the Edict, several persons, namely,
Tholozan, Gaurier, Gauanre, Chabrict, and ten or twelve other inhabitants of
the Valleys, went to the Intendant, to declare to him, that they and their
Families intended to go out of the Estates of Piedmont, conformably to the
Edict, and to desire of him safe Conducts, which he refused them, under
pretense that they should stay till they went out with the rest. Moreover,
because there were several who resisted his solicitations to change their
Religion, he caused them to be put in Prison, where some of them languished,
and at last died miserably, and others remained there above nine months, viz.
till the time when all the other Prisoners were discharged. There is no need of
any further proof to make it appear, that their design was to destroy the
Waldenses, who would not change their Religion. However, the Communities of the
Valleys having received a Letter from the Ambassadors, made another Assembly at
Rocheptate, the 19th. of April: They persisted in their resolution not to
accept the Edict, and to defend themselves. It was then ordered in that
Assembly, that all the Ministers should preach, and administer the Sacrament
the Sunday following, which was Easter Day. The Valley of S. Martin entered
into this deliberation with the rest, but put it not in execution. Some of that
Valley changed their mind, without acquainting the other Valleys. And the
Rectors of the Church of Villeseche wrote to the Ambassadors who were yet at
Turin upon the point of their departing, a Letter dated the 20th. of April,
wherein they declared to them, that they would execute the Edict, they
entreated them for that reason, to procure for them a safe Conduct, and some
time to provide for their retreat. One of the Ambassadors took the pains to go
to the Camp to demand a safe Conduct; but they denied it, under pretense that
they had not desired it in time. It was always too soon or too late, and the
time was never convenient to obtain safe Conducts. In the mean time the Duke of
Savoy was come into the Camp some days after the publication of the Edict, to
the end he might strike terror into the Waldenses by his presence, and force
them to accept of the Conditions that he had imposed on them; he had made a
review of his Troops, and of those of France, that were encamped on the Plain
at the foot of the Alps; his Army was composed of his Family, of all the
Cava'rie and Infantry, and the Militia of Mondovi, of Barjes, of Bagnols, and
of a great number of Foragers. And the Army of France consisted of several
Regiments of Horse and Dragoons, of seven or eight Battalions of Foot, that had
passed the Mountains, and a Party of the Garrison of Pignerol and Casal, he had
also prepared all things to attack the Waldenses, as soon as the Truce that was
granted them should be expired, having appointed his own Army to storm the
Valley of Lucerne and the Community of Angrogne; and the Army of France to
attack the Valleys of S. Martin and Peirouse. The Waldenses on the other side
had taken some care to defend themselves; they possessed but a part of the
Valley of Lucerne. For the Tower that gives the Name to this Valley, and many
other considerable places were in the Enemies hand. The Community of Angrogne,
from which some call the Valley by the same Name, by reason of its large
extent, was not wholly occupied by the Waldenses. In the Valley of Peirouse
they took up only certain Posts in the places that depend on the Estates of
Piedmont; for this Valley is divided by the Cluson between the King of France
and the Duke of Savoy; but they were in possession of all the Valley of S.
Martin, being the strongest of all by its situation. They had fortified
themselves in every one of those Valleys with several Retrenchments of Earth
and dry Stones. They were about 2500. Men bearing Arms; they had made Captains
and Officers of the chiefest among themselves, for they had no Foreigners, and
they expected the approach of the Enemies with a great deal of resolution. But
since on the one side they had neither regular Troops, nor Captains, nor
experienced Officers; and that on the other side there were several Waldenses
who had been corrupted, or that had relented during the Negotiation; it is not
to be wondered if they took not all the necessary precautions that were in
their power. One of the greatest faults they committed was, their striving to
maintain all their Posts; For if they had abandoned the most advanced, and had
retired withing the Retrenchments they had made in the Mountains, it is not
likely that they would have been beaten out of them.

The 22d. of April being the day appointed for the attack* the French Army
commanded by Catinat Governor of Casal, march^^ two hours before day by
Torch-light against the Valleys of Peirouse and S. Martin, having for some time
followed the River Cluson on the Kings Territories. Catinat sent out a
Detachment of Infantry, commanded by Vellevieille Lieutenant Colonel in
Limosin, who having passed the River over a Bridge, entered into the Valley of
Peirouse on the side of Piedmont. He seized on S. Germain a Village that the
Waldenses had abandoned, and came to attack a Retrenchment that they had made
hard by, in which there were two hundred Men. The Waldenses quitted this Post
after some resistance, and took possession of another more advantageous. In the
mean time a new Detachment of Horse and of yellow Dragoons having again passed
the River, came to relieve the Foot who had began the Engagement. They used
their utmost efforts to gain the Entrenchments of the Waldenses, which they
thought easily to be Masters of, since they were six to one; but they found so
stout a resistance, that after having lost abundance of their Soldiers, they
were forced to entrench themselves at a Pistol shot distance; continual Fires
were made on both sides for more than ten hours together; but at length the
Waldenses went out of their Entrenchments with their Swords in their hands,
surprised the French, who little expected so bold an action, and drove them
even into the Plain on the other side of the Cluson, where opportunely they
found a Bridge that kept them from being drowned. There were on this occasion
more than five hundred Frenchmen killed and wounded, and among the rest
several Officers of note, and the Waldenses had but two men killed and some few
wounded. The account that the contrary Party has given of this Action,
entitled, A Relation of the War against the Religious, called Barbets, agrees
in this, concerning the great loss the French then sustained; for it affirms
that the Fire of the revolted put a great Party of them into disorder. It
confirms also the routing of the French; for it says, that the Waldenses
fell violently upon the Soldiers, and drove them out to the other side of the
Cluson. In this rout Villevieille threw himself into the Church of S. Germain
with threescore and ten Soldiers and some Officers: They summoned him to
surrender himself, and offered him good Quarter; but he refused it, and showed
great courage, although they had killed and wounded a Party of his men. The
Waldenses had nevertheless infallibly forced him; but the night being come,
they found themselves so harrassed with the fatigue of the day, that they were
constrained, having left a few behind to guard at the door of the Church, to go
seek for some refreshment. Villevieille was disengaged at break of day by
certain Troops that the G^vernor of Pignerol had caused to march all night. The
Waldenses retreated into their Intrenchments, thinking that they would come and
attack them, but the Enemies being gathered together in greater numbers than
the day before, were content to encamp out of the reach of a Pistol-shot,
without shooting on either side but at random for two days together. Whilst
things passed thus in Peirouse, the Body of the Kings Army repassed the Cluson
to the Fort of Peirouse on the side of France, then Catinat made a Detachment
of Horse commanded by Melac, who having passed the River on two Bridges,
fetched a compass about to gain the high grounds that separate the Valley of S.
Martin from Dauphine. The rest of the Army having likewise passed the River,
went to encamp with Catinat at Bolards part of the night, and the next day
attacked the Valley of S. Martin at a Village called Rioclaret. But since those
that had the command in that Valley, did not think that they would molest them,
after they had shown their inclination to accept of the Amnesty, especially
since the day appointed for their departure out of that Valley was not
prefixed: The Waldenses were not in a condition to defend themselves nor to
make any resistance, but yielded to lay down their Arms, and to implore the
pity and compassion of the Conqueror. But the French being heated and vexed
with what had passed before S. Germain, were not content only to burn, to
ravish, and to pillage, but they massacred without distinction of Age or Sex,
with an unparalled fury all those that could not escape their barbarous
Cruelty. Catinat having ravaged all the Country of Rioclaret after a most
horrible manner, left some Troops in the Valley of S. Martin traversed with the
Body of his Army the mountains that separate this Valley from that of Peirouse,
and encamped without any opposition, in the Community of Pramol in the Valley
of Peirouse; the Soldiers notwithstanding put to the edg of the Sword all that
fell into their hands, without respect to Women nor Children, to the old nor
the sick. In the mean time the Detachment that Melac commanded, having encamped
one night on the eminencies of the Valley of S. Martin, entered through diverse
passages into that Valley, having certain Waldenses for their Guides, who were
so base and treacherous as to conduct them through ways unknown to any but the
Inhabitants of the Country. He left wheresoever he passed the marks of an
unheard of rage, and joined the main Body of the Army that was encamped at
Pramol. I shall not here give an account of the Cruelties that were exercised
here on these occasions and many others: It shall be sufficient to report in
the sequel of this Relation, some Examples whereby one may judge of the rest.

It is necessary to interrupt the Relation of the Actions of the French in the
Valley of Peirouse, because their happened things in the Valley of Lucerne and
Angrogne that ought to be known before.

The Army of the Duke of Savoy having had their Rendezvous at the Plain of S.
John the 22d. of April, was divided the next day into several Bodies, that
attacked diverse Entrenchments that the Waldenses had made in the Valleys of
Lucerne and Angrogne. The Waldenses not being able to resist the Enemies Cannon
in the Post that were too open, where the Horse might also draw up, were forced
after some resistance to abandon a part of these Entrenchments, and to withdraw
into a Fort that was more advantageous above Angrogne, where they found
themselves to be near five hundred Men. The Enemy having burnt all the Houses
that they found in their way, came to storm the Fort of the Waldenses, who
received them so warmly with their Muskets and Stones, and defended themselves
so vigorously against this great Body, that they kept their Post all that day
without the loss of above five men; the Enemy lost above three hundred, though
they were covered with an Intrenchment beyond Pistol shot. The Waldenses
fearing that they should not be able to keep this Fort any longer, by reason
that the Troops increased, passed into another distant an hundred paces beyond
it, in a more convenient place, there they expected with great resolution the
Army that advanced to attack them; when the next day being the 24th of April,
they were informed that the Valley of S. Martin was surrendered, and that the
French were coming on their backs; for from that Valley there is an easy
passage to those of Lucerne and Angrogne. This news obliged the Waldenses to
treat with Don Gabriel of Savoy, Uncle to and General of the Armies of the Duke
of Savoy, and with the rest of the General Officers, who having understood the
mind of his Royal Highness, promised positively on his part and on their own,
that the Waldenses should be absolutely pardoned, and that they should be
remitted to the terms of the Order of the 9th of April, provided they would
yield themselves up to his Clemency: But the Waldenses making some difficulty
to confide in this promise, Don Gabriel who had notice of it, sent them a Note
written and signed with his own hand in the name of his Royal Highness, to this
effect, Lay down your Arms immediately, and submit your selves to his Royal
Highness's Clemency, in sodoing, assure your selves that he will pardon you,
and that your persons and those of your Wives and Children shall not be
touched. An assurance of this nature might give full satisfaction to the
Waldenses for the security of their lives and liberties. For besides that this
promise was made in the name and on the part of the Duke; on the other hand,
though it had been made only by Don Gabriel and the General Officers, it ought
not to be the less inviolable. The Waldenses then lay down their Arms, relying
on his promise, and the greatest purt of them went and surrendered themselves to
their Enemies, believing that they should be quickly released. But all those
that yielded themselves into their hands, were made Prisoners, and carried to
the City of Lucerne, under pretense of leading them to his Royal Highness to
make their submissions. The Enemies seized also all the ^osts that the
Waldenses possessed in the Community of Angrogne; they were not content only to
plunder, to pillage and to burn the Houses of these poor People, but they also
caused a great number of the Waldenses of what Age or Sex soever, to be put to
the edg of the Sword, they ravished abundance of Women and Virgins, and in
fine, committed Actions so barbarous and brutish, that they are enough to
strike horror into the minds of all those that have any shame or sense of
humanity lef^. There were nevertheless many Waldenses, who after this
composition dispersed themselves up and down, not being willing to deliver
themselves into the hands of their Enemies, till they had heard what became of
the first that did: seeing then on the one hand, that the Army exercised all
manner of outrages whithersoever they came, and on the other, that all those
that had surrendered themselves were detained, they hid themselves in the
Woods, and sent a Petition to Don Gabriel by a man of S. John named Bartholomew
Fraschie, to entreat the release of their Brethren whom they kept in hold
contrary to their word, and to cause a cessation of those Acts of Hostility
that the Army executed after so barbarous a manner. Don Gabriel returned no
answer to this request; but certain Officers replied to Fraschie, that they
carried the Waldenses to Lucerne, for no other cause, but to ask forgiveness of
his Royal Highness, and that afterward they should be released. In the mean
time Don Gabriel caused the highest places of the Valley of Angrogne to be
gained by part of his Army, who finding no more opposition, came as far as the
Tower, being the most considerable Fort of the Waldenses, in which they had the
greatest part of their Cattle. The Marquess de Parelle who commanded this Body
of the Army, gave the Waldenses to understand, that a Peace being concluded by
the Capitulation of Angrogne, he offered to them the enjoyment of the frui^s of
the said Peace. He assured them to this effect, on the Word and Honor of a
Gentleman, That if they would deliver themselves into his hands, their Persons
and those of their Wives and Children should be preserved harmless; that they
might carry away with them what they had a mind to, without fear of having any
thing taken from them; that they had nothing to do but to come to Lucerne to
make their Submissions to his Royal Highness; and that upon this condition,
those that were willing to turn Catholics, might return with all Safety to
their Houses and Goods; and those that would go out of the Estates of Piedmont,
should have Liberty to depart, conformably to the Order of the 9th of April.
The Waldenses that were in the Field and in the Tower yielded themselves again,
upon the credit of these Promises, that were no better performed than the
other: for the Enemies were no sooner entered within the bounds of the Tower,
when not only all that belonged to the Waldenses, was left to the plunder of
the Soldiers, and of the Banditi of Mondovi their mortal Enemies, who enriched
themselves with their spoils: but those poor people, the greatest part of whom
consisted of old Men, of sick Persons, and of Women and Children, were made
Prisoners, with some Ministers who were among them, and hurried along so
violently, that those who through Age or Infirmity could not march so fast as
the Soldiers would have them, had their Throats cut, or were flung headlong
down Precipices.

To return to the French, whom we left at Pramol in the Valley of Peirouse,
they committed almost the same Outrages that the Dukes Troops had done at
Angrogne and at the Tower in the Valley of Lucerne. They were encamped in a
Quarter of the Community of Pramol, called la Rua, distant about half an hours
march from another Quarter called Peumian, where a Party of the Communities of
Pramol, St. Germain, Prarustia and Rocheplate were retreated, to the number of
1500 persons, as well Men as Women and Children. The French might easily make a
descent from their Quarters to St. Germain, and carry away the two hundred
Waldenses who had so valiantly defended themselves before, and were retreated
within their Retrenchments: but they being informed of the loss of the Valley
of St. Martin, and of the Enemies March, quitted this Intrenchment, fearing
lest they should be surprised in it, and went into Peumian with their Brethren.
They were consulting how they might defend themselves against the French who
prepared to attack them, when certain Inhabitants of the Valleys who had
revolted to the Enemy, came and assured them that the Valleys of Angrogne and
Lucerne had already submitted to their Prince's discretion, who had pardoned
them, and referred them to the terms of the Order of the 9th of April. They
told them also, That he only offered them to put an end to a War, the weight
whereof they were not able to sustain alone, and to procure for themselves an
advantageous Peace. This News having in part broke the measures of the
Waldenses, they sent Deputies and a Drummer to treat with the General of the
French Army, who desired nothing more than a Proposition of Peace. He told them
that his Royal Highness's Intention was to pardon them, and promised them
positively on the part of the Prince and on his own behalf, the Lives and
Liberty of the Waldenses, with a permission to return with all security to
their Houses and Goods, provided they would readily lay down their Arms: and
whereas the Deputies represented to him that they feared lest the French, being
exasperated with what had passed at St. Germain, should revenge themselves on
the Waldenses when they were disarmed; he made great Protestations to them, and
confirmed them with Oaths, that although the whole Army should pass by their
Houses, yet they should not kill so much as a Chicken. This Proposition being
made, Catinat detained with him one of the Deputies, and sent back the others
to give notice to the Waldenses, and to oblige all them that were dispersed to
meet together the next day, being the 25th of April, at Peumian, to the end
that every one might return to his House after they were informed of the Peace,
while the Waldenses were gathering together their scattered Families at
Peumian, Catinat gave an account of this Capitulation to Don Gabriel, who sent
a Courier to him in the Evening, who passing through Peumian assured the
Waldenses that he brought Peace; and the next day at his Return, he told them
that the Peace was concluded. They were so well persuaded of it, that they had
laid down their Arms the day before, observing the conditions of the Treaty,
and confiding wholly in Catinat's Promises. In these Circumstances they were
expecting the News at Peumian, when there arrived a person named St. Peter, one
of the Kings Captains in the Garrison of the Fort of Peirouse, with several
Dragoons with him. This Captain, who was very well known by the Waldenses,
repeated to them the assurances of Peace, and caused the Men to be put in one
Quarter, and the Women and Children in another. The French Troops being arrived
at the same time, told the Men that they had Orders to lead them to their own
Houses, and caused them to march four by four. These poor people being forced
to leave their Wives and their Daughters exposed to the discretion of the
Soldiers, were conducted, not to their Houses, as they were told, but to Don
Gabriel who was encamped on the Mountain de la Vachiere, and caused them to be
carried Prisoners to Lucerne. In the mean time, the Women suffered all the
abominable usage and cruelty that the rage of brutish Soldiers could invent;
for these Barbarians were not satisfied with rifling them of all the money they
had about them, but they ravished many Women and Virgins after a manner that
modesty forbids to relate, and murdered several of them that offered to resist
in defense of their Honor. Catinat was not present at this that was acted at
Peumian. He left the management of this Affair to certain Officers, without
doubt that he might be out of the hearing of those Complaints that the
Waldenses might justly have made to him, or that he might not be a spectator of
these villainous Actions. Howsoever it were, it is certain that besides the
Women that were killed, and those that escaped by flight from the persecution
of these Monsters, and saved themselves in the neighboring Woods, in danger of
being killed by the Muskets they shot to stop them: all the rest of them were
dragged to diverse Prisons after a most inhuman manner.

It were needless here to allege any reasons to make it appear that the
Enemies of the Waldenses have broke in these Rencounters the most sacred and
most inviolable Laws. This Relation of what has passed is sufficient to
confirm the truth, since it is evident that the Waldenses have fallen, as so
many Sacrifices to the false promises of their Enemies. And it is in vain that
they pretend to excuse themselves from this Treachery, under pretense that the
Waldenses were rebellious Subjects, who had taken up Arms against their lawful
Prince; for besides that it were easy to demonstrate that they cannot be
accused of Rebellion, since they have only made use of a natural and
warrantable Defense against the unjust and violent oppression of the Council of
the Propagation, and of their other Enemies; on the other hand, the Question is
not whether the Waldenses have a right to do what they have done? The case is
precisely concerning the execution of those Promises that have been made to
them notwithstanding this pretended Rebellion, since this is the only
Foundation of those Promises that they made. Now it is certain that the
breaking of their Word in this nature can never be justified but by those that
follow this pernicious Maxim, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. It
is certain also, That Kings and Princes are so much the more obliged to condemn
this Maxim, in regard that they are the lively Images of God Almighty, who has
never failed to keep his faithful Promises, and who has always punished
Perjury and Perfidiousness either in the person of those that have committed
it, or in that of their Posterity. It is also in vain that they would say, that
when the Waldenses surrendered themselves, they only promised them their Lives,
according to the relation of the contrary party; for it has been justified
that they had positively promised them their Liberty. But supposing that they
had only promised them their Lives, can it be said in good truth that they have
kept their Word? Is it not true, on the contrary, That they have caused almost
all to expire under the weight of an unsupportable misery, and of the hardest
Captivity that ever was?

The Valley of Peirouse being reduced as the others, by the Capitulation of
Peumian, a Party of the French Army quitted this Valley, and went to join Don
Gabriel at la Vachiere: then it was that they gathered together the poor
Waldenses from all Parts, and dragged them into diverse Prisons or Castles,
under pretense of leading them to his Royal Highness to ask his pardon; but
that which was most afflicting and most lamentable, was this, That they
refused, upon their earnest Prayers and Tears, to put their Families together.
They separated a Father from his Child, and a Husband from his Wife, to take
away from them all means of supporting and comforting one another. They broke
the sacred bonds of Nature and Consanguinity, to the end that they might be the
less able to withstand those Temptations, and to undergo those Evils that they
had prepared for them; they would have those who could not bear the sufferings
and miseries of a close Confinement, to be consumed with the corroding anguish
and regret of being separated so far from their Kindred. There was a great
number of young Boys and Girls whom they put not in prison, but dispersed
through Piedmont in private Houses; yet this was not done upon point of Equity,
but only to make them change their Religion, to cause them to be instructed in
the Catholic, and to ravish them from their Parents.

There was also a considerable number of Waldenses who had not surrendered
themselves, and were not taken. For those of Villars, of Boby, and some other
Places in the Valley of Lucerne, would not come to composition as the rest did,
that they might not partake of the same fortune. Several of those of Angrogne
had joined with them, having seen the Enemies break their word; and several
Waldenses of the Valley of St. Martin had took Sanctuary, and retreated into
the Woods and in the Rocks, to escape the barbarous fury of the French, who
gave no Quarter. The Enemies were resolved to become Masters of these Waldenses
by force or by craft, as they had done to the others. For the effecting this,
while a body of the Army of the Duke of Savoy was engaged against those that
remained in Arms in the Valley of Lucerne, the French returned into that of St.
Martin with the Marquess de Parelle, who was a Person well known to the
Waldenses, and very fit to persuade them. He knew by experience, that Policy
was a more certain means to gain his ends than open Force. He made use of then
certain Waldenses who had yielded themselves, in whom the People had much
confidence. He caused them to march at the head of the Army, and with Pistols
presented to their Breasts, forced them not only to serve as Guides to the
French, to discover the Waldenses in their most hidden Recesses; but also to
write several Letters to the Valley of St. Martin, to exhort their Countrymen
to submit themselves to the Clemency of their Prince, whose Pardon was offered
to all those who would accept it: and because the measures that they had taken
with respect to those that had surrendered themselves, might take away the
credit of this Solicitation, they added, in many of these Letters, That the
Prisoners should be suddenly released; whereupon, on the sight of these
Letters, the Writing and Character whereof they knew, and on the assurance that
the Marquess de Parelle, and the other general Officers, gave the Waldenses
concerning the Peace and Favor of the Prince, a great number of these poor
people delivered themselves into their hands within a few days: many others
were taken or butchered by the Soldiers; but those that yielded themselves, and
those that were taken, had the same fate; and were equally carried Prisoners
into diverse Prisons or Castles.

Whilst Subtilty or Cruelty depopulated the Valley of St. Martin of its
Inhabitants, let us fee what happens in the Valley of Lucerne. The Waldenses
possessed among others two Posts, one called Iaimis, and the other Chamroma,
beyond the Tower, wherein a Party of those that had escaped at Angrogne had
cast themselves. These two Posts covered Villars, where there were about a
thousand Persons, as well old Men as Women and Children. A detachment of the
Army of the Duke of Savoy enforced by the Banditi of Mondovi, came to attack
these two Posts, wherein the Waldenses defended themselves a whole day with
extraordinary Courage: They killed a great number of Soldiers and considerable
Officers, among whom was the Commander of the Banditi. They had but six men
killed and as many wounded. The Enemies were extremely wearied, and having no
more Ammunition left, began to think of a Retreat; but since they might have
been easily pursued, and defeated in Retreating, they made use of this
Stratagem: Several Officers having laid their Arms and their Hats on the
ground, approached in the Evening to the Intrenchment of Chamrama, with a
Handkerchief tied to the top of a Stick, and demanded a Parley, to make
Propositions of Peace: they showed a Paper, and told the Waldenses that they
had just now received Letters, the purport of which was, That the Peace was
concluded in all the Valleys; that his Royal Highness had given a General
Pardon to all his Subjects, and that those that were still in Arms were
comprehended as well as the others: they added, That they had Orders not to
fight any more, but to retreat; and exhorted the Waldenses to do the same, and
to accept of this favor that his Royal Highness had offered them, whereof the
Podesta Prat, who was there present, might assure them. This Podesta being well
known to the Waldenses, having joined his Protestations with those of the
Officers, and all together having positively promised them their Lives and
Liberty provided that they would retire: the Waldenses of Chamrama confiding in
their Promises, left off firing, and gave their Enemies opportunity of
retreating, and retreated also themselves, being all persuaded that the Peace
was made. There were several of the Community of Angrogne who met at the Tower
to enjoy the fruits of this Peace, but they were presently committed to Prison.
The Credulity of the Waldenses made them lose a fair opportunity of revenging
themselves on their Enemies; for they might without trouble or danger have
vanquished those Troops that had no Ammunition of War left, and the greatest
part of whom were in disorder. The Enemy that feigned to retreat, only to cause
the Waldenses to retire, and to oblige them to abandon the Post of Chamrama
that was so advantageous, being reinforced with some Succors, immediately
seized on the said Post. Those that were at Iaimet, and had made no
Composition, were thereupon forced to quit their Post, because it was commanded
by the other, and to wheel off to the Hills of Villars. The Enemy marched on
after them, and encamped at Bonnet on the Avenues of Villars and Boby; they
remained there two days without storming the Waldenses, who were got together,
and might make four or five hundred men. The Officers of the Army spent this
time in making Propositions of Peace to them, accompanied with fair Promises if
they yielded, and terrible Threatenings if they refused, The Waldenses replied
to these Propositions, That they were desirous of nothing more than Peace, but
that that which they offered them was more lamentable than War, since they
could not purchase it but at the price of their Liberty; that notwithstanding
the Peace that they had promised to those of Chamrama, in pursuance of which
they had quitted their Post, they had not left imprisoning those that
surrendered themselves; and that the Example of their Brethren had sufficiently
instructed them what they were to expect from such Propositions: however this
hindered not a great number of Waldenses from going to deliver themselves into
their hands, on the account that they had sworn to them, those who would submit
should return quickly to their Houses, without being carried to his Royal
Highness to beg his Pardon, but these also were clapped in Prison, and treated
after the same manner as the others. There is great reason to admire the
easiness with which the Waldenses suffered themselves so often to be deceived.
But it is to be observed, that there were many who could not believe that it
was possible for them to resist after the reddition of the Body of the Valleys,
others feared lest Resistance would be of mischievous consequence to their
Wives and Children that were in Prison, and the greatest part could not be
persuaded that their Enemies would be so cruel as to cause those to perish in
Prison who had surrendered themselves. They imagined that they should be
discharged for a few Weeks Captivity, and that afterward they should obtain
their Liberty.

However, the Waldenses being very much weakened, left Villars, which the
Enemies seized. They gave them respit till the 4th of May, when the Troops
being reinforced, went to attack Boby, where the Waldenses were retired; but
they were vigorously repulsed by 150 Waldenses who were on the Mountain of
Subjusque, and without the loss of a man, killed some Officers and a great
number of Soldiers. Eight days after, the Army of France joined that of the
Duke of Savoy. The Enemies then made their last Effort to gain Boby; but the
Waldenses defended themselves so resolutely, that after a Fight that lasted all
the day, they forced the Army to retire, and to go and encamp at Sarsena, with
the loss of abundance of their men. The next day the Marquess de Parelle, who
came from the Valley of St. Martin, with a great Detachment passed the Mountain
of Julian, which is one of the Alps, that was thought, till then,
inaccessible, and prepared to take the Waldenses from above. This obliged the
Waldenses to abandon Bobi, and to convey themselves into the Woods and Rocks.
The Marquess de Parelle, and the Count de Birchanteau, having occupied the
Posts that the Waldenses had quitted, sent after them in their Retreat diverse
Persons to exhort them to submit, and to offer them favor: several of these
poor People being worn out with the Fatigue, and fore pressed with Hunger and
Misery, yielded to this Offer, but they lost their Liberty into the bargain.
Others surrendered themselves to the Governor of Mireboue, on an assurance that
he had given them of their Lives and Liberty; but he rewarded their Faith with
a rigorous Imprisonment. There were several who had withdrawn themselves into
the Mountain of Vandalin, and fought for some time with much Courage and good
Fortune: but at last they did as the others, and let themselves be seduced by
the Count de la Roche, Governor of the Valleys. He promised them positively, by
a Letter wrote with his own hand, that they should return to their Houses with
all freedom; but they had no sooner quitted their Post, than that he caused
them to be carried to Prison, and took from them the Letter that he had given
them.

The Enemies of the Waldenses having thus by the means aforementioned taken
away the Lives of a multitude of People, deprived more than twelve thousand
Waldenses of their Liberty, and taken away and dispersed two thousand Children,
thought that they had no more to do. They proceeded to carry on their Injustice
to the utmost, and caused all the Goods of the Waldenses to be confiscated.

After this manner it was, that the Valleys of Piedmont have been depopulated
of their ancient Inhabitants; that the light of the Gospel has been
extinguished in a Country where it has shone so bright for so many Ages; that
Perfidiousness and Treachery has triumphed over the good Faith of the
Waldenses; that the Council of the Propagation and the rest of their Enemies,
have executed the design they had formed for their Extirpation; and that the
Waldenses have unjustly suffered, and for the sole cause of their Religion,
this horrible Persecution and lamentable Dissipation, that ought to draw Tears
from the eyes of all good Christians. But for the more perfect knowledge of
what Spirit their Persecutors have been animated with, it will be requisite to
take a prospect of the Outrages and Cruelties they have committed on these
occasions.

Although it is my design to give an Account only of those dismal effects of
their rage that were produced after the Capitulations, yet I cannot but mention
the barbarous Enormities where with the French signalized their entry into the
Valley of St. Martin; not only because they exceed those bounds that Christians
ought to set to their Victories, but also because they were committed on
Persons not capable of defending themselves: it were easy to expose to public
view the Massacre of so many old Men, Women, and little Children that were
sacrificed to the fury of the Soldiers, the desolation of those poor Women and
Maidens, who after they had been ravished, were constrained to march stark
naked at the head of the Army, to serve for Guides to the French, and the
monstrous and diabolical actions of those enraged Soldiers that satiated their
infamous Lusts on the very Bodies of those whom they had deprived of Life. But
I shall pass by all those things, to produce some examples of Cruelties and
Oppressions executed after the subduing of the Valleys.

The Soldiers committed several Massacres at Angrogne, which I shall not
specify, that I may not be engaged in too tedious a recital. They ravished
many Women and Maidens, whose Names (for modesty sake) I shall spare by reason
that several of them are yet living. They would also have deflowered Margaret
Maraude who was not fourteen years old, and because James Maraude her Father,
and Margaret Maraude made some opposition to this Violence, they were most
inhumanly butchered. Susanna Oliviette and Margaret Baline endeavoring to
preserve their Chastity lost their Lives by the hands of these Barbarians.
Joseph David being wounded at Angrogne, was carried by the Soldiers into a
neighboring House, where they caused him to be burnt. Four Women and three
Children of Prarustin were murdered in a Cave in a Rock where they had hid
themselves. Daniel Fourneron's Mother aged fourscore years was tumbled down a
Precipice coming from the Tower-field, because she did not go fast enough. M.
Deumian killed the Wife of James Fourneron and Magdalen Roche, with a Back
Sword, because they had not delivered soon enough the Money that they had about
them. Mary Romain a handsome young Woman espoused to James Griot was massacred
for striving to maintain her Honor. Another Maid for keeping hers, being cast
into a River, was killed with a Musket Shot. Several Women and Maidens who are
yet living, were dragged by the Hair into Houses, where they were ravished with
abominable circumstances; there was one of these who through despair flung
herself headlong out at Window. Honoria Iayer a young Child, being found with
the Woman, was shot to death with a Fuzee: A great number of Women and Virgins
trying to save themselves in the Woods to get out of danger of the Violences of
the Soldiers, were dispatched with Muskets that were shot off to stop them. The
Marquess de Parelle and several Waldenses whom he caused to march to serve him
for Guides, passing through Plumian to go into the Valley of S. Martin, found
the dead Bodies of many little Children cut in pieces, several naked Women
massacred with Swords, among whom there were some that had Stones thrust into
their Privy Parts: They saw also several Soldiers that carried in their Hats
the mark of an horrible Cruelty, and of a diabolical Impudicity, at the sight
whereof, the Marquess de Parelle was offended. In the Valley of S. Martin there
were six men, twenty Women, and some Children, who went to surrender themselves
in the City of Peirouse, upon promise that was made them that they should
receive no harm. But as soon as they were come they shot these six men to death
in the presence of their Wives. John Ribet of Macel being apprehended, they
caused his Arms and Legs to be burnt, to oblige him to change his Religion; but
God gave him the Grace to obtain the Crown of Martyrdom, in constantly
suff^ring the Death that these Butchers put him to. They also inhumanly
murdered Bartholomew Ribet, James Breus and his Son. They tied a poor infirm
Person to a Horses Tail, and dragged him along till he expired. They hung up an
old blind Woman before her own House. They found a Woman at the point of being
brought to bed, and committed two Murders at one blow, taking away her Life
and that of the Child in her Belly. They pursued after two young Maids from a
place called le Colet to another quarter named Bonniot, where having overtook
them they ravished them, and at length shot them to death and hacked them in
pieces. Four Women falling at the same time into the hands of these Barbarians,
had the same fortune, with this difference only, that before they were ravished
and massacred, they saw their Childrens Throats cut, at a place called the
Fountains. They cut open the Body of a Mother and her Child, and tore out their
Entrails which they burned in the Fire. They killed a great number of Children
in the same place, because they were sick, and had not strength to follow them
into the Prisons where they would have carried them. Twenty two Persons who
were for a long time hid in the Woods, the greatest part of whom were Women and
Children, were found by these Murderers on the Mountain of Pelue, and flung
down headlong into dreadful Abysses cross the points of the Rocks, where the
Entrails of these Martyrs were seen a great while after. In the Valley of
Lucerne, Susanna the Wife of Daniel Violin, Katharine the Wife of James Negrin,
and Anne Melanote and her Daughter, had their Throats cut with a Baionet. Some
Soldiers having used their utmost endeavors to flea Daniel Pellene alive, and
not being able to pull the Skin over his Shoulders, laid him along upon the
ground, put a great Stone upon his Belly, and caused him to expire in this
condition. Daniel Blumerol lost his life by the means of a Cord that they tied
violently about his Head, his Belly, and his Privy Members. Anne and Magdalen
Vittorie, and several others were burnt. The Wife of Daniel Monin was massacred
with a Back-Sword, and had her Head chopped in pieces. Anne Bastianne was tumbled
down the Precipices. David Moudon had his Head cleft asunder with a broad
Sword. Margaret Salvajote being stripped stark naked, was run through with a
Dagger in several parts of her Body, but she did not suffer only this cruel
Death in her own person; for before they cut her Throat, these Russians
mortified her little Daughter about seven months old before her face, and
dashed her Head against the Rock, till all her Brains flew out. They cut Mary
Salvajot in pieces with a Scimeter. They pierced Mary Duraud through with a
Dagger because she resisted their design to ravish her. They cut the Throat of
the Mother of the Sieur Bertrand a Minister, a Person that was 80 years old,
and lay Bedridden through extreme old Age. A certain Maiden of Boby was tied
stark naked cross a Mule, with her Privy-parts exposed to public view, and was
led about in this condition through the City of Lucerne. Amongst a great number
of Waldenses whom they hanged at Boby, there was one called Anthony Malanot,
whom the Soldiers shot at several times after he was dead, taking for their
Mark those parts of his Body that modesty forbids to name. The Soldiers having
found a Woman named Iaimonate in a hole in a Rock on the Mountain of
Carbonnieres, brought her to the Marquess de Bevil Colonel of the Regiment of
Savoy, who demanded of her how long she had been in that Cavern, and what Food
she got there: she made Answer, that she had been there eight days, and that
she nourished her self with a little Milk of a Shee-Goat that she took along
with her: They would force her at length to discover where the Waldenses were
that hid themselves in the Rocks; but she protesting that she knew nothing of
them, the Soldiers having put her to a sort of Torture by fastening their
Matches to her fingers to make her speak, tied her Feet to her Head backwards,
and in this posture hurled her down a Precipice: but as she was stopped in
falling, the Soldiers flinging Stones and Brick-bats at her, caused her Bowels
to drop out of her Belly, and thrust her down headlong in the presence of the
Marquess de Bevil. A young Lad of the Valleys, by name David Magnot, whom the
said Marquess took for his Domestic Servant, and who had afterward made his
escape, was an Eyewitness of, and related this horrible Action. Daniel Moudon
an Elder of the Church of Roras, after he had been spectator of the Death of
his two Sons John and James Moudon, whose Heads the Soldiers cut off, having
seen John's Wife cleaved asunder from her Breast to the bottom of her Belly,
her Child also knocked on the Head that was but six weeks old, and James's two
Children cut in pieces, one whereof was four years old, and the other but
fourteen months, was constrained by these Butchers to carry the Heads of his
two Sons on his shoulders, and to travel thus barefoot two hours, till they
came to Lucerne, where he was hanged in the middle of these Heads that were
stuck upon the Gibbet. I shall pass over an infinite number of examples of
Barbarity of the like nature, not to mention the miserable Death of so many old
Men, Women, young Infants and sick persons that died with cold and hunger in
the Woods or in the clefts of the Rocks: Not to mention an incredible number of
Prisoners that were hanged without form of Justice on the branches of Trees, or
in the Towns and Villages, among whom there was one Paul Megle aged 27 years,
whom they carried from his Bed to the Gallows. At present I shall content my
self with what I have already related, which may be sufficient to show how far
the fury of the Enemies of the Waldenses proceeded. I shall only add here the
Death of the Sieur Leidet that equally deserves pity and admiration: He was
Minister of Pr^be in the Valley of S. Martin, who had escaped at the subduing
of the Valleys, and had hid himself for some time within the Caverns of the
Rocks; He was taken by a Detachment of Soldiers, and carried to Lucerne into
the Palace of the Marquess of Angrogne, where the Duke of Savoy was at that
time: He was put in prison within a Tower of this Palace, and fettered with a
kind of Stocks that were made with two thick pieces of Timber, between which
they locked his Legs: He remained a great while in this condition, fed with
Bread and Water, not being able to lie down by reason of the weight of those
Shackles; it was reported that he had taken up Arms, but it was a false
Accusation, from which he was cleared even by the Testimony of those that
apprehended him: They let him lie several months in Prison, without bringing
him to his Trial, and some Judges themselves desired to be excused from being
concerned in his Process. In the mean time there was not a day passed wherein
he was not exposed to the Persecutions of the Monks and Priests, and had great
Disputes with them about matters of Religion, wherein he came off always
victorious. They caused one day two Bibles to be brought, wherein he
demonstrated to them so clearly the truth of his Belief, that being ashamed and
put to confusion, they retired after a Conference of four hours. They often
threatened him with Death, thinking thereby to affright him, and told him
several times that there was no other means to preserve himself, but by turning
Catholic. But he received the news of his Death with a great deal of
Tranquillity. He replied to them, that although he knew well that they could
not put him to death with Justice, since he was not taken in Arms, and that
besides the Duke of Savoy had pardoned all his Subjects; nevertheless he was
prepared for death, esteeming himself most happy to be able to suffer for the
Name of Jesus Christ. He fortified by his example and pious Exhortations the
Prisoners that were in the same Palace, some of whom were permitted to see him.
At last, the Monks and Priests provoked with his Zeal and Constancy, found out
Judges who were willing enough to condemn him to Death. The day that he was
executed, the Auditor Salvay caused Sentence to be pronounced against him in
the presence of certain Monks, he heard the publication thereof with a
resignation altogether Christian, without any emotion, trouble, or fear
appearing in his Countenance. The Monks left him not that day, and although he
desired them several times to leave him to his repose, that he might pray to
God freely without disturbance, yet they always persecuted him, and forced him
to enter into a Dispute with them, thinking that he was not in a condition to
maintain it; but he acquitted himself with that Courage and presence of Mind,
that they were astonished at it. This did not hinder them nevertheless from
coming again the next morning at break of day, to give themseves the pleasure
of tormenting him, even to the end of his life. He said as he was going out of
the Prison, that it was the day of a double deliverance to him, since his Body
went out of Captivity, and his Soul was agoing quickly out the Prison of his
Body to enter into Heaven, to enjoy the full Liberand Pleasures of the blessed.
He went to Execution with an holy Joy and admirable Resolution, despising
equally both the Life that the Monks offered him, and the Death that was set
before his eyes; he made a long and good Prayer at the foot of the Scaffold,
with which all that assisted were extremely touched. He pronounced these words
on the Ladder, O my God, into thy hands I recommend my Spirit; and dyed a Death
so edifying, that the Monks themselves, who forsook him not to the last, were
forced to avouch that he died like a Saint.

At that time there remained only in the Valleys certain Inhabitants, who
preferring Death before Slavery, would not hearken to any Propositions of Peace
whatsoever. Some of these were in the Valley of S. Martin, and although they
could not know one another Designs, because the Army was encamped between the
two Valleys, and hindered them from having any Communication, yet they were all
of the same mind, and equally took up a resolution worthy of immortal Praise.
They remained a long time hid and distressed in the Mountains, that they might
avoid falling into the hands of the Enemies that every day sent out Detachments
to surprise them; one cannot sufficiently admire the Constancy with which they
endured all the Fatigues and all the Miseries to which they were exposed, but
especially that whereby they suffered the extremity of hunger, for they were
often compelled to feed on the grass of the Fields, and to eat Dogs and other
Beasts that came to devour the dead Bodies of those Waldenses that were left
unburied. But the French and the Banditi of Mondovi being retired, they were no
more so hardly pressed by the Duke of Savoy's Army that remained alone in the
Valley. Then it was that they that were in the Valley of Lucerne began to go
out of their places of refuge to search for some Victuals wherewith to sustain
their languishing Lives. There were found in this Valley but 42 Men, some
Women, and Children when they were got together; nevertheless they made several
Incursions into the Plain, from whence they always carried away Victuals and
Booty, defeated in several Rencounters several Detachments of the Enemies,
killed or drove away a great number of Savoyards that were come to inhabit in
the Valleys, and lastly for some months, committed Actions, so stout, so bold
and so vigorous, that they put the Enemies to Contribution, and forced them to
furnish them with Provisions for some time, to hinder them from continuing
their inroads into the Plain. I shall not here recite all these mavelous
Actions, that I may not be engaged in too long a Relation: I shall only say
thus much, That the Court of Turin having to no purpose made use of force to
drive them out of the Valleys, caused an offer to be made them of safe Conduct,
in due form, and Hostages for the security of their retreat. They that brought
the Proposition to the Waldenses, took no care to avouch that they acted by
order of the Court of Turin. But they affirmed on the contrary, that they
treated only on their own account, and at the motion of some Persons that had
promised to procure for them these safe Conducts, and to cause Hostages to be
given; but it is certain that these Overtures mere not made without the
participation of the Court: For besides that no private person durst have
undertook such a negotiation of his own head, the safe Conducts that were
afterward dispatched make it appear plain enough, that all was done by the
orders of the Court. However it were, the Waldenses at first refused to hearken
to this Proposition, whether it were because they thought that they ought not
to give any credit to their words, or because they were resolved either to
perish, or to bring the Prisoners out of Captivity, Death being more eligible
to them than Life, so long as their Brethren groaned under their Chains. Some
time after this Proposition was renewed, they made use of diverse Considerations
to oblige the Waldenses to accept it. They told them that the D. of Savoy had
declared that as long as they were in Arms, the Prisoners should not be
released, and promised them positively that as soon as they were gone, orders
should be given to set their Brethren at liberty: in so much that the Waldenses
considering on the one side that the Winter drew nigh, and that they could not
expect any relief; and on the other side, that their Resistance might give them
a pretense to detain the Prisoners, thought it was best for them to retire out
of the Estates of Piedmont. It was agreed then and ordained, That they should
go out of the Valleys with their Wives and Children, Arms and Baggage, in two
Troops or Brigades, that should be defrayed and conducted to Suitzerland at two
several times, by one of his Royal Highness's Captains named Perret, with safe
Conducts in due form: That for the security of the first Troop that should
depart, Hostages should be left in the Valleys in the hands of the second, who
should keep them till they were certified of the Arrival of the first; and that
as soon as the first Troop should be arrived, this Captain should give them an
Officer of his Kindred for an Hostage till such time as the second Troop should
be also arrived. This Treaty was faithfully executed; for these two Troops
arrived happily in a place of security with their Arms and Baggage under the
Conduct of the said Captain. One remarkable Circumstance is not to be forgot;
that is, That the Waldenses could never be brought to consent to a Retreat,
till they had sent them back some of their Kinsfolks that were in Prison, and
in effect carried them away along with them; whence it may be inferred, That
this Treaty was managed by the Court of Turin; since these Prisoners could not
have been delivered but by their Orders.

The Waldenses that were in the Valley of St. Martin acted almost the same
things as the other had done in the Valley of Lucerne: for although they were
reduced at last to twenty five men, and some Women and Children, yet they
defended themselves with so much Courage and Resolution, that they procured for
themselves safe Conducts and Securities to pass into Suitzerland with their
Wives and Children, Arms and Baggage. It is said, That those that were in one
Valley knew not what passed in the other, because the Army hindered them from
keeping any correspondence one with another. If they had been able to join
together, or to have heard any News one of another, they had without doubt made
a more advantageous Composition, and it may be have rescued their Brethren out
of Captivity. For whether the Court of Turin would have been obliged to
maintain an Army in the Valleys to hinder the Incursion of the Waldenses, or
whether they had a design to re-people that Country with Savoyards, who would
not care to go and inhabit there, as long as there were any in Arms; it is
probable that to cause them to depart, they would have consented to deliver the
Prisoners.

Whilst the valiant Waldenses retreated into Switzerland by virtue of the
Hostages and safe Conducts that their Arms had procured, the generous reformed
Cantons transacted for the liberty of the Prisoners. They had wrote several
times in vain to the Court of Turin on this Subject: but as their Zeal and
Charity never fails, they called an Assembly at Arau in the Month of September
1686. in which they resolved once more to demand the release of the Prisoners:
to this effect they sent two Deputies to the Count de Govon the Duke of Savoy's
Resident at Lucerne in Switzerland. These Deputies having carried the
Proposition to this Resident, and having represented to him the reasons that
induced the Reformed Cantons to intercede for the Waldenses, concluded a Treaty
with him in the beginning of October by agreement of their Superiors. The tenor
of this Treaty was, that the Duke of Savoy should give liberty to all the
Prisoners to go into Switzerland in safety, and that he should cause them to be
clothed, conducted, and their Charges born to the frontiers of Switzerland,
where the Reformed Cantons shall cause them to be received and conducted into
the heart of their Country, that they may not be in a condition to re-enter
into the Territories of Piedmont. When this Treaty was made they were ignorant
without doubt at Lucerne, that the Waldenses aforementioned were already
retired; for there is an Article that imports that the Duke should give them
safe Conducts in due form, that they might be able to retreat freely and
securely, which they would not have inserted in this Treaty, if they had known
what had passed with respect to them. However the Cantons immediately ratified
this Treaty; but the Duke of Savoy did not ratify it till some time after, in
a Letter that he wrote to them on this occasion, in which he appoints the Road
through which the Prisoners should pass, by Mountains then inaccessible, and by
the Country of Valay that belongs not to the Duke of Savoy, nor to the
Switzers, and through which there is no going without agreeing for a Passage
with the Bishop of Sion in whose jurisdiction it is. It was evident that they
designed to raise obstacles to hinder the execution of this Treaty; otherwise
they would not have appointed a passage through other Territories than their
own, where there are Roads much more convenient to go into Switzerland. The
Reformed Cantons complained thereof to the Count de Govon, who having wrote
about it to the Court of Turin; at length the Duke ordered their passage
through that part of Savoy that borders on the Canton of Bern, and caused the
Prisons to be opened; but it was in the middle of Winter and in a season so
rigorous, that according to all appearance, those that had escaped the miseries
of the Prisons would have perished on the way.

It would be very difficult to represent all the Miseries and Calamities that
the Prisoners have endured during a Captivity of more than nine months. There
are nevertheless exact Memorials of what has passed in every Prison, out of
which a particular Relation might be collected: but since it would exceed the
due bounds of this present Narrative, I shall only give a general Idea of the
Hardships they have suffered, expecting a more particular enumeration of them
hereafter. They were put in Prison at several times, according to the different
Circumstances wherein they surrendered themselves or were taken. They were
dispersed to the number of about two thousand, as well Men as Women and
Children, into fourteen Prisons or Castles of the Estates of Piedmont, and they
were more or less ill used according to the Humor of those that had the
Government of those Prisons: but it is certain, that every where they were
exposed to many Inconveniences and great Sufferings. In every Prison they had
nothing but Bread and Water for their ordinary Food; neither had they as much
of that as necessity required. In some Prisons they gave them very bad Bread,
black and heartless without Substance, kneeded up with dirty Water taken out of
Sinks and Kennels, in which they often find pieces of Mortar, Glass, and other
Ordure: in other places they gave them stinking and corrupted Water, of which
they could hardly drink: they were forced in some places to take it out of a
Pond wherein they had watered Cattle and flung in Dogs. In some places they
would not suffer them to take Water out of the Wells, but caused it to be
poured into Troughs and exposed to the Sunbeams and to the heat of the
Weather, that they might not drink it till it were lukewarm. In other Parts
they would give them no Water but at certain set hours, out of which it was not
permitted them to take any, though they were ready to dye with Thirst; which
has caused many poor sick Persons to expire for want of a Glass of Water to
refresh their parched Bowels. They were compelled almost every where to lie on
the hard Bricks with which the Chambers of Piedmont are paved, without Straw;
or if in some places they had any given them, it was either reduced to Chaff,
or as rotten as Dung. They were so crowded together and stuffed up in some
Prisons, that they were scarcely able to stir themselves; and when any of them
dyed, which happened every day, they put others in their room, that they might
be always equally pressed. The suffocating heat that there was in the Summer,
and the Corruption with which the Chambers were infected, by reason of the
Sick, had engendered abundance of Lice that would not let the Prisoners sleep
night nor day; there were also great Worms that eat through their skin: there
were several sick Persons to be seen that were (if we may so say) eaten up
alive with Worms; for by continual lying, as not being able to rise or lift
themselves up, these poor People were become so mangy, that their very skin
being already putrified, parted from their Flesh and mouldred away in pieces:
they left them thus flead and miserably languishing till death put a period to
all their Sufferings. They have not only endured all the inconveniences of
excessive heat, but also those of extreme cold; for in the middle of Winter
they never allowed them any fire to warm themselves at, nor gave them any
cloths to cover themselves with, though they lay in upper Rooms, that for the
most part had no Windows. They never were permitted neither during the Summer,
nor yet in the Winter, to have any Candles or Lamps to give Light in the
obsourest nights, notwithstanding they have often desired it, to find means to
succor the sick, many of whom have died for want of relief: a great number of
Women have also expired in the pains of Childbirth merely for want of help in
the dark, and the loss of them has been followed with that of their Infants,
who have received Death the same moment wherein they should have received Life.
They have put sick People whom they had separated from the whole, into open
places, to be exposed to the injuries of the Air and the Weather, whether fair
or foul, wet or dry. But this sort of Cruelty has proved in some manner
charitable, since it has caused them to find an end to their Sufferings and
Sorrows in that of their Lives. In other Prisons they have put many Children
taken with the Smallpox into wet Yards, and on the Gutters of the Houses,
forcing them to receive the water that falls from thence. They are not content
not to afford the sick any relief themselves, but hinder others from bringing
them any sustenance, as Water Gruel, Broth, etc. Whenever the Prisoners dare so
much as to complain of the little care they take of them, they reproach them
with threatenings, and blows. They tell them that instead of having compassion
on them, they will use them like Dogs till such time as they are all dead.
There is hardly a Prisoner that is not seized with many distempers. There has
been such a great number of sick people together, that they have counted
threescore and fifteen at the same time in one chamber: They have taken away
out of the Prisons many young Children, notwithstanding the opposition of their
Parents. In fine, the Prisoners have been so barbarously used, that it is
scarce possible to believe, that among those that bear the name of Christians,
there could be found so much inhumanity, were it not known to what degree the
Enemies of the Waldenses have extended their fury. But we cannot doubt of the
excess of miseries that these poor Captives have endured, since we have been
informed that more than 8000 persons have expired under the weight of this
cruel bondage. In the mean time, as if the sufferings wherewith their bodies
were afflicted were not sufficient, they have even persecuted their very souls
after a most dreadful manner. For the Monks and the Priests have tried all the
means imaginable to oblige them to change their Religion. The good God has
nevertheless given them the grace to persist in the Truth, and there are very
few that have yielded to the force of these temptations: those that turned were
treated a little more gently than the others, but they gave them not their
liberty.

The Prisoners were reduced to this lamentable condition, when the Duke of
Savoy caused the Order to be published in the Prisons, that permitted them to
go out, and to retreat into Switzerland. This publication was not made every
where in the same manner, nor at the same time; but successively, and with
proportion to the departure of the Prisoners. It was made nevertheless in the
greatest part of the Prisons by the means of an Auditor who caused the
Prisoners to appear before him, and told them that those that had a mind to
retreat out of the Estates of Piedmont to go into Switzerland were permitted so
to do; even those that had promised to change their Religion, because that
promises that had been made in a Prison ought to be looked on as forced and
extorted, and by consequence and void. He added that they were left to their
liberty, whether they would go, or stay behind and change their Religion;
nevertheless the Prisoners had not all this freedom of choice that they
pretended to grant them. For the Monks and the Officers of the Prisons who were
present at this publication endeavored to hinder the effects thereof.
Sometimes they represented to them that the rigor of the Season, and the
cruelty of the Soldiers that conducted them, would cause part of them to perish
on the Road. Sometimes they flattered them with the hopes of returning to their
Houses if they would abjure their Religion. But when these Considerations could
not move them, they beat them outragiously, as it happened in the Prisons of Ast,
where the Governor gave them a thousand blow, with his Cane in the presence of
the Auditor Leonardy. They shut them up in deep ditches, and in very stinking
places, as were the Prisons of Queirasque and others. In fine, they raised so
many obstacles, that there were several that yielded to the temptation, and
consented to renounce their Religion. But instead of sending them back to their
Houses, they carried them at length, as it were into captivity, into the
Province of Verceil, being the most barren, and the least fertile part of all
the Duke of Savoy's Dominions. I cannot omit some circumstances that were very
remarkable; one whereof is, that several young Children, as well those that had
been taken out of the Prisons, as those that were dispersed through Piedmont,
hearing that the prisoners were set at liberty, desired to go along with their
Parents and Kindred, but they would not suffer them to do it: the other is,
that the permission to depart was not published in the Prisons of Lucerne, but
only stuck upon the Walls, that the Prisoners might have no benefit thereof:
And lastly, they would not give liberty to the Prisoners that were in the deep
ditches of Ast, nor to the families that were in the Citadel of Turin.

Soon after this publication, they caused the Waldenses to depart in several
Troops or Brigades, that were conducted to Geneva by the Officers, and Soldiers
of the Duke of Savoy. They had promised by the Treaty made with the Count de
Govon to Cloth all the Prisoners; whereupon they gave them certain old
tattered Coats, and some pairs of Stockings; but as they executed the Treaty in
this particular, they broke it in others much more considerable. For besides
the Cruelties that they exercised against several Brigades; they took away a
great number of young Children upon the Road. There happened amongst others, two
things by which one may judge of the rest. One respects the Prisoners that were
at Mondovi; they caused to be published at Christmas, about five of the Clock
in the evening, the Order that gave them permission to depart; they told them
that if they did not go away immediately upon the spot, they should have no
benefit of the Order, because they intended to revoke it the next day. These
miserable creatures were all disabled and worn out with Diseases and
languishing Pains. Nevertheless they chose rather to go free, and to expose
themselves to a manifest danger, than to groan any longer under this cruel
Captivity. They departed then in a night the most cold, and the most
inconvenient that can be possibly imagined, and traveled without stopping,
four or five miles over the Snow and the Ice, but with so great misfortune,
that there were more than an hundred and fifty that fainted under this fatigue,
and dyed by the way, without any possibility of succor from their Brethren.
The other is in reference to the Prisoners that were at Fossan. There was a
Brigade of these Prisoners that having lain at Novalaise, at the foot of Mount
Senis, perceived the next morning as they were going, a great storm to arise on
that Mountain. Some of them caused the Officer that conducted them to take
notice of that storm. They entreated him to stay till it was over, and not to
expose them to an apparent destruction, but to take pity of so many persons,
the greatest part of whom were feeble, and without strength; they told him also
that if he would be so charitable to them, they would ask him for no Bread,
choosing rather to pass without eating, than to venture to cast themselves on
this danger: but this Officer was so rigorous and unmerciful, as to cause them
to march on, and to Sacrifice part of them to his barbarous cruelty. For there
were about twenty six that dyed under Mount Senis, being destroyed by the
tempest. They were old Men, sick Persons, Women, and little Children, that had
not strength to resist the rigor of the bad weather, whom their kindred were
compelled to leave behind them for a prey to the wild Beasts, because this
Officer would not suffer them to take any care of them: the following Brigades,
and several Merchants, who soon after passed by this Mountain, saw the bodies
of these miserable wretches extended on the Snow, and the Women having their
Children in their Arms. However, this testimony must be given to the truth,
that several Officers, that conducted the Waldenses, took a particular care of
them.

The Reformed Cantons being informed of the taking away of the Children, and
the other ill treatment received by the Waldenses on the way, thought that they
were still obliged in Charity to solicit in their behalf. Therefore to that
end they sent Deputies to the Court of Turin, as well in favor of the march of
the Brigades that were not yet arrived at Geneva, as to demand the restitution
of the Children that were taken away on the Road, and of the young Boys and
Girls that were dispersed through Piedmont, when the Valleys were subdued. And
since they had received at the same time a Letter from the Count de Govon,
wherein he acquainted them that his Master had deferred for some time the
deliverance of the Ministers, and that he would not release some Prisoners that
had been taken in Arms, and that had been condemned to work all their lifetime
in his Royal Highness's Fortifications: the Reformed Cantons charged their
Deputies again to demand the liberty of the Ministers, and of all the other
Prisoners conformably to the Treaty made with the Count de Govon. But before we
speak of the success of this Negotiation, let us see in what condition the
Waldenses were, when they arrived at Geneva.

They arrived at several times, and in several Troops or Brigades, that
composed in all but two thousand five hundred persons; but they were in so sad
and deplorable a condition, that it is not possible to express it. There were
several poor people that expired between the two Gates of the City, and that
found the end of their lives in the beginning of their liberty; others were so
consumed with diseases and pain, that they thought every moment they would dye
in the Arms of those that had the Charity to entertain them. Others were so
frozen with cold that they had not strength enough to speak; some staggered
under the weight of an extreme faintness and weariness, others lost the use of
some of their Members, and were not able to lift up their Hands to receive the
assistance that was offered them. The greatest part of them were naked and
without shoes: in fine, they all carried about them such marks of excessive
sufferings, and extreme misery, that the most obdurate Heart would have been
pierced to the quick with a sensible grief at the very fight of them. Whereas
the Brigades remained some time at Geneva, to take a little rest and
refreshment before they set forward for Switzerland; those that arrived first
went to meet those that came after, to inform themselves concerning their
kinsfolks and acquaintance of whom they had heard no News since the reddition
of the Valleys. A Father enquired after his Child, and a Child after his
Father, a Husband sought for his Wife, and a Wife for her Husband, and every
one endeavored to hear some News of their Friends and Neighbors; but as this
was to very little purpose, since the most part were dead in Prison, it made a
spectacle so sad and dismal, that all that stood by, were dissolved in Tears,
whilst these poor miserable creatures, being oppressed, and overwhelmed with
the excess of their grief, were not able any longer to lament themselves, or so
much as to complain. But as it is very difficult to represent objects so sad
and so affecting, so it would be as hard a task to express the charity
wherewith the people of Geneva were animated on this occasion. The Inhabitants
pressed on so fast to go before these poor wretches to lead them into their
Houses, that the Magistrates were obliged to forbid them to go out of the City,
to avoid the confusion and disorders that usually attend so great a concourse
of people. Every one strove who should entertain the most sick, or those that
were most afflicted, to the end they might have a greater subject whereon to
exercise their Charity. They treated them not only as dear and tender Children,
but also as persons that brought Peace, and a Blessing along with them on their
Families. They took an extraordinary care of the sick, several of whom dyed at
Geneva, and some of them had the wounds yet on their Bodies, that the Worms had
caused in Prison. All the Waldenses that wanted clothing, were either
furnished by those that lodged them, or by the Italian Bank, the Directors
whereof from the beginning to the end, showed all the marks of a tender
compassion, and of an ardent Charity.

But it was not only in Geneva, that the Waldenses have found such consolation,
but they have received also a great deal in Switzerland, where the Reformed
Cantons have opened to them their Country, and the Bowels of their Compassions,
after the most Generous, the most Christian, and the most Charitable manner in
the World. And it is upon the account of the Waldenses, as well as of other
distressed people that have took Sanctuary there, that it may be said, that the
Country of Switzerland is a safe Harbor, that the Hand of God has made, to
preserve from Shipwreck, those that are exposed to the Waves of Persecution.

Furthermore, the Deputies of the Reformed Cantons being arrived at Turin,
demanded the liberty of the Ministers, and of the other Prisoners, and the
restitution of the Children that were took from them on the way, and of those
that were dispersed through Piedmont when the Valleys were subdued. They
represented on behalf of the Ministers, that they could have no justifiable
pretense to detain them, not only because they were comprehended in the Treaty
made with the Count de Govons; but also because they were the principal subject
of the Switzers intercession: besides that it was but just to restore the
Pastors to their Flocks, to comfort and support them in their Trials. As for
the Prisoners condemned during their lives to work in the Fortifications, they
represented also that they ought not to be distinguished from the rest, under
color that they were more culpable: For

1. The Treaty mentions no exception to their prejudice. And it imports, that
all the Prisoners in general shall be released. 2. The Count de Govon himself
has declared in a Letter, that he wrote on this Subject in behalf of the Duke
his Master, that they did not intend to detain any of the Prisoners. 3. Since
it has pleased his Royal Highness to grant safe Conducts to those that were
actually in Arms, with much more reason ought he to give leave to these
Prisoners (of whom it is disputed) to retreat, who have always been considered
as far less criminal. And as for the young Children, they showed, that they
ought to be released, both those that had been took away upon the Road, and
those that had been dispersed through Piedmont, because both the one sort and
the other was kept back, contrary to the purport and intent of the Treaty: but
neither the Reasons nor the Solicitations of the Deputies produced any effect;
they yielded to nothing but the restitution of some of the Children that were
taken on the way. For all the rest remain as yet in the Estates of Piedmont. It
is true the Court of Turin has promised to restore the Ministers in some time.
But at present they are distributed with their Families, consisting of forty
seven persons into three Prisons or Castles, where they are strictly guarded,
and exposed to abundance of Inconveniences and miseries, without seeing yet any
appearance of Redemption.
Thus I have given you in short, a Relation of the most material Passages on
the account of the dissipation of the Churches and Inhabitants of the Valleys
of Piedmont. There wants nothing more to demonstrate, that there never was any
Persecution more unjust, nor more violent. Much less is there any thing wanting
to make it appear, that there never were any Objects more worthy of the
compassion of all good Christians, than the Waldenses that have escaped this
Persecution. They are persuaded, that all Reformed Europe will look with an eye
of pity on the Calamities and Pains with which they are overwhelmed, and that
they will be partakers of their sorrow. These are the sad Remains of that
dismal Shipwreck, wherewith the true Successors of the Apostles have been so
lately swallowed up. This is that scattered Remnant of those Mother Churches,
the most ancient of all, that from the Top of the Alps had illuminated a great
part of the Universe. Finally, this is that poor Remainder reduced to so small
a number, and to so deplorable a condition, on whose diminution and misery we
cannot reflect without being pierced to the Heart with an extraordinary and
surprising grief. They implore the Protection of Kings, Princes and Protestant
Estates: and in fine, of all the Faithful. They conjure them by the Bowels of
Compassion of the common Savior of the World, and by all that is most Sacred
in the Communion of Saints, to hearken to the sad voice of their bitter
Lamentations and Groans. They beseech them to continue the effects of this
incomparable Charity of which they have given so many famous Examples, and to
open the Treasure of their Benevolence toward this Residue, that the good God
has just now saved by a Miracle of his Providence. They will by this means
endeavor to conduce somewhat to the Glory of the Sovereign Monarch of the
Universe. And they will receive this Consolation, that they have made use of so
happy an opportunity of preserving in the persons of the Waldenses, the first
Fruits of the Primitive Church. In the mean time, these poor distressed people
will never cease to open their Hearts in the presence of the Father of Light,
for their charitable Benefactors, that it may please him to multiply more and
more these their good Fruits, and crown their Charity with the most precious
Blessings, both in this life, and that which is to come.

A LETTER from his Royal Highness of Savoy, to the Inhabitants of the Valleys.
To our most Dear and Faithful Subjects, the Communities of the Valleys of
Lucerne, Peirouse and S. Martin, and of the Quarters of Perrustin, S.
Bartholomew and Rocheplatte The Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piedmont, King of
Cyprus, etc.
Most Dear and Faithful,
SInce we have been well pleased with the zeal and readiness, with which you
have provided Men who have served us to our entire satisfaction in the Affairs
we had against the Genoeses; we have thought fit by these Presents to testify
unto you our good liking thereof, and to assure you, that we will keep it in
particular remembrance, to make you sensible on all occasions, of the Effects
of our Royal Protection, whereof the Count and Intendant Boccaria shall give
you a more full Information, whom we have commanded to express to you our
sentiments more at large, and also to take a List of the Officers and Soldiers,
as well of those that are dead, as of those that remain Prisoners, to make
report thereof unto us; to the end that we may have due regard thereto. In the
mean time these Presents shall serve you for an assured testimony of our
satisfaction and good will; and we pray God to preserve you from Evil.

From Turin the fifth of November, 1672. Signed C. Emanuel Buonfiglio.

A Copy of a Letter wrote to Count Boccaria, by His Royal Highness.
Trusty and Well-Beloved,
THe Men whom the Communities of the Valleys of Lucerne, etc. have provided,
have served us so faithfully, that being desirous to testify unto them our
satisfaction therein, we have sent you a Letter herein enclosed, that we have
wrote to them; to the end that you may deliver it to them, and also express
more fully the good will that we bear to them on this account, and that you may
assure them, that whenever any thing shall happen, that may tend to their
advantage, we

(...)
