A Continuation of the Second part of the ENQUIRY Into the REASONS Offered by
Sa. Oxon for the Abrogating of the TEST: relating to the Idolatry of the Church
of Rome.
THe words of the Test, that belong to this point, are these, The Invocation or
Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and
Idolatrous: Upon which our Author fastens this Censure, that since by this the
Church of Rome is charged with Idolatry, which both forfeits men's Lives here,
and their Salvation hereafter, according to the express words of Scripture, it
is a damnable piece of Cruelty and Uncharitableness to load them with this
charge, if they are not guilty of it: and upon this he goes to clear them of
it, not only in the two Articles mentioned in the Test, the Worship of Saints,
and the Sacrifice of the Mass, but that his Apology might be complete, he takes
in, and indeed Insists chiefly, on the Worship of Images, tho that is not at
all mentioned in the Test. He brings a great many quotations out of the Old
Testament, to show the Idolatry prohibited in it, was the Worshipping the Sun,
Moon and Stars, or the making an Image to resemble the Divine Essence, upon
which he produces also some other Authorities: And in this consists the
substance of his Plea for the Church of Rome.

But upon all this he ought to have retracted both the License that himself
gave some years ago, to Dr. Stillingfleets Book Of the Idolatry of the Church
of Rome, and his own hasty assertion in condemning both Turk and Papist as
guilty of Idolatry; the one for worshipping a lewd Impostor, and the other for
Worshipping a senseless piece of matter. Def. of his Eccl. Pol. p. 285, 286.
It seems he is now convinced, that the latter part of this charge that falls
on the Papists, was as false, as the former that falls on the Turks certainly
is; for they never Worshipped Mahomet, but hold him only in high Reverence, as
an Extraordinary Prophet, as the Jews do Moses. It is very like that if the
Turks had taken Vienna, he would have retracted that, as he has now in effect
done the other: for I believe he is in the same disposition to reconcile
himself to the Mufti, and the Pope: but the Ottoman Empire is now as low as
Popery is high: so he will brave the Turk still to his teeth, tho he did him
wrong, and will humble himself to the Papist, tho he did him nothing but right:
but now I take leave of the man, and will confine my self severely to the
matter that is before me; And.

I. How guilty soever the Church of Rome is of Idolatry, yet the Test does not
plainly assert that: for there is as great a difference between Idolatrous and
Idolatry, as there is in Law between what is Treasonable and what is Treason.
The one Imports only a Worship that is conformable to Idolatry, and that has a
tendency to it: whereas the other is the plain sin it self; there is also a
great difference, between what is now used in that Church, and the Explanations
that some of their Doctors give of that usage. We are to take the usage of the
Church of Rome from her Public Offices, and her authorized practices; so that
if these have a Conformity to Idolatry, and a tendency to it, then the words of
the Test are justified, what sense soever some learned men among them may put
on these Offices and Practices; therefore the Test may be well maintained, even
tho we should acknowledge that the Church of Rome was not guilty of Idolatry.

II. If Idolatry was a Crime punishable by Death under the Old Testament, that
does not at all concern us: nor does the Charge of Idolatry authorize the
people to kill all Idolaters: unless our Author can prove, that we believe our
selves to be under all the Political and Judiciary Precepts of the Law of
Moses: and even among the Jews the execution of that severe Law, belonged
either to the Magistrate, or to some authorized and Inspired person, who as a
Zealot might execute the Law, when the Magistrate was wanting to his duty. So
that this was writ Invidiously, only as it seems to Inflame the Papists the
more against us. But the same Calvinist Prince, that has expressed so just an
aversion to the repealing the Test, has at the same time showed so merciful an
Inclination toward the To. Catholics, that of all the Reproaches in the
World, one that intended to plead for that Religion ought to have avoided the
mentioning of Blood or Cruelty with the greatest care.

III. It is true, we cannot help believing that Idolatry is a damnable sin,
that shuts men out of the Kingdom of Heaven: and if every sin in which a man
dies without repentance, does it, much more this, which is one of the greatest
of all sins. But yet after all, there is Mercy for Sins of Ignorance, upon men's
general repentance; and therefore since God alone knows the degrees of men's
knowledge and of their Ignorance, and how far it is either Affected on the one
hand, or Invincible on the other; we do not take upon us to enter into Gods
Secrets, or to Judge of the Salvation or Damnation of particular persons; nor
must we be biased in our Enquiry into the nature of any sin, either by a fond
regard to the state of our Ancestors, or by the due respect that we owe to
those who are over us in Civil matters. In this case things are what God has
declared them to be: We can neither make them better nor worse than he has made
them: and we are only to Judge of things, leaving persons to the merciful as
well as the just and dreadful judgment of God.

IV. All the stir that our Author keeps with the examining of the Idolatry
committed by the Jews, under the Old Testament, supposing it were all true,
will serve no more for acquitting the Church of Rome, than a Plea would avail a
Criminal, who were arraigned of high Treason for Coining Money or for
Counterfeiting the Kings Seal, in which one should set forth that High Treason
was the Murdering the King, or the levying war against him, and that therefore
the Criminal who was guilty of neither of these two, ought to be acquitted.
Idolatry as well as Treason is a Comprehensive Notion, and has many different
branches: so that tho the Worshipping the Host of heaven, or the Worshipping an
Image as a resemblance of the Divinity, may be acknowledged to be the highest
degrees of Idolatry, yet many other corruptions in the Worship of God are
justly reducible to it, and may be termed not only Idolatrous but Idolatry it
self.

V. Our Savior in his sermon on the Mount has showed us how many sins are
reducible to the second Table of the Law, besides those of Murder, Adultery,
etc. that are expressly named in it: and tho the Jews in that time having
delivered themselves entirely from the sin of Idolatry, to which their Fathers
were so prone, gave him no occasion of commenting on the first and second
Commandment, yet by the parity of things we may conclude, that many sins are
reducible to them, besides those that are expressly named. And tho we have not
so complete a History of the Idolatry of the Neighboring Nations to Judea,
before the Captivity, yet we do certainly know what was the Idolatry of which
the Greeks and Romans were guilty when the New Testament was writ. And tho the
greatest part of the New Testament is written chiefly with relation to the
Jews, whose freedom from Idolatry gave no occasion to (...) made plainer than
the matter of Fact is. We know likewise, that when the Controversy arose
concerning the Godhead of Jesus Christ, Athanasius and the other Fathers, made
use of the same Argument against the Arrians, who worshipped him; that they
could not be excused from the sin of Idolatry, in worshipping and Invocating
him, whom they believed to be only a Creature: which shows, that it was the
sense of the Christians of that Age, that all Acts of Divine worship, and in
particular, all Prayers that were offered up to any that was not truly and by
nature God, and the Eternal God, were so many Acts of Idolatry. So that upon
the whole matter, it is clear, that the worshipping the true God under a
Corporeal Representation, and the worshipping or Invocating of Creatures, tho
in an Inferior degree, was taxed by the Apostles and by the Primitive Church
as Idolatrous. When they accuse them for those Corruptions of Divine worship,
they did not consider the softning excuses of more refined men, so much as the
acts that were done, which to be sure do always carry the stupid Vulgar to the
grossest degrees of Idolatry: and thetefore every step toward it is so
severely forbid by God: since upon one step made in the public worship, the
people are sure to make a great many more in their notions of things. Therefore
if we should accuse the Church of Rome, for all the excesses of the past Ages,
or of the more Ignorant Nations in the present Age, such as Spain and Portugal,
even this might be in some degree well grounded; because the public and
authorized Offices and Practices of that Church, has given the rise to all
those Disorders: and even in this, we should but Copy after the Fathers, who
always represent the Pagan Idolatry not as Cicero or Plutarch had done it, but
according to the grossest notions and practices of the Vulgar.

XIV. All that our Author says, concerning the Cherubims, deserves not an
answer: for what use soever might be made of this, to excuse the Lutherans, for
the use of Images, without worshipping them (tho after all the doing such a
thing upon a Divine Command, and the doing it without a Command, are two very
different things,) yet it cannot belong to the worship of Images, since the
Israelites paid no worship to the Cherubims. They paid indeed a Divine
worship to the Cloud of Glory, which was between them, and which is often in
the Old Testament called God himself, in all those expressions, in which he is
said to dwell between the Cherubims. But this being a miraculous Symbol^ of the
Divine presence, from which they had answers in all extraordinary cases, it was
God himself, without any Image or Representation, that was worshipped in it. As
we Christians, pay our Adorations to the Humane Nature of Christ, by virtue of
that more sublime and ineffable indwelling of the Godhead in Him: in which case
it is God only that we worship, in the man Christ. Even as the respect that we
pay to a man terminates in his mind, tho the outward expressions of it go to
the body, to which the mind is united. So in that unconceivable Union between
the Divine and Humane Natures in Christ, we adore the Godh^ad only, even when
we worship the man.

XV. The General part of this Discourse, being thus stated, the application of
it to the Church of Rome, will be no hard matter. I will not insist much on the
Article of Image Worship, because it is not comprehended in the Test, tho our
Author dwells longest on it, to let us see how carefully, but to how little
purpose he had read Dr. Spencers learned Book. But if one considers the
Ceremonies and Prayers with which Images, and particularly Crosses, are to be
dedicated by the Roman Pontifical, and the formal Adoration of the Cross on
Good Friday, and the strange virtues that are not only believed to be in some
Images by the rabble, but that are authorized not only by the Books of Devotion
publicly allowed among them, but even by Papal Bulls and Indulgences, he will
be forced to confess, that the old notions of the Teraphim are clearly revived
among them. This could be made out in an infinite Induction of particulars, of
which the Reader will find a large account in the learned Dr. Brevint's
Treatise, entitled, Saul and Samuel at Endor. But I come now to the two
Branches mentioned in the Test.

XVI. One is the Sacrifice of the Mass, in which if either our Senses, that
tell us, it is now Bread and Wine, or the New Testament in which it is called
both Bread and the fruit of the Vine, even after the Consecration, or if the
Opinion of the first seven Centuries, or if the true principles of Philosophy,
concurring altogether, are strong enough, we are as certain as it is possible
for us to be of any thing, that they are still according to our Authors own
phrase, a senceless piece of matter. When therefore this has divine Adoration
offered to it, when it is called, the good God, carried about in solemn
Processions, and receives as public and as humble a Veneration, as ^^uld be
offered up to the Deity it self, i^ it appeared visibly: here the highest
degree of Divine worship is offered up to a Creature: nor will such
Worshippers, believing this to be truly the Body of Christ, save the matter,
if indeed it is not so. This may no doubt go a great way to save themselves,
and to bring their sin into the the class of the sins of Ignorance: but what
large thoughts soever we may have of the mercies of God to their persons, we
can have no Indulgence for an Act of Divine Adoration, which is directed to an
Object that we are either sure is Bread, or we are sure of nothing else.

XVII. As for the Invocation and Adoration of the B. Virgin and the Saints, I
shall offer only three Classes of Instances to prove it Idolatrous. 1. In the
Office of the Mass on many of the Saints days, that Sacrifice, which is no
other than the Body and Blood of Christ, according to them, is offered up to
the honor of the Saints, and they pray to God, to accept of it through the Saints
Intercession. One would think, it were enough to offer up the Sacrifices of
prayers and praises to them: but here is a Sacrifice, which carries in the
plain words of it, the most absurd Idolatry that is possible; which is the
offering up the Creator to the honor of a Creature.

2. In the Prayers and Hymns that are in their public Offices, there are
Petitions offered up to the Saints, that in the plain sense of the words import
their pardoning our sins, and changing our hearts. The daily prayer to the
Virgin goes far this way: Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe: Do
thou protect us from our Enemy, and receive us in the hour of death. Another
goes yet further: Culpas nostras ablue, ut perennis sedem gloriae, per te
redempti, valeamus scandere: Wash thou away our sins, that so being redeemed by
thee, we may ascend up to the mansions of glory. That to the Angels is of the
same nature, Nostra diluant jam peccata praestando supernam Coeli gloriam: May
they wash away our sins, and grant us the heavenly glory. I shall to this add
two Addresses to two of our English Saints; the first is to St. Alban, Te nunc
petimus Patron praeco sedule, qui es nostra vera gloria, solve precum votis,
servorum scelera: We implore thee, our Patron, who art our true Glory, do thou
take away the crimes of thy Servants, by thy prayers. And the other relates to
Thomas Becket, whom I believe, our Author will not deny to have been as great a
Rebel, as either Coligny, or his Faction; and yet they pray thus to Christ, Tu
per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te effudit, fac nos Christ scandere quo Thomas
ascendit. Do thou, O Christ, make us by the blood of Thomas, which he shed for
thee, to ascend up whether he has ascended: and the Hymn upon him, is that
Verse of the eighth Psalm, Thou have crowned him with Glory and Honor, and has
set him over all the works of thy hands. One would think, it were no bold thing
to pronounce all this, and innumerable more Instances, which might be brought
to the same purpose, to be Idolatrous. If we are sent by our Author to the
senses that may be put on these words, I shall only say with relation to that,
that the Test condemns the Devotions as they are used in the Roman Church: so
this belongs to the plain sense of the words, and if it is confessed that these
are Idolatrous, as ascribing to Creatures the right of pardoning sin, and of
opening the Kingdom of Heaven, which are main parts of the Divine glory, then
the matter of the Test is justified.

A third sort of Instance is in the prayer that comes after the Priest has
pronounced the words of Absolution, Passio Domini nostri Jesu Christi, merita
B. Mariae Virginis, and omnium Sanctorum, and quicquid boni feceris, vel mali
sustinueris, sint tibi in remissionem peccatorum, augmentum gratiae, and
premium vitae aeternae: May the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of
the B. Virgin, and all the Saints, and all the good thou have done, or the evil
that thou have suffered, be to thee effectual, for the remission of thy sins,
the increase of grace, and the reward of Eternal life. Absolution in its true
and unsophisticated meaning, being the declaration made to a Penitent of the
mercys of God in Christ, according to the Gospel, I would gladly know, what
milder Censure is due to the mixing the merits of the Virgin and the Saints,
with the Passion of Christ, in order to the obtaining this Gospel pardon, with
all the effects of it, than this of our Test, that it is Idolatrous.

I have now examined the two points, in which our Author thought fit to make an
Apology for the Church of Rome, without descending to the particulars of his
Plea more minutely. I have used him in this more gently than he deserves: for
as I examined his Reasonings, I found all along both so much Ignorance, and
such gross disingenuity, that I had some difficulty to restrain my self, from
flying out on many occasions: but I resolved to pursue these two points, with
the gravity of style which the matter required, without entangling the
discourse, with such unpleasant digressions, as the discovery of his Errors
might have led me to. And I thought it enough to free unwary Readers from the
mistakes into which his Book might lead them, without increasing the contempt
belonging to the Writer, who has now enough upon him; but I pray, God grant him
Repentance and a better mind.

FINIS.

