Charitable Reproof.

A SERMON Preached at The Church of St. Mary-le-Bow, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR
Reformation of Manners, The 25th of MARCH 1700.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

Published at the Request of the said Societies.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1700.

27 Proverbs 5, 6. Open rebuke is better than secret love.

Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.


SElf-Love is so natural to us, that as it makes us apt to flatter our selves
on all occasions, so it inclines us to accept too easily of the flatteries of
all others; even those flatteries which Decency makes us turn away from, and
seem to dislike, are hearkened to by us: We open our Ears to them; we lay them
up in our Memory, and do often please our selves with vain Reflections on them.
But we are so little accustomed to find fault with our selves, or to reflect on
our Errors and Follies, that when Thoughts of that kind break in upon us, we
fly from them; we impute them to Vapors, to Fits of the Spleen and
Melancholy. Our unwillingness to know our own Faults, or to be humbled under
the sense of them, makes us uneasy when any venture on the most charitable, but
often the most unacceptable Act of Friendship, the telling us of our Faults. If
it is possible, we will either deny or extenuate them: or if Sense and good
Breeding makes us civil to such Friends, yet we will feel a Sharpness arise, we
will Love them the less for it; and if we can, we will be ready to revenge our
selves by returning some Admonitions to them; perhaps not without some Acrimony
of Look or Style. All this arises from the partiality and injustice with which
we treat our selves, which must incline us to love others the better, who treat
us in the same manner.

But as long as we have Faults, it is very fit that we be made acquainted with
them: And since we are too much blinded in our own favor, it is a great
Happiness to fall into the hands of such Friends as will not spare us: It is
better that we should hear of them even from Enemies, than to be kept in an
Ignorance that must be fatal. There are few in the World who do not commend
Friendship as the chief Happiness of Life, and are not ready to run out upon
the advantages of having found a true and faithful Friend; and yet even those
who are very copious upon so common a Theme, do not much care for the best
Offices of Friendship.

No man can perform this Act of Friendship, without some force put upon
himself; unless there is a great mixture of Roughness and Superciliousness in
his Temper. Few love to touch a tender part, or to grieve a person who is dear
to them. Therefore the harder it is to reprove another, it ought to be the more
valued, and the better received. Caresses and Congratulations pass easily among
Friends: These are the common and natural Vents of Friendship. Reproofs and
Admonitions go against the grain; therefore Friends ought to encourage them,
let their Friends know, that they expect them, and by the good Entertainment
that they give the first Essays made of this kind, to secure themselves of a
continuance of the like Freedom.

Solomon understood well the happiness of having an ancient, and as it were a
hereditary Friend made sure of; therefore he says a little after the words of
my Text, Ver. 10.
Thine own Friend, and thy Father's Friend, forsake not. And in the words I
have read, he sets out the best use and effect of Friendship. In the preceding
words he had set out the Mischiefs that may arise from Wrath and Anger, which
are cruel and outrageous: To which he adds, But who can stand before Envy?
Wrath and Anger are commonly provoked by ill usage, or injury; so Innocence may
protect a man from them: But Envy is an ill-natured passion, that is raised
without any provocation. The Virtues, or the Reputation, the Prosperity and
Happiness of others, set men on to detract from their Fame, or undermine their
Happiness, without any prospect of advantage to themselves. Men therefore whose
Qualities, as well as their Condition, expose them to Envy, though they must
expect their share in it, yet are by my Text directed to the best Methods to
prevent the advantages that Spiteful men may take; for if their Friends are
beforehand with their Enemies in their Reproofs, and if they themselves are so
wise as to be corrected by their means, then envious Men will not find much
matter to work on. Their Friends see their Faults while they are yet secret,
before they break out into open observation; so by the kind severity of their
rebukes, they save them that shame, which the discoveries that Envy will soon
make, may bring upon them.

Open rebuke is better than secret love. A Friendship that carries a man to
rebuke another plainly and roundly, with a due measure of severity, is better
then secret Love; that is, a fond, tender, and indulgent Love, that may be
sincere and deep, but is so blind and feeble, as either not to see Faults in
their Friends; or if they see any, not to be able to disturb their Quiet by
seasonable Reproofs. Another sense is given to these words; Open, that is,
public rebuke, is better than secret love; that is, rebuke in secret. Some can
bear Reproofs in secret, but are not the better for them; therefore in such
Cases, though we ought always to begin our Admonitions in private, 18 S. Matthew.
15.
according to our Savior's Rule; yet when these do not prevail, we ought to
rebuke before all, 1 Timothy 4. 20.
that if the Offender is not reclaimed by it, yet that others may fear. This is
chiefly to take place when men's sins are so public, 24 Verse.
that they go before to judgment, and do as it were extort it. Such wounds,
when given by a friend with a good design, and in a proper method, are
faithful, that is, they are sincere, they are proofs of his Fidelity to the
Ties of Friendship, they will also attain their End; and as the Incisions of a
Skilful Surgeon are faithful, and do quickly heal again, so such Rebukes will
have a good effect. Others render the word, Beautiful; there is nothing more
amiable in True Friendship, than so exact and just a Freedom, as makes a man
neither to overlook nor to neglect the Faults of his Friend. On the other hand,
the Kisses or Caresses of an Enemy, who covers his Hatred with the Shows of
Friendship, and with a dissembled Behavior, who kisses on design to betray, as
Judas did his Master; These are deceitful; they are false in them; they flatter
persons to their faces, for those very Faults for which they will censure them
severely in Corners: they are also deceitful, while they see people commit
Faults which they hope will be their ruin; and yet lest they should find that
out, and prevent their ruin by seasonable Correction, they study to humor them
in them, that they may become Incorrigible, and be Infallibly ruined by them.
But the word may be also rendered frequent and earnest, or hard and pressing, as
well as deceitful. The sense will then be, the Kisses or Caresses of an Enemy
will be redoubled; they will be officious in them both in season and out of
season. Flatterers, when they perceive that their base Obsequiousness is
acceptable, they follow close upon that Scent; they are Assiduous and Abject in
it. And whereas Friends are cautious, and must wait fit Opportunities to
reprove, Flatterers find Access at all times, and are ever Applauding every
thing that is either said or done by him, whom they hope either to subdue or
ruin by their mean Compliances. Nor is it easy to shake off that servile Crew;
their kisses are hard; they strike against a weak part; few Men are wise enough
to find them out, or strong enough to resist them. Some are so course in their
Flatteries, that they must quickly be nauseated; but Men of Design, who have
the Art to season their Flattery, to hit right in it, and are dextrous in the
Methods of offering it, are often too hard for Men, who in all other respects
may be very valuable, but in this only do really lessen themselves, by
suffering others to magnify them too much.

Thus I have opened the various Rendrings of the Words of my Text; all amount
to the same sense in general, That we do then express our Friendship in the
best manner, when we do plainly and openly Reprove our Friends for their
Faults, which will be much more useful to them than any Fondness, how deep or
tender soever, when it makes us excessively Indulgent to them. Such Reproofs
may be as Wounds, and give a very painful Uneasiness: but even that will be
Medicinal; it will bring our Faults into View, and into our Remembrance; when
we see that others observe us, it will bring us into a habit of looking more
carefully to our selves, and of observing all our Words and Actions with due
Attention: Whereas on the other hand, Enemies, who have no other Regards but
for their own Ends, or perhaps for our Ruin, they will by frequent Flatteries,
well timed, and skilfully infused, so corrupt our Minds, that as they will
render us more uneasy to the Rebukes of our true and faithful Friends, so they
will feed our Self-love to such a height, that we shall be thereby exposed to
Errors that may end very fatally, and make us perish unpitied, as well as live
inexcusable.

The Words thus opened, do lead us to examine our Obligations to this Duty of
Reproving others: That will be soon settled, if we do consider the Zeal that we
owe to God and to his Honor. 69 Psalm. 9.
If the zeal of his house does as it were eat us up, then the reproaches of
those who do as it were attack and defy him, will fall on us. We will feel a
lively concern in us for the Honor of Religion; and when we see it
dishonored, we will interpose, if it were but to express a just Indignation at
Impiety and Vice. If we have any regard to the Concerns of other Men, whether
with respect to this Life, or to the next; and more particularly if we are
under strict Ties of Kindred, Friendship, or any other Relation to them; but
chiefly if we watch over their Souls, and must give an account of them; then
certainly we will not so far hate our brother in our heart, 19 Lev. 17.
as to suffer sin upon him, but will in one way or another reprove him, lest by
such a vicious feebleness we bring his blood on our own head; 33 Ezekiel. 6.
that is, entitle our selves to a share in the Judgments that those Sins which
we connived at may bring down both on him and on us.

Eli had a large share of Punishment for his Remisness to his Sons: 1 Samuel 2.
13.
We have Sins enough of our own, we need not therefore take an additional Load
of partaking in other men's sins; and indeed, 1 Timothy 5 22.
if we desire to keep our selves pure, and to maintain in our Minds a just
abhorrence of Sin, we ought never to contract so easy a neighborhood and
familiarity with it, even in others, as to let it pass without feeling an
indignation at it, and expressing that in the properest methods we can fall on.
We owe it to the Society we live in, and to the next Generation that is growing
up before us, to take care that Sins, especially open ones, and such as are apt
to spread and infect others, should be either repressed by secret Reproofs, or
the Sinners be brought to open Shame and Punishment, that such as see the one,
may likewise see or hear of the other.

If Sins grow National, and are avowedly practiced without Shame or Check, they
will probably be put to the account of the whole Nation, and so they may draw
down National Judgments, from which we have no reason to expect an Exemption,
if we do not except our selves, by doing our duty in order to their correction:
But when that is done, we may expect a distinction, even in a common Calamity;
or at least we shall have this comfort, even if we are overwhelmed in it, that
we were not wanting in our Endeavors to stave it off, by putting a stop to
those Sins that brought it on.

I will dwell no longer on this; for how little soever some may like Reproof,
as generally those who need it most, like it least; yet all will agree in the
general, That it is absolutely necessary for the preserving the Order and Peace
of Society, that there should be both Reprovers to admonish, and Magistrates to
punish Offenders. It is therefore more necessary to show how this ought to be
managed to the best advantage, and with the most probable hopes of succeeding
in it.

The first and most necessary Rule, is that given by our Savior, That no man
should offer to reprove another, who is eminently and notoriously faulty
himself; he who having a beam before his eye, 7 Matthew. 3, 4, 5.
does not remove that, but goes about to take a small chip of wood out of his
neighbor's eye, does justly lay himself open, according to our Savior's
words, to the Imputation of hypocrisy. The aversion that is in every man to the
being subject to the Corrections of others, will then rise up into a just
Indignation, when he finds that he is thus set on, by a man who is known to be
more guilty than himself. It is an impudent thing to make that pass for a crime
in another, which we know we are practicing every day our selves. Nor is it
enough to authorize a man to be a Monitor, that he does not offend just in that
sort and manner for which he blames others. He must be a man of Integrity in
all respects; Education, Age, Habits, and the different Circumstances of Life,
may make a great diversity with relation to particular Sins; yet both Virtue
and Vice are complicated Things; and if a man is in some parts of his Life
irregular, especially if he lives in those Sins that carry a Train along with
them, his Reproofs cannot have a great Effect. Let a man be ever so sober and
temperate, yet if he is false and deceitful, if he is unjust and spiteful,
those things which require Thought and Study, and in which Men do pursue a
design, and where they are not convinced of their Faults, nor redress them by
restoring or repairing that in which they have wronged others; all this man's
Reproofs will be thrown off, as soon as it is known how crafty or false he is:
they will be reckoned among the Arts of Hypocrisy, by which he studies to gain
some Credit and Authority, that it may help him to go on in his other wicked
Practices, and may at least keep him long from being suspected of them, or
discovered in them; for a man who passes for a grave Admonisher of others,
seems to be thereby covered from all black Imputations. I am afraid some
Discoveries of this sort that have been made, may have brought a Scandal upon
all Pretenders to Religion: For as there is no Principle nor Party in Religion
that can support Men in those deceitful Practices; so no man is guilty of them,
but he himself knows it, he goes into them with Deliberation and Study, and he
lives in them still, till by as full a restitution as he can possibly make, he
has completed his Repenting of them. After all, it is not enough to qualify a
man to rebuke with authority, that he cannot be charged with as bad things as
those are for which he blames others; he must shine as a light in the world; 2
Phil. 15.
there must be something Eminent and Exemplary in his whole Deportment. His
Candor and Integrity, his Humility and Meekness, his Modesty and Charity, must
be so conspicuous, 5 Matthew 16.
that his light may thereby shine before others; and then he may more
reasonably hope, that others may be wrought on both by his Example and
Influence to glorify his Father which is in Heaven.

Another Rule to be observed in Reproving is, to do it in such a manner, that
it may appear we are their Friends whom we reprove, and that we Correct them
for their own Good. Some by indulging too much to a sharp and morose Temper,
reprove with an acrimony and heat, that is liker to provoke than to gain upon
any: Ps. 141. 5.
We ought to reprove in kindness (for so the words of the Psalm may be rendered)
and then those smitings will be as an excellent oil that will not break their
heads whom we reprove. The tenderness we express will enforce our Admonitions,
and it will raise the spirits of those, whom freer Reproofs might otherwise
Repress too much: As therefore we ought* chiefly when we begin to deal with any
in this way, to address our Reproofs in the softest manner possible, and show
while we Reprove others, a readiness in our selves to submit to the like
Reproofs from them, so we ought to watch all occasions in which it may be in
our power to do acts of kindness to them; that having by this means got some
interest in their affections* we may have thereby the more credit with them. We
ought to be ready to own how near we our selves may have been in other parts of
our life to those very faults for which we blame them. We ought to make our
first essays at fit times and in the likeliest way to succeed, in private, or
in a Letter; thus to make our approaches in the properest manner, that so we
may conquer and gain him whom we take to task; and we must be sure to join with
the Severity that may be necessary, such mollifying strokes as may secure to us
a ready access for the future, if there is occasion to return again to the like
Admonitions; but then tho we must rise in the severities of our style, yet we
ought never to sink in the expressions of our affection, as long as we have any
hopes of succeeding in the way of private Admonition.

But the most comprehensive Rule in the management of Reproofs, is to order
them with discretion and prudence; otherwise all we can do that way will have
no effect; we will pass either for hypocritical, morose, supercilious, or
fantastical Men. This is a thing of great extent, and may be so much
diversified, that it will not be easy to bring it all under clear and certain
Rules; but some few of the more obvious are to be considered.

First, With relation to the things for which we find fault with others, they
ought to be of some Importance: In trifles it is not worth the while to
reprove. To stand too nicely upon small matters, may give others such a mean
opinion of our Understanding, that our Admonitions on greater occasions will
make no impression, because they have been often applied to such inconsiderable
things. The insisting too much on a peculiar Cut of the Hair, as was too common
in the last Age, or on Modes of Dress, is a sure way to bring our Reproofs into
such Contempt, that all we can offer at, will look like Affectation or
Singularity. We ought not to lay too much weight on small or disputable things,
but should proportion our Zeal to the importance of the Matters we are
concerned for. We ought also to have some good reason to believe Men to be
guilty of those things for which we deal roundly with them. It is hard enough
to submit to Reproof even when Men know that they do deserve it, but if they
know they are Innocent, they will very naturally justify themselves, they will
accuse their Reprovers as Credulous and Uncharitable, and will not fail to put
them in mind at another time when reproved, though they know themselves guilty,
how that upon another occasion they were unjustly suspected and blamed;
therefore when we do Reprove, we ought to make just allowances for the false
Reports that go in the World, and be ready both to be disabused by them, or at
least to make all the just abatements that in reason can be supposed, and be
ready rather to lessen than to aggravate the Offense.

Another measure of Discretion is with relation to the Persons to whom we may
address our Reproofs; generally speaking, Junior or Inferior Persons ought not
to Reprove those who are above them in Age and Rank; yet some Exceptions must
be made even to this, for Old Men are not always Wise. Our Savior after he had
given the Rule which I named first of all, of Correcting our own greater faults
before we presume to blame others for lesser ones, adds another that will
require great attention, Matt. 7. 6.
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.
Some Men are of so boisterous and insolent a Temper, that we can have no reason
to believe they will be the better for Reproof, or that they are capable of
bearing it. They will probably turn upon us with fury, and ask us, What right
we have to tell them of their Faults: Perhaps to revenge themselves, they will
treat us opprobriously and charge us falsely with gross faults for no other
reason, but because we have offered some charitable Reproofs to them: These are
the Persons meant by our Savior under the Figure of dogs, who will turn upon
us and rend us, by all the injuries they can think on. Others are as Swine so
brutal and impudent, so depraved and stupid, that they despise all that can be
laid before them. When it appears that our Admonitions are like either to have
no effect at all, or to have bad ones, we may reckon that we are not under the
common Obligations of Reproving, if there are no probabilities of our
succeeding in them.

Another measure of Discretion to be used in Reproving, is to choose the time of
doing it as nicely as we can; but even in this, caution must be used: Commonly
speaking, Afflictions bring Men into a temper fit for being the better for
Admonition; but some may sink so much under their burden, that it may be too
severe to lay more load upon them. In sickness, as the danger may be greater,
so the Obligation is more indispensable: But in all those cases it will be
necessary to use a due mixture of Skill, as well as Fidelity, that we may not
add affliction to the afflicted, more than is absolutely necessary both for the
good of those concerned, and for the discharge of our own Consciences. A
prudent method in addressing Reproof, we see in Nathan, who though he acted
upon an immediate Commission from God, 2 Samuel 12.
yet introduced that severe Message he had to David by a Parable, which engaged
him before he saw into the Prophet's design, to pronounce his own Condemnation.
A Man may furnish himself with many Stories of what passes daily in the World,
by the telling of which he may prepare a Person to bear with his freedom: In
some of those Stories a guilty Person may find both his faults and the
consequences of them so plainly set forth, that if he does not feel that, he
would not feel, or at least he would not bear a closer application.

But the last and chief Rule in managing Reproof, is to order it so, that it
may not pass barely as a finding fault with another upon some general and
popular Notions, which will have no great operation, but that it may carry with
it so full a Conviction, that he who is Reproved may see that there is great
and just causes for such Admonitions. I shall in this descend to Instances of
two sorts, which relate to some of those things, the Correcting of which is
chiefly designed by these Societies.

When we Reprove any for entering into that lewd commerce of forbidden pleasure,
at which the corruption of Youth does commonly begin; we ought to let them see,
that if they break through the measures of Modesty, their Appetites will grow
more and more violent and unruly. These will be for some time resisted by the
checks of Conscience; but when by ill practices often repeated, those are
blunted, and young Men free themselves from stricter Rules, this will involve
them in ill designs, these will draw them into much lying, and many base
methods to support the expense of a vicious course of life. They will become
slothful in all their Affairs, and thus their care and industry being once
slackned, they have no reason to hope that they can succeed in their business,
as they can have none to expect a Blessing from God upon their endeavors. Nor
can they go long or far in those unlawful pleasures, but they will be
discovered, and by that they must suffer much in their Reputation; for though
Men may take too much pleasure in lewd Company, yet few care to deal with such
Persons, or put any confidence in them: And this is all evident, besides the
ill effects that such a course of life may have on their Persons and Families;
for if the Banks of Modesty are once cut through, they are seldom made up
again; such a course of life must strangely agitate the Mind between the
violence of passion, and the fear of a discovery: This must let in such a black
train of base and cursed thoughts upon a Man's Mind, and must set him at such a
distance from God and all Religious Exercises, that the setting this in a true
light before one, with such stories as may be easily picked up to confirm from
daily experience what is thus to be set out; all this, I say, may through the
Blessing of God, make a deep Impression, and raise steadfast Resolutions of
keeping this Sin at the greatest distance, by not entering into those liberties,
into that conversation, and into those nearnesses to it, which may be fatal,
and must certainly be so, where Nature is so strong on the side of Sin, that it
ought not to be too much trusted to.

Another instance of managing Reproofs shall be given in the Sin of Swearing.
It is a common, but a very unbecoming answer, when Men are told of their
Swearing, I ask you Pardon, I did not think on it: As if the Offense were
against a Mortal like our selves, and not against the Sovereign Lord of Heaven
and Earth: Much as if a Subordinate Magistrate finding fault for a high Offense
committed against the King, should be so answered. Alas! how small is the
Offense committed against us in comparison of the dishonor done to God! And it
aggravates the Sin when a Man is so habituated to it, that he falls into it
without reflection, or so much as knowing that he had so transgressed. But if a
Man who has unhappily accustomed himself to this cursed Dialect, will be so far
calm as to hearken to what may be offered to him, it may be fit to show him
that the root of all Religion is a Veneration for the Deity, and that nothing
weakens this more, than a Custom of thinking and speaking slightly of God;
nothing is more unbecoming the dread that ought to possess us, and the awe of
God under which we ought to live, than this profane practice; which is so
contrary to all decency and just respect: Besides, no Man goes into the habit
of common Swearing, but he will be very apt to support Falsehoods with repeated
Oaths; and the more he sees he is suspected, he will study to fortify his
credit by whole peals of them; though such as do not believe a Man upon his
Word, are seldom convinced by the frightfullest Oaths he can bring forth, which
do rather serve to increase than to lay jealousy. Now if we have any right
Notions of God, we must conclude that an Oath being an Appeal to him, a false
Oath is an Appeal to him as it were to vouch for our Lies: And if no Honest Man
could with patience hear another appeal to him to give credit to a Lie, What do
we think of the God of Truth, if we can imagine that false Oaths will go
unpunished?

This matter may be carried yet further, to show what dismal consequences arise
from the habit of common Swearing: Nothing tends more visibly to the perverting
the course of Justice, and the dissolving our whole Government, which turns
much upon Swearing, than a vicious habit that takes away the fear of an Oath.
He who never Swears but upon great and just occasions, comes to it full of
dread, and full of the Impressions that arise from a belief of the Attributes
of God: Whereas he to whom common practice has made Oaths become familiar,
cannot have that fear of an Oath that is necessary to strike the sense of an
Obligation from it deep into his Conscience.

England is the Nation of the whole World that has studied the most to secure
it self by Oaths. All Employments are entered upon by peculiar Oaths; many of
these are very large and comprehensive. How great is the extent of the Oath of
a Grand Jury? Does not all matters of Life and Death, as well as of Property,
turn upon the regard that Jurors have to their Oath? so that Bloodshed, or
Property, given unjustly by their Verdict, must lie heavy on them; and to bind
it the heavier, they take the Oath of God upon them to give a just Verdict. The
Evidence given upon Oath, is that which must direct both Judge and Jury. A Man
must have strangely subdued his Conscience that dares prevaricate and go
against it, when he is under the quick sense of an Oath newly taken. When Men
are once corrupted to such a degree, there is an end of all Justice and Order.
How far are we got into this? What loud complaints do we hear every where of
Sets of Suborned Witnesses, and of Partial Juries? The Obligations to Justice
and Equity ought to be strong of themselves, nothing can force them more than
these sacred Bonds of a solemn Appeal to God. But can Men, whose common Dialect
is made up of Oaths and Imprecations, consider an Oath so much as to be under
any deep Impressions of dread and horror from it? Oaths of Magistrates, or Men
in other Employments, are very Comprehensive, and too soon let go out of their
Minds. It were a good method to enter such Oaths as one takes, in a Book that
comes often in view, that so it may be frequently considered as a powerful
motive to engage him to the faithful discharge of his Duty. It were to be
wished, that the Oaths of Magistrates were more explicit; but Men of
Conscience will consider Oaths well before they come to take them, that so they
may make a true judgment whether they think they can or will keep them, and
accordingly they will either avoid the occasions of being entangled by them, or
if they do take them, they will be governed exactly by them.

Upon the whole matter, when all this is laid together, it will appear that the
cursed habit of common Swearing, has so many ill tendencies and effects, that
there being nothing on the other hand to recommend it, but a depraved Custom,
every one will soon see, what need there is to watch over himself, till he
wears out of that profane and impious Style; and if he is not watchful enough
over himself, he will easily be convinced, how much he is obliged to those to
help him to be more careful; when all he suffers by it, is that at the expense
of a little trouble and shame, and a small Forfeit, he is taught to keep his
Tongue with more caution.

And now I have done with all that I intend to say from my Text: It remains
that I say somewhat with relation to the occasion of our Meeting together at
this time.

We have enjoyed a long continuance of Peace and Plenty; even a long and
devouring War has made no great Impression: We have been safe and quiet at
home, when all the World about us was in a flame. Nor has the great expense of
the War altered the face of Plenty every where: I am sorry to say it, our
Luxury and Vanity, the Symptoms of an overflowing Plenty, have not lessened
upon all that Charge; I wish it were not too visible, that they increase upon
us. We may remember how near we were to great dangers; it is not so long since
we saw a Cloud gathered and set over our heads, that we had reason to fear was
to burst out in Storms and Tempests; and must have thrown us into terrible
Convulsions, if not into utter Ruin.

All this went over with so little disturbance that we scarce felt our Danger,
till we were Delivered from it; and after a War that gave so melancholy a
prospect, in a course of many Years, we are now at Peace with all the World
abroad: But, alas! Are we at Peace with God or among our selves? Does not
Impiety and Atheism, that walk abroad without either fear or shame, seem to
dare and defy God even to his Face? This is such a plain Revolt from God, and a
rising, as it were, up against him, that we have no reason to think that he
will not at last arise and visit for all these things. How soon can he withdraw
his Defense? And then how easily may that which we rely on be blasted? Storms
may shatter our Fleets, and if God should for our Sins deliver us so far to an
Enemy that they should but once Land upon us, How naked and defenseless are we?
How soon must all be overrun? And what a scene of Confusion and Pillage, of
desolation and Ruin would quickly open upon us? But we need not another Enemy
than our selves; we are going into such strong and deeply rooted Animosities,
our hatred to one another, our jealousy of one another, our quarrels and
factions, do so increase, and are growing to such a height, that if no Temper
can be found, and if there is no Interposition from the Goodness of God, or the
Wisdom of Men, to put a stop to the progress of all these Evils, they must end
fatally at last; we may go on to bite and devour one another, till in
conclusion we are consumed one of another. What can put a stop to all these sad
things that we may justly fear? A general Reformation is too great a Blessing
to be soon hoped for. In these matters Men seldom go all of the sudden from
one extreme to another. God knows how near we are the extreme of an universal
Depravation. It gives us some small beginnings of hope, that in and about this
great City, from which the Nation is apt to take its ply, whither to good or
bad; there has been for some years past a Spirit stirring, that looks like a
reviving, as if even our dry bones could live: A Spirit of true devotion, a
seriousness in the service of God, a frequency at Sacrament, with a Zeal for
Religion and against Vice, show themselves upon many eminent occasions, as if
by a noble Opposition the more that the Men of Impiety show themselves, and
enter into Clubs and Confederacies to advance their wicked designs, the Spirit
of Zeal should take fire from thence, and be fortified by the joint endeavors
of those, who while many say, Malac. 3. 14, 16, 17.
It is Vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance? those who fear the Lord speak often one to another. Their words how
secret soever are heard by God, and all is entered in a book of remembrance
written for them that fear the Lord, and that think of his name, for they shall
be his; and in that day when he makes up his jewels, he will spare them as a
man spares his own son that serves him. Blessed be God for this door of hope
which he is thus opening to us! and Blessed be they of the Lord who have
offered themselves so willingly before him and before all the People! Their
Name shall be of a good Savor in the present and in the succeeding
Generations, who have begun the first to set forward so noble a Design, to put
a stop to so many vicious practices, and to raise a true Spirit of Piety and
Virtue among us. These are the salt of the earth, the Pillars of it, and the
light of the world.

Go on you noble Christians, shine more and more as patterns of those Virtues
which you endeavor to recommend to others. Your Enemies wait for your halting,
that by your Errors they may bring up a scandal upon Religion and Godliness.
The public Crimes of some who pretended highly, brought within our memory such
an ill reputation upon Religion, that we have labored under the ill effects of
those prejudices ever since. This we hope will make you the more watchful and
diligent, lest by your means the Name of God should be agains Blasphemed. Go on
and see to the Execution of the Laws, but do it with a Zeal becoming the
Gospel, and not with a Pharisaical or bitter Zeal. Be not discouraged, neither
by the slow progress that you can make, nor by the contradiction and slanders
that you may meet with. Go on and prosper, for great is your Reward in Heaven;
and while you study to repair the Breaches that are made in the House of God,
you may hope that God will build up Houses for you and your Posterity, and will
at last receive you into Everlasting Habitations. To whom be Glory for ever.

FINIS.

