THE History of the REFORMATION of the CHURCH of ENGLAND LONDON Printed for
Ric: Chiswell

Whitehall, May 23. 1679.
THis Book, entitled [ The History of the Reformation of the Church of
ENGLAND] having been perused and approved by Persons of eminent Quality, and
several Divines of great Piety and Learning, who have recommended it as a Work
very fit to be made public, as well for the Usefulness of the Matter, as for
the Industry and Integrity the Author has used in compiling of it; the
Honorable Mr. SECRETARY COVENTRY does therefore allow it to be Printed and
Published.

IO. COOK.

THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England. The First Part, OF
THE Progress made in it during the Reign OF K. Henry the VIII. By GILBERT
BVRNET.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXXIX.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
THE first step that was made in the Reformation of this Church, was the
restoring to your Royal Ancestors the Rights of the Crown, and an entire
Dominion over all their Subjects; of which they had been disseised by the craft
and violence of an unjust Pretender: to whom the Clergy, though your Majesty's
Progenitors had enriched them, by a bounty no less profuse than ill-managed,
did not only adhere, but drew with them the Laity, over whose Consciences they
had gained so absolute an Authority, that our Kings were to expect no Obedience
from their people, but what the Popes were pleased to allow.

It is true, the Nobler part of the Nation did frequently in Parliament, assert
the Regal Prerogatives against those Papal invasions; yet these were but faint
endeavors, for an ill-executed Law is but an unequal match to a Principle
strongly infused into the Consciences of the people.

But how different was this from the teaching of Christ and his Apostles? They
forbad men to use all those Arts by which the Papacy grew up and yet subsists:
They exhorted them to obey Magistrates, when they knew it would cost them their
Lives: They were for setting up a Kingdom, not of this World, nor to be
attained but by a holy and peaceable Religion. If this might everywhere take
place, Princes would find Government both easy and secure: It would raise in
their Subjects the truest courage, and unite them with the firmest charity: It
would draw from them Obedience to the Laws, and Reverence to the persons of
their Kings. If the Standards of Justice and Charity, which the Gospel gives,
of doing as we would be done by, and loving our Neighbors as our selves, were
made the measures of men's actions, how steadily would Societies be governed,
and how exactly would Princes be obeyed!

The design of the Reformation, was to restore Christianity to what it was at
first, and to purge it of those Corruptions, with which it was overrun in the
later and darker Ages.

GREAT SIR, This work was carried on by a slow and unsteady Progress under King
Henry the VIII; it advanced in a fuller and freer course under the short but
blessed Reign of King Edward; was Sealed with the blood of many Martyrs under
Queen Mary; was brought to a full settlement in the happy and glorious days of
Queen Elizabeth; was defended by the learned Pen of King James; but the
established frame of it, under which it had so long flourished, was overthrown
with your Majesty's blessed Father, who fell with it, and honored it by his
unexempled Suffering for it; and was again restored to its former beauty and
order, by your Majesty's happy Return.

What remains to complete and perpetuate this Blessing, the composing of our
differences at home, the establishing a closer correspondence with the Reformed
Churches abroad, the securing us from the restless and wicked practices of that
Party, who hoped so lately to have been at the end of their designs; and that
which can only entitle us to a Blessing from God, the Reforming of our manners
and lives, as our Ancestors did our Doctrine and Worship; All this is reserved
for your Majesty, that it may appear, that your Royal Title of Defender of the
Faith is no empty sound, but the real strength and Glory of your Crown.

For attaining these ends, it will be of great use to trace the steps of our
first Reformers; for if the landmarks they set be observed, we can hardly go
out of the way. This was my chief design in the following sheets, which I now
most humbly offer to your Majesty, hoping that as you were graciously pleased
to command that I should have free access to all Records for composing them, so
you will not deny your Royal Patronage to the History of that Work, which God
grant your Majesty may live to raise to its perfection, and to complete in your
Reign the Glory of all your Titles. This is a part of the most earnest as well
as the daily Prayers of,

May it please Your Sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most Loyal, most Faithful,
and most devoted Subject and Servant, G. BVRNET.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS VOLUME.
BOOK I. A Summary View of King Henry the Eighths Reign, till the Process of
his Divorce was begun, in which the State of England chiefly as it related to
Religion, is opened. Page 1. BOOK II. Of the Process of Divorce between King
Henry and Queen Katherine, and of what passed from the 19th to the 25th year of
his Reign; in which he was declared Supreme Head of the Church of England. Page
34. BOOK III. Of the other Transactions about Religion and Reformation; during
the rest of the Reign of King Henry the 8th. Page. 179. COLLECTION OF RECORDS,
etc. Ad Librum Primum. Page 3. Ad Librum Secundum. Page 9. Ad Librum Tertium.
Page 131. An Appendix concerning the Errors and Falsehoods in Sanders's Book of
the English Schism. Page 273. ADDENDA. Page 305.

ERRATA in the Historical part.
PAge 12. Line 6. Margent for 15. read 1st. p. 49. l. 19. for chiefly r.
clearly. p. 54. l. 15. for 10. r. 13. p. 103. l. 32. Abisha r. Abishag. p. 109.
l. 47. had r. has. p. 115. l. 10. having r. had. p. 126. l. 9. before officiate
r. did. p. 151. l. 31. speak r. spoke. p. 173. l. 31. dele a. p. 186. l. 25.
Pachon r. Pachom p. 198. l. 8. co r. to. p. 203. l. 41. then r. that. p. 205.
l. 20. being her last words r. her last words being. p. 235. l. 44. that so, r.
so that. p. 239. l. 33. was r. is. p. 259. l. 42. As r. All. p. 264. l. 15.
down r. out. p. 275. l. 5. no r. on. p. 283. l. 49. in that r. that in. l. 51.
the great charges of r. of the great charges. p. 284. l. 21. person r. prison.
p. 327. l. 31. desertion r. discovery. p. 333. Marginal Note resentments r.
pre^erments, Informers r. Reformers. p. 344. l. 22. before he r. that. p. 369.
l. 5. utrumque r. utcumque.

Some Literal faults and mistakes in the Punctuation the Reader will more
easily Correct.

THE PREFACE.
THere is no Part of History better received than the Account of great Changes,
and Revolutions of States and Governments, in which the Variety of unlooked-for
Accidents and Events, both entertains the Reader and improves him.

Of all Changes, those in Religion that have been sudden and signal, are
enquired into with the most searching Curiosity: where the Salvation of Souls
being concerned, the better sort are much affected; and the Credit, Honor, and
Interest of Churches and Parties draw in these, who though they do not much
care for the Religious part, yet make noise about it to serve other Ends. The
Changes that were made in Religion in the last Century have produced such
effects everywhere, that it is no wonder if all persons desire to see a clear
account of the several steps in which they advanced, of the Counsels that
directed them, and the Motives both Religious and Political that inclined men
of all conditions to concur in them. Germany produced a Sleidan, France a
Thuanus, and Italy a Friar Paul, who have given the World as full satisfaction
in what was done beyond Sea as they could desire. And though the two last lived
and died in the Communion of the Church of Rome, yet they have delivered things
to Posterity, with so much Candor and Evenness, that their Authority is
disputed by none but those of their own Party.

But while Foreign Churches have such Historians, ours at home have not had
the like good fortune: for whether it was, that the Reformers at first presumed
so far on their Legal and calm proceedings, on the continued Succession of
their Clergy, the Authority of the Law, and the Protection of the Prince, that
they judged it needless to write an History, and therefore employed their best
pens, rather to justify what they did, than to deliver how it was done; or
whether by a mere neglect the thing was omitted, we cannot determine. True it
is, that it was not done to any degree of Exactness, when matters were so fresh
in men's memories, that things might have been opened with greater Advantages,
and vouched by better Authority, than it is to be expected at this distance.

They were soon after much provoked by Sanders History, which he published to
the World in Latin: yet either despising a writer, who did so impudently
deliver falsehoods, that from his own Book many of them may be disproved, or
expecting a Command from Authority, they did not then set about it. The best
account I can give of their silence is, that most of Sanders Calumnies being
levelled at Queen Elizabeth, whose birth and parents he designed chiefly to
disgrace, it was thought too tender a point by her wise Counselors to be much
enquired into: it gave too great credit to his Lies, to answer them; an answer
would draw forth a Reply, by which those Calumnies would still be kept alive;
and therefore it was not without good reason thought better to let them lie
unanswered and despised. From whence it is come that in this age that Author is
in such Credit, that now he is quoted with much assurance: most of all the
writers in the Church of Rome, rely on his testimony as a good authority. The
Collectors of the General History of that Age, follow his thread closely, some
of them transcribe his very words. One Pollini a Dominican, published an
History of the Changes that were made in England, in Italian at Rome Anno.
1594. which he should more ingenuously have called a Translation, or Paraphrase
of Sanders History: and of late more heartily, but no less maliciously, one of
the best pens of France has been employed to translate him into their language,
which has created such prejudices in the minds of many there, that our
Reformation, which generally was more modestly spoken of, even by those who
wrote against it, is now looked on by such as read Sanders, and believe him, as
one of the foulest things that ever was.

Fox for all his Voluminous Work, had but few things in his eye when he made
his Collection, and designed only to discover the Corruptions and Cruelties of
the Roman Clergy, and the Sufferings and Constancy of the Reformers. But his
work was written in haste, and there are so many defects in it, that it can by
no means be called a Complete History of these times; though I must add, that
having compared his Acts and Monuments with the Records, I have never been able
to discover any errors or prevarications in them, but the utmost fidelity and
exactness. Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, designed only in his account of
the British Antiquities, to do justice and honor to his See, and so gives us
barely the life of Cranmer, with some few and general hints of what he did.
Hall was but a superficial Writer, and was more careful to get full
informations of the Clothes that were worn at the Interviews of Princes, Iusts,
Tournaments, and great Solemnities, than about the Counsels, or secret
Transactions of the time he lived in. Holingshead, Speed, and Stow, give bare
Relations of things that were Public, and commit many faults. Upon their scent
most of our later Writers have gone, and have only collected and repeated what
they wrote.

The Lord Herbert judged it unworthy of him to trifle as others had done, and
therefore made a more narrow search into Records and original Papers, than all
that had gone before him; and with great fidelity and industry, has given us
the History of King Henry the Eighth. But in the Transactions that concern
Religion, he dwells not so long as the matter required, leaving those to men of
another Profession, and judging it perhaps not so proper for one of his
condition to pursue a full and accurate Deduction of those matters.

Since he wrote, two have undertaken the Ecclesiastical History, Fuller and
Heylin. The former got into his hands some few Papers, that were not seen
before he published them; but being a man of fancy, and affecting an odd way
of writing, his work gives no great Satisfaction. But Doctor Heylin wrote
smoothly and handsomely, his Method and Style are good, and his work was
generally more read than any thing that had appeared before him: but either he
was very ill informed, or very much led by his Passions; and he being wrought
on by most violent prejudices against some that were concerned in that time,
delivers many things in such a manner and so strangely, that one would think he
had been secretly set on to it by those of the Church of Rome, though I doubt
not he was a sincere Protestant, but violently carried away by some particular
conceits. In one thing he is not to be excused, That he never vouched any
Authority for what he writ, which is not to be forgiven any who write of
Transactions beyond their own time, and deliver new things not known before. So
that upon what grounds he wrote a great deal of his Book we can only
conjecture, and many in their guesses are not apt to be very favorable to him.

Things being delivered to us with so much alloy and uncertainty, those of the
Church of Rome do confidently disparage our Reformation. The short History of
it, as it is put in their mouths, being, That it was begun by the lusts and
passions of King Henry the Eighth, carried on by the Ravenousness of the Duke
of Summerset, under Edward the Sixth, and confirmed by the Policy of Queen
Elizabeth and her Council to secure her Title. These things being generally
talked and spread abroad in Foreign parts, especially in France, by the new
Translation of Sanders, and not being yet sufficiently cleared, many have
desired to see a fuller and better account of those Transactions than has yet
been given; so the thing being necessary, I was the more encouraged to set
about it by some persons of great Worth and Eminence, who thought I had much
leisure and other good Opportunities to go through with it, and wished me to
undertake it. The person that did engage me chiefly to this work, was on many
Accounts much fitter to have undertaken it himself, being the most
Indefatigable in his Industry, and the most Judicious in his Observations, of
any I know, and is one of the greatest Masters of Style now living. But being
engaged in the service of the Church, in a station that affords him very little
leisure, he set me on to it, and furnished me with a curious Collection of his
own Observations. And in some sort this work may be accounted his, for he
corrected it with a most Critical Exactness; so that the first materials, and
the last finishing of it, are from him. But after all this, I lie under such
restraints from his Modesty, that I am not allowed to publish his name.

I had two Objections to it, besides the knowledge of my own unfitness for such
a work. One was my Unacquaintedness with the Laws and Customs of this Nation,
not being born in it: the other was the Expense, that such a Search as was
necessary, required, which was not easy for me to bear. My acquaintance with
the most ingenious Master William Petyt Counselor of the Inner Temple cleared
one difficulty, he offering me his assistance and direction, without which I
must have committed great faults. But I must acknowledge my self highly obliged
by the favor and bounty of the Honorable Master of the Rolls, Sir Harebottle
Grimstone, of whose Worth and Goodness to me I must make a large digression, if
I would undertake to say all that the Subject will bear: The whole Nation
expressed their value of him, upon the most Signal Occasion, when they made him
their Mouth and Speaker in that Blessed Assembly which called home their King,
after which real evidence all little Commendations may be well forborne. The
Obligations he has laid on me are such, that as the Gratitude and Service of my
whole life, is the only equal return I can make for them; so as a small tribute
I judge my self obliged to make my acknowledgments in this manner, for the
leisure I enjoy under his Protection, and the Support I receive from him; and
if this work does the world any service, the best part of the Thanks is due to
him, that furnished me with particular Opportunities of Carrying it on. Nor
must I conceal the Nobleness of that Renowned Promoter of Learning Master
Boil, who contributed liberally to the Expense this Work put me to.

Upon these encouragements I set about it, and began with the Search of all
Public Records and Offices, the Parliament and Treaty-Rolls with all the
Patent-Rolls, and the Registers of the Sees of Canterbury and London, and of
the Augmentation-Office. Then I laid out for all the MSS. I could hear of, and
found things beyond my Expectation in the famous Cotton Library, where there is
such a Collection of Original Papers relating to these times, as perhaps the
World can show nothing like it. I had also the favor of some MSS. of great
value, both from the Famous and eminently Learned Doctor Stillingfleet, who
gave me great Assistance in this work, and from Mr. Petyt and others. When I
had looked these over, I then used all the Endeavors I could, to gather
together the Books that were printed in those days, from which I not only got
considerable hints of matters of Fact, but (that which I chiefly looked for)
the Arguments upon which they managed the Controversies then on foot, of which
I thought it was the part of an Ecclesiastical Historian to give an Account, as
I could recover them, that it may appear upon what motives and grounds they
proceeded.

The Three chief Periods of Henry the Eighth his Reign, in which Religion is
concerned, are, First, From the beginning of his Reign, till the Process of his
Divorce with Queen Katharine commenced. The Second is from that, till his total
Breaking off from Rome, and setting up his Supremacy over all Causes and
Persons. The Third is from that, to his Death.

When I first set about this Work, I intended to have carried on the History of
the Reformation to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in which it was finished and
fully settled; but I was forced to change that Resolution. The chief reason,
among many others, was, that I have not yet been able to discover such full
Informations of what passed under the Succeeding Reigns, as were necessary for
a History; and though I have searched the public Registers of that time, yet I
am still in the dark my self in many particulars. This made me resolve on
publishing this Volume first, hoping that those in whose hands any Manuscripts
or Papers of that time lie, will from what is now performed, be encouraged to
Communicate them: or if any have made a considerable Progress in those
Collections, I shall be far from envying them the honor of such a work, in
which it had been inexcusable Vanity in me to have meddled, if the desires of
others, who have great Power over me, had not prevailed with me to set about
it. And therefore, though I have made a good Advance in the following part of
the Work, I shall most willingly resign it up to any who will undertake it, and
they shall have the free use of all my Papers. But if none will set about it,
who yet can furnish materials toward it, I hope their zeal for carrying on so
desired a Work, will engage them to give all the help to it that is in their
Power.

There is only one passage belonging to the next Volume, which I shall take
notice of here, since from it I must plead my Excuse for several defects, which
may seem to be in this Work. In the Search I made of the Rolls and other
Offices, I wondered much to miss several Commissions, Patents, and other
Writings, which by clear evidence I knew were Granted, and yet none of them
appeared on record. This I could not impute to any thing but the omission of
the Clerks, who failed in the enrolling those Commissions, though it was not
likely that matters of so high Concernment should have been neglected,
especially in such a Critical time, and under so severe a King. But as I
continued down my search to the Fourth year of Queen Mary, I found in the
Twelvth Roll of that year, a Commission, which cleared all my former doubts,
and by which I saw what was become of the things I had so anxiously searched
after. We have heard of the Expurgation of Books practiced in the Church of
Rome, but it might have been imagined, that public Registers and Records would
have been safe; yet lest these should have been afterward Confessors, it was
resolved they should then be Martyrs; for on the 29th of December, in the 4th
year of her Reign, a Commission was issued out under the great Seal to Bonner
Bishop of London, Cole Dean of St. Paul's, and Martine a Doctor of the Civil
Law, which is of that importance, that I shall here insert the material words
of it: Whereas it is come to our knowledge, that in the time of the late Schism
diverse Compts, Books, Scrolls, Instruments, and other writings were practiced,
devised, and made, concerning Professions against the Popes Holiness, and the Sea Apostolic; and also sundry infamous Scrutinies taken in Abbeys and other
Religious houses, tending rather to subvert and overthrow all good Religion and
Religious houses, than for any truth contained therein: Which being in the
Custody of diverse Registers, and we intending to have those writings brought to
knowledge, whereby they may be Considered and ordered according to our will and
pleasure; thereupon, those three or any two of them are empowered to cite any
persons before them, and examine them upon the Premises upon Oath, and to
bring all such Writings before them, and certify their diligence about it to
Cardinal Pool, that further order might be given about them.

When I saw this, I soon knew which way so many Writings had gone: and as I
could not but wonder at their boldness, who thus presumed to raze so many
Records; so their ingenuity in leaving this Commission in the Rolls, by which
any who had the Curiosity to search for it, might be satisfied how the other
Commissions were destroyed, was much to be commended. Yet in the following
Work, it will appear that some few Papers escaped their hands.

I know it is needless to make great Protestations of my sincerity in this
Work. These are of course and are little considered, but I shall take a more
effectual way to be believed, for I shall vouch my Warrants for what I say, and
tell where they are to be found. And having copied out of Records and MSS. many
Papers of great importance, I shall not only insert the substance of them in
the following Work, but at the end of it shall give a Collection of them at
their full length, and in the Language in which they were originally written:
from which as the Reader will receive full Evidence of the truth of this
History; so he will not be ill pleased, to observe the Genius and way of the
Great men in that time, of which he will be better able to judge, by seeng
their Letters and other Papers, than by any representation made of them at
second hand. They are digested into that order, in which they are referred to
in the History.

It will surprise some to see a Book of this Bigness, written of the History of
our Reformation, under the Reign of King Henry the Eighth: since the true
beginnings of it, are to be reckoned from the Reign of King Edward, the 6. in
which the Articles of our Church, and the Forms of our Worship, were first
compiled and set forth by Authority. And indeed in King Henry's time the
Reformation, was rather conceived than brought forth, and two Parties were in
the last 18 years of his Reign struggling in the Womb, having non and then
advantages, on either side, as the unconstant humor of that King changed, and
as his Interests, and often as his passions swayed him.

Cardinal Wolsey had so dissolved his mind into pleasures, and puffed him up
with Flattery and servile Compliances, that it was not an easy thing to serve
him; for being boisterous and impatient naturally, which was much heightened by
his most extravagant vanity, and high conceit of his own Learning and Wisdom,
he was one of the most uncounsellable persons in the World.

The Book which he wrote, had engaged him deep in these Controversies, and by
perpetual flatteries, he was brought to fancy it was written with some degrees
of inspiration. And Luther in his answer had treated him so unmannerly, that it
was only the necessity of his Affairs, that forced him into any correspondence
with that Party in Germany.

And though Cranmer and Cromwell improved every advantage, that either the Kings
temper, or his Affairs offered them, as much as could be; yet they were to be
pitied, having to do with a Prince, who upon the slightest pretenses threw down
those whom he had most advanced; which Cromwell felt severely, and Cranmer was
sometimes near it.

The faults of this King being so conspicuous, and the severity of his
proceedings so unjustifiable, particularly that heinous violation of the most
sacred Rules of Justice and Government, in condemning men without bringing them
to make their Answers; most of our Writers have separated the Concerns of this
Church from his Reign: and imagining that all he did, was founded only on his
Revenge upon the Court of Rome, for denying his Divorce, have taken little care
to examine how matters were transacted in his time.

But if we consider the great things that were done by him, we must acknowledge
that there was a signal providence of God, in raising up a King of his temper,
for clearing the way to that blessed Work that followed: and that could hardly
have been done, but by a man of his humor; so that I may very fitly apply to
him the witty Simile of an ingenious writer, who compares Luther to a Postilion
in his waxed Boots and oiled Coat, lashing his horses through thick and thin,
and be spattering all about him.

This Character befits King Henry better (saving the Reverence due to his
Crown) who as the Postilion of Reformation, made way for it through a great
deal of mire and filth. He abolished the Popes Power, by which not only that
Tyranny was destroyed, which had been long an heavy burden on this oppressed
Nation; but all the Opinions, Rites, and Constitutions, for which there was no
better Authority than Papal Decrees, were to fall to the ground; The Foundation
that supported them being thus sapped. He suppressed all the Monasteries; in
which though there were some inexcusable faults committed, yet he wanted not
reason to do what he did. For the Foundation of those Houses being laid on the
Superstitious Conceit of Redeeming Souls out of Purgatory, by saying Masses for
them; they whose Office that was, had by counterfeiting Relics, by forging of
Miracles, and other like Impostures, drawn together a vast wealth, to the
enriching of their Saints, of whom some perhaps were damned Souls, and others
were never in being. These arts being detected, and withal their great
Viciousness in some places, and in all, their great abuse of the Christian
Religion, made it seem unfit they should be continued. But it was their
dependence on the Sea of Rome, which, as the state of things then was, made it
necessary that they should be suppressed. New Foundations might have done well,
and the scantness of those, considering the number and wealth of those which
were suppressed, is one of the great blemishes of that Reign. But it was in
vain to endeavor to amend the old ones. Their numbers were so great, their
Riches and Interests in the Nation so considerable; that a Prince of Ordinary
metal would not have attempted such a design, much less have completed it in
Five years time. With these fell the Superstition of Images, Relics, and the
Redemption of Souls out of Purgatory. And those Extravagant Addresses to Saints
that are in the Roman Offices were thrown out, only an Ora pro nobis was kept
up, and even that was left to the liberty of Priests, to leave it out of the
Litanies as they saw cause. These were great preparations for a Reformation.
But it went further, and two things were done, upon which a greater Change was
reasonably to be expected. The Scriptures were Translated into the English
tongue, and set up in all Churches, and every one was admitted to read them,
and they alone were declared the Rule of Faith. This could not but open the
eyes of the Nation, who finding a profound silence in these writings about many
things, and a direct opposition to other things that were still retained, must
needs conclude, even without deep Speculations or nice Disputing, that many
things that were still in the Church had no ground in Scripture, and some of
the rest were directly contrary to it. This Cranmer knew well would have such
an operation, and therefore made it his chief business to set it forward, which
in Conclusion he happily effected.

Another thing was also established, which opened the way to all that followed:
That every National Church was a Complete Body within it self, so that the
Church of England, with the Authority and Concurrence of their Head, and King,
might examine and Reform all Errors and Corruptions, whether in Doctrine or
Worship. All the Provincial Councils in the ancient Church, were so many
Precedents for this, who condemned Heresies, and Reformed abuses as the
occasion required. And yet these being all but parts of one Empire, there was
less reason for their doing it, without staying for a General Council, which
depended upon the pleasure of one man (the Roman Emperor) than could be
pretended, when Europe was divided into so many Kingdoms: By which a common
Concurrence of all these Churches was a thing scarce to be expected; and
therefore this Church must be in a very ill Condition, if there could be no
endeavors for a Reformation, till all the rest were brought together.

The Grounds of the New Covenant between God and man in Christ, were also truly
stated, and the terms on which Salvation was to be hoped for, were faithfully
opened according to the New Testament. And this being in the strict notion of
the word, the Gospel, and the glad tidings preached through our Blessed Lord
and Savior, it must be confessed that there was a great Progress made, when
the Nation was well instructed about it; though there was still an alloy of
other Corruptions, embasing the Purity of the Faith. And indeed in the whole
progress of these changes, the Kings design seemed to have been to terrify the
Court of Rome, and cudgel the Pope into a Compliance with what he desired: for
in his heart he continued addicted to some of the most extravagant Opinions of
that Church, such as Transubstantiation and the other Corruptions in the Mass,
so that he was to his lives end more Papist than Protestant.

There are two Prejudices, which men have generally drunk in against that time.
The one is, from the Kings great Enormities, both in his personal Deportment
and Government, which make many think, no good could be done by so ill a man,
and so cruel a Prince. I am not to defend him nor to lessen his faults. The
vastness and irregularity of his Expense procured many heavy Exactions, and
twice extorted a public Discharge of his debts, embased the Coin, with other
Irregularities. His proud and impatient Spirit occasioned many cruel
proceedings. The taking so many lives, only for denying his Supremacy,
particularly Fisher's and More's, the one being extreme old, and the other one
of the Glories of his Nation, for Probity and Learning: The taking advantage
from some Eruptions in the North, to break the Indemnity he had before
proclaimed to those in the Rebellion, even though they could not be proved
Guilty of those second disorders: His extreme Severity to all Cardinal Pool's
Family: his cruel using, first Cromwell, and afterward the Duke of Norfolk and
his Son, besides his un-exampled Proceedings against some of his Wives; and
that which was worst of all, The laying a Precedent for the subversion of
Justice, and oppressing the clearest Innocence, by attaining men without
hearing them: These are such remarkable blemishes, that as no man of ingenuity
can go about the whitening them; so the poor Reformers drunk so deep of that
bitter cup, that it very ill becomes any of their followers, to endeavor to
give fair Colors to those red and bloody Characters, with which so much of his
Reign is stained.

Yet after all this sad enumeration, it was no new nor unusual thing in the
methods of Gods Providence, to employ Princes who had great mixtures of very
gross faults, to do signal things for his Service. Not to mention David and
Solomon, whose sins were expiated with a severe Repentance; it was the bloody
Cyrus that sent back the Jews to their Land, and gave them leave to re-build
their Temple. Constantine the Great is by some of his Enemies, charged with
many blemishes both in his Life, and Government. Clovis of France under whom
that Nation received the Christian Faith, was a monster of Cruelty and
Perfidiousness, as even Gregory of Tours represents him, who lived near his
time, and nevertheless makes a Saint of him. Charles the Great; whom some also
make a Saint, both put away his wife for a very slight cause, and is said to
have lived in most unnatural lusts with his own Daughter. Irene whom the Church
of Rome magnifies, as the Restorer of their Religion in the East, did both
contrary to the Impressions of Nature, and of her Sex, put out her own Sons
eyes, of which he died soon after, with many other execrable things. And
whatever Reproaches those of the Church of Rome cast on the Reformation, upon
the account of this Kings faults, may be easily turned back on their Popes, who
have never failed to court and extol Princes that served their ends, how gross
and scandalous soever their other faults have been. As Phocas, Brunichild,
Irene, Mathildis, Edgar of England, and many more. But our Church is not near
so much concerned in the persons of those Princes, under whom the Reformation
began, as theirs is in the persons of their Popes, who are believed to have far
higher Characters of a Divine Power and Spirit in them, than other Princes
pretend to. And yet if the lives of those Popes, who have made the greatest
advances in their Jurisdiction be examined, particularly Gregory the Seventh,
and Boniface the Eighth, vices more eminent, than any can be charged on King
Henry, will be found in them. And if a lewd and wicked Pope may yet have the
holy Ghost dwelling in him, and directing him infallibly; why may not an ill
King do so good a Work as set a Reformation forward, And if it were proper to
enter into a dissection of Four of those Popes, that sat at Rome during this
Reign, Pope Julius will be found beyond him in a vast Ambition, whose bloody
Reign did not only embroil Italy, but a great part of Christendom. Pope Leo
the Tenth was as extravagant and prodigal in his expense, which put him on
baser Shifts, than ever this King used, to raise money; not by embasing the
Coin, or raising new and heavy taxes, but by embasing the Christian Religion,
and prostituting the pardon of sin in that foul trade of Indulgences. Clement
the Seventh was false to the highest degree; a vice which cannot be charged on
this King. And Paul the 3d. was a vile and lewd Priest, who not only kept his
whore, but gloried in it, and raised one of his Bastards to an high Dignity,
making him Prince of Parma and Piacenza; and himself is said to have lived in
Incest with others of them. And except the short Reign of Hadrian the Sixth,
there was no Pope at Rome all this while, whose example might make any other
Prince blush for his faults; so that Guicciardine, when he calls Pope Clement a
good Pope, adds, I mean not Goodness Apostolical, for in those days he was
esteemed a good Pope, that did not exceed the wickedness of the worst of men.

In sum, Gods ways are a great deep, who has often showed his Power and Wisdom,
in raising up unlikely and unpromising instruments, to do great services in the
World; not always employing the best men in them, lest good Instruments should
share too deep in the Praises of that, which is only due to the Supreme Creator
and Governor of the World. And therefore he will stain the pride of all Glory,
that such as Glory may only Glory in the Lord. Jehu did an acceptable Service
to God, in destroying the Idolatry of Baal, though neither the way of doing it
be to be imitated, being grossly insincere, nor was the Reformation complete,
since the Worshipping the two Calves was still kept up; and it is very like,
his chief design in it, was to destroy all the Party that favored Ahab's
Family; yet the thing was good and was rewarded by God: So whatever this Kings
other faults were, and how defective soever the Change he made was, and upon
what ill motives soever it may seem to have proceeded; yet the things
themselves being good, we ought not to think the worse of them because of the
Instrument, or manner by which they were wrought; but are to adore and admire
the paths of the Divine Wisdom, that brought about such a Change, in a Church,
which being subjected to the Sea of Rome, had been more than any other part of
Europe most tame under its Oppressions, and was most deeply drenched in
Superstition: And this by the means of a Prince, who was the most devoted to
the Interest of Rome of any in Christendom, and seemed to be so upon knowledge,
being very learned; and continued to the last much leavened with Superstition,
and was the only King in the World whom that See declared, Defender of the
Faith. And that this should have been carried on so far, with so little
Opposition, some risings though numerous and formidable being scattered and
quieted without Blood; And that a mighty Prince, who was Victorious almost in
all his undertakings, Charles the 5th. and was both provoked in point of Honor
and Interest, yet could never find one spare season to turn his Arms upon
England, are great Demonstrations of a particular Influence of Heaven in these
Alterations, and of its watchful care of them.

But the other prejudice touches the Reformation in a more vital and tender
part; and it is, That Cranmer and the other Bishops, who promoted the
Reformation in the Succeeding Reign, did in this comply too servilly with King
Henry's humors, both in carrying on his frequent Divorces, and in retaining
those Corruptions in the worship, which by their throwing them off in the
beginning of King Edward's Reign, we may conclude were then condemned by them;
so that they seem to have praevaricated against their Consciences in that
Compliance.

It were too faint a way of Answering so severe a Charge, to turn it back on
the Church of Rome, and to show the base Compliances of some, even of the best
of their Popes, as Gregory the Great, whose Congratulations to the Usurper
Phocas, are a strain of the meanest, and undecentest flattery that ever was put
in writing. And his Complements to Brunichild, who was one of the greatest
Monsters both for Lust and Cruelty that ever her Sex produced, show that there
was no person so wicked that he was ashamed to flatter: but the blemishing them
will not (I confess) excuse our Reformers, therefore other things are to be
considered for their Vindication. They did not at once attain the full knowledge
of divine Truth, so that in some particulars, as in that of the Corporal
Presence in the Sacrament, both Cranmer and Ridley were themselves then in the
dark. Bertram's Book first convinced Ridley, and he was the chief instrument in
opening Cranmer's eyes; So if themselves were not then enlightened, they could
not instruct others. As for other things, such as the giving the Cup to the
Laity, the Worshipping God in a known tongue, and several reformations about the
Mass, though they judged them necessary to be done as soon as was possible; yet
they had not so full a persuasion of the necessity of these, as to think it a
sin not to do them. The Prophets words to Naaman the Syrian, might give them
some color for that mistake, and the practice of the Apostles, who continued
not only to worship at the Temple, but to Circumcise and to offer Sacrifices
(which must have been done by St. Paul, when he purified himself in the Temple)
even after the Law was dead, by the appearing of the Gospel, seemed to excuse
their Compliance. They had also observed, that as the Apostles were all things
to all men, that so they might gain some; so the Primitive Christians had
brought in many rites of Heathenism into their worship: Upon which inducements
they were wrought on to comply in some uneasy things, in which if these
excuses do not wholly clear them, yet they very much lessen their Guilt.

And after all this, it must be Confessed they were men, and had mixtures of
fear and human infirmities with their other excellent Qualities. And indeed
Cranmer was in all other points so extraordinary a person, that it was perhaps
fit, there should be some ingredients in his Temper, to lessen the Veneration,
which his great worth might have raised too high, if it had not been for these
feeblenesses, which upon some occasions appeared in him. But if we examine the
failings of some of the greatest of the Primitive Fathers, as Athanasius,
Cyril, and others, who were the most zealous asserters of the Faith, we must
conclude them to have been nothing inferior to any that can be charged on
Cranmer; whom if we consider narrowly, we shall find as eminent virtues, and as
few faults in him, as in any Prelate that has been in the Christian Church for
many Ages. And if he was prevailed on to deny his Master through fear, he did
wash off that stain by a sincere Repentance and a patient Martyrdom, in which
he expressed an eminent resentment of his former frailty, with a pitch of
Constancy of mind above the rate of modern Examples.

But their virtues as well as their faults are set before us for our
instruction; and how frail soever the vessels were, they have conveyed to us a
treasure of great value, The pure Gospel of our Lord and Savior: which if we
follow, and govern our lives and hearts by it, we may hope in easier and
plainer paths to attain that Blessedness, which they could not reach but
through scorching flames: and if we do not improve the Advantages, which this
light affords, we may either look for some of those trials, which were sent for
the exercise of their Faith and Patience, and perhaps for the punishment of
their former Compliance; or if we escape these, we have cause to fear worse in
the Conclusion.

EFFIGIES HENRICI VIII D.G ANGLIAE GALL. ET HIB. REGIS DEFENSORIS FIDEI
HHolbein pinxit

Natus 1491 Iun 28. Patri Successit in Regno 1509 Apr. 22. Obijt 1547/8 Ian 28.
Anno Aetat 57.

page 1. Printed for Ric^ Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church
yard.


THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England. BOOK I.
A Summary View of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, till the Process of his
Divorce was begun, in which the State of England, chiefly as it related to
Religion, is opened.

ENGLAND had for a whole Age felt the Miseries of a long and cruel War between
the Two Houses of York and Lancaster; King Henry's Succession to the Crown,
Apr. 22. 1509.
during which time as the Crown had lost great Dominions beyond Sea, so the
Nation was much impoverished, many Noble Families extinguished, much Blood shed,
great Animosities everywhere raised, with all the other Miseries of a lasting
Civil War: But they now saw all these happily composed, when the Two Families
did unite in King Henry the Eighth. In his Fathers Reign they were rather
cemented and joined than united; whose great Partiality to the House of
Lancaster, from which he was Descended, and Severity to the Branches of the
House of York, in which even his own Queen had a large share, together with the
Impostors that were set up to disturb his Reign, kept these heats alive, which
were now all buried in his grave: and this made the Succession of his Son so
universally acceptable to the whole Nation, who now hoped to revive their
former pretensions in France, and to have again a large share in all the
Affairs of Europe, from which their Domestic Broils had so long excluded them.

There was another thing, He proceeds against Dudley and Empson*
which made his first coming to the Crown no less acceptable, which was, that
the same day that his Father died, Hall says the same day.

L. Herbert says the day following.


he ordered Dudley and Empson to be committed to the Tower: His Father, whether
out of Policy, or Inclination, or both, was all his life much set on the
gathering of Treasure, so that those Ministers were most acceptable, who could
fill his Coffers best: and though this occasioned some Tumults, and disposed
the People to all those Commotions, which fell out in his Reign; yet he being
successful in them all, continued in his course of heaping up Money.

Toward the end of his Life, he found out those Two Instruments, who out-did
all that went before them, and what by vexatious Suits upon Penal but obsolete
Laws, what by unjust Imprisonments, and other violent and illegal proceedings,
raised a general odium upon the Government; and this grew upon him with his
years, and was come to so great a height toward the end of his Life, that he
died in good time for his own quiet: For as he used all possible endeavors to
get Money, so what he got, he as carefully kept, and distributed very little of
it among those about him, so that he had many Enemies, and but few Friends.
This being well considered by his Son, he began his Government with the
disgrace of those Two Ministers, against whom he proceeded according to Law;
all the other inferior Officers whom they had made use of were also Imprisoned.

When they had thus fallen, many and great Complaints came in from all parts
against them; they also apprehending the danger they were like to be in upon
their Masters Death, had been practicing with their Partners to gather about
them all the Power they could bring together, whether to secure themselves from
popular Rage, or to make themselves seem considerable, or formidable to the new
King. This and other Crimes being brought in against them, they were found
guilty of Treason in a legal Trial. But the King judged this was neither a
sufficient Reparation to his Oppressed People, nor Satisfaction to Justice:
Therefore he went further, Hall.
and both ordered Restitution to be made by his Fathers Executors of great Sums
of Money, which had been unjustly extorted from his Subjects; and in his first
Parliament which he Summoned to the Twenty first of January following, He holds
a Parliament Ian. 21. 1510.
he not only delivered up Empson and Dudley with their Accomplices to the Justice
of the Two Houses, who attainted them by Act of Parliament, and a little after
gave order for their Execution; Aug. 18.
but did also give his Royal assent to those other Laws by which the Subject
was secured from the like Oppressions for the future: and that he might not at
all be suspected of any such Inclinations as his Father had to amass Treasure,
he was the most magnificent in his Expense of any Prince in Christendom, and
very bountiful to all about him; and as one extreme commonly produces another,
so his Fathers Covetousness led him to be Prodigal, and the vast Wealth which
was left him, His great Expense.
being reckoned no less then 1800000 l. was in Three years dissipated, as if
the Son in his expense had vied Industry with his Father in all his Thrift.

Thomas Earl of Surrey (afterward Duke of Norfolk) to show how compliant he
was to the Humors of the Princes whom he served, as he had been Lord-Treasurer
to the Father the last Seven years of his Life; so being continued in the same
Office by this King, did as dexterously comply with his Prodigality, as he had
done formerly with his Fathers sparingness.

But this in the beginning of the Princes Reign did much endear him both to the
Court and Nation: there being a freer Circulation of Money by which Trade was
encouraged; and the Courtiers tasted so liberally of the Kings bounty, that he
was everywhere much magnified, though his Expense proved afterward heavier to
the Subject, than ever his Father's Avarice had been.

Another thing that raised the Credit of this King was, His Affairs beyond Sea.
the great Esteem he was in beyond Sea, both for his Wisdom and Power; so that
in all the Treaties of Peace and War he was always much considered; and he did
so exactly pursue that great Maxim of Princes, of Holding the Balance, that
still as it grew heavier, whether in the Scale of France, or Spain, he governed
Himself and Them as a wise Arbiter. His first Action was against France, which
by the Accession of the Duchy of Britain, through his Father's oversight, was
made greater and more formidable to the Neighboring Princes; therefore the
French Successes in Italy having United all the Princes there against them,
Spain and England willingly joined themselves in the Quarrel. The Kingdom of
Spain being also then United, conquered Navarre, which set them at great ease,
A War with France.
and weakened the King of France on that side. Whose Affairs also declining in
Italy, this King finding him so much lessened, made Peace with him; having
first managed his share of the War, with great Honor at Sea and Land: For,
going over in Person, he did both defeat the French Army, and take Terwin and
Tourney; the former he demolished, Aug. 24. and October. 2. 1513.
the latter he kept: and in these Exploits he had an unusual Honor done him,
which though it was a slight thing, yet was very pleasant to him; Maximilian
the Emperor taking pay in his Army, amounting to a Hundred Crowns a day, and
upon all public Solemnities giving the King the precedence.

The Peace between England and France was made firmer by Lewis the French Kings
Marrying Mary the Kings Sister; but he dying soon after, Aug. 7. 1514. A Peace,
and a Match with France. Oct. 9.

Lewis dies Ian. 1. 1515.


new Counsels were to be taken. Francis, who succeeded, did in the beginning of
his Reign, court this King with great Offers to renew the Peace with him, which
was accordingly done. Afterward Francis falling in with all his force upon the
Duchy of Milan, all endeavors were used to engage King Henry into the War,
both by the Pope and Emperor, this last feeding him long with hopes of
resigning the Empire to him, which wrought much on him; insomuch that he did
give them a great Supply in Money, but he could not be engaged to divert
Francis by making War upon him: and Francis ending the War of Italy by a Peace,
Lady Mary Betrothed to the Dolphin, October. 8. 1518.
was so far from resenting what the King had done, that he courted him into a
straiter League, and a Match was agreed between the Dolphin and the Lady Mary
the Kings Daughter, and Tourney was delivered up to the French again.

But now Charles, Archduke of Austria by his Father, and Heir to the House of
Burgundy by his Grandmother, and to the Crown of Spain by his Mother, began to
make a great Figure in the World; and his Grandfather Maximilian dying,
Emperor dies, Ian. 12. 1519.

Charles Elected, June 28.


Francis and He were Corrivals for the Empire: but Charles being preferred in
the Competition, there followed, what through personal Animosities, what
through reason of State, and a desire of Conquest, lasting Wars between them;
which though they were sometimes for a while closed up, yet were never clearly
ended. And those two great Monarchs as they eclipsed most other Princes about
them, so they raised this Kings glory higher, both courting him by turns, and
that not only by earnest and warm Addresses, but often by unusual Submissions; in
which they, knowing how great an Ingredient Vanity was in his temper, were
never deficient when their Affairs required it. All which tended to make him
appear greater in the eyes of his own People. 1520.
In the year 1520. there was an Interview agreed on between the French King and
Him; but the Emperor, to prevent the effects he feared from it, resolved to out
do the French King in the Complement, and without any Treaty or previous
assurances came to Dover, The Emperor comes to England, May. 26.
and solicited the Kings friendship against Francis: and to advance his design
gained Cardinal Wolsey, who then Governed all the Kings Counsels, by the
promise of making him Pope; in which he judged he might, for a present
Advantage, promise a thing that seemed to be at so great a distance, (Pope Leo
the Tenth being then but a young man) and with rich presents, which he made
both to the King, the Cardinal and all the Court, wrought much on them. But
that which prevailed most with the King was, that he saw, though Charles had
great Dominions, yet they lay at such a distance, that France alone was a
sufficient Counterpoise to him; but if Francis could keep Milan, recover
Naples, Burgundy, and Navarre, to all which he was then preparing, he would be
an uneasy Neighbor to himself; and if he kept the footing he then had in
Italy, he would lie so heavy on the Papacy, that the Popes could no longer
carry equally in the affairs of Christendom, upon which much depended,
according to the Religion of that time. Therefore he resolved to take part with
the Emperor, till at least Francis was driven out of Italy, and reduced to
juster terms: so that the following Interview between Francis and him, June 7.
produced nothing but a vast Expense and high Complements: and from a second
Interview between the King and the Emperor, July. 10.

A second War with France.


Francis was full of jealousy, in which what followed justified his
apprehensions; for the War going on between the Emperor and Francis, the King
entered in a League with the former, and made War upon France.

Leo. 10. dies Dec. 1. 1521.
But the Pope dying sooner than it seems the Emperor looked for, Cardinal Wolsey
claimed his promise for the Papacy; but before the Messenger came to him,
Adrian chosen Pope Ian. 9. 1522.
Adrian the Emperors Tutor was chosen Pope: yet to feed the Cardinal with fresh
hopes, a new promise was made for the next vacancy, and in the mean while he
was put in hope of the Archbishopric of Toledo. He dyed September. 14. 1523.
But two years after, That Pope dying, the Emperor again broke his word with
him; yet though he was thereby totally alienated from him, he concealed his
indignation, till the public Concerns should give him a good opportunity to
prosecute it upon a better color; Clement the 7th chosen November. 19.
and by his Letters to Rome, dissembled his resentments so artificially, that
in a Congratulation he wrote to Pope Clement, He protested his Election was
matter of such joy both to the King and himself, that nothing had ever befaln
them which pleased them better, and that he was the very person, whom they had
wished to see raised to that Greatness. But while the War went on, the Emperor
did cajole the King with the highest Complements possible, 1522.
which always wrought much on him, Emperor Landed at Dover. May. 26.
and came in person into England to be installed Knight of the Garter: where a
new League was Concluded, by which, beside mutual assistance, a Match was
agreed on between the Emperor and the Lady Mary, The Emperor contracted to the
Kings Daughter.

June 19.


the Kings only Child by his Queen, of whom he had no hopes of more Issue. This
was sworn to on both hands, and the Emperor was obliged, when She was of Age,
to marry Her, Per verba de praesenti, under pain of Excommunication and the
forfeiture of 100000 Pounds.

The War went on with great success on the Emperors part, especially after the
Battle of Pavia, in which Francis his Army was totally defeated, and himself
taken Prisoner and carried into Spain. After which the Emperor being much
offended with the Pope for joining with Francis, turned his Arms against him,
which were so successful that he besieged and took Rome, and kept the Pope
prisoner Six Months. May 6. 15^7.


The Cardinal finding the public Interests concur so happily with his private
Distastes, engaged the King to take part with France, and afterward with the
Pope against the Emperor, his Greatness now becoming the Terror of
Christendom; for the Emperor lifted up with his success, began to think of no
less than an Universal Empire. And first, that he might unite all Spain
together, he preferred a Match with Portugal, to that which he had before
Contracted in England; and he thought it not enough to break off his sworn
Alliance with the King, but he did it with an heavy Imputation on the Lady
Mary: for in his Council it was said that she was illegitimate, as being born
in an unlawful Marriage, so that no Advantage could be expected from her Title
to the Succession, as will appear more particularly in the Second Book. And the
Pope having dispensed with the Oath, he Married the Infanta of Portugal.
Besides, though the King of England had gone deep in the Charge, he would give
him no share in the Advantages of the War; much less give him that Assistance
which he had promised him, to recover his Ancient Inheritance in France. The
King being irritated with this manifold ill usage, and led on by his own
Interests, and by the offended Cardinal, joined himself to the Interests of
France. Upon which there followed not only a firm Alliance, but a personal
Friendship, which appeared in all the most obliging expressions that could be
devised. And upon the Kings threatening to make War on the Emperor, the French
King was set at liberty, though on very hard terms, Mar. 18. 1526.
if any thing can be hard that sets a King out of Prison; but he still
acknowledged he owed his Liberty to King Henry.

Then followed the famous Clementine League between the Pope and Francis, the
Venetians, The Clementine League. May. 22. 1526.
the Florentines and Francis Sforza Duke of Milan, by which the Pope absolved
the French King from the Oath he had sworn at Madrid, and they all united
against the Emperor, and declared the King of England Protector of the League.
This gave the Emperor great distaste, who complained of the Pope as an
ungrateful and perfidious person. The first beginning of the storm fell heavy
on the Pope; for the French King, who had a great mind to have his Children
again into his own hands, that lay Hostages in Spain, went on but slowly in
performing his part. And the King of England would not openly break with the
Emperor, but seemed to reserve himself to be Arbiter between the Princes. So
that the Colonna's being of the Imperial Faction, with 3000 men entered Rome,
September. 20*
and sacked a part of it, forcing the Pope to fly into the Castle of St.
Angelo, and to make peace with the Emperor. But as soon as that fear was over,
the Pope returning to his old arts, complained of the Cardinal of Colonna, and
resolved to deprive him of that Dignity, and with an Army entered the Kingdom of
Naples, taking diverse places that belonged to that Family. But the Confederates
coming slowly to his Assistance, and he hearing of great forces that were
coming from Spain against him, submitted himself to the Emperor, and made a
Cessation of Arms; but being again encouraged with some hopes from his Allies,
and (by a Creation of 14 Cardinals for Money, 1527.
) having raised 300000 Ducats he disowned the Treaty, and gave the Kingdom of
Naples to Count Vaudemont, whom he sent with forces to subdue it. But the Duke
of Bourbon prevented him, and went to Rome, and giving the Assault, in which
himself received his mortal wound, the City was taken by Storm, and plundered
for several days, Rome taken and sacked May 16.
about 5000 being killed. The Pope with 17 Cardinals fled to the Castle St.
Angelo, but was forced to render his person, and to pay 400000 Ducats to the
Army.

This gave great offense to all the Princes of Christendom, except the
Lutherans of Germany; but none resented it more loudly than this King, July 11.
who sent over Cardinal Wolsey to make up a new Treaty with Francis, which was
chiefly intended for setting the Pope at Liberty. Nor did the Emperor know well
how to justify an Action which seemed so inconsistent with his Devotion to the Sea of Rome; yet the Pope was for some months detained a Prisoner, till at
length the Emperor having brought him to his own terms, ordered him to be setat
liberty: but he being weary of his Guards escaped in a disguise, and owned his
Liberty to have flowed chiefly from the Kings endeavors to procure it. December.
9.
And thus stood the King as to foreign affairs: he had infinitely obliged both
the Pope and the French King, and was firmly united to them, and engaged in a
War against the Emperor, when he began first to move about his Divorce.

As for Scotland, the near Alliance between him and James the Fourth King of
Scotland, The Kings success against Scotland.
did not take away the standing Animosities between the two Nations, nor
interrupt the Alliance between France and Scotland. And therefore when he made
the first War upon France in the Fourth year of his Reign, the King of Scotland
came with a great Army into the North of England, but was totally defeated by
the Earl of Surrey in Floudon field. Sept. 9. 1513.
The King himself was either killed in the Battle, or soon after; so that the
Kingdom falling under Factions, during the Minority of the new King, the
Government was but feeble, and scarce able to secure its own quiet. And the
Duke of Albany, the chief Instrument of the French Faction, met with such
opposition from the Parties that were raised against him by King Henry's means,
that he could give him no disturbance. And when there came to be a lasting
peace between England and France, then, as the King needed fear no trouble from
that Warlike Nation, so he got a great Interest in the Government there. And at
this time Money becoming a more effectual Engine than any the War had ever
produced, and the discovery of the Indies having brought great wealth into
Europe, Princes began to deal more in that trade than before: so that both
France and England had their Instruments in Scotland, and gave considerable
yearly Pensions to the chief heads of Parties and Families. In the search I
have made, I have found several Warrants for Sums of Money, to be sent into
Scotland, and divided there among the Favorers of the English Interest; and
it is not to be doubted but France traded in the same manner, which continued
till a happier way was found out for extinguishing these Quarrels, both the
Crowns being set on one head.

Having thus showed the State of this Kings Government as to foreign Matters,
His Counsels at home.
I shall next give an account of the Administration of Affairs at home, both as
to Civil and Spiritual Matters. The King upon his first coming to the Crown did
choose a wise Council, partly out of those whom his Father had trusted, partly
out of those that were recommended to him by his Grandmother, the Countess of
Richmond and Derby, in whom was the Right of the House of Lancaster, though she
willingly devolved her pretensions on her Son, claiming nothing to her self,
but the Satisfaction of being Mother to a King. She was a wise and Religious
Woman, 1509.
and died soon after her Grandson came to the Crown. There was a Faction in
the Council between Fox Bishop of Winchester, and the Lord Treasurer, which
could never be well made up, though they were often reconciled: Fox always
complaining of the Lord Treasurer, for squandring away so soon that vast Mass
of Treasure, left by the Kings Father in which the other justified himself,
that what he did, was by the Kings Warrants which he could not disobey: but Fox
objected that he was too easy to answer, if not to procure these Warrants, and
that he ought to have given the King better advice. Ian. 21. 1510.
In the Kings first Parliament things went as he desired upon his delivering up
Empson and Dudley, in which his preventing the severity of the Houses, and
proceeding against them at the Common Law, as it secured his Ministers from an
unwelcome President, so the whole honor of it fell on the Kings justice.

His next Parliament was in the Third year of his Reign, Feb. 4. 1512.
and there was considered the Brief from Pope Julius the Second to the King,
complaining of the Indignities and Injuries done to the Apostolic See and the
Pope by the French King, and entreating the Kings assistance with such cajoling
words as are always to be expected from Popes on the like occasions. It was
first read by the Master of the Rolls in the House of Lords, and then the Lord
Chancellor ( Warham Archbishop of Canterbury) and the Lord Treasurer, with
other Lords, went down to the House of Commons and read it there. Upon this and
other reasons they gave the King subsidies toward the War with France. At this
time Fox, to strengthen his Party against the Lord Treasurer, finding Thomas
Wolsey to be a likely man to get into the Kings favor, Cardinal Wolseys rising.
used all his endeavors to raise him, who was at that time neither unknown nor
inconsiderable, being Lord Almoner; he was at first made a Privy Counselor,
and frequently admitted to the Kings presence, and waited on him over to
France. The King liked him well, which he so managed that he quickly engrossed
the Kings favor to himself, and for 15 years together was the most absolute
Favorite that had ever been seen in England; all foreign Treaties and Places
of Trust at home were at his Ordering; he did what he pleased, and his
Ascendant over the King was such, that there never appeared any Party against
him all that while. The great Artifice by which he insinuated himself so much
on the King, is set down very plainly by one that knew him well, in these
words. In him the King conceived such a loving fancy, especially for that he
was most earnest and readiest in all the Counsel to advance the Kings only will
and pleasure, Cavendish life of Wolsey MSS. in Biblioth. Nob. D.G. Pierpoint.
having no respect to the case; and whereas the Ancient Counselors would
according to the Office of good Counselors, diverse times persuade the King to
have some time a recourse unto the Council, there to hear what was done in
weighty Matters, the King was nothing at all pleased therewith; for he loved
nothing worse than to be constrained to do any thing contrary to his pleasure,
and that knew the Almoner very well, having secret Insinuations of the Kings
Intentions; and so fast as the others Counseled the King to leave his
pleasures, and to attend to his Affairs, so busily did the Almoner persuade him
to the contrary, which delighted him much, and caused him to have the greater
affection and love to the Almoner. Having got into such Power, he observed the
Kings Inclinations exactly, and followed his Interests closely: for though he
made other Princes retain him with great Presents and Pensions, yet he never
engaged the King into any Alliance, but what was for his Advantage. For affairs
at home, after he was established in his Greatness, he affected to Govern
without Parliaments, there being from the Seventh year of his Reign, after
which he got the great Seal, but one Parliament in the 14th and 15th year, and
no more till the One and Twentieth, when matters were turning about: But he
raised great Sums of Money by Loans and Benevolences. And indeed if we look on
him as a Minister of State, he was a very extraordinary Person; but as he was a
Churchman, he was the disgrace of his Profession. He not only served the King
in all his secret pleasures, but was lewd and vicious himself; so that his
having the French Pox (which in those days was a matter of no small infamy) was
so public, that it was brought against him in Parliament when he fell in
disgrace: he was a man of most extravagant vanity, as appears by the great
State he lived in; and to feed that, his Ambition and Covetousness were
proportionable.

October. 1513.
He was first made Bishop of Tourney, when that Town was taken from the French;
then he was made Bishop of Rest. temp. 4. March. 5 Regni 1 part Rot pat.
Lincoln, which was the first Bishopric that fell void in this Kingdom; after
that, upon Cardinal Bembridge his death, he parted with Lincoln and was made
Archbishop of November. 6 Regni, 1. part. R. P.
York; then Hadrian, that was a Cardinal and Bishop of Bath and Wells, being
deprived, that Aug. 28.10. Regni. 1 part. R. P.
See was given to him; then the Abbey of December. 7.13. Regni 3 part. R. P.
St Albans was given to him in Comendam; he next parted with Bath and Wells,
and got the Bishopric of April 30.15. Reg. 2 part. R. P.
Duresm, which he afterward exchanged for the Bishopric of May 4.20. Reg. 1.
part R. P.
Winchester. But besides all that he had in his own hands, the King granted him
a full Power of disposing of all the Ecclesiastical benefices in England (which
brought him in as much money as all the Places he held) for having so vast a
Power committed to him both from the King and the Pope as to
Church-preferments, it may be easily gathered what advantages a man of his
temper would draw from it. Warham was Lord Chancellor the first seven years of
the Kings Reign, but retired to give place to this aspiring favorite, who had
a mind to the great Seal, that there might be no interfering between the
Legantine and Chancery Courts. And perhaps it wrought somewhat on his vanity,
that even after he was Cardinal, Warham as Lord Chancellor took place of him,
as appears from the Entries made in the Journals of the House of Peers in the
Parliament held the 7th year of the Kings Reign, and afterward gave him place,
as appears on many occasions, particularly, in the Letter written to the Pope
1530 set down by the Lord Herbert, which the Cardinal subscribed before Warham.
We have nothing on record to show what a Speaker he was, for all the Journals
of Parliament from the 7th to the 25th year of this King are lost, but it is
like he spoke as his Predecessor in that Office Warham did, whose speeches as
they are entered in the Journals, are Sermons begun with a Text of Scripture;
which he expounded and applied to the business they were to go upon, stuffing
them with the most fulsome flattery of the King that was possible.

The next in favor and Power was the Lord Treasurer restored to his Fathers
honor of Duke of Norfolk, to whom his Son succeeded in that Office as well as
in his hereditary honors; and managed his Interest with the King so
dexterously that he stood in all the Changes that followed, and continued Lord
Treasurer during the Reign of this King, till near the end of it, when he fell
through Jealousy rather than guilt; this showed how dexterous a man he was,
that could stand so long in that employment under such a King.

But the chief Favorite in the Kings pleasures, was Charles Brandon a Gallant
graceful Person, one of the strongest men of the Age, and so a fit match for
the King at his Justs and Tiltings, which was the manly diversion of that time,
and the King taking much pleasure in it, being of a robust Body, and singularly
expert at it, he who was so able to second him in these Courses, grew mightily
in his favor; so that he made him first Viscount Lisle, and some Months after,
Duke of Suffolk. May 15.5^^ Reg. 1. Part. Rot. pat.
Nor was he less in the Ladies favors, than the Kings; for his Sister the Lady
Mary liked him, and being but so long Married to King Lewis of France, as to
make her Queen Dowager of France, she resolved to choose her second Husband her
self, and cast her eye on the Duke of Suffolk, who was then sent over to the
Court of France. Her Brother had designed the Marriage between them, yet would
not openly give his Consent to it; but she by a strange kind of Wooing,
prefixed him the Term of four days to gain her Consent, in which she told him
if he did not prevail, he should for ever lose all his hopes of having her,
though after such a Declaration he was like to meet with no great difficulty
from her. So they were Married, April 1515.
and the King was easily pacified and received them into favor; neither did
his favor die with her, for it continued all his life: but he never meddled
much in business, Lady Mary died Iun. 23. 1533.
and by all that appears was a better Courtier than Statesman. Little needs be
said of any other Person more than will afterward occur.

The King loved to raise mean Persons, and upon the least distaste to throw
them down: and falling into disgrace, he spared not to sacrifice them to
public discontents. His Court was magnificent, and his Expense vast; he
indulged himself in his pleasures: and the hopes of Children (besides the Lady
Mary,) failing by the Queen, he, who of all things desired issue most, kept one
Elizabeth Blunt by whom he had Henry Fitzroy, I^n. 17.18. Reg. Rot. Pa^.
whom in the 17th year of his Reign he created Earl of Nottingham, and the same
day made him Duke of Richmond and Sommerset, Duke Rich. died I^n. 22. ^536.
and intended afterward to have put him in the Succession of the Crown after
his other Children; but his death prevented it.

As for his Parliaments, he took great care to keep a good understanding with
them, and chiefly with the House of Commons, by which means he seldom failed to
carry Matters as he pleased among them: only in the Parliament held in the 14th
and 15th of his Reign, the Demand of the Subsidy toward the War with France,
being so high as 800000 lib. the 5th of men's goods and lands to be paid in Four
years, and the Cardinal being much hated, there was great Opposition made to
it: for which the Cardinal blamed Sir Thomas More much, who was then Speaker of
the House of Commons; and finding that which was offered, was not above the
half of what was asked, went himself to the House of Commons, and desired to
hear the reasons of those who opposed his Demands, that he might answer them:
but he was told the Order of their House was to reason only among themselves,
and so went away much dissatisfied. It was with great difficulty that they
obtained a Subsidy of 3 s. in the lib. to be paid in four years. This
disappointment it seems did so offend the Cardinal, that as no Parliament had
been called for Seven years before, so there was none summoned for Seven years
after. And thus stood the Civil Government of England in the 19th year of the
Kings Reign, when the Matter of the Divorce was first moved. But I shall next
open the State of Affairs in Reference to Religious and Spiritual Concerns.

He was bred a Sc^olar.
King Henry was bred with more care than had been usually bestowed on the
Education of Princes for many Ages, who had been only trained up to those
Exercises that prepared them to War; and if they could read and write, more was
not expected of them. But learning began now to flourish; and as the House of
Medici in Florence had great honor by the Protection it gave to learned men,
so other Princes everywhere cherished the Muses. King Henry the 7th, though
illiterate himself, yet took care to have his Children instructed in good
letters. And it generally passes current that he bred his second Son a Scholar,
having designed him to be Archbishop of Canterbury, but that has no
foundation; for the Writers of that time tell, that his Elder Brother Prince
Arthur was also bred a Scholar. And all the Instruction King Henry had in
Learning, must have been after his Brother was dead, when that Design had
vanished with his life. For he being born the 18th of June 1491. and Prince
Arthur dying the Second of April 1502. he was not full eleven years of Age,
when he became Prince of Wales; at which Age Princes have seldom made any great
progress in Learning. But King Henry the 7th, judging either that it would make
his Sons Greater Princes, and fitter for the Management of their Affairs, or
being jealous of their looking too early into business, or their pretending to
the Crown upon their Mothers Title, which might have been a dangerous
competition to him, that was so little beloved by his Subjects, took this
Method for amusing them with other things: thence it was, that his Son was the
most learned Prince that had been in the World for many Ages, and deserved the
Title Beau-Clerke, on a better account than his Predecessor that long before
had carried it. The Learning then in credit, was either that of the Schools,
about abstruse Questions of Divinity, which from the days of Lombard were
debated and descanted on with much subtlety and nicety, and exercised all
Speculative Divines; or the Study of the Canon Law, which was the way to
Business and Preferment. To the former of these the King was much addicted, and
delighted to read often in Thomas (...); and this made Cardinal Wolsey more
acceptable to him, who was (...) conversant in that sort of Learning. He loved
the purity of the (...) tongue, which made him be so kind to Erasmus that was
the great Res^^^er of it, and to Polidore Virgil; though neither of these made
their Court dexterously with the Cardinal, which did much intercept the King^
favor to them; so that the one left England, and the other was but co^rsly
used in it, who has sufficiently revenged himself upon the Cardinal's Memory.
The Philosophy then in fashion was so intermixed with their Divinity, that the
King understood it too; and was also a good Musician, as appears by two whole
Masses which he composed. He never wrote well, but scrawled so that his hand
was scarce legible.

Being thus inclined to Learning, he was much courted by all hungry Scholars,
who generally over Europe dedicated their Books to him, with such flattering
Epistles, that it very much lessens him, to see how he delighted in such
stuff. For if he had not taken pleasure in it, and rewarded them, it is not
likely that others should have been every year writing after such ill Copies.
Of all things in the World Flattery wrought most on him; and no sort of
Flattery pleased him better than to have his great Learning and Wisdom
commended. And in this, his Parliaments, his Courtiers, his Chaplains,
Foreigners and Natives, all seemed to vie who should exceed most, and came to
speak to him in a Style which was scarce fit to be used to any Creature. But he
designed to entail these praises on his Memory, cherishing Churchmen more than
any King in England had ever done; he also Courted the Pope with a constant
submission, and upon all occasions made the Popes Interests his own, and made
War and Peace as they desired him. So that had he dyed any time before the 19th
year of his Reign, he could scarce have escaped being Canonized, notwithstanding
all his faults; for he abounded in those virtues, which had given Saintship to
Kings for near 1000 years together, and had done more than they all did, by
writing a Book for the Roman Faith.

England had for above 300 years been the tamest part of Christendom to the
Papal Authority, and had been accordingly dealt with. The Kings Prerogative in
Ecclesiastical matters.
But though the Parliaments and two or three high-spirited Kings, had given
some interruption to the cruel exactions and other illegal proceedings of the
Court of Rome, yet that Court always gained their designs in the end. But even
in this Kings days, the Crown was not quite stripped of all its Authority over
Spiritual persons. The Investitures of Bishops and Abbots, which had been
originally given by the delivery of the Pastoral Ring and Staff, by the Kings
of England, were after some opposition wrung out of their hands: yet I find
they retained another thing, which upon the matter was the same. When any See
was vacant, a Writ was issued out of the Chancery for seizing on all the
Temporalties of the Bishopric, Cus^odia Temporalitatis.
and then the King recommended one to the Pope, upon which his Bulls were
expeded at Rome, and so by a Warrant from the Pope he was consecrated, and
invested in the Spiritualties of the Sea; but was to appear before the King
either in Person or by Proxy, and renounce every clause in his Letters and
Bulls, that were or might be prejudicial to the Prerogative of the Crown, or
contrary to the Laws of the Land, and was to swear Fealty and Allegiance to the
King. And after this a new Writ was issued out of the Chancery, bearing that
this was done, and that thereupon the Temporalties should be restored.
R^stitut^o Temporalitatis.
Of this there are so many Precedents in the Records, that every one that has
searched them must needs find them in every year; but when this began, I leave
to the more Learned in the Law to discover. Collect Numb. 15.
And for proof of it the Reader will find in the Collection the fullest Record
which I met with concerning it in Henry the 7th his Reign, of Cardinal Adrian's
being Invested in the Bishopric of Bath and Wells. So that upon the matter the
Kings then disposed of all Bishoprics, keeping that still in their own hands
which made them most desired in those Ages; and so had the Bishops much at
their Dovotion.

But King Henry in a great degree parted with this, by the abovementioned power
granted to Cardinal Wolsey, who being Legate as well as Lord Chancellor, it
was thought a great error in Government, to lodge such a trust with him which
might have past into a Precedent, for other Legates pretending to the same
Power; since the Papal greatness had thus risen, and often upon weaker grounds,
to the height it was then at. Yet the King had no mind to suffer the Laws made
against the suing out of Bulls in the Court of Rome without his leave to be
neglected; License to the Prior of Peterburg. November. 3.1 Part. 5^^ Reg. Rot.
Pat.
for I find several Licenses granted to sue Bulls in that Court, bearing for
their Preamble the Statute of the 16 of Richard the Second against the Popes
pretended Power in England.

But the immunity of Ecclesiastical persons was a thing that occasioned great
complaints. And good cause there was for them. For it was ordinary for persons
after the greatest Crimes to get into Orders; and then not only what was past
must be forgiven them, but they were not to be questioned for any Crime after
holy Orders given, till they were first degraded; and till that was done they
were the Bishops Prisoners. Whereupon there rose a great dispute in the
beginning of this Kings Reign, of which none of our Historians having taken any
Notice, I shall give a full account of it.

King Henry the Seventh in his Fourth Parliament did a little lessen the
Privileges of the Clergy, A Contest about the EcclesiasticalImmunity.

Killways Reports.


enacting that Clerks convicted should be burnt in the hand. But this not
proving a sufficient restraint, it was Enacted in Parliament in the Fourth year
of this King, that all Murderers and Robbers should be denied the benefit of
their Clergy. But though this seemed a very Just Law, yet to make it pass
through the House of Lords, they added two Proviso's to it, the one for
excepting all such as were within the Holy Orders of Bishop, Priest, or Deacon;
the other that the Act should only be in force till the next Parliament. With
these Proviso's it was unanimously assented to by the Lords on the 26 Ian.
1513. and being agreed to by the Commons, the Royal Assent made it a Law:
Pursuant to which many Murderers and Felons were denied their Clergy, and the
Law passed on them to the great Satisfaction of the whole Nation. But this gave
great offense to the Clergy, who had no mind to suffer their Immunities to be
touched or lessened. And judging that if the laity made bold with Inferior
Orders, they would proceed further even against Sacred Orders; therefore as
their Opposition was such that the Act not being continued did determine at the
next Parliament (that was in the 5th year of the King,) so they not satisfied
with that, resolved to fix a censure on that Act as contrary to the Franchises
of the Holy Church. And the Abbot of Winchelcomb being more forward than the
rest, during the session of Parliament in the 7 year of this King's Reign, in a
Sermon at Paul's Cross, said openly, That that Act was contrary to the Law of
God, and to the Liberties of the Holy Church, and that all who assented to it,
as well Spiritual as Temporal Persons, had by so doing incurred the Censures of
the Church. And for Confirmation of his Opinion, he published a Book to prove,
That all Clerks, whether of the greater or lower Orders, were Sacred, and
exempted from all Temporal Punishment by the Secular Judge, even in Criminal
cases. This made great noise, and all the Temporal Lords, with the concurrence
of the House of Commons, desired the King to suppress the growing Insolence of
the Clergy. So there was a hearing of the Matter before the King, with all the
Judges and the Kings Temporal Council. Doctor Standish Guardian of the
Mendicant Friars in London (afterward Bishop of Saint Asaph) the chief of the
Kings Spiritual Council, argued, That by the Law, Clerks had been still
convened and judged in the Kings Court for Civil Crimes, and that there was
nothing either in the Laws of God, or the Church, inconsistent with it; and
that the public good of the Society, which was chiefly driven at by all Laws,
and ought to be preferred to all other things, required that Crimes should be
punished. But the Abbot of Winchelcomb being Counsel for the Clergy, excepted
to this and said, There was a Decree made by the Church expressly to the
contrary, to which all ought to pay Obedience under the pain of Mortal sin; and
that therefore the trying of Clerks in the Civil Courts was a sin in it self.
Standish upon this turned to the King and said, God forbid that all the Decrees
of the Church should bind. It seems the Bishops think not so, for though there
is a Decree that they should reside at their Cathedrals all the Festivals of
the year, yet the greater part of them do it not; Adding, That no Decree could
have any force in England, till it was received there; and That this Decree was
never received in England, but that as well since the making of it, as before,
Clerks had been tried for Crimes in the Civil Courts. To this the Abbot made no
answer, but brought a place of Scripture to prove this Exemption to have come
from our Saviors words, Nolite tangere Christos meos, Touch not mine Anointed;
and therefore Princes ordering Clerks to be arrested and brought before their
Courts, was contrary to Scripture, against which no custom can take place.
Standish replied, these words were never said by our Savior, but were put by
David in his Psalter 1000 years before Christ; and he said these words had no
relation to the Civil Judicatories, but because the greatest part of the World
was then wicked, and but a small number believed the Law, they were a Charge to
the Rest of the World, not to do them harm. But though the Abbot had been very
violent, and confident of his being able to confound all that held the contrary
opinion, yet he made no answer to this. The Laity that were present being
confirmed in their former opinion by hearing the Matter thus argued, moved the
Bishops to order the Abbot to renounce his former opinion, and recant his
Sermon at Paul's Cross. But they flatly refused to do it, and said they were
bound by the Laws of the Holy Church to maintain the Abbots opinion in every
point of it. Great heats followed upon this during the sitting of the
Parliament, of which there is a very partial Entry made in the Journal of the
Lords House; and no wonder, the Clerk of the Parliament Doctor Tylor Doctor of
the Canon Law being at the same time Speaker of the Lower House of Convocation.
Made Clerk October. 29. 1. Reg. Rot. Pat. Part. 1o.

Iournal Procerum 7 H^n. 8. Dissolutum and finitum fait hoc Parliamentum ^2
D^^e. 1515. Iohanne Tylor I^r^s Pontificii Doct. Clerico Parliamentorum Domini
R^gis: and ^^dem tempore Prolocutore Convocationis Cleri quod raro accidit. I^
hoc Parliamento and Convocatione periculosi ^im^ seditiones exort^^ ^ent inter
Cl^^um and Sec^l^r^m p^t^^tatem ^^per libertati^^s Ecclesiasticis, quodam
Fratre Minore, nomine Standish, omniam malorum mini^^ro ac stimulatore.

Hali. and Fox.


The Entry is in these words. In this Parliament and Convocation there were
most dangerous contentions between the Clergy and the Secular Power, about the
Ecclesiastical liberties, one Standish a Minor Friar being the Instrument and
Promoter of all that mischief. But a passage ^ell out, that made this matter be
more fully prosecuted in the Michaelmas-Term. One Richard Hunne a
Merchant-Taylor in London, was questioned by a Clerk in Middlesex for a
Mortuary, pretended to be due for a Child of his that died 5 weeks old. The
Clerk claiming the beering sheet, and Hunne refusing to give it; upon that he
was sued, but his Counsel advised him to sue the Clerk in a Praemunire, for
bringing the Kings Subjects before a foreign Court; the Spiritual Court
sitting by Authority from the Legate. This touched the Clergy so in the quick,
that they used all the Arts they could to fasten Heresy on him; and
understanding that he had Wickliff's Bible, upon that he was attached of
Heresy and put in the Lollards Tower at Paul's, and examined upon some Articles
objected to him by Fitz-Iames then Bishop of London. He denied them as they
were charge^ against him, but acknowledged he had said some words sounding that
way, for which he was sorry, and asked Gods mercy, and submitted himself to the
Bishops Correction; upon which he ought to have been enjoined Penance and set
at Liberty, but he persisting still in his Suit in the Kings Courts, they used
him most cruelly. On the Fourth of December he was found hanged in the Chamber
where he was kept Hunne hanged in Prison.
Prisoner. And Doctor Horsey Chancellor to the ^i^hop of London, with the
other Officers who had the Charge of the Prison, gave it out that he had hanged
himself. But the Coroner of London coming to hold an Inquest on the dead body,
they found him hanging so loose, and in a silk girdle, that they clearly
perceived he was killed; they also found his Neck had been broken, as they
judged, with an Iron chain, for the Skin was all fretted and cut; they saw some
streams of blood about his body, besides several other evidences which made it
clear he had not murdered himself; whereupon they did acquit the dead body, and
laid the Murder on the Officers that had the charge of that Prison: and by
other proofs they found the Bishops Sumner and the Bell-ringer guilty of it,
and by the deposition of the Sumner himself it did appear, that the Chancellor
and he, and the Bell-ringer did Murder him, and then hang him up.

But as the Inquest proceeded in this Trial, the Bishop began a new Process
against the dead body of Richard Hunne, for other points of Heresy; and
several Articles were gathered out of Wickliff's Preface to the Bible with
which he was charged. And his having the Book in his Possession being taken for
good evidence, he was judged an Heretic, and his body delivered to the Secular
Power. When judgment was given, the Bishops of Duresme and Lincoln with many
Doctors both of Divinity and the Canon Law sat with the Bishop of London; so
that it was looked on as an Act of the whole Clergy, and done by common consent.
And his body burned Dec. 20. 1514.
On the 20th of December his body was burnt at Smithfield.

But this produced an effect very different from what was expected, for it was
hoped that he being found an Heretic no body should appear for him any more:
whereas on the contrary, it occasioned a great outcry, the man having lived in
very good reputation among his Neighbors; so that after that day the City of
London was never well affected to the Popish Clergy, but inclined to follow any
body who spoke against them, and every one looked on it, as a Cause of common
concern. All exclaimed against the Cruelty of their Clergy, that for a man's
suing a Clerk according to law, he should be long and hardly used in a severe
imprisonment, and at last cruelly murdered; and all this laid on himself to
defame him, and ruin his family. And then to burn that body which they had so
handled, was thought such a complication of Cruelties, as few Barbarians had
ever been guilty of. The Bishop finding that the Inquest went on, and the whole
matter was discovered, used all possible endeavors to stop their proceedings;
and they were often brought before the Kings Council, where it was pretended
that all proceeded from Malice and Heresy. The Cardinal labored to procure an
order to forbid their going any further, but the thing was both so foul and so
evident that it could not be done: and that opposition made it more generally
believed. In the Parliament there was a Bill sent up to the Lords by the
Commons for restoring Hunne's Children, which was passed, and had the Royal
assent to it; but another Bill being brought in about this Murder it
occasioned great heats among them. The Bishop of London said that Hunne had
hanged himself, that the Inquest were false perjured Caitiffs, and if they
proceeded further he could not keep his house for Heretics; so that the Bill
which was sent up by the Commons was but once read in the House of Lords, April
3.
for the power of the Clergy was great there. But the Trial went on, and both
the Bishops Chancellor and the Summer were endicted as Principals in the
Murder.

The Convocation that was then sitting, finding so great a stir made, and that
all their liberties were now struck at, resolved to call Doctor Standish to an
Account for what he had said and argued in that matter, so he being summoned
before them, some Articles were objected to him by word of mouth, concerning
the judging of Clerks in Civil Courts; and the day following they being put in
writing, the Bill was delivered to him, and a day assigned for him to make
answer. The Doctor perceiving their intention, and judging it would go hard
with him if he were tried before them, went and claimed the Kings Protection,
from this trouble that he was now brought in, for discharging his duty as the
Kings Spiritual Counsel. But the Clergy made their excuse to the King, that
they were not to question him for any thing he had said as the Kings Counsel;
but for some Lectures he read at St Paul's and elsewhere, contrary to the Law of
God, and Liberties of the holy Church which they were bound to maintain; and
desired the Kings Assistance according to his Coronation Oath, and as he would
not incur the Censures of the holy Church. On the other hand the Temporal Lords
and Judges, with the concurrence of the House of Commons, addressed to the
King, to maintain the Temporal Jurisdiction according to his Coronation Oath,
and to protect Standish from the Malice of his enemies.

This put the King in great perplexity, for he had no mind to lose any part of
his Temporal Jurisdiction, and on the other hand was no less apprehensive of
the dangerous effects that might follow on a breach with the Clergy. So he
called for Doctor Veysey, then Dean of his Chapel and afterward Bishop of
Exeter, and charged him upon his Allegiance to declare the truth to him in that
matter: which after some study he did, and said, upon his Faith, Conscience,
and Allegiance, he did think that the convening of Clerks before the secular
Judge, which had been always practiced in England, might well consist with the
Law of God and the true Liberties of the holy Church. This gave the King great
satisfaction; so he commanded all the Judges, and his Council both Spiritual
and Temporal, and some of both Houses, to meet at Blackfriars, and to hear the
matter argued. The Bill against Doctor Standish was read, which consisted of
Six Articles that were objected to him. First, That he had said that the lower
Orders were not sacred. Secondly, That the Exemption of Clerks was not founded
on a divine Right. Thirdly, That the Laity might coerce Clerks when the
Prelates did not their duty. Fourthly, That no positive Ecclesiastical Law
binds any but those who receive it. Fifthly, That the Study of the Canon Law
was needless. Sixthly, That of the whole Volume of the Decretum, so much as a
man could hold in his fist, and no more, did oblige Christians. To these Doctor
Standish answered, that for those things expressed in the Third, the Fifth, and
the Sixth Articles he had never taught them; as for his asserting them at any
time in discourse, as he did not remember it, so he did not much care, whether
he had done it or not. To the First he said, Lesser Orders in one sense are
sacred, and in another they are not sacred. For the Second and Fourth, he
confessed he had taught them, and was ready to justify them. It was objected
by the Clergy, that as by the Law of God, no man could judge his Father, it
being contrary to that Commandment, Honor thy Father: So Churchmen being
Spiritual Fathers, they could not be judged by the Laity who were their
Children. To which he answered, that as that only concluded in favor of
Priests, those in Inferior Orders not being Fathers; so it was a mistake to
say a Judge might not sit upon his Natural Father, for the Judge was by another
Relation above his Natural Father: and though the Commandment is conceived in
general words, yet there are some exceptions to be admitted; as though it be
said, Thou shall not kill, yet in some cases we may lawfully kill, so in the
case of justice a Judge may lawfully sit on his Father.

But Doctor Veysey's Argument was that which took most with all that were
present. He said, it was certain that the Laws of the Church did not bind any
but those who received them. To prove this, he said, that in old times all
secular Priests were Married; but in the days of St. Augustine, the Apostle of
England, there was a Decree made to the contrary, which was received in England
and in many other places, by virtue whereof the Secular Priests in England may
not Marry; but this Law not being universally received, the Greek Church never
judged themselves bound by it, so that to this day the Priests in that Church
have Wives as well as other secular men. If then the Churches of the East not
having received the Law of the Celibate of the Clergy, have never been
condemned by the Church, for not obeying it; then the conveening Clerks having
been always practiced in England, was no sin, notwithstanding the Decree to the
contrary which was never received here. Nor is this to be compared to those
privileges that concern only a Private man's Interest, for the Commonwealth of
the whole Realm was chiefly to be looked at, and to be preferred to all other
things.

When the Matter was thus argued on both sides, all the Judges delivered their
Opinions, in these words. That all those of the Convocation who did award the
Citation against Standish, were in the case of a Praemunire facias; and added
somewhat about the Constitution of the Parliament, which being foreign to my
business, and contrary to a received opinion, I need not mention, but refer the
Reader to Keilway for his Information, if he desires to know more of it: and
thus the Court broke up. But soon after, all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
with many of the House of Commons, and all the Judges and the Kings Council,
were called before the King to Baynards Castle; and in all their presence the
Cardinal kneeled down before the King, and in the name of the Clergy said, That
none of them intended to do any thing that might derogate from his Prerogative,
and least of all himself, who owed his advancement only to the Kings favor.
But this matter of Conveening of Clerks, did seem to them all to be contrary to
the Laws of God, and the Liberties of the Church, which they were bound by
their Oaths to maintain according to their Power. Therefore in their name he
humbly begged, That the King to avoid the Censures of the Church, would refer
the Matter to the decision of the Pope and his Council, at the Court of Rome.
To which the King answered, It seems to us that Doctor Standish, and others of
our Spiritual Council, have answered you fully in all points. The Bishop of
Winchester replied, Sir, I warrant you Doctor Standish will not abide by his
Opinion at his peril. But the Doctor said, what should one poor Friar do
alone, against all the Bishops and Clergy of England? After a short silence the
Archbishop of Canterbury said, That in former times diverse holy Fathers of the
Church had opposed the execution of that Law, and some of them suffered
Martyrdom in the Quarrel. To whom Fineux Lord Chief Justice said, That many
holy Kings had mantained that Law, and many holy Fathers had given Obedience to
it, which it is not to be presumed they would have done, had they known it to
be contrary to the Law of God: and he desired to know by what Law Bishops could
judge Clerks for Felony, it being a thing only determined by the Temporal Law;
so that either it was not at all to be tried, or it was only in the Temporal
Court; so that either Clerks must do as they please, or be tried in the Civil
Courts. To this no Answer being made, the King said these words: By the
Permission and Ordinance of God we are King of England, and the Kings of
England in times past had never any Superior, but God only. Therefore know you
well that we will maintain the Right of our Crown, and of our Temporal
Jurisdiction as well in this, as in all other points, in as ample manner as any
of our Progenitors have done before our time. And as for your Decrees we are
well assured that you of the Spirituality go expressly against the words of
diverse of them, as has been showed you by some of our Council; and you
interpret your Decrees at your pleasure, but we will not agree to them more
than our Progenitors have done in former times. But the Archbishop of
Canterbury made most humble Instance, that the Matter might be so long
respited, till they could get a Resolution from the Court of Rome, which they
should procure at their own Charges; and if it did consist with the Law of God,
they should conform themselves to the Law of the Land. To this the King made no
answer: but the Warrants being out against Doctor Horsey the Bishop of London's
Chancellor, he did abscond in the Archbishops house; though it was pretended
he was a Prisoner there, till afterward a temper was found, that Horsey should
render himself a Prisoner in the Kings Bench and be tried. But the Bishop of
London made earnest Applications to the Cardinal that he would move the King to
command the Attourney-General to confess the Indictment was not true, that it
might not be referred to a Jury; since he said the Citizens of London did so
favor Heresy, that if he were as Innocent as Abel they would find any Clerk
guilty. The King not willing to irritate the Clergy too much, and judging he
had maintained his Prerogative by bringing Horsey to the Bar, ordered the
Attorney to do so. And accordingly when Horsey was brought to the Bar and
Endited of Murder, he pleaded Not guilty; which the Attorney acknowledging, he
was dismissed, and went and lived at Exeter, and never again came back to
London, either out of fear or shame. And for Doctor Standish, upon the Kings
Command, he was also dismissed out of the Court of Convocation.

It does not appear that the Pope thought fit to interpose in this Matter. For
though upon less Provocations, Popes had proceeded to the highest Censures
against Princes, yet this King was otherwise so necessary to the Pope at this
time, that he was not to be offended. The Clergy suffered much in this
business, besides the loss of their reputation with the people, who involved
them all in the guilt of Hunne's Murder; for now their Exemption being well
examined, was found to have no foundation at all, but in their own Decrees; and
few were much convinced by that authority, since upon the matter it was but a
judgment of their own, in their own favors: nor was the City of London at all
satisfied with the Proceedings in the Kings Bench, since there was no justice
done; and all thought the King seemed more careful to maintain his Prerogative
than to do Justice.

This I have related the more fully, because it seems to have had great
Influence on peoples minds, and to have disposed them much to the Changes that
followed afterward. How these things were entered in the Books of Convocation,
cannot be now known. For among the other sad losses sustained in the late
burning of London, this was one, that almost all the Registers of the Spiritual
Courts were burnt, some few of the Archbishops of Canterbury and Bishops of
London's Registers being only preserved. But having compared Fox his Account of
this and some other matters, and finding it exactly according to the Registers
that are preserved, I shall the more confidently build, on what he published
from those Records that are now lost.

The King obliged the Popes highly, and was much cour^ed by them.
This was the only thing in the first 18 years of the Kings Reign that seemed to
lessen the Greatness of the Clergy, but in all other matters he was a most
faithful Son of the Sea of Rome. Pope Julius soon after his coming to the
Crown, sent him a Golden Rose with a Letter to Archbishop Warham to deliver
it, Collect. Numb. 2 d.
and though such Presents might seem fitter for young Children, than for men of
discretion; yet the King was much delighted with it: and to show his Gratitude,
Treaty-Rolls 3 Reg.
there was a Treaty concluded the year following between the King and Ferdinand
of Arragon, for the Defense of the Papacy against the French King. And when in
opposition to the Council, that the French King and some other Princes and
Cardinals had called, first to Pisa (which was afterward translated to Milan,
and then to Lions, that summoned the Pope to appear before them, 19 April 1512.
and suspended his Authority) Pope Julius called another Council to be held in
the Lateran; the King sent the Bishops of Worcester and Rochester, the Prior of
St. John's and the Abbot of Winchelcomb to sit in that Council, in which there
was such a Representative of the Catholic Church as had been for several of
the latter Ages in the Western Church: in which a few Bishops packt out of
several Kingdoms, and many Italian Bishops, with a vast number of Abbots,
Priors, and other Inferior Digni^^ed Clergymen, were brought to Confirm
together whatever the Popes had a mind to Enact; which passing easily among
them, was sent over the world with a stamp of Sacred Authority, as the Decrees
and Decisions of the Holy Universal Church assembled in a General Council.

Nor was there a worse understanding between this King and Pope Leo the 10 th.
that succeeded Julius, who did also complement him with those Papal Presents of
Roses, and at his desire made Wolsey a Cardinal; and above all other things
obliged him by conferring on him the Title of Defender of the Faith, 1521.
October 11.
(upon the presenting to the Pope his Book against Luther) in a pompous Letter
Signed by the Pope, and 27 Cardinals, in which the King took great pleasure;
affecting it always beyond all his other Titles, L. Herbert.
though several of the former Kings of England had carried the same Title, as
Spelman informs us. So easy a thing it was for Popes to oblige Princes in
those days, when a Title or a Rose was thought a sufficient Recompense for the
greatest Services.

The Cardinal Governing all Temporal Affairs as he did, it is not to be doubted
but his Authority was absolute in Ecclesiastical Matters, which seemed
naturally to lie within his Province; yet Warham made some opposition to him,
and complained to the King of his encroaching too much in his Legantine Courts,
upon his Jurisdiction; and the things being clearly made out, the King chid the
Cardinal sharply for it, who ever after that hated Warham in his heart, yet he
proceeded more warily for the future.

But the Cardinal drew the hatred of the Clergy upon himself, A Bull for
Reforming the Clergy.

10 June 1519. L. Herbert, and Article 29. of his Impeachment.


chiefly by a Bull which he obtained from Rome, giving him Authority to visit
all Monasteries, and all the Clergy of England, and to dispense with all the
Laws of the Church for one whole year after the date of the Bull. The power
that was lodged in him by this Bull was not more invidious, than the words in
which it was conceived were offensive; for the Preamble of it was full of
severe Reflections against the Manners and Ignorance of the Clergy, who are
said in it to have been delivered over to a Reprobate mind. This, as it was a
public De^aming them, so how true soever it might be, all thought it did not
become the Cardinal, whose Vices were notorious and scandalous, to tax others
whose faults were neither so great, nor so eminent as his were.

The Cardinal's Pride. Polydore Virgil
He did also affect a Magnificence and Greatness, not only in his Habit (being
the first Clergyman in England that wore Silks) but in his Family, his Train,
and other pieces of State, equal to that of Kings. And even in performing
Divine Offices, and saying Mass, he did it with the same Ceremonies that the
Popes use; who judge themselves so nearly related to God, that those humble acts
of Adoration, which are Devotions in other persons, would abase them too much.
He had not only Bishops and Abbots to serve him, but even Dukes and Earls to
give him the Water and the Towel. He had certainly a vast mind; and he saw the
corruptions of the Clergy gave so great Scandal, and their Ignorance was so
profound, that unless some effectual ways were taken for correcting these, they
must needs fall into great disesteem with the People: For though he took great
liberties himself, and perhaps according to the Maxim of the Canonists, he
judged Cardinals as Princes of the Church were not comprehended within ordinary
Ecclesiastical Laws; He designs a Reformation
yet he seemed to have designed the Reformation of the Inferior Clergy by all
the means he could think of, except the giving them a good Example: Therefore
he intended to visit all the Monasteries of England, that so discovering their
corruptions, he might the better justify the design he had to suppress most of
them, and convert them into Bishoprics, Cathedrals, Collegiate Churches and
Colleges: For which end he procured the Bull from Rome: but he was diverted
from making any use of it; by some who advised him rather to suppress
Monasteries by the Popes Authority, And a Suppression of Monasteries.
than proceed in a Method which would raise great hatred against himself, cast
foul aspersions on Religious Orders, and give the Enemies of the Church great
advantages against it. Yet he had communicated his design to the King; and his
Secretary Cromwell understanding it, was thereby instructed how to proceed
afterward when they went about the total suppression of the Monasteries.

The Summoning of Convocations he assumed by virtue of his Legantine Power. The
Calling of Convocations.
Of these there were two sorts, the first were called by the King; for with the
Writs for a Parliament there went out always a Summons to the Two Archbishops
for calling a Convocation of their Provinces, Collect. Numb. 3 d.
the Style of which will be found in the Collection. It differs in nothing from
what is now in use, but that the King did not prefix the day: requiring them
only to be Summoned to meet with all convenient speed; and the Archbishops,
having the King's pleasure signified to them, did in their Writs prefix the
day. Other Convocations were called by the Archbishops in their several
Provinces upon great Emergencies to meet and treat of things relating to the
Church, and were Provincial Councils. Of this I find but one, and that called
by Warham in the first year of this King, Collect. Numb. 4 th.
for restoring the Ecclesiastical Immunities that had been very much impaired,
as will appear by the Writ of Summons. But the Cardinal did now, as Legate,
issue out Writs for Convocations. Regist. Tonst. Fol. 33, 34.
In the year 1522. I find by the Register there was a Writ issued from the King
to Warham to call one, who upon that Summoned it to meet at St. Paul's the 20
th. of April. But the Cardinal prevailed so far with the King, that on the 2 d.
of May after, he by his Legantine Authority dissolved that Convocation; and
issued out a Writ to Tonstall Bishop of London to bring the Clergy of
Canterbury to St. Peter's in Westminster, there to meet and reform Abuses in
the Church; and consider of other important Matters that should be proposed to
them. What they did toward Reformation, I know not, the Records being lost:
But as to the Kings Supply, it was proposed, That they should give the King the
half of the full value of their Livings for one year, to be paid in Five years.
The Cardinal laid out to them how much the King had merited from the Church,
both by suppressing the Schism that was like to have been in the Papacy in Pope
Julius his time, and by Protecting the Sea of Rome from the French Tyranny;
but most of all, for that excellent Book written by him in Defense of the Faith
against the Heretics: and that therefore, since the French King was making War
upon him, and had sent over the Duke of Albany to Scotland to make War also on
that side, it was fit that on so great an occasion, it should appear that his
Clergy were sensible of their Happiness in having such a King; which they ought
to express in granting somewhat, that was as much beyond all former Presidents,
as the King had merited more from them than all former Kings had ever done.

But the Bishops of Winchester and Rochester opposed this: For they both hated
the Cardinal. The one thought him ungrateful to him who had raised him: The
other being a man of a strict Life hated him for his Vices. Both these spoke
against it as an unheard of Tax, which would so oppress the Clergy, that it
would not be possible for them to live and pay it; and that this would become a
Precedent for aftertimes, which would make the condition of the Clergy most
miserable. But the Cardinal, who intended that the Convocation by a great
Subsidy should lead the way to the Parliament, took much pains for carrying it
thorough; and got some to be absent, and others were prevailed on to consent to
it: And for the fear of its being made a Precedent, a Clause was put in the
Act, That it should be no Precedent for aftertimes. Others laughed at this,
and said, It would be a Precedent for all that, if it once passed. But in the
end it was granted, with a most glorious Preamble; Collect. Numb. 5th.
and by it all the Natives of England that had any Ecclesiastical Benefice were
to pay the full half of the true value of their Livings in Five years; and all
Foreigners who were Beneficed in England were to pay a whole years Rent in the
same time: out of which number were excepted the Bishops of Worcester and
Landaffe, Polidore Virgil, Peter the Carmelite, Erasmus of Roterdam, Silvester
Darius, and Peter Vannes, who were to pay only as Natives did. This increased
the hatred that the Clergy bore the Cardinal. But he despised them, and in
particular was a great Enemy to the Monks, and looked on them as idle mouths
that did neither the Church nor State any Service, but were through their
scandalous Lives a reproach to the Church, and a burden to the State. Therefore
he resolved to suppress a great number of them, and to change them to another
Institution.

From the days of King Edgar the State of Monkery had been still growing in
England. For most of the Secular Clergy being then Married, Of the State of the
Monasteries.
and refusing to put away their Wives, were by Dunstan Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Ethelwald Bishop of Winchester, and Oswald Bishop of Worcester,
who were all Monks, turned out of their Livings. There is in the Rolls an
Inspeximus of King Edgars, Rot. Pat. 11. Hen. 8. Part. 1.
Erecting the Priory and Convent of Worcester, which bears date Anno 964.
Edgari 6to. on St. Innocents-day, Signed by the King, the Queen, Two
Archbishops, Five Bishops, Six Abbots, (but neither Bishopric nor Abbey are
named) Six Dukes, and Five Knights, but there is no Seal to it. It bears, that
the King, with the Council and Consent of his Princes and Gentry, did Confirm
and Establish that Priory; and that he had Erected 47 Monasteries, which he
intended to increase to 50. the number of Jubilee; and that the former
Incumbents should be for ever excluded from all pretensions to their Benefices,
because they had rather chosen, with the danger of their Order, and the
prejudice of the Ecclesiastical Benefice, to adhere to their Wives, than to
serve God Chastely and Canonically.

The Monks being thus settled in most Cathedrals of England, gave themselves up
to Idleness and Pleasure, which had been long complained of; but now that
Learning began to be restored, they being everywhere possessed of the best
Church-Benefices, were looked upon by all Learned-men with an evil eye, as
having in their hands the chief encouragements of Learning, and yet doing
nothing toward it; they on the contrary decrying and disparaging it all they
could, saying, It would bring in Heresy, and a great deal of mischief. And the
Restorers of Learning, such as Erasmus, Vives, and others, did not spare them,
but did expose their Ignorance and ill Manners to the world.

Now the King naturally loved Learning, and therefore the Cardinal, either to
do a thing which he knew would be acceptable to the King, or that it was also
agreeable to his own Inclinations, resolved to set up some Colleges, The
Cardinal's Colleges
in which there should be both great Encouragements for eminent Scholars to
prosecute their Studies, and good Schools for teaching and training up of
Youth. This he knew would be a great honor to him, to be looked upon as a
Patron of Learning; and therefore he set his heart much on it, to have Two
Colleges (the one at Oxford, the other at Ipswich, the place of his Birth)
well constituted, and nobly Endowed. But toward this, it was necessary to
suppress some Monasteries, which was thought every-whit as justifiable and
lawful, as it had been many Ages before, to change Secular Prebends into Canons
Regular; the endowed Goods being still applied to a Religious use. And it was
thought hard to say, That if the Pope had the absolute Power of dispensing the
Spiritual Treasure of the Church, and to translate the Merits of one man, and
apply them to another; that he had not a much more absolute Power over the
Temporal Treasure of the Church, to translate Church Lands from one use, and
apply them to another. And indeed the Cardinal was then so much considered at
Rome, as a Pope of another world; that whatever he desired he easily obtained.
Therefore on the 3 d. of April 1524. Pope Clement by a Bull gave him Authority
to suppress the Monastery of St. Frediswood in Oxford, and in the Diocese of
Lincoln, and to carry the Monks elsewhere, The Bull and Royal Assent, 14. Reg.
2. Part. Rot. Pat.
with a very full non obstante. To this the King gave his assent the 19 th. of
April following. After this there followed many other Bulls for other Religious
Houses and Rectories that were Impropriated. These Houses being thus suppressed
by the Law, they belonged to the King; who thereupon made them over to the
Cardinal by new and special Grants, which are all Enrolled. And so he went on
with these great Foundations, and brought them to Perfection: That at Oxford in
the 18 th. year, and that at Ipswich in the 20 th. year of the Kings Reign, as
appears by the Dates of the Kings Patents for Founding them.

In the last Place I come to show the new opinions in Religion, or those that
were accounted new then in England; and the State and Progress of them till the
19th year of the Kings Reign.

From the days of Wickliffe, The First beginning of Reformation in England.
there were many that disliked most of the received Doctrines, in several parts
of the Nation. The Clergy were at that time very hateful to the people; for as
the Pope did exact heavily on them, so they being oppressed took all means
possible to make the people repay what the Popes wrested from them. Wickliffe
being much encouraged and supported by the Duke of Lancaster, and the Lord
Piercy, the Bishops could not proceed against him till the Duke of Lancaster
was put from the King, and then he was condemned at Oxford. Many opinions are
charged upon him, but whether he held them or not, we know not, but by the
Testimonies of his Enemies, who write of him with so much passion, that it
discredits all they say; yet he dyed in peace, though his body was afterward
burnt. He translated the Bible out of Latin into English, with a long Preface
before it, in which he reflected severely on the corruptions of the Clergy, and
condemned the Worshipping of Saints and Images, and denied the corporal
Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, and exhorted all people to the Study
of the Scriptures. His Bible with this Preface was well received by a great
many, who were led into these Opinions, rather by the Impressions which common
sense and plain Reason made on them, than by any deep Speculation or Study. For
the followers of this Doctrine were illiterate and ignorant men: some few
Clerks joined to them, but they formed not themselves into any body or
association; and were scattered over the Kingdom, holding these Opinions in
private without making any public Profession of them: Generally they were
known by their disparaging the superstitious Clergy, whose Corruptions were
then so notorious, and their Cruelty so enraged, that no wonder the people were
deeply prejudiced against them. Nor were the methods they used likely to
prevail much upon them, being severe and cruel.

In the Primitive Church, though in their Councils they were not backward to
pass Anathematisms on every thing that they judged Heresy; The Cruelties of
the Church of Rome.
yet all Capital proceedings against Heretics were condemned; and when two
Bishops did prosecute Priscillian, and his followers before the Emperor
Maximus, upon which they were put to death, they were generally so blamed for
it, that many refused to hold Communion with them. The Roman Emperors made many
Laws against Heretics, for the fining and banishing of them, and secluded them
from the Privileges of other Subjects; such as making Wills, or receiving
Legacies; only the Manichees (who were a strange mixture between Heathenism and
Christianity) were to suffer death for their errors. Yet the Bishops in those
days, particularly in Africa, doubted much, whether upon the Insolences of
Heretics, or Schismatics, they might desire the Emperor to execute those Laws
for Fining, Banishing, and other restraints. And St. Austin was not easily
prevailed on to consent to it. But at length the Donatists were so intolerable,
that after several Consultations about it, they were forced to consent to those
inferior penalties, but still condemned the taking away of their lives. And
even in the Execution of the Imperial Laws in those inferior punishments, they
were always interposing, to moderate the severity of the Prefects and
Governors. The first Instance of severity on men's bodies that was not censured
by the Church, was in the Fifth Century under Iustine the first, who Ordered
the tongue of Severus (who had been Patriarch of Antioch, but did daily
Anathematise the Council of Chalcedon) to be cut out. In the Eighth Century
Justinian the 2d (called Rhinotmetus from his cropped nose) burnt all the
Manichees in Armenia: And in the end of the Eleventh Century the Bogomili were
condemned to be burnt by the Patriarch and Council of Constantinople. But in
the end of the 12, and in the beginning of the 13th Century, a Company of
Simple and Innocent persons in the Southern parts of France, being disgusted
with the Corruptions both of the Popish Clergy and of the public Worship,
separated from their Assemblies; and then Dominick and his brethren-Preachers,
who came among them to convince them, finding their Preaching did not prevail,
betook themselves to that way, that was sure to silence them. They persuaded
the Civil Magistrates to burn all such as were judged Obstinate Heretics. That
they might do this by a Law, the Fourth Council of Lateran did Decree, that all
Heretics should be delivered to the Secular Power to be extirpated; (they
thought not fit to speak out, but by the Practice it was known that Burning was
that which they meant;) and if they did it not, they were to be Excommunicated;
and after that, if they still refused to do their duty, (which was upon the
matter to be the Inquisitors Hangmen) they were to deny it at their utmost
Perils. For not only the Ecclesiastical Censures, but Anathema's were thought
too feeble a punishment for this Omission. Therefore a Censure was found out,
as severe upon the Prince, as Burning was to the poor Heretic. He was to be
deposed by the Pope, his Subjects to be absolved from their Oaths of
Allegiance, and his Dominions to be given away, to any other faithful Son of
the Church, such as pleased the Pope best and all this by the Authority of a
Synod, that passed for a Holy General Council. This as it was fatal to the
Counts of Toulouse, who were great Princes in the South of France, and first
fell under the Censures; so it was terrible to all other Princes, who
thereupon, to save themselves delivered up their Subjects to the Mercy of the
Ecclesiastical Courts.

Fitz-Herbert, de Not. Brevi^^.
Burning was the death they made choice of, because Witches, Vizards, and
Sodomites had been so executed. Therefore to make Heresy appear a terrible
thing, this was thought the most proper punishment of it. It had also a
resemblance of everlasting Burning, to which they adjudged their Souls, as well
as their bodies were condemned to the ^ire; but with this signal difference,
that they could find no such effectual way to oblige God to execute their
sentence, as they contrived against the Civil Magistrate. But however they
confidently gave it out, that by virtue of that Promise of our Saviors, Whose
sins ye bind on Earth, they are bound in Heaven, their Decrees were ratified in
Heaven. And it not being easy to disprove what they said, people believed the
one, as they saw the other Sentence executed. So that whatever they condemned
as Heresy, was looked on as the worst thing in in the world.

There was no occasion for the execution of this Law in England, till the days
of Wickliffe. And the favor he had from some great men stopped the Proceedings
against him. The Laws of England against Heretics.
But in the 5th year of King Richard the Second, a Bill passed in the House of
Lords, and was assented to by the King, and published for an Act of Parliament,
though the Bill was never sent to the House of Commons. By this pretended Law
it appears, Wickliff's followers were then very numerous; that they had a
certain habit, and did Preach in many places, both in Churches, Under Rich. the
2d.
Churchyards and Markets, without License from the Ordinary; and did preach
several Doctrines both against the Faith, and the Laws of the Land, as had been
proved before the Archbishop of Canterbury, the other Bishops, Prelates,
Doctors of Divinity, and of the Civil and Canon Law, and others of the Clergy:
That they would not submit to the admonitions, nor Censures of the Church; but
by their subtle ingenious words, did draw the people to follow them and defend
them by strong hand, and in great routs. Therefore it was Ordained, that upon
the Bishops certifying into the Chancery the names of such Preachers and their
Abettors, the Chancellor should issue forth Commissions to the Sheriffs and
others the Kings Ministers, to hold them in Arrest and strong Prison till they
should justify them according to the Law and reason of Holy Church. From the
gentleness of which law it may appear, that England was not then so tame as to
bear the severity of those cruel laws which were settled and put in execution in
other Kingdoms.

The Custom at that time was to engross Copies of all the Acts of Parliament,
Cook's Institutes 3. part. chap. 5. of Heresy.
and to send them with a Writ under the great Seal to the Sheriffs, to make
them be proclaimed within their jurisdictions. And John Braibrook Bishop of
London, then Lord Chancellor, sent this with the other Acts of that Parliament
to be proclaimed. The Writ bears date the 26th of May, 5to Reg. But in the next
Parliament that was held in the 6th year of that Kings Reign, 6to Rich. 2. 1
Part. Numb. 52. Rot. parl.
the Commons preferred a Bill reciting the former Act, and constantly affirmed
that they had never assented to it, and therefore desired it might be declared
to be void; for they Protested it was never their intent to be Justified, and
to bind themselves and their Successors to the Prelates, more than their
Ancestors had done in times past. To which the King gave the Royal Assent, as
it is in the Records of Parliament. But in the Proclamation of the Acts of that
Parliament this Act was suppressed; so that the former Act was still looked on
as a good law, and is Printed in the Book of Statutes. Such pious frauds were
always practiced by the Popish Clergy, and were indeed necessary for the
supporting the Credit of that Church. When Richard the 2d was deposed and the
Crown usurped by Henry the 4th, then he in gratitude to the Clergy that
assisted him in his coming to the Crown, Another Law under King Henry the 4th.
granted them a law to their hearts content in the 2 d. year of his Reign. The
Preamble bears, That some had a new Faith about the Sacraments of the Church,
and the Authority of the same; and did Preach without Authority, gathered
Conventicles, taught Schools, wrote Books against the Catholic Faith; with
many other heinous aggravations. Upon which the Prelates and Clergy, and the
Commons of the Realm prayed the King to provide a sufficient remedy to so great
an evil. Therefore the King by the assent of the States, and other discreet men
of the Realm being in the said Parliament, did Ordain, That none should Preach
without License, except persons Privileged; That none should Preach any
Doctrine contrary to the Catholic Faith, or the Determination of the Holy
Church, and that none should favor and abett them, nor keep their Books, but
deliver them to the Diocesan of the place within 40 days after the Proclamation
of that Statute. And that if any Persons were defamed, or suspected of doing
against that Ordinance, then the Ordinary might Arrest them, and keep them in
his Prison, till they were Canonically purged of the Articles laid against
them, or did abjure them according to the Laws of the Church. Provided always
that the proceedings against them were publicly and judicially done and ended,
within three Months after they had been so Arrested; and if they were Convict,
the Diocesan, or his Commissaries, might keep them in Prison as long as to his
discretion shall seem expedient, and might Fine them as should seem competent
to him, certifying the Fine into the Kings Exchequer; and if any being Convict
did refuse to abjure, or after Abjuration did fall into Relapse, then he was to
be left to the Secular Court according to the Holy Canons. And the Majors,
Sheriffs, or Bailiffs were to be personally present at the passing the
Sentence, when they should be required by the Diocesan, or his Commissaries,
and after the Sentence they were to receive them, and them before the People in
a high place do to be Brent. By this Statute the Sheriffs, or other Officers,
were immediately to proceed to the Burning of Heretics without any Writ, or
Warrant from the King. But it seems the Kings Learned Council advised him to
issue out a Writ, De Haeretico comburendo, upon what grounds of Law I cannot
tell. For in the same year when William Sartre (who was the first that was put
to death upon the account of Heresy) was judged Relapse by Thomas Arundel,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Fitz Herbert's Natura Brevium.
in a Convocation of his Province, and thereupon was degraded from Priesthood,
and left to Secular Power; a Writ was issued out to Burn him, which in the Writ
is called, The Customary Punishment (relating it as like to the Customs that
were beyond Sea.) But this Writ was not necessary by the Law, and therefore it
seems these Writs were not Enrolled. For in the whole Reign of King Henry the 8
th. I have not been able to find any of these Writs in the Rolls. But by
Warham's Register I see the Common course of the Law, was to certify into the
Chancery the Conviction of an Heretic, upon which the Writ was issued out, if
the King did not send a Pardon. Thus it went on all the Reign of Henry the 4
th. But in the beginning of his Sons Reign, there was a Conspiracy (as was
pretended) by Sir John Oldcastle, and some others against the King and the
Clergy; upon which many were put in Prison, and 29 were both attainted of
Treason, and condemned of Heresy, so they were both Hanged and Burnt. But as a
Writer that lived in the following Age, says, Certain affirmed that these were
but feigned causes, Hall.
surmised of the Spiritualty more of displeasure than truth. That Conspiracy,
whether real or pretended, produced a severe Act against those Heretics, who
were then best known by the name of Lollards. By which Act all Officers of
State, Judges, Justices of the Peace, Majors, Sheriffs and Bailiffs, were to be
Sworn when they took their Employments, to use their whole Power and Diligence
to destroy all Heresies and Errors, called Lollardies, and to assist the
Ordinaries and their Commissaries in their proceedings against them; and that
the Lollards should forfeit all the Lands they held in Fee-Simple, and their
Goods and Chattels to the King.

The Clergy, according to the Genius of that Religion, having their Authority
fortified with such severe Laws, were now more cruel and insolent than ever.
And if any man denied them any part of that respect, or of those advantages to
which they pretended, he was presently brought under the suspicion of Heresy,
and vexed with Imprisonments, and Articles were brought against him.

Upon which great complaints followed. And the Judges to correct this, granted
Habeas Corpus upon their Imprisonments, and examined the Warrants, and either
Bailed, or Discharged the Prisoners as they saw cause: For though the Decrees
of the Church had made many things Heresy, so that the Clergy had much matter
to work upon; yet when Offenders against them in other things could not be
charged with any formal Heresy, then by consequences they studied to fasten it
on them, but were sometimes overruled by the Judges. Thus, 5th. year of Edw.
4th.
when one Keyser (who was Excommunicated by Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of
Canterbury, at the Suit of another) said openly, that That Sentence was not to
be feared; for though the Archbishop, or his Commissary had Excommunicated
him, yet he was not Excommunicated before God; he was upon this Committed by
the Archbishop's Warrant, as one justly suspected of Heresy: but the Judges
upon his moving for an Habeas Corpus, granted it; and the Prisoner being
brought to the Bar, with the Warrant for his Imprisonment, they found the
matter contained in it was not within the Statute, and first Bailed him, and
after that they Discharged him. One Warner of London, having said, That he was
not bound to pay Tithes to his Curate, was also imprisoned by Edward Vaughan,
at the command of the Bishop of London; but he escaped out of Prison, and
brought his Action of false Imprisonment against Vaughan. Whereupon Vaughan
pleading the Statute of Henry the 4 th. and that his Opinion was an Heresy
against the Determination of the Catholic Faith; the Court of the Common Pleas
judged, That the words were not within the Statute, and that his Opinion was an
Error, but no Heresy. So that the Judges looking on themselves as the
Interpreters of the Law, thought, That even in the case of Heresy, they had
Authority to declare, what was Heresy by the Law, and what not: But what
opposition the Clergy made to this, I do not know.

I hope the Reader will easily excuse this Digression, it being so material to
the History that is to follow. I shall next set down what I find in the Records
about the proceedings against Heretics in the beginning of this Reign.

On the 2 d. of May in the year, 1611. Six Men and Four Women, Warham's
Proceedings against Heretics.

Regist. Warham, Fol. 164.


most of them being of Tenterden, appeared before Archbishop Warham, in his
Manor of Knall, and abjured the following Errors. 1 st. That in the Sacrament
of the Altar is not the Body of Christ, but Material Bread. 2 dly. That the
Sacraments of Baptism, and Confirmation, are not necessary, nor profitable for
men's Souls. 3 dly. That Confession of Sins ought not to be made to a Priest. 4
thly. That there is no more Power given by God to a Priest than to a Layman. 5
thly. That the Solemnization of Matrimony is not profitable, nor necessary for
the well of man's Soul. 6 thly. That the Sacrament of Extreme Unction is not
profitable, nor necessary for man's Soul. 7 thly. That Pilgrimages to holy and
devout Places be not profitable, neither Meritorious for man's Soul. 8 thly.
That Images of Saints be not to be worshipped. 9 thly. That a man should pray
to no Saint, but only to God. 10 thly. That holy water and holy bread be not
the better after the Benediction made by the Priest, than before. And as they
abjured these Opinions, so they were made to Swear, That they should discover
all whom they knew to hold these Errors, or who were suspected of them, or that
did keep any private Conventicles, or were Fautors, or Comforters of them that
published such Doctrins. Two other men of Tenterden did that day in the
Afternoon abjure most of these Opinions. The Court sat again the 5 th. of May,
and the Archbishop enjoined them Penance, to wear the Badg of a Faggot in
Flames on their Clothes during their lives, or till they were dispensed with
for it; and that in the Procession both at the Cathedral of Canterbury, and at
their own Parish Churches they should carry a Faggot on their shoulders: which
was looked on as a public Confession that they deserved Burning.

That same day another of Tenterdon abjured the same Doctrines. On the 15 th.
of May the Court sat at Lambeth, where 4 Men and one Woman abjured. On the 19
th. Four Men more abjured. On the 3 d. of June a Man and a Woman abjured.
Another Woman the 26 th. of July: Another Man the 29 th. of July: Two Women on
the 2 d. of August: A Man on the 3 d. and a Woman on the 8 th. of August: Three
Men on the 16 th. of August: And three Men and a Woman on the 3 d. of Sept. In
these Abjurations some were put to abjure more, some fewer of the former
Doctrines; and in some of their Abjurations Two Articles more were added, 1 st.
That the Images of the Crucifix, of our Lady and other Saints, ought not to be
worshipped, because they were made with men's hands, and were but Stocks and
Stones. 2 dly. That Money and Labor spent in Pilgrimages was all in vain. All
these Persons (whether they were unjustly accused, or were overcome with fear,
or had but crude conceptions of those Opinions, and so were easily frighted out
of them) abjured and performed the Penance that was enjoined them. Others met
with harder measure, for on the 29 th. of April, in the same year, 1511. one
William Carder of Tenterdon, being Endited on the former Articles, he denied
them all but one, That he had said it was enough to pray to Almighty God alone,
and therefore we needed not to pray to Saints for any mediation. Upon which
Witnesses were brought against him, who were all such as were then Prisoners,
but intended to abjure, and were now made use of to Convict others. They Swore
that he had taught them these Opinions. When their Depositions were published,
he said, he did repent if he had said any thing against the Faith and the
Sacraments; but he did not remember that he had ever said any such thing.
Sentence was given upon him as an obstinate Heretic, and he was delivered up
to the Secular Power. On the same day a Woman, Agnes Grevill, was Endited upon
the same Articles: She pleaded not Guilty, but by a strange kind of proceeding,
her Husband and her Two Sons were brought in Witnesses against her. Her Husband
deposed, that in the end of the Reign of King Edward the 4 th. one John Ive,
had persuaded her into these Opinions, in which she had persisted ever since:
Her Sons also deposed, that she had been still infusing these Doctrines into
them. One Robert Harrison was also Endited, and pleading not Guilty, Witnesses
did prove the Articles against him. And on the 2 d. of May Sentence was given
against these Two as obstinate He^et^cks. And the same day the Archbishop
Signed the Writs for certi^ying these Sentences into the Chancery, which
conclude in these words: Our holy Mother the Church having nothing further that
she can do in this matter, we leave the forementioned Heretics, and every one
of them to your Royal Highness, and to your Secular Council. And on the 8 th.
o^ May, John Brown and Edward Walker, being also Endited of Heresy on the
former Points, they both pleaded not Guilty. But the Witnesses deposing against
them, they were judged obstinate Heretics, and the former a Relapse, for he
had abjured before Cardinal Morton. And on the 19 th. of May Sentence was
given. When, or how the Sentences were Executed, I cannot find. Sure I am,
there are no Pardons upon Record ^or any of them, and it was the course of the
Law, either to send a Pardon, or to issue out the Writ for Burning them.

Fox mentions none of these proceedings, only he tells that John Brown was
taken for some words said in Discourse with a Priest, about the saying of
Masses for Redeeming Souls out of Purgatory. Upon which he was committed for
suspicion of Heres^e: But Fox seems to have been misinformed about the time of
his Burning, which he says was, Anno 1517. for they would not have kept a
condemned Heretic Six years out of the Fire. I never find them guilty of any
such clemency. These severe Sentences made the rest so apprehensi^e of their
danger, that all the others who were Endited, abjured. And in the year, 1512.
on the 5 th. of June, Two men and two women abjured that Article, That in the
Sacrament of the Altar, there was only Material Bread, and not the Body of
Christ. And on the 4 th. and 13 th. of Septemb^r, Two other women abjured the
former Articles; and this is a^l that is in Warham's Register about Heretics.

In what remains of Fitz-Iames, Bishop of London's Register, Fitz-Iames Bishop
of London, his proceeding against Heretics, Fol. 4.
There are but Three Abjurations. In the year 1509. one Elizabeth Sampson, of
Aldermanbury, was Endited for having spoken reproachfully of the Images of our
Lady, of Willsden, Crom, and Walsingham, condemning Pilgrimages to them, and
saying, It was better to give Alms at home to poor people, than to go on
Pilgrimages; and that Images were but Stocks and Stones, and denying the virtue
of the Sacrament of the Altar, when the Priest was not in clean li^e, and
saying, It was but Bread, and that Christ could not be both in Heaven and
Earth; and for denying Christ's Ascension to Heaven, and saying, That more
should not go to Heaven than were already in it. But she, to be free of further
trouble, confessed her self Guilty, and abjured all those Opinions. It is
generally observed, That in the proceedings against Lollards, the Clergy always
mixed some Capital Errors, which all Christians rejected, with those for which
they accused them; and some particulars being proved, they gave it out that
they were Guilty of them all, to represent them the more odious. And in this
case the thing is plain, for this woman is charged for denying Christ's
Ascension; and yet another of the Articles was, That she said Christ's Body
could not be in the Sacrament, because it could not be both in Heaven and on
Earth. Which two Opinions are inconsistent. In the year 1511. William Potier
was Endited for saying, There were Three Gods, and that he knew not for what
Christ's Passion, or Baptism availed; and did abjure. Whether he only spoke
these things Impiously, or whether he held them in Opinion, is not clear. But
certainly he was no Lollard. One Joan Baker was also made to abjure some words
she had said, That Images were but Idols, and not to be worshipped; and that
they were set up by the Priest out of Covetousness, that they might grow rich
by them; and that Pilgrimages were not to be made. More is not in that
Register. But Fox gives an account of Six others, who were Burnt in Fitz-Iames
his time. On this I have been the longer, that it may appear, what were the
Opinions of the Lollards at that time before Luther had published any thing
against the Indulgences. For these Opinions did very much dispose people to
receive the Writings which came afterward out of Germany.

The Progress of Luther's Doctrine.
The First beginnings and progress of Luther's Doctrine are so well known, that
I need not tell how upon the publishing of Indulgences in Germany, in so gross
a manner, that for a little Money any man might both preserve himself, and
deliver his Friends out of Purgatory, many were offended at this merchandise,
against which Luther wrote. But it concerning the Sea of Rome in so main a
Point of their Prerogative, which would also have cut off a great Branch of
their Revenue, he was proceeded against with extreme severity: So small a spark
as that Collision made, could never have raised so great a fire* i^ the world
had not been strongly disposed to it, by the just prejudices they had conceived
against the Popish Clergy, whose Ignorance and lewd Lives had laid them so open
to contempt and hatred, that any one that would set himself against them, could
not but be kindly looked on by the people. They had engrossed the greatest part
both of the Riches and Power of Christendom, and lived at their ease and in
much Wealth. And the corruptions of their Worship and Doctrine were such, that
a very small proportion of common sense, with but an overly looking on the New
Testament, discovered them. Nor had they any other varnish to color them by,
but the Authority and Traditions of the Church. But when some studious men
began to read the Ancient Fathers, and Councils (though there was then a great
mixture of Sophisticated stuff that went under the Ancient names, and was
joined to their true works, which Critics have since discovered to be
spurious) they found a vast difference between the first Five Ages of the
Christian Church, in which Piety and Learning prevailed, and the last Ten Ages
in which Ignorance had buried all their former Learning, only a little
misguided Devotion was retained for Six of these Ages; and in the last Four,
the restless Ambition and Usurpation of the Popes was supported by the seeming
holiness of the begging Friars, and the false Counterfeits of Learning, which
were among the Canonists, Schoolmen and Casuists. So that it was incredible to
see, how men, notwithstanding all the opposition the Princes everywhere made
to the progress of these reputed new Opinions, and the great advantages by
which the Church of Rome both held and drew many into their Interests, were
generally inclined to these Doctrines. Those of the Clergy, who at first
Preached them, were of the begging Orders of Friars, who having fewer
engagements on them from their Interests, were freer to discover and follow the
truth. And the austere Discipline they had been trained under, did prepare them
to encounter those difficulties that lay in their way. And the Laity that had
long looked on their Pastors with an evil eye, did receive these Opinions very
easily; which did both discover the Impostures with which the world had been
abused, and showed a plain and simple way to the Kingdom of Heaven, by putting
the Scriptures into their hands, and such other Instructions about Religion, as
were sincere and genuine. The Clergy who at first despised these new Preachers,
were at length much Allarmed when they saw all people running after them, and
r^ceiving their Doctrines.

As these things did spread much in Germany, Switzerland, and the Netherlands,
so their Books came over into England, where there was much matter already
prepared to be wrought on, not only by the prejudices they had conceived
against the corrupt Clergy, but by the Opinions of the Lollards which had been
now in England since the days of Wickliff, for about 150 years. Between which
Opinions, and the Doctrines of the Reformers, there was great Affinity; and
therefore, to give the better vent to the Books that came out of Germany, many
of them were translated into the English-Tongue, and were very much read and
applauded. This quickened the proceedings against the Lollards, and the enquiry
became so severe, that great numbers were brought into the Toils of the Bishops
and their Commissaries. If a man had spoken but a light word against any of the
Constitutions of the Church, he was seized on by the Bishop's Officers; and if
any taught their Children the Lord's Prayer, the Ten Commandments, and the
Apostle's Creed in the Vulgar Tongue, that was crime enough to bring them to
the Stake: As it did Six men and a woman at Coventry, in the Passion-week,
1519. being the 4 th. of April. Longland, Fox.
Bishop of Lincoln was very cruel to all that were suspected of Heresy in his
Diocese; several of them abjured, and some were Burnt.

But all that did not produce what they designed by it. The Clergy did not
correct their own faults, and their cruelty was looked on as an evidence of
Guilt, and of a weak Cause; so that the method they took, wrought only on
peoples fears, and made them more cautious and reserved, but did not at all
remove the Cause, nor work either on their reasons or affections.

Upon all this, the King to get himself a name, The King writes against Luther.
1522.
and to have a lasting Interest with the Clergy, thought it not enough to
assist them with his Authority, but would needs turn their Champion, and write
against Luther in defense of the Seven Sacraments. This Book was magnified by
the Clergy as the most Learned Work that ever the Sun saw; and he was compared
to King Solomon, and to all the Christian Emperors that had ever been: And it
was the chief subject of flattery for many years, besides the glorious Title of
Defender of the Faith, which the Pope bestowed on him for it. And it must be
acknowledged, that considering the Age, and that it was the Work of a King, it
did deserve some Commendation. But Luther was not at all daunted at it, but
rather valued himself upon it, that so great a King had entered the lists with
him, and answered his Book. And he replied, not without a large mixture of
Acrimony, for which he was generally blamed, as forgetting that great respect,
that is due to the Persons of Sovereign Princes.

But all would not do. These Opinions still gained more footing, and William
Tindal made a Translation of the New Testament in English, to which he added
some short Glosses. October 23. Reg. Tonstall, Fol. 45. with which that in Fox
agrees exactly.
This was printed in Antwerp, and sent over into England in the year 1526.
Against which there was a Prohibition published by every Bishop in his Diocese.
Bearing that some of Luthers followers had erroneously Translated the New
Testament, and had corrupted the Word of God, both by a false Translation, and
by Heretical Glosses: Therefore they required all Incumbents to charge all
within their Parishes, that had any of these, to bring them in to the
Vicar General within 30 days after that premonition, under the pains of
Excommunication and incurring the suspicion of Heresy. There were also many
other Books Prohibited at that time, most of them written by Tindal. And Sir
Thomas More, who was a man celebrated for Virtue and Learning, Collect. numb.
6th.
undertook the answering of some of those; but before he went about it, he
would needs have the Bishops License for keeping and reading them. He wrote
according to the way of the Age with much bitterness: and though he had been no
Friend to the Monks, and a great declaimer against the Ignorance of the Clergy,
and had been ill used by the Cardinal; yet he was one of the bitterest Enemies
of the new Preachers, not without great cruelty when he came into Power, though
he was otherwise a very good-natured man. So violently did the Roman Clergy
hurry all their Friends into those excesses of Fire and Sword.

When the Party became so considerable, that it was known there were Societies
of them, not only in London, but in both the Universities, then the Cardinal
was constrained to act. His contempt of the Clergy was looked on as that which
gave encouragement to the Heretics. When reports were brought to Court of a
company that were in Cambridge, Bilney, Latimer, and others that read and
propagated Luther's Book and Opinions; some Bishops moved, in the year 1523.
that there might be a Visitation appointed to go to Cambridge, for trying who
were the Fautors of Heresy there. But he, as Legate, did inhibite it (upon
what grounds I cannot imagine.) Which was brought against him afterward in
Parliament (Art. 43. of his Impeachment.) Yet when these Doctrines were spread
everywhere, he called a meeting of all the Bishops and Divines, and Canonists
about London; where Thomas Bilney and Thomas Arthur were brought before them,
and Articles were brought in against them. The whole process is set down at
length by Fox in all Points according to Tonstall's Register, except one fault
in the Translation. When the Cardinal asked Bilney whether he had not taken an
Oath before, not to preach, or defend any of Luthers Doctrines; he confessed he
had done it, but not judicially, ( judicialiter in the Register) This Fox
Translates, not lawfully. In all the other particulars there is an exact
agreement between the Register and his Acts. The sum of the proceedings of the
Court, was, That after examination of Witnesses, and several other steps in the
Process, which the Cardinal left to the Bishop of London, and the other Bishops
to manage; Bilney stood out long, and seemed resolved to suffer for a good
Conscience. In the end, what through human infirmity, what through the great
importunity of the Bishop of London, who set all his Friends on him, he did
abjure on the 7 th. of December, as Arthur had done on the 2 d. of that Month.
And though Bilney was relapst, and so was to expect no mercy by the Law, yet
the Bishop of London enjoined him Penance, and let him go. For Tonstall being a
man both of good Learning and an unblemisht life, these Virtues produced one of
their ordinary effects in him, great moderation, that was so eminent in him,
that at no time did he dip his hands in Blood. Geoffrey Loni, and Thomas
Gerard, also abjured for having had Luther's Books, and defending his Opinions.

These were the proceedings against Heretics, in the first half of this Reign.
And thus far I have opened the State of Affairs, both as to Religious and Civil
concerns for the first 18 years of this Kings time, with what Observations I
could gather of the dispositions and tempers of the Nation at that time, which
prepared them for the Changes that followed afterward.

The End of the First Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England. BOOK II.
Of the Process of Divorce between King Henry and Queen Katharine, and of what
passed from the Nineteenth to the Twenty fifth year of his Reign, in which he
was declared Supreme Head of the Church of England.

KING Henry hitherto lived at ease, and enjoyed his pleasures; The beginning of
the Suit of Divorce.
he made War with much honor, and that always produced a just and advantageous
Peace. He had no trouble upon him in all his affairs, except about the getting
of Money, and even in that, the Cardinal eased him. But now a Domestic trouble
arose, which perplexed all the rest of his Government, and drew after it
Consequences of a high nature.

The Marriage of Prince Arthur to the Infanta of Spain.
Henry the 7 th. upon wise and good considerations, resolved to link himself in
a close Confederacy with Ferdinand and Isabella, Kings of Castile and Arragon,
and with the House of Burgundy against France, which was looked on as the
lasting and dangerous Enemy of England. And therefore a Match was agreed on
between his Son, Prince Arthur, and Katharine the Infanta of Spain, whose
eldest Sister Joan was Married to Philip, that was then Duke of Burgundy, and
Earl of Flanders; out of which arose a triple Alliance between England, Spain,
and Burgundy, against the King of France, who was then become formidable to all
about him. There was given with her 200000 Ducats, the greatest Portion that
had been given for many Ages with any Princess, which made it not the less
acceptable to King Henry the Seventh.

EFFIGIES CATHARINAE PRINCIPIS ARTHURI VXORIS HENRICO REGI NUPTAE
H. Holbe^n Pinxit R. White Sculp

1486. Nata. 1501. Nov. 14. Arthuro nupsit. 1509. Iun. 3. Henrico Regi nupsit.
1526. toro exclusa. 1533. May. 23 incesti damnata. 1536. Ian. 8. obijt.

Printed for Rich: Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's Church yard



The Infanta was brought into England, 1501.
and on the 14th of Nov. was Married at St. Paul's to the Prince of Wales. They
lived together as man and wife, till the 2d of April following; and not only
had their Bed solemnly blessed when they were put in it, on the night of their
Marriage, but also were seen publicly in Bed for several days after, See the
Deposit^ons of Witnesses in L. Herbert.
and went down to live at Ludlow-Castle in Wales, where they still Bedded
together. But Prince Arthur, though a strong and healthful youth when he
Married her, yet died soon after, which some thought was hastened by his too
early Marriage. Prince Arth. his Death. Apr* 2. 1502.
The Spanish Ambassador had by his Masters order taken proofs of the
Consummation of the Marriage, and sent them into Spain; the young Prince also
himself had by many expressions given his Servants cause to believe that his
Marriage was consummated the first night, which in a youth of Sixteen years of
Age, that was vigorous and healthful, was not at all judged strange. It was so
constantly believed that when he dyed, his younger Brother Henry Duke of York
was not called Prince of Wales, for some considerable time. Some say for one
Month, some for 6 Months. Bacons Henry the 7th.
And he was not created Prince of Wales till 10 Months were elapsed, viz. in
the February following, when it was apparent that his Brothers wife was not
with Child by him. These things were afterward looked on as a full
Demonstration (being as much as the thing was capable of) that the Princess was
not a Virgin after Prince Arthur's Death.

But the reason of State still standing for keeping up the Alliance against
France, Consultations about a second Marriage of the Infanta to his Brother.
and King Henry the 7th having no mind to let so great a Revenue as she had in
Jointure be carried out of the Kingdom, it was proposed That she should be
married to the younger Brother Henry now Prince of Wales. The two Prelates that
were then in greatest esteem with King Henry the 7th, were Warham Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Fox Bishop of Winchester. The former delivered his opinion
against it, Warham's Deposition in L Herbert.
and told the King that he thought it was neither honorable nor well-pleasing
to God. The Bishop of Winchester persuaded it, and for the Objections that were
against it, and the Murmuring of the people who did not like a Marriage that
was disputable, lest out of it new Wars should afterward arise about the Right
of the Crown, the Popes Dispensation was thought sufficient to answer all; and
his Authority was then so undisputed that it did it effectually. So a Bull was
obtained on the 26 of December. 1503 to this effect, that the Pope according to
the greatness of his Authority, It is allowed by the Pope Collections Numb.
first.
having received a Petition from Prince Henry and the Princess Katharine,
Bearing, That whereas the Princess was Lawfully Married to Prince Arthur (
which was perhaps consummated by the Carnalis Copula) who was dead without any
issue, but they being desirous to Marry for preserving the Peace between the
Crowns of England and Spain, did Petition his Holiness for his Dispensation;
therefore the Pope, out of his care to maintain peace among all Catholic
Kings, did absolve them from all Censures under which they might be, and
Dispensed with the Impediment of their Affinity, notwithstanding any
Apostolical Constitutions or Ordinances to the contrary, and gave them leave to
Marry, or if they were already Married, he Confirming it, required their
Confessor to enjoin them some healthful penance for their having Married before
the Dispensation was obtained.

Upon political reasons. L. Herbert.
It was not much to be wondered at, that the Pope did readily grant this, for
though very many both Cardinals and Divines did then oppose it, yet the
Interest of the Papacy, which was preferred to all other Considerations,
required it. For as that Pope being a great Enemy to Lewis the 12th the French
King, would have done any thing to make an Alliance against him firmer; so he
was a Warlike Pope who considered Religion very little, and therefore might be
easily persuaded to Confirm a thing that must needs oblige the succeeding Kings
of England to maintain the Papal Authority, since from it they derived their
Title to the Crown; little thinking that by a secret Direction of an
overruling Providence, that Deed of his would occasion the extirpation of the
Papal Power in England. So strangely does God make the Devices of Men become of
no effect, and turn them to a contrary end to that which is intended.

Upon this Bull they were Married, the Prince of Wales being yet under Age. But
Warham had so possessed the King with an aversion to this Marriage, Henry
Protests against it. Iun. 27. 1505.
that on the same day that the Prince was of Age, he by his Fathers command,
laid on him in the presence of many of the Nobility and others, made a
Protestation in the hands of Fox Bishop of Winchester before a public Notary,
Collect. Number. 2d Morison.
and read it himself, by which he Declared, That whereas he being under Age was
Married to the Princess Katharine, yet now coming to be of Age, he did not
confirm that Marriage but retracted and Annulled it, and would not proceed in
it, but intended in full form of Law to void it and break it off; which he
declared he did freely and of his own accord.

His Father also dissuaded it.
Thus it stood during his Fathers life, who continued to the last to be against
it; and when he was just dying, he charged his Son to break it off, though it
is possible that no consideration of Religion might work so much on him, as the
apprehension he had of the troubles that might follow on a controverted Title
to the Crown; Apr. 22. 1509 K. Henry VII. dies.
of which the Wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster had given a fresh
and sad Demonstration. The King being dead, one of the first things that came
under Consultation, was, that the young King must either break his Marriage
totally, Henry being come to the Crown Marries her. Iun. 3

They are Crowned June 24.

Son born Ian. 1. 1511. dies Feb. 22. another born and dies Nov. 1514.

Lady Mary born Feb. 19. 1516.


or conclude it. Arguments were brought on both hands* but those for it
prevailed most with the King: So six weeks after he came to the Crown, he was
Married again publicly, and soon after they were both Crowned. On the first
day of the year she made him a very acceptable new years gift of a Son, but he
dyed in the Febru^ry thereafter: She miscarried often, and an other Son dyed
soon after he was born; only the Lady Mary lived to a perfect Age.

In this state was the Kings Family when the Queen le^t bearing more Children,
and contracted some diseases, that made her person unacceptable to him; but
was, as to her other Qualities, a virtuous and grave Princess, much esteemed
and beloved both of the King and the whole Nation. The King being out of hopes
of more Children declared his Daughter Princess of Wales, and sent her to
Ludlow to hold her Court there, and projected diverse Matches for her. The first
was with the Dolphin, which was agreed to between the King of France and him
the 9th of November. 1518. as appears by the Treaty yet extant. But this was
broken afterward upon the Kings Confederating with the Emperor against France,
1^27.
and a new Match agreed and sworn to between the Emperor and the King at
Windsor the 22 of June 1522. the Emperor being present in person. 1518.

Treaty Rolls 10. Reg.

His Daughter Mary Contracted to the Dolphin, October 11.

Afterward to the Emperor. Iun. 22. 1522.

Offered to Scotland. Sept. 1524.

again to France. April 30. 1527.

For K. Francis himself, or for his Son the Duke of Orleance.

The Kings Marriage questioned by Foreigners


This being afterward neglected and broken by the Emperor, by the advice of
his Cortes and States, as was formerly related, there followed some Overtures
of a Marriage with Scotland. But those also vanished, and there was a second
Treaty begun with France, the King offering his Daughter to Francis himself,
which he gladly accepting, a Match was Treated: and on the last of April, it
was agreed that the Lady Mary should be given in Marriage either to Francis
himself, or to his second Son the Duke of Orleance; and that Alternative was to
be determined by the two Kings, at an Enterview that was to be between them,
soon after at Calais, with forfeitures on both sides if the Match went not on.

But while this was in agitation the Bishop of Tarbe the French Ambassador made
a a great demur about the Princess Mary's being illegitimate, as begotten in a
Marriage that was contracted against a Divine precept, with which no humane
Authority could Dispense. How far this was secretly concerted between the
French Court and ours, or between the Cardinal and the Ambassador, is not
known. It is surmised that the King or the Cardinal set on the French to make
this exception publicly, that so the King might have a better Color to
justify his suit of Divorce, since other Princes were already questioning it.
For if upon a Marriage proposed of such infinite advantage to France, as that
would be with the Heir of the Crown of England, they never^heless made
Exceptions and proceeded but coldly in it, it was very reasonable to expect
that after the Kings Death, other Pretenders would have disputed her Title in
another manner.

To some it seemed strange that the King did offer his Daughter to such great
Princes as the Emperor and the King of France, to whom if England had fallen in
her Right, it must have been a Province: for though in the last Treaty with
France, she was offered either to the King, or his second Son; by which either
the Children which the King might have by her, or the Children of the Duke of
Orleance, should have been Heirs to the Crown of England, and thereby it would
still have continued divided from France; yet this was full of hazard, for if
the Duke of Orleance by his Brothers Death should become King of France, as it
afterward fell out, or if the King of France had been once possessed of
England, then according to the maxim of the French Government, that whatever
their King acquires he holds it in the Right of his Crown, England was still to
be a Province to France, unless they freed themselves by Arms. Others judged
that the King intended to Marry her to France, the more effectually to seclude
her from the Succession, considering the aversion his Subjects had to a French
Government, that so he might more easily settle his Bastard Son the Duke of
Richmond in the Succession of the Crown.

While this Treaty went on, The King himself Scruples it.

Sanderus de Schism. Angl.


the Kings scruples about his Marriage began to take vent. It is said that the
Cardinal did first infuse them into him, and made Longland Bishop of Lincoln,
that was the Kings Confessor, possess the Kings mind with them in Confession.
If it was so, the King had, according to the Religion of that time, very just
cause of Scruple, when his Confessor judged his Marriage sinful, and the Popes
Legate was of the same mind. It is also said that the Cardinal being alienated
from the Emperor, that he might irreparably embroil the King and him, and unite
the King to the French Interests, designed this out of Spite; and that he was
also dissatisfied toward the Queen, who hated him for his lewd and dissolute
Life, and had often admonished and checked him for it: And that he therefore,
designing to engage the King to Marry the French Kings Sister the Duchess of
Alenoon, did (to make way for that) set this Matter on foot: but as I see no
good Authority for all this, except the Queens suspicions, who did afterward
charge the Cardinal as the cause of all her trouble; In his Letter to Bucer,
Sept. 10. 1531. in MSS. R. Smith.
so I am inclined to think the Kings Scruples were much ancienter, for the King
declared to Simon Grineus four years after this, that for seven years he had
abstained from the Queen upon these Scruples, so that by that it seems they had
been received into the Kings mind three years before this time.

The grounds of his Scruples.
What were the Kings secret motives and the true grounds of his Aversion to the
Queen, is only known to God, and till the discovery of all Secrets at the day
of Judgment, must lie hid. But the reasons which he always owned, of which all
Humane Judicatories must only take notice, shall be now fully opened. He found
by the Law of Moses, if a man took his Brothers Wife they should die childless:
This made him reflect on the death of his Children, which he now looked on as a
Curse from God for that unlawful Marriage. Upon this he set himself to Study
the case, and called for the judgments of the best Divines and Canonists. For
his own Enquiry, Thomas Aquinas being the Writer in whose works he took most
pleasure, and to whose judgment he submitted most, did decide it clearly
against him. For he both Concluded, that the Laws in Leviticus about the
forbidden degrees of Marriage were Moral and Eternal, such as obliged all
Christians; and that the Pope could only Dispense with the Laws of the Church,
but could not Dispense with the Laws of God. Upon this reason, that no Law can
be Dispensed with, by any Authority, but that which is equal to the Authority
that enacted it. Therefore he infers that the Pope can indeed Dispense with all
the Laws of the Church, but not with the Laws of God, to whose Authority he
could not pretend to be equal. But as the King found this from his own private
Study, so having commanded the Archbishop of Canterbury to require the
Opinions of the Bishops of England, they all in a Writing under their hands and
Seals, All his Bishops, except Fisher, declare it unlawful.
declared they judged it an unlawful Marriage. Only the Bishop of Rochester
refused to set his hand to it, and though the Archbishop pressed him most
earnestly to it, yet he persisted in his refusal, saying, that it was against
his Conscience. Upon which the Archbishop made another write down his Name,
Cavendish his li^e of Wolsey.
and set his Seal to the Resolution of the rest of the Bishops. But this being
afterward questioned, the Bishop of Rochester denied it was his hand, and the
Archbishop pretended that he had leave given him by the Bishop to put his hand
to it, which the other denied. Nor was it likely that Fisher who scrupled in
Conscience to Subscribe it himself, would have consented to such a weak
Artifice. But all the other Bishops did declare against the Marriage, and as
the King himself said afterward in the Legantine Court, neither the Cardinal
nor the Bishop of Lincoln did first suggest these scruples, but the King being
possessed with them, did in Confession propose them to that Bishop: and added
that the Cardinal was so far from cherishing them, that he did all he could to
stiffle them.

The King was now convinced that his Marriage was unlawful, The dangers that
were like to follow from it.
both by his own study, and the resolution of his Divines. And as the point of
Conscience wrought on him, so the Interest of the Kingdom required, that there
should be no doubting about the Succession to the Crown: left as the long
Civil-War between the Houses of York and Lancaster had been buried with his
Father, so a new one should rise up at his death. The King of Scotland was the
next Heir to the Crown after his Daughter. And if he Married his Daughter to
any out of France, then he had reason to judge, that the French upon their
Ancient Alliance with Scotland, and that they might divide and distract
England, would be ready to assist the King of Scotland in his pretensions: Or
if he Married her in France, then all those in England to whom the French
Government was hateful, and the Emperor and other Princes to whom the French
Power grew formidable, would have been as ready to support the pretensions of
Scotland. Or if he should either set up his Barstard Son, or the Children which
his Sister bore to Charles Brandon, there was still cause to fear a Bloody
decision of a Title that was so doubtful. And though this may seem a
consideration too Politic and Foreign to a matter of that nature; yet the
obligation that lies on a Prince to provide for the happiness and quiet of his
Subjects, was so weighty a thing, that it might well come in among other
Motives, to incline the King much to have this matter determined. Wols^y went
into France 1527. July 11.
At this time the Cardinal went over into France under color to conclude a
League between the Two Crowns, and to Treat about the means of setting the Pope
at liberty, who was then the Emperors Prisoner at Rome; and also for a project
of Peace between Francis, and the Emperor. But his chief business was to
require Francis to declare his Resolutions concerning that alternative about
the Lady Mary. To which it was answered, That the Duke of Orleance as a fitter
Match in years, was the French King's Choice; but this matter fell to the
ground upon the Process that followed soon after.

The King did much apprehend the opposition the Emperor was like to make to
his designs; The Kings fears and hopes about it.
either out of a principle of nature and honor to protect his Aunt, or out of
a Maxim of State, to raise his Enemy all the trouble he could at home. But on
the other hand he had some cause to hope well even in that particular. For the
Question of the unlawfulness of the Match had been first debated in the Cortes,
or Assembly of the States at Madrid; and the Emperor had then showed himself
so ^avourable to it, that he broke the Match, (to which he had bound himself)
with the Princess. Therefore the King had reason to think that this at least
would mitigate his opposition. The Emperor had also used the Pope so hardly,
that it could not be doubted that the Pope hated him. And it was believed that
he would find the protection of the King of England most necessary to secure
him, either from the greatness of France or Spain, who were Fighting for the
best part of Italy, which must needs fall into one of their hands. Therefore
the King did not doubt but the Pope would be compliant to his desires. And in
this he was much confirmed by the hopes, or rather assurance, which the
Cardinal gave him of the Popes favor; who either calculating what was to be
expected from that Court on the account of their own Interest, or upon some
promises made him, had undertaken to the King to bring that matter about to his
hearts content. It is certain that the Cardinal had carried over with him out
of the Kings Treasure 240000 l. to be employed about the Popes Liberty. L.
Herbert.
But whether he had made a bargain for the Divorce, or had fancied that nothing
could be denied him at Rome, it does not appear. It is clear by many of his
Letters that he had undertaken to the King, that the business should be done;
and it is not like that a man of his wisdom would have adventured to do that
without some good warrant.

The Arguments against the Bull.
But now that the Suit was to be moved in the Court of Rome, they were to devise
such Arguments as were like to be well heard there. It would have been
unacceptable to have insisted on the nullity of the Bull on this account,
because the matter of it was unlawful, and fell not within the Popes Power. For
Popes, like others Princes, do not love to hear the extent of their Prerogative
disputed, or defined. And to condemn the Bull of a former Pope as unlawful, was
a dangerous Precedent at a time when the Popes Authority was rejected by so
many in Germany. Therefore the Canonists as well as Divines, were consulted to
find such Nullities in the Bull of Dispensation, as according to the Canon Law,
and the proceedings of the Rota, might serve to invalidate it without any
diminution of the Papal Power. Which being once done, the Marriage that
followed upon it, must needs be annulled. When the Canonists examined the Bull,
they found much matter to proceed upon. It is a Maxim in Law, that if the Pope
be surprised in any thing, and Bulls be procured upon false suggestions and
untrue premises, they may be annulled a^terwards. Upon which foundation most of
all the Processes against Popes Bulls were grounded. Now they found by the
preamble of this Bull that it was said, The King had desired that he might be
dispensed with to Marry the Princess. This was false; for the King had made no
such desire, being of an Age that was below such considerations, but Twelve
years old. Then it appeared by the preamble that this Bull was desired by the
King to preserve the Peace between the King of England, and Ferdinand, and
Isabella (called Elizabetha in the Bull) the Kings of Spain. To which they
excepted, That it was plain this was false, since the King being then but
Twelve years old, could not be supposed to have such deep speculations, and so
large a prospect as to desire a Match upon a politic account. Then it being
also in the Bull, that the Popes Dispensation was granted to keep Peace between
the Crowns, if there was no hazard of any Breach or War between them, this was
a false suggestion, by which the Pope had been made believe, That this Match
was necessary for averting some great mischief. And it was known that there was
no danger ^t all of that, and so this Bull was obtained by a surprise. Besides,
both King Henry of England, and Isabella of Spain were dead before the King
Married his Queen; so the Marriage could not be valid by virtue of a Bull that
was granted to maintain Amity between Princes that were dead before the
Marriage was consummated: And they also judged that the Protestation which the
King made, when he came of Age, did retract any such pretended desire, that
might have been preferred to the Pope in his name; and that from that time
forward, the Bull could have no further operation, since the ground upon which
it was granted, which was the King's desire, did then cease, any pretended
desire before he was of Age being clearly annulled and determined by that
Protestation after he was of Age, so that a subsequent Marriage founded upon
the Bull must needs be void.

These were the grounds upon which the Canonists advised the Process at Rome to
be carried on. But first to amuse or overreach the Spaniard, Wolsey's advice
to the King, 1527. Aug. 1.
the King sent word to his Ambassador in Spain to silence the noise that was
made about it in that Court. Whether the King had then resolved on the Person
that should Succeed the Queen, when he had obtained what he desired, or not, is
much questioned. Some suggest that from the beginning he was taken with the
charms of Anne Boleyn, and that all this Process was moved by the unseen
spring of that secret affection. Others will have this Amor to have been later
in the King's thoughts. How early it came there, as this distance it is not
easy to de^ermine. Sanders his story about Anne Bol^yn examined.
But before I say more of it, she being so considerable a Person in the
^ollowing Relation, I shall give some account of her. Sanders has assured the
world. That the King had a liking to her Mother, who was Daughter to the Duke
of Norfolk, For this he ci^es Rastal's life of Sir Tho. Moor, a Book that was
never seen by any body else.
and to the end that he might enjoy her with the less disturbance, he sent her
Husband Sir Thomas Boleyn to be Ambassador in France: And that after Two years
absence his Wife being with Child, he came over, and sued a Divorce against her
in the Archbishop of Canterburies Court, but the King sent the Marquis of
Dorchester to let him know, that she was with Child by him, and that therefore
the King desired he would pass the matter over, and be reconciled to his Wi^e:
to which he consented. And so Anne Boleyn, though she went under the name of
his Daughter, yet was of the King's b^getting. As he describes her, she was
ill-shaped and ugly, had Six Fingers, a Gag-tooth, and a Tumor under her Chin,
with many other unseemly things in her Person. At the 15 th. year of her Age,
he says, both her Father's Butler and Chaplain lay with her: Afterwa^ds she was
sent to France, where she was at first kept privately in the house of a Person
of Quality, then she went to the French Court, where she led such a dissolute
life, that she was called, the English Hackney. That the French King liked her,
and from the freedoms he took with her, she was called, the King's Mule. But
returning to England, she was admitted to the Court, where she quickly
perceived how weary the King was of the Queen, and what the Cardinal was
designing; and having gained the King's affection, she governed it so, that by
all innocent freedoms she drew him into her Toiles, and by the appearances of a
severe virtue, with which she disguised her self, so increased his affection
and esteem, that he resolved to put her in his Queens place as soon as the
Divorce was granted. The same Author adds, That the King had likewise enjoyed
her Sister, with a great deal more, to the disgrace of this Lady and her Family.

I know it is not the work of an Historian to refute the Lies of others, but
rather to deliver such a plain account as will be a more effectual confutation,
than any thing can be that is said by way of Argument, which belongs to other
Writers. And at the end of this King's Reign, I intend to set down a Collection
of the most Notorious False-hoods of that Writer, together with the evidences
of their being so. But all this of Anne Boleyn is so palpable a lie, or rather
a complicated heap of lies, and so much depends on it, that I presume it will
not offend the Reader to be detained a few minutes in the refutation of it. For
if it were true, very much might be drawn from it, both to disparage King
Henry, who pretended Conscience to annul his Marriage for the nearness of
Affinity, and yet would after that Marry his own Daughter. It leaves also a
foul and lasting stain both on the Memory of Anne Boleyn, and of her
incomparable Daughter Queen Elizabeth. It also derogates so much from the first
Reformers, who had some kind of dependence on Queen Anne Boleyn, that it seems
to be of great importance for directing the Reader in the judgment he is to
make of persons and things, to lay open the falsehood of this account. It were
sufficient for blasting it, that there is no proof pretended to be brought for
any part of it, but a Book of one Rastall a Judge, that was never seen by any
other person than that Writer. The Title of the Book is The Life of Sir Thomas
More: there is great reason to think that Rastall never writ any such Book, for
it is most common for the Lives of great Authors to be prefixed to their Works.
Now this Rastall published all More's Works in Queens Mary's Reign, to which if
he had written his Life, it is likely he would have prefixed it. No evidence
therefore being given for his Relation, either from Record, Letters, or the
Testimony of any person who was privy to the matter, the whole is to be looked
upon as a black Forgery, devised on purpose to defame Queen Elizabeth. For upon
her Mothers death, who can doubt but that some, either to flatter the King, or
to defame her, would have published these things, which if they had been true,
could be no secrets? For a Lady of her Mothers condition to bear a Child, two
years after her Husband was sent out of England on such a public Employment,
and a Process thereupon to be entered in the Archbishops Courts, are things
that are not so soon to be forgotten. And that she her self was under so ill a
Reputation, both in her Father's Family, and in France, for common lewdness,
and for being the Kings Concubin, are things that could not lie hid. And yet
when the Books of the Archbishops Courts (which are now burnt) were extant, it
was published to the world, and satisfaction offered to every one that would
take the pains to inform themselves, Anti-Sanderus.
that there was no such thing on Record. Nor did any of the Writers of that
time, either of the Imperial or Papal side, once mention these things,
notwithstanding their great occasion to do it. But 80 years after, this Fable
was invented, or at least it was then first published, when it was safer to
lie, because none who had lived in the time could disprove it.

But it has not only no foundation, but Sanders through the vulgar errors of
Liars, has strained his wit to make so ill a story of the Lady, that some
things in his own relation, make it plainly appear to be impossible. For to
pass by those many improbable things that he relates, as namely, That both the
King of England and the French King, could be so taken with so ugly and
monstrous a Woman, of so notorious and lewd manners; and that this King, for
the space of Seven years, that is, during the Suit of the Divorce, should
continue enamoured of her, and never discover this, or having discovered it,
should yet resolve at all hazards to make her his Wife; which are things that
would require no common testimony to make them seem credible: There is beside
in that story, an heap of things so inconsistent with one another, 1501.
that none but such an one as Sanders could have had either blindness or brow
enough to have made or published it. For first, if the King, that he might the
more freely enjoy Sir Thomas Boleyn's Lady, sent him over into France, as
Sanders says, I shall allow it as soon as may be, that it was in the very
beginning of his Reign 1509. Then the time when Anne Boleyn was born, being
according to Sanders his account two years after, that must be Anno 1511. and
being, as he says, deflowred when she was 15. that must be Anno 1526. Then some
time must be allowed for her going to France, for her living privately there
for some time, and afterward for her coming to Court, and meriting those
Characters that he says went upon her; and after all that, for her return into
England, and insinuating her self into the Kings favor: yet by Sanders his own
Relation these things must have happened in the same year 1526. for in that
year he makes the King think of putting away his Wife in order to Marry Anne
Boleyn, when according to his account she could be but 15. years old, though
this King had sent Sir Thomas Boleyn into France the first day of his coming to
the Crown. But that he ^as not sent so early appears by several Grants, that I
have seen in the Rolls, which were made to him in the first 4 years of the
Kings Reign: They sufficiently show that he was all that while about the Kings
person, and mention no services beyond Sea, but about the Kings person, as the
ground upon which they were made. Besides, I find in the Treaty-Rolls no
mention of his being Ambassador the first 8 years of the Kings Reign. In the
first year the Bishops of Winchester and Duresme, March. 10. 1509.
and the Earl of Surrey, are named in the Treaty between the two Crowns, as the
Kings Ambassadors in France. After this, none could be Ambassadors there for
two years together, Feb. 12. 1511 1514.
for before two years elapsed there was a War proclaimed against France, and
when overtures were made for a Peace, it appears by the Treaty-Rolls that the
Earl of Worcester was sent over Ambassador. And when the Kings sister was sent
over to Lewis the French King, though Sir Thomas Boleyn went over with her,
September. 23* 6to Regn.
he was not then so much considered as to be made an Ambassador. For in the
Commission that was given to many persons of Quality, to deliver her to her
Husband King Lewis the 12, Sir Thomas Boleyn is not named. The persons in the
Commission are the Duke of Norfolk, the Marquess of Dorchester, the Bishop of
Duresm, the Earls of Surrey and Worcester, the Prior of St. John's, 1515.
and Doctor West Dean of Windsor. A year after that, Sir Thomas Boleyn was made
Ambassador; but then it was too late for Anne Boleyn to be yet unborn, much
less could it be, as Sanders says, that she was born two years after it.

But the Learned Camden, Cambd. I^ apparat^ ad Hi^t* Eliz. Reg.
whose Study and Profession led him to a more particular knowledge of these
things, gives us another account of her birth. He says that she was born in the
year 1507. which was two years before the King came to the Crown. And if it be
suggested, that then the Prince, to enjoy her Mother, prevailed with his Father
to send her Husband beyond Sea, that must be done when the Prince himself was
not 14 years of Age: so they must make him to have corrupted other men's wives
at that Age, when yet they will not allow his Brother (no not when he was 2
years older) to have known his own wife.

1528.
But now I leave this foul Fiction, and go to deliver certain Truths^ Anne
Boleyn's Mother was Daughter to the Duke of Norfolk, and Sister to the Duke
that was at the time of the Divorce Lord Treasurer. Her Birth.
Her Fathers Mother was one of the Daughters and heirs to the Earl of Wiltshire
and Ormond, and her great Grandfather Sir Geofry Boleyn, who had been Lord
Major of London, Married one of the Daughters and Heirs of the Lord Hastings;
and their Family as they had mixed with so much great Blood, so had Married
their Daughters to very Noble Families. She being but seven years old was
carried over to France with the Kings Sister, 1514.
which shows she could have none of those deformities in her person, since such
are not brought into the Courts and Families of Queens. And though upon the
French Kings Death the Queen Dowager came soon back to England, and Breeding.
yet she was so liked in the French Court, that the next King Francis his Queen
kept her about her self for some years: and after her death the Kings Sister
the Duchess of Alenson, kept her in her Court all the while she was in France;
which as it shows there was somewhat extraordinary in her person, so those
Princesses being much celebrated for their virtues, it is not to be imagined
that any person so notoriously defamed as Sanders would represent her, was
entertained in their Courts.

Her coming to England.

L. Herbert.

Title and Duplex.

Cavendish says she was very young. Camden.


When she came into England is not so clear: it is said that in the year 1522.
when War was made on France, her Father who was then Ambassador was recalled,
and brought her over with him, which is not improbable; but if she came then,
she did not stay long in England, for Camden says, that she served Queen
Claudia of France till her death (which was in July 1524) and after that she
was taken into service by K Francis his Sister. How long she continued in that
service I do not find, but it is probable that she returned out of France with
her Father from his Embassy in the year 1527. when, as Stow says, he brought
with him the Picture of her Mistress, who was offered in Marriage to this King.
If she came out of France before, as those Authors beforementioned say* it
appears that the King had no design upon her then, because he suffered her to
return, and when one Mistress died to take another in France; but if she stayed
there all this while, then it is probable he had not seen her till now at last,
when she came out of the Princess of Alenson's service: but whenever it was
that she came to the Court of England, it is certain that she was much
considered in it. And though the Queen, who had taken her to be one of her
Maids of Honor, had afterward just cause to be displeased with her as her
Rival; yet she carried her self so, that in the whole Progress of the Suit, I
never find the Queen her self, or any of her Agents, fix the least ill
Character on her, which would most certainly have been done had there been any
just cause or good color for it.

She is contracted to the Lord Piercy.
And so far was this Lady at least for some time from any thoughts of Marrying
the King, that she had consented to Marry the Lord Piercy the Earl of
Northumberland's eldest Son, whom his Father, by a strange compliance with the
Cardinals vanity, had placed in his Court and made him one of his servants. The
thing is considerable, and clears many things that belong to this History; and
the Relator of it was an Ear-witness of the Discourse upon it as himself
informs us. Cavendish Life of Wolsey.
The Cardinal hearing that the Lord Piercy was making addresses to Anne Boleyn,
1527.
one day as he came from the Court called for him before his servants ( before
us all says the Relator including himself) and chid him for it, pretending at
first that it was unworthy of him to match so meanly; but he justified his
choice, and reckoned up her birth and Quality, which he said was not inferior
to his own. And the Cardinal insisting fiercely, to make him lay down his
pretensions, he told him, he would willingly submit to the King and him; but
that he had gone so far before many witnesses, that he could not forsake it,
and knew not how to discharge his conscience: and therefore he entreated the
Cardinal would procure him the Kings favor in it. Upon that the Cardinal in
great rage said, why? think thou that the King and I know not what we have
to do in so weighty a matter? yes I warrant you, but I can see in thee no
submission at all to the purpose: and said, you have matched your self with
such a one, as neither the King, nor yet your Father will agree to it; and
therefore I will send for thy Father, who at his coming shall either make thee
break this unadvised bargain, or disinherit thee for ever. To which the Lord
Piercy replied, That he would submit himself to him, if his Conscience were
discharged of the weighty burden that lay upon it, and soon after, his Father
coming to Court he was diverted another way.

Had that Writer told us in what year this was done, it had given a great light
to direct us, but by this relation we see that she was so far from thinking of
the King at that time, that she had engaged her self another way; but how far
this went on her side, or whether it was afterward made use of, when she was
divorced from the King, shall be considered in its proper place. It also
appears that there was a Design about her then formed between the King and the
Cardinal, yet how far that went, whether to make her Queen, or only to Corrupt
her, is not evident. It is said, L. Herbert.
that upon this she ever after hated the Cardinal, and that he never designed
the Divorce after he saw on whom the King had fixed his thoughts: but all that
is a mistake, as will afterward appear.

And now having made way through these things that were previous to the first
motion of the Divorce, 1527.
my narration leads me next to the Motion it self. The King moved for his
Divorce at Rome.
The King resolving to put the matter home to the Pope, sent Doctor Knight
Secretary of State to Rome, with some Instructions to prepare the Pope for it,
and to observe what might be the best Method, and who the fittest tools to work
by. At that time the Family of the Cassali being three Brothers, were
entertained by the King as his Agents in Italy, both in Rome, Venice, and other
places. Sir Gregory Cassali, was then his ordinary Ambassador at Rome: To him
was the first full dispatch about this business directed by the Cardinal, the
Original whereof is yet extant dated the 5th of December. 1527. which the Reader
will find in the Collection: but here I shall give the Heads of it.

After great and high Complements, The first dispatch about it.

Collect. Numb. 3 d.


and Assurances of Rewards to engage him to follow the Business very
vigorously, and with great Diligence, he writes that he had before opened the
Kings case to him, and that partly by his own study, partly by the opinion of
many Divines, and other Learned men of all sorts, he found that he could no
longer with a good Conscience continue in that Marriage with the Queen: having
God and the Quiet and Salvation of his Soul chiefly before his eyes. And that
he had consulted both the most Learned Divines and Canonists, as well in his
own Dominions as elsewhere, to know whether the Popes Dispensation could make
it good, and that many of them thought the Pope could not Dispense in this case
of the first degree of Affinity, which they esteemed forbidden by a Divine,
Moral; and Natural Law; and all the rest concluded, that the Pope could not do
it, but upon very weighty reasons: and they found not any such in the Bull.
Then he lays out the reasons for Annulling the Bull which were touched before,
upon which they all concluded the Dispensation to be of no force; that the King
looked on the death of his Sons as a Curse from God: and to avoid further
Judgments, he now desired help of the Apostolic See, to consider his case, to
reflect on what he had merited by these Services he had done the Papacy, and to
find a way that he being divorced from his Queen may Marry another Wife, of
whom by the blessing of God he might hope for issue Male. Therefore the
Ambassador was to use all means possible to be admitted to speak to the Pope in
Private, and then to deliver him these Letters of Credence, in which there was
a most earnest Clause added with the Kings own hand. He was also to make a
Condoleance of the Miseries the Pope and Cardinals were in, both in the Kings
name and the Cardinals, and to assure the Pope they would use all the most
effectual means that were possible for setting him at Liberty, in which the
Cardinal would Employ as much Industry, as if there were no other way to come
to the Kingdom of Heaven but by doing it. Then he was to open the Kings
business to the Pope, the Scruples of his Conscience, the great danger of cruel
Wars upon so disputable a Succession, the Entreaties of all the Nobility and
the whole Kingdom, with many other urgent reasons, to obtain what was desired.
He was also to lay before the Pope the present condition of Christendom and of
Italy, that he might consider of what Importance it was to his own affairs, and
to the Apostolic See, to engage the King so firmly to his Interests as this
would certainly do. And to move that the Pope without communicating the Matter
to any person, would freely grant it, and Sign the Commission which was
therewith sent engrossed in due form, and ready to be Signed, by which the
Cardinal was Authorized with the Assistance of such as he should choose, to
proceed in the Matter, according to some Instructions which were also sent
fairly written out for the Pope to Sign. A Dispensation was also sent in due
form: and if these were expeded, he might assure the Pope that as the King had
sent over a vast sum to the French King, for paying his Army in Italy, so he
would spare no Travel nor Treasure, but make War upon the Emperor in Flanders,
with his whole strength, till he forced him to set the Pope at Liberty* and
restore the State of the Church to its former Power and Dignity. And if the
Pope were already at Liberty, and had made an Agreement with the Emperor, he
was to represent to him how little cause he had to trust much to the Emperor,
who had so often broke his faith, and designed to do all he could toward the
Depressing the Ecclesiastical State. And the Pope was to be remembered, that he
had dispensed with the Emperors Oath, for Marrying the Kings Daughter without
communicating the Matter to the King. And if he had done so much for one that
had been his Enemy, how much more might the King expect the like favor, who
had always paid him a most filial Duty? Or if the Pope would not grant the
Commission to the Cardinal to try the Matter, as a Person that being the Kings
chief Minister, was not indifferent enough to judge in any of the Kings
Concerns; he was by all means to overcome that, and assure the Pope that he
would proceed in it as a Judge ought to do. But if the Pope stood upon it, and
would by no means be persuaded to sign the Commission for the Cardinal, then he
was to propose Staphileus, Dean of the Rota, who was then in England; and was
to except against all other Foreigners, if the Pope chanced to propose any
other. He was also to represent to the Pope, that the King would look upon a
delay as a Denial, and if the Pope inclined to consult with any of the
Cardinals about it, he was to divert him from it all that was possible: but if
the Pope would needs do it, then he was to Address himself to them, and partly
by informing them of the reasons of the Kings Cause, partly by rewarding the
good Offices they should do, he was to engage them for the King. And with this
Dispatch Letters were sent to Cardinal Puccy, Sanctorum Quatuor, and the other
Cardinals, to be made use of as there should be occasion for it. And because
Money was like to be the most powerful Argument, especially to men impoverished
by a Captivity* 10000 Ducats were remit^ed to Venice, to be distributed as the
Kings Affairs required; and h^ was empowered to make farther promises, as he
saw cause for it, which the King would faithfully make good; and in particular,
they were to be wanting in nothing, that might absolutely engage the Cardinal
Datary to favor the Kings Business.

The same things had been committed to the Secretary's care, The Pope grants it
when he was in Prison.

Collect. Numb. 4th.


and they were both to proceed by concert, each of them doing all that was
possible to promote the business. But before this reached Rome, Secretary
Knight was come thither, and finding it impossible to be admitted to the Popes
presence, he had by corrupting some of his Guards sent him the Sum of the Kings
Demands. Upon which the Pope sent him word, that the Dis^ensation should be
sent fully expeded. So gracious was a Pope in Captivity. But at that time the
General of the Observants in Spain being at Rome, required a Promise of the
Pope not to grant any thing that might prejudice the Queens Cause till it were
first communicated to the Imperialists there. But when the Pope made his
Escape, Pope escaped December. 9.
the Secretary and the Ambassador went to him to Orvieto about the end of
December, and first did in the Kings and Cardinals name congratulate his
freedom. Then the Secretary discoursed the Business. The Pope owned that he had
received the Message which he had sent to him at Rome, but in respect of his
Promise, and that yet in a manner he was in Captivity, he beged the King would
have a little Patience, and he should before long have not only that
Dispensation, but any thing else that lay in his Power. But the Secretary not
being satisfied with that excuse, the Pope in the end said, he should have it;
but with this condition, That he would beseech the King not to proceed upon it,
till the Pope were fully at Liberty, and the Germans and Spaniards were driven
out of Italy. And upon the Kings promising this, the Dispensation was to be put
in his hands. So the Secretary, who had a great mind once to have the Bull in
his possession, made no scruple to engage his promise for that. The Pope also
told them he was not expert in those things, but he easily apprehended the
danger that might arise from any Dispute about the Succession to the Crown, and
that therefore he would communicate the business to the Cardinal Sanctorum
Quatuor; upon which they resolved to prevent that Cardinals being with the
Pope, and went and delivered the Letters they had for him, and promised him a
good reward if he were favorable to their Requests in the Kings behalf. Then
they showed him the Commissions that were sent from England; but he upon the
perusal of them, said, They could not pass without a perpetual dishonor on the
Pope and the King too, and excepted to several Clauses that were in them. So
they desired him to draw one that might both be sufficient for the Kings
purpose, and such as the Pope might with honor grant. Which being done, the
Pope told them, That though he apprehended great danger to himself, if the
Emperor should know what he had done; yet he would rather expose himself to
utter ruin, than give the King, or the Cardinal cause to think him Ingrate;
but with many sighs and tears, And being at liberty, gives a Bull for it.
he begged that the King would not precipitate things, or expose him to be
undone, by beginning any Process upon the Bull. And so he delivered the
Commission and Dispensation Signed to Knight. But the means that the Pope
proposed for his publishing and owning what he now granted, was, That Lau^rech
with the French Army should march, The Pope's craft and policy
and coming where the Pope was, should require him to grant the Commission: So
that the Pope should excuse himself to the Emperor, that he had refused to
grant it upon the desire of the English Ambassador, but that he could not deny
the General of the French Army, to do an act of public justice: And by this
means he would save his honor, and not seem guilty of breach of promise; and
then he would dispatch the Commission about the time of Lautrech's being near
him, and therefore he entreated the King to accept of what was then granted for
the present. The Commission and Dispensation was given to the Secretary: and
they promised to send the Bull after him, of the same form that was desired
from England, and the Pope engaged to reform it as should be found needful. And
it seems by these Letters, that a Dispensation and Commission had been Signed
by the Pope when he was a Prisoner; but they thought not fit to make any use of
them, lest they should be thought null, as being granted when the Pope was in
Captivity.

Thus the Pope expressed all the readiness that could be expected from him, And
the measures that governed them.
in the circumstances he was then in; being over-awed by the Imperialists, who
were harassing the Country, and taking Castles very near the place where he
was. Lautrech with the French Army lay still fast about Bononia, and as the
season of the year was not favorable, so he did not express any inclinations
to enter into action. The Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor got 4000 Crowns as the
reward of his pains, and in earnest of what he was to expect when the matter
should be brought to a final conclusion. 1528.
In this whole matter the Pope carried himself as a wise and politic Prince,
that considered his Interest, and provided against dangers with great
foresight. But as for Apostolical wisdom, and the Simplicity of the Gospel,
that was not to be expected from him. For now, though the high-sounding names
of Christ's Vicar, and St. Peter's Successor, were still retained to keep up the
Popes Dignity and Authority, yet they had for many Ages governed themselves as
Secular Princes; so that the Maxims of that Court were no more to keep a good
Conscience, and to proceed according to the Rules of the Gospel, and the
Practice of the Primitive Church, committing the event to God, and submitting
to his Will in all things: but the keeping a balance, the maintaining their
Interest in the Courts of Princes, the securing their Dominions, and the
raising their Families, being that which they chiefly looked at, It is not to
be wondered at, that the Pope governed himself by these measures, though
Religion was to be made use of to help him out of straits. All this I set down
the more particularly, both because I take my information from Original
Letters, and that it may chiefly appear how matters went at that time in the
Court of Rome.

Secretary Knight being Infirm, could not travel with that haste that was
required in this business, and therefore he sent the Proto-Notary Gambara with
the Commission and Dispensation to England, and followed in easy journies. The
Cardinals that had been consulted with, Collect. Numb. 5th*
did all express great readiness in granting the Kings desire. The Cardinal
Datary had forsaken the Court, and betaken himself to serve God and his Cure;
and other Cardinals were Hostages, so that now there were but Five about the
Pope, Monte, Sanctorum Quatuor, Ridolphi, Ravennate and Perusino. But a motion
being made of sending over a Legate, the Pope would by no means hearken to it,
for that would draw new troubles on him from the Emperor. That had been desired
from England by a dispatch of the 27th. of December, which pressed a speedy
conclusion of the business; upon which the Pope on the 12th. of January, did
communicate the matter under the Seal of Confession to the Cardinals Sanctorum
Quatuor and Simoneta, The method proposed by the Pope.

Collect. Numb. 6th.


(who was then come to the Court) and upon conference with them, he proposed to
Sir Gregory Cassali, that he thought the safer way was, That either by virtue
of the Commission that the Secretary had obtained, or by the Legantine Power
that was lodged with the Cardinal of York, he should proceed in the business.
And if the King found the matter clear in his own Conscience, (in which the
Pope said, No doctor in the whole world could resolve the matter beter than the
King himself) he should without more noise, make judgment be given; and
presently Marry another Wife, and then send for a Legate to Confirm the matter.
And it would be easier to ratify all when it was once done, than to go on in a
Process from Rome. For the Queen would protest, that both the Place and the
Judges were suspected and not free, upon which, in the course of Law, the Pope
must grant an Inhibition for the Kings not Marrying another while the Suit
depended, and must avocate the business to be heard in the Court of Rome;
which, with other prejudices, were unavoidable in a public Process by Bulls
from Rome. But if the thing went on in England, and the King had once Married
another Wife, the Pope then would find very good reasons to justify the
conf^rming a thing that was gone so far, and promised to send any Cardinal whom
they should name. This the Pope desired the Ambassador would signify to the
King, as the advice of the two Cardinals, and take no notice of him in it. But
the dispatch shows he was a more faithful Minister than to do so.

The Ambassador found all the earnestness in the Pope that was possible, to
comply with the King; and that he was jealous both of the Emperor and Francis,
and depended wholly on the King* so that he found if the terror of the Imperial
Forces were over, the Court of England would dispose of the Apostolical See as
they pleased. And indeed this advice, how little soever it had of the
Simplicity of the Gospel, was certainly prudent and subtle, and that which of
all things the Spaniards apprehended most. And therefore the General of the
Observants moved Cardinal Campegius, then at Rome, for an Inhibition, lest the
Process should be carried on and determined in England. But that being
signified to the Pope, he said, It could not be granted, since there was no
Suit depending, in which case only an Inhibition can be granted.

Staphileus sent from England*
But now I must look over again to England, to open the Counsels there. At that
time Staphileus Dean of the Rota was there; and he either to make his Court the
better, or that he was so persuaded in opinion, seemed fully satisfied about
the Justice of the King's Cause. So they sent him to Rome with Instructions
both public and secret. The public Instructions related to the Popes Affairs,
in which all possible Assistance was promised by the King. But one Proposition
in them flowed from the Cardinals Ambition, That the Kings of England and
France thought it would advance the Popes Interests, His Instructions.
if he should command the Cardinals that were under no restraint, to meet in
some secure place, to consider of the Affairs of the Church, Cotton. Libr.
Vitel. B. 10. Ian. 8.
that they might suffer no prejudice by the Popes Captivity: And for that end,
and to conserve the Dignity of the Apostolic See, that they should choose such
a Vicar or President, as partly by his Prudence and Courage, partly by the
assistance of the two Kings, Duplicates corrected by the Cardinal's Hand.
upon whom depended all their hopes, might do such Services to the Apostolic
See, as were most necessary in that distracted time, by which the Popes Liberty
would be hastened.

It cannot be imagined but the Pope would be offended with this Proposition,
and apprehend that the Cardinal of York was not satisfied to be intriguing for
the Popedom after his death, but was aspiring to it while he was alive. For as
it was plain, he was the Person that must be chosen for that trust; so if the
Pope were used hardly by the Emperor, and forced to ill conditions, the Vicar
so chosen and his Cardinals would disown those Conditions, which might end in a
Schism or his Deposition. But Staphileus his secret Instructions, related
wholly to the Kings business, which were these: That the King had opened to him
the error of his Marriage, and that the said Bishop out of his great Learning,
did now clearly perceive how invalid and insufficient it was: Therefore the
King recommended it to his care, that he would convince the Pope and the
Cardinals, with the Arguments that had been laid before him, and of which a
Breviate was given him. He was also to represent the great mischiefs that might
follow, if Princes got not justice and ease from the Apostolic See. Therefore
if the Pope were yet in Captivity he was to propose a meeting of the Cardinals,
for choosing the Cardinal of York to be their head, during the Popes
Imprisonment, or that a full Commission might be sent to him for the Kings
ma^ter. And in particular he was to take care that the Business might be tried
in England. And for his pains in promoting the Kings Concerns, the King
promised to procure a Bishopric for him in France; and to help him to a
Cardinals hat. By him the King wrote to the Pope. The rude draught of it
remains under the Cardinals hand, earnestly desiring a speedy and favorable
dispatch of his business with a Credence to the Bearer.

The Cardinal also wrote to the Pope by him; The Cardinals Letter^ by him.
and after a long Congratulating his Liberty with many sharp reflections on the
Emperor, he pressed a Dispatch of the Kings Business, in which he would not use
many words: this only I will add, says he, That that which is desired is holy
and just, and very much for the safety and quiet of this Kingdom, which is most
devoted to the Apostolical See. He also wrote by the same hand to the
Ambassador, that the King would have things so carried, that all occasion of
discontent or cavilling, whether at home or abroad, might be removed; and
therefore desired that another Cardinal might be sent Legate to England, and
joined in Commission wi^h himself for judging the Matter. He named either
Campegius, Tranus, or Farnese: Or if that could not be obtained, that a fuller
Commission might be sent to himself, with all possible haste, since delays
might produce great inconveniences. If a Legate were named, then care must be
taken that he should be one who were Learned, Indifferent, and Tractable; and
if Campegius could be the man, he was the fittest person. And when one was
named he should make him a decent present, and assure him that the King would
most liberally recompense all his labor and expense. He also required him to
press his speedy Dispatch, and that the Commission should be full to try and
determine, without any reservation of the Sentence to be given by the Pope.
This Dispatch is interlined, and amended with the Cardinals own hand.

But upon the Arrival of the Messenger whom the Secretary had sent, A Larger
Bull desired by the King.
with the Commission and Dispensation, and the other Packets before mentioned;
It was debated in the Kings Council, whether he should go on in his Process, or
continue to solicit new Bulls from Rome. On the one hand, they saw how
tedious, dangerous and expensive a Process at Rome was like to prove: and
therefore it seemed the easiest and most expedite way to proceed before the
Cardinal in his Legantine Court, who should ex officio, and in the Summary way
of their Court, bring it to a speedy Conclusion. But on the other hand, if the
Cardinal gave Sentence, and the King should Marry, then they were not sure, but
before that time the Pope might either change his mind, or his Interest might
turn him another way. And the Popes Power was so absolute by the Canon Law,
that no general Clauses in Commissions to Legates, could bind him to confirm
their Sentences: and if upon the Kings Marrying another Wife, the Pope should
refuse to confirm it, then the King would be in a worse case than he was now
in, and his Marriage and Issue by it should be still disputable: Therefore they
thought this was by no means to be adventured on, but they should make new
Addresses to the Court of Rome. In the debate, some sharp words fell either
from the King, or some of his Secular Counselors; Gardener and Fox sent to
Rome.
Intimating that if the Pope continued under such fears, the King must find
some other way to set him at ease. So it was resolved that Stephen Gardener,
commonly called Doctor Stevens, the Cardinals chief Secretary, and Edward Fox
the Kings Almoner, should be sent to Rome; the one being esteemed the ablest
Canonist in England, the other one of the best Divines, they were Dispatched
the 10th of February. With Letters from the King,
By them the King wrote to the Pope thanking him, that he had expressed such
forward and earnest willingness to give him ease: and had so kindly promised to
gratify his desires, of which he expected now to see the effects. Collect.
Numb. 7th.
He wrote also to the Cardinals, his thanks for the cheerfulness with which
they had in Consistory promised to promote his Suit; for which he assured them
they should never have cause to Repent. But the Cardinal wrote in a strain,
that shows he was in some fear that if he could not bring about the Kings
desires, and the Cardinal.

Collect. Numb. 8th.


he was like to lose his favor.

He besought the Pope as lying at his feet, that if he thought him a Christian,
a good Cardinal, and not unworthy of that Dignity, an useful member of the
Apostolic See, a Promoter of Justice and Equity, or thought him his faithful
Creature, or that he desired his own eternal Salvation, that he would now so
far consider his Intercession, as to grant kindly and speedily that which the
King earnestly desired; which if he did not know to be Holy, Right, and Just,
he would undergo any hazard or punishment whatsoever, rather than promote it;
but he did aprehend if the King found that the Pope was so overawed by the
Emperor, as not to grant that which all Christendom judged was grounded both on
the Divine and Human Laws, both he and other Christian Princes would from
thence take occasion to provide themselves of other Remedies, and lessen and
despise the Authority of the Apostolic See. Collect. Numb. 9th.


In his Letters to Cassali he expressed a great sense of the Services which the
Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor had done the King; and bid him enquire what were the
things in which he delighted most, whether Furniture, Gold plate, or Horses,
that they might make him acceptable presents; and assure him that the King
would contribute largely toward the carrying on the building of St. Peter's in
the Vatican.

The most Important thing about which they were employed, was to procure the
expediting of a Bull which was formed in England, The substance of the Bull
desired by them.

Collect. Numb. 10th.


with all the strongest Clauses that could be imagined. In the Preamble of
which all the Reasons against the validity of the Bull of P. Julius the 2d,
were recited: and it was also hinted that it was against the Law of God; but to
lessen that, it was added, at least where there was not a sufficient
Dispensation obtained: therefore the Pope, to reward the great Services by
which the King had obliged the Apostolic See, and having regard to the
Distractions that might follow on a Disputable Title; upon a full Consultation
with the Cardinals, having also heard the Opinions of Divines and Canonists,
Deputed -- for his Legate, to concur with the Cardinal of York, either
together, or (the one being hindered, or unwilling) severally. And if they found
those things that were suggested against the Bull of P. Julius, or any of them,
well or sufficiently proved, 1527.
then to declare it void and null, as surreptitiously procured, upon false
grounds; and thereupon to Annul the Marriage that had followed upon it: And to
give both Parties full leave to Marry again, notwithstanding any Appellation or
Protestation, the Pope making them his Vicars, with full and absolute Power and
Authority: empowering them also to declare the Issue begotten in the former
Marriage good and legitimate, if they saw cause for it. The Pope binding
himself to confirm whatever they should do in that process, and never to revoke
or repeal what they should Pronounce. Declaring also that this Bull should
remain in force till the Process were ended, and that by no Revocation or
Inhibition it should be recalled; and if any such were obtained, these are all
declared void and null, and the Legates were to proceed notwithstanding: and all
ended with a full Non obstante.

This was judged the uttermost force that could be in a Bull: Though the
Civilians would scarce allow any validity at all in these extravagant Clauses:
but the most material thing in this Bull, is, that it seems the King was not
fully resolved to declare his Daughter illegitimate. Whether he pretended this,
to mitigate the Queens, or the Emperors opposition, or did really intend it, is
not clear. But what he did afterward in Parliament, shows, he had this deep in
his thoughts, though the Queens Carriage did soon after provoke him to pursue
his resentments against her Daughter. The French King did also join a most
earnest Letter of his to the Pope, which they were also to deliver. They had
likewise a secret Instruction by all means to endeavor that Cardinal Campegio
should be the Legate, he had the reputation of a Learned Canonist, and they
knew he was a tractable man: and besides that, he was Bishop of Salisbury, the
King had obliged him by the grant of a Palace, Rot. Pa^. 2d^ Pars. Regn. 10.
which the King was building in Burgo at Rome for his Ambassadors, which before
it was finished, he had by a Patent given to him and his heirs: so they had
better hopes of him than of any other.

By these Ambassadors the Cardinal wrote a long and most earnest Letter to John
Cassali the Proto-Notarie, The Cardinals Earnestness in this matter.

Collect. Numb. 11th.


that was the Ambassadors Brother. In which all the Arguments that a most
anxious mind could invent or dictate, are laid together to persuade the Pope to
grant the Kings desires. Among other things he tells him, How he had engaged to
the King, that the Pope would not deny it; That the King both out of scruple of
Conscience, and because of some Diseases in the Queen, that were incurable, had
resolved never to come near her more; and that if the Pope continued, out of
his partial respects to the Emperor, to be inexorable, the King would proceed
another way. He offers to take all the blame of it upon his own Soul, if it
were amiss; with many other particulars in which he is so pressing, that I
cannot imagine what moved the Lord Herbert, who saw those Letters, to think
that the Cardinal did not really intend the Divorce. He (it seems) saw another
Paper of their Instructions, by which they were ordered to say to the Pope,
that the Cardinal was not the Author of the Counsel. But all that was intended
by that, was only to excuse him so far, that he might not be thought too
partial, and an incompetent Judge. For as he was far from disowning the justice
of the Kings Suit, so he would not have trusted a Secret of that Importance to
paper, which when it should be known to the King, would have lost him his
favor. But undoubtedly it was concerted between the King and him to remove an
Exception, which otherwise the Cardinals of the Imperial Faction would have
made, to his being the Judge in that matter.

Collect. Numb. 12.
With those Letters and Instructions were Gardener and Fox sent to Rome, where
both the Cassalies and Staphileus were promoting the Kings business all they
could. And being strengthened with the Accession of those other two they made a
greater progress; so that in April the Pope did in Consistory, Campegio
declared Legate.

Collect. Numb. 10.


Declare Cardinal Campegio Legate to go to England, that he with the Cardinal
of York might try the validity of the Kings Marriage: But that* Cardinal made
great excuses, he was then Legate at Rome, in which he had such advantages,
that he had no mind to enter in a business which must for ever engage either
the Emperor or the King against him. He also pretended an Inability to travel
so great a journey, being much subject to the Gout. But when this was known in
England, the Cardinal wrote him a most earnest Letter, Wolsey writes to him to
haste over.

May 7.


to hasten over, and bring with him all such things as were necessary for
making their Sentence firm and irreversible, so that it might never again be
Questioned.

But here I shall add a Remark, which though it is of no great importance, yet
will be diverting to the Reader. The draught of the Letter is in Wolsey's
Secretaries hand, amended in some places by his own; and concluded thus, I hope
all things shall be done according to the Will of God, the desire of the King,
the Quiet of the Kingdom, and to our honor with a good Conscience. But the
Cardinal dashed out this last word with a good Conscience. Perhaps judging that
was a thing fit for meaner persons, but that it was below the Dignity of two
Cardinals to consider it much. He wrote also to Cassali high complements for
his diligence in the Step that was made, but desired him with all possible
means to get the Bull granted and trusted to his keeping, with the deepest
Protestations, that no use should be made of it, but that the King only should
see it; by which his mind would be at ease, and he being put in good hopes*
would employ his Power in the service of the Pope and Apostolic See: but the
Pope was not a man to be cozened so easily.

When the Cardinal heard by the next Dispatch what excuses and delays Campegio
made, May 23.
he wrote to him again, and pressed his coming over in haste. For his being
Legate of Rome he desired him to name a Vice-Legate. For his want of Money and
Horses, Gardener would furnish him as he desired, and he should find an
equipage ready for him in France; and he might certainly expect great rewards
from the King. But if he did not make more haste, the King would incline to
believe an advertisement that was sent him, of his turning over to the Emperors
Party. Therefore if he either valued the Kings kindness, or were grateful for
the favors he had received from him; if he valued the Cardinals Friendship or
safety, or if he would hinder the diminution of the Authority of the Roman
Church, all excuses set aside, he must make what haste in his Journey was
possible. Yet the Legate made no great haste, for till October following he
came not into England. The Bull that was desired could not be obtained, but
another was granted, which perhaps was of more force because it had not those
extraordinary Clauses in it. The Pope grants a Decretal Bull

Anti-Sanderus. L. Herbert.


There is the Copy of a Bull to this purpose in the Cottonian Library, which
has been printed more than once by some that have taken it for a Copy of the
same Bull that was sent by Campegio: but I take it to be rather, a Copy of that
Bull which the Pope Signed at Rome while he was there a Prisoner, and probably
afterward at Orvieto he might give it the date that it bears 1527. December. 17.
But that there was a Decretal Bull sent by Campegio will appear evidently in
the sequel of this Relation. About this time I meet with the first evidence of
the progress of the Kings love to Anne Boleyn, in two Original Letters of hers
to the Cardinal, from which it appears, not only that the King had then
resolved to Marry her, but that the Cardinal was privy to it. They bear no
date, but the matter of them shows they were written after the end of May, when
the Sweating-sickness began, and about the time that the Legate was expected.
They give such a light to the History, that I shall not cast them over to the
Collection at the end, but set them down here.

MY Lord, in my most humblest wise that my heart can think, Two Letters of Anne
Boleyn's to Wolsey.
I desire you to pardon me that I am so bold to trouble you with my simple and
rude writing, esteeming it to proceed from her, that is much desirous to know
that your Grace does well, as I perceive by this Bearer that you do. The which
I pray God long to continue, as I am most bound to pray; for I do know the
great pains and troubles that you have taken for me both day and night, is
never like to be recompensed on my part, but alonly in loving you next, unto
the Kings Grace, above all creatures living. And I do not doubt but the daily
proofs of my deeds, shall manifestly declare and affirm my writing to be true,
and I do trust you do think the same. My Lord, I do assure you I do long to
hear from you news of the Legate: for I do hope and they come from you they
shall be very good, and I am sure you desire it as much as I, and more, and it
were possible, as I know it is not: and thus remaining in a steadfast hope, I
make an end of my Letter written with the hand of her that is most bound to be.

THe writer of this Letter would not cease till she had caused me likewise to
set to my hand; desiring you, A Postscript of the Kings to him.
though it be short to take it in good part. I ensure you there is neither of
us, but that greatly desires to see you, and much more joyous to hear that you
have escaped this Plague so well, trusting the fury thereof to be passed,
specially with them that keeps good diet as I trust you do. The not hearing
of the Legates Arrival in France, causes us somewhat to muse; notwithstanding
we trust by your diligence and vigilance (with the assistance of Almighty God)
shortly to be eased out of that trouble. No more to you at this time; but that
I pray God send you as good health and prosperity as the Writer would.

By Your Loving Sovereign and Friend Henry K. Your Humble Servant Anne Boleyn.


1528.
MY Lord, In my most humblest wise that my poor heart can think, I do thank your
Grace for your kind Letter, and for your rich and goodly Present, the which I
shall never be able to deserve without your help: of the which I have hitherto
had so great plenty, that all the days of my life I am most bound of all
Creatures, next the King's Grace, to love and serve your Grace: of the which I
beseech you never to doubt, that ever I shall vary from this thought as long as
any breath is in my body. And as touching your Graces trouble with the sweat, I
thank our Lord, that them that I desired and prayed for, are escaped, and that
is the King and you; not doubting but that God has preserved you both for great
causes known alonly of his high wisdom. And as for the coming of the Legate, I
desire that much, and if it be God's pleasure, I pray him to send this matter
shortly to a good end, and then I trust, My Lord, to recompense part of your
great pains. In the which I must require you in the mean time to accept my
good will in the stead of the power, the which must proceed partly from you, as
our Lord knows; to whom I beseech to send you long life, with continuance in
honor. Written with the hand of her that is most bound to be,

Your Humble and Obedient Servant, Anne Boleyn.


Collect. Numb. 14th.
The Cardinal hearing that Campegius had the Decretal Bull committed to his
Trust, to be showed only to the King and himself, wrote to the Ambassador that
it was necessary it should be also showed to some of the Kings Council; not to
make any use of it, but that thereby they might understand how to manage the
Process better by it. This he begged might be trusted to his care and fidelity,
and he undertook to manage it so, that no kind of danger could arise out of it.

At this time the Cardinal having Finished his Foundations at Oxford and
Ipswich, The Cardinal's Colleges finished.
and finding they were very acceptable, both to the King and to the Clergy,
resolved to go on, and suppress more Monasteries, and erect new Bishoprics,
turning some Abbeys to Cathedrals. This was proposed in the Consistory, October.
30.
and granted, as appears by a dispatch of Cassali's. He also spoke to the Pope
about a general Visitation of all Monasteries. And on the 4th of November, the
Bull for suppressing some was expected, a Copy whereof is yet extant, but
written in such a hand, that I could not read three words together in any place
of it; and though I tried others that were good at reading all hands, yet they
could not do it. But I find by the dispatch that the Pope did it with some
aversion: and when Gardener told him plainly, More Monasteries were to be
suppressed.
it was necessary and it must be done, he paused a little, and seemed unwilling
to give any further offense to Religious Orders: But since he found it so
uneasy to gratify the King in so great a Point, as the matter of his Divorce,
he judged it the more necessary to mollify him by a compliance in all other
things. So there was a power given to the Two Legates to examine the state of
the Monasteries, and to suppress such as they thought fit, and convert them
into Bishoprics and Cathedrals.

While matters went thus between Rome and England, the Queen was as active as
she could be, to engage her Two Nephews, the Emperor, and his Brother, to
appear for her. The Emperor oppos^s the Kings suit.
She complained to them much of the King, but more of the Cardinal: She also
gave them notice of all the Exceptions that were made to the Bull, and desired
both their advice and assistance: They having a mind to perplex the Kings
Affairs, advised her by no means to yield, nor to be induced to enter into a
Religious life; and gave her assurance, that by their Interest at Rome, they
would support her, and maintain her Daughters Title, if it went to extremities.
And as they employed all their agents at Rome to serve her concerns, so they
consulted with the Canonists about the force of the Exceptions to the Bull. The
issue of which was, that a Breve was found out, or forged, that supplied some
of the most material defects in the Bull. For whereas in the Bull, the Preamble
bore, that the King and Queen had desired the Popes Dispensation to Marry, that
the Peace might continue between the Two Crowns without any other cause given:
In the preamble of this Breve, A Breve found out in Spain.

Collect. Numb. 15th.


mention is made of their desire to Marry, because otherwise it was not likely
that the Peace would be continued between the Two Crowns. And for that, and
diverse other reasons they asked the Dispensation. Which in the body of the
Breve is granted, bearing date the 26th of December, 1503. Upon this they
pretended that the Dispensation was granted upon good Reasons; since by this
Petition it appeared, that there were fears of a Breach between the Crowns: And
that there were also other reasons made use of, though they were not named. But
there was one Fatal thing in it. In the Bull it is only said, That the Queens
Petition bore, That perhaps she had Consummated her Marriage with Prince
Arthur, by the Carnalis Copula. But in this perhaps is left out, and it is
plainly said, That they had Consummated their Marriage. This the King's
Council, who suspected that the Breve was forged, made great use of when the
Question was argued, whether Prince Arthur knew her or not? Though at this time
'twas said, the Spaniards did put it in on design, knowing it was like to be
proved, that the former Marriage was Consummated: which they intended to throw
out of the debate, since by this it appeared that the Pope did certainly know
that, and yet granted the Breve; and that therefore there was to be no more
enquiry to be made into that, which was already confessed: so that all that was
now to be debated, was the Popes power of granting such a Dispensation, in
which they had good reason to expect a favorable Decision at Rome.

But there appeared great grounds to reject this Breve as a forged writing.
Presumptions of its being forged.
It was neither in the Records of England, nor Spain, but said to be found
among the Papers of D. de Puebla, that had been the Spanish Ambassador in
England at the time of concluding the Match. So that if he only had it, it must
have been cassated, otherwise the Parties concerned would have got it into
their hands: Or else it was forged since. Many of the names were written false,
which was a presumption that it was lately made by some Spaniards, who knew not
how to write the names true. For Sigismund, who was Secretary, when it was
pretended to have been Signed, was an exact man, and no such errors were found
in Breves at that time. But that which showed it a manifest Forgery, was, that
it bore date the 26th of December, Anno 1503. on the same day that the Bull was
granted. It was not to be imagined that in the same day a Bull, and a Breve,
should have been expedited in the same business, with such material differences
in them. And the style of the Court of Rome had this singularity in it; That in
all their Breves, they reckon the beginning of the year from Christmas Day,
which being the Nativity of our Lord, they count the year to begin then. But in
their Bulls they reckon the year to begin at the Feast of the Annunciation. So
that a Breve dated the 26th. of December, 1503. was in the vulgar account in
the year, 1502. therefore it must be false; for neither was Julius the 2d. who
granted it, then Pope, nor was the Treaty of the Marriage so far advanced at
that time, as to admit of a Breve so soon. But allowing the Breve to be true,
they had many of the same Exceptions to it, that they had to the Bull, since it
bore that the King desired the Marriage, to avoid a Breach between the Crowns,
which was false. It likewise bore that the Marriage had been Consummated
between the Queen and Prince Arthur, which the Queen denied was ever done; so
that the suggestion in her name being as she said, false, it could have no
force, though it were granted to be a true Breve: And they said, it was plain,
the Imperialists were convinced the Bull was of no force, since they betook
themselves to such arts to fortify their Cause.

Campegio comes into England.
When Cardinal Campegio came to England, he was received with the public
Solemnities ordinary in such a case, and in his speech at his first Audience,
he called the King the Deliverer of the Pope, and of the City of Rome, with the
highest complements that the occasion did require. But when he was admitted to
a private Conference with the King, and the Cardinal, he used many arguments to
diswade the King from prosecuting the matter any further. This the King took
very ill, as if his errand had been rather to confirm than annul his Marriage;
and complained that the Pope had broken his word to him. But the Legate studied
to qualify him, and showed the Decretal Bull, by which he might see, that
though the Pope wished rather that the business might come to a more friendly
conclusion; And shows the King the Bull,
yet if the King could not be brought to that, he was empowered to grant him
all that he desired. But he could not be brought to part with the DecretalBull
out of his hands, or to leave it for a minute, either with the King or the
Cardinal: saying, That it was demanded on these terms, that no other person
should see it; and that Gardener and the Ambassador had only moved to have it
expedited, But refuses to let it be seen to the Council.
and sent by the Legate, to let the King see how well the Pope was affected to
him. With all this the King was much dissatisfied; but to encourage him again,
the Legate told him, he was to speak to the Queen in the Popes name, to induce
her to enter into a Religious life, and to make the Vows. But when he proposed
that to her, she answered him modestly, that she could not dispose of her self,
but by the advice of her Nephews.

Of all this the Cardinal of York advertised the Cassalies, and Collect. Numb.
16th.

Collect. Numb. 17th.


ordered them to use all possible endeavors, Wolsey's endeavor at Rome that
it might be showed.
that the Bull might be showen to some of the Kings Council. Upon that (Sir
Gregory being then out of Rome) the Proto-Notary went to the Pope, and
complained that Campegio had dissuaded the Divorce. The Pope justified him in
it, and said, He did as he had ordered him. He next complained that the Legate
would not proceed to execute the Legantine Commission. The Pope denied that he
had any order from him to delay his proceedings, but that by virtue of his
Commission they might go on and pass Sentence. Then the Proto-Notary pressed
him for leave to show the Bull to some of the Kings Council, complaining of
Campegio's stiffness in refusing it, and that he would not trust it to the
Cardinal of York, who was his equal in the Commission. To this the Pope
answered in passion, That he could show the Cardinals Letter, in which he
assures him, that the Bull should only be showed to the King and himself; and
that if it were not granted he was ruined, therefore to preserve him he had
sent it, but had ordered it to be burnt when it was once showed. He wished he
had never sent it, saying, he would gladly lose a Finger to recover it again,
and expressed great grief for granting it: and said, They had got him to send
it, and now would have it showed, to which he would never consent, for then he
was undone for ever. Upon this, the Proto-Notary laid before him the danger of
losing the King, and the Kingdom of England; of ruining the Cardinal of York,
and of the undoing of their Family, whose hopes depended on the Cardinal; and
that by these means Heresy would prevail in England, which if it once had
great footing there, would not be so easily rooted out: That all persons judged
the Kings Cause right; but though it were not so, some things that were not
good, must be born with to avoid greater evils. And at last he fell down at his
feet, and in most passionate expressions begged him to be more compliant to the
Kings desires, and at least not to deny that small favor of showing the
Decretal to some few Counselors, upon the assurance of absolute secrecy: But
the Pope interrupted him, and with great signs of an unusual grief, told him,
But all in vain.
these sad effects could not be charged on him, he had kept his word, and done
what he had promised, but upon no consideration would he do any thing that
might wound his Conscience, or blemish his Integrity. Therefore let them
proceed as they would in England, he should be free of all blame, but should
confirm their Sentence. And he protested he had given Campegio no commands to
make any delays, but only to give him notice of their proceedings. If the King,
who had maintained the Apostolic See, had written for the Faith, and was the
Defender of it, would over-turn it, it would end in his own disgrace. But at
last the secret came out, for the Pope confessed there was a League in Treaty
between the Emperor and himself; but denied that he had bound himself up by it,
as to the Kings business.

The Pope consulted with the Cardinals, Sanctorum Quatuor and Simonetta, (not
mentioning the Decretal to them, which he had granted without communicating it
to any body, or entering it in any Register) and they were of opinion that the
Process should be carried on in England, without demanding any thing further
from Rome. But the Imperial Cardinals spoke against it, and were moving
presently for an Inhibition, and an Avocation of the Cause, to be tried at the
Court of Rome. The Pope also took notice, that the Intercession of England and
France had not prevailed with the Venetians to restore Cervia and Ravenna,
which they had taken from him; and that he could not think that Republic durst
do so, if these Kings were in earnest. It had been promised that they should be
restored as soon as his Legate was sent to England, but it was not yet done.
The Proto-Notary told him it should most certainly be done. Thus ended that
Conversation. But the more earnest the Cardinal was to have the Bull seen by
some of the Privy Council, the Pope was the more confirmed in his resolutions
never to consent to it. For he could not imagine the desire of seeing it was a
bare curiosity, or only to direct the Kings Counselors; since the King and the
Cardinal could inform them of all the material Clauses that were in it.
Therefore he judged the desire of seeing it was only that they might have so
many witnesses to prove that it was once granted, whereby they had the Pope in
their power; and this he judged too dangerous for him to submit to.

The Pope sends Campana to England.

Collect. Numb. 18th.


But the Pope finding the King and the Cardinal so ill satisfied with him,
resolved to send Francisco Campana, one of his Bedchamber, to England, to
remove all mistakes, and to feed the King with fresh hopes. In England,
Campegio found still means by new delays to put off the business, and amused
the King with new and subtle motions for ending the matter more dexterously.
Upon which, in the beginning of December, Sir Francis Brian and Peter Vannes,
New Ambassadors sent to Rome,
the Kings Secretary for the Latin Tongue were sent to Rome. They had it in
Commission to search all the Records there, for the Breve that was now so much
talked of in Spain. They were to propose several overtures. Whether if the
Queen vowed Religion, the Pope would not dispense with the Kings second
Marriage? or if the Queen would not vow Religion, With other overtures.
unless the King also did it, Whether in that case would the Pope dispense with
his vow? Or whether if the Queen would hear of no such proposition, would not
the Pope dispense with the Kings having two Wives? For which there were diverss
presidents vouched from the Old Testament. They were to represent to the Pope
that the King had laid out much of his best Treasure in his Service, and
therefore he expected the highest favors out of the deepest Treasure of the
Church. And Peter Vannes was commanded to tell the Pope as of himself, Collect.
Numb. 19th.
that if he did for partial respects and fears, refuse the Kings desires, he
perceived it would not only alienate the King from him, but that many other
Princes his Confederates, with their Realms, would withdraw their Devotion and
Obedience from the Apostolic See.

By a dispatch that followed them, the Cardinal tried a new project, which was
an offer of 2000 men for a Guard to the Pope, A Guard of 2000 men offered to
the Pope.
to be maintained at the cost of the King and his Confederates. And also
proposed an enterview of the Pope, the Emperor, the French King, and the
Ambassadors of other Princes, to be either at Nice, Avignon, or in Savoy, and
that himself would come thither from the King of England. But the Pope resolved
steadfastly to keep his ground, and not to engage himself too much to any
Prince; therefore the motion of a Guard did not at all work upon him. To have
Guards about him upon another Princes pay, was to be their Prisoner; and he was
so weary of his late Imprisonment, that he would not put himself in hazard of
it a second time. Besides, such a Guard would give the Emperor just cause of
jealousy, and yet not secure him against his power. He had been also so
unsuccesful in his contests with the Emperor, The Pope resolved to unite
himself to the Emperor.
that he had no mind to give him any new provocation: And though the Kings of
England and France gave him good words, yet they did nothing, nor did the King
make War upon the Emperor, so that his Armies lying in Italy, he was still
under his power. Therefore the Pope resolved to unite himself firmly to the
Emperor; and all the use he made of the Kings earnestness in his Divorce, was
only to bring the Emperor to better terms. The Lutherans in Germany were like
to make great use of any decision he might make against any of his Predecessors
Bulls. The Cardinal Elector of Mentz, had written to him to consider well what
he did in the Kings Divorce, for if it went on, nothing had ever fallen out
since the beginning of Luthers Sect, that would so much strenghen it as that
Sentence. He was also threatened on the other side from Rome, Being frightened
with the threats of the Imperialists.
that the Emperor would have a General Council called, and whatsoever he did in
this Process should be examined there, and he proceeded against accordingly.
Nor did they forget to put him in mind of his Birth, that he was a Bastard, and
so by the Canon incapable of that Dignity, and that thereupon they would depose
him. He having all these things in his prospect, and being naturally of a
fearful temper, which was at this time more prevalent in him by reason of his
late Captivity, resolved not to run these hazards, which seemed unavoidable, if
he proceeded further in the Kings business. But his constant Maxim, being to
promise and swear deepest, when he intended least, he sent Campana to England,
with a Letter of Credence to the Cardinal the effects of which message will
appear afterward. And thus ended this year, in which it was believed that if
the King had employed that Money, which was spent in a fruitless Negotiation at
Rome, on a War in Flanders, it had so distracted the Emperors Forces, and
encouraged the Pope, that he had sooner granted that, which in a more fruitless
way was sought of him.

In the beginning of the next year, Cassali wrote to the Cardinal, 1529. Ian. 3.
that the Pope was much inclined to unite himself with the Emperor, and
proposed to go in Person to Spain, to solicit a general Peace; but intended to
go privately, and desired the Cardinal would go with him thither, as his Friend
and Counselor, and that they two should go as Legates. But Cassali, by
Salviati's means, who was in great favor with the Pope, understood that the
Pope was never in greater fear of the Emperor than at that time; for his
Ambassador had threatened the Pope severely, if he would not recall the
Commission that he had sent to England; Repents his granting the Decretal.
so that the Pope spoke often to Salviati of the great Repentance that he had
inwardly in his heart, for granting the Decretal: and said, He was undone for
ever, if it came to the Emperors knowledge. He also resolved, that though the
Legates gave Sentence in England, it should never take effect, for he would not
confirm it: Of which Gregory Cassali gave Advertisement by an express
Messenger, who as he passed through Paris, Kings Letter to the Cardinal, Ian.
8th.
met Secretary Knight and Doctor Bennet, whom the King had dispatched to Rome,
to assist his other Ambassadors there, and gave them an account of his message:
and that it was the Advice of the Kings Friends at Rome, That he and his
Confederates should follow the War more vigorously, and press the Emperor
harder, without which all their applications to the Pope would signify
nothing. Of this they gave the Cardinal an account, and went on but faintly in
their Journey, judging that upon these Advertisements they would be recalled,
and other Counsels taken.

At the same time the Pope was with his usual Arts cajoling the Kings Agents in
Italy: Ian. 9.
For when Sir Francis Brian and Peter Vannes came to Bononia, the Proto-Notary
Cassali was surprised, to hear that the business was not already ended in
England: since (he said) he knew there were sufficient Powers sent about it,
1529.
and that the Pope assured him he would confirm their Sentence; but that he
made a great difference between the confirming their judgment, by which he had
the Legates between him and the Envy or Odium of it, and the granting a Bull,
by which the Judgment should arise immediately from himself. This his best
Friends dissuaded, and he seemed apprehensive, that in case he should do it, a
Council would be called, and he should be deposed for it. And any such
distraction in the Papacy, considering the footing which Heresy had alread
gotten, would ruin the Ecclesiastical State, and the Church: So dexterously did
the Pope govern himself between such contrary tides. But all this Dissimulation
was short of what he acted by Campana in England, whose true errand thither was
to order Campegio to destroy the Bull; but he did so persuade the King and the
Cardinal of the Popes sincerity, Ian. 15.
that by a dispatch to Sir Francis Brian, and Peter Vannes, and Sir Gregory
Cassali, he chid the two former for not making more haste to Rome; for he
believed it might have been a great advantage to the Kings Affairs, if they had
got thither before the General of the Observants (then Cardinal Angel.) He
ordered them to setle the business of the Guard about the Pope presently, and
tells them that the Secretary was recalled, and Dr. Stephens again sent to
Rome: And in a Letter to Secretary Knight, who went no further than Lions, he
writ to him; That Campana had assured the King and him, But feeds the King with
high promises.
in the Popes name, that the Pope was ready to do, not only all that of Law,
Equity, or Justice, could be desired of him, but whatever of the fullness of his
Power he could do or devise, for giving the King content: And that although
there were three things, which the Pope had great reason to take care of; The
calling a General Council, The Emperors descent into Italy, and the Restitution
of his Towns, which were offered to be put in his hands by the Emperors means;
yet neither these, nor any other consideration, should divert him from doing
all that lay within his Authority, or Power, for the King: And that he had so
deep a sense of the Kings merits, and the obligations that he had laid on him,
that if his resignation of the Popedom might do him any Service, he would
readily consent to it: And therefore in the Popes name he encouraged the
Legates to proceed and end the business.

Upon these assurances the Cardinal ordered the Secretary to haste forward to
Rome, and to thank the Pope for that kind message, to setle the Guard about
him, and to tell him, that for a Council, none could be called but by himself,
with the consent of the Kings of England and France. And for any pretended
Council or meeting of Bishops, which the Emperor by the Cardinals of his Party
might call, he needed not fear that. For his Towns, they should be most
certainly restored. Nor was the Emperors offering to put them in his hand to be
much regarded; for though he restored them, if the Pope had not a better
Guaranty for them, it would be easy for him, to take them from him when he
pleased. He was also to propose a firmer League between the Pope, England, and
France, in order to which, he was to move the Pope most earnestly to go to
Nice; and if the Pope proposed the Kings taking a second Wife, with a
Legitimation of the Issue, which she might have, so the Queen might be induced
to enter into a state of Religion, to which the Pope inclined most, he was not
to accept of that; both because the thing would take up much time, and they
found the Queen resolved to do nothing, but as she was advised by her Nephews.
Yet if the Pope offered a Decretal about it, he might take it, to be made use
of as the Occasion might require. But by a Postscript he is recalled, and it is
signified to him, that Gardener was sent to Rome, to negotiate these a^fairs,
who had returned to England with the Legate, and his being so successful in his
former Message, made them think him the fittest Minister they could employ in
that Court; and to send him with the greater Advantage, he was made a Privy
Counselor.

But an unlooked-for Accident put a stop to all Proceedings in the Court of
Rome. The Pope sickens.
For on Epiphany-day the Pope was taken extreme ill at Mass, and a great
sickness followed, of which it was generally believed he could not recover; and
though his distemper did soon abate so much, that it was thought to be over,
yet it returned again upon him, insomuch that the Physicians did suspect he was
poisoned. Then followed all the secret Caballings and Intrigues, which are
ordinary in that Court upon such an occasion. The Collonna's and the other
Imperialists were very busy, but the Cardinal of Mantua opposed them; and
Farnese who was then at his house in the Country, came to Rome and joined with
Mantua; and these of that Faction, resolved that if the Spanish Army marched
from Naples toward them, they would dispense with that Bull, which provides
that the Succeeding Pope should be chosen in the same place where the former
died, and would retire to some safe place. Some of the Cardinals spoke highly
in favor of Cardinal Wolsey, Ian. 27.
whom (if the Ambassadors did not flatter and lie grossly in their Letters, from
which I draw these Informations) they reverenced as a Deity. And the Cardinal
of Mantua, it seems, proposing him as a Pattern, would needs have a Particular
account of his whole Course of Life, and expressed great esteem for him. When
Gardener was come as far as Lions he wrote the Cardinal word, that there went a
Prophecy that an Angel should be the next Pope, but should die soon after. He
also gave Advice that if the Pope died, the Commission for the Legates must
needs expire with him, unless they made some Step in their Business, by a
Citation of Parties, which would keep it alive; but whether this was done or
not I cannot find. Cardinal Wolsey's intrigues for the Papacy.

Feb. 6th.


The Cardinals Ambition was now fermenting strongly, and he resolved to lay his
Project for the Popedom better than he had done before. His Letter about it to
Gardener, and the Kings Instructions to his Ambassadors, are Printed by Fox,
and the Originals from which they are taken are yet extant. He wrote also
another Letter to the Ambassadors, which the Reader will find in the
Collection. Collect. Numb. 20.
But because the Instructions show what were the methods in choosing Popes in
those days, by which it may be easily gathered, how such an Election must needs
recommend a man to Infallibility, Supremacy, and all the other Appendages of
Christ's Vicar on Earth, I shall give a short Summary of them.

By his Letter to his Confident Gardener, he commits the thing chiefly to his
care, and orders him to employ all his parts, to bring it to the desired issue;
sparing neither Presents, nor Promises; and that as he saw men's Inclinations or
affections led them, whether to public or private Concerns, so he should
govern himself toward them accordingly. The Instructions bear, that the King
thought the Cardinal the fittest person to succeed to the Papacy; (they being
advertised that the Pope was dead; The Kings Instructions for the Election.
) that the French King did also of his own Motion offer his Assistance to him
in it, and that both for public and private ends, the Cardinal was the
fittest. Therefore the Ambassadots are required with all possible earnestness
and vigor, to promote his Election. A Schedule of the Cardinals names is sent
them with marks to every one, whether he was like to be present or absent,
favorable, indifferent, or opposite to them. It was reckoned there could be
but 39 present, Numb.
of which 26 were necessary to choose the Pope. Of these the two Kings thought
themselves sure of 20. So 6 was all the number that the Ambassadors were to
gain, and to that number, they were first to offer them good reasons, to
convince them of the Cardinals fitness for the Papacy. But because humane
frailty was such, that reason did not always take place, they were to promise
Promotions, and Sums of Money, with other good Rewards, which the King gave
them Commission to offer, and would certainly make them good: besides all the
great Preferments which the Cardinal had, that should be shared among those who
did procure his Election. The Cardinals of their Party were first to enter into
a firm bond, to exclude all others. They were also to have some Creatures of
theirs to go into the Conclave, to manage the Business. Sir Gregory Cassali,
was thought fittest for that Service. And if they saw the adverse party too
strong in the Conclave, so that they could carry nothing, then Gardener was to
draw a Protestation, which should be made in name of the two Crowns; and that
being made, all the Cardinals of their Faction were to leave the Conclave. And
if the fear of the Emperors Forces overawed them, the Ambassadors were to offer
a Guard of 2 or 3000. men to secure the Cardinals: and the French King Ordered
his Armies to move, if the Spanish Troops did move either from Naples, or
Millan. They were also to assure them, that the Cardinal would presently upon
his Election come and live at Rome, and were to use all endeavors to gain the
Cardinal de Medici to their Faction; but at the same time to assure the
Florentines, that Wolsey would assist them to exclude the Medici out of the
Government of their Town and State. They were also to have a strict eye upon
the motions of the French Faction, lest if the Cardinal were excluded, they
should consent to any other, and refuse to make the Protestation as it was
desired. But to oblige Campegio the more, it was added, that if they found all
hopes of raising the Cardinal of York to vanish, then they should try if
Campegio could be Elected; and in that case the Cardinals of their Faction were
to make no Protestation.

These were the Apostolical Methods, then used for choosing a Successor to St.
Peter; for though a Successor had been chosen to Judas by lot, yet more
Caution was to be used in choosing one for the Prince of the Apostles. But when
the Cardinal heard that the Pope was not dead, and that there was hope of his
recovery, he wrote another long Letter to the Ambassadors (the Original of
which is yet extant) to keep all their Instructions about a new Pope very
secret, to be gaining as many Cardinals as they could, and to take care that
the Cardinals should not go into the Conclave, unless they were free, and safe
from any fears of the Imperial Forces. But if the Pope recovered, Feb. 20.

New propositions about the Divorce.


they were to press him to give such orders about the Kings Business, that it
might be speedily ended: and then the Cardinal would come and wait on the Pope
over to Spain, as he had proposed. And for the Apprehensions the Pope had of
the Emperors being highly offended with him, if he granted the Kings desire, or
of his coming into Italy, he needed not fear him. They knew whatever the
Emperor pretended about his obligation to protect his Aunt, it was only for
reason of State: but if he were* satisfied in other things, that would be soon
passed over. They knew also that his design of going into Italy was laid aside
for that year; because he apprehended that France and England would make War on
him in other places. There were also many Precedents found, of Dispensations
granted by Popes in like cases: And lately there had been one granted by Pope
Alexander the 6th, to the King of Hungary, against the Opinion of his
Cardinals, which had never been questioned: and yet he could not pretend to
such Merits as the King had. And all that had ever been said in the Kings
Cause, was Sum'd up in a short Breviate by Cassali, and offered to the Pope; a
Copy whereof taken from an Original under his own hand, Collect. Numb. 21.
the Reader will find in the Collection.

The King ordered his Ambassadors to make as many Cardinals sure for his cause,
as they could, who might bring the Pope to consent to it, if he were still
averse. But the Pope was at this time possessed with a new jealousy, of which
the French King was not free, as if the King had been tampering with the
Emperor, and had made him great offers, so he would consent to the Divorce;
about which Francis wrote an anxious Letter to Rome, the Original of which I
have seen. The Pope was also surprised at it, and questioned the Ambassadors
about it; but they denied it, and said the union between England and France was
inseparable, and that these were only the Practices of the Emperors Agents to
create distrust. The Pope seemed satisfied with what they said, and added that
in the present conjuncture a firm union between them was necessary. Of all this
Sir Francis Brian wrote a long account in cipher.

But the Popes relapse put a new stop to business, The Popes relapse.
of which the Cardinal being informed, as he ordered the Kings Agents to
continue their care about his Promotion, April. 6.
so he charged them to see if it were possible to get Access to the Pope, and
though he were in the very Agony of Death, to propose two things to him: the
one, that he would presently command all the Princes of Christendom to agree to
a Cessation of Arms, under pain of the Censures of the Church, another Dispatch
to Rome.

Collect. Numb. 2.2.


as Pope Leo and other Popes had done; and if he should die, he could not do a
thing that would be more meritorious, and for the good of his Soul, than to
make that the last Act of his Life. The other thing was concerning the Kings
business, which he presses as a thing necessary to be done, for the clearing
and e^se of the Popes Conscience, toward God: And withal he orders them to
gain as many about the Pope, and as many Cardinals and Officers in the Rota as
they could, to promote the Kings desires, whether in the Popes sickness or
health. 1528.
The Bishop of Verona had a great Interest with the Pope, so by that, and
another Dispatch of the same Date, (sent another way) they were ordered to gain
him, promising him great Rewards, pressing him to remain still about the Popes
person* to balance the ill Offices which Cardinal Angel, and the Archbishop
of Capua did, who never stirred from the Pope: And to assure that Bishop, that
the King laid this Matter more to heart, than any thing that ever befell him;
and that it would trouble him as much to be overcome in this Matter by these
two Friars, as to loose both his Crowns: and for my part ( writes the Cardinal)
I would expose any thing to my life, yea life it self, rather than see the
Inconveniences that may ensue upon disappointing of the Kings desire. For
promoting the Business, the French King sent the Bishop of Bayon, to assist the
English Ambassadors in his name, who was first sent over to England, to be well
Instructed there. They were either to procure a Decretal for the Kings Divorce,
or a new Commission to the two Legates, with ampler Clauses in it, than the
former had; to judge as if the Pope were in person, and to emit compulsorie
Letters against any, whether Emperor, King, or of what degree soever, to
produce all manner of Evidences or Records, which might tend toward the
clearing the Matter, and to bring them before them. This was sought because the
Emperor would not send over the pretended Original Breve, to England, and gave
only an Attested Copy of it to the Kings Ambassadors: least therefore from that
Breve, a new Suit might be afterward raised, for Annulling any Sentence which
the Legates should give, they thought it needful to have the Original brought
before them. In the penning of that new Commission, Dr. Gardener was ordered to
have special care that it should be done, by the best advice he could get in
Rome. It appears also from this Dispatch, that the Popes Pollicitation to
Confirm the Sentence which the Legates should give, was then in Gardiner's
hands, for he was ordered to take care that there might be no disagreement
between the date of it, and of the new Commission. And when that was obtained,
Sr. Francis Brian was commanded to bring them with him to England. Or if
neither a Decretal, nor a new Commission could be obtained, then if any other
expedient were proposed, that upon good advice should be found sufficient and
effectual, they were to accept of it, and send it away with all possible
diligence. And the Cardinal conjured them by the Reverence of Almighty God, to
bring them out of their Perplexity, that this Virtuous Prince may have this
thing sped, which would be the most joyous thing that could befall his heart
upon Earth. But if all things should be denied, then they were to make their
Protestations, not only to the Pope, but to the Cardinals, of the Injustice
that was done the King, and in the Cardinals name to let them know that not
only the King and his Realm would be lost, but also the French King and his
Realm, with their other Confederates, would also withdraw their Obedience from
the Sea of Rome, which was more to be regarded, than either the Emperors
Displeasure, or the Recovery of two Cities. They were also to try what might be
done in Law by the Cardinals in a Vacancy, and they were to take good Counsel
upon some Chapters of the Canon Law, which related to that: and Govern
themselves accordingly, either to hinder an Avocation, 1529.
or Inhibition, or if it could be done to obtain such thing, as they could
grant, toward the Conclusion of the Kings Business. At this time also the
Cardinals Bulls for the Bishopric of Winchester were expedited: The Cardinals
Bulls for the Bishopric of Winchester.
they were rated high at 15000 Ducats, for though the Cardinal pleaded his
great Merits, to bring the composition lower, yet the Cardinals at Rome, said
the Apostolic Chamber was very poor, and other Bulls were then coming from
France, to which the favor they should show the Cardinal would be a Precedent.
But the Cardinal sent word that he would not give past 5, or 6000 Ducats,
because he was exchanging Winchester for Duresm, and by the other they were to
get a great Composition. And if they held his Bulls so high, he would not have
them; for he needed them not, since he enjoyed already by the Kings Grant the
Temporalities of Winchester; which it is very likely was all that he considered
in a Bishopric. They were at last expedited, at what Rates I cannot tell; but
this I set down to show, how severe the Exactions of the Court of Rome were.

As the Pope recovered his health, The Pope inclines to join with the Emperor.
so he inclined more to join himself to the Emperor than ever, and was more
alienated than formerly from the King and the Cardinal; which perhaps was
increased by the distaste he took at the Cardinals aspiring to the Popedom. The
first thing that the Emperor did in the Kings Cause, was to protest in the
Queen of Englands name, that she refused to submit to the Legates. The one was
the Kings chief Minister and her mortal enemy: Who protests against the Legates
Commission.

May 15.


The other was also justly suspected, since he had a Bishopric in England. The
Kings Ambassador pressed the Pope much, not to admit the Protestation; but it
was pretended that it could not be denied, either in Law or Justice. But that
this might not offend the King, Salviati that was the Popes Favorite, wrote to
Campegio, that the Protestation could not be hindered, but that the Pope did
still most earnestly desire to satisfy the King, and that the Ambassadors were
much mistaken, who were so distrustful of the Popes good mind to the Kings
Cause. But now good words could deceive the King no longer, who clearly
discovered the Popes mind, and being out of all hopes of any thing more from
Rome, resolved to proceed in England before the Legates: and therefore Gardener
was recalled, who was thought the fittest person, to manage the Process in
England, being esteemed the greatest Canonist they had; and was so valued by
the King, that he would not begin the Process till he came. Collect Numb. 23.
Sr. Francis Brian was also recalled, and when they took leave of the Pope,
they were ordered to Expostulate in the Kings name: Upon the Partiality he
expressed for the Emperor, notwithstanding the many assurances, that both the
Legates had given the King, that the Pope would do all he could toward his
Satisfaction; which was now so ill performed that he expected no more justice
from him. They were also to say, as much as they could devise in the Cardinals
name, to the same purpose, upon which they were to try, if it were possible to
obtain any Enlargement of the Commission with fuller Power to the Legates; for
they saw it was in vain to move for any new Bulls, The Pope promised not to
recall, but to confirm it.
or Orders from the Pope about it. And though Gardener had obtained a
Pollicitation from the Pope, by which he both bound himself not to recall the
cause from the Legates, and also to confirm their Sentence, and had sent it
over; they found it was so conceived, that the Pope could go back from it when
he pleased. So there was a new Draught of a Pollicitation formed with more
binding Clauses in it, which Gardener was to try if he could obtain by the
following Pretense. He was to tell the Pope, that the Courier to whom he
trusted it, had been so little careful of it, that it was all wet and defaced,
and of no more use; so that he durst not deliver it. And this might turn much
to Gardiners prejudice, that a matter of such Concern was through his neglect
spoiled: upon which he was to see if the Pope would renew it. If that could be
obtained, he was to use all his Industry to get as many pregnant and material
words added, as might make it more binding. He was also to assure the Pope,
that though the Emperor was gone to Barcellona, to give reputation to his
affairs in Italy; yet he had neither Army, nor Fleet ready, so that they needed
not fear him. And he was to inform the Pope of the Arts he was using both in
the English and French Court to make a separated Treaty: But that all was to no
p^rpose, the two Kings being so firmly linked together. But the Pope was so
great a Master in all the Arts of Dissimulation, and Policy, that he was not to
be overreached easily; and when he understood that his Polli^itation was
defaced, he was in his heart glad at it, and could not be prevailed with, to
renew it. So they returned to England, and Dr. Bennet came in their place. He
carried with him one of the fullest and most important Dispatches that I find
in this whole matter, The Legates write to the Pope.
from the two Legates to the Pope, and the Consistory, who wrote to them, that
they had in vain endeavored to persuade either party to yield to the other;
Collect. Numb. 24.
That the Breve being showed to them by the Queen, they found great and evident
Presumptions of it is being a mere forgery; and that they thought it was too
much for them to sit and try the Validity, or Authenticalness of the Popes
Bulls, or Breves, or to hear his Power of Dispencing in such cases disputed:
therefore it was more expedient to Avocate the cause, to which the King would
consent, if the Pope obliged himself under his hand, to pass Sentence speedily
in his favor; but they rather advised the Granting a Decretal Bull which would
put an end to the whole matter, in order to which the Bearer was Instructed to
show very good Precedents. But in the mean while, they advised the Pope to
press the Queen most effectually, to enter into a Religious life, as that which
would compose all these differences in the softest and easiest way. It pitied
them to see the rack and torments of Conscience, under which the King had
smarted so many years: and that the Disputes of Divines, and the Decrees of
Fathers, had so disquieted him, that for clearing a matter thus perplexed,
there was not only need of Learning, but of a more singular Piety and
Illumination. To this were to be added the desire of Issue, the Settlement of
the Kingdom, with many other pressing reasons: that as the matter did admit of
no further delays, so there was not any thing in the opposite scale to balance
these Considerations. There were false Suggestions surmised abroad, as if the
hatred of the Queen, or the desire of another wife (who was not perhaps yet
known, much less designed) were the true causes of this Suit. But though the
Queen was of a rough Temper, and an unpleasant Conversation, and was passed all
hopes of Children; yet who could imagine that the King who had spent his most
youthful days with her, so kindly, would now in the decline of his Age, be at
all this trouble to be rid of her, if he had no other Motives? But they by
searching his sore, found there was rooted in his heart, both an awe of God,
and a respect to Law and Order; so that though all his people pressed him to
drive the Matter to an issue, yet he would still wait for the decision of the
Apostolic See. Therefore they most pressingly desire the Pope to grant the
Cure which his distemper required, and to consider that it was not fit to
insist too much on the Rigor of the Law; but since the Soul and Life of all
the Laws of the Church was in the Popes breast; in doubtful cases, where there
was great hazard, he ought to mollify the severity of the Laws, which if it
were not done, other Remedies would be found out, to the vast prejudice of the
Ecclesiastical Authority, to which many about the King advised him: There was
reason to fear they should not only lose a King of England, but a Defender of
the Faith. The Nobility and Gentry were already enraged at the delay of a
Matter, in which all their Lives and Interests were so nearly concerned: and
said many things against the Popes Proceedings, which they could not relate
without horror. And they plainly complained, that whereas Popes had made no
scruple to make and change divine Laws, at their pleasure; yet one Pope sticks
so much at the Repealing what his Prodecessor did, as if that were more sacred,
and not to be meddled with. The King betook himself to no ill Arts, neither to
the charms of Magitians, nor the Forgeries of Impostours, therefore they
expected such an Answer as should put an end to the whole matter.

But all these things were to no purpose: Campegio's ill life.

Pelerin In glese.


the Pope had taken his measures, ard was not to be moved by all the reasons,
or Remonstrances, the Ambassador could lay before him. The King had absolutely
gained Campegio to do all he could for him without losing the Popes favor. He
led at this time a very dissolute life in England, hunting and gaming all the
day long, and following whores all the night: and brought a Bastard of his own
over to England with him, whom the King Knighted, so that if the King sought
his pleasure, it was no strange thing: since he had such a Copy set him by two
Legates, who representing his Holiness so lively in their manners, it was no
unusual thing, if a King had a slight sense of such disorders. The King wrote
to his Ambassadors, April 6.
that he was satisfied of Campegio's love and affection to him, and if ever he
was gained by the Emperors Agents, he had said something to him which did
totally change that Inclination.

The Imperialists being Alarmed at the recalling of some of the English
Ambassadors, and being Informed by the Queens means, The Emperor presses for an
Avocation.
that they were forming the Process in England, put in a Memorial for an
Avocation of the cause to Rome. The Ambassadors answered, that there was no
Color for asking it, since there was nothing yet done by the Legates. For they
had strict orders to deny that there was any Process forming in England, even
to the Pope himself in private, unless he had a mind it should go on; but were
to use all their Endeavors to hinder an Avocation; and plainly in the Kings
name, to tell the Pope, that if he granted that, the King would look on it as a
Formal decision against him. And it would also be an high affront to the two
Cardinals: and they were thereupon to Protest, that the King would not obey,
Which the Kings Ambassadors oppose much.
nor consider the Pope any more, if he did an Act of such high Injustice; as
after he had granted a Commission, upon no complaint of any Illegality, or
Injust Proceedings of the Legates, but only upon surmises and suspicions, to
take it out of their hands. But the Pope had not yet brought the Emperor to his
Terms in other things, therefore to draw him on the faster, he continued to
give the English Ambassador good words; and in discourse with Peter Vannes, The
Popes deep dissimulation.
did insinuate as if he had found a means to bring the whole matter to a good
Conclusion, and spoke it with an Artificial smile, adding, In the name of the
Father, etc. But would not speak it out, Collect. Numb. 25th.
and seemed to keep it up as a secret, not yet ripe. But all this did
afterward appear to be the deepest Dissimulation that ever was practiced. And
in the whole Process, though the Cardinal studied to make tricks pass upon him,
yet he was always too hard for them all at it; and seemed as Infallible in his
Arts of Juggling, as he pretended to be in his Decisions. Collect. Numb. 26th.
He wrote a Cajoling Letter to the Cardinal, but words went for nothing.

The Pope complains of the Florentines
Soon after this, the Pope complained much to Sr. Gregory Cassali, of the ill
usage he received from the French Ambassador, and that their Confederates, the
Florentines, and the Duke of Ferrara used him so ill, June 5.
that they would force him to throw himself into the Emperors hands: and he
seemed inclined to grant an Avocation of the cause, and complained that there
was a Treaty of peace going on at Cambray, in which he had no share. But the
Ambassador undertook that nothing should be done to give him just offense; yet
the Florentines continued to put great affronts on him, and his Family: and the
Abbot of Farfa their General, made excursions to the gates of Rome; so that the
Pope with great signs of fear said that the Florentines would some day seize on
him, June 13.
and carry him with his hands bound behind his back in Procession to Florence:
and that all this while the Kings of England and France did only entertain him
with good words, and did not so much as restrain the Insolences of their
Confederates. And whereas they used to say, that if he joined himself to the
Emperor, he would treat him as his Chaplain, he said with great Commotion, that
he would not only choose rather to be his Chaplain, but his horse-Groom, than
suffer such injuries from his own Rebellious Vassals and Subjects. This was
perhaps set on by the Cardinals Arts, to let the Pope feel the weight of
offending the King, and to oblige him to use him better: but it wrought a
contrary effect, for the Treaty between the Emperor and him, was the more
advanced by it. And the Pope reckoned that the Emperor being (as he was
informed) ashamed and grieved for the taking and Sacking of Rome, would study
to repair that by better usage for the future.

Great Contests about the Avocation.

June 23.

Collect. Numb* 27.


The Motion for the Avocation was still driven on, and pressed the more
earnestly, because they heard the Legates were proceeding in the cause. But the
Ambassadors were instructed by a Dispatch from the King, to obviate that
carefully; for as it would reflect on the Legates, and defeat the Commission,
and be a gross violation of the Popes Promise, which they had in writing; so it
was more for the Popes Interest, to leave it in the Legates hands, than to
bring it before himself; for then, whatever Sentence passed, the ill effects of
it would ly on the Pope without any Interposition. And as the King had very
just exceptions to Rome, where the Emperors forces lay so near, that no safety
could be expected there; so they were to tell the Pope that by the Laws of
England, the Prerogative of the Crown Royal was such, that the Pope could do
nothing that was prejudicial to it: To which the citing the King to Rome, to
have his cause decided there, was contrary in a high degree. And if the Pope
went on, notwithstanding all the diligence they could use to the contrary, they
were by an other Dispatch which Gardener sent, ordered to Protest and Appeal
from the Pope as not the true Vicar of Christ, to a true Vicar. But the King
upon second thoughts, judged it not fit to proceed to this Extremity so soon.
They were also ordered to advertise the Pope, that all the Nobility had assured
the King, they would adhere to him, in case he were so ill used by the Pope,
that he were constrained to withdraw his obedience from the Apostolic See; and
that the Cardinals ruin was unavoidable, if the Pope granted the Avocation.
The Emperors Agents had pretended they could not send the original Breve into
England, and said their Master would send it to Rome, upon which the
Ambassadors had solicited for Letters Compulsory, to require him to send it to
England; yet left that might now be made an Argument by the Imperialists for an
Avocation, they were ordered to speak no more of it, for the Legates would
proceed to Sentence, upon the attested Copy that was sent from Spain.

The Ambassadors had also orders to take the best Counsel in Rome, June 28.
about the Legal ways of hindering an Avocation. But they found it was not fit
to rely much on the Lawyers in that matter. For as on the one hand, there was
no secrecy to be expected from any of them, they having such expectations of
preferments from the Pope, (which were beyond all the Fees that could be given
them,) that they discovered all secrets to him: So none of them would be
earnest to hinder an Avocation, it being their Interest to bring all Matters to
Rome, by which they might hope for much greater Fees. And Salviati whom the
Ambassadors had gained, told them, that Campana brought word out of England,
that the Process was then in a good forwardness. They with many Oaths denied
there was any such thing, and Silvester Darius who was sent express to Rome,
for opposing the Avocation, confirmed all that they swore. But nothing was
believed, for by a secret conveyance, Campana had Letters to the contrary. And
when they objected to Salviati, what was promised by Campana, in the Popes
name, that he would do every thing for the King, that he could do out of the
fullness of his Power; He answered, that Campana swore he had never said any
such thing. So hard is the case of Ministers in such ticklish negotiations,
that they must say, and unsay, swear, and forswear, as they are Instructed,
which goes of Course, as a part of their Business.

But now the Legates were proceeding in England: Of the steps in which they
went, though a great deal be already published, The Legate^ sit in England
yet considerable things are passed over. On the 31th of May, the King by a
Warrant under the Great Seal, gave the Legates leave to execute their
Commission, Orig. Iourn Cott. Libr. Vitel. B. 12.
upon which they Sat that same day. The Commission was presented by Longland,
Bishop of Lincoln, which was given to the Proto-Notary of the Court, and he
read it publicly; then the Legates took it in their hands, and said, They were
resolved to Execute it: And first gave the usual Oaths to the Clerks of the
Court, and ordered a peremtory Citation of the King and Queen to appear on the
18th of June, between 9 and 10 a Clock; and so the Court Adjourned. The next
Session was on the 18th of June, where the Citations being returned duly
Executed; Richard Simpson, Dean of the Chapel, and Mr. John Bell, appeared as
the Kings Proxies. But the Queen appeared in Person, and did protest against
the Legates as incompetent Judges, alleging that the cause was already
Avocated by the Pope, and desired a competent time in which she might prove it.
The Legates assigned her the 21th, and so Adjourned the Court till then.

A severe charge against the Queen.
About this time there was a severe Complaint exhibited against the Queen in
Council, of which there is an account given in a paper, that has somewhat
written at the conclusion of it, with the Cardinals own hand. The substance of
it is, That they were informed some designed to kill the King, or the Cardinal;
in which, if she had any hand, she must not expect to be spared. That she had
not showed such love to the King, neither in Bed, nor out of Bed, as she ought.
And now that the King was very pensive, and in much grief, she showed great
signs of joy, setting on all people to Dancings, and other Diversions. This it
seemed she did out of spite to the King, since it was contrary to her temper
and ordinary behavior. And whereas she ought rather to pray to God to bring
this matter to a good conclusion, she seemed not at all serious; and that she
might corrupt the peoples affections to the King, she showed her self much
abroad, and by civilities, and gracious bowing her head, which had not been her
custom formerly, did study to work upon the people: And that having the
pretended Breve in her hands, she would not show it sooner. From all which the
King concluded that she hated him, Therefore his Council did not think it
advisable for him to be any more conversant with her, either in Bed or at
Board. They also in their Consciences thought his life was in such danger, that
he ought to withdraw himself from her company, and not suffer the Princess to
be with her. These things were to be told her, to induce her to enter into a
Religious Order, and to persuade her to submit to the King. To which paper, the
Cardinal added in Latin, That she played the fool, Quod stulte facit, si
contendit cum Rege, quod ^ale illi successit in faetibus: de Brevi acsuspicione
falsitatis.

The King and Queen appear in Court.


if she contended with the King, that her Children had not been blessed, and
somewhat of the evident suspicions that were of the Forgery of the Breve. But
she had a constant mind, and was not to be threatened to any thing. On the 21th
of June, the Court Sat, The King and Queen were present in Person. Campegio
made a long Speech of the errand they were come about: Fidelis servi insideli
subdito Responsio.
That it was a new, unheard* of, vile, and intolerable thing, for the King and
Queen to live in Adultery, or rather Incest; which they must now try, and
proceed as they saw just cause. And both the Legates made deep protestations of
the sincerity of their minds, and that they would proceed justly and fairly
without any favor or partiality.

As for the formal Speeches which the King and Queen made, Hall, who never
failed in trifles, sets them down, which I incline to believe they really
spoke; for with the Journals of the Court, I find those Speeches written down,
though not as a part of the Journal.

But here the Lord Herbert's usual diligence fails him; for he fancies the
Queen never appeared after the 18th. upon which, because the Journal of the
next Sessions are lost, he infers against all the Histories of that time, That
the King and the Queen were not in Court together. And he seems to conclude
that the 25th of June, was the next Session after the 18th, but in that he was
mistaken: For by an original Letter of the Kings to his Ambassadors, Collect.
Numb. 28.
it is plain that both the King and Queen came in Person into the Court; where
they both sat, with their Council standing about them: The Bishops of
Rochester, and St. Asaph, and Doctor Ridley being the Queens Council. When the
King and Queen were called on, the King answered, Here; but the Queen left her
seat and went and kneeled down before him, and made a Speech, that had all the
Insinuations in it to raise pity and compassion in the Court. She said, She was
a poor woman, and a stranger in his Dominions, where she could neither expect
good Council, nor indifferent Judges; The Queen's Speech.
she had been long his Wife, and desired to know wherein she had offended him:
she had been his Wife twenty years and more, and had born him several Children,
and had ever studied to please him; and protested he had found her a true Maid,
about which she appealed to his own Conscience. If she had done any thing
amiss, she was willing to be put away with shame. Their Parents were esteemed
very wise Princes, and no doubt had good Counselors, and Learned men about
them, when the Match was agreed: Therefore she would not submit to the Court,
nor durst her Lawyers, who were his Subjects, and assigned by him, speak freely
for her. So she desired to be excused till she heard from Spain. That said, she
rose up, and made the King a low Reverence, and went out of the Court. And
though they called after her, she made no answer, but went away and would never
again appear in Court.

She being gone, the King did publicly Declare, The King gives the account of
his Scruples.
what a true and obedient Wife she had always been, and commended her much for
her excellent Qualities. Then the Cardinal of York desired the King would
witness, whether he had been the first or chief mover of that matter to him,
since he was suspected to have done it. In which the King did vindicate him,
and said, That he had always rather opposed it, and protested it arose merely
out of a scruple in his Conscience, which was occasioned by the Discourse of
the French Ambassador; who during the Treaty of a Match between his Daughter,
and the Duke of Orleance, did except to her being Legitimate, as begotten in an
unlawful Marriage: upon which he resolved to try the lawfulness of it, both for
the quiet of his Conscience, and for clearing the Succession of the Crown: And
if it were found lawful, he was very well satisfied to live still with the
Queen. But upon that, he had first moved it in Confession to the Bishop of
Lincoln; then he had desired the Archbishop of Canterbury to gather the
Opinions of the Bishops, who did all under their Hands and Seals Declare
against the Marriage. This the Archbishop confirmed, but the Bishop of
Rochester denied his Hand was at it. And the Archbishop pretended he had his
consent to make another write his name to the Judgment of the rest, which he
positively denied.

The Court Adjourned to the 25th, ordering Letters Monitory to be Issued out
for Citing the Queen to appear under pain of Contumacy. But on the 25th, The
Queens Appeal.
was brought in her Appeal to the Pope, the Original of which is extant, every
page being both Subscribed, and Superscribed by her. She excepted both to the
Place, to the Judges, and to her Council, in whom she could not confide; and
therefore appealed and desired her Cause might be heard by the Pope, with many
things out of the Canon Law, on which she grounded it. This being read, and she
not appearing, was Declared Contumax. Then the Legates being to proceed, ex
officio, drew up Twelve Articles, upon which they were to examine witnesses.
Articles drawn by the (...).
The substance of them was, That Prince Arthur and the King were Brothers; that
Prince Arthur did Marry the Queen, and Consummated the Marriage; that upon his
death the King by virtue of a Dispensation had Married her; that this Marrying
his Brothers Wife was forbidden both by Humane and Divine Law; and that upon
the complaints which the Pope had received, he had sent them now to try and
judge in it. The Kings Council insisted most on Prince Arthur's having
Consummated the Marriage, and that led them to say many things that seemed
indecent; of which the Bishop of Rochester complained, and said they were
things detestable to be heard: but Cardinal Wolsey (...) him, and there passed
some sharp words between them.

Upon which witnesses are examined.
The Legates proceeded to the Examination of Witnesses, of which I shall say
little, the substance of their Depositions, being fully set down with all their
names by the Lord Herbert. The sum of what was most material in them, was, that
many violent presumptions appeared by their Testimonies, that Prince Arthur did
carnally know the Queen. And it cannot be imagined how greater proofs could be
made 27 years after their Marriage. Thus the Court went on several days
Examining Witnesses; but as the matter was going on to a conclusion, there came
an Avocation from Rome. Of which I shall now give an Account

The pro^e^dings at (...).
The Queen wrote most earnestly to her Nephews to procure an Avocation;
protesting she would suffer any thing, and even death it self, rather than
depart from her Marriage: that she expected no justice from the Legates, and
therefore looked for their assistance, that her appeal being admitted by the
Pope, (...) this is (...) from (...) June 2^, and 30. July 8, and 9.
the Cause might be taken out of the Legates hands. Campegio did also give the
Pope an account of their Progress, and by all means advised an Avocation; for
by this he thought to excuse himself to the King, to oblige the Emperor much,
and to have the reputation of a man of Conscience.

The Emperor, and his Brother Ferdinand, sent their Ambassadors at Rome orders,
to give the Pope no rest till it were procured; and the Emperor said, He would
look on a Sentence against his Aunt, as a dishonor to his Family, and would
lose all his Kingdoms sooner than endure it. And they plied the Pope so warmly,
that between them and the English Ambassadors, he had for some days very little
rest. To the one he was kind, and to the other he resolved to be civil. The
English Ambassadors met often with Salviati, and studied to persuade him, that
the Process went not on in England; but he told them their Intelligence was so
good, that whatever they said on that head would not be believed. They next
suggested, that it was visible Campegio's advising an Avocation was only done
to preserve himself from the envy of the Sentence, and to throw it wholly on
the Pope: for were the matter once called to Rome, the Pope must give Sentence
one way or another, and so bear the whole burden of it. There were also secret
surmises of Deposing the Pope, if he went so far; for seeing that the Emperor
prevailed so much by the terrors of that, the Cardinal resolved to try what
operation such threatenings in the Kings name might have. But they had no Armies
near the Pope, so that big words did only provoke and alienate him the more.

The matter was such, that by the Canon Law it could not be denied. For to
grant an Avocation of a Cause upon good reason, from the Delegated to the
Supreme Court, was a thing which by the course of Law was very usual: And it
was no less apparent that the Reasons of the Queens appeal were just and good.
The Pope agrees with the Emperor.
But the secret and most convincing Motives that wrought more on the Pope than
all other things, were, that the Treaty between him and the Emperor was now
concerted: Therefore this being to be published very speedily, the Pope thought
it necessary to avocate the matter to Rome, before the publication of the
Peace, lest if he did it after, it should be thought that it had been one of
the secret Articles of the Treaty, which would have cast a foul blot upon him.
Yet on the other hand he was not a little perplexed with the fears he had of
losing the King of England; he knew he was a man of an high Spirit, and would
resent what he did severely. And the Cardinal now again ordered Dr. Bennet in
his name, and as with tears in his eyes, Collect. Numb. 29th.
lying at the Popes feet, to assure him, that the King and Kingdom of England
were certainly lost, if the Cause were Avocated: Therefore he besought him to
leave it still in their hands, and assured him, that for himself, he should
rather be torn in pieces joint by joint, than do any thing in that matter
contrary to his Conscience or to Justice. Yet is in great perplexities.
These things had been often said, and the Pope did apprehend that ill effects
would follow; for if the King fell from his Obedience to the Apostolic See, no
doubt all the Lutheran Princes, who were already bandying against the Emperor,
would join themselves with him; and the Interests of France would most
certainly engage that King also into the Union, which would distract the
Church, give encouragement to Heresy, and end in the utter ruin of the
Popedom. But in all this the crafty Pope comforted himself, that many times
threatenings are not intended to be made good, but are used to terrify; and
that the King who had written for the Faith against Luther, and had been so ill
used by him, would never do a thing that would sound so ill, as because he
could not obtain what he had a mind to, therefore to turn Heretic: he also
resolved to caress the French King much, and was in hopes of making Peace
between the Emperor and him.

But that which went nearest the Popes heart of all other things, was the
setting up of his Family at Florence: and the Emperor having given him
assurance of that, it weighed down all other considerations. Therefore he
resolved he would please the Emperor, but do all he could not to lose the King:
So on the 9th of July he sent for the Kings Ambassadors, and told them, the
Process was now so far set on in England, and the Avocation so earnestly
pressed, that he could deny it no longer; for all the Lawyers in Rome had told
him, the thing could not be denied in the common course of Justice. Upon this
the Ambassadors told him what they had in Commission to say against it, both
from the King and the Cardinal, and pressed it with great vehemence: So that
the Pope by many sighs and tears showed how deep an impression that which they
said made upon him; he wished himself dead, that he might be delivered out of
that Martyrdom: and added these words, which because of their savouring so much
of an Apostolical Spirit, I set down: Woe is me, no body apprehends all those
evils better than I do. But I am so between the Hammer and the Forge, that when
I would comply with the Kings desires, the whole storm then must fall on my
head; and which is worse, on the Church of Christ. They did object the many
promises he had made them, both by word of mouth, and under his hand. He
answered, He desired to do more for the King than he had promised; but it was
impossible to refuse what the Emperor now demanded, whose Forces did so
surround him, that he could not only force him to grant him Justice, but could
dispose of him and all his Concerns at his pleasure.

The Ambassadors seeing the Pope was resolved to grant the Avocation, pressed
against it no further, but studied to put it off for some time. And therefore
proposed that the Pope would himself write about it to the King, and not grant
it till he received his answer. Of all this they gave Advertisement to the
King, and wrote to him, that he must either drive the matter to a Sentence in
great haste, or to prevent the affront of an Advocation, suspend the Process
for some time. They also advised the searching all the Packets that went or
came by the way of Flanders; and to keep up all Campegio's Letters, and to take
care that no Bull might come to England; for they did much apprehend that the
Avocation would be granted within very few days. July 26.
Their next Dispatch bore, that the Pope had sent for them to let them know,
that he had Signed the Avocation the day before. The Avocation is granted.
But they understood another way, that the Treaty between the Emperor and him
was finished, and the Peace was to be proclaimed on the 18th of July; and that
the Pope did not only fear the Emperor more than all other Princes, but that he
also trusted him more now. On the 19th of July, the Pope sent a Messenger with
the Avocation to England, Collect. Numb. 30th.
with a Letter to the Cardinal. To the King he wrote afterward.

All this while Campegio, as he had Orders from the Pope to draw out the matter
by delays, The proceedings of the Legates.
so did it very dexterously: And in this he pretended a fair excuse, that it
would not be for the Kings honor to precipitate the matter too much, lest
great advantages might be taken from that by the Queens Party. That therefore
it was fit to proceed slowly, that the world might see with what Moderation as
well as Justice, the matter was handled. From the 25th of June, the Court
Adjourned to the 28th, ordering a second Citation, for the Queen under the
pains of Contumacy, and of their proceeding to examine Witnesses. And on the
28th they declared the Queen Contumacious the second time; and examined several
Witnesses upon the Articles, and Adjourned to the 5th of July. on that day the
Bull and Breve were read in Court, and the Kings Council argued long against
the validity of the one, and the truth of the other, Upon the grounds that have
been already mentioned, in which Campegio was much disgusted to hear them argue
against the Popes Power, of granting such a Dispensation in a matter that was
against a Divine Precept, alleging that his Power did not exend so far. This
the Legates overruled, and said, that that was too high a point for them to
judge in, or so much as to hear argued; and that the Pope himself was the only
proper judge in that: And it was odds but he would judge favorably for
himself. The Court Adjourned to the 12th, and from that to the 14th. On these
days the Depositions of the rest of the Witnesses were taken, and some that
were ancient Persons were examined by a Commission from the Legates; and all
the Depositions were published on the 17th; other instruments relating to the
Process, were also read and verified in Court. On the 21th the Court sa^e to
conclude the matter as was expected, and the Instrument that the King had
Signed when he came of Age, protesting that he would not stand to the Contract
made when he was under Age, was then read and verified. Upon which, the Kings
Council (of whom Gardener was the chief,) closed their Evidence, and summed up
all that had been brought: and in the Kings name, desired Sentence might be
given. All things are ready for a Sentence.
But Campegio pretending that it was fit some interval should be between that
and the Sentence, put it off till the 23th, being Friday; and in the whole
Process he presided, both being the ancienter Cardinal, and chiefly to show
great equity; since exceptions might have been taken, if the other had appeared
much in it; so that he only sat by him for form: But all the Orders of the
Court were still directed by Campegio. On Friday there was a great appearance,
and a general expectation; but by a strange surprise Campegio Adjourned the
Court to the 1st. of October, Campegio Adjourned the Court.
for which he pretended that they sat there as a part of the Consistory of
Rome, and therefore must follow the Rules of that Court, which from that time
till October was in a Vacation, and heard no Causes: And this he averred to be
true on the word of a true Prelate.

The King was in a Chamber very near where he heard what passed, and was
inexpressibly surprised at it. The Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk were in Court,
and complained much of this delay; and pressed the Legates to give Sentence.
Campegio answered, that, what they might then pronounce would be of no force,
as being in Vacation-time; but gave great hopes of a favorable Sentence in the
beginning of October. Upon which the Lords spoke very high. Which gives great
offense.
And the Duke of Suffolk with great Commotion, Swore by the Mass, that, he saw
it was true which had been commonly said, That never Cardinal yet did good in
England; and so all the Temporal Lords went away in a fury, leaving the
Legates, ( Wolsey especially) in no small perplexity. Wolsey knew it would be
suspected that he understood this beforehand, and that it would be to no
purpose for him, either to say he did not know, or could not help it, all
Apologies being ill heard by an enraged Prince. Campegio had not much to lose
in England but his Bishopric of Salisbury, and the reward he expected from the
King, which he knew the Emperor and the Pope would plentifully make up to him.
But his Colleague was in a worse condition, he had much to fear, because he had
much to lose: For as the King had severely chid him for the delays of the
business, so he was now to expect a heavy storm from him; Wolsey's danger.
and after so long an Administration of Affairs by so insolent a Favorite, it
was not to be doubted, but as many of his Enemies were joining against him, so
matter must needs be found to work his ruin with a Prince that was Alienated
from him: Therefore he was under all the disorders, which a fear that was
heightened by Ambition and Covetousness could produce.

But the King governed himself upon this occasion, with more temper than could
have been expected from a man of his humor: Therefore as he made no great show
of disturbance, so to divert his uneasy thoughts he went his Progress. Soon
after, he received his Agents Letter from Rome, and made Gardener (who was then
Secretary of State) write to the Cardinal, to put Campegio to his Oath, whether
he had revealed the Kings Secrets to the Pope, or not? And if he Swore he had
not done it, to make him Swear he should never do it. A little after that, the
Messenger came from Rome with a Breve to the Legates, requiring them to proceed
no further, and with an Avocation of the Cause to Rome; together with Letters
Citatory to the King and Queen to appear there in Person, Aug. 4.
or by their Proxies. Of which when the King was advertised, Gardener wrote to
the Cardinal by his order, That the King would not have the Letters Citatory
executed, or the Commission discharged by virtue of them; but that upon the
Popes Breve to them, they should declare their Commission void: For he would
not suffer a thing so much to the prejudice of his Crown, as a Citation be made
to appear in another Court, nor would he let his Subjects imagine that he was
to be Cited out of his Kingdom. This was the first step that he made for the
lessening of the Popes Power: Upon which the two Cardinals (for they were
Legates no longer) went to the King at Grafton. It was generally expected that
Wolsey should have been disgraced then, for not only the King was offended with
him, but he received new Informations of his having juggled in the business,
and that he secretly advised the Pope to do what was done. This was set about
by some of the Queens Agents, as if there was certain knowledge had of it at
Rome; and it was said, that some Letters of his to the Pope were by a trick
found and brought over to England. The Emperor looked on the Cardinal as his
inveterate Enemy, and designed to ruin him if it was possible; nor was it hard
to persuade the Queen to concur with him to pull him down. But all this seems
an artifice of theirs only to destroy him. For the earnestness the Cardinal
expressed in this matter, was such, that either he was sincere in it, or he was
the best at dessembling that ever was. But these suggestions were easily
infused in the Kings angry mind, so strangely are men turned by their
affections, that sometimes they will believe nothing, and at other times they
believe every thing. Yet when the Cardinal with his Colleague came to Court,
they were received by the King with very hearty expressions of kindness; and
Wolsey was often in private with him, sometimes in presence of the Council, and
sometimes alone: once he was many hours with the King alone, and when they took
leave he sent them away very obligingly. But that which gave Cardinal Wolsey
the most assurance, Sept. 23, in a Letter from the Cardinal, Secetary to
Cromwell.
was that all those who were admitted to the Kings privacies, did carry
themselves toward him as they were wont to do; both the Duke of Suffolk, Sir
Thomas Boleyn then made Vis-count of Rochford, Sir Brian Tuke and Gardener:
concluding that from the motions of such Weather-cocks the air of the Princes
affections was best gathered.

Anne Boleyn returns to Court.
Anne Boleyn was now brought to the Court again, out of which she had been
dismissed for some time, for silencing the noise, that her being at Court,
during the Process, would have occasioned. It is taid, that she took her
dismission so ill, that she resolved never again so return; and that she was
very hardly brought to it afterward, not without Threatenings from her Father.
But of that nothing appears to me; only this I find, that all her former
kindness to the Cardinal, was now turned to enmity, so that she was not wanting
in her endeavors to pull him down.

But the King being reconciled to her, and as it is ordinary after some
intermission and disorder between Lovers, his affection increasing, he was
casting about for overtures, how to compass what he so earnestly desired.
Sometimes he thought of procuring a new Commission; but that was not advisable,
for after a long dependence it might end as the former had done. Then he
thought of breaking off with the Pope; but there was great danger in that, for
besides that in his own persuasion he adhered to all the most Important parts
of the Roman Religion, his subjects were so addicted to it, that any such a
Change could not but seem full of hazard. Sometime he inclined to Confederate
himself with the Pope and Emperor, for now there was no dividing of them, till
he should thereby bring the Emperor to yield to his desires. But that was
against the Interests of his Kingdom, and the Emperor had already proceeded so
far in his Opposition, that he could not be easily brought about.

While his thoughts were thus divided, a new Proposition was made to him that
seemed the most reasonable and feasible of them all. Cranmers proposition about
the Kings Divorce.
There was one Dr. Cranmer, who had been a Fellow of Jesus College in
Cambridge; but having Married, forfeited his fellowship, yet continued his
Studies, and was a Reader of Divinity in Buckingham College. His wife dying,
he was again chosen Fellow of Jesus College; and was much esteemed in the
University for his Learning, which appeared very eminently on all public
occasions. But he was a man that neither courted Preferment, nor did willingly
accept of it, when offered. And therefore though he was invited to be a Reader
of Divinity in the Cardinals College at Oxford, he declined it. He was at this
time forced to fly out of Cambridge, from a Plague that was there, and having
the Sons of one Mr. Cressy of Waltham-Cross committed to his Charge, he went
with his Pupils to their Fathers house at Waltham. There he was when the King
returned from his Progress, who took Waltham in his way, and lay a night there.
The Harbingers having appointed Gardener and Fox, the Kings Secretary, and
Almoner, to ly at Mr. Cressies house; it so happened that Cranmer was with them
at Supper. The whole discourse of England being then about the Divorce, these
two Courtiers, knowing Cranmer's Learning and solid Judgment, entertained him
with it, and desired to hear his opinion concerning it. He modestly declined
it; but told them, that he judged it would be a shorter and safer way once to
clear it well, if the Marriage was unlawful in it self, by virtue of any divine
Precept: For if that were proved, then it was certain, that the Popes
Dispensation could be of no force to make that lawful, which God had declaed to
be unlawful. Therefore he thought that instead of a long fruitless Negotiation
at Rome, it were better to consult all the Learned men, and the Universities of
Christendom; for if they once declared it in the Kings favors, then the Pope
must needs give judgment, or otherwise the Bull being of it self, null and
void, the Marriage would be found sinful, notwithstanding the Popes
Dispensation. This seemed a very good Motion, which they resolved to offer to
the King; so next night when he came to Greenwich, they proposed it to him; but
with this difference, that Gardener had a mind to make it pass for their own
Contrivance, but Fox, who was of a more ingenuous Nature, told the King from
whom they had it. Approved by the King.
He was much affected with it, so soon as he heard it, and said, had he known
it sooner, it would have saved him a vast expense, and much trouble; and would
needs have Cranmer sent for to Court, saying in his coarse way of speaking,
That he had the Sow by the right ear. So he was sent for to Court, and being
brought before the King, he carried himself so, that the King conceived an high
opinion of his Judgment, and Candor, which he preserved to his death, and
still paid a respect to him, beyond all the other Churchmen that were about
him: and though he made more use of Gardener in his Business, whom he found a
man of great dexterity and Cunning; yet he never had any respect for him. But
for Cranmer, though the King knew that in many things he differed from him, yet
for all his being so impatient of Contradiction, he always Reverenced him.

And he much esteemed by him.
He was soon looked on as a Rising Churchman, and the rather because the
Cardinal was now declining; for in the following Michaelmas-Term, the King sent
for the great Seal, which the Cardinal at first was not willing to part with.
But the next day the King wrote to him, The Cardinals fall.
and he presently delivered it to the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk. It was
offered back again to Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury; but he being very old,
and foreseeing great difficulties in the keeping of it, excused himself. So it
was given to Sr. Thomas More, who was not only eminent in his own Profession,
but in all other Learning: and was much esteemed for the strictness of his
life, and his Contempt of Money. He was also the more fit to be made use of,
having been in ill terms with the Cardinal. Soon after, Hales the
Attourney-General, put in an Information against the Cardinal, in the Kings
Bench; bearing, that notwithstanding the Statute of Richard the 2 d, against
the Procuring Bulls from Rome, under the pains of Praemunire, yet he had
procured Bulls for his Legantine Power, which he had for many years executed;
and some particulars, for form, were named out of a great many more. To this he
put in his answer, by his Attorney, and confessed the Indictment, but pleaded
his ignorance of the Statute, and submitted himself to the Kings mercy. Upon
this it was declared, that he was out of the Kings protection, and that he had
forfeited his Goods and Chattells to the King, and that his Person might be
seized on. Then was his rich Palace of York-house (now Whitehall) with all that
vast wealth, and Royal furniture that he had heaped together, (which was beyond
any thing that had ever been seen in England before,) seized on for the King.
But it seems the King had not a mind to destroy him out right, but only to
bring him lower, and to try if the terror of that would have any influence on
the Pope: Roll. Pat. 2d^ pars vices. prin. Regni.

Feb. 12.


Therefore on the 21st of November, the King granted him first his Protection,
and then his Pardon, and restored him to the Archbishopric of York, and the
Bishopric of Winchester, and gave him back in Money, EFFIGIES THOMAE WOLSEI
CARDINALIS.
Natus 1471 Mar^ Consecrat EpL^^ colu^ 1514 Mar^ 26 Translatus ad Sedet
E^oracense^ Nov. 6 Cardinalis (...) 1515 Sept. 7. Obyt 1530 Nov. 26

Pri^^^d for Ri^ Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's Church yard

Goods, and Plate, that which amounted to 6374 l. 3 s. 7 d. and many kind
Messages were sent him, both by the King, and Anne Boleyn.

But as he had carried his Greatness with most extravagant pride, The meanness
of his Temper.
so he was no less basely cast down with his misfortune; and having no ballast
within himself, but being wholly guided by things without him, he was lifted
up, or cast down, as the Scales of Fortune turned: yet his Enemies had gone too
far, ever to suffer a man of his parts or temper, to return to favor. And
therefore they so ordered it, that an high Charge of many Articles was brought
against him, into the House of Lords, in the Parliament that sat in November
following; and it passed there, where he had but few friends, and many and
great enemies. But when the charge was sent down to the House of Commons, it
was so managed by the industry of Cromwell, who had been his servant, that it
came to nothing. The heads of it have been often printed, therefore I shall not
repeat them; they related chiefly to his Legantine Power, contrary to Law, to
his Insolence and Ambition, his lewd life, and ^ther things that were brought
to defame, as well as destroy him.

All these things did so sink his proud mind, that a deep melancholy overcame
his Spirits. The King sent him frequent assurances of his favor, which he
received with extravagant transports of joy, The King still ^avoured him.
falling down on his knees in the dirt, before the messenger that brought one
of them, and holding up his hands for joy, which showed how mean a Soul he had,
and that as himself afterward acknowledged, he preferred the Kings favor, to
God Almighties. But the King found they took little notice of him at Rome; the
Emperor hated him, and the Pope did not love him, looking on him as one that
was almost equal to himself in Power: and though they did not love the
Precedent to have a Cardinal so used, yet they were not much troubled at Rome,
to see it fall on him. So in Easter-week, he was ordered to go North, though he
had a great mind to have stayed at Richmond, which the King had given him in
Exchange for Hampton Court, that he had also built. But that was too near the
Court, and his enemies had a mind to send him further from it. Accordingly he
went to Cawood in Yorkshire, in which journey it appears, that the ruins of
his state were considerable, for he traveled thither with an 160 horse in his
train, and 72 Carts following him, with his household stuff.

To Conclude his story all at once, He is afterward attached for Treason.
he was in November the next year, seized on by the Earl of Northumberland, who
attached him for high Treason, and committed him to the keeping of the
Lieutenant of the Tower, who was ordered to bring him up to London. And even
^hen he had gracious messages from the King; but these did not work much on
him, for whether it was that he knew himself guilty of some secret Practices
with the Pope, or with the Emperor, which yet he denied to the last; or whether
he could no longer stand under the Kings displeasure, and that change of
condition; he was so cast down, that on his way to London, he sickened at
Sheffield Park, in the Earl of Shrewsburies house, from whence by slow journeys
he went as far as Leicester, where after some days languishing he dyed; and at
the last made great Protestations of his having served the King faithfully, and
that he had little regarded the service of God, to do him pleasure; but if he
had served God as he had done him, he would not have given him over so, as he
did in his gray hairs. And he desired the King to reflect on all his past
services, and in particular, in his weighty matter (for by that phrase, they
usually spoke of the Kings Divorce) and then he would find in his Conscience
whether he had offended him or not. And dies.
He dyed the 28 of November 1530. and was the greatest Instance that several
Ages had shown of the Variety and Inconstancy of Humane things, both in his
rise and fall; and by his temper in both, it appears he was unworthy of his
greatness, and deserved what he suffered. But to conclude all that is to be
said of him, I shall add what the writer of his life ends it with. Here is the
end and fall of Pride and Arrogance, His Character.
for I assure you, in his time he was the haughtiest man in all his proceedings
alive, having more respect to the honor of his Person, than he had to his
Spiritual Profession, wherein should be showed all meekness and charity.

A Parliament called.
But now with the change of this great Minister, there followed a change of
Counsels, and therefore the King resolved to hold a Parliament, that he might
meet his people, and establish such a good understanding between himself and
them, that he might have all secured at home; and then he resolved to proceed
more confidently abroad. There had been no Parliament for seven years, but the
blame of that, and of every other miscarriage, falling naturally on the
disgraced Minister, he did not doubt, that he should be able to give his people
full satisfaction in that, and in every thing else. So a Parliament was
summoned to meet the 3d of November. And there, among several other Laws that
were made for the public good of the Kingdom, there were Bills sent up by the
House of Commons, against some of the most exorbitant abuses of the Clergy: one
was against the Exactions for the Probates of Wills; another was for the
Regulating of Mortuaries; a third was about the Plurality of Benefices, and
non-residence, and Churchmens being Farmers of Lands. In the passing of these
Bills there were severe reflections made on the vices and corruptions of the
Clergy of that time, which were believed to flow from men that favored Luthers
Doctrine in their hearts.

When these Bills were brought up to the House of Lords, the Bishop of
Rochester speaking to them, Hall.
did reflect on the House of Commons: saying, that they were resolved to bring
down the Church, and he desired they would consider the miserable state of the
Kingdom of Bohemia, to which it was reduced by Heresy, and ended, that all
this was for lack of Faith. But this being afterward known to the House of
Commons, The House of Commons complains of the Bishop of Rochester.
they sent their speaker, Sr. Thomas Audley, with 30 of their members, to
complain to the King of the Bishop of Rochester, for saying, that their Acts
flowed from the want of Faith, which was an high Imputation on the whole
Nation, when the Representative of the Commons was so charged, as if they had
been Infidels and Heathens. This was set on by the Court, to mortify that
Bishop, who was unacceptable to them, for his adhering so firmly to the Queens
cause. The King sent for the Archbishop of Canterbury and six other Bishops,
and before them told the complaint of the Commons. But the Bishop of Rochester
excused himself, and said, he only meant of the Kingdom of Bohemia, when he
said, all flowed from the want of Faith, and did not at all intend the House of
Commons. This Explanation the King sent by the Treasurer of his household, Sr.
Will. Fitz-Williams. But though the matter was passed over, yet they were not
at all satisfied with it, so that they went on, laying open the abuses of the
Clergy.

In the House of Peers, great opposition was made to the Bills, Some Bills past
reforming the abuses of the Clergy.
and the Clergy both within and without doors did defame them, and said, these
were the ordinary beginnings of Heresy, to complain of Abuses, and pretend
Reformation, on purpose to disgrace the Clergy, from which Heresy took it is
chief strength. And the Spiritual Lords did generally oppose them, the Temporal
Lords being no less earnest to have them passed. The Cardinal was admitted to
sit in the House, where he showed himself as submissive in his fauning as he
had formerly done in his scorn and contempt of all who durst oppose him. But
the King set the Bills forward, and in the end they were agreed to by the
Lords, and had the Royal Assent.

The King intended by this, to let the Pope see what he could do if he went on
to offend him, and how willingly his Parliament would concur with him, if it
went to extremities. He did also endear himself much to the People, by
relieving them from the oppressions of the Clergy. But the Clergy lost much by
this means, for these Acts did not only lessen their present profits, but did
open the way for other things that were more to their detriment afterward.
Their opposing of this and all other motions for Reformation, did very much
increase the prejudices that were conceived against them: whereas if such
motions had either risen from themselves, or had at least been cherished by
them, their Adversaries had not perhaps been so favorably heard; so fatally
did they mistake their true Interest, when they thought they were concerned, to
link with it all abuses and corruptions.

But there past another Bill in this Parliament, One Act discharging the King
of his debts.

Collect. Numb. 31.


which because of its singular nature, and that it was not printed with the
other Statutes, shall be found in the Collection of Instruments at the end. The
Bill bore in a Preamble; the highest flattery that could be put in Paper, of
the great things the King had done for the Church and Nation, in which he had
been at vast Charges; and that diverse of the Supjects had lent great Sums of
Money, which had been all well employed in the public Service: and whereas
they had Security for their Payment, the Parliament did offer all these Sums so
lent to the King; and discharged him of all the obligations or assignations
made for their payment, and of all Suits that might arise thereupon.

This was brought into the House by the Kings Servants, who enlarged much on
the wealth and peace of the Nation, notwithstanding the wars, the King always
making his enemies Country the scene of them; and showed that for fourteen
years, the King had but one Subsidy from his people; that now he asked nothing
for any other purpose, but only to be discharged of a Debt contracted for the
public, the accounts whereof were shown, by which they might see to what uses
the Money so raised had been applied. But there were several ends in passing
this Bill: those of the Court did not only intend to deliver the King from a
charge by it, but also to ruin all the Cardinals friends and creatures, whom he
had caused everywhere to advance great Sums, for an Example to others. Others
in the house that were convinced that the Act was unjust in it self, yet did
easily give way to it, that they might effectually for the future discredit
that way of raising Money by Loans, as judging it to be the public Interest of
the Kingdom, that no sums of Money should be raised but by Parliament. So this
Act passed, and occasioned great Murmuring among all them that suffered by it.
But to qualify the general discontent, the King gave a free pardon to his
Subjects for all offenses, some Capital ones only excepted, as is usual in such
cases; and to keep the Clergy under the Lash, all transgressions against the
Statutes of Provisors and Praemunire were excepted, in which they were all
involved, as will afterward appear. There are two other exceptions in this
Pardon, not fit to be omitted: the one is of the pulling or digging down
Crosses on the high ways, which shows what a Spirit was then stirring among
the people; the other is of the Forfeitures that accrued to the King, by the
Prosecution against Cardinal Wolsey, that is, the Cardinals College in Oxford,
with the Lands belonging to it which are excepted, upon which the Dean and
Canons resigned their Lands to the King, the Original of which is yet extant:
But the King founded the College anew soon after. All this was done both to
keep the Clergy quiet, and to engage them to use what Interest they had in the
Court of Rome, to dispose the Pope to use the King better in his great Suit.
After those Acts were passed, on the 17 of December, the Parliament was
prorogued till April following; yet it did not sit, till January after that,
being continued by several Prorogations.

There had been great industry used in carrying Elections for the Parliament,
and they were so successful, that the King was resolved to continue it for some
time. This great business being happily over, the Kings thoughts turned next to
affairs beyond Sea. The whole world was not at peace. The Pope and the Emperor
firmly united.

I^n. 20.


The Pope and the Emperor (as was said before) had made an Alliance on terms of
such advantage to the Pope, that as the Emperor did fully repair all past
injuries, so he laid new and great obligations on him: for he engaged that he
would assist him in the recovery of his Towns, and that he would restore his
Family to the Government of Florence, and invest his Nephew in it, with the
Title of Duke, to whose Son he would Marry his own natural Daughter; and that
he would hold the Kingdom of Naples of the Papacy. These were the Motives that
directed the Popes conscience, so infallibly in the Kings business. Not long
after that, in August an other Peace was made in Cambray, between the Emperor
and the French King, and Lady Margaret the Emperors Aunt, and Regent of
Flanders: where the King first found the hollowness of the French friendship
and alliance; for he was not so much considered in it as he expected, The
women's peace.

Aug. 5.


and he clearly perceived that Francis would not embroyl his own affairs, to
carry on his Divorce.

The Emperor went over into Italy, and met the Pope at Bononia, where he was
Crowned with great Magnificence. 1530.

The Emperors Coronation at Bononia.


The Pope and he lodged together in the same Palace, and there appeared such
signs of a familiar friendship between them, that the Kings Ambassadors did now
clearly perceive that they were firmly united. The Emperor did also, by a rare
mixture of Generosity and Prudence, restore the Duchy of Milan to Francis
Sforza. By this he settled the Peace of Italy, nothing holding out but Florence,
which he knew would be soon reduced, Florence taken.

Aug. 9.

Popes Nephew made Duke of it.

July 17. 1531.

Siege of Vienna raised.

October. 13. 1529.

Emperor Crowned King of Lombardy.

Feb. 22. 1530.

Romans Emp.

Feb. 2.


when there was no hope of succor from France; and accordingly after eleven
Months Siege, it was taken, and within a year after, Alexander de Medici was
made Duke of it. About the time that the Emperor came to Bononia, news was
brought, that the Turk was forced to raise the Siege of Vienna; so that all
things concurred to raise his glory very high. At Bononia he would needs
receive the two Crowns of the Roman Empire, that of Milan, and that of Rome,
which was done with all the Magnificence possible, the Pope himself saying Mass
both in Latin and Greek. There is one ceremony of the Coronation, fit to be
taken notice of, in this work; that the Emperor was first put in the habit of a
Canon of Sancta Maria de la Torre in Rome, and after that in the habit of a
Deacon, to make him be looked on as an Ecclesiastical person. This had risen
out of an Extravagant vanity of the Court of Rome, who devised such rites to
raise their reputation so high, that on the greatest solemnity, the Emperor
should appear in the habit of the lowest of the Sacred orders, by which he must
know, that Priests and Bishops are above him. When the Pope and he first met,
the ceremony of kissing the Popes foot was much looked for, and the Emperor
very gently kneeled to pay that submission; but the Pope (whether it was that
he thought it was no more seasonable to expect such Complements, or more
signally to oblige the Emperor) did humble himself so far as to draw in his
foot, and kiss his cheek.

But now the Divorce was to be managed in another method, and therefore
Cranmer, after he had discoursed with the King, The King consults his
Universities about his Divorce.
about that Proposition which was formerly mentioned, was commanded by him to
write a Book for his opinion, and confirm it with as much Authority as he
could; and was recommended to the care of the Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond (to
which honor, the King had advanced Sr. Thomas Boleyn in the right of his
Mother) and in the beginning of the next year he published his Book about it.
Richard Crook (who was Tutor to the Duke of Richmond) was sent into Italy, and
others were sent to France and Germany, to consult the Divines, Canonists, and
other Learned men in the Universities, about the Kings business. How the rest
managed the matter, I have not yet been able to discover; but from a great
number of original Letters of Doctor Crooks, I shall give a full account of his
Negotiation. It was thought best to begin at home, and therefore the King wrote
to the two Universities in England, to send him their conclusions about it. The
matters went at Oxford thus. The Bishop of Lincoln being sent thither with the
Kings Letters for their Resolution, Lord Herbert out of the Record.

April. 4. 1530.


it was by the Major vote of the Convocation of all the Doctors and Masters, as
well Regents as non-Regents, committed to 33 Doctors and Batchelours of
Divinity (who were named by their own Faculty) or to the greater number of
them, to determine the Questions, that were sent with the Kings Letters, and to
set the common Seal of the University to their Conclusions: and by virtue of
that Warrant, they did on the 8 of April put the common Seal of the University
to an Instrument, declaring the Marriage of the Brothers wife, to be both
contrary to the Laws of God and Nature. v. Wood. p. 8.257.
The Collector of the Antiquities of Oxford, informs us of the uneasiness that
was in the University in this matter, and of the several messages the King
sent, before that Instrument could be procured, so that from the 12 of February
to the 8 of April, the matter was in agitation, the Masters of Arts generally
opposing it, though the Doctors and Heads were (for the greatest part) for it.
But after he has set down the Instrument, Lib. 10. p. 225.
he gives some reasons (upon what design, I cannot easily imagine) to show that
this was extorted by force; and being done without the consent of the Masters
of Arts, was of it self void, and of no force: and as if it had been an ill
thing, he takes pains to purge the University of it, and lays it upon the fears
and corruptions of some aspiring men of the University: and without any proof,
gives credit to a lying Story set down by Sanders, of an Assembly called in the
night, in which the Seal of the University was set to the Determination. But it
appears that he had never seen or considered the other Instrument, to which the
University set their Seal, that was agreed on in a Convocation of all the
Doctors and Masters, as well Regents as non-Regents; giving Power to these
Doctors and Batchelors ofDivinity, to determine the Matter, and to set the Seal
of the University to their Conclusion. The original whereof the Lord Herbert
saw, upon which the persons so deputed, had full Authority to set the
University Seal to that Conclusion without a new Convocation. Perhaps that
Instrument was not so carefully preserved among their Records, or was in Queen
Mary's days taken away, which might occasion these mistakes in their Historian.

There seems to be also another mistake in the Relation he gives: for he says,
those of Paris had determined in this matter before it was agreed to at Oxford.
The Printed Decision of the Sorbone contradicts this: for it bears date the 2d
of July, 1530. whereas this was done the 8th of April, 1530. But what passed at
Cambridge, I shall set down* more fully, Collect. Numb. 32.
from an original Letter written by Gardener and Fox to the King in February
(but the day is not marked) When they came to Cambridge, they spoke to the
Vice Chancellor, whom they found very ready to serve the King; so was also
Bonner (whom they call Doctor Edmonds) and several others, And at Cambridge.

Feb.


but there was a contrary party that met together, and resolved to oppose them.
A meeting of the Doctors, Batchelors of Divinity, and Masters of Arts, in all
about 200, was held. There the Kings Letters were read, and the Vice Chancellor
calling upon several of them, to deliver their opinions about it, they answered
as their affections led them, and were in some disorder. But it being proposed,
that the answering the Kings Letter, and the Questions in it, should be
referred to some indifferent men; great exceptions were made to Doctor Salcot,
Doctor Reps, and Crome, and all others who had approved Doctor Cranmers Book,
as having already declared themselves partial. But to that it was answered,
that after a thing was so much discoursed of, as the Kings matter had been, it
could not be imagined, that any number of men could be found, who had not
declared their judgment about it, one way or another. Much time was spent in
the debate, but when it grew late, the Vice Chancellor commanded every man to
take his place, and to give his voice, whether they would agree to the Motion
of referring it to a Select body of men: but that night they would not agree to
it.

The Congregation being Adjourned till next day, the Vice Chancellor offered a
Grace (or Order) to refer the matter to 29 persons (himself, 10 Doctors, and 16
Batchelors, and the 2 Proctors) That (the Questions being publicly disputed)
what two parts of three agreed to, should be read in a Congregation, and
without any further debate, the Common Seal of the University should be set to
it. Yet it was at first denied; then being put to the vote, it was carried
equally on both sides. But being a third time proposed, it was carried for the
Divorce. Of which an account was presently sent to the King, with a Schedule of
their names to whom it was committed, and what was to be expected from them, so
that it was at length determined, though not without opposition, That the
King's Marriage was against the Law of God.

It is thought strange, Though with great difficulty.
that the King who was otherwise so absolute in England, should have met with
more difficulty in this matter at home, than he did abroad. But the most
reasonable account I can give of it, is, That at this time there were many in
the Universities, (particularly at Cambridge) who were addicted to Luthers
Doctrine. And of those Cranmer was looked on as the most Learned: So that Crome,
Shaxton, Latimer, and others of that Society favored the Kings Cause; besides
that, Anne Boleyn had in the Duchess of Alancon's Court (who inclined to the
Reformation) received such impressions as made them fear, that her Greatness
and Cranmers Preferment would encourage Heresy; to which the Universities were
furiously averse, and therefore they did resist all Conclusions that might
promote the Divorce.

But as for Crook in Italy, he being very Learned in the Greek Tongue, Crook
employed in Venice.

Crooks Negotiation, taken from many of his Original Letters. Cott. Libr.
Vitel. B. 13.


was first sent to Venice to search the Greek Manuscripts that lay in the
Library of St. Mark, and to examine the Decrees of the ancient Councils: He
went incognito without any Character from the King, only he had a Letter
Recommending him to the care of John Cassali, then Ambassador at Venice, to
procure him an admittance into the Libraries there. But in all his Letters he
complained mightily of his Poverty, that he had scarce whereby to live and pay
the Copiers whom he employed to Transcribe passages out of MSS. He stayed some
time at Venice, from whence he went to Padua, Bononia, and other Towns, where
he only talked with Divines and Canonists about these questions: Whether the
Precepts in Leviticus, of the Degrees of Marriage, do still oblige Christians?
And whether the Popes Dispensation could have any force against the Law of God?
These he proposed in Discourse, without mentioning the King of England, or
giving the least intimation, that he was sent by him, till he once discovered
their Opinions. But finding them generally inclining to the Kings Cause, he
took more courage and went to Rome; where he sought to be made a Penitentiary
Priest, that he might have the freer access into Libraries, and be looked on as
one of the Popes Servants. But at this time the Earl of Wiltshire and
Stokesley, (who was made Bishop of London, Tonstall being Translated to
Duresm,) were sent by the King into Italy, Ambassadors both to the Pope and
Emperor. Cranmer went with them to justify his Book in both these Courts.
Stokesley brought full Instructions to Crook to search the Writings of most of
the Fathers on a great many passages of the Scripture; and in particular to
try, what they wrote on that Law in Deuteronomy, which provided, that when one
died without Children, his Brother should marry his Wife to raise up Children
to him. This was most pressed against the King by all that were for the Queen,
as either an Abrogation of the other Law in Leviticus, or at least a
Dispensation with it in that particular Case. He was also to consult the Jews
about it; and was to Copy out every thing that he found in any Manuscript of
the Greek or Latin Fathers, relating to the Degrees of Marriage. Of this
labor he complained heavily, and said, That though he had a great task laid on
him, yet his allowance was so small, that he was often in great straits. This I
take notice of, because it is said by others, That all the Subscriptions that
he procured were bought. At this time there were great Animosities between the
Ministers whom the King employed in Italy; the two Families of the Cassali, and
the Ghinucci, hating one another. Of the former Family were the Ambassadors at
Rome, and at Venice. Of the other Hierome was Bishop of Worcester, and had been
in several Ambassies into Spain. His Brother Peter was also employed in some of
the little Courts of Italy as the Kings Agent. Whether the King out of Policy
kept this hatred up to make them Spies one on another, I know not. To the
Ghinucci was Crook gained, so that in all his Letters he complained of the
Cassali, as men that betrayed the Kings Affairs; and said that John, then
Ambassador at Venice, not only gave him no assistance, but used him ill: and
publicly discovered, That he was employed by the King; which made many who had
formerly spoken their minds freely, be more reserved to him. But as he wrote
this to the King, he begged of him, that it might not be known* otherwise he
expected either to be Killed, or Poisoned by them: Yet they had their
Correspondents about the King, by whose means they understood what Crook had
Informed against them. But they wrote to the King, that he was so morose and
ill-natured, that nothing could please him; and to lessen his Credit, they did
all they could to stop his Bills. All this is more fully set down, than perhaps
was necessary, if it were not to show that he was not in a condition to corrupt
so many Divines, and whole Universities, as some have given out. He got into
the acquaintance of a Friar at Venice, Franciscus Georgius, who had lived 49
years in a Religious order, and was esteemed the most Learned man in the
Republic, not only in the vulgar Learning, but in the Greek and Hebrew, and
was so much accounted of by the Pope, that he called him the Hammer of
Heretics. He was also of the Senatorian Quality, and his Brother was Governor
of Padua, and paid all the Readers there. This Friar had a great opinion of
the King: and having studied the case, Many ^n Italy write for the Kings cause.
wrote for the Kings cause, and endeavored to satisfy all the other Divines
of the Republic, among whom he had much credit. Thomas Omnibonus a Dominican,
Philippus de Cremis a Doctor of the Law, Valerius of Bergamo, and some others,
wrote for the Kings cause. Many of the Jewish Rabbis, did give it under their
hands in Hebrew, That the Laws of Leviticus and Deuteronomy, were thus to be
reconciled. That Law of Marrying the Brothers wife when he dyed without
Children, did only bind in the Land of Judaea, to preserve Families and
maintain their Successions in the Land, as it had been divided by Lot. But that
in all other places of the world, the Law of Leviticus, of not Marrying the
Brothers wife was obligatory. He also searched all the Greek MSS. of Councils,
and Nazianzens and Chrysostoms works. After that he run over Macarius, Acacius,
Apollinaris, Origin, Gregory Nyssen, Cyril, Severian, and Gennadius; and copied
out of them all that which was pertinent to his purpose. He procured several
hands to the Conclusions, before it was known that it was the Kings business,
in which he was employed. But the Government of Venice was so strict, that when
it was known whose Agent he was, he found it not easy to procure
Subscriptions: Therefore he advised the King to order his Minister to procure a
License from the Senate, for their Divines, to declare their opinions in that
matter. Which being proposed to the Senate, all the answer he could obtain was,
that they would be Neutrals; Feb. 18.
and when the Ambassador pressed, as an evidence of Neutrality, that the Senate
would leave it free to their Divines, to declare of either side as their
Consciences led them; he could procure no other answer, the former being again
repeated. Yet the Senate making no Prohibition, many of their Divines put their
hands to the Conclusions. And Crook had that Success, that he wrote to the
King, he had never met with a Divine that did not favor his cause: but the
Conclusions touching the Popes Power, his Agents did everywhere discourage,
Though the Pope and Emperor discour^ged them.

July 4.


and threaten those who subscribed them. And the Emperors Ambassador at Venice,
did threaten Omnibonus for writing in prejudice of the Popes Authority; and
asserting conclusions, which would make most of the Princes of Europe Bastards.
He answered, he did not consider things as a Statesman, but as a Divine. Yet to
take off this fear, Crook suggested to the King, to order his Minister at the
Court of Rome, to procure a Breve that Divines or Canonists might without fear
or hazard, deliver their opinions according to their Consciences, requiring
them under the pain of Excommunication, that they should write nothing for gain
or Partial affections, but say the pure and simple truth, without any artifice,
as they would answer to God in the great day of Judgment. This seemed so fair,
that it might have been expected, the Successor of St. Peter would not deny it;
yet it was not easily obtained, though the King wrote a very earnest Letter to
the Bishop of Verona, to assist his Minister in procuring it. Aug. 7.
And I find by another Dispatch, that the Breve was at length gained, September.
16.
not without much opposition made to it by the Emperors Ambassadors: For at
Rome, though they knew not well how to oppose this method, because it seemed so
very reasonable; yet they had great apprehensions of it, because they thought
it was designed to force the Pope to determine as the King pleased: and they
abhorred the President, that a company of poor Friars, should Dictate to them
in matters of this nature. July 28.
Crook reports out of a Letter of Cranmers to him from Rome, these words. As
for our Successes here, they be very little, nor dare we attempt to know any
man's mind, because of the Pope, nor is he content with what you have done; and
he says, no Friars shall discuss his Power: and as for any favor in this
Court, I look for none, but to have the Pope with all his Cardinals declare
against us. But Crook, as he went up and down procuring hands, told these he
came to, he desired they would write their Conclusions, Aug. 5.
according to Learning and Conscience, without any respect, or favor, as they
would answer it at the last day; and Protested he never gave, nor promised any
Divine any thing, till he had first freely written his mind, No Money nor
bribes given for subscriptions.
and that what he then gave, was rather an honorable Present than a Reward.
And in another Letter to the King he writes: Upon pain of my head if the
contrary be proved, I never gave any man one halfpenny, before I had his
Conclusion to your Highness, (...). 7.
without former Prayer or Promise of reward for the same. From whence it
appears, that he not only had no orders from the King to corrupt Divines, but
that his orders were express to the contrary.

As for the Money he gave, the Reader will be best able to judge by the
following account, whether it was such as could work much on any man. There is
an Original Bill of his accounts yet extant, audited and signed by Peter a
Ghinu^iis, F^b. 8.
out of which I have extracted these particulars: Item, To a Servite Friar when
he subscribed, one Crown. To a Jew one Crown. To the Doctors of the Servites
two Crowns. Only some small acknowledgments.
To the Observant Friars two Crowns. To the Prior of St. John and St. Paul's,
who wrote for the Kings Cause fifteen Crowns. To that Convent four Crowns.
Item, Given to John Maria for his expense of going to Milan from Venice, and
for rewarding the Doctors there, thirty Crowns. Item, To John Marino Minister
of the Franciscans, who wrote a Book for the Kings cause, Twenty Crowns. This
shows that they must have had very prostituted Consciences, if they could be
hired so cheap. Feb. 22.
It is true Crook in many of his Letters says, That if he had Money enough, he
did not doubt but he should get the hands of all the Divines in Italy, for he
found the greatest part of them all Mercenary. But the Bishop of Worcester in
his Letters to him, Feb. 9.
ordered him only to promise rewards to those who expected them, and lived by
them, that is, to the Canonists who did not use to give their opinion without a
fee.

But at the same time, the Emperor did reward and fee Divines at another rate,
September. 16.
for Crook informed the King, that one Friar Felix having written for the
validity of the Marriage against the King, there was a Benefice of 500 Ducats a
year, given him in reward. And the Emperors Ambassador offered a thousand
Ducats to the Provincial of the Gray-friars in Venice, But great Rewards given
by the Emperor.
if he would Inhibite all within his Province to write or subscribe for the
Kings cause. But the Provincial refused it, September. 29.
and said, he neither could nor yet would do it. And another that wrote for the
Queen, had a Benefice of 600 Crowns. So that it was openly said at Ferrara,
that they who wrote for the King, had but a few Crowns a-piece, but they who
wrote on the other side had good Benefices. They also tried what could be done
at Padua, both by threatenings, entreaties, and rewards, to induce them to
reverse the determination they had made in the matter; but with no success. And
though Francis Georgius the Venetian Friar, Feb. 18.
did greatly promote the Kings cause, both by his writings and authority; yet
Crook wrote that he could not prevail to make either him or his Nephew accept
one farthing of him. By such fair means it was, that Crook procured so many
Subscriptions.

First, of particular Divines, many Franciscans, Dominicans, and Servites, set
their hands to the Conclusions; though even in that, there was opposition made
by the Popes Agents. Campegio was now engaged in the Emperors Faction, and did
everywhere mis-represent the Kings cause. Being at Venice, he so wrought on
the Minister of the Franciscans, March 29.
that though he had declared for the King, and engaged to bring the hands of 24
Doctors and Learned men of his Order for it, and had received a small Present
of ten Crowns; 1530.
yet after he had kept the Money three weeks, he sent it back, and said, he
would not meddle more in it: But they procured most of these hands without his
help. At Milan, a Suffragan Bishop, and sixteen Divines Subscribed. May 26.
Nine Doctors Subscribed at Vincenza, but the Pope's Nuntio took the writing
out of his hands that had it, and suppressed it. I^n^ 2^.
At Padua all the Franciscans, both Observants and Conventuals, Subscribed, and
so did the Dominicans, and all the Canonists; and though the Popes and
Emperor's Emissaries did threaten all that Subscribed, yet there were got
eighty hands at Padua. Next the Universities determined.

At Bononia, though it was the Popes Town, many Subscribed. They Determined for
the King at (...).

(...) 1^th.


The Governor of the Town did at first oppose the granting of any
Determination; but the Popes Breve being brought thither, he not without great
difficulty gave way to it. So on the 19th of June, the matter being publicly
debated, and all Cajetans Arguments being examined, who was of Opinion, That
the Laws of Marriage in Leviticus did not bind the Christian Church; they
determined, That th^se Laws are still in force, and that they bind all both
Christians and Infidels, being parts of the Law of Nature, as well as of the
Law of God; and that therefore they judged Marriages in these degrees unlawful,
and that the Pope had no Authority to dispense with them.

The University of Padua after some days public Dispute, At Padua.

July 1st.

Collect. Numb. 33.

And Ferrara, Sept. 29th.


on the 1st of July, determined to the same purpose; about which Crooks Letter
will be found among the Instruments at the end of this Book.

At Ferrara, the Divines did also confirm the same conclusion, and s^t their
Seal to it; but it was taken away violently by some of the other Faction, yet
the Duke made it be restored. The profession of the Canon Law was then in great
credit there, and in a Congregation of 72* of that pro^ession, it was
determined for the King; but they asked 150 Crowns for setting the Seal to it,
and Crook would not give more than an hundred; the next day he came and offered
the Money, but then it was told him they would not meddle in it, and he could
not afterward obtain it.

In all, Crook sent over by Stokesley an hundred several Books, Papers and
Subscriptions, and there were many hands subscribed to many of those Papers.
But it seems Crook died before he could receive a reward of this great Service
he did the King, for I do not find him mentioned after this. I hope the Reader
will forgive my insisting so much on this Negotiation; for it seemed necessary
to give full and convincing Evidences of the sincerity of the Kings proceedings
in it, since it is so confidently given out that these were but mercenary
Subscriptions.

What difficulties or opposition those who were employed in France found, does
not yet appear to me; And in Orleance,

April 7.

At Paris of the Canonists.

May 25th.


but the Seals of the chief Universities there were procured. The University of
Orleance determined it on the 7th of April. The faculty of the Canon Law at
Paris, did also conclude that the Pope had no Power to dispense in that Case,
on the 25th of May. But the great and celebrated faculty of the Sorbon, (whose
Conclusions had been looked on for some Ages as little inferior to the Decrees
of Councils) made their Decision with all possible Solemnity and Decency. They
first met at the Church of St. Mathurin, where there was a Mass of the H.
Ghost, and every one took an Oath to study the Question, and resolve it
according to his Conscience, and from the 8th of June, to the 2d of July, they
continued searching the matter with all possible diligence, both out of the
Scriptures, the Fathers, and the Councils; and had many Disputes about it. Of
the So^bon, I^ly 2d.
After which, the greater part of the Faculty did Determine, That the King of
Englands Marriage was unlawful, and that the Pope had no Power to dispense in
it; and they set their common Seal to it, at St. Mathurin's, the 2d of July,
1530. To the same purpose did both the Faculties of Law, At Angiers. May 7th.
At Bourges. June 10th.
Civil and Canon at Angiers, Determine the 7th of May. On the 10th of June, the
Faculty of Divinity, at Bourges, made the same Determination. And on the 1st of
October the whole University of Tholose, did all with one consent give their
judgment, agreeing with the former Conclusions. And T^^lose,

October. 1st.

Collect. Numb. 34.


More of the Decisions of Universities were not Printed, though many more were
obtained to the same effect. In Germany, Spain, and Flanders, the Emperors
Authority was so great, that much could not be expected except from the
Lutherans, with whom Cranmer conversed, and chiefly with Osiander, whose Niece
he then Married. Ian. 28th. his Orig. Let. Cott. Libr. Otho. C. 10.
Osiander upon that wrote a Book about Incestuous Marriages, which was
published; but was called in by a Prohibition Printed at Ausburg, because it
Determined in the Kings cause, and on his side.

But now I find the King did likewise deal among those, in Switzerland that had
set up the Reformation. Pelerine I^glise.
The Duke of Suffolk did most set him on to this, so one who was employed in
that time writes, for he often asked him, how he could so humble himself, as to
submit his Cause to such a vile, vicious, stranger, Priest, as Campegio was? To
which the King answered, He could give no other reason, but that it seemed to
him, Spiritual men should judge Spiritual things; yet, he said, he would search
the matter further, but he had no great mind to seem more curious than other
Princes. But the Duke desired him to discuss the matter secretly amongst
Learned men, to which he consented; and wrote to some Foreign Writers that
were then in great estimation. Erasmus was much in his favor, but he would not
appear in it. He had no mind to provoke the Emperor, Grineus employed amongst
the Reformed in Switzerland.

Whose Letters are in a MSS. in R. Smiths Libr.

The Opinions of O^colompadius.


and live uneasily in his own Country. But Simon Grineus was sent for, whom the
King esteemed much for his Learning. The King informed him about his Process,
and sent him back to Basil, to try what his Friends in Germany and Switzerland
thought of it. He wrote about it to Bucer, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, and Paulus
Phrygion.

Oecolampadius, as it appears by three Letters, one dated the 10th of August,
1531. another the last of the same Month, another to Bucer the 10th of
September; was positively of Opinion, That the Law in Leviticus did bind all
mankind, and says, That Law of a Brothers Marrying his Sister-in-Law, was a
Dispensation given by God to his own Law, which belonged only to the Jews; and
therefore he thought that the King might without any scruple put away the
Queen. B^cer
But Bucer was of another mind, and thought the Law in Leviticus did not bind,
and could not be Moral, because God had dispensed with it in one Case, of
raising up seed to his Brother: Therefore he thought these Laws belonged only
to that Dispensation, and did no more bind Christians, than the other
Ceremonial or Judiciary Precepts; and that to Marry in some of these Degrees,
was no more a sin, than it was a sin in the Disciples to pluck Ears of Corn on
the Sabbathday. There are none of Bucers Letters remaining on this Head, but by
the answers that Grineus wrote to him, one on the 29th of August, another of
the 10th of September, I gather his Opinion, and the reasons for it. But they
all agreed, That the Popes Dispensation was of no force to alter the nature of
the thing. Paulus Phrygion was of Opinion, Phrygion.
That the Laws in Leviticus did bind all Nations, because it is said in the
Text, That the Canaanites were punished for doing contrary to them, which did
not consist with the Justice of God, if those Prohibitions had not been parts
of the Law of Nature. Dated Basil the 10th of September. In Grineus's Letter to
Bucer, he tells him, that the King had said to him, That now for seven years he
had perpetual trouble upon him about this Marriage. Zuinglius.
Zuinglius Letter is very full. First, he largely proves that neither the Pope,
nor any other Power could dispense with the Law of God: Then, that the Apostles
had made no new Laws about Marriage, but had left it as they found it: That the
Marrying within near degrees was hated by the Greeks, and other Heathen
Nations. But whereas Grineus seemed to be of opinion, that though the Marriage
was ill made, yet it ought not to be dissolved, and inclined rather to advise
that the King should take another Wife, keeping the Queen still; Zuinglius
confutes that, and says, If the Marriage be against the Law of God, it ought to
be dissolved: But concludes the Queen should be put away honorably, and still
used as a Queen; and the Marriage should only be dissolved for the future,
without Illegitimating the Issue begotten in it, since it had gone on in a
public way, upon a received error. But advises, that the King should proceed
in a Judiciary way, and not establish so ill a President as to put away his
Queen, and take another without due form of Law. Dated Basil, 17th of Aug.
There is a second Letter of his to the same purpose from Zurick, the first of
September. There is also with these Letters a long paper of Osianders* in the
form of a Direction how the Process should be managed.

There is also an Epistle of Calvin's, published among the rest of his. Neither
the date nor the person to whom it was directed are named. And Calvin Epist.
384.
Yet I fancy it was written to Grineus, upon this occasion: Calvin was clear
in his judgment that the Marriage was null, and that the King ought to put away
the Queen, upon the Law of Leviticus. And whereas it was objected, that the Law
is only meant of Marrying the Brothers wife while he is yet alive; he shows
that could not be admitted, for all the prohibited degrees being forbidden in
the same style, they were all to be understood in one sense: Therefore since it
is confessed, that it is unlawful to Marry in the other degrees, after the
death of the Father, Son, Uncle, or Nephew, so it must be also a sin, to Marry
the Brothers wife after his death. And for the Law in Deuteronomy of Marrying
the Brothers wife to raise up seed to him; he thought, that by Brother there,
is to be understood a near Kinsman, according to the usual phrase of the Hebrew
tongue: and by that he reconciles the two Laws which otherwise seem to differ,
illustrating his Exposition by the History of Ruth and Boaz. It is given out
that Melancthon advised the Kings taking another wife, justifying Polygamy from
the old Testament; but I cannot believe it. It is true the Lawfulness of
Polygamy was much controverted at this time. And as in all controversies newly
started, many crude things are said; so some of the Helvetian and German
Divines seem not so fierce against it; though none of them went so far as the
Pope did, Lord Herb. from an Orig. Let. Sept. 18. 1530.
who did plainly offer to grant the King License to have two wives: and it was
a motion the Imperialists consented to, and promoted, though upon what reason,
the Ambassador Cassali, who wrote the account of it to the King, could not
learn. The Pope forbade him to write about it to the King, perhaps as
Whisperers enjoin silence, as the most effectual way to make a thing public.
But for Melancthons being of that mind, great evidences appear to the contrary;
for there is a Letter of Osianders to him, giving him many reasons to persuade
him to approve of the Kings putting away the Queen, and Marrying another: the
Letter also shows he was then of opinion, that the Law in Leviticus was
Dispensable.

And after the thing was done, when the King desired the Lutheran Divines to
approve his second Marriage; The opinion of the Lutheran Divines.
they begged his excuse in a writing, which they sent over to him; so that
Melan^^hon not allowing the thing, Instructions sent by Dr. Barns to Cromwell
Cott. Lib. V^tel. B. 13.
when it was done, cannot be imagined to have advised Polygamy before hand. And
to open at once all that may clear the sense of the Protestants in the
Question, when some years after this, Fox being made Bishop of Hereford, and
much inclined to their Do^ctrine, was sent over to get the Divines of Germany,
to approve of the Divorce, and the subsequent Marriage of Anne Boleyn; he found
that Melancthon and others had no mind to enter much into the Dispute about it,
both for fear of the Emperor, and because they judged the King was led in it by
dishonest affections: they also thought the Laws in Leviticus were not Moral,
and did not oblige Christians, and since there were no Rules made about the
Degrees of Marriage in the Gospel, they thought Princes and States might make
what Laws they pleased about it: yet after much Disputing they were induced to
change their minds, They condemn the Kings first Marriage, but are against a
second.

Collect. Numb. 35.


but could not be brought to think that a Marriage once made, might be
annulled, and therefore demurred upon that; as will appear by the Conclusion
they passed upon it, to be found at the end of this volume. All this I have set
together here, to give a right representation of the judgments of the several
parties of Christendom about this matter.

It cannot be denied, that the Protestants did express great sincerity in this
matter: such as became men of conscience, who were acted by true Principles,
and not by maxims of Policy. For if these had governed them, they had struck
in more compliantly with so great a Prince, who was then alienated from the
Pope, and in very ill terms with the Emperor: so that to have gained him by a
full Compliance to have protected them, was the wisest thing they could do; and
their being so cold in the matter of his Marriage, in which he had engaged so
deeply, was a thing, which would very much provoke him against them. But such
measures as these, though they very well became the Apostolic See, yet the^
were unworthy of men, who designed to restore an Apostolic Religion.

Fox.
The Earl of Wiltshire with the other Ambassadors, when they had their Audience
of the Pope at Bononia, refused to pay him the submission of Kissing his foot,
though he graciously stretched it out to them; but went to their Business, and
expostulated in the Kings name, and in high words: and in Conclusion told the
Pope, that the Prerogative of the Crown of England was such, The King refuses
to appear at Rome.
that their Master would not suffer any Citation to be made of him, to any
foreign Court; and that therefore the King would not have his cause tried at
Rome. The Pope answered, that though the Queens Solicitor had pressed him to
proceed in the Citation; b^th that her Marriage being further examined, might
receive a new Con^irmation, for silencing the Dispu^es about it, and because
the King had withdrawn himself from her; yet if the King did not go further,
and did not innovate in Religion, the Pope was willing to let the matter rest.
They went next to the Emperor, to justify the Kings Proceedings in the Suit of
the Divorce. But he told them he was bound in honor and justice to ^upp^rt his
Aunt, and that he would not abandon her. Cranmer offered to maintain what he
had written in his Book, but whether they went so far, Cranmer offers to
maintain the Kings cause.
as to make their Divines enter into any Discourse with him about it, I do not
know. This appears that the Pope, to put a Complement on the King, declared
Cranmer his Paenitentiary in England. He having stayed some months at Rome,
after the Ambassadors were gone, went into Germany: where he became acquainted
with Cornelius Agrippa, a man very famous for great and curious Learning, and
so satisfied him in the Kings cause, that he gave it out, that the thing was
clear and indisputable, for which he was afterward hardly used by the Emperor,
and dyed in Prison.

But when the King received the Determinations and Conclusions of the
Universities, and other Learned men beyond Sea, The Nobility, Clergy, and
Commons of England* write to the Pope.
he resolved to do two things. First, to make a new attempt upon the Pope, and
then to publish those Conclusions to the World, with the arguments upon which
they were grounded. But to make his address to the Pope carry more terror with
it, he got a Letter to be signed by a great many Members of Parliament, to the
Pope. The lord Herbert ^aith, it was done by his Parliament; but in that, he
had not applied his ordinary diligence, the Letter bears date the 13 of July.
Now by the Records of Parliament, it appears, there could be no Session at that
time, for there was a Prorogation from the 21 of June, till the ^st of October
that year: In the life of Wolse^.
But the Letter was sent about to the chief Members, for their hands; and
Cavendish tells how it was brought to the Cardinal, and with what cheerfulness
he set his hand to it. It was subscribed by the Cardinal, and the Archbishop
of Canterbury, 4 Bishops, 2 Dukes, 2 Marquesses, 13 Earls, 2 Viscoun^s, 23
Barons, 22 Abbots, and 11 Commoners, most of these being the Kings Servants.

The Contents of the Letters were, that their near Relation to the King, made
them address thus to the Pope. This Letter and the answer are Printed by the
Lord Herbert.
The Kings cause was now in the opinion of the Learned men, and Universities
both in England, France, and Italy found just, which ought to prevail so far
with the Pope, that though none moved in it, and notwithstanding any
Contradiction, he ought to confirm their judgment; especially it touching a
King and Kingdom, to whom he was so much obliged. But since neither the justice
of the cause, nor the Kings most earnest desires had prevailed with him, they
were all forced to complain of that strange usage of their King; who both by
his Authority, and with his Pen, had supported the Apostolic See, and the
Catholic Faith, and yet was now denied justice. From which they apprehended
great mischief and Civil Wars, which could only be prevented by the Kings
Marrying another wife, of whom he might have issue. This could not be done,
till his present Marriage were annulled. nulled. And if the Pope would still
refuse to do this, they must conclude that they were abandoned by him, and so
seek for other Remedies. This they most earnestly prayed him to prevent, since
they did not desire to go to extremities, till there was no more to be hoped
for at his hands.

The Popes answer.
To this the Pope made answer, the 27 of September. He took notice of the
vehemence of their Letter, which he forgave them, imputing it to their great
affection to their King: they had charged him with ingratitude and injustice;
two grievous Imputations. He acknowledged all they wrote of the obligations he
owed to their King, which were far greater than they called them, both on the
Apostolic See, and himself in particular. But in the Kings cause he had been
so far from denying justice, that he was often charged as having been too partial
to him. He had granted a Commission to two Legates to hear it, rather out of
favor, than in Rigor of Law; upon which the Queen had appealed: he had delayed
the admitting of it, as long as was possible; but when he saw it could not be
any longer denied to be heard, it was brought before the Consistory, where all
the Cardinals with one consent, found that the Appeal, and an Avocation of the
cause must be granted. That since that time, the King had never desired to put
it to a Trial, but on the contrary, by his Ambassadors at Bononia moved for a
delay: and in that posture it was still, nor could he give sentence in a thing
of such Consequence, when it was not so much as sought for. For the conclusions
of Universities and Learned men, he had seen none of them from any of the Kings
Ambassadors. It was true some of them had been brought to him another way; but
in them there were no reasons given, but only bare Conclusions, and he had also
seen very important things for the other side; and therefore he must not
precipitate a Sentence, in a cause of such high Importance, till all things
were fully heard and considered. He wished their King might have Male Issue,
but he was not in Gods stead to give it. And for their Threatenings of seeking
other Remedies, they were neither agreeable to their wisdom, nor to their
Religion. Therefore he admonished them to abstain from such Counsels; but
minded them that it is not the Physicians fault, if the Patient will do himself
hurt. He knew the King would never like such courses; and though he had a just
value for their Intercession; yet he considered the King much more, to whom as
he had never denied any thing, that he could grant with his honor; so he was
very desirous to examine this matter, and to put it to a speedy issue, and
would do every thing that he could without offending God.

A Proclamation against Bulls from Rome.

Lord Herb.


But the King either seeing the Pope resolved to grant nothing, or apprehending
that some Bull might be brought into England, in behalf of the Queen, or the
disgraced Cardinal, did on the Nineteenth of September, put forth a
Proclamation against any who purchased any thing from Rome, or elsewhere,
contrary to his Royal Prerogative and Authority, or should publish or divulge
any such thing, requiring them not to do it, under the pains of incurring his
indignation, Imprisonment, and other punishments on their persons. This was
founded on the Statutes of Provisors and Premunires. But that being done, he
resolved next to publish to the world, and to his Subjects the justice of his
cause: Therefore some Learned men were app^inted to compare all that had been
written on it, and out of all the Transcrip^s of the Manuscripts, of Fathers
and Councils, Books written for the Kings cause.
to gather together whatsoever did strengthen it. Several of these Manuscripts
I have seen, one is in Mr. Smiths Library, where are the Quotations of the
Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, and Canonists, written out at length. There are
Three other such MSS. in the Cotton Library, Otho. C. ^0*
of which one contains a large vindication of these Authorities, from some
Exceptions made to them; ibidem.
another is an answer to the Bishop of Rochesters Book for the Queens cause.
Visp. B. 5. Co^lect. Numb. 36.
A Third digests the Matter into Twelve Articles, which the Reader will find in
my Appendix; and these are there enlarged on and proved. But all these, and
many more were sum'd up in a short Book, and Printed first in Latin, then in
English, with the Determinations of the Universities before it. These are of
such weight and Importance, and give so great a light to the whole Matter, that
I hope the Reader will not be ill pleased to have a short abstract of them laid
before him.

An Abstract of those things which were written for the Divorce.
The Law of Marriage was originally given by God, The grounds of it in the old
Testament.
to Adam in the state of Innocence, with this Declaration, that man and wife
were one Flesh; but being afterward corrupted by the Incestuous commixtures of
those which were of Kin, in the nearest degrees, the Primitive Law was again
revived by Moses. Lev. 18.20^
And he gives many Rules and Prohibitions about the Degrees of Kindred and
Affinity, which are not to be looked on, as new Laws and judiciary Precepts,
but as a Restoring of the Law of Nature, originally given by God, but then much
corrupted. Lev. 18.2* 4.5.6.21.
For as the Preface which is so often repeated before these Laws, I am the Lord,
insinuates that they were conform to the Divine Nature; so the consequences of
them show they were Moral and Natural. v. 17.24.26. v. 24.25.
For the Breaches of them are called Wickedness and Abomination, and are said
to defile the Land; and the Violation of them is charged on the Canaanites, by
which the Land was polluted, and for which it did vomit out the Inhabitants.
From whence it must be concluded, that these were not positive Precepts, which
did only bind the Jews, but were parts of the Law of Mankind and Nature;
otherwise those Nations could contract no Guilt by their Violating them. Among
the forbidden Degrees, one is, L^v. 18. v. 16.
Thou shall not discover the Nakedness of thy Brothers wife, it is thy Brothers
Nakedness. And it is again repeated, Lev. 20.21*
If a man shall take his Brothers wife, it is an unclean thing, he has
uncovered his Brothers Nakedness, they shall be childless. These are clear and
express Laws of God, which therefore must needs oblige all persons of what rank
soever, without exception.

In the New Testament, St. John Baptist said to Herod, And in the New. Mat.
14.4*
It is not Lawful for thee, to take thy Brothers wife, which shows that these
Laws of Moses were still obligatory. St. Paul also in his epistle to the
Corinthians, condemns the Incestuous person for having his Fathers wife which
is one of the Degrees forbidden by the Law of Moses, 1 Cor. 5.^*
and calls it a Fornication, not so much as named among the Gentiles. From
whence it is inferred, that these forbidden degrees are excluded by the Law of
Nature, since the Gentiles did not admit them. St. Paul also calling it by the
common name of Fornication, within which, according to that place, all undue
Commixtures of men and women are included; Therefore those places in the New
Testament, that condemn Fornication, do also condemn Marriages in forbidden
degrees: our Savior did also assert the foundation of affinity, by saying,
that man and wife are one Flesh.

But in all Controverted things, the sense of the Scriptures must be taken from
the Tradition of the Church, which no good Catholic can deny: and that is to
be found in the Decrees of Popes and Councils, and in the writings of the
Fathers and Doctors of the Church: against which, if any argue from their
private understanding of the Scriptures, it is the way of Heresy, and savours
of Lutheranism. The first of the Fathers, who had occasion to write of this
Matter, Lib. 4to cont. Marcion^^.
was Tertullian, who lived within an Age after the Apostles. He in express
words says, that the Law of not Marrying the Brothers wife, did still oblige
Christians.

The Authorities of Popes
The first Pope, whose decision was sought in this Matter, was Gregory the
Great, to whom Austin the Apostle of England wrote for his resolution of some
things, in which he desired direction; and one of these is, Whether a man may
Marry his Brothers wife? (who in the Language of that time was called his
Kinswoman) The Pope answered Negatively, and proved it by the Law of Moses, and
therefore Defined, that if any of the English Nation, who had Married within
that degree, were converted to the Faith, he must be admonished to abstain from
his wife, and to look on such a Marriage as a most grievous Sin. From which it
appears, that that good Pope did judge it a thing, which by no means could be
dispensed with, otherwise he had not pressed it so much under such
Circumstances; since in the first Conversion of a Nation to the Christian
Faith, the Insisting too much upon it, might have kept back many from receiving
the Christian Religion, who were otherwise well inclined to it. ad omnes
Gal^i^e Episcopos.
Calixtus, 30. Quaest. 3. cap. Pitan^m.
Zacarias, and De Pres. cap. cum in juventutem. and Counci^s. Can. 2.
Innocent the Third, have plainly asserted the obligation of these Precepts in
the Law of Moses, the last particularly, who treats about it with great
vehemence: So that the Apostolic See has already judged the Matter.

Several Provincial Councils have also declared the obligation of the Precepts,
about the degrees of Marriage in Leviticus, by the Council at Neocesarea; If a
woman had been Married to two Brothers, she was to be cast out of the Communion
of the Church till her death, and the man that Married his Brothers wife, Chap.
5.
was to be Anathematized, which was also Confirmed in a Council held by Pope
Gregory the Second. I^ the Council of Agde, (...). 61.
where the Degrees that make a Marriage incestuous are reckoned; this of
Marrying the Brothers wife is one of them: and there it was Decreed, that all
Marriages within these Degrees were Null, and the Parties so Contracting, were
to be cast out of the Communion of the Church, and put among the Catechumens,
till they separated themselves from one another. And in the Second Council of
Toledo, Chap. 5.
the Authority of the Mosaical Prohibitions about the Degrees of Marriage is
acknowledged. It was one of Wickcliffs errors, that the Prohibition of Marriage
within such degrees was without any foundation in the Law of God; for which,
and other points, he was condemned first in a Convocation at London, then at
Oxford, and last of all at the general Council of Constance these Condemnations
were confirmed. So formally had the Church in many Provincial Councils, and in
one that was General, decided this matter.

Next to these, the Opinions of the Fathers were to be considered. In the Greek
Church And the Greek.

In 20. Levit.


Origin first had occasion to Treat about it, writing on Leviticus; and Homil.
71. on 22. Mat.
Chrysostom after him; but most fully St. Epist. ad Diodor.
Basil the Great, who do expressly assert the obligations of these Precepts.
The last particularly, refuting at great length the Opinion of some, who
thought the Marrying two Sisters was not unlawful, lays it down as a
Foundation, That the Laws in Leviticus about Marriage were still in force.
Hesychius also, writing upon Leviticus, On Levit. 18. and 20.
proves that these Prohibitions were universally obligatory, because both the
Egyptians and Cananites are taxed for Marrying within these Degrees; From
whence he inferrs, they are of Moral and Eternal obligation.

From the Greek they went to the Latin Fathers, and alleged, And the Latin
Fathers.
as was already observed, that Tertullian held the same Opinion, and with him
agreed the three great Doctors of the Latin Church, Lib. 8. Ep. 66.
Ambrose, Cont. H^^vidium.
Ierom, and St. Cont. Fa^st. chap. 8, 9, 10. and Quaest. 64. in Lev. Ad
Bonifac. Lib. 3. chap. 4. Lib. 15. de Civ. D^i. chap. 16.

And of the Modern Writers.

In Epist. ad Pium Frat^em.


Austin, who do plainly deliver the Tradition of the Church about the
obligation of those Laws, and answer the objections that were made, either from
Abraam's Marrying his Sister, or from Jacob's Marrying two Sisters, or the Law
in Deuteronomy, for the Brothers Marrying his Brothers Wife, if he died without
Children.

They observed that the same Doctrine was also taught by the Fathers and
Doctors in the latter Ages. d Anselm held it, and pleads much for Marrying in
remote Degrees, and answer the Objection from the Decision in the Case of the
Daughters of Zelophehad. On 18. Lev.
Hugo Cardinalis, Radulphus Flaviacenfis, and Rupertus Tuitiensis, do agree,
that these Precepts are Moral, and of perpetual obligation, as also Hugo de
Sto. Victore. Epist. ad Arch. Rotomag. and Epis. Sag.
Hildebert Bishop of Man's, being consulted in a Case of the same nature with
what is now controverted, Lib. 2. de Sacram. p. 2. chap. 5. Art. 2.
plainly Determines, That a man may not Marry his Brothers Wife; and by many
Authorities shows, That by no means it can be allowed. And Epist. 240.
Ivo Carnotensis being desired to give his Opinion in a Case of the same
circumstance^, of a Kings Marrying his Brothers Wife, says, Such a Marriage is
null, as inconsistent with the Law of God, and that the King was not to be
admitted to the Communion of the Church, till he put away his Wife, since there
was no Dispencing with the Law of God, and no Sacrifice could be offered for
those that continued willingly in sin. Passages also to the same purpose, are
in other places of his Epistles.

From these Doctors and Fathers the Inquiry descended to the Schoolmen, who had
with more niceness and subtlety examined things. The Schoolmen.
They do all agree in asserting the obligation of these Levitical Prohibitions.
Thomas Aquinas does it in many places, 2d^. 2 dae. Quaest. 154. art 9. In
Tertiam Quaest. 54. art. 3. In 4tam. did. 40. Q. 3. and 4.
and confirms it with many Arguments. Altisiodorensis, says, they are Moral
Laws, and part of the Law of Nature. Petrus de Palude, is of the ^ame mind, and
says, that a man's Marrying his Brothers Wife, was a Dispensation granted by
God, but could not be now allowed, because it was contrary to the Law of
Nature. St. Antonine of Florence, Ioannes de Turre Cremata, Ioannes de Tabia,
Iacobus de Lausania, and Astexanus, were also cited for the same Opinion. And
those who wrote against Wickliffe, namely ^
Wydeford, ^
Cotton, and ^
Waldensis, charged him with Heresy, for denying that those Prohibitions did
oblige Christians. And asserted that they were Moral Laws, which obliged all
Mankind. And the Books of Waldensis were approved by P. Martin the First. There
were also many Quotations brought out of Petrus de Tarantasia, Durandus,
Stephanus Brulifer, Richardus de Media Villa, Guido Briancon, Gerson, Paulus
Ritius, and many others, to confirm the same Opinion, who did all unanimously
assert, That those Laws in Leviticus are parts of the Law of Nature, which
oblige all Mankind, and that Marriages contracted in these Degrees are null and
void. All the Canonists were also of the same mind, Ioannes Andreas, Ioannes de
Imola, Abbas Panormitanus, And Canonists.
Mattheus Neru, Vincentius, Innocentius, and Ostiensis, all Concluded that
these Laws were still in force, and could not be Dispensed with.

There was also a great deal alleged, to prove that a Marriage is completed
by the Marriage-Contract, Marriage completed by Consent.
though it be never Consummated. Many Authorities were brought to prove that
Adonijah could not Marry Abishag, because she was his Fathers Wife, though
never known by him. And by the Law of Moses a woman espoused to a man, if she
admitted another to her Bed, was to be stoned as an Adulteress; from whence it
appears, that the validity of Marriage is from the mutual Covenant. And though
Joseph never knew the Blessed Virgin, yet he was so much her Husband by the
Espousals, that he could not put her away, but by a Bill of Divorce: and was
afterward called her Husband, and Christ's Father. Affinity had been also
defined by all writers, a Relation arising out of Marriage, and since Marriage
was a Sacrament of the Church, its Essence could only consist in the Contract;
and therefore as a man in Orders has the Character, though he never Consecrated
any Sacrament: So Marriage is complete, though its effect never follow. And it
was showed that the Canonists had only brought in the Consummation of Marriage
as essential to it by Ecclesiastical Law. But that as Adam and Eve were
perfectly Married before they knew one another, so Marriage was complete upon
the Contract; and what followed, was only an effect done in the right of the
Marriage. And there was a great deal of filthy stuff brought together, of the
different Opinions of the Canonists concerning Consummation, to what Degree it
must go, to show that it could not be essential to the Marriage Con^ract, which
in modesty were suppressed. Both Hildebert of Man's, Ivo Carnotensis, and Hugo
de Sto. Victore, had delivered this Opinion, and proved it out of St.
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Austin, and Isidore. Pope Nicolas, and the Council of
Tribur, defined, that Marriage was completed by the Consent, and the
Benediction. From all which they Concluded, that although it could not be
proved that Prince Arthur knew the Queen, Violent presumptions of the
Consummation of Prince Art^^r's Marriage.
yet that she being once lawfully Married to him, the King could not afterward
Marry her.

It was also said, that violent presumptions were sufficient in the Opinion of
the Canonists to prove Consummation. Formal proofs could not be expected; and
for Persons that were of Age, and in good health, to be in Bed together, was in
all Trials about Consummation, all that the Cononists sought for. And yet this
was not all in this Case, for it appeared that, upon her Husbands death, she
was kept with great care by some Ladies, who did think her with Child; and she
never said any thing against it. And in the Petition offered to the Pope in her
name, (repeated in the Bull that was procured for the Second Marriage,) it is
said, she was perhaps known by Prince Arthur, and in the Breve, it is plainly
said, she was known by Prince Arthur, and though the Queen offered to purge her
self by Oath, that Prince Arthur never knew her, it was proved by many
Authorities out of the Canon Law, That a Partie's Oath ought not to be taken,
when there were violent presumptions to the contrary.

As for the validity of the Popes Dispensation, it was said, That though the
Schoolmen and Canonists did generally raise the Popes Power very high, and
stretch it as far as it was possible; The Popes Dispensation of no force.
yet they all agreed that it could not reach the Kings Case: Upon this received
Maxim, That only the Laws of the Church are subject to the Pope, and may be
dispensed with by him; but that Laws of God are above him, and that he cannot
dispense with them in any case. In Quodi^. Lib. 4. Art. 13. and in 4tam* did.
15. Q. 3. art. 2.

S^p. Cap. Conjunctioni^ 35. Q. 2. and 3.


This Aquinas delivers in many places of his Works, Petrus de Palude, says, The
Pope cannot dispense with Marriage in these Degrees, because it is against
Nature. But Ioannes de Turre Cremata, reports a singular Case, which fell out
when he was a Cardinal. A King of France desired a Dispensation to Marry his
Wives Sister. The matter was long considered of, and debated in the Rota,
himself being there, and bearing a share in the Debate; but it was concluded,
That if any Pope either out of Ignorance, or being Corrupted, had ever granted
such a Dispensation, that could be no president or warrant for doing the like
any more, since the Church ought to be governed by Laws, and not by such
Examples. Antonin, and Ioannes de Tabia, held the same. And one Bacon an
Englishman, who had taught the contrary, was censured for it even at Rome, and
he did retract his Opinion, and acknowledged, that the Pope could not dispense
with the Degrees of Marriage forbidden by the Law of God.

The Canonists agree also to this, both Ioannes Andreas, Ioannes de Imola, and
Abbas Panormitanus, assert it, saying, Sup. Cap. Literas de Rest. Spons.
That the Precepts in Leviticus oblige for ever, and therefore cannot be
dispensed with. And Panormitan says, These things are to be observed in
Practice, because great Princes do often desire Dispensations from Popes. Cap.
ad Audien. Spousal.
Pope Alexander the 3d. would not suffer a Citizen of Pavia to Marry his
younger Son, to the Widow of his eldest Son, though he had Sworn to do it. For
the Pope said, it was against the Law of God, therefore it might not be done,
and he was to repent of his unlawful Oath.

And for the Power of dispencing even with the Laws of the Church, by Popes; it
was brought in, in the latter Ages. All the Fathers with one consent believed,
That the Laws of God could not be dispensed with by the Church, for which many
places were cited out of St. Cyprian, Basil, Ambrose, Isidore, Bernard, and
Urban, Fabian, Marcellus, and Innocent, that were Popes; besides an infinite
number of latter Writers. And also the Popes Zosimus, Damasus, Leo, and
Hilarious did freely acknowledge they could not change the Decrees of the
Church, nor go against the Opinions or Practices of the Fathers. And since the
Apostles confessed, they could do nothing against the truth, but for the truth;
the Pope being Christ's Vicar, cannot be supposed to have so great a Power as to
abrogate the Law of God: and though it is acknowledged, that he is Vested with
a fullness of Power, yet the phrase must be restrained to the matter of it,
which is the Pastoral care of Souls. And though there was no Court Superior to
the Popes, yet as St. Paul had withstood St. Peter to his face; so in all Ages
upon several occasions, holy Bishops have refused to comply with, or submit to
Orders sent from Rome, when they thought the matter of them unlawful.

Several Bishops refuse to submit to the Popes Decrees.
Laurence that Succeeded Austin the Monk in the Sea of Canterbury, having
Excommunicated King Edbald for an Incestuous Marriage, would not Absolve him,
till he put away his Wife; though the Pope plied him earnestly both by
Entreaties and Threatenings, to let it alone, and Absolve him. Dunstan did the
like to Count Edwin for an other Incestuous Marriage; nor did all the Popes
Interposition make him give over. They found many other such instances which
occurred in the Ecclesiastical History, of Bishops proceeding by Censures and
other Methods, to stop the course of Sin, notwithstanding any encouragement the
Parties had from Popes.

And it is certain, that every man when he finds himself engaged in any course,
which is clearly sinful, ought presently to forsake it, according to the
opinion of all Divines. And therefore the King upon these Evidences of the
unlawfulness of his Marriage ought to abstain from the Queen; and the
Archbishop of Canterbury, with the other Bishops, ought to require him to do
it, otherwise they must proceed to Church Censures. Many things were also
brought from reason (or at least the Maxims of the School Philosophy, which
passed for true reason in those days,) to prove Marriage in the degrees
forbidden by Moses to be contrary to the Law of Nature; and much was alleged
out of Profane Authors, to show what an abhorrency some Heathen Nations had of
Incestuous Marriages.

And whereas the chief strength of the Arguments for the contrary opinion, The
Authority of Tradition
rested in this, That these Laws of Moses were not confirmed by Christ or his
Apostles in the New Testament. To that they answered, That if the Laws about
Marriage were Moral, as had been proved, then there was no need of a particular
Confirmation, since those Words of our Savior: I came not to destroy the Law,
but to fulfill it; do confirm the whole Moral Law. Christ had also expressly
asserted the Relation of Affinity, saying, That man and wife are one Flesh. St.
Paul also condemned a Match as Incestuous for Affinity. But though it were not
expressly set down in the Gospel, yet the Traditions of the Church, are received
with equal Authority to written Verities. This the Court of Rome, and all the
Learned Writers for the Catholic Faith, lay down as a Fundamental Truth. And
without it, how could the Seven Sacraments (some of which are not mentioned in
the New Testament,) with many other Articles of Catholic Belief be maintained
against the Heretics. The Tradition of the Church being so full and formal in
this particular, must take place: And if any Corruptions have been brought in
by some Popes within an Age or two, which have never had any other Authority
from the Decrees of the Church, or the Opinions of Learned men, they are not to
be maintained in opposition to the Evidence that is brought on the other side.

This I have summed up in as short and Comprehensive words as I could, Being
the Substance of what I gathered out of the Printed Books and Manuscripts for
the Kings cause. But the Fidelity of an Historian leads me next to open the
arguments that were brought against it, by those who wrote on the other side
for the Queens cause, to prove the validity of the Marriage, and the Popes
Power of Dispensing with a Marriage in that degree of Affinity.

I could never by all the search I have made, see either MSS. or Printed Books
that defended their Cause, except Cajetans and Victorias Books that are Printed
in their works. But from an answer that was written to the Bishop of Rochesters
Book, and from some other writings on the other side, I gather the Substance of
their arguments to have been what follows.

Cardinal Cajetan, had by many arguments endeavored to prove, The Arguments for
the Marriage.
that the Prohibitions in Leviticus, were not parts of the Moral Law. They were
not observed before the Law, no not by the holy seed. Adams Children Married
one another, Abraham Married his Sister, Jacob Married two Sisters, Judah gave
his two Sons to Tamar, and promised to give her the third for her Husband. By
the Law of Moses, a Dispensation was granted in one case, for Marrying the
Brothers wife, which shows the Law was not Moral, otherwise it could not be
dispensed with, and if Moses dispensed with it, why might not the Pope as well
do it, nor was there any force in the places cited from the New Testament. As
for that of Herod, both Josephus and Eusebius witness, that his Brother Philip
was alive when he took his wife, and so his sin was Adultery and not Incest. We
must also think that the Incestous Person in Corinth, took his Fathers Wife
when he was yet living, otherwise if he had been dead, St. Paul could not say
it was a Fornication not named among the Gentiles, for we not only find both
among the Persians and other Nations, the Marriage of Step-Mothers allowed, but
even among the Jews, Adonijah desired Abisha in Marriage, who had been his
Fathers Concubine.

From all which they concluded, that the Laws about the Degrees of Marriage,
were only Judiciary Precepts, and so there was no other obligation on
Christians to obey them, than what flowed from the Laws of the Church, with
which the Pope might dispense. They also said, that the Law in Leviticus of not
taking the Brothers wife, must be understood of not taking her, while he was
alive; for after he was dead, by another Law, a man might marry his Brothers
wife.

They also pleaded, that the Popes Power, of Dispensing, did reach further than
the Laws of the Church, even to the Law of God, for he daily Dispensed with the
Breaking of Oaths and Vows, though that was expressly contrary to the Second
Commandment, and though the Fifth Command, Thou shall do no Murder, be against
Killing, yet the Pope Dispensed with the putting Thieves to death, and in some
cases, where the reason of the Commandment does not at all times hold, he is
the only judge according to Summa Angelica. They Concluded the Popes Power of
Dispensing was as necessary, as his Power of Expounding the Scriptures, and
since there was a Question made concerning the obligation of these Levitical
Prohibitions, whether they were Moral, 1529.
and did oblige Christians or not? the Pope must be the only Judge: There were
also some late Presidents found, one of P. Martin, who in the case of a man's
having Married his own Sister, who had lived long with her, upon a Consultation
with Divines and Lawyers, Confirmed it: to prevent the Scandal, which the
dissolving of it would have given. Upon which St. Antonin of Florence says,
that since the thing was dispensed with, it was to be refered to the judgment
of God, and not to be condemned.

The Pope had granted this Dispensation, upon a very weighty Consideration, to
keep peace between two great Crowns; it had now stood above Twenty years: it
would therefore raise an high scandal, to bring it under debate; besides that
it would do much hurt, and bring the Titles to most Crowns into Controversy.

But they Concluded, that whatever Informalities or Nullities were pretended to
be in the Bulls or Breves, the Pope was the only competent judge of it, and
that it was too high a presumption for inferior Prelates, to take upon them to
examine or discuss it.

The Anwers made to h ese.
But to these Arguments it was Answered by the writers for the Kings cause, that
it was strange to see men, who pretended to be such Enemies to all Heretical
Novelties, yet be guilty of that, which Catholic Doctors hold to be the
foundation of all Heresy; which was the setting up of private senses of
Scripture, and Reasonings from them, against the Doctrine and Tradition of the
Church. It was fully made out, that the Fathers and Doctors of the Church did
universally agree in this, that the Levitical Prohibitions of the Degrees of
Marriage are Moral, and do oblige all Christians. Against this Authority
Cajetan was the first that presumed to write, opposing his private conceits to
the Tradition of the Church: which is the same thing, for which Luther and his
followers are so severely Condemned. May it not then be justly said of such
men, that they plead much for Tradition, when it makes for them, but reject it
when it is against them? Therefore all these exceptions are overthrown, with
this one Maxim of Catholic Doctrine, That they are Novelties against the
constant Tradition of the Christian Church, in all Ages. But if the force of
them be also examined, they will be found as weak, as they are New. That before
the Law, these degrees were not observed, proves only, that they are not
evidently contrary to the Common sense of all men; But as there are some Moral
Precepts, which have that natural evidence in them, that all men must discern
it, so there are others, that are drawn from public inconvenience and
dishonesty, which are also parts of the Law of nature: These Prohibitions are
not of the first, but of the second sort, since the Immorality of them appears
in this, that the Familiarities and freedoms among near Relations are such,
that if an horror were not struck in men at conjunctures in these degrees,
Families would be much defiled. This is the Foundation of the Prohibitions of
Marriages in these degrees: Therefore it is not strange if men did not
apprehend it, before God made a Law concerning it. Therefore all examples
before the Law, show only the thing is not so evident, as to be easily
collected by the light of Nature. And for the story of Judah and Tamar, there
is so much wickedness in all the parts of it, 1531.
that it will be very hard to make a President out of any part of it. As for
the Provision about Marrying the Brothers wi^e, that only proves, the ground of
the Law is not of its own Nature Immutable, but may be Dispensed with by God in
some cases. And all these Moral Laws, that are founded on public convenience
and honesty, are Dispensable by God in some cases; but because Moses did it by
Divine Revelation, it does not follow, that the Pope can do it by his Ordinary
Authority.

For that about Herod, it is not clear from Josephus, that Philip was alive
when Herod Married his Wife. For all that Josephus says, is, that she separated
from her Husband, when he was yet alive, and divorced her self from him. But he
does not say, that he lived still after she Married his Brother. And by the Law
of Divorce Marriage was at an end, and broken by it as much, as if the Party
had been dead, So that, in that case she might have Married any other:
Therefore Herod's sin in taking her, was from the Relation of having been his
Brothers Wife. And for the Incestuous person in Corinth, it is as certain, that
though some few Instances of a King of Syria and some others, may be brought of
Sons Marrying their Step-Mothers, yet these things were generally ill looked
on, even where they were practiced by some Princes, who made their Pleasure
their Law. Nor could the Laws of Leviticus be understood, of not Marrying the
Brothers wife when he was alive; for it was not Lawful to take any man's Wife
from him living. Therefore that cannot be the meaning. And all those
Prohibitions of Marriage in other degrees, excluding those Marriages simply,
whether during the life, or after the death of the Father, Son, Uncle, and
other such Relations, there is no ground to disjoynt this so much from the
rest, as to make it only extend to a Marriage before the Husbands death. And
for any Presidents that were brought, they were all in the latter Ages, and
were never Confirmed by any public Authority. Nor must the Practices of later
Popes be laid in the Balance against the Decisions of former Popes, and the
Doctrine of the whole Church; and as to the Power that was ascribed to the
Pope, that began now to be enquired into with great Freedom, as shall appear
afterward.

These Reasons on both sides being thus opened, The Queen still intractable.
the Censures of them, it is like, will be as different now, as they were then:
for they prevailed very little on the Queen, who still persisted to justify
her Marriage, and to stand to her Appeal. Hall.
And though the King carried it very kindly to her in all outward appearance,
and employed every body that had credit with her, to bring her to submit to
him, and to pass from her Appeal, remitting the Decision of the matter to any
Four Prelates, and Four Secular men in England, she was still unmovable and
would hearken to no Proposition. In the judgments that people passed, the Sexes
were divided; the Men generally approved the Kings cause, and the Women
favored the Queen. A Session of Parliament.
But now the Session of Parliament came on the Sixteenth of January, and there
the King first brought in to the House of Lords, the Determination of the
Universities, and the Books that were written for his cause by Foreigners.
After they were read and Considered there, the Lord Chancellor did on the 20th
of March, More.
with Twelve Lords both of the Spiritualty and Temporalty go down to the House
of Commons, and showed them what the Universities and Learned men beyond Sea,
had written for the Divorce, and produced Twelve Original Papers, with the
Seals of the Universities to them, which Sr. Brian Tuke took out of his hand,
and read openly in the House, Translating the Latin into English. Then about
an Hundred Books written by Foreign Divines, for the Divorce, were also showed
them; none of which were read, but put off to another time, it being late. When
that was done, the Lord Chancellor desired they would report in their
Countries, what they had heard and seen, and then all men should clearly
perceive, that the King has not attempted this matter of Will and Pleasure, as
strangers say, but only for the Discharge of his Conscience, and the Security
of the Succession to the Crown. Having said that, he left the House. The matter
was also brought before the Convocation; Convocation.
and they having weighed all that was said on both sides, seemed satisfied,
that the Marriage was unlawful, and that the Bull was of no force; more not
being required at that time.

The whole Clergy sued in a Prem^nire.
But it is not strange, that this matter went so easily in the Convocation, when
another of far greater consequence passed there, which will require a ^ull and
distinct account. Cardinal Wolsey by exercising his Legantine Authority had
fallen into a Praemunire, as has been already shown, and now those who had
appeared in his Courts, and had suits there, were found to be likewise in the
same guilt by the Law; and this matter, being excepted out of the Pardon that
was granted in the former Parliament, was at this time set on foot: Therefore
an Indictment was brought into the Kings Bench, against all the Clergy of
England, for breaking the Statutes against Provisions or Provisors. But to open
this more clearly,

The Prerogative of the Kings of England, in Ecclesiastical affairs.
It is to be Considered, that the Kings of England having claimed in all Ages, a
Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, equal to what the Roman Emperors had in that
Empire, they exercised this Authority both over the Clergy and Laity: and did
at first erect Bishoprics, grant Investitures in them, call Synods, make Laws,
about Sacred as well as Civil Concerns: and in a word, they Governed their
whole Kingdom. Yet when the Bishops of Rome did stretch their Power beyond
either the limits of it in the Primitive Church, or what was afterward granted
them by the Roman Emperors; and came to assume an Authority in all the Churches
of Europe; as they found some Resistance every where, so they met with a great
deal in this Kingdom; and it was with much Difficulty, that they gained the
Power of giving Investitures, Receiving Appeals to Rome, and of sending Legates
to England, with several other things, which were long contested, but were
delivered up at length, either by feeble Princes, or when Kings were so engaged
at home or abroad, that it was not safe for them to offend the Clergy. For in
the first Contest between the Kings and the Popes, the Clergy were generally on
the Popes side, because of the Immunity and Protection they enjoyed from that
See, but when Popes became ambitious and warlike Princes, then new Projects and
Taxes were every where set on foot, to raise a great Treasure. The Pall, with
many Bulls and high Compositions for them, The Encroachment of the Papacy.
Annates or first Fruits, and Tenths were the standing Taxes of the Clergy,
besides many new ones upon emergent occasions. So that they finding themselves
thus oppressed by the Popes, fled again back to the Crown for Protection, which
their Predecessors had abandoned.

From the days of Edward the 1st many Statutes were made to restrain the
Exactions of Rome. For then the Popes not satisfied with their other
oppressions, (which a Monk of that time lays open fully, Mat. Paris. The Laws
made against them.
and from a deep sense of them) did by Provisions, Bulls, and other Arts of
that See, dispose of Bishoprics, Abbeys, and lesser Benefices to Foreigners,
Cardinals, and others that did not live in England. Upon which the Commonalty
of the Realm, did represent to the King in Parliament, That the Bishoprics,
Abbeys, and other Benefices were founded by the Kings and people of England, 25
Edw. 1st. repeated in the Stat. of Provisors. 25. Edw. 3d.
To inform the people of the Law of God, and to make Hospitality, Alms, and
other works of Charity, for which end they were endowed by the King and people
of England; and that the King, and his other Subjects who endowed them, had,
upon Voidances, the Presentment and Collations of them, which now the Pope had
Usurped and given to Aliens, by which the Crown would be disinherited, and the
ends of their endowments destroyed, with other great Inconveniences: Therefore
it was ordained, that these Oppressions should not be suffered in any manner.
But notwithstanding this, the abuse went on, and there was no effectual way
laid down in the Act, to punish these Transgressions. The Court of Rome was not
so easily driven out of any thing, that either increased their Power or their
Profits; Therefore by another Act in his Grandchild Edward the 3ds time, the
Commons complained that these abuses did abound, and that the Pope did daily
reserve to his Collation, Church-Preferments in England, 25. Edward 3d. Statute
of Provisors.
and raised the First Fruits with other great Profits, by which the Treasure of
the Realm was carried out of it, and many Clerks advanced in the Realm, were
put out of their Benefices, by those Provisors, therefore the King being bound
by Oath to see the Laws kept, did with the assent of all the great men and the
Commonalty of the Realm, ordain, that the free Elections, Presentiments, and
Collations of Benefices, should stand in the Right of the Crown, or of any of
his Subjects as they had formerly enjoyed them, notwithstanding any Provisions
from Rome. And if any did disturb the Incumbents by virtue of such Provisions,
those Provisors or others employed by them, were to be put in Prison, till they
made Fine and Ransom to the King at his will; or if they could not be
apprehended, writs were to be issued out to seize them, and all Benefice^
possessed by them, were to fall into the Kings hands, except they were (...) or
Priories, that fell to the Canons or Colleges. By another Act the Provisors
were put out of the Kings Protection, and if any man offended against them, in
Person or Goods, he was excused, and was never to be impeached for it. And two
years after that, upon another Complaint, of their Suing the Kings Subjects in
other Courts, 27. Edward 3d. cap. 1st.
or beyond Sea, it was Ordained, that any who Sued either beyond Sea, or in any
other Court, for things that had been Sued, and about which, judgment had been
given in former times, in the Kings Courts, were to be Cited to answer for it
in the Kings Courts within two Months; and if they came not, they were to be
put out of the Kings Protection, and to forfeit their Lands, Goods, and
Chattels to the King, and to be imprisoned and ransomed at the Kings will. Both
these Statutes received a new Confirmation Eleven years after that. But those
Statutes proved ineffectual, 38. Edward 3d. cap. 1st.
and in the beginning of the Reign of Richard the 2d, the former Acts were
Confirmed by another Statute, and appointed to be Executed; and not only the
Provisors themselves, 3. Richard 2d. cap. 3d.
but all such as took Procuratories, Letters of Attorney, or Farms from them,
were involved in the same Guilt. And in the 7th year of that King, Provisions
was made against Aliens, having Benefices without the Kings License, and the
King promised to abstain from granting them Licenses: for this was another
Artifice of the Roman Court, to get the King of their side, by accepting his
License, which by this Act was restrained. This failing, they betook themselves
to another course, which was to prevail with the Incumbents that were presented
in England according to Law, to take Provisions for their Benefices from Rome,
to Confirm their Titles. This was also forbidden under the former Pains. 12
Richard. 2d. cap. 15.
As for the Rights of Presentations, by the Law they were tried and judged in
the Kings Courts, and the Bishops were to give Institution according to the
Title declared in these judgments: This the Popes had a mind to draw to
themselves, and to have all Titles to Advousons tried in their Courts; and
Bishops were Excommunicated, who proceeded in this matter according to the Law.
Of which great Complaint was made in the 16th year of the Reign of Richard the
2d. 16. Richard 2d. cap. 5.
And it was added to that, that the Pope intended to make many Translations of
Bishops, some to be within, and some out of the Realm, which among other
Inconveniences reckoned in the Statute, would produce this effect, That the
Crown of England, which had been so free at all times, should be subjected to
the Bishop of Rome, and the Laws and Statutes of the Realm by him defeated and
destroyed, at his Will. They also found those things to be against the Kings
Crown, and Regality, used and approved in the time of his Progenitors:
Therefore all the Commons resolved to live and dye with him and his Crown, and
they required him by way of Justice, to Examine all the Lords, Spiritual and
Temporal, what they thought of those things, and whether they would be with the
Crown to uphold the Regality of it? To which all the Temporal Lords answered,
they would be with the Crown. But the Spiritual Lords being asked, said, they
would neither deny nor affirm that the Bishop of Rome, might, or might not,
Excommunicate Bishops, or make Translations of Prelates: But upon that
Protestation, they said, that if such things were done, they thought it was
against the Crown, and said, they would be with the King, as they were bound by
their Leageance; whereupon it was ordained, that if any did purchase
Translations, Sentences of Excommunication, Bulls, or other Instruments from
the Court of Rome, against the King or his Crown, or whosoever brought them to
England, or did receive, or execute them, they were out of the Kings
Protection, and that they should forfeit their Goods and Chattels to the King,
and their Persons should be imprisoned. And because the Proceedings were to be
upon a writ, called from the most material words of it, Praemunire facies, this
was called the Statute of Praemunire.

When Henry the 4th, had Treasonably Usurped the Crown, all the Bishops (
Carlisle only excepted) did assist him in it, and he did very gratefully oblige
them again in other things; yet he kept up the force of the former Statutes.
For the Cistercian Order having procured Bulls, discharging them of paying
Tithes, and forbiding them to let their Farms to any, but to possess them
themselves,

(...) This was complained of in Parliament in the 2d year of his Reign, and
those Bulls were declared to be of no force, and if any did put them in
Execution, or procured other such Bulls, they were to be proceeded against, 2.
Hen. 4. cap. 4.
upon the Statutes made in the 13th year of the former Kings Reign, against
Provisors. But all this while though they made Laws for the future, yet they
had not the Courage to put them in Execution. And this Feebleness in the
Government, made them so much despised, and so often broken; whereas the severe
execution of one Law in one Instance would more effectually have preven^ed the
Mischief, than all these Laws did without Execution. In the 6th year of his
Reign, 6. Henry 4. cap. 1st.
Complaints being made of the excessive Rates of Compositions for
Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics in the Popes Chamber, which were raised to the
treble of what had been formerly paid; it was Enacted, That they should pay no
more, than had been formerly wont to be paid. 7. Hen. 4. cap. 6.8.
In the 7th year of his Reign, the Statu^e made in the 2d year was confirmed,
and by another Act, the Licenses which the King had Granted for the Executing,
any of the Popes Bulls are declared of no force, to prejudice any Incumbent in
his Right. Yet the abuses and Encroachments of the Court of Rome still
increasing, all former Statutes against Provisors were Confirmed again, and all
Elections declared free, 17. Hen. 4. cap. 8.
and not to be interrupted, either by the Pope, or the King. But at the same
time, the King pardoned all the former Transgressions against these Statutes.
By those Pardons the Court of Rome was more encouraged, than terrified by the
Laws, therefore there was a necessity of making another Law in the Reign of
Henry 5th, against Provisors, that the Incumbents Lawfully Invested in their
Livings, should not be molested by them, though they had the Kings Pardon; and
both Bulls and Licenses were declared void and of no value, and those who did
upon such grounds molest them, 4. Hen. 5. cap. 4.
should incur the pains of the Statutes against Provisors.

Our Kings took the best opportunity that ever could have been found, to
depress the Papal Power; for from the beginning of Richard the Second's Reign,
till the Fourth year of Henry the Fi^th, the Popedom was broken by a long and
great Schism; and the Kin^doms of Europe were divided in their Obedience: Some
holding for those that sat at Rome, and others for the Popes of Avignon:
England in opposition to France, that chiefly supported the Avignon-Popes, did
adhere to the Roman Popes. The Papacy being thus divided, the Popes were as
much at the mercy of Kings for their Protection, as Kings had formerly been at
theirs; so that they durst not Thunder as they were wont to do, otherwise this
Kingdom had certainly been put under Excommunications and Interdicts for these
Statutes, as had been done formerly upon less Provocations.

But now that the Schism was healed, Pope Martin the Fifth, began to reassume
the Spirit of his Predecessors, and sent over threatening messages to England,
in the beginning of Henry the Sixths Reign. None of our Books have taken any
notice of this piece of our History: The Manuscript out of which I draw it, Ex
MSS. D, Petyt.
had been written near that time, and contains many of the Letters, that passed
between Rome and England, upon this occasion.

The first Letter is to Henry Chichely, then Archbishop of Canterbury, who had
been promoted to that See by the Pope, but had made no opposition to the
Statute against Provisions in the Fourth year of Henry the Fifth; 1530.
and afterward in the Eighth year of his Reign, when the Pope had granted a
Provision of the Archbishopric of York, Reg. Chic^el* Fol. 39.
to the Bishop of Lincoln, the Chapter of York rejected it, and pursuant to the
former Statute, made a Canonical Election. Henry the Fifth being then the
greatest King in Christendom, the Pope durst not offend him: So the Law took
place without any further contradiction, till the Sixth year of his Sons Reign,
that England was both under an Infant King, and had fallen from its former
greatness: Therefore the Pope who waited for a good conjuncture, laid hold on
this, and first expostulated severely with the Archbishop for his remisness,
that he had not stood up more, for the Right of St. Peter and the Sea of Rome,
that had bestowed on him the Prima^y of England; and then says many things
against the Statute of Praemunire, and exhorts him to imitate the Example of his
Predecessor St. Thomas of Canterbury the Martyr, in asserting the Rights of the
Church; requiring him, under the pain of Excommunication, to declare at the
next Parliament to both Houses, the unlawfulness of that Statute, and that all
were under Excommunication, who obeyed it. But to make sure work among the
people, he also commands him, to give orders under the same pains, that all the
Clergy of England should preach the same Doctrine to the people. Collect. Numb.
37.
This bears date the 5th day of December 1426. and will be found in the
Collection of Papers.

But it seems the Pope was not satisfied with his Answer, for the next Letter
in that MSS. is yet more severe, and in it, his Legantine Power is suspended.
It has no date added to it, but the Paper that follows, bearing date the 6th of
April 1427. leads us pretty near the date of it. It contains an Appeal of the
Archbishops, from the Popes Sentence, to the next general Council; or if none
met, to the Tribunal of God and Jesus Christ.

There is also another Letter, dated the 6th of May directed to the
Archbishop, and makes mention of Letters written to the whole Clergy to the
same purpose, Requiring him to use all his Endeavors, for repealing the
Statute, and chides him severely because he had said, that the Popes zeal in
this matter was only, that he might raise much Money out of England; which he
resents as an high Injury, and Protests that he designed only to maintain these
Rights, that Christ himself had granted to his See, which the Holy Fathers, the
Councils, and the Catholic Church has always acknowledged. If this does not
look like Teaching ex Cathedra it is left to the Readers Judgment.

But the next Letter is of an higher strain* It is directed to the two
Archbishops only, and it seems, in despite to Chichely, the Archbishop of
York is named before Canterbury. By it the Pope annuls the Statutes made by
Edward the Third and Richard the Second, and commands them to do no Act in
pursuance of them: and declares, if they, or any other gave obedience to them,
they were ipso facto Excommunicated, and not to be relaxed, unless at the point
of death, by any but the Pope. He charges them also to intimate that his
Monitory Letter to the whole nation, and cause it to be affixed in the several
places, where there might be occasion for it. This is dated the 8th of December.
the tenth year of his Popedom. Then follow Letters from the University of
Oxford, the Archbishop of York, 1531.
the Bishops of London, Duresm, and Lincoln, to the Pope; all to mitigate his
displeasure against the Archbishop of Canterbury, in which they gave him the
highest testimony possible, bearing date the 10th and the 25th day of July.
These the Archbishop sent by an Express to Rome, and wrote the humblest
submission possible to the Pope; Protesting that he had done, and would do all
that was in his Power, for repealing these Statutes. One thing in this Letter
is remarkable, he says, he hears the Pope had proceeded to a Sentence against
him, which had never been done from the days of St. Austin to that time: but he
knew that only by report, for he had not opened, much less read the Bulls, in
which it was contained; being commanded by the King, to bring them with the
Seals entire, and lay them up in the Paper-Office, till the Parliament was
brought together.

There are two other Letters to the King. and one to the Parliament, And to the
King and Parliament.

Collect. Numb. 38.


for the Repeal of the Statute. In those to the King, the Pope writes, that he
had often pressed both King and Parliament to it; and that the King had
answered, that he could not repeal it without the Parliament. But he excepts to
that, as a delaying the business, and shows it is of it self unlawful, and that
the King was under Excommunication, as long as he kept it; therefore he expects
that at the furthest, in the next Parliament, it should be repealed. Collect.
Numb. 39.
It bears date the 13th of October, in the 10th year of his Popedom. In his
Letter to the Parliament, he tells them, that no Man can be saved, who is for
the observation of that Statute: Therefore he requires them, under pain of
Damnation to repeal it, and offers to secure them from any abuses, which might
have crept in formerly with these Provisions. This is dated the Third of
October, Decimo Pontificat. but I believe it is an error of the Transcriber,
and that its true date was the 13th of October.

The Parliament sat in January 1427, being the 6th year of King Henry the 6th,
during which on the 30th of January, the Archbishop of Canterbury accompanied
by the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of London, St. David's, Ely, and
Norwich, and the Abbots of Westminster and Reading, went from the House of
Lords, to the place where the House of Commons ordinarily sat, which was the
Refectory of the Abbey of Westminster, where the Archbishop made a long
Speech, in the form of a Sermon, upon that Text; Render to Coesar the things
that are Coesars, and to God, the things that are Gods. He began with a
Protestation, that he and his Brethren intended not to say any thing, that
might derogate from the King, the Crown, or the people of England. Then he
alleged many things, for the Popes Power in granting Provisions, to prove it
was of Divine Right, and admonished and required them to give the Pope
satisfaction in it, otherwise he laid out to them with tears, what mischiefs
might follow, if he proceeded to censures; which will appear more fully from
the Instrument, But to no purpose.

Collect. Numb. 40.


that will be found in the Collection at the end. But it seems the Parliament
would do nothing for all this, for no Act neither of Repeal nor Explanation was
passed.

Yet it appears the Pope was satisfied with the Archbishops carriage in this
matter, for he soon after restored him to the Exercise of his Legantine Power,
as Godwin has it; only he by a mistake says, he was made Legate, Anno 1428.
whereas it was only a Restitution after a Censure.

Thus stood the Law of England in that matter, which was neither Repealed nor
well Executed; The Clergy excuse themselves.
for the Popes Usurpations still increasing, those Statutes lay dead among the
Records, and several Cardinals had procured and executed a Legantine Power,
which was clearly contrary to them. And as Cardinal Wolsey was already brought
under the lash for it, so it was now made use of; partly to give the Court of
Rome apprehensions of what they were to expect from the King, if they went on
to use him ill; and partly to proceed severely against all those of the Clergy,
who adhared obstinately to the Interests of that Court; and to make the rest
compound the matter, both by a full Submission and a considerable Subsidy. It
was in vain to pretend, it was a public and allowed Error, and that the King
had not only connived at the Cardinals Proceedings, but had made him all that
while his chief Minister: That therefore they were excusable in submitting to
an Authority to which the King gave so great encouragement, and that if they
had done otherwise they had been unavoidably ruined. For to all this it was
answered, that the Laws were still in force, and that their Ignorance could not
excuse them, since they ought to have known the Law; yet since the violation of
it was so public, though the Court proceeded to a Sentence, That they were all
out of the Kings protection, and were liable to the pains in the Statutes; Yet
they Compound.
the King was willing, upon a reasonable Composition, and a full Submission, to
Pardon them.

So in the Convocation of Canterbury, a Petition was brought in to be offered
to the King. In the Kings Title, he was called, the Protector and Supreme Head
of the Church, And acknowledge the King Supreme Head of the Church of England.
Lord He^bert.
and Clergy of England. To this some opposition was made, and it was put off to
another day; but by the Interposition of Cromwell, and others of the Kings
Council, who came to the Convocation, and used arguments to persuade them to
it, they were prevailed with to pass it with that Title, at least none speaking
against it: For when Warham Archbishop of Canterbury said, That silence was to
be taken for consent, They cried out, they were then all silent: Yet it was
moved by some to add these words to the Title, in so far as is lawful by the
Law of Christ. But Parker says, The King disliked that Clause, since it left
his Power still disputable; Antiquit. Britanniae in vita Warham.
therefore it was cast out, and the Petition passed simply, as it was first
brought in. Yet in that he was certainly misinformed, for when the Convocation
of the Province of York demurred about the same Petition, and sent their
reasons to the King, why they could not acknowledge him Supreme Head, which (as
appears by the Kings answer to them, Printed in the Cabala.
) were chiefly founded on this, that the term Head was improper, and did not
agree to any under Christ; the King wrote a long and sharp answer to them, and
showed them, that words were not always to be understood in their strict sense,
but according to the common acceptance. And among other things he showed what
an Explanation was made in the Convocation of Canterbury, That it was in so far
as was agreeable to the Law of Christ; by which it appears, that at that time
the King was satisfied to have it pass any way, and so it was agreed to by nine
Bishops (the Bishop of Rochester being one) and 52 Abbots and Priors, and the
major part of the lower House of Convocation in the Province of Canterbury. Of
which number it is very probable Reginald Pool was, for in his Book to the
King, he says, he was then in England, and adds, that the King would not accept
of the sum the Clergy offered, unless they acknowledged him Supreme Head: he
being then Dean of Exceter, was of the lower House of Convocation; and it is
not likely the King would have continued the Pensions, and other
Church-Preferments he had, if he had refused to Sign that Petition and
Submission. By it they prayed the King to accept 100000 l. in lieu of all
punishments which they had incurred, by going against the Statutes of
Provisors, and did promise for the future, neither to make, nor execute any
Constitution without the Kings License; upon which he granted them a general
Pardon: and the Convocation of the Province of York offering 18840 l. with
another Submission of the same nature afterward, though that met with more
opposition, they were also Pardoned.

When the King's Pardon for the Clergy was brought in to the House of Commons,
they were much troubled to find themselves not included within it; for by the
Statutes of Provisors, many of them were also liable, and they apprehended, The
Commons desire to be included in the King's Pardon.

Hall*


that either they might be brought in trouble, or at least it might be made use
of to draw a Subsidy from them: so they sent their Speaker with some of their
Members, to represent to the King, the great grief of his Commons to find
themselves out of his favor, which they concluded from the Pardon of the pains
of Praemunire to his Spiritual Subjects, in which they were not included; and
therefore prayed the King that they might be comprehended within it. But the
King answered them, That they must not restrain his Mercy, nor yet force it; it
was free to him either to execute, or mitigate the Severity of the Law: That he
might well grant his Pardon by his Great-Seal without their assent, but he
would be well advised before he pardoned them, because he would not seem to be
compelled to it. So they went away, and the House was in some trouble: many
blamed Cromwell, who was growing in favor, for this rough answer; yet the
King's Pardon was passed.

But his other concerns made him judge it very unfit to send away his
Parliament discontented, Which the King afterward grants.
and since he was so easy to them as to ask no Subsidy, he had no mind to
offend them; and therefore when the thing was over, and they out of hopes of
it, he of his own accord sent another Pardon to all his Temporal Subjects, of
their Transgressons of the Statutes of Provisors and Praemunire; which they
received with great joy, and acknowledged there was a just Temperature of
Majesty and Clemency in the Kings proceedings.

During this Session of Parliament, an unheard of Crime was committed by one
Richard Rouse a Cook, who on the 16th of February, One Attain^^ed for Poisoning.
Poisoned a Vessel of Yest that was to be used in Porridge, in the Bishop of
Rochester's Kitchen, with which 17 Persons of his Family were mortally
infected, and one of the Gentlemen died of it; and some poor People that were
Charitably fed with the remainder of it, were also infected, one woman dying.
The Person was Apprehended, 22. Hen. 8* Act. 16.
and by Act of Parliament, Poisoning was declared Treason, and Rouse was
attainted, and Sentenced to be Boiled to death, which was to be the punishment
of Poisoning for all times to come: That the Terror of this unheard of
Punishment might strike a Horror in all Persons at such an unexampled Crime. ^
And the Sentence was Executed in Smithfield soon after.

Of this I take Notice, the rather because of Sander's Malice, who says, this
Rouse was set on by Anne Boleyn, to make away the Bishop of Rochester, of which
there is nothing on Record, nor does any Writer of that time so much as
insinuate it. But persons that are set on ^o commit such Crimes, are usually,
either conveyed out of the way, or secretly dispatched, that they may not be
brought to an open Trial. And it is not to be imagined, That a man that was
employed by them that might have preferred him, and found himself given up and
adjudged to such a death, would not have published their names who set him on,
to have lessened his own Guilt, by casting the load upon them that had both
employed and deserted him. But this must pass among the many other vile
Calumnies, of which Sanders has been the inventer, or publisher, and for which
he had already answered to his Judge.

When the Session of Parliament was over, the King continued to ply the Queen
with all the applications he could think of, Lord Herbert.
to depart from her Appeal. He grew very Melancholy, and used no sort of
Diversion, The King leaves the Queen.
but was observed to be very pensive. Yet nothing could prevail with the Queen.
She answered the Lords of the Council, when they pressed her much to it, That
she prayed God to send the King a quiet Conscience, but that she was his lawful
Wife, and would abide by it, till the Court of Rome declared the contrary. Upon
which the King forbore to see her, or to receive any Tokens from her, and sent
her word, to choose where she had a mind to live, in any of his Mannours. She
answered, that to which place soever she were removed, nothing could remove her
from being his Wife. Upon this answer the King left her at Windsor, the 14th of
July, and never saw her more. She removed first to Moor, then to Easthamstead,
and at last to Ampthill, where she stayed longer.

A disorder among the Clergy of London about the Subsidy. Hall.
The Clergy went now about the raising of the 100000 l. which they were to pay
in five years; and to make it easier to themselves, the Prelates had a great
mind to draw in the Inferior Clergy to bear a part of the burden. The Bishop
of London called a meeting of some Priests about London, on the 1st. of
September, to the Chapter House at St. Paul's: He designed to have had at first
only a small number, among whom he hoped it would easily pass, and that being
done by a few, others would more willingly follow. But the matter was not so
secretly carried, but that all the Clergy about the City hearing of it, went
thither. They were not a little encouraged by many of the Laity, who thought it
no unpleasant diversion to see the Clergy fall out among themselves. So when
they came to the Chapter House on the day appointed, the Bishop's Officers
would only admit some few to enter, but the rest forced the door and rushed in,
and the Bishop's Servants were beaten and ill used. But the Bishop seeing the
tumult was such, that it could not be easily quieted, told them all, That as
the State of men in this life was frail, so the Clergy through frailty and want
of wisdom, had misdemeaned themselves toward the King, and had fallen in a
Praemunire, for which the King of his great Clemency was pleased to Pardon them,
and to accept of a little, in stead of the whole of their Benefices, which by
the Law had fallen into his hand: Therefore he desired they would patiently
bear their share in this burden. But they answered, They had never meddled with
any of the Cardinals Faculties, and so had not fallen in the P remunire; and
that their Livings were so small, that they could hardly subsist by them.
Therefore since the Bishops and Abbots were only Guilty, and had good
Preferments, they only ought to be punished, and pay the Tax; but that for
themselves they needed not the Kings Pardon, and so would pay nothing for it.
Upon which the Bishop's Officers threatened them, but they on the other hand
(being encouraged by some Laymen that came along with them) persisted in their
denial to pay any thing; so that from high words the matter came to blows, and
several of the Bishop's Servants were ill handled by them. But he to prevent a
further Tumult, apprehending it might end upon himself, gave them good words,
and dismissed the meeting with his blessing, and promised that nothing should
be brought in Question that was then done. Yet he was not so good as his word,
for he complained of it to the Lord Chancellor, who was always a great Favourer
of the Clergy; by whose order fifteen Priests and five Laymen were committed
to several Prisons; but whether the Inferior Clergy paid their proportion of
the Tax or not, I have not been able to discover.

This year the State of Affairs Beyond Sea, changed very considerably. The Pope
falls off to the French Faction.
The Pope expected not only to recover Florence to his Family by the Emperors
means, but also to wrest Modena and Reggio from the Duke of Ferrara, to which
he pretended, as being Fiefs of the Papacy; and the Emperor having engaged by
the former Treatyto restore them to him. But now that the Popes pretensions
were appointed to be examined by some Judges delegated by the Emperor, they
determined against the Pope, for the Duke of Ferrara: which so disgusted the
Pope, that he fell totally from the Emperor, and did unite with the King of
France, a Match being also projected between the Duke of Orleance (afterward
Henry the 2d) and his Niece Catharine de Medici; which did work much on the
Popes ambition, to have his Family Allied to so mighty a Monarch. So that now
he became wholly French.

The French King was also on account of this Marriage, A Match projected
between the Pope's Niece and the Duke of Orleance.
to resign all the pretensions he had to any Territory in Italy to his younger
Son; which as it would give less-Umbrage to the other Princes of Italy, who
liked rather to have a King's younger Son among them, than either the Emperor
or the French King; so the Pope was wonderfully pleased to raise another great
Prince in Italy out of his own Family. On these grounds was the Match at this
time designed, which afterward took effect; but with this difference, that by
the Dolphin's death, the Duke of Orleance became King of France, and his Queen
made the greatest Figure that any Queen of France had done for many Ages.

This change in the Popes mind might have produced another in the Kings
Affairs, if he had not already gone so far, that he was less in fear of the
Pope than formerly. He found the Credit of his Clergy was so low, that to
preserve themselves from the contempt and fury of the people, they were forced
to depend wholly on the Crown. For Lutheranisme was then making a great
progress in England, of which I shall say nothing here, being resolved at the
end of this Book to give an account of the whole Course of it in those years
that fall within this time. But what by the means of the new Preachers, what by
the scandals cast on the Clergy, they were all at the Kings Mercy; so he did
not fear much from them, especially in the Southern parts, which were the
richest and best peopled. Therefore the King went on resolutely. The Pope on
the other hand was in great perplexity, he saw England ready to be lost, and
knew not what to do to rescue or preserve it. If he gave way to what was lately
done in the business of the Praemunire, he must thereby lose the greatest
advantages he drew from that Nation; and it was not likely that after the King
had gone so far, he would undo what was done.

The Emperor was more remiss in prosecuting the Queens Appeal at Rome, for at
that time the Turk with a most numerous and powerful Army was making an
impression on Hungary, The Emperor is engaged in a War with ^he Turk.
(which to the great scandal of the most Christian King was imputed to his
Councils and Presents at the Port) and all the Emperor's thoughts were taken up
with this. Therefore as he gave the Protestant Princes of Germany some present
satisfaction in Religion and other matters; so he sent over to England, and
desired the Kings assistance against that vast Army of 300000 men that was
falling in upon Christendom. To this the King made a general answer, that gave
some hopes of assisting him. But at the same time the Protestant Princes,
resolving to draw some advantage from that conjuncture of Affairs, and being
courted by the French King, entered into a League with him, for the defense of
the Rights of the Empire. And to make this firmer, the King was invited by the
French King to join in it; to which he consented, and sent over to France a sum
of Money to be employed ^or the safety of the Empire. And this provoked the
Emperor to renew his endeavors in the Court of Rome for prosecuting the Queens
Appeal.

The French King encouraged the King to go on with his Divorce, that he might
totally Alienate him from the Emperor. The French Writers also add another
Consideration, which seems unworthy of so great a King, that he himself being
at that time so public a Courtier of Ladies, was not ill pleased to set
forward a thing of that nature. But though Princes allow themselves their
pleasures, yet they seldom Govern their Affairs by such Maxims.

1532.
In the beginning of the next year a new Session of Parliament was held, in
which the House of Commons went on to complain of many other grievances they
lay under from the Clergy, The Parliament complains of the Ecclesiastical
Courts.
which they put in a writing, and Presented it to the King. In it they
complained of the proceedings in the Spiritual Courts, and especially their
calling men before them, ex officio, and laying Articles to their charge,
without any Accuser; and then admitting no Purgation, but causing the Party
Accused, either to abjure, Hall.
or to be burnt; which they found very grievous and intolerable. This was
occasioned by some violent proceeding against some reputed Heretics, of which
an account shall be given afterward. But those complaints were stifled, and
great misunderstandings arose between the King and the House of Commons upon
this following occasion.

But reject a Bill about Wards.
There was a common practice in England of men's making such Setlements of their
Estates by their Last Wills, or other Deeds, that the King and some great Lords
were thereby defrauded of the advantages they made by Wards, Marriages, and
Primer Season. For regulating which, a Bill was brought in to the House of
Peers, and assented to there; but when it was sent down to the House of
Commons, it was rejected by them, and they would neither pass the Bill, nor any
other Qualification of that Abuse, This gave the King great offense, and the
House when they addressed to him about the proceedings of the Clergy, The
Commons Petition that they may be Dissolved.
also prayed, That he would consider what Cost, Charge, and Pains they had been
at since the beginning of the Parliament, and that it would please his Grace of
his Princely Benignity to Dissolve his Court of Parliament, 1532.
and that his Subjects might return into their Countries. To which the King
answered, That for their complaints of the Clergy, he must hear them also
before he could give Judgment, since in Justice he ought to hear both Parties;
but that their desiring the Redress of such Abuses, was contrary to the other
part of their Petition; for if the Parliament were Dissolved, The King's Answer.
how could those things they complained of be amended? And as they complained
of their long attendance, so the King had stayed as long, as they had done, and
yet he had still patience, and so they must have, otherwise their grievances
would be without Redress. But he did expostulate severely upon their rejecting
the Bill about Deeds in prejudice of the Rights of the Crown. He said, he had
offered them a great mitigation of what by the rigor of the Law he might
pretend to; and if they would not accept of it, he would try the outmost
severity that the Law allowed, and would not offer them such a favor again.
Yet all this did not prevail, for the Act was rejected, and their complaint
against the Clergy was also laid aside, and the Parliament was Prorogued till
April next.

In this Parliament the Foundation of the Breach that afterward followed with
Rome, was laid, by an Act for restraining the payment of Annates to that Court,
which since it is not Printed with the other Statutes, shall be found in the
end of this Volume: The substance of it is as follows.

That great Sums of Money had been conveyed out of the Kingdom, under the Title
of Annates or first Fruits to the Court of Rome, An Act against Annates.

Collect. Numb. 41.


which they extorted by restraint of Bulls and other writs; that it happened
often by the frequent deaths of Archbishops, and Bishops, to turn to the utter
undoing of their Friends, who had advanced those Sums for them. These Annates
were founded on no Law, for they had no other way of obliging the Incumbents of
Sees to pay them, but by restraining their Bulls. The Parliament therefore
considering that these were first begun to be paid, to defend Christendom
against Infidels, but were now turned to a duty claimed by that Court against
all Right and Conscience, and that vast Sums were carried away upon that
account, which from the Second year of King Henry the 7th to that present time
amounted to 800000 Ducats, besides many other heavy Exactions of that Court,
did declare that the King was bound by his Duty to Almighty God, as a good
Christian Prince to hinder these oppressions. And that the rather, because many
of the Prelates were then very Aged, and like to die in a short time, whereby
vast Sums of Money should be carried out of England, to the great Impoverishing
of the Kingdom. And therefore all payments of first Fruits to the Court of Rome
were put down, and for ever restrained, under the pains of the forfeiture of
the Lands, Goods, and Chattels of him that should pay them any more, together
with the Profits of his See, during the time that he was vested with it. And in
case Bulls were restrained in the Court of Rome, any person presented to a
Bishopric, should be notwithstanding Consecrated by the Archbishop of the
Province; or if he were presented to an Archbishopric, by any two Bishops in
the Kingdom, whom the King should appoint for that end; and that being so
Consecrated, they should be Invested, and enjoy all the Rights of their Sees in
full and ample manner: yet that the Pope and Court of Rome might have no just
cause of Complaint, the persons presented to Bishoprics are allowed to pay
them 5 lib. for the Hundred, of the clear Profits and Revenues of their several
Sees. But the Parliament not willing to go to extremities, Remitted the final
ordering of that Act to the King, that if the Pope would either charitably and
reasonably put down the payment of Annates, or so moderate them, that they
might be a tolerable burden, the King might at any time before Easter 1533. or
before the next Session of Parliament, declare by his Letters Patents whether
the premises or any part of them should be observed or not, which should give
them the full force and Authority of a Law. And that if upon this Act the Pope
should vex the King, or any of his Subjects by E xommunications or other
Censures, these notwithstanding the King should cause the Sacraments, and other
Rites of the Church to be administered, and that none of these Censures might be
published or Executed.

This Bill began in the House of Lords, from them it was sent to the Commons,
and being agreed to by them, received the Royal Assent, but had not that final
Confirmation mentioned in the Act before the 9th of July 1533. and then by
Letters Patents (in which the Act is at length recited) it was confirmed. Parl.
Rolls.


But now I come to open the final Conclusion of the Kings Suit at Rome. The
Pope writes to the King about the Queens Appeal.
On the 25th of January the Pope wrote to the King, that he heard reports,
which he very unwillingly believed, that he had put away his Queen, and kept
one Anne about him as his Wife; which as it gave much Scandal, so it was an
high Contempt of the Apostolic See, to do such a thing while his Suit was
still depending, notwithstanding a Prohibition to the contrary. Therefore the
Pope remembering his former merits, which were now like to be clouded with his
present Carriage, did exhort him to take home his Queen, and to put Anne away;
and not to continue to provoke the Emperor and his Brother by so high an
Indignity, nor to break the General peace of Christendom, which was its only
security against the Power of the Turk. What answer the King made to this I do
not find, but instead of that I shall set down the Substance of a Dispatch,
which the King sent to Rome about this time, drawn from a Copy of it, to which
the date is not added. But it being an answer to a Letter he received from the
Pope the 7th of October, it seems to have been written about this time, and it
concluding with a Credence to an Ambassador, I judge it was sent by Doctor
Bennet, who was dispatched to Rome in January 1532. to show the Pope the
Opinions of Learned men, L. Herbert.
and of the Universities, with their Reasons. The Letter will be found in the
end of this Volume, Collect. Numb. 42.
the Contents of it are to this purpose.

A Dispatch of the King to the Pope.
The Pope had writ to the King, in order to the clearing all his scruples, and
to give him quiet in his Conscience; of which the King takes notice, and is
sorry that both the Pope and himself were so deceived in that matter; the Pope
by trusting to the judgments of others, and writing whatever they suggested;
and the King by depending so much on the Pope, and in vain expecting remedy
from him so long. He imputes the mistakes that were in the Popes Letters,
(which he says had things in them contrary both to Gods Law and Man's Law,) to
the Ignorance and rashness of his Counselors: for which himself was much to be
blamed, since he rested on their advice, and that he had not carried himself as
became Christ's Vicar, but had dealt both unconstantly and deceitfully: for when
the Kings cause was first opened to him, and all things that Related to it were
explained; he had Granted a Commission, with a promise not to recall it, but to
confirm the Sentence which the Legates should give: and a Decretal was sent
over defining the cause. If these were justly granted, it was unjustice to
revoke them, but if they were justly revoked, it was unjust to grant them. So
he presses the Pope, that either he could grant these things, or he could not.
If he could do it, where was the Faith which became a Friend, much more a Pope
since he had broke these promises: But if he said he could not do them, had he
not then just cause to distrust all that came from him, when at one time he
condemned what he had allowed at another. So that the King saw clearly he did
not Consider the ease of his Conscience, but other worldly respects; that had
put him on Consulting so many Learned men, whose judgments differed much from
those few that were about the Pope, who thought the Prohibition of such
Marriages was only positive, and might be dispensed with by the Pope: whereas
all other Learned men thought the Law was Moral and indispensable. He perceived
the Apostolic See was destitute of that Learning, by which it should be
directed: and the Pope had often professed his own Ignorance, and that he spoke
by other men's mouths; but many Universities in England, France, and Italy had
declared the Marriage unlawful, and the Dispensation null. None honored the
Apostolic See more than he had done, and therefore he was sorry to write such
things if he could have been silent. If he should obey the Popes Letters, he
would offend God and his own Conscience, and give scandal to those who
condemned his Marriage: he did not willingly dissent from him without a very
urgent cause, that he might not seem to despise the Apostolic See; therefore
he desired the Pope would forgive the freedom that he used, since it was the
Truth that drew it from him. And he added, that he intended not to Impugn the
Popes Authority further, except he compelled him; and what he did was only to
bring it within its first and Ancient Limits, to which it was better to reduce
it, than to let it always run on headlong and do amiss; therefore he desired
the Pope would Conform himself to the opinions of so many Learned men, and do
his Duty and Office. The Letter ends with a Credence to the Ambassador.

The Pope seeing his Authority was declining in England, resolved now to do all
he could to recover it, either by force or Treaty: and so ordered a Citation to
be made of the King to appear in Person or by Proxy at Rome, to answer to the
Queens appeal: upon which Sir Edward Karne was sent to Rome, with a new
Character of Excusatour. His Instructions were to take the best Counsel for
pleading an Excuse of the Kings appearance at Rome. First, Sir Edward Karne
sent to Rome.
upon the grounds that might be found in the Canon Law; and these not being
sufficient, he was to Insist on the Prerogatives of the Crown of England.
Doctor Bonner went with him, who had expressed much zeal in the Kings cause,
though his great zeal was for Preferment, which by the most servile ways he
always Courted. He was a forward bold man, and since there were many
Threatenings to be used to the Pope and Cardinals, he was thought fittest for
the employment, but was neither Learned nor discreet.

His Negotiation there taken from the Original Letters. Cott. lib. Viteli. B.
13.
They came to Rome in March, where they found great heats in the Consistory
about the Kings business. The Imperialists pressed the Pope to proceed, but all
the wise and indifferent Cardinals were of another mind. And when they
understood what an Act was passed about Annates; they saw clearly, that the
Parliament was resolved to adhere to the King in every thing he intended to do
against their Interests. The Pope expostulated with the Ambassadors about it,
but they told him the Act was still in the Kings Power; and except he provoked
him, he did not intend to put it in execution. The Ambassadors finding the
Cardinal of Ravenna of so great reputation, both for Learning and Virtue, that
in all matters of that kind his opinion was heard as an Oracle, and gave Law to
the whole Consistory; they resolved to gain him by all means possible. And
Doctor Bennet made a secret address to him, and offered him what Bishopric
either in France or England he would desire, if he would bring the Kings matter
to a good issue. He was at first very shie, at length he said he had been often
deceived by many Princes, who had made him great Promises, but when their
business was ended, never thought of performing them; therefore he would be
sure: and so drove a Bargain, and got under Doctor Bennets hand a promise, (of
which a Copy being sent to the King, written by Bennet himself, will be found
at the end of this Volume;) Bearing, that he having Powers from the King for
that effect, The Cardinal of Ravenna corrupted by Bribes.

Collect. Numb. 43.


dated the 29th of December last, did promise the Cardinal for his help in the
Kings affair, Monasteries or other Benefices in France, to the value of 6000
Ducates a year: and the first Bishopric that fell vacant in England; and if it
were not Ely, that when ever that See was vacant, upon his resigning the other,
he should be provided with the Bishopric of Ely; dated at Rome the 7th of
February 1532. This I set down as one of the most Considerable Arguments that
could be used to satisfy the Cardinals Conscience about the justice of the
Kings cause. This Cardinal was the fittest to work secretly for the King, for
he had appeared visible against him. I find also by other Letters, that both
the Cardinals of An^ona and Monte (afterward Pope Julius the 3d) were
prevailed with, by arguments of the same nature, though I cannot find cut what
the Bargains were. Providellus, that was accounted the greatest Canonist in
Italy, was brought from Bononia, and entertained by the Ambassadors, to give
Counsel in the Kings cause, and to plead his Excuse from appearing at Rome. The
plea was summed up in 28 Articles, which were offered to the Pope; and he
admitted them to be examined in the Consistory, appointing three of them to be
opened at a Session. But the Imperialists opposed that, and after fifteen of
them had been heard, procured a new order that they should be heard in a
Congregation of Cardinals before the Pope; Collect. Numb. 44.
pretending that a Consistory sitting but once a week, and having a great deal
of other Business, it would be long before the matter could be brought to any
issue. So Karne was served with a new order to appear in the Congregation the
3d. of April with this Certification, That if he appeared not they would
proceed. Upon which he protested, that he would adhere to the former Order: yet
being warned the second time, he went first and protested against it, which he
got entered in the Datary. This being considered in the Congregation, they
renewed the Order ofhearing it in the Consistory on the 10th. of April, and
then Providellus opened three Conclusions. Two of them related to Karne's
Powers, the third was concerning the Safety of the place to both parties. But
the Imperialists and the Queens Council being dissatisfied with this Order
would not appear. Upon which Karne complained of their Contumacy, and said, By
that it was visible they were distrustful of their Cause. On the 14th. of April
a new intimation was made to Karne to appear on the 17th. with his Advocates to
open all the rest of the Conclusions, but he according to the first Order would
only plead to three of them, and selected the 19, 20, Collect. Numb. 45.
and 21; (what these related to I find not.) Upon which Providellus pleaded and
answered the Objections that did seem to militate against them, but neither
would the Imperiallists appear that Session.

In June news were brought to Rome, which gave the Pope great offense: A Priest
had preached for the Popes Authority in England, and was for that cast into
prison. And another Priest being put in prison by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
upon suspicion of Heresy, had appealed to the King as the Supreme Lord: upon
which he was taken out of the Archbishops hands, and being examined in the
Kings Courts was set at liberty. This the Pope resented much, but the
Ambassadors said, all such things might have been prevented, if the King had
got Justice at the Popes hands.

The King also at this time desired a Bull for a Commission to erect six new
Bishoprics, A Bull for erecting new Bishoprics.
to be endowed by Monasteries that were to be suppressed. This was expedited
and sent away at this time: And the old Cardinal of Ravenna was so jealous,
that the Ambassadors were forced to promise him the Bishopric of Chester, (one
of the new Bishoprics) with which he was well satisfied, having seen by a
particular state of the Endowment that was designed for it, what advantage it
would yield him. But he had declared himself so openly before against the
Reasons for the Excuse, that he could not serve the King in that matter, but in
the main Cause he undertook to do great service, and so did the Cardinals De
Monte and Ancona.

Upon the 27th. of June the Debate was brought to a Conclusion about the Plea
Excusatory; and when it was expected, that the Pope should have given sentence
against the Articles, he admitted them all Si and prout de jure. Upon which the
Imperiallists made great Complaints: The Cardinals grew weary of the length of
the Debate, since it took up all their time; but it was told them, the matter
was of great importance, and it had been better for them not to have proceeded
so precipitately at first, which had now brought them into this trouble, and
that the King had been at much pains and trouble on their account; therefore it
was unreasonable for them to complain, who were put to no other trouble, but to
sit in their Chairs two or three hours in a week to hear the Kings Defenses.
The Imperiallists had also occasioned the Delays, though they complained of
them; by their Cavils, and Allegations ofLaws and Decisions that never were
made, by which much time was spent. But it was objected, That the Kings Excuse
for not coming to Rome, because it was too remote from his Kingdom, and not
safe, was of no force, since the place was safe to his Proxy. And the Cardinal
of Ravenna pressed the Ambassadors much to move the King, instead of the
Excusatory Process to send a Proxy, for examining and discussing the Merits of
the Cause, in which it would be much easier to advance the Kings matter; and
that he having appeared against the King in this Process, would be the less
suspected in the other.

The Pope desires the King would submit to him.

Collect. Numb. 46.


The business being further considered in three Sessions of the Consistory, it
was resolved, that since the Vacation was coming on, they would neither allow
of, nor reject the Kings Excusatory Plea; but the Pope and College of Cardinals
would write to the King, entreating him to send a Proxy for judging the Cause
against the Winter. And with this Bonner was sent over, with Instructions from
the Cardinals that were gained to the King, to represent to him that his
Excusatory Plea could not be admitted; for since the Debate was to be, whether
the Pope could grant the Dispensation or not, it could not be committed to
Legates, but must be judged by the Pope and the Consistory. He was also ordered
to assure the King, that the Pope did now lean so much to the French Faction,
that he needed not fear to refer the matter to him.

But while these things were in debate at Rome, there was another Session of
Parliament in April; A Session of Parl.
and then the King sent for the Speaker of the House of Commons, and gave him
the Answer which the Clergy had drawn to the Addresses they made in the former
Session about their Courts. The King himself seemed not at all pleased with it,
but what the House did in it does not appear, further than that they were no
way satisfied with it. But there happened another thing that offended the King
much: One Temse of the House of Commons moved, that they should address to the
King to bring the Queen back to the Court, One moves for bringing the Queen to
Court.
and ran out upon the Inconveniences that were like to follow if the Queen were
put away, particularly the ill consequence of the Illegitimation of the
Princess. Upon this the King took occasion (when he gave them the Clergies
Answer) to tell them, At which the King is offended.
that he wondered at that motion made in their House, for the matter was not to
be determined there. It touched his Soul; he wished his Marriage were good, but
the Doctors and Learned men had determined it to be null and detestable; and
therefore he was obliged in Conscience to abstain from her, which he assured
them flowed from no Lust nor foolish Appetite. He was then 41 years old and at
that Age those Heats abate. But except in Spain or Portugal it had not been
heard of, that a man married two Sisters; and that he never heard, that any
Christian man before himself had married his Brothers Wife: Therefore he
assured them his Conscience was troubled, which he desired them to report to
the House. In this Session the Lord Chancellor came down to the Commons, with
many of the Nobility about him, and told them the King had considered the
Marches between England and Scotland, which were uninhabited on the English
side, but well peopled on the Scottish; and that laid England open to the
Incursion of the Scots; therefore the King intended to build Houses there, for
planting the English side. This the Lords liked very well, and thought it
convenient to give the King some Aids for the Charges of so necessary a Work,
and therefore desired the Commons to consult about it. Upon which the House
voted a Subsidy of a Fifteenth: A Subsidy is voted.
But before the Bill could be finished the Plague broke out in London, and the
Parliament was prorogued till February following. On the 11th of May (three
days before the Prorogation) the King sent for the Speaker of the House of
Commons, and told him, The King remits the Oaths which the Clergy swore to be
considered by the Commons.
That he found upon Inquiry, that all the Prelates, whom he had looked on as
wholly his Subjects, were but half-Subjects; for at their Consecration they
swore an Oath quite contrary to the Oath they swore to the Crown; so that it
seemed they were the Popes Subjects rather than his. Which he referred to their
care, that such order might be taken in it, that the King might not be deluded.
Upon which the two Oaths that the Clergy swore to the King and the Pope, were
read in the House of Commons, but the Consequence of them will be better
understood by setting them down.

The Oath to the Pope.
I John Bishop or Abbot of A, from this hour forward shall be faithful and
obedient to S. Peter, and to the holy Church of Rome, Their Oath to the Pope.
and to my Lord the Pope and his Successors canonically entering. I shall not
be of counsel nor consent, that they shall lose either Life or Member, or shall
be taken, or suffer any violence or any wrong by any means. Their Counsel to me
credited by them, their Messengers or Letters I shall not willingly discover to
any person. The Papacy of Rome, the Rules of the holy Fathers, and the Regality
of S. Peter, I shall help, and maintain, and defend against all men. The Legate
of the Sea Apostolic going and coming I shall honorably entreat. The Rights,
Honors, Privileges, Authorities of the Church of Rome, and of the Pope and his
Successors, I shall cause to be conserved, defended, augmented, and promoted. I
shall not be in Council, Treaty, or any act in the which any thing shall be
imagined against him or the Church of Rome, their Rights, Seats, Honors, or
Powers. And if I know any such to be moved or compassed, I shall resist it to
my power, and as soon as I can I shall advertise him, or such as may give him
knowledge. The Rules of the holy Fathers, the Decrees, Ordinances, Sentences,
Dispositions, Reservations, Provisions, and Commandments Apostolic, to my
power I shall keep, and cause to be kept of others. Heretics, Schismatics,
and Rebels to our Holy Father and his Successors I shall resist and persecute
to my power. I shall come to the Synod when I am called, except I be let by
a Canonical Impediment. The Thresholds of the Apostles I shall visit yearly
personally, or by my Deputy. I shall not alienate or sell my Possessions
without the Popes counsel. So God help me and the Holy Evangelists.

The Oath to the King.
Their Oath to the King.
I John Bishop of A, utterly renounce and clearly forsake all such Clauses,
Words, Sentences, and Grants, which I have or shall have hereafter of the Popes
Holiness, of and for the Bishopric of A, that in any wise has been, is, or
hereafter may be hurtful or prejudicial to your Highness, your Heirs,
Successors, Dignity, Privilege, or Estate Royal. And also I do swear, that I
shall be faithful and true, and faith and truth I shall bear to you my
Sovereign Lord, and to your Heirs Kings of the same, of Life and Limb, and
yearly Worship above all Creatures, for to live and die with you and yours
against all people. And diligently I shall be attendant to all your needs and
business after my wit and power, and your Counsel I shall keep and hold,
knowledging my self to hold my Bishopric of you only, beseeching you of
Restitution of the Temporalties of the same; promising as before that I shall
be a faithful, true and obedient Subject to your said Highness, Heirs, and
Successors, during my Life; and the Services and other things due to your
Highness for the Restitution of the Temporalties of the same Bishopri^k, I
shall truly do and obediently perform. So God me help and all Saints.

The Contradiction that was in these was so visible, that it had soon produced
a severe Censure from the House, if the Plague had not hindered both that and
the Bill of Subsidy. So on the 14th. of May the Parliament was prorogued. More
laid down his Office.
Two days after Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor, having often desired leave to
deliver up the Great Seal, and be discharged of his Office, obtained it; and
Sir Thomas Audley was made Lord Chancellor. More had carried that Dignity with
great temper, and lost it with much joy. He saw now how far the Kings Designs
went; and though he was for cutting off all the Illegal Jurisdiction, which the
Popes exercised in England, and therefore went cheerfully along with the Suit
of Praemunire; yet when he saw a t^tal Rupture like to follow, he excused
himself, and retired from Business with a Greatness of Mind, that was equal to
what the ancient Philosophers pretended in such cases. He also disliked Anne
Boleyne, and was prosecuted by her Father, who studied to fasten some Criminal
Imputations on him about the discharge of his Employment; but his Integrity had
been such, that nothing could be found to blemish his Reputation.

In September following the King created Anne Boleyne Marchioness of Pembroke,
to bring her by degrees up to the Height for which he had designed her. An
Enterveiw with the French King.
And in October he passed the Seas, and had an Enterview with the French King;
where all the most obliging Complements that were possible passed on both sides
with great Magnificence, and a firm Union was concerted about all their
Affairs. They published a League that they made to raise a mighty Army next
year against the Turk; but this was not much considered, it being generally
believed that the French King and the Turk were in a good Correspondence. As
for the matter of the Kings Divorce, Francis encouraged him to go on in it, and
in his intended Marriage with Anne Boleyne, promising if it were questioned to
assist him in it: And as for his appearance at Rome, as it was certain he could
not go thither in Person, so it was not fit to trust the secrets of his
Conscience to a Proxy. The French King seemed also resolved to stop the
payments of Annates and other Exactions of the Court of Rome, and said he would
send an Ambassador to the Pope, to ask Redress of these, and to protest, that
if it were not granted, they would seek other remedies by Provincial Councils:
And since there was an interview designed between the Pope and the Emperor at
Bononia in December, the French King was to send two Cardinalsthither to
procure Judges for ending the business in England. There was also an interview
proposed between the Pope and the French King, at Nice or Avignon. To this the
King of England had some Inclinations to go for ending all differences, if the
Pope were well disposed to it.

Upon this Sir Thomas Eliot was sent to Rome with answer to a message the Pope
had sent to the King, Eliot sent to Rome with Instructions. Cott. Lib. Vil. B.
13.
from whose Instructions both the substance of the message and of the answer
may be gathered. The Pope had offered to the King, that if he would name any
indifferent place out of his own Kingdom, he would send a Legate and two
Auditors of the Rota thither, to form the Process, reserving only the Sentence
to himself. The Pope also proposed a Truce of three or four years, and promised
that in that time he would call a general Council. For this message the King
sent the Pope thanks, but for the Peace he could receive no propositions about
it without the concurrence of the French King; and though he did not doubt the
justice of a general Council, yet considering the state of the Emperor's
Affairs at that time, with the Lutherans, he did not think it was then
seasonable to call one. That as for sending a Proxy to Rome, if he were a
private Person he could do it, but it was a part of the Prerogative of his
Crown, and of the Privileges of his Subjects, That all Matrimonial Causes
should be originally judged within his Kingdom by the English Church, which was
consonant to the general Councils and Customs of the ancient Church, whereunto
he hoped the Pope would have regard: And that for keeping up his Royal
Authority, to which he was bound by Oath, he could not without the consent of
the Realm, submit himself to a Foreign Jurisdiction; hoping the Pope would not
desire any violation of the Immunities of the Realm, or to bring these into
public Contention, which had been hitherto enjoyed without intrusion or
molestation. The Pope had confessed that without an urgent cause, the
Dispensation could not be granted. This the King laid hold on, and ordered his
Ambassador to show him that there was no War nor appearance of any between
England and Spain when it was granted. To verify that, he sent an attested
Copy of the Treaty between his Father and the Crown of Spain at that time: By
the words of which it appeared that it was then taken for granted, that Prince
Arthur had Consummated the Marriage, which was also proved by good witnesses.
In fine, since the thing did so much concern the Peace of the Realm, it was
fitter to judge it within the Kingdom than any where else; therefore he desired
the Pope would remit the discussing of it to the Church of England, and then
confirm the Sentence they should give. To the obtaining of this, the Ambassador
was to use all possible diligence, yet if he found real intentions in the Pope
to satisfy the King, he was not to insist on that as the Kings final
Resolution: And to let the Cardinal of Ravenna see, that the King intended to
make good what was promised in his name, the Bishopric of Coventry and
Litchfield falling vacant, he sent him the offer of it, with a promise of the
Bishopric of Ely when it should be void.

Soon after this he Married Anne Boleyn, on the 14th of November, upon his
landing in England, The King Married Anne Bo^eyn, Nov. 14.

Cowper, Holins^ies and Sanders.


but Stow says without any ground, that it was on the 25th of January. Rowland
Lee (who afterward got the Bishopric of Coventry and Liechfield) officiate in
the Marriage. It was done secretly in the presence of the Duke of Norfolk and
her Father, her Mother, and Brother, and Dr. Cranmer. The grounds on which the
King did this, were, That his former Marriage being of it self null, there was
no need of a Declarative Sentence after so many Universities and Doctors had
given their judgments against it. Soon after the Marriage she was with-Child,
which was looked on as a signalEvidence of her Chastity, and that she had till
then kept the King at a due distance.

But when the Pope and the Emperor met at Bononia, the Pope expressed great
Inclinations to favor the French King, An enterview between Pope and Emperor.
from which the Emperor could not remove him, nor engage him to accept of a
Match for his Niece Katherine de Medici with Francis Sforza Duke of Milan. But
the Pope promised him all that he desired as to the King of England, and so
that matter was still carried on. Some overtures about the Divorce. Lord
Herbert.
Dr. Bennet made several propositions to end the matter, either that it should
be judged in England, according to the Decree of the Council of Nice, and that
the Archbishop of Canterbury with the whole Clergy of his Province should
determine it, or that the King should name one, either Sir Thomas More or the
Bishop of London, the Queen should name another, the French King should name a
third, and the Archbishop of Canterbury to be the fourth; or that the cause
should be heard in England, and if the Queen did Appeal, it should be referred
to three Delegates, one of England, another of France, and a third to be sent
from Rome, who should sit and judge the Appeal in some indifferent place. But
the Pope would hearken to none of these Overtures, since they were all directly
contrary to that height of Authority, which he resolved to maintain: Therefore
he ordered Capisucci the Dean of the Rota, to cite the King to answer to the
Queens Appeal. Karne at Rome protested against the Citation, since the
Emperor's Power was so great about Rome, that the King could not expect justice
there; and therefore desired they would desist, otherwise the King would Appeal
to the Learned men in Universities; and said there was a nullity in all their
proceedings, since the King was a Sovereign Prince, and the Church of England a
free Church, over which the Pope had no just Authority.

1533.
But while this depended at Rome, another Session of Parliameot was held in
England, which began to sit on the 4th of February. In this the Breach with
Rome was much forwarded by the Act they passed against all Appeals to Rome. A
Session of Parliament.
The Preamble bears, that the Crown of England was Imperial, An Act against
Appeals to Rome. 24. Hen. 8. Act 22.
and that the Nation was a complete Body within it self, with a full Power to
give justice in all cases Spiritual as well as Temporal; and that in the
Spiritualty as there had beed at all times, so there were them men of that
sufficiency and integrity, that they might declare and determine all doubts
within the Kingdom; and that several Kings, as Edward the 1st, Edward the 3d,
Richard the 2d, 1533.
and Henry the 4th, had by several Laws preserved the Liberties of the Realm,
both Spiritual and Temporal, from the annoyance of the Sea of Rome, and other
foreign Potentates; yet many inconveniences had arisen by Appeals to the Sea
of Rome in Causes of Matrimony, Divorces, and other cases, which were not
sufficiently provided against by these Laws; by which not only the King and his
Subjects were put to great charges, but justice was much delayed by Appeals,
and Rome being at such a distance, Evidences could not be brought thither nor
Witnesses so easily as within the Kingdom: Therefore it was Enacted, that all
such Causes, whether relating to the King, or any of his Subjects, were to be
determined within the Kingdom in the several Courts to which they belonged,
notwithstanding any Appeals to Rome, or Inhibitions and Bulls from Rome; whose
Sentences should take effect, and be fully Executed by all Inferior Ministers;
and if any Spiritual Persons refused to Execute them because of Censures from
Rome, they were to suffer a years Imprisonment, and fine and ransom at the
Kings will; and if any Persons in the Kings Dominions procured or executed any
Process or Censures from Rome, they were declared liable to the pains in the
Statute of Provisors in the 16th of Rich. the 2d. But that Appeals should only
be from the Archdeacon or his Official to the Bishop of the Diocese, or his
Commissary, and from him to the Archbishop of the Province, or the Dean of the
Arches, where the final Determination was to be made without any further
Process, and in every Process concerning the King or his Heirs and Successors,
an Appeal should lie to the upper House of Convocation, where it should be
finally Determined, never to be again called in question.

As this Bill passed, the sense of both Houses of Parliament about the Kings
Marriage did clearly appear, but in the Convocation the business was more fully
debated. The Convocation of the Province of Canterbury was at this time
destitute of its Head and principal Member. For Warham Archbishop of
Canterbury was dead since August last year. Warhams Death, Aug. 23.
He was a great Canonist, an able Statesman, a dextrous Courtier, and a
favourer of Learned men. He always hated Cardinal Wolsey, and would never stoop
to him, esteeming it below the Dignity of his See. He was not so peevishly
engaged to the Learning of the Schools as others were, but set up and
encouraged a more generous way of Knowledge; yet he was a severe persecutor of
them whom he thought Heretics, and inclined to believe idle and Fanatical
people, as will afterward appear, when the Impostures of the Maid of Kent
shall be related.

The King saw well of how great importance it was to the designs he was then
forming, to fill that See, with a Learned, The King resolves to promote Cranmer.
Prudent, and resolute man; but finding none in the Episcopal Order that was
qualified to his mind, and having observed a native simplicity joined with much
courage, and tempered with a great deal of wisdom, in Dr. Cranmer, who was then
Negotiating his business among the Learned men of Germany, he of his own accord
without any adresses from Cranmer, designed to raise him to that Dignity, and
gave him notice of it, that he might make have and come home to enjoy that
reward which the King had appointed for him. But Cranmer having received this,
Fox.
did all he could to excuse himself from the burden which was coming upon him;
and therefore he returned very slowly to England, hoping that the Kings
thoughts cooling, some other person might step in between him and a Dignity, of
which having a just and primitive sense, he did look on it with fear and
apprehension, rather than joy and desire. This was so far from setting him
back, that the King (who had known well what it was to be importuned by
ambitious and aspiring Churchmen, but had not found it usual that they should
decline and fly from Preferment) was thereby confirmed in his high opinion of
him; and neither the delays of his Journey, nor his Entreaties to be delivered
from a Burden, which his Humility made him imagine himself unable to bear,
could divert the King. So that though six months elapsed before the thing was
settled, yet the King persisted in his Opinion, and the other was forced to
yield.

Cranmers Bulls from Rome.
In the end of January the King sent to the Pope for the Bulls for Cranmers
Promotion; and though the Statutes were passed against procuring more Bulls
from Rome, yet the King resolved not to begin the breach till he was forced to
it by the Pope. It may be easily imagined, that the Pope was not hearty in this
Promotion, and that he apprehended ill consequences from the Advancement of a
Man, who had gone over many Courts of Christendom, disputing against his Power
of Dispensing, and had lived in much Familiarity with Osiander and the
Lutherans in Germany: Yet on the other hand he had no mind to precipitate a
Rupture with England; therefore he consented to it, and the Bulls were
expedited, though instead of Annates there was only 900 Ducats paid for them.

They were the last Bulls that were received in England in this Kings Reign;
and therefore I shall give an account of them, as they are set down in the
beginning of Cranmers Register. By one Bull he is upon the Kings Nomination,
promoted to be Archbishop of Canterbury, which is directed to the King. By a
second directed to himself, he is made Archbishop. By a third he is absolved
from all Censures. A fourth is to the Suffragans. A fifth to the Dean and
Chapter. A sixth to the Clergy of Canterbury. A seventh to all the Laity in his
See. An eighth to all that held Lands of it, requiring them to receive and
acknowledge him as Archbishop. All these bear Date the 21th. of February, 1533.
By a ninth Bull dated the 22th. of February he was ordained to be consecrated,
taking the Oath that was in the Pontifical. By a tenth Bull dated the second of
March the Pall was sent him. And by an eleventh of the same Date the Archbishop
of York and the Bishop of London were required to put it on him. These were the
several Artifices to make Compositions high, and to enrich the Apostolic
Chamber, for now that about which S. Peter gloried, that he had none of it, (
neither silver nor gold) was the thing in the world for which his Successors
were most careful.

When these Bulls were brought into England, Thomas Cranmer was on the 13th. of
March consecrated by the Bishops of Lincoln, Exeter, and S. Asaph. But here a
great Scruple was moved by him concerning the Oath that he was to swear to the
Pope, which he had no mind to take; and Writers near that time say, the dislike
of that Oath was one of the motives that made him so unwillingly accept of that
Dignity. He declared, that he thought there were many things settled by the
Laws of the Popes, which ought to be reformed, and that the Obligation which
that Oath brought upon him, would bind him up from doing his Duty both to God,
the King, and the Church. But this being communicated to some of the Canonists
and Casuists, His Protestation about his Oath to the Pope.
they found a temper that agreed better with their Maxims, than Cranmers
sincerity; which was, that before he should take the Oath, he should make a
good and formal Protestation, That he did not intend thereby to restrain
himself from any thing that he was bound to either by his Duty to God, or the
King, or the Country; and that he renounced every thing in it that was
contrary to any of these. This Protestation he made in S. Stephens Chapel at
Westminster, in the hands of some Doctors of the Canon Law before he was
consecrated, and he afterward repeated it when he took the Oath to the Pope;
by which if he did not wholly save his Integrity, yet it was plain he intended
no Cheat, but to act fairly and above board.

As soon as he was consecrated, and had performed every thing that was
necessary for his Investiture, he came and sat in the Upper House of
Convocation. Antiq. Brit. i^ vita Cranm^^*
There were there at that time hot and earnest Debates upon these two
Questions; Whether it was against the Law of God, and Indispensable by the
Pope, for a man to marry his Brothers Wife, he being dead without Issue, but
having consummated the Marriage? And whether Prince Arthur had consummated his
Marriage with the Queen? As for the first, it was brought first into the Lower
House of Convocation, and when it was put to the Vote, 14 were for the
Affirmative, 7 for the Negative; one was not clear, and another voted the
Prohibition to be Moral, but yet dispensable by the Pope. In the Upper House it
was long debated, Stokesly Bishop of London arguing for the Affirmative, and
Fisher Bishop of Rochester for the Negative. The Opinions of 19 Universities
were read for it, and the oneHouse being as full as the other was empty, 216
being present either in person or by Proxy, it was carried in the Affirmative
Nemine contradicente; those few of the Queens party that were there it seems
going out. For the other Question about the Matter ofFact, it was remitted to
the Faculty of the Canon Law, (it being a matter that lay within their St^dies)
whether the Presumptions were violent, and such as in the course of Law must be
looked on as good Evidences of a thing that was secret, and was not capable of
formal proof? They all except five or six were for the Affirmative, and all the
Upper House confirmed this, the Bishop of Bath and Wells only excepted.

In this account it may seem strange, that there were but 23 persons in the
Lower House of Convocation, and 216 in the Upper House. It is taken from an
unquestioned Authority, so the Matter of Fact is not to be doubted. The most
Learned Sir Henry Spelman has in no place of his Collection of our Councils,
considered the Constitution of the two Houses of Convocation; and in none of
our Records have I been able to discover of what persons they were made up in
the Times of Popery: and therefore since we are left to conjecture, I shall
offer mine to the learned Reader. It is, that none sat in the Lower House, but
those who were deputed by the inferior Clergy; and that Bishops, Abbots
Mitered and not Mitered, and Priors, Deans and Archdeacons, sat then in the
Upper House of Convocation. To which I am induced by these two Reasons: It is
probable that all who were declared Prelates by the Pope, 1532.
and had their Writ to sit in a General Council, had likewise a right to come
to the Upper House of Convocation, and sit with the other Prelates. And we find
in the Tomes of the Councils, that not only Abbots and Priors, but Deans and
Archdeacons were summoned to the fourth Council in the Lateran, and to that at
Vienna. Another Reason is, that their sitting in two Houses (for in all other
Nations they sit together) looks as if it had been taken from the Constitution
of our Parliament, in which all that have Writs personally sit in the Lords
House; and those who come upon an Election sit in the Lower House. So it is not
improbable, that all who were summoned personally sat in the Upper House, and
those who were returned with an Election, sat in the Lower House of
Convocation.

This Account of that Convocation I take from that Collection of the British
Antiquities, which is believed to have been made by Matthew Parker, who lived
at that time, and was afterward Archbishop of Canterbury. But the Convocation
Books being burnt, there are no Records to be appealed to; yet it is not to be
supposed, that in a Matter of Fact that was so public and well known, any man
(especially one of that high Rank) would have delivered Falsehoods, while the
Books were yet extant that would have disproved them.

New Endeavors to make the Queen submit.
The Church of England having in her Representative made such a full Decision,
nothing remained but to give Judgment, and to declare the Marriage Null. The
thing was already determined, only the Formality of a Sentence Declarative was
wanting. But before they proceeded to that, a new Message was sent to the
Queen, to lay all that had passed before her, and to desire her to acquiesce in
the Opinions of so many Universities and Learned Men. But she still persisted
in her Resolution to own her Marriage, and to adhere to her Appeal till the
Pope should judge in it. And when it was told her, that the King would settle
the Jointure that she was to have by his Brother, and that the Honor of
Princess of Wales should still be paid her, she rejected it. But the new Queen
was now with child, But in vain.
and brought forth Queen Elizabeth the 7th. of September this year; from which
looking backwards nine months, to the beginning of December, it shows that she
must have been married at or before that time: for all the Writers of both
sides agree, that she was married before she conceived with child. The King
therefore thought not fit to conceal it much longer, so on Easter Eve she was
declared Queen of England. It seems it was not thought needful at that time to
proceed to any further Sentence about the former Marriage, otherwise I cannot
see what made it be so long delayed, since the thing was in their power now, as
well as after. And it was certainly a preposterous Method to judge the first
Marriage Null, after the second was published. So that it seems more probable,
they did not intend any Sentence at all, till afterward perhaps upon
Advertisements from beyond Sea, they went on to a formal Process. Nor is it
unlikely that the King remembering the old Advice that the Pope sent him, once
to marry a second Wife, and then to send for a Commission to try the matter,
which the Pope was willing to confirm, though he would not seem to allow it
originally, resolved to follow this Method; for the Pope was now closing with
Francis, from which Union the King had reason to expect great Advantages.

Whatsoever were the Reasons of the Delay, 1533.
the Process was framed in this Method. First, Cranmer wrote to the King, that
the World had been long scandalized with his Marriage, and that it lay on him
as his Duty to see it tried and determined; therefore craved his Royal Leave to
proceed in it. Which being obtained, Cranmer proceeds to a Sentence of Divorce,
taken from the Originals. Cott. lib. Otho C. 1^*
both the King and Queen were cited to appear before the Archbishop, at
Dunstable the 20th. of May, and the Archbishop went thither with the Bishops of
London, Winchester (Gardener,) Bath and Wells, and Lincoln, and many Divines
and Canonists. That place was chosen because the Queen lay then very near it at
Ampthill, and so she could not pretend ignorance of what was done; and they
needed not put many days in the Citation, but might end the Process so much the
sooner. On the 10th. of May the Archbishop sat in Court, and the King appeared
by Proxy, but the Queen appeared not. Upon which she was declared Contumax, and
a second Citation was issued out, and after that a third: But she intended not
to appear, and so she was finally declared Contumax. Then the Evidences that
had been brought before the Legates, of the Consummation of the Marriage with
Prince Arthur, were read. After that the Determinations of the Universities,
and Divines, and Canonists, were also produced and read. Then the Judgments of
the Convocations of both Provinces were also read, with many other Instruments,
and the whole Merits of the Cause were opened. Upon which after many Sessions,
Collect. Numb. 47.
on the 23th. of May Sentence was given with the Advice of all that were there
present, declaring it only to have been a Marriage de facto, but not de jure,
pronouncing it Null from the beginning. One thing is to be observed, That the
Archbishop in the Sentence is called, The Legate of the Apostolic See. Whether
this went of course as one of his Titles, or was put in to make the Sentence
firmer, the Reader may judge. Sentence being given, the Archbishop with all the
rest returned to London; and five days after on the 28th. of May, at Lambeth,
by another Judgment he in general words (no Reasons being given in the
Sentence) confirmed the Kings Marriage with the new Queen Anne, and the first
of June she was crowned Queen.

When this great Business, which had been so long in agitation, The Censures
past at that time.
was thus concluded, it was variously censured as men stood affected. Some
approved the Kings Proceedings as Canonical and Just, since so many
Authorities, which in the intervall of a General Council were all that could be
had, (except the Pope be believed Infallible) had concurred to strengthen the
Cause; and his own Clergy had upon a full and long examination judged it on his
side. Others, who in the main agreed to the Divorce, did very much dislike the
Kings second Marriage before the first was dissolved; for they thought it
against the common course of Law, to break a Marriage without any public
Sentence; and since one of the chief politic Reasons that was made use of in
this Suit, was to settle the Succession of the Crown, this did embroil it more,
since there was a fair color given to except to the Validity of the second
Marriage, because it was contracted before the first was annulled. But to this
others answered, That the first Marriage being judged by the Interpreters of
the Doctrine of the Church, to have been Null from the beginning, there was no
need of any Sentence, but only for Form. And all concluded, it had been better
there had been no Sentence at all, than one so late. Some excepted to the
Archbishop of Canterbury's being Judge, who by his former Writings and Disputes
had declared himself partial. But to this it was answered, That when a man
changes his Character, all that he did in another Figure is no just Exception:
so Judges decide Causes in which they formerly gave Counsel; and Popes are not
bound to the Opinions they held when they were Divines or Canonists. It was
also said, That the Archbishop did only declare in Legal Form, that which was
already judged by the whole Convocation of both Provinces. Some wondered at the
Popes stifness, that would put so much to hazard, when there wanted not as good
Colors to justify a Bull, as they had made use of to excuse many other
things. But the Emperors Greatness, and the fear of giving the Lutherans
advantages in disputing the Popes Authority, were on the other hand so
prevalent Considerations, that no wonder they wrought much on a Pope, who
pretended to no other knowledge but that of Policy; for he had often said, He
understood not the matter, and therefore left it in other men's hands. All
persons excused Queen Katharine for standing so stiffly to her ground; only her
denying so confidently that Prince Arthur consummated the Marriage, seems not
capable of an Excuse. Every body admired Queen Annes Conduct, who had managed
such a Kings Spirit so long, and had neither surfeited him with great freedom,
nor provoked him by the other Extreme: for the King, who was extremely nice in
these matters, conceived still an higher Opinion of her; and her being so soon
with child after the Marriage, as it made people conclude she had been chaste
till then, so they hoped for a Blessing upon it, since there were such early
appearances of Issue. Those that favored the Reformation expected better days
under her Protection, for they know she favored them: But those who were in
their hearts for the Established Religion did much dislike it; and many of the
Clergy, especially the Orders of Monks and Friars, condemned it both in their
Sermons and Discourses.

But the King little regarding the Censures of the Vulgar, sent Ambassadors to
all the Courts of Europe, to give notice of his new Marriage, and to justify
it by some of those Reasons, which have been opened in the former parts of this
History. He also sent the Lord Mountjoy to the Divorced Queen, to let her know
what was done, and that she was no more to be treated as Queen, but as Princess
Dowager. He was to mix Promises with Threatenings, particularly concerning her
Daughters being put next the Queens Issue in the Succession. But the afflicted
Queen would not yield, and said she would not damn her Soul, nor submit to such
an Infamy: That she was his Wife, and would never call her self by any other
Name, whatever might follow on it, since the Process still depended at Rome.
That Lord having written a Relation of what had passed between him and her,
Cott. lib. Otho. C. 10.
showed it to her; but she dashed with a Pen all those places in which she was
called Princess Dowager; and would receive no Service at any ones hands, but of
those who called her Queen: and she continued to be still served as Queen by
all about her. Against which though the King used all the Endeavors he could,
not without both threatening and violence to some of the Servants, yet he could
never drive her from it: and what he did in that, was thought far below that
Height of Mind which appeared in his other Actings; for since he had stripped her
of the real Greatness of a Queen, it seemed too much, to vex her for keeping up
the Pageantry of it.

But the news of this made great impressions elsewhere. The Emperor received
the Kings justification very coldly, and said ^e would consider what he was to
do upon it, which was looked on as a D^c^aration of War. The French King, The
Pope unites himself to the French King.
though he expressed still great Friendship to the King, yet was now resolved
to link himself to the Pope; for the crafty Pope apprehending that nothing made
the King of England so confident, as that he knew his Friendship was necessary
to the French King, and fearing they had resolved to proceed at once to the
pu^ting down the Papal Authority in their Kingdoms, (which it appears they had
once agreed to do,) resolved by all means to make sure of the French King,
which as it would preserve that Kingdom in his obedience, so would perhaps
frighten the King of England from proceeding to such extremities; since that
Prince, in whose conjunction he trusted so much, had forsaken him: Therefore
the Pope did so vigorously pursue the Treaty with Francis, that it was as good
as ended at this time, and an Interview was projected between them at
Marseilles. The Pope did also grant him so great Power over his own Clergy,
that he could s^arce have expected more, if he had set up a Patriarch in
France; so that Francis did resolve to go on in the designs, which had been
concerted between him and the King of England, no further; but still he
considered his alliance so much, that he promised to use his most effectual
intercession with the Pope to prevent all Censures and Bulls against the King;
and if it were possible to bring the matter to an Amicable conclusion. And the
Emperor was not ill-pleased to see France and England divided. Therefore though
he had at first opposed the Treaty between the Pope and Francis, yet afterward
he was not troubled that it took effect, hoping that it would dis-unite those
two Kings, whose conjunction had been so troublesome to him.

But when the news was brought to Rome of what was done in England, And
condemns the Kings proceedings in England.
with which it was also related that Books were coming out against the Popes
Supremacy, all the Cardinals of the Imperial Faction pressed the Pope to give a
definitive Sentence, and to proceed to Censures against the King. But the more
moderate Cardinals thought, England was not to be thrown away with such
precipitation: And therefore a temper was found, that a Sentence should be
given upon what had been attempted in England, by the Archbishop of Canterbury
(which in the Style of the Canon Law were called the Attentates,) for it was
pretended that the matter depending in the Court of Rome, by the Queens Appeal
and the other steps that had been made, it was not in the Archbishop's Power
to proceed to any Sentence. Therefore in general it was declared, that all that
had been attempted or done in England about the Kings Suit of Divorce was null,
and that the King by such attempts was liable to Excommunication, unless he put
things again in the state they were in, and that before September next, and
that then they would proceed further; and this Sentence was affixed in Dunkirk
soon after.

The King resolving to follow the thing as far as it was possible, sent a great
Embassy to Francis, who was then on his Journey to Marseilles, to dissuade the
Interview and Marriage, till the Pope gave the King satisfaction. But the
French King was engaged in honor to go forward; yet he protested he would do
all that lay in his Power to compose the matter, and that he would take any
injury that were done to the King as highly, as if it were done to himself; and
he desired the King would send some to Marseilles, who thereupon sent Gardener
and Sir Francis Brian.

But at this time the Queen brought forth a Daughter, who was Christened
Elizabeth (the renowned Queen of England, Queen Elizabeth Born, S^p. 7.
) the Archbishop of Canterbury being her Godfather. She was soon after
declared Princess of Wales; though Lawyers thought that against Law, for she
was only Heir presumptive, but not apparent to the Crown, since a Son coming
after, he must be preferred. Yet the King would justify what he had done in
his Marriage with all possible respect, and having before declared the Lady
Mary Princess of Wales, he did now the same in favor of the Lady Elizabeth.

An Interview between the Pope and Fr^nch King at Mars^ill^s.
The Interview between the Pope and the French King was at Marseilles in
October, where the Marriage was made up between the Duke of Orleance and
Katharine de Medici; to whom besides 100000 Crowns Portion, the Principality of
many Towns in Italy, as Milan, Reggio, Pisa, Legorn, Parma, and Piacenza, and
the Duchy of Urbin were given. To the former, the Pope pretended in the Right
of the Popedom, and to the last in the Right of the House of Medici. But the
French King was ^o clear all those Titles by his Sword. The Pope promises to
give Sentence for the King of England's Divorce.
As for the Kings business, the Pope referred it to the Consistory. But it
seems there was a secret Transaction between him and Francis, that if the King
would in all other things return to his wonted obedience to the Apostolic See,
and submit the matter to the judgment of the Consistory, (excepting only to the
Cardinals of the Imperial Faction as partial and incompetent judges,) the
Decision should be made to his hearts content. This I collect from what will
afterward appear. The King upon the Sentence that was passed against him,
Fidel. serve. Infid^. subdit. Responsio.
sent Bonner to Marseilles, who procuring an Audience of the Pope, delivered to
him the Authentic Instrument of the Kings Appeal from him to the next general
Council lawfully called. At this the Pope was much incensed, but said he would
consider of it in Consistory; and having consulted about it there, he answered
that the Appeal was unlawful, and therefore he rejected it; and for a general
Council, the calling of it belonged to him, and not to the King. About the same
time the Archbishop of Canterbury being threatened with a Process from Rome,
put in also his Appeal to the next general Council. Upon which Bonner delivered
the threatenings that he was ordered to make, with so much vehemence and fury,
that the Pope talked of throwing him in a Cauldron of melted Lead, or of
Burning him alive; and he apprehending some danger made his escape. About the
middle of November the Interview ended, the Pope returning to Rome, and the
French King to Paris, a firm Alliance being established between them. But upon
the Duke of Orleance his Marrying the Pope's Niece, I shall add one
observation, that will neither be unpleasant nor impertinent. The Duke of
Orleance was then but Fourteen years and Nine Months old, being born on the
last of March, Bzovius.
1518. and yet was believed to have consummated his Marriage the very first
night after: The French King prevails with the King of England to submit to the
Pope.
so the Popes Historians tell us with much Triumph; though they represented
that improbable, if not impossible in Prince Arthur, who was nine Months elder
when he died.

Upon the French Kings return from Marseilles, the Bishop of Paris was sent
over to the King; which (as may be reasonably collected,) followed upon some
Agreement made at Marseilles, and he prevailed with the King to submit the
whole matter to the Pope and the Consistory, on such terms that the
Imperialists should not be allowed a Voice, because they were Parties, being in
the Emperor's Power. None that has observed the genius of this King, can think
that after he had proceeded so far, he would ^a^e made this Submission without
very good assurances; and if there had not been great grounds to expect good
effects from it, the Bishop of Paris would not in the middle of Winter have
undertaken a Journey from England to Rome. But the King, it seems, would not
abase himself so far as to send any Submission in writing, till he had fuller
assurances. The Lord Herbert has published a Letter (which he transcribed from
the Original, written by the Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Duresm^, to
the King the 11th of May, 1534.) giving an account of a Conference they had
with Queen Katharine* in which, among other motives they used, this was one, to
persuade her to comply with what the King had done: That the Pope had said at
Marseilles, that if the King would send a Proxy to Rome, he would give the
Cause for him against the Queen, because he knew his Cause was good and just.
Which is a great presumption, that the Pope did really give some engagements to
the French King about the King's business.

When the Bishop of Paris came to Rome, the Motion was liked, Which was well
received at Rome.
and it was promised, that if the King sent a promise of that under his Hand,
with an Order to his Proxies to appear in Court, there should be Judges sent to
Cambray to form the Process, and then the matter should be Determined for him
at Rome. This was sent to the King, Hist. Council of Trent by Padre Paul.
with the Notice of the day that was prefixed for the return of his answer, and
with other Motives which must have been very great, since they prevailed so
much. For in answer there was a Courier dispatched from the King, with a formal
promise under his Hand. And now the matter seemed at a point, the French
Interest was great in the Court of Rome; four new Cardinals had been made at
Marseilles, and there were six of that Faction before, which with the Popes
Creatures, and the indifferent or venal Voices, balanced the Imperial Faction,
so that a wound that was looked on as fatal, was now almost healed. But God in
his wise and unsearchable Providence had designed to draw other great ends out
of this Rupture, and therefore suffered them that were the most concerned to
hinder it, to be the chief instruments of driving it on. But the Imperialists
opposed it.
For the Cardinals of the Imperial Faction were now very active, they liked not
the President of excluding the Cardinals of the Nations concerned, out of any
business. But above all things they were to hinder a Conjunction between the
Pope and the King of England; for the Pope being then allied to France, there
was nothing the Emperor feared more than the closing the Breach with England,
which would make the union against him so much stronger. Therefore when the day
that had been prefixed for the return of the Courier from England, was elapsed,
they all pressed the Pope to proceed to a Sentence Definitive and to Censures.
Bellay the Bishop of Paris represented the injustice of proceeding with so much
Precipitation, since where there were Seas to cross, in such a Season, many
accidents might occasion the delay of the Express. The King of England had
followed this Suit six years, and had patience so long; therefore he desired
the delay of six days, 1531.
and if in that time no return came, they might proceed. But the Imperialists
represented, that those were only delays to gain time; and that the King of
England was still proceeding in his contempt of the Apostolic See, and of the
Cardinals, and publishing Books and Libels against them. This so wrought on the
angry Pope, that without consulting his ordinary prudence, he brought the
business into the Consistory, And with great preparation procure a sentence
against the King.
where the Plurality of voices carried it to proceed to a Sentence. And though
the Process had been carried on all that winter in their usual Forms, yet it
was not so ripe, but by the Rules of the Consistory, there ought to have been
three Sessions before Sentence was given. But they concluded all in one day,
and so on the 23d of March, the Marriage between the King and Queen Katharine
was declared good, and the King required to take her as his wife; otherwise
Censures were to be denounced against him.

Two days after that, the Courier arrived from England, with the Kings
Submission under his hand in due Form, and earnest Letters from the French King
to have it accepted, that so the business might be composed. When this was
known at Rome* all the indi^^erent and wise Cardinals (among whom was Farnese,
that was afterward Pope Paul the 3d.) came to the Pope, and desired that it
might be again considered before it went fur^her. So it was brought again into
the Consistory. But the secret reason of the Imperialists opposing it, was now
more pressing, since there was such an appearance of a settlement, if the
former Sentence were once recalled. Therefore they so managed the matter, that
it was confirmed anew by the Pope and the Consistory, and they ordered the
Emperor to execute the Sentence.

The King resolves to abolish the Popes Power in England.
The King was now in so good hope of his business, that he sent Sr. Edward Karne
to Rome to prosecute his Suit; who, on his way thither, met the Bishop of
Paris, coming back with this Melancholic account of his unprosperous
Negotiation. When the King heard it, and understood that he was used with so
much scorn and contempt at Rome, being also the more vexed, because he had come
to such a submission, he resolved then to break totally from Rome. And in this,
he was before hand with that Court. For judging it the best way to procure a
peace, to manage the War vigorously, he had held a Session of Parliament from
the 15th of January, till the 30th of March, in which he had procured a great
Change of the whole Constitution of the Government of the Church. But before I
give an account of that, I shall first open all the Arguments and reasons, upon
which I find they proceeded in this Matter.

Which had been much disputed there
The Popes Power had been then for 4 years together much examined and disputed
in England; in which they went by these steps, one leading to another. They
first controverted his Power of Dispensing with the Law of God. From that they
went to examine what Jurisdiction he had in England, upon which followed the
Convicting the Clergy of a Praemunire with their Submission to the King. And
that led them to controvert the Popes right to Annates, and other Exactions,
which they also condemned. The Condemning all appeals to Rome followed that
naturally. And now so many branches of that Power were cut off, the Root was
next struck at, and the Foundations of the Papal Authority were examined. 1532.
For near a year together there, had been many public debates about it; and
both in the Parliament and Convocation the thing was long disputed, ^elerine
Inglese.
and all that could be alleged on both sides was Considered. The Reader will
be best able to judge of their reasons, Hall.
(and thereby of the ripeness of their judgments, when they Enacted the Laws
that passed in this Parliament,) when he sees a full account of them; which I
shall next set down, not drawn from the Writings and Apologies that have been
published since, but from these that came out about that time. For then were
written the Institution for the Necessary Erudition of a Christian man,
Concluded in the Convocation, and published by Authority; and another Book, De
Differentia Regiae and Ecclesiasticae Potestatis. The former of these was
called the Bishops, and the latter the Kings Book. Gardener also wrote a Book,
De vera Obedientia, to which Bonner prefixed a Preface upon the same Subject.
Stokesly Bishop of London, and Tonstal Bishop of Duresm, wrote a long Letter in
defense of the Kings Proceedings in this matter to Reginald, (soon after,
Cardinal) Pool: from these writings, and the Sermons preached by some Bishops
at this time, with other Authentic pieces. I have Extracted the Substance of
the Arguments upon which they grounded their Laws, which I shall divide in two
heads. The one of the reasons for rejecting the Popes pretended Power. The
other for setting up the Kings Supremacy with the Explanations and Limitations
of it.

First, of the Popes Power, The Arguments upon which it was rejected.
they declared that they found no ground for it in the Scripture. All the
Apostles were made equal by Christ, when he committed the Church to their care
in Common. And he did often declare, there was no Superiority of one above
another. St. Paul claimed an equality with the chief Apostles both Peter,
James, and John; and when he thought St. Peter blameworthy, he withstood him to
his face. But whatsoever Pre-eminence St. Peter might have, that was only
Personal, and there was no reason to affix it to his Chair at Rome, more than
at Antioch. But if any See be to be preferred before another, it should be
Jerusalem where Christ dyed, and out of which the Faith was propagated over all
Nations, Christ commanding his Disciples to begin their Preaching in it; so
that it was truly the Mother Church, and is so called by St. Paul, whereas in
the Scripture, Rome is called Babylon, according to Tertullian and St. Jerome.

For the places brought from Scripture in favor of the Papacy, they judged that
they did not prove any thing for it. That Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I
will build my Church, if it prove any thing in this matter, would prove too
much; even that the Church was founded on St. Peter, as he was a private
person, and so on the Popes in their Personal Capacity. But both St. Ambrose,
St. Jerome, and St. Austin, think, that by the Rock, the Confession he had made
was only to be meant. Others of the Fathers thought by the Rock, Christ himself
was meant, who is the only true Foundation of the Church; though in another
sense all the Apostles are also called Foundations by St. Paul. That, Tell the
Church, is thought by Gerson and Aeneas Silvius, (afterward Pope Pius the 2d.)
rather to make against the Pope and for a General Council. And the Fathers have
generally followed St. Chrysostom and St. Austin, 1533.
who thought that, the giving of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Charge, Feed my Sheep, were addressed to St. Peter, in behalf of all the rest
of the Apostles. And that, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith sail not, was
only Personal, and related to his Fall, which was then Imminent. It is also
clear by St. Paul, that every Apostle had his peculiar Province, beyond which
he was not to Stretch himself; and St. Peter's Province was the Circumcision,
and his, the Uncircumcision, in which he plainly declares his Equality with him.

This was also clear from the constant Tradition of the Church. St. Cyprian was
against Appeals to Rome, and would not submit to P. Stephens definition in the
point of Re-baptizing of Heretics; and expressly says, That all the Apostles
were equal in Power, and that all the Bishops were also equal, since the whole
Office and Episcopate was one entire thing, of which every Bishop had a
complete and equal share. And though some places are brought out of him
concerning the Unity of the Roman Church, and of other Churches with it; yet
those places have no relation to any Authority that the Roman Church had over
other Churches, but were occasioned by a Schism that Novatian had made there at
Rome, being Elected in opposition to the Bishop that was rightly chosen: and of
that unity only St. Cyprian writes in those places. But from all his Epistles
to the Bishops of Rome, it is visible he looked on himself as their Equal,
since he calls them Brother, Colleague, and Fellow-Bishop. And whatsoever is
said by any Ancient Writer of St. Peter's Chair, is to be understood of the pure
Gospel, which he delivered, as St. Austin observes, that by Moses Chair, is to
be understood The delivering of Moses Law. But though St. Peter sat there, the
succeeding Popes have no more right to pretend to such Authority, than the
Kings of Spain to claim the Roman Empire, because he that is now their King, is
Emperor. When Constantine turned Christian, the Dignity of the chief City of
the Empire made Rome to be accounted the first See, but by the General Council
of Nice it was declared, that the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch had the
same Authority over the Countries round about them, that he of Rome had over
those that lay about that City. It is true, at tha^ time the Arrian Heresy,
having spread Generally over the Eastern Churches* from which the Western were
free; the oppressed Catholic Bishops of the East made Appeals to Rome, and
extolled that See by a natural Maxim in all men, who magnify that from which
they have Protection. But the Second general Council took care, that that
should not grow a President, for they Decreed that every Province should be
governed by its own Synod, and that Bishops when they were accused, must first
be judged by the Bishops of their own Province, and from them they might appeal
to the Bishops of the Diocese but no higher appeal was allowed: and by that
Council it appears; what was the Foundation of the greatness of the Bishop of
Rome, for when Constantinople was made the Seat of the Empire and New Rome, it
had the same Privileges that Old Rome had, and was set next to it in order and
dignity. 1534.
In a Council at Milevi in which St. Austin sat, they appointed that every
Clerk, that should appeal to any Bishop beyond the Sea, should be
excommunicated. And when Faustianus was sent by the Pope to the African
Churches, to claim the Right of receiving appeals, and pretended a Canon of the
Council of Nice for it, the Pretension was rejected by the Af^ican Fathers, who
acknowledged no such Right, and had never heard of that Canon. Upon which they
sent to the East^rn Churches, and search was everywhere made for the Copies of
the Canons of that Council, but it was found that it was a Forgery. From whence
two things were observable: The one, that the Church in that Age had no
Tradition of any Divine Institution for the Authority of that See, since as the
Popes, who claimed it, never pretended to any such thing; so the African
Bishops by their rejecting that Power, show, that they knew nothing of any
Divine Warrant, all the Contest being only about a Canon of the Church. It also
appeared how early the Church of Rome aspired to Power, and did not stick at
making use of Forged writings to support it. But Pope Agatho more modestly
writing to the Emperor in his own name, and in the name of all the Synods that
were Subject to his See, calls them a few Bishops in the Northern and Western
Parts. When afterward the Patriarch of Constantinople was declared by the
Emperor Mauritius, The Universal Bishop, Gregory the great did exclaim against
the Ambition of that Title, as being equal to the Pride of Lucifer, and
declared, that he who assumed it was the Forerunner of Antichrist; saying, that
none of his Predecessors had ever claimed such a Power. And this was the more
observable, since the English were Converted by those whom he sent over; so
that this was the Doctrine of that See, when this Church received the Faith
from it.

But it did not continue long within those limits; for Boniface the Third
assumed that Title, upon the Grant of Ph^^as. And as that Boniface got the
Spiritual Sword put in his hand, so the Eighth of that name pretended also to
the Temporal Sword; but they owe these Powers to the Industry of those Popes,
and not to any Donation of Christ's. The Popes when they are Consecrated promise
to obey the Canons of the Eight first General Councils, which if they observe,
they will receive no Appeals, nor pretend to any higher Jurisdiction than these
give to them, and the other Patriarchs equally.

As for the Decrees of Latter Councils, they are of less Authority. For those
Councils consisted of Monks and Friars in great part, whose exemptions obtained
from Rome obliged them to support the Authority of that Court; and those who
sat in them knew little of the Scriptures, Fathers, or the Tradition of the
Church, being only conversant in the Disputes and Learning of the Schools. And
for the Florentine Council, the Eastern Churches, who sent the Greek Bishops
that sat there, never received their Determination, neither then, nor at any
time since.

Many places were also brought out of the Fathers to show, that they did not
look on the Bishops of Rome as superior to other Bishops; and that they
understood not those places of Scripture, which were afterward brought for the
Popes Supremacy, in that sense; so that if Tradition be the best Expounder of
Scripture, those latter glosses must give place to the more ancient. But that
passage of St. Jerome, in which he equals the Bishops of Eugubium and
Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome, was much made use of, since he was a
Presbyter of Rome, and so likely to understand the Dignity of his own Church
best. There were many things brought from the Contests that other Sees had with
Rome, to show, that all the Privileges of that and other Sees, were only
founded on the practice and Canons of the Church, but not upon any Divine
Warrant. Constantinople pretended to equal privileges. Ravenna, Milan, and
Aquileia, pretended to a Patriarchal Dignity and Exemption. Some Archbishops
of Canterbury contended, that Popes could do nothing against the Laws of the
Church; so Laurence and Dunstan. Robert Grostest Bishop of Lincoln, asserted
the same, and many Popes confessed it. And to this day no Constitution of the
Popes is binding in any Church, except it be received by it; and in the daily
practice of the Canon Law, the customs of Churches are pleaded against Papal
Constitutions; which shows their Authority cannot be from God, otherwise all
must submit to their Laws. And from the latter Contests up and down Europe,
about giving Investitures, receiving Appeals, admitting of Legates, and Papal
Constitutions, it was apparent, that the Papal Authority was a Tyranny, which
had been managed by cruel and fraudulent Arts, but was never otherwise received
in the Church, than as a Conquest to which they were constrained to yield. And
this was more fully made out in England, from what passed in William the
Conqueror, and Henry the 2d's time, and by the Statutes of Provisors in many
Kings Reigns, which were still renewed, till within an hundred years of the
present time.

Upon these grounds they Concluded, that the Popes Power in England had no
Foundation, neither in the Law of God, nor in the Laws of the Church or of the
Land.

The Arguments for the Kings Supremacy.
As for the Kings Power over Spiritual persons, and in Spiritual causes, they
proved it from the Scriptures. In the old Testament they found the Kings of
Israel intermedled in all matters Ecclesiastical. Samuel, though he had been
Judge, yet acknowledged Saul's Authority: From the old Testament.
So also did Abimelech the High Priest, and appeared before him when cited to
answer upon an Accusation. And Samuel (1 Samuel 15.18.) says, he was made the
head of all the Tribes. Aaron, in that, was an Example to all the following
Highpriests who submitted to Moses. David made many Laws about sacred things,
such as, the Order of the Courses of the Priests and their Worship; and when he
was dying, he declared to Solomon how far his Authority extended. He told him,
1 Chronicles. 28.21. That the Courses of the Priests and all the people were to be
wholly at his commandment: pursuant to which Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 8.14, 15. did
appoint them their charges in the service of God, and both the Priests and
Levites departed not from his commandment in any matter: and though he had
turned out Abiathar from the High Priesthood, yet they made no opposition.
Iehosophat, Hezekiah and Josias made likewise Laws about Eccledsiastical
Matters.

In the New Testament, Christ himself was obedient, 1533.
he paid Taxes, he declared that he pretended to no earthly Kingdom, he
charged the people to render to Caesar the things that were Caesar's, And the New
and his Disciples not to affect temporal dominion, as the Lords of the Nations
did. And though the Magistrates were then Heathens, yet the Apostles wrote to
the Churches to obey Magistrates, to submit to them, to pay Taxes, they call
the King Supreme and say he is Gods Minister to encourage them that do well,
and to punish the evil doors, which is said of all persons without exception,
and every Soul is charged to be subject to the Higher Power.

Many passages were cited out of the Writings of the Fathers, to show, that
they thought Churchmen, were included in these places as well as other
persons, so that the Tradition of the Church was for the Kings Supremacy: and
by one place of Scripture the King is called Supreme, by another he is called
Head, and by a third every Soul must be subject to him, which laid together,
make up this conclusion, That the King is the Supreme Head over all persons. In
the primitive Church, the Bishops in their Councils made rules for ordering
their Dioceses, which they only called Canons or Rules, nor had they any
compulsive Authority, but what was derived from the Civil Sanctions.

After the Emperors were Christians, they made many Laws about sacred things,
as may be seen in the Codes; And the Practices of the primitive Church.
and when Justinian digested the Roman Law, he added many Novel Constitutions
about Ecclesiastical persons and causes. The Emperors called general Councils,
presided in them, and confirmed them. And many Letters were cited of Popes to
Emperors, to call Councils, and of the Councils to them to Confirm their
Decrees. The Election of the Popes themselves, was sometimes made by the
Emperors, and sometimes confirmed by them. Pope Hadrian in a Synod decreed,
that the Emperor should choose the Pope: And it was a late and unheard of
thing, before the days of Gregory the 7th, for Popes to pretend to depose
Princes, and give away their Dominions. This they compared to the pride of
Antichrist and Lucifer.

They also argued from Reason, And from Reason.
that there must be but one Supreme; and that the King being Supreme over all
his Subjects, Clergymen must be included, for they are still Subjects. Nor can
their being in Orders, change that former relation, founded upon the Law of
Nature and Nations, no more than Wives or Servants, by becoming Christians,
were not, according to the Doctrine of the Apostles, discharged from the Duties
of their former Relations.

For the great Objection from those Offices that are peculiar to their
Functions, It was answered, that these notwithstanding the King might well be
Supreme Head; for in the Natural body, there were many vital motions that
proceeded not from the Head, but from the Heart, and the other inward parts and
vessels; and yet the Head was still the chief seat and root of Life: So though
there be peculiar functions appropriated to Churchmen, yet the King is still
Head, having Authority over them, and a Power to direct and coerce them in
these. And from the Laws of England.


From that, they proceeded to show, that in England, the Kings have always
assumed a Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters. 1534.
They began with the most Ancient Writing that relates to the Christian
Religion in England then extant, Pope Elentherius Letter to King Lucius, in
which he is twice called by him Gods Vicar in his Kingdom, and he writ in it,
that it belonged to his Office, to bring his Subjects to the Holy Church, and
to maintain, protect, and govern them in it. Many Laws were cited, which
Canutus, Ethelred, Edgar, Edmond, Athelstan and Ina had Enacted concerning
Churchmen, many more Laws since the Conquest were also made, both against
appeals to Rome, and Bishops going out of the Kingdom without the Kings leave.

The whole business of the Articles of Clarendon, and the Contests that
followed between King Henry the 2d, and Thomas Becket were also opened. And
though a Bishops Pastoral care be of Divine Institution, yet as the Kings of
England had divided Bishoprics as they pleased, so they also converted
Benefices from the Institution of the Founders, and gave them to Cloisters and
Monasteries as King Edgar did; all which was done by the Consent of their
Clergy and Nobility, without dependence on Rome; They had also granted these
Houses Exemption from Episcopal Jurisdiction, so Ina exempted Glastenbury, and
Offa, St. Albans, from their Bishops visitation: and this continued even till
the days of William the Conqueror, for he to perpetuate the Memory of the
Victory he obtained over Harald, and to endear himself to the Clergy, founded
an Abbey in the Field where the Battle was fought, and called it Battel-Abbey,
and in the Charter he granted them, these words are to be found. It shall be
also free and quiet for ever, from all subjection to Bishops, or the Dominion
of any other persons, as Christ's Church in Canterbury is. Many other things
were brought out of King Alfreds Laws, and a speech of King Edgars, with
several Letters written to the Popes from the Kings, the Parliaments, and the
Clergy of England, to show, that their Kings did always make Laws about Sacred
matters, and that their Power reached to that, and to the persons of
Churchmen, as well as to their other Subjects.

The Qualification of that Supremacy.
But at the same time that they pleaded so much for the Kings Supremacy, and
Power of making Laws for restraining and Coercing his Subjects, it appeared
that they were far from vesting him with such an absolute Power, as the Popes
had pretended to, for they thus defined the extent of the Kings Power. To them
specially and principally, Necessary Erudition upon the Sacrament of Orders.
it pertains to defend the Faith of Christ and his Religion, to conserve and
maintain the true Doctrine of Christ, and all such as be true Preachers and
setters forth thereof; and to abolish Abuses, Heresies, and Idolatries, and to
punish with corporal pains such as of malice be the occasion of the same. And
finally to oversee and cause that the said Bishops and Priests do execute their
pastoral office truly and faithfully, and specially in these points, which by
Christ and his Apostles was given and Committed to them; and in case they shall
be negligent in any part thereof, or would not diligently execute the same, to
cause them to redouble and supply their lack: and if they obstinately withstand
their Princes kind monition, and will not amend their faults, then and in such
case to put others in their rooms and places. And God has also commanded the
said Bishops and Priests to obey with all humbleness and Reverence, both Kings,
and Princes, and Governors, and all their Laws; not being contrary to the Laws
of God, whatsoever they be: and that not only propter Iram but also propter
Conscientiam, that is to say, not only for fear of punishment, but also for
Discharge of Conscience.

Thus it appears, that they both limited obedience to the Kings Laws, with the
due Caution of their not being contrary to the Law of God, and acknowledged the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the discharge of the Pastoral Office, committed
to the Pastors of the Church by Christ and his Apostles; and that the Supremacy
then pretended to, was no such Extravagant Power as some imagine.

Upon the whole matter, it was Concluded, that the Popes Power in England had
no good Foundation, The necessity of extirpating the Popes Power.
and had been managed with as much Tyranny, as it had begun with Usurpation,
the Exactions of their Courts were everywhere heavy, but in no place so
intolerable as in England: and though many complaints were made of them in
these last 300 years, yet they got no ease, and all the Laws about Provisors
were still defeated and made ineffectual; Therefore they saw it was impossible
to moderate their proceedings; so that there was no other Remedy, but to
extirpate their pretended Authority, and thenceforth to acknowledge the Pope
only Bishop of Rome, with the jurisdiction about it, defined by the Ancient
Canons: and for the King to reassume his own Authority, and the Prerogatives
of his Crown, from which the Kings of England had never formally departed,
though they had for this last Hundred years connived at an Invasion and
Usurpation upon them, which was no longer to be endured.

These were the Grounds of casting off the Pope's Power, that had been for two
or three years studied, Pains taken to satisfy Fisher about it.
and enquired into by all the Learned men in England; and had been debated both
in Convocation and Parliament, and except Fisher Bishop of Rochester, I do not
find that any Bishop appeared for the Popes Power; and for the Abbots and
Priors, as they were generally very ignorant, so what the Cardinal had done in
suppressing some Monasteries, and what they now heard, that the Court had an
eye on their Lands, made them to be as complyant as could be. But Fisher was a
man of great reputation, and very ancient, so that much pains was taken to
satisfy him. A week before the Parliament sat down, the Archbishop of
Canterbury proposed to him, that he and any Five Doctors, such as he should
choose, and the Bishop of London, and Five Doctors with him might confer about
it, and examine the Authorities of both sides, that so there might be an
Agreement among them, by which the scandal might be removed, which otherwise
would be taken from their Janglings and Contests among themselves. Fisher
accepted of this, and Stokesley wrote to him on the 8th of January, that he was
ready whenever the other pleased, and desired him to name time and place, The
Origi^nal is in the Cott. lib. (...) C. 10.
and if they could not agree the matter among themselves, he moved to refer it
to two Learned men whom they should choose, in whose determination they would
both acquiesce. How far this overture went, I cannot discover, and perhaps
Fishers sickness hindered the progress of it. But now on the 15th of January,
the Parliament sat down: by the Journals I find no other Bishops present but
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Lincoln, Bath
and Wells, Landaffe and Carlisle. There were also twelve Abbots present, but
upon what pretenses the rest excused their attendance, I do not know; perhaps
some made a difference between submitting to what was done, and being active
and concurring to make the change. During the Session a Bishop preached every
Sunday at Pauls-Cross, and declared to the people, That the Pope had no
Authority at all in England. In the two former Sessions the Bishops had
preached, that the general Council was above the Pope, but now they struck a
note higher. This was done to let the people see, what justice and reason was
in the Acts that were then passing, to which I now turn, and shall next give an
account of this great Session of Parliament, which I shall put rather in the
natural Method according to the matter of the Acts, than in the order of time
as they passed.

On the 9th of March a Bill came up from the Commons for dischargeing the
Subjects of all dependence on the Court of Rome, it was read the first time in
the House of Lords the 13th of March, Journal, Procer.
and on the 14th was read the second time, and Committed. The Committee
reported it on the 19th, by which it appears there was no stiff nor long
opposition, and he that was likest to make it, was both obnoxious and absent,
as will afterward appear. On the 19th it was read the third time, and on the
20th the fourth time, and then passed without any protestation. Some Proviso's
were added to it by the Lords, to which the Commons agreed, and so it was made
ready for the Royal assent.

In the Preamble the intolerable exactions for Peter Pence, Provisions,
Pensions, and Bulls of all sorts are complained of, which were contrary to all
Laws, The Act for taking away the Popes Power.
and grounded only on the Popes Power of Dispensing, which was Usurped. But the
King and the Lords and Commons within his own Realm had only power to consider,
how any of the Laws were to be Dispensed with or Abrogated; and since the King
was acknowledged the Supreme Head of the Church of England by the Prelates and
Clergy, It is the Act 21 in the Statute Book, 27 in the Record, and 8 in the
Journal.
in their Convocations, Therefore it was Enacted that all Payments made to the
Apostolic Chamber, and all Provisions, Bulls, or Dispensations should from
thenceforth cease. But that all Dispensations or Licenses for things that were
not contrary to the Law of God, but only to the Law of the Land, should be
granted within the Kingdom, by, and under the Seals of the two Archbishops in
their several Provinces; who should not presume to grant any contrary to the
Laws of Almighty God, and should only grant such Licenses as had been formerly
in use to be granted, but give no License for any new thing till it were first
examined by the King and his Council whether such things might be dispensed
with; and that all Dispensations which were formerly taxed at, or above 4 l.
should be also confirmed under the Great-Seal. Then many clauses follow about
the Rates of Licenses and the ways of procuring them. It was also declared,
that they did not hereby intend to vary from Christ's Church about the Articles
of the Catholic Faith of Christendom, or in any other things declared by the
Scriptures, and the word of God necessary for their Salvation; confirming
withal the exemptions of Monasteries formerly granted by the Bishop of Rome,
exempting them still from the Archbishops Visitations; declaring that such
Abbeys whose Elections were formerly confirmed by the Pope, shall be now
confirmed by the King; who likewise shall give Commission under his Great-Seal
for visiting them, providing also that Licenses and other Writs obtained from
Rome before the 12 of March in that year should be valid and in force, except
they were contrary to the Laws of the Realm; giving also to the King and his
Council power to order and reform all Indulgences and Privileges (or the
abuses of them) which had been granted by the Sea of Rome. The offenders
against this Act were to be punished according to the Statutes of Provisors and
Praemunire.

This Act, as it gave great ease to the Subject, The judgments past on that Act.
so it cut off that base trade of Indulgences about Divine Laws, which had been
so gainful to the Church of Rome, but was of late fatal to it. All in the
Religious Houses saw their Privileges now struck at, since they were to be
reformed as the King saw cause, which put them in no small confusion. Those
that favored the Reformation rejoiced at this Act, not only because the Popes
Power was rooted out, but because the Faith that was to be adhered to, was to
be taken from those things, which the Scriptures declared necessary to
Salvation; so that all their fears were now much qualified, since the Scripture
was to be the standard of the Catholic Faith. On the same day that this Bill
passed in the House of Lords, another Bill was read for confirming the
Succession to the Crown in the Issue of the Kings present Marriage with Queen
Anne. It was read the second time on the 21 of March, and Committed. It was
reported on the 23th, and read the third time and passed, and sent down to the
Commons, who sent it back again to them on the 26th, so speedily did this Bill
go through both Houses without any opposition.

The Preamble of it was, Act about the Succession to the Crown, 22 in the
Statute Books, 34 in the Re^ord, 26 in the Journal.
The distractions that had been in England about the Succession to the Crown,
which had occasioned the effusion of much Blood, with many other mischiefs, all
which flowed from the want of a clear Decision of the true Title, from which
the Popes had Usurped a Power of investing such as pleased them in other
Princes Kingdoms, and Princes had often maintained such Donations for their
other ends; therefore to avoid the like inconveniences, the Kings former
Marriage with the Princess Katharine, is judged contrary to the Laws of God,
and void and of no effect, and the Sentence passed by the Archbishop of
Canterbury annulling it, is confirmed, and the Lady Katharine is thenceforth to
be reputed only Princess Dowager and not Queen, and the Marriage with Queen
Ann^ is established and confirmed: and Marriages within the degrees Prohibited
by Moses (which are enumerated in the Statute) are declared to be unlawful,
according to the judgment of the Convocations of this Realm, and of the most
famous Universities and Learned men abroad, any Dispensations to the contrary
notwithstanding, which are also declared null, since contrary to the Laws of
God; and all that were Married within these degrees are appointed to be
Divorced, and the Children begotten in such Marriages were declared
Illegitimate: And all the Issue that should be between the King and the present
Queen is declared Lawful, and the Crown was to descend on his Issue Male by
her, or any other Wife; or in default of Issue Male, to the Issue Female by the
Queen; and in default of any such, to the right Heirs of the Kings Highness for
ever: and any that after the 1st of May should maliciously divulge any thing to
the slander of the Kings Marriage, or of the Issue begotten in it, were to be
adjudged for misprision of Treason, and to suffer Imprisonment at the Kings
will, and forfeit all their Goods and Chattels to him: And if the Queen
outlived the King, she is declared Regent till the Issue by her were of Age,
if a Son 18, and if a Daughter 16 years of Age; and all the Kings Subjects were
to Swear that they would maintain the Contents of this Act, and whoever being
required, did refuse it, was to be judged guilty of misprision of Treason, and
punished accordingly. The Oath it seems was likewise agreed on in the House of
Lords, for the Form of it is set down in their Journal as follows.

The Oath about the Succes^ion.
Ye shall Swear to bear Faith, Truth, and Obedience alonely to the Kings
Majesty, and to his Heirs of his body of his most dear and entirely beloved
lawful Wife Queen Anne, begotten and to be begotten. And further, to the Heirs
of our said Sovereign Lord according to the limitation in the Statute made for
surety of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm mentioned and contained,
and not to any other within this Realm, nor Foreign Authority or Potentate.
And in case any Oath be made, or has been made, by you to any Person or
Persons, that then ye to repute the same as vain and annihilate. And that to
your cunning, wit, and uttermost of your Power, without guile, fraud, or other
undue means, ye shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said Act of
Succession and all the whole Effects and Contents thereof, and all other Acts
and Statutes made in Confirmation, or for Execution of the same, or of any
thing therein contained. And this ye shall do against all manner of Persons of
what Estate, Dignity, Degree, or condition soever they be; and in no wise to do
or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done or attempted, directly or
indirectly, any thing or things, privily or appartly, to the let, hindrance,
damage, or derogation thereof, or of any part of the same, by any manner of
means, or for any manner of pretense. So help you God, and all Saints, and the
holy Evangelists.

And thus was the Kings Marriage confirmed. But when the Commons returned this
Bill to the Lords, they sent them another with it, concerning the proceedings
against Heretics. There had been complaints made formerly, as was told before,
of the severe and intolerable proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts against
Heretics: And on the 4th of F^bruary, the Commons sent up a complaint made by
one Thomas Philips against the Bishop of London, for using him cruelly in
Prison, upon the suspicion of Heresy; but the Lords doing nothing in it, on
the 1st of March the House of Commons sent some of their number to the Bishop,
requiring him to make answer to the complaints exhibited against him, Journal
Procer.
who acquainted the House of Lords with it the next day: but as they had
formerly laid aside the complaint as not worthy of their time, so they all with
one consent answered, That it was not fit for any of the Peers to appear or
answer at the Bar of the House of Commons. Upon this the House of Commons
finding they could do nothing in that particular case, resolved to provide an
effectual remedy for such abuses for the future: And therefore sent up a Bill
about the punishment of Heretics, which was read that day for the first time,
and the second and third time on the 27th and 28th, in which it passed.

The Act was a repeal of the Statute of the 2d. of Henry the 4th, by which
Bishops upon suspicion of Heresy might commit any to Prison, as was before
told, but in that Act there was no Declaration made, Act about punishing
Heretics, 14 in the St^tute Book, 33 in the Record, 31 in the Journal:
what was Heresy, except in the general words of what was contrary to
Scriptures, or Canonical Sanctions. This was liable to great Ambiguity, by
which men were in much danger, and not sufficiently instructed what was
Heresy. They also complained of their proceedings without Presentment or
Accusation, contrary to what was practiced in all other cases, even of Treason
it self; and many Canonical Sanctions had been established only by Popes
without any Divine Precept, therefore they repealed the Act of Henry the 4th,
but left the Statutes of Richard the 2d, and Henry the 5th still in force, with
the following Regulation: That Heretics should be proceeded against upon
Presentiments, by two Witnesses at least, and then be Committed, but brought to
answer to their Enditements in open Court; and if they were found guilty, and
would not abjure, or were relapse, to be adjudged to death; the Kings Writ De
Haeretico comburendo being first obtained. It was also declared, that none
should be troubled upon any of the Popes Canons or Laws, or for speaking or
doing against them. It was likewise provided that men Committed for Heresy
might be Bailed.

It may easily be imagined how acceptable this Act was to the whole Nation,
since it was such an effectual limitation of the Ecclesiastical Power, in one
of the uneasiest parts of it; and this Regulation of the Arbitrary proceedings
of the Spiritual Courts, was a particular blessing to all that favored
Reformation. But as the Parliament was going on with these good Laws, there
came a Submission from the Clergy then sitting in Convocation, to be passed in
Parliament. With what opposition it went through the two Houses of Convocation,
and the House of Commons, is not known; for as the Registers of the Convocation
are burnt, so it does not appear that there were any Journals kept in the House
of Commons at that time. On the 27th of March it was sent up to the Lords, and
since the Spiritual Lords had already consented to it, there was no reason to
apprehend any opposition from the Temporal Lords. The Session was now near an
end, so they made haste and read it twice that day, and the third time the next
day, and passed it. The Contents of it were: The Clergy acknowledged that all
Convocations had been and ought to be assembled by the Kings Writ; and promised
in verbo Sacerdotii, The submission made by the Clergy to the King, 19 in the
Statute Book, 25 in the Record.
that they would never make nor execute any new Canons or Constitutions,
without the Royal assent to them; and since many Canons had been received that
were found prejudicial to the Kings Prerogative, contrary to the Laws of the
Land, and heavy to the Subjects, That therefore there should be a Committee of
thirty two Persons, sixteen of the two Houses of Parliament, and as many of the
Clergy to be named by the King, who should have full power to abrogate or
confirm Canons as they found it expedient; the Kings assent being obtained.
This was confirmed by Act of Parliament, and by the same Act all appeals to
Rome were again condemned. If any party found themselves agrieved in the
Archbishops Courts, an appeal might be made to the King in the Court of
Chancery; and the Lord-Chancellor was to grant a Commission under the
Great-Seal for some Delegates, in whose determination all must acquiesce. All
exempted Abbots were also to appeal to the King; and it concluded with a
Proviso, that till such Correction of the Canons was made, all those which were
then received should still remain in force, except such as were contrary to the
Laws and Customs of the Realms, or were to the damage or hurt of the Kings
Prerogative.

This Proviso seemed to have a fair color, that there might still be some
Canons in force to govern the Church by; but since there was no day prefixed to
the Determination of the Commission, this Proviso made that the Act never took
effect; for now it lay in the Prerogative, and in the Judges breast, to declare
what Canons were contrary to the Laws, or the Rights of the Crown: and it was
judged more for the Kings Greatness to keep the matter undetermined, than to
make such a Collection of Ecclesiastical Laws as should be fixed and
unmovable. The last of the public Acts of this Session that related to the
Church, was about the Election and Consecration of Bishops. On the 4th of
February the Commons sent up a Bill to the Lords about the Consecration of
Bishops; Journal Proc^r.
it lay on the Table till the 27th of February, and was then cast out, and a
new one drawn. On what reason it was cast out, is not mentioned, and the
Journal does not so much as say that it was once read. The new Bill had its
second reading the 3d of March, and on the 5th it was ordered to be Engrossed;
and on the 9th it was read the third time, and agreed to, and sent down to the
Commons, who returned it to the Lords on the 16th of March. The first part of
it is a confirmation of their former Act against Annates, to which they added,
that Bishops should not be any more presented to the Bishop of Rome, or sue out
any Bulls there, but that all Bishops should be presented to the Archbishop,
(...), 26 in the Record.
and Archbishops to any Archbishop in the Kings Dominions, or to any four
Bishops whom the King should name; and that when any See was vacant, the King
was to grant a License for a new Election, with a Letter missive, bearing the
name of the Person that was to be chosen: and twelve days after these were
delivered, an Election was to be returned by the Dean and Chapter, or Prior and
Convent, under their Seals. Then the Person Elected was to swear Fealty to the
King, upon which a Commission was to be issued out, for Consecrating and
Investing him with the usual Ceremonies; after which he was to do Homage to the
King, and be restored both to the Spiritualities and Temporalities of his See,
for which the King granted Commissions during the vacancy; and whosoever
refused to obey the Contents of the Act, or acted contrary to it,were declared
within the Statute of Praemunire. Collect. ^umb. 48.
There passed a private Act for depriving the Bishops of Salisbury and
Worcester, who were Cardinal Campegio and Jerome de Ghinuccii; the former
deserved greatter severities at the Kings hand, but the latter seems to have
served him faithfully, and was recommended both by the King and the French King
about a year before to a Cardinals Hat. The Preamble of the Act bears, that
persons promoted to Ecclesiastical Benefices ought to reside within the Kingdom
for preaching the Laws of Almighty God, and for keeping Hospitality; and since
these Prelates did not that, but lived at the Court of Rome, and neglected
their Diocesses, and made the Revenues of them be carried out of the Kingdoms,
contrary to the intentions of the Founders, and to the prejudice of the Realm,
3000 l. being at least carried yearly out of the Kingdom; therefore their
Diocesses were declared vacant.

But now I come to the Act of the Attainder of Elizabeth Barton and her
Accomplices, which I shall open fully, The Act about the Maid of K^nt* and her
Accomplices.
since it was the first step that was made to Rebellion, and the first occasion
of putting any to death upon this quarrel; and from it one will clearly see,
the Genius of that part of the Clergy that adhered to the Interests of the
Court of Rome. On the 21th of February the Bill was sent up to the Lords, 12 in
Statute Book, 31 in the Record, 7 in the Journ^^.
and read the first time; on the 26th it was read the second time, and
committed; then the Witnesses and other Evidences were brought before them, but
chiefly she with all her Accomplices, who confessed the Crimes charged on her. It
was reported and read the 6th of March the third time, and then the Lords
addressed to the King to know his pleasure, whether Sir Thomas More, and others
mentioned in the Act as Accomplices, or at least Concealers, might not be heard
to speak for themselves in the Star Chamber: As for the Bishop of Rochester he
was sick, but he had written to the House all that he had to say for his own
excuse. What presumptions lay against Sir Thomas More, I have not been able to
find out, only that he wrote a Letter to the Nun, at which the King took great
exceptions; yet it appears he had a mean opinion of her, See his Works, pa^*
1435.
for in discourse with his beloved Daughter Mistress Roper, he called her
commonly the silly Nun. But for justifying himself, he wrote a full account of
all the intercourse he had with the Nun and her Accomplices to Cromwell; but tho
by his other printed Letters, both to Cromwell and the King, it seems some ill
impressions remained in the Kings mind about it, he still continued to justify
not only his intentions, but his actions in that particular. One thing is not
unworthy of observation, that Rastall, who published his Works in Queen Mary's
time, printed the second Letter he wrote to Cromwell, yet did not publish that
account which he sent first to him concerning it, to which More refers himself
in all his following Letters; though it is more like a Copy of that would have
been preserved, than of those other Letters that refer to it. But perhaps it
was kept up on design; for in Queen Mary's time they had a mind to magnify
that story of the Nuns, since she was thought to have suffered on her Mothers
account: and among the other things she talked, one was that the Lady Mary
should one day Reign in England, for which Sanders has since thought fit to
make a Prophetess of her. And it is certain, More had a low opinion of her,
which appears in many places of his printed Letters; but that would have been
much plainer, if that full account he wrote of that Affair had been published;
and therefore that one of their Martyrs might not lessen the esteem of another,
it was fit to suppress it. Whether my conjectures in this be well grounded, or
not, is left to the Readers judgment. In conclusion, More's justifications
seconded with the good Offices that the Lord Chancellor Audley, and Cromwell
did him, (who as appears by his Leters stood his Friends in that matter) did so
work on the King, that his name was put out of the Bill, and so the Act was
agreed on by both Houses, and the Royal assent followed. The matter was this,
Elizabeth Barton of Kent, in the Parish of Aldington, being sick and
distempered in her brain, fell in some Trances, (it seems by the Symptoms they
were Hysterical fits) and spoke many words that made great impressions on some
about her, who thought her Inspired of God, and Richard Master, Parson of the
Parish, hoping to draw great advantages from this, went to Warham Archbishop
of Canterbury, and gave him a large account of her Speeches, who ordered him to
attend her carefully, and bring him a further report of any new Trances, she
might afterward fall in. But she had forgot all she had said in her fits, yet
the crafty Priest would not let it go so, but persuaded her, that what she had
said, was by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and that she ought to own that
it was so. Upon which he taught her to counterfeit such traunces, and to utter
such speeches as she had done before; so that after a whiles Practice, she
became very ready at it. The thing was much noised abroad, and many came to see
her, but the Priest had a mind to raise the reputation of an Image of the
Blessed Virgin, that was in a Chapel within his Parish, that so Pilgrimages
being made to it, he might draw these advantages from it, that others made from
their famed Images, but chose for his Associate one Doctor Bocking, a Canon of
Christ-Church in Canterbury: Upon which they instructed her to say in her
Counterfeited traunces, that the Blessed Virgin had appeared to her, and told
her she could never recover, till she went and visited her Image in that
Chapel. They had also taught her in her fits to make strange motions with her
body, by which she was much diffigured, and to speak many Godly words against
Sin, and the new Doctrines, which were called Heresies, as also against the
Kings suit of Divorce. It was also noised abroad, on what day she intended to
go and visit the Image of the Virgin, so that about 2000 people were gathered
together, and she being brought to the Chapel, fell into her fits and made
many strange Grimaces and alterations of her body, and spoke many words of
great piety, saying, that by the Inspiration of God, she was called to be a
Religious Woman, and that Bocking was to be her Ghostly Father. And within a
little while she seemed by the intercession of our Lady, to be perfectly
recovered of her former distempers, and she afterward professed a Religious
Life. There were also violent suspicions of her incontinency, and that Bocking
was a Carnal, as well as a Spiritual Father. She fell in many raptures, and
pretended she saw strange Visions, heard Heavenly Melody, and had the
Revelation of many things that were to come, so that great credit was given to
what she said, and people generally looked on her as a Prophetess, and among
those the late Archbishop of Canterbury was led away with the rest. A Book was
writ of her Revelations and Prophecies by one Deering another Monk, who was
taken in to the Conspiracy with many others. It was also given out that Mary
Magdalen gave her a Letter that was writ in Heaven, which was showed to many,
being all writ in Golden Letters. She pretended when the King was last at
Calais, that he being at Mass, an Angel brought away the Sacrament and gave it
to her, being then invisibly present, and that she was presently brought over
the Sea to her Monastery again. But the design of all these traunces was to
alienate the people from their duty to the King, for the Maid gave it out, that
God revealed to her, that if the King went on in the Divorce and Married
another Wife, he should not be King a Month longer, and in the reputation of
Almighty God not one howr longer, but should die a villains Death. This, she
said was revealed to her in answer to the prayers she had put up to God, to
know whether he approved of the Kings proceedings or not? Which coming to the
knowledge of the Bishop of Rochester and some others, who adhered to the Queens
interests, they had frequent meetings with the Maid, and concealed what she
spoke concerning the King, and some of them gave such credit to what she said,
that they practiced on many others to draw them from their allegiance, and
prevailed with several of the Fathers and Nuns of Sion, of the Charter House in
London and Shene, and of the Observants of Richmont, Greenwich and Canterbury,
with a great many other persons.

This appeared most signally at Greenwich, The (...) of the (...)*
where the King lived most in Summer, for one Peto being to preach in the Kings
Chapel, denounced heavy judgments upon him to his face, and told him, that
many lying prophets had deceived him, S^ow.
but he as a true Michaja^ warned him that the dogs should lick his blood as
they had done Ahabs (for that prophecy about Ahab was his Text) with many other
bitter words, and Concluded, that it was the greatest misery of Princes, to be
daily so abused by flatterers as they were. The King bore it patiently, and
expressed no signs of any commotion, but to undeceive the people, he took care
that Doctor Corren or Carwin should preach next Sunday, who justified the Kings
proceedings, and condemned Peto as a Rebel, a Slanderer, a Dog, and a Traitor.
Peto was gone to Canterbury, but another observant Friar of the same House,
Elston interrupted him: and said he was one of the lying Prophets, that sought
by Adultery to establish the Succession to the Crown, and that he would
justify all that Peto had said, and speak many other things with great
vehemence, nor could they silence him, till the King himself commanded him to
hold his peace. And yet all that was done either to him, or Peto, was, that
being called before the Privy Council, they were rebuked for their insolence,
by which it appears, that King Henry was not very easily inflamed against them,
when a crime of so high a Nature was so slightly passed over.

Nor was this all, but the Fathers that were in the Conspiracy, had
confederated to publish these Revelations in their Sermons, up and down the
Kingdom. They had also given Notice of them to the Popes Ambassadors, and had
brought the Maid to declare her Revelations to them, they had also sent an
account to Queen Katharine for encouraging her to stand out and not submit to
the Laws, of which Confederacy Thomas Abel was likewise one. The thing that was
in so many hands could not be a secret, Stow.
therefore the King who had despised it long, ordered that in November the
former year the Maid and her Accomplices, Richard Master, Doctor Bocking, Richard
Deering, Henry Gold, a Parson in London, Hugh Rich an observant Friar, Richard
Risby, Thomas Gold and Edward Twaites Gentlemen, and Thomas Laurence should be
brought into the Star Chamber, where there was a great appearance of many
Lords, they were examined upon the premises, and did all without any rack or
torture confess the whole Conspiracy, and were adjudged to stand in Paul's all
the Sermon time; and after Sermon, the Kings Officers were to give every one of
them his Bill of Confession to be openly read before the people, which was done
next Sunday, the Bishop of Bangor preaching, they being all set in a Scaffold
before him. This public manner was thought upon good grounds, to be the best
way to satisfy the people of the Imposture of the whole matter, and it did
very much convince them, that the cause must needs be bad, where such methods
were used to support it. From thence they were carried to the Tower, where they
lay till the Session of Parliament, but when they lay there, some of their
Accomplices sent messages to the Nun, to encourage her to deny all that she had
said; and it is very probable, that the reports that went abroad of her being
forced or cheated into a Confession, made the King think it necessary to
proceed more severely against her. The thing being considered in Parliament, it
was judged a Conspiracy against the Kings Life and Crown. So the Nun and
Master, Bocking, Deering, Rich, Risby and Henry Gold were Attainted of high
Treason. And the Bishop of Rochester, Thomas Gold, Thomas Laurence, Edward
Twaites, John Adeson, and Thomas Abell, were judged guilty of misprision of
Treason, and to forfeit their goods and Chattels to the King, and to be
imprisoned during his pleasure, and all the Books that were written of her
Revelations, were ordered to be sent in, to some of the chief Officers of
State, under the pains of Fine and Imprisonment. It had been also found, that
the Letter which she pretended to have got from Mary Magdalen e, was written by
one Hankherst of Canterbury, and that the door of the Dormitorie, which was
given out to be made open by miracle, that she might go into the Chapel for
Converse with God, was opened by some of her Accomplices, for beastly and carnal
ends. But in the Conclusion of the Act, all others who had been corrupted in
their Allegiance by these impostures, except the persons before named, were at
the earnest intercession of Queen Anne, pardoned.

The two Houses of Parliament (having ended their business) were prorogued on
the 29th of March, to the 3d of November, and before they broke up, all the
Members of both Houses, that they might give a good example to the Kings other
Subjects, swore the Oath of Succession, as appears from the Act made about it
in the next Session of Parliament. The Execution of these persons was delayed
for some time, it is like, till the King had a return from Rome, of the
Messenger he had sent thither with his Submission.

Soon after that, on the 20 of April, the Nun and Bocking, Master, Deering,
Risby and Gold (Rich is not named being perhaps either dead or pardoned) were
brought to Tiburn. The Nun spoke these words. Hither I am come to die, and I
have not been only the cause of mine own death, The Nuns speech at her death.
which most justly I have deserved, but also I am the cause of the death of all
those persons, which at this time here suffer. And yet to say the truth, I am
not so much to be blamed, considering that it was well known to these learned
men, Hall.
that I was a poor wench without Learning, and therefore they might easily have
perceived, that the things that were done by me, could not proceed in no such
sort; but their capacities and Learning could right well judge, from whence
they proceeded, and that they were altogether feigned; but because the thing
which I feigned was profitable to them, therefore they much praised me, and
bore me in hand, that it was the Holy Ghost and not I, that did them; and then
I being pussed up with their praises, fell into a certain pride and foolish
fantasy with my self, and thought I might feign what I would, which thing has
brought me to this case: and for the which now, I cry God and the Kings
Highness most heartily Mercy, and desire you, all good people, to pray to God
to have mercy on me, and on all them that here suffer with me,

On all this I have dwelt the longer, both because these are all called Martyrs
by Sanders, and that this did first provoke the King against the Regular
Clergy, and drew after it all the severities that were done in the rest of his
Reign. The foulness and the wicked designs of this Imposture, did much alienate
people from the Interest of Rome, and made the other Acts both pass more
easily, and be better received by the people. It was also generally believed,
that what was now discovered was no new practice, but that many of the Visions
and Miracles, by which Religious Orders had raised their Credit so high, were
of the same Nature: and it made way for the destroying of all the Monasteries
in England, though all the severity which at this time followed on it, was that
the Observant Friars of Richmont, Stow*
Greenwich, Canterbury, Newark, and Newcastle were removed out of their Houses,
and put with the other Gray-Friers, and Augustin-Friers were put in their
Houses.

But because of the great name of Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and since this
was the first step to his ruin, it is necessary to give a fuller account of his
carriage in this matter. When the cheat was first discovered, Cromwell then
Secretary of State, Fisher gently dealt with.
sent the Bishops Brother to him, with a sharp reproof for his carriage in that
business; but withal advised him to write to the King, and acknowledge his
offense, and desire his pardon, which he knew the King, considering his Age and
sickness, would grant. But he wrote back, excusing himself, that all he did,
was only to try, whether her Revelations were true? He confessed, But is
obstinate and intractable.
he conceived a great opinion of her Holiness, both from common Fame, and her
entering into Religion; from the report of her Ghostly Father, whom he esteemed
Learned and Religious, and of many other Learned and Virtuous Priests; from the
good opinion the late Archbishop of Canterbury had of her, and from what is in
the Prophet Amos, That God will do nothing without revealing it to his
Servants. That upon these grounds, he was induced to have a good opinion of
her; and that to try the truth about her, he had sometimes spoken with her, and
sent his Chaplains to her, but never discovered any falsehood in her. And for
his concealing what she had told him about the King, which was laid to his
charge, he thought it needless for him to speak of it to the King, since she
had said to him, that she had told it to the King her self: She had named no
person who should kill the King, which by being known, might have been
prevented. And as in Spiritual things, every Churchman was not bound to
denounce judgments against those that could not bear it; so in temporal things,
the case might be the same; and the King had on other occasions spoken so
sharply to him, that he had reason to think, the King would have been offended
with him for speaking of it, and would have suspected that he had a hand in it;
therefore he desired for the passion of Christ to be no more troubled about
that matter, otherwise he would speak his Conscience freely. To all which,
Cromwell wrote a long Letter, which the Reader will find in the Collection,
Collect. Numb. 49. Cott. Lib. Cleopat^e. E. 4.
copied from the rude draught of it, written with his own hand. In which he
charges the Matter upon him heavily, and shows him, that he had not proceeded,
as a grave Prelate ought to have done; for he had taken all that he had heard
of her upon trust, and had examined nothing; that if every person that pretends
to Revelations were believed on their own words, all Government would be
thereby destroyed. He had no reason to conclude from the Prophecy of Amos,
that every thing that is to fall out, must be revealed to some Prophet, since
many notable things had fallen out, of which there was no Revelation made
before hand. But he told him the true reason that made him give credit to her,
was, the matter of her Prophecies: to which he was so addicted, as he was to
every other thing in which he once entered, that nothing could come amiss that
served to that end. And he appealed to his Conscience, whether if she had
prophesied for the King, he would have given such easy credit to her, and not
have examined the matter further. Then he shows how guilty he was, in not
revealing what concerned the Kings Life, and how frivolous all his excuses
were. And after all, tells him, that though his excusing the matter had
provoked the King, and that if it came to a Trial, he would certainly be found
guilty; yet again he advises him to beg the Kings pardon for his Negligence,
and offense in that matter; and undertakes that the King would receive him into
his favor, and that all matters of displeasure passed before that time, should
be forgiven and forgotten. This shows that though Fisher had in the progress of
the Kings cause, given him great offense, yet he was ready to pass it all over,
and not to take the advantage, which he now had against him. But Fisher was
still obstinate and made no submission, and so was included within the Act for
misprision of Treason; and yet I do not find, that the King proceeded against
him upon this Act, till by new provocations he drew a heavier storm of
indignation upon himself.

When the Session of Parliament was at an end, Commissioners were sent
everywhere, The Oath for the Succession generally sworn.

Orig. Cott. Lib. Otho. C. ^^.


to offer the Oath of the Succession to the Crown, to all, according to the Act
of Parliament, which was universally taken by all sorts of persons. Gardener
wrote from Winchester the 6th of May to Cromwell, that in the presence of the
Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Audley, and many other Gentlemen, all Abbots,
Priors, Wardens, with the Curates of all Parishes and Chapels within the
Shire, had appeared and taken the Oath very obediently; and had given in a list
of all the Religious persons in their Houses of 14 years of Age and above, for
taking whose Oaths some Commissioners were appointed. The forms in which they
took the Oath are not known, and it is no wonder, for though they were
enrolled, yet in Queen Mary's time there was a Commission given to Bonner and
others, to examine the Records and raze out of them all things, that were done
either in contempt of the Sea of Rome, or to the defamation of Religious
Houses, pursuant to which, there are many things taken out of the Rolls, which
I shall sometimes have occasion afterward to take notice of; yet some Writings
have escaped their diligence, so there remains but two of the Subscriptions of
Religious Orders, both bearing date the 4th of May 1534. One is by the Prior
and Convent of Langley Regis, that were Dominicans, the Franciscans of
Ailesbury, the Dominicans of Dunstable, the Franciscans of Bedford, the
Carmelites of Hecking and the Franciscans de Mare. The other is by the Prioress
and Convent of the Dominican Nuns at Deptford.

In these, besides the renewing their allegiance to the King, Collect. Numb.
50. Rot. Claus.
they swear the Lawfulness of his Marriage with Queen Anne, and that they shall
be true to the Issue begotten in it, that they shall always acknowledge the
King, Head of the Church of England: and that the Bishop of Rome has no more
Power, than any other Bishop has in his own Diocese, and that they should
submit to all the Kings Laws, notwithstanding the Popes censures to the
contrary. That in their Sermons they should not pervert the Scriptures, Those
last claus^^ (...) not in the other Writing.
but preach Christ and his Gospel sincerely according to the Scriptures, and
the Tradition of Orthodox and Catholic Doctors, and in their Prayers that they
should pray first for the King, as Supreme Head of the Church of England, then
for the Queen and her issue, and then for the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
other ranks of the Clergy. To this these Six Priors set their hands with the
Seals of their Convents, and in their Subscriptions declared, that they did it
freely and uncompelled, and in the name of all the Brethren in the Convent.

But Sir. Thomas More and the Bishop of Rochester, More and Fisher refuse the
Oath.
refused to take the Oath as it was conceived: Whose Fall being so remarkable,
I shall show the steps of it. There was a meeting of the Privy Council at
Lambeth, to which many were cited to appear, and take the Oath. See his works*
p. 1428.
Sr. Thomas More was first called, and the Oath was tendered to him under the
great Seal, then he called for the Act of Succession, to which it related,
which was also showed him: having considered of them, he said he would neither
blame these that made the Act, nor those that Swore the Oath, but for his part,
though he was willing to Swear to the Succession, if he might be suffered to
draw an Oath concerning it, yet for the Oath that was offered him, his
Conscience so moved him, that he could not without hazarding his Soul take it.
Upon this, the Lord Chancellor told him, that he was the first who had refused
to Swear it, and that the King would be highly offended with him for denying
it, and so he was desired to withdraw and consider better of it. Several others
were called upon, and did all take the Oath, except the Bishop of Rochester,
who answered upon the matter as More had done. When the Lords had dispatched
all the rest, More was again brought before them: they showed him how many had
taken it, he answered, he judged no man for doing it, only he could not do it
himself. Then they asked the reasons why he refused it? He answered, he feared
it might provoke the King more against him, if he should offer reasons which
would be called a disputing against Law: but when he was further pressed to
give his reasons, he said if the King would command him to do it, he would put
them in Writing.

The Archbishop of Canterbury urged him with this Argument, that since he said
he blamed no other person for taking it, it seemed he was not persuaded it was
a Sin, but was doubtful in the matter: but he did certainly know, he ought to
obey the King, and the Law, so there was a certainty on the one hand, and only
a doubt on the other; therefore he was obliged to do that about which he was
certain, notwithstanding these his doubtings. This did shake him a little,
especially (as himself writes) coming out of so Noble a Prelates mouth: but he
answered, that, though he had examined the matter very carefully, yet his
Conscience leaned positively to the other side; and he offered to purge himself
by his Oath, that it was purely out of a Principle of Conscience, and out of no
light Fantasy or Obstinacy that he thus refused it. The Abbot of Westminster
pressed him, that however the matter appeared to him, he might see his
Conscience was Erroneous, since the great Council of the Realm was of another
mind, and therefore he ought to change his Conscience. (A Reasoning very fit
for so rich an Abbot, which discovers of what temper his Conscience was) But to
this More answered, that if he were alone against the whole Parliament, he had
reason to suspect his own understanding; but he thought he had the whole
Council of Christendom on his side, as well as the great Council of England
was against him. Secretary Cromwell, who (as More writes) tenderly favored
him, seeing his ruin was now inevitable, was much affected at it; and protested
with an Oath, he had rather his own only Son had lost his head, than that he
should have refused the Oath. Thus both he and the Bishop of Rochester refused
it, but both offered to Swear another Oath for the Succession of the Crown to
the issue of the Kings present Marriage, because that was in the Power of the
Parliament to determine it. Cranmer, who was a moderate and wise man, and
foresaw well the ill effects that would follow on contending so much, with
persons so highly esteemed over the World, and of such a temper, that severity
would bend them to nothing, did by an earnest Letter to Cromwell dated the 27th
of April move, Weavers Monuments, page 504 and 506.
that what they offered might be accepted; for if they once Swore to the
Succession, it would quiet the Kingdom, for they acknowledging it, all other
persons would acquiesce and submit to their Judgments. But this sage advice was
not accepted.

And are proceeded against.
The King was much irritated against them, and resolved to proceed with them
according to Law, and therefore they were both indicted upon the Statute, and
Committed Prisoners to the Tower. And it being apprehended, that if they had
Books and Paper given them, they would write against the Kings Marriage or his
Supremacy, these were denied them. The Old Bishop was hardly used, his
Bishopric was seized on, and all his goods taken from him, only some old rags
were left to cover him; and he was neither supplied well in diet nor other
necessaries, of which he made sad complaints to Cromwell. But the remander of
this Tragical business, which left one of the greatest blots on this Kings
proceedings, falling within the limits of the next Book, I haste on to the
Conclusion of this.

The Separation from Rome was made in the former Session of Parliament, but the
Kings Supremacy was not yet fully settled. This was reserved for the next
Session that sat in November from the 3d of that month, to the 18th of
December, Another Session of Parliament.
about which we can have no light from the Journals, they being lost. The first
Act Confirmed what had been already acknowledged by the Clergy, The Kings
Supremacy declared.
that the King was the Supreme Head in Earth, of the Church of England, which
was to be annexed to his other Titles: it was also enacted that the King and
his heirs and Successors should have Power to visit and reform all Heresies,
Errors, and other Abuses, which in the Spiritual jurisdiction, ought to be
reformed.

By the Second Act they Confirmed the Oath about the Succession, The Oath about
the Succession con^i^med.
concerning which some doubts had been made, because there was no Oath
specified in the former Act: though both Houses had taken it: it was now
Enacted, that all the Subjects were obliged to take it when offered to them,
under the pains contained in the Act passed in the former Session. By the Third
Act, the first Fruits and Tenths of all Ecclesiastical Benefices were given to
the King, The first Fruits of Benefices given to the King.
as the Supreme Head of the Church. The Clergy were easily prevailed on, to
consent to the putting down of the Annates, paid to the Court of Rome, for all
men readily concur to take off any Imposition; but at that time it had perhaps
abated much of their heartiness, if they had imagined that these duties should
have been still paid, therefore that was kept up till they had done all that
was to be done against Rome. And now as the Commons and the Secular Lords would
no doubt easily agree to lay a tax on the Clergy, so the others having no
foreign support, were not in a condition to wrestle against it.

In the Thirteenth Act, Sundry things are declared Treason.
among other things that were made Treason, one was the denying the King the
Dignity, Title or name, of his Estate Royal: or the calling the King Heretic,
Schismatic, Tyrant, Infidel, or Usurper of the Crown. This was done to
restrain the Insolences of some Friars, and all such offenders were to be
denied the Privilege of Sanctuaries. By the Fourteenth Act, An Act for
Suffragan Bishops.
provision was made for Suffragan Bishops, which as is said, had been
accustomed to be had within this Realm, for the more speedy administration of
the Sacraments, and other good wholesome and devout things, and laudable
ceremonies, to the increase of Gods honor, and for the commodity of good and
devout people, therefore they appointed for Suffragans Sees, the Towns of
Thetford, Ipswich, Colechester, Dover, Gilford, Southampton, Taunton,
Shaftbury, Malton, Marleborough, Bedford, Leicester, Gloucester, Shrewsbury,
Bristol, Penreth, Bridgewater, Nottingham, Grantham, H^ll, Huntington,
Cambridge, and the Towns of Pereth and Berwick, St. Germans in Cornwall, and
the Isle of Wight. For these Sees the Bishop of the Diocese was to present two
to the King, who might choose either of them, and present the person so named,
to the Archbishop of the Province, to be Consecrated; after which, they might
exercise such jurisdiction as the Bishop of the Diocese should give to them, or
as Suffragans had been formerly used to do, but their Authority was to last no
longer than the Bishop continued his Commission to them. But that the Reader
may more clearly see how this Act was executed, he shall find in the
Collection, Collect. Numb. 51.
a Writ for making a Suffragan Bishop. These were believed to be the same with
the Chor^piscopi in the Primitive Church, which as they were begun before the
first Council of Nice, so they continued in the Western Church till the Ninth
Century, and then a Decretal of Damasus being forged, that condemned them, they
were put down everywhere by degrees, Act 26. Ro^. Parl.

A Subsidy granted.


and now revived in England. Then followed the grant of a Subsidy to the King:
It was now Twelve years since there was any Subsidy granted. A Fiveteenth and a
Tenth were given, to be paid in Three years, the final payment being to be at
Allhallontide, in the year 1537. The Bill began with a most Glorious Preamble
of the Kings high Wisdom and Policy in the Government of the Kingdom these
Twenty Four years in great wealth and quietness, and the great charges he had
been at in the last War with Scotland, in fortifying Callais, and in the War of
Ireland, and that he intended to bring the wilful, wild, and unreasonable, and
savage people of Ireland, to Order and Obedience, and intended to build Forts
on the Marches of Scotland, for the security of the Nation, to amend the Haven
of Calais, and make a new one at Dover. By all which they did perceive the
entire love and zeal which the King bore to his People, and that he sought not
their wealth and quietness, only for his own time, being a Mortal man, but did
provide for it in all time coming, therefore they thought that of very equity,
reason, and good Conscience, they were bound to show like correspondence of
zeal, gratitude and kindness. Upon this the King sent a general pardon with
some exceptions, ordinary in such cases. But Fisher and More, were not only
excluded from this pardon by general Clauses, More and Fisher attainted. Act.
3. and 4. Rot. Parl.
but by two particular Acts they were attainted of misprision of Treason. By
the Third Act according to the Record, John Bishop of Rochester, Christopher
Plummer, Nicholas Wilson, Edward Powel, Richard Fetherston, and Miles Willyr
Clerks, were attainted for refusing the Oath of Succession, and the Bishopric
of Rochester, with the Benefices of the other Clerks were declared void from
the 2d of January next, yet it seems few were fond of succeeding him in that
See, for John Hilsey the next Bishop of Rochester was not Consecraed before the
year 1537. By the Fourth Act Sr. Thomas More is by an Invidious Preamble
charged with ingratitude, for the great favors he had received from the King,
and for studying to sow and make sedition among the Kings Subjects, and
refusing to take the Oath of Succession, therefore they declared the Kings
Grants to him to be void, and attaint him of misprision of Treason.

This severity though it was blamed by many, yet others thought it was
necessary in so great a Change; The Proceedings against them variously censured.
since the Authority of these two men was such, that if some signal notice had
not been taken of them, many might by their endeavors, especially encouraged by
that Impunity, have been corrupted in their affections to the King. Others
thought the prosecuting them in such a manner, did rather raise their
reputation higher, and give them more credit with the people, who are naturally
inclined to pity those that suffer, and to think well of those opinions, for
which they see men resolved, to endure all extremities. But others observed the
justice of God, in retaliating thus upon them their own severities to others,
for as Fisher did grievously prosecute the preachers of Luthers Doctrine, so
Mores hand had been very heavy on them as long as he had Power, and he had
showed them no mercy, but the extremity of the Law, which himself now felt to
be very heavy. Thus ended this Session of Parliament, with which this Book is
also to conclude, for now I come to a Third period of the Kings Reign, in which
he did Govern his Subjects without any Competitor, but I am to stop a little,
and give an account of the Progress of the Reformation in these years that I
have past through.

The Cardinal was no great persecutor of Heretics, The progress of the
Reformation.
which was generally thought to flow from his hatred of the Clergy, and that he
was not ill pleased to have them depressed. During the agitation of the Kings
process, there was no prosecution of the Preachers of Luthers Doctrine, whether
this flowed from any Intimation of the Kings pleasure to the Bishops or not, I
cannot tell, but it is very probable it must have been so, for these opinions
were received by many, and the Popish Clergy were so inclined to severity, that
as they wanted not Occasions, so they had a good mind to use those Preachers
cruelly, so that it is likely the King restrained them, and that was always
mixed with the other threatenings to work upon the Pope, that Heresy would
prevail in England, if the King got not justice done him, so that till the
Cardinal fell, they were put to no further trouble.

But as soon as More came into favor, he pressed the King much, to put the
Laws against Heretics in execution, and suggested that the Court of Rome would
be more wrought upon, by the Kings supporting the Church, and defending the
Faith vigorously, than by threatenings: and therefore a long Proclamation was
issued out against the Heretics, many of their Books were prohibited, and all
the Laws against them were appointed to be put in execution, Fox.
and great care was taken to seize them as they came into England, but many
escaped their diligence.

There were some at Antwerp, Tindal, Joy, Constantine, Tindal and others at
Antwerp.
with a few more, that were every year writing and printing new Books chiefly
against the corruptions of the Clergy, the Superstition of pilgrimages, of
worshipping Images, Saints, and Relics, and against relying on these things,
which were then called in the common style, Good works, in opposition to which
they wrote much about Faith in Christ with a true Evangelical obedience, as the
only mean by which men could be saved. The Book that had the greatest Authority
and influence, was Tindals Translation of the new Testament, of which the
Bishops made great complaints, and said, it was full of errors. But Tonstall
then Bishop of London, being a man of invincible moderation, would do no body
hurt, Hall.
yet endeavored as he could, to get their Books into his hands: So being at
Antwerp in the year 1529. as he returned from his Embassy at the Treaty of
Cambray, he sent for one Packington an English Merchant there, and desired him
to see how many New Testaments of Tindals Translation he might have for Money.
Packington, who was a secret favourer of Tindal, told him, what the Bishop
proposed. Tindal was very glad of it, for being convinced of some faults in his
work, he was designing a new and more correct Edition; but he was poor, and the
former Impression not being sold off, he could not go about it: so he gave
Packington all the Copies that lay in his hands, for which the Bishop paid the
price, and brought them over, and burnt them publicly in Cheapside. This had
such an hateful appearance in it, The New T^stament burnt.
being generally called a burning of the Word of God, that people from thence
concluded there must be a visible contrariety, between that book and the
Doctrines of those who so handled it; by which both their prejudice against the
Clergy, and their desire of reading the New Testament was increased. So that
next year, when the Second Edition was finished, many more were brought over,
and Constantine being taken in England, the Lord Chancellor in a private
examination, promised him that no hurt should be done him if he would reveal
who encouraged and supported them at Antwerp; which he accepted of, and told
that the greatest encouragement they had, was from the Bishop of London, who
had bought up half the Impression. This made all that heard of it laugh
heartily, though more judicious persons discerned the great temper of that
Learned Bishop in it. When the Clergy condemned Tindals Translation of the New
Testament, they declared they intended to set out a true Translation of it;
which many thought, was never truly designed by them, but only pretended, that
they might restrain the Curiosity of seeing Tindals work, with the hopes of one
that should be Authorized: and as they made no progress in it, so at length on
the 24th of May, Anno 1530. there was a paper drawn and agreed to by
Archbishop Warham, Chancellor More, Bishop Tonstall, and many Canonists and
Divines, which every Incumbent was commanded to read to his Parish, as a
warning to prevent the Contagion of Heresy. The last Paper in Sr. Henry
Sp^lmans 2d vol.
The Contents of which were, that the King having called together many of the
Prelates, with other Learned men out of both Universities, to examine some
Books lately set out in the English tongue, they had agreed to condemn them, as
containing several points of Heresy in them; and it being proposed to them,
whether it was necessary to set forth the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, they
were of opinion, that though it had been sometimes done, yet it was not
necessary, and that the King did well, not to set it out at that time in the
English tongue. So by this all the hopes of a Translation of the Scriptures
vanished.

There came out another Book which took mightily, it was entitled The
Supplication of the Beggars, Supplication of the Beggars.
written by one Simon Fish of Grayes-Inn. In it the Beggars complained to the
King, that they were reduced to great misery, the Alms of the people being
intercepted by companies of strong and idle Friars; for supposing that each of
the Five Mendicant Orders, had but a Penny a quarter from every household, it did
rise to a vast Sum, of which the Indigent and truly Necessitous Beggars were
defrauded. Their being unprofitable to the Commonwealth, with several other
things, were also complained of. He also taxed the Pope for Cruelty and
Covetousness, that did not deliver all persons out of Purgatory, and that none
but the Rich who paid well for it, could be discharged out of that Prison.
This was written in a witty and taking Style, and the King had it put in his
hands by Anne Boleyn, and liked it well, and would not suffer any thing to be
done to the Author.

Chancellor More was the most zealous Champion the Clergy had, More answer^ it.
for I do not find that any of them wrote much, only the Bishop of Rochester
wrote for Purgatory; but the rest left it wholly to him, either because few of
them could write well, or that he being much esteemed, and a disinteressed
person, things would be better received from him, than from them who were
looked on as Parties. So he answered this Supplication by another, in the name
of the souls that were in Purgatory; representing the miseries they were in,
and the great relief they found by the Masses the Friars said for them, and
brought in every man's Ancestors calling earnestly upon him to befriend those
poor Friars now, when they had so many Enemies. He confidently asserted, it had
been the Doctrine of the Church for many Ages, and brought many places out of
the Scriptures to prove it, besides several reasons that seemed to confirm it.
This, being writ of a Subject that would allow of a great deal of popular and
moving Eloquence, in which he was very eminent, took with many.

But it discovered to others what was the Foundation of those Religious Orders,
Frith replie^.
and that if the belief of Purgatory were once rooted out, all that was built
on that Foundation must needs fall with it. So John Frith wrote an answer to
More's Supplication, to show, that there was no ground for Purgatory in
Scripture; and that it was not believed in the Primitive Church. He also
answered the Bishop of Rochester's Book, and some Dialogues that were written
on the same Subject, by Rastal a Printer, and Kinsman of Mores: He discovered
the fallacy of their reasonings, which were built on the weakness, or defects
of our Repentance in this Life; and that therefore there must be another state
in which we must be further purified. To this he answered, That our sins were
not pardoned for our Repentance, or the Perfection of it, but only for the
Merits and Sufferings of Christ; and that if our Repentance is sincere, God
accepts of it; and sin being once pardoned, it could not be further punished.
He showed the difference between the punishments we may suffer in this Life,
and those in Purgatory; the one are either Medicinal Corrections for Reforming
us more and more, or for giving Warning to others: The other are terrible
Punishments without any of these ends in them: therefore the one might well
consist with the free pardon of sin, the other could not. So he argued from all
these places of Scripture, in which we are said to be freely pardoned our sins
by the Blood of Christ, that no punishment in another state could consist with
it: He also argued from all those places in which it is said, that we shall at
the day of Judgment receive according to what we have done in the body, that
there was no state of Purgatory beyond this life. For the places brought out of
the Old Testament, he showed they could not be meant of Purgatory, since
according to the Doctrine of the Schoolmen there was no going to Purgatory
before Christ. For the places in the New Testament he appealed to More's great
Friend, Erasmus, whose Exposition of these places differed much from his
Glosses. That place in the Epistle to the Corinthians about the fire, that was
to try every man's work, he said, was plainly Allegorical; and since the
Foundation, the building of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; of Wood, Hay and
Stubble, were Figuratively taken, there was no reason to take the fire in a
literal sense: therefore by fire was to be understood the Persecution then near
at hand; called in other places, the fiery trial.

For the Ancient Doctors, he showed, that in the fourth Century, St. Ambrose,
Jerome, and St. Austin, the three great Doctors of that Age did not believe it,
and cited several passages out of their Writings. It is true, St. Austin went
further than the rest, for though in some passages he delivered his Opinion
against it, yet in other places he spoke of it more doubtfully as a thing that
might be enquired into, but that it could not be certainly known; and indeed
before Gregory the Greats time, it was not received in the Church, and then the
Benedictine Monks were beginning to spread and grow numerous, and they to draw
advantages from it, told many stories of Visions and Dreams, to possess the
world with the belief of it; then the trade grew so profitable, that ever since
it was kept up, and improved: and what succeeded so well with one Society and
Order, to enrich themselves much by it, was an encouragement to others to
follow their tract in the same way of traffic. This Book was generally well
received, and the Clergy were so offended at the Author, that they resolved to
make him feel a real fire whenever he was catched, for endeavoring to put out
their imaginary one.

That from which More and others took greatest advantage, was, that the new
preachers prevailed only on simple Tradsemen, and women, and other illiterate
persons: but to this the others answered, That the Pharisees made the same
objection to the followers of Christ, who were Fishermen, women, and rude
Mechanics; but Christ told them, that to the poor the Gospel was preached; and
when the Philosophers and Jews objected that to the Apostles: They said Gods
glory did the more appear, since not many rich, wise, or noble, were called,
but the poor and despised were chosen: that men who had much to lose, had not
that simplicity of mind, nor that disingagement from worldly things, that was a
necessary disposition to fit them for a Doctrine, which was like to bring much
trouble and persecution on them.

Thus I have opened some of these things, which were at that time disputed by
the pen, The cruel proceedings against the Reformers.
in which opposition new things were still started and examined. But this was
too feeble a weapon for the defense of the Clergy, therefore they sought out
sharper tools. So there were many brought into the Bishops Courts, some for
teaching their Children the Lords Prayer, in English, some for reading the
forbidden Books, some for harboring the Preachers, some for speaking against
Pilgrimages, or the worshipping and adorning of Images, some for not observing
the Church Fasts, some for not coming to Confession and the Sacrament, and some
for speaking against the Vices of the Clergy. Most of these were simple and
illiterate men, and the terror of the Bishops Courts, and Prisons, and of a
Faggot in the end, wrought so much on their fears and weakness, that they
generally abjured, and were dismissed. But in the end of the year, 1530. one
Thomas Hitton, More.
who had been Curate of Maidston, and had left that place, going often to
Antwerp; he bringing over some of the Books that were printed there, was taken
at Gravesend, and brought before Warham and Fisher, Tindal.
who, after he had suffered much by a long and cruel Imprisonment, condemned
him to be Burnt.

The most eminent person that suffered about this time, was Thomas Bilney, of
whose Abjuration an account was given in the first Book: he after that, went to
Cambridge, Bilneys Trial.
and was much troubled in his Conscience, for what he had done, so that the
rest of that Society at Cambridge, were in great apprehensions of some violent
effect, which that desperation might produce, Latimers Sermons.
and sometimes watched him whole nights. This continued about a year, but at
length his mind was more quieted, and he resolved to expiate his Abjuration, by
as public and solemn a Confession of the Truth: and to prepare himself the
better both to defend and suffer for the Doctrines, which he had formerly
through fear denied; he followed his Studies for two years. And when he found
himself well fortified in this resolution, he took leave of his Friends at
Cambridge, and went to his own Country of Norfolk, to whom he thought he owed
his first endeavors.

He preached up and down the Country, The things objected to him.
confessing his former sin of denying the Faith, and taught the people to
beware of Idolatry, or trusting to Pilgrimages, to the Cowle of St. Francis, to
the Prayers of Saints, or to Images; but exhorted them to stay at home, Fox.
to give much Alms, to believe in Jesus Christ, and to offer up their hearts,
wills, and minds, to him in the Sacrament. This being noised about he was
seized on by the Bishops Officers, and put in Prison at Norwich, and the Writ
was sent for to burn him as a Relapse, he being first condemned and degraded
from his Priesthood: while he was in Prison the Friars came often about him to
persuade him to recant again, and it was given out that he did read a Bill of
Abjuration.

More not being satisfied to have sent the Writ for his burning, It is given
out that he abjured.
studied also to defame him, publishing this to the World; yet in that he was
certainly abused, for if he had signed any such Paper, it had been put in the
Bishops Register, as all things of that nature were; but no such writing was
ever shown, only some said they heard him read it, and others who denied there
was any such thing, being questioned for it, submitted and confessed their
fault. But at such a time it was no strange thing, if a ly of that nature, was
vented with so much Authority, that men were afraid to contradict it; and when
a man is a close Prisoner, those who only have access to him, may spread what
report of him they please, and when once such a thing is said, they never want
officious vouchers to ly and swear for it. But since nothing was ever showed
under his hand, it is clear there was no truth in these reports, which were
spread about to take away the honor of Martyrdom from the new Doctrines. It is
true he had never enquired into all the other Tenets of the Church of Rome, and
so did not differ from them about the presence of Christ in the Sacrament and
some other things. But when men durst speak freely, The falsehood of which
afterward appeared.

Fox.


there were several persons, that witnessed the Constancy and sincerity of
Bilney, in these his last Conflicts; and among the rest, Matthew Parker
afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, was an eyewitness of his sufferings,
which from his relation were published afterward: he took his death patiently
and constantly, and in the little time that was allowed him to live after his
Sentence, he was observed to be cheerful; and the poor Victuals that were
brought him, Bread and Ale, he eat up heartily, of which when one took notice,
he said he must keep up that ruinous Cottage till it fell; and often repeated
that passage in Isaiah, When thou walk'st through the fire thou shall not be
burnt; and putting his finger in the flame of the Candle, he told those about
him, that he well knew what a pain burning was, but that it should only consume
the Stubble of his Body, and that his Soul should be purged by it.

The manner of his Suffering.
When the day of Execution came, being the 10th of November, as he was led out,
he said to one that exhorted him to be patient and constant, that as the
Mariners endured the tossing of the Waves, hoping to arrive at their desired
Port, so though he was now entering into a storm, yet he hoped he should soon
arrive at the Haven, and desired their Prayers. When he came to the Stake, he
repeated the Creed, to show the People that he dyed in the Faith of the
Apostles; then he put up his Prayers to God with great show's of inward
devotion; which ended, he repeated the 143 Psalm, and paused on these words of
it, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified, with deep recollection: and when Doctor Warner, that
accompanied him to the Stake, took leave of him with many tears, Bilney with a
cheerful countenance exhorted him, to feed his flock, that at his Lords coming
he might find him so doing. Many of the begging Friars desired him to declare
to the people, that they had not procured his death; for that was got among
them, and they feared the people would give them no more Alms: so he desired
the Spectators not to be the worse to these men for his sake, for they had not
procured his death. Then the fire was set to, and his Body consumed to ashes.

Thus it appears, both what Opinion the people had of him, and in what charity
he dyed even toward his enemies, doing them good for evil; but this, though it
perhaps struck terror in weaker minds, yet it no less encouraged others to
endure patiently all the severities that were used to draw them from this
Doctrine. Soon after, one Richard Byfield suffered, Byfield's Sufferings.
he was a Monk of St. Edmundsbury, and had been instructed by Doctor Barnes,
who gave him some Books; which being discovered, he was put in Prison, but
through fear abjured; yet afterward he left the Monastery and came to London:
He went often over to Antwerp, and brought in forbidden Books, which being
smelled out, he was seized on, and examined about these Books; he justified
them, and said, he thought they were good and profitable, and did openly
exclaim against the dissolute lives of the Clergy; so being judged Heretic, he
was burnt in Smithfield, the 11th of November.

And Tewksburies.
In December, one John Tewksbury a Shopkeeper in London, who had formerly
abjured, was also taken and tried in Sr. Thomas Mores house at Chelsey, where
Sentence was given against him by Stokesley Bishop of London, (for Tonstall was
translated the former year to Duresm) and was burnt in Smithfield. There were
also three Burnt at York this year, two men and one woman.

These proceedings were complained of in the following Session of Parliament,
as was formerly told, and the Ecclesiastical Courts being found both Arbitrary
and Cruel, the House of Commons desired a redress of that from the King; but
nothing was done about it till Three years after, that the new Act against
Heretics was made, as was already told. The Clergy were not much moved at the
address which the House of Commons made, and therefore went on in their extreme
Courses, and to strike a Terror in the Gentry, they resolved to make an Example
of one James Bainham a Gentleman of the Temple: he was carried to the Lord
Chancellors House, Bainham's Sufferings.
where much pains was taken to persuade him to discover such as he knew in the
Temple, who favored the new Opinions; Fox.
but fair means not prevailing, More made him be whipped in his own presence, and
after that, sent him to the Tower, where he looked on, and saw him put to the
Rack. Yet it seems nothing could be drawn from him, that might be made use of,
to any other persons hurt; yet he himself afterward overcome with fear,
abjured and did penance, but had no quiet in his Conscience, till he went
publicly to Church, with a New Testament in his hand, and confessed with many
tears, that he had denied God, and prayed the people not to do as he had done,
and said, that he felt an Hell in his own Conscience, for what he had done. So
he was soon after carried to the To^er, (for now the Bishops, to avoid the
Imputation of using men cruelly in their Prisons, did put Heretics in the
Kings Prisons) he was charged for having said, That Thomas a Becket was a
Murderer, and damned in Hell if he did not repent; and for speaking
contemptously of praying to Saints, and saying that the Sacrament of the Altar
was only Christ's Mystical Body, and that his Body was not chewed with the
Teeth, but received by Faith. So he was judged an obstinate and relapsed
Heretic, and was burnt in Smithfield about the end of April 1532. There were
also some others burnt a little before this time, of whom a particular account
could not be recovered by Fox with all his Industry. But with Bainham, Mores
persecution ended, for soon after he laid down the great Seal, which set the
poor Preachers at ease.

Crome and Latimer were brought before the Convocation and accused of Heresy.
They both Subscribed the Articles offered to them, Regist. Tonst*
That there was a Purgatory: That the Souls in it were profited by Masses said
for them; That the Saints are now in Heaven, Articles which some abjured.
and as Mediators pray for us: That men ought to pray to them and honor them:
That Pilgrimages were Pious and Meritorious: That men who vowed Chastity might
not Marry without the Popes Dispensation: That the Keys of binding and loosing
were given to St. Peter, and to his Successors, though their lives were bad,
and not at all to the Laity: That men merited by Prayers, Fasting, and other
good Works: That Priests prohibited by the Bishop, should not preach, till they
were purged and restored: That the Seven Sacraments conferred Grace: That
Consecrations and Benedictions used by the Church were good: That it was good
and profitable to set up the Images of Christ and the Saints in the Churches,
and to adorn them and burn Candles before them; and that Kings were not obliged
to give their people the Scriptures in a vulgar tongue. By these Articles it
may be easily Collected, what were the Doctrines then preached by the
Reformers. There was yet no dispute about the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, which was first called in question by Frith; for the Books of
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius came later into England, and hitherto they had only
seen Luthers works with those written by his followers.

But in the year 1532. there was another memorable instance of the Clergies
cruelty against the dead bodies of those whom they suspected of Heresy. (...)
Testament.
The Common style of all Wills and Testaments at that time was, First I
bequeath my Soul to Almighty God, and to our Lady St. Mary, Regist Fitz-(...).
and to all the Saints in Heaven: but one William Tracie of Worcestershire
dying, left a Will of a far different strain, for he bequeathed his Soul only
to God through Jesus Christ, to whose intercession alone he trusted, without
the help of any other Saint, therefore he left no part of his goods to have any
pray for his Soul. This being brought to the Bishop of Londons Court, he was
condemned as an Heretic, Regist. Stok^s. Fol. 72.
and an order was sent to Parker Chancellor of Worcester to raise his Body. The
Officious Chancellor went beyond his order and burned the Body; but the Record
bears, that though he might by the Warrant he had, raise the body according to
the Law of the Church, yet he had no Authority to burn it. So two years after
Tracies heirs sued him for it, and he was turned out of his Office of
Chancellor, and fined in 400 Pound.

There is another Instance of the Cruelty of the Clergy this year. One Thomas
Harding of Buckinghamshire, Harding's Sufferings.
an Ancient man, who had abjured in the year 1506. was now observed to go often
into woods, and was seen sometimes reading. Upon which his house was searched,
and some parcels of the New Testament in English were found in it. So he was
carried before Longland Bishop of Lincoln, who as he was a cruel Persecutor, so
being the Kings Confessor, acted with the more Authority. This Aged man was
judged a Relapse, and sent to Chesham, where he lived, to be burned, which was
Executed on Corpus Christi Eve. At this time there was an Indulgence of 40
days pardon proclaimed to all that carried a Faggot to the burning of an
Heretic: So dexterously did the Clergy endeavor to infect the Laity with their
own cruel Spirit; and that wrought upon this occasion a signal effect, for as
the fire was kindled, one flung a Faggot at the old man's head, Fox.
which dash't out his brains.

1533.
In the year 1533. it was thought fit by some signal evidence to convince the
World, that the King did not design to change the established Religion, though
he had then proceeded far in his breach with Rome; and the crafty Bishop of
Winchester, Gardener, as he complied with the King in his second Marriage and
separation from Rome, Friths Sufferings.
so being an inveterate Enemy to the Reformation, and in his heart addicted to
the Court of Rome, did by this argument often prevail with the King, to punish
the Heretics, That it would most effectually justify his other proceedings,
and convince the World that he was still a good Catholic King; which at
several times drew the King to what he desired. And at this time, the steps the
King had made in his Separation from the Pope, had given such heart to the new
Preachers, that they grew bolder and more public in their Assemblies.

John Frith, as he was an excellent Scholar, which was so taken notice of,
some years before, that he was put in the list of those whom the Cardinal
intended to bring from Cambridge, and put in his College at Oxford; so he had
offended them by several writings, and by a discourse which he wrote against
the Corporal presence of Christ, in the Sacrament, had provoked the King, who
continued to his death to believe that firmly. The substance of his Arguments
was, that Christ in the Sacrament gave eternal life, His Arguments against the
Corporal presence.
but the receiving the bare Sacrament did not give eternal life, since many
took it to their damnation; therefore Christ's presence there, was only felt by
Faith. This he further proved by the Fathers before Christ, who did eat the
same spiritual food, and drink of the Rock, which was Christ, according to St.
Paul: since then, they and we communicate in the same thing, and it was certain
that they did not eat Christ's Flesh Corporally, but fed by Faith on a Messiah
to come, as Christians do on a Messiah already come: therefore we now do only
communicate by Faith. He also insisted much on the signification of the word
Sacrament, from whence he concluded, that the Elements must be the Mystical
Signs of Christ's Body and Blood; for if they were truly the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, they should not be Sacraments: he concluded, that the ends of the
Sacrament were these three, by a visible action to knit the Society of
Christians together in one body, to be a means of conveighing Grace upon our
due participating of them, and to be Remembrances to stir up men to bless ^od
for that unspeakable love, which in the death of Christ appeared to mankind. To
all these ends the Corporal presence of Christ availed nothing, they being
sufficiently answered by a Mystical presence: yet he drew no other Conclusion
from these Premises, but that the belief of the Corporal presence in the
Sacrament, was no necessary Article of our Faith. This either flowed from his
not having yet arrived at a sure persuasion in the matter, or that he chose in
that modest style, to encounter an opinion of which the World was so fond, that
to have opposed it in downright words, would have given prejudices against all
that he could say.

Frith upon a long conversation with one upon this Subject, was desired to set
down the heads of it in writing, which he did. The Paper went about and was by
a false Brother conveyed to Sr. Thomas More's hands, who set himself to answer
it in his ordinary style, treating Frith with great contempt, calling him
always the young man. Frith was in Prison before he saw Mores Book, yet he
wrote a reply to it, which I do not find was then published; but a Copy of it
was brought afterward to Cranmer, who acknowledged when he wrote his Apology
against Gardener, that he had received great light in that matter from Friths
Books, and drew most of his Arguments out of it. It was afterward Printed with
his works Anno 1573. and by it may appear, how much Truth is Stronger than
Error. For though More wrote with as much Wit and Eloquence as any man in that
Age did, and Frith wrote plainly without any Art; yet there is so great a
difference between their Books, that whoever compares them, will clearly
perceive the one to be the Ingenious defender of an ill cause, and the other a
simple asserter of Truth. Frith wrote with all the disadvantage that was
possible, being then in the Jayl, where he could have no Books, but some Notes
he might have collected formerly: he was also so loaded with Irons, that he
could scarce sit with any ease. He began with confirming what he had delivered
about the Fathers before Christ, their feeding on his Body in the same manner
that Christians do since his death: This he proved from Scripture, and several
places of St. Austins works; he proved also from Scripture, that after the
Consecration, the Elements were still Bread and Wine, and were so called both
by our Savior and his Apostles; that our Senses show they are not changed in
their Natures, and that they are still subject to Corruption, which can no way
be said of the body of Christ. He proved that the eating of Christ's Flesh in
the 6th of St. John, cannot be applied to the Sacrament; since the wicked
receive it, who yet do not eat the Flesh of Christ, otherwise they should have
eternal life. He showed also, that the Sacrament coming in the room of the
Jewish Paschal Lamb, we must understand Christ's words, This is my Body, in the
same sense in which it was said, that the Lamb was the Lords Passover. He
confirmed this by many passages, cited out of Tertullian, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, Austin, Fulgentius, Eusebius, and some later
Writers, as Beda, Bertram and Druthmar, who did all assert that the Elements
retained their former Natures, and were only the Mysteries, Signs, and Figures
of the Body and Blood of Christ. But Gelasius's words seemed so remarkable,
that they could not but determine the Controversy, especially considering he
was Bishop of Rome: he therefore writing against the Eutichians, who thought
the humane nature of Christ was changed into the Divine, says, that as the
Elements of Bread and Wine being Consecrated to be the Sacraments of the Body
and Blood of Christ, did not cease to be Bread and Wine in Substance, but
continued in their own proper natures; so the humane nature of Christ continued
still, though it was united to the Divine nature: this was a manifest
Indication of the belief of the Church in that Age, and ought to weigh more
than a hundred high Rhetorical Expressions. He brought likewise several
testimonies out of the Fathers to show that they knew nothing of the
Consequences that follow Transubstantiation; of a Body being in more places at
once, or being in a place after the manner of a Spirit, or of the worship to be
given to the Sacrament. Upon this he digresses, and says, that the German
Divines believed a Corporal presence; yet since that was only an Opinion that
rested in their minds, and did not carry along with it any Corruption of the
worship, or Idolatrous practice, it was to be born with, and the peace of the
Church was not to be broken for it: but the case of the Church of Rome was very
different, which had set up gross Idolatry, building it upon this Doctrine.

Thus I have given a short Abstract of Friths Book, which I thought fit, the
rather to do, because it was the first Book that was written on this Subject in
England by any of the Reformers. And from hence it may appear, upon what solid
and weighty reasons they then began to shake the received Opinion of
Transubstantiation: and with how much learning this Controversy was managed by
him, who first undertook it.

One thing was singular in Friths Opinion, that he thought there should be no
contest made about the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament; for
whatever Opinion men held in Speculation, if it went not to a practical error
(which was the Adoration of it, for that was Idolatry in his Opinion) there
were no disputes to be made about it, therefore he was much against all heats
between the Lutherans and Zuinglians, for he thought in such a matter that was
wholly speculative, every man might hold his own Opinion without making a
breach of the Unity of the Church about it.

He was apprehended in May 1533. and kept in Prison till the 20th of June, and
then he was brought before the Bishop of London, Gardener, and Longland sitting
with him. Register Stok^s. Fol. 71. and a Letter of his in Fox*
They objected to him his Opinions about the Sacrament and Purgatory; he
answered, that for the first he did not find Transubstantiation in the
Scriptures, nor in any approved Authors; and therefore he would not admit any
thing as an Article of Faith, without clear and certain grounds: for he did not
think the Authority of the Church reached so far. They argued with him upon
some passages out of St. Austin and St. Chrysostom, to which he answered, by
opposing other places of the same Fathers, and showed how they were to be
reconciled to themselves; when it came to a Conclusion, these words are set
down in the Register as his Confession.

Frith thinks and judges that the natural Body of Christ, is not in the
Sacrament of the Altar, but in one place only at once. His Opinion of the
Sacrament.
Item he says, that neither part is a necessary Article of our Faith, whether
the natural Body be there in the Sacrament or not.

As for Purgatory, he said a man consisted of two parts, his Body and Soul; his
Body was purged by sickness and other pains, and at last by death, and was not
by their own Doctrine sent to Purgatory. And for the Soul, it was purged
through the word of God received by Faith. So his Confession was written down
in these words. Item Frith thinks and judges that there is no Purgatory for
the Soul after that it is departed from the Body, and as he thinks herein,
And of Purgatory.
so has he said, written, and defended, howbeit he thinks neither part to be
an Article of Faith, necessarily to be believed under pain of Damnation.

The Bishops with the Doctors that stood about them, took much pains to make
him change; but he told them, that he could not be induced to believe, that
these were Articles of Faith. And when they threatened to proceed to a Final
Sentence, he seemed not moved with it, but said, Let judgment be done in
righteousness. The Bishops, though none of them were guilty of great
tenderness, yet seemed to pity him much; and the Bishop of London professed, he
gave Sentence with great grief of heart. In the end he was judged an Obstinate
Heretic, and was delivered to the Secular Power: He is Condemned.
there is one clause in this Sentence, which is not in many others, therefore I
shall set it down.

Most earnestly requiring in the Bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, that this
Execution and punishment worthily to be done upon thee, may be so moderate,
that the rigor thereof be not too extreme, nor yet the gentleness too much
mitigated, but that it may be to the Salvation of thy Soul, to the extirpation,
terror, and conversion of Heretics, and to the Unity of the Catholic Faith.
This was thought a scorning of God and men, when those, who knew that he was to
be burnt, and intended it should be so, yet used such an Obtestation by the
Bowels of Jesus Christ, that the rigor might not be extreme. This being
certified, the Writ was issued out, and as the Register bears, he was burnt in
Smithfield the 4th of July, and one Andrew Hewet with him, who also denied the
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar. This Hewet was an Apprentice,
and went to the meetings of these Preachers, and was twice betrayed by some
spies whom the Bishops Officers had among them, who discovered many. When he
was examined, he would not acknowledge the Corporal Presence, but was
illiterate, and resolved to do as Frith did, so he was also condemned and burnt
with him.

His Constancy in his Sufferings.
When they were brought to the Stake, Frith expressed great joy, at his
approaching Martyrdom, and in a Transport of it, hugged the ^aggots in his
Arms, as the Instruments that were to send him to his eternal rest. One Doctor
Cook a Parson of London called to the people, that they should not pray for
them any more than they would do for a Dog. At which Frith smiled, and prayed
God to forgive him; so the fire was set to, and they were consumed to Ashes.

This was the last Act of the Clergies Cruelty against men's lives, and was much
condemned: it was thought an unheard of barbarity, thus to burn a moderate and
learned young man, only because he would not acknowledge some of their
Doctrines to be Articles of Faith; and though his private judgment was against
their tenet, yet he was not positive in it, any further, than that he could not
believe the contrary to be necessary to Salvation. But the Clergy were now so
bathed in blood, that they seemed to have stripped themselves of those
impressions of pity and compassion, which are natural to mankind; they
therefore held on in their severe courses, till the Act of Parliament did
effectually restrain them.

In the Account that was given of that Act, mention was made of one Thomas
Philips, P^il^ip's Sufferings.
who put in his complaint to the House of Commons against the Bishop of London.
The proceedings against him, had been both extreme and illegal; he was first
apprehended, and put in the Tower upon suspicion of Heresy, and when they
searched him, a Copy of Tracy's Testament was found about him, and Butter and
Cheese were found in his Chamber, it being in the time of Lent. There was also
another Letter found about him, exhorting him to be ready to suffer constantly
for the Truth. Upon these presumptions the Bishop of London proceeded against
him, and required him to abjure. But he said, he would willingly swear to be
obedient as a Christian man ought, and that he would never hold any Heresy
during his life, nor favor Heretics; but the Bishop would not accept of that,
since there might be Ambiguities in it: therefore he required him to make the
Abjuration in common form, which he refused to do, and appealed to the King as
the Supreme Head of the Church. Yet the Bishop pronounced him Contumax, and did
excommunicate him; but whether he was released on his Appeal, or not, I do not
find; yet perhaps this was the man of whom the Pope complained to the English
Ambassadors 1532. that an Heretic having appealed to the King as the Supreme
Head of the Church, was taken out of the Bishops hands, and judged and
acquitted in the Kings Courts. It is probable this was the man, only the Pope
was informed, that it was from the Archbishop of Canterbury that he Appealed,
in which there might be a mistake for the Bishop of London. But whatever ground
there may be for that conjecture, Philips got his liberty, and put in a
Complaint to the House of Commons, which produced the Act about Heretics.

And now that Act being passed, A stop is pu^ to these crue^ proceedings.
together with the extirpation of the Popes Authority, and the Power being
lodged in the King to correct and reform Heresies, Idolatries, and Abuses, the
Standard of the Catholic Faith being also declared to be the Scriptures, the
Persecuted Preachers had ease and encouragement everywhere. They also saw that
the necessity of the Kings Affairs, would constrain him to be gentle to them,
for the Sentence which the Pope gave against the King, was committed to the
Emperor to be executed by him, who was then aspiring to an universal Monarchy;
and therefore as soon as his other Wars gave him leisure to look over to
England and Ireland, he had now a good color to justify an Invasion both from
the Popes Sentence, and the interests and honor of his Family in protecting
his Aunt and her Daughter: Therefore the King was to give him work elsewhere,
in order to which his interest obliged him to join himself to the Princes of
Germany, who had at Smalcald entered into a League offensive and defensive, for
the liberty of Religion and the Rights of the Empire. This was a thorn in the
Emperor's side, which the Kings Interest would oblige him by all means to
maintain. Upon which the Reformers in England concluded, that either the King,
to recommend himself to these Princes, would relax the severities of the Law
against them; or otherwise, that their Friends in Germany would see to it: for
in these first fervours of Reformations, the Princes made that always a
condition in their Treaties, that those who favored their Doctrine, might be
no more persecuted.

But their chief encouragement was from the Queen, The Queen favored the
Reformers.
who Reigned in the Kings heart, as absolutely as he did over his Subjects; and
was a known favourer of them. She took Shaxton and Latimer to be her Chaplains,
and soon after promoted them to the Bishoprics of Salisbury and Worcester,
then vacant by the deprivation of Campegio and Ghinuccii; and in all other
things cherished and protected them, and used her most effectual endeavors
with the King to promote the Reformation. Next to her, Cranmer promoted the
Reformation.
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury was a professed favourer of it, who besides
the Authority of his Character and See, was well-fitted for carrying it on,
being a very Learned and Industrious man. He was at great pains to collect the
sense of Ancient Writers, upon all the Heads of Religion, by which he might be
well-directed in such an Important matter. I have seen two Volumns in Folio
written with his own Hand, containing upon all the Heads of Religion, a vast
heap both of places of Scripture, and Quotations out of Ancient Fathers, and
later Doctors, and Schoolmen; by which he governed himself in that work. There
is also an original Letter of the Lord Burghly's extant, which I have seen, in
which he writes that he had six or seven Volumns of his Writings, all which,
except two other, that I have seen, are lost, for ought I can understand. From
which it will appear in the sequel of this work, that he neither Copied form
Foreign Writers, nor proceeded rashly in the Reformation. He was a man of
great temper, and as I have seen in some of his Letters to Osiander, and some
of Osiander's answers to him, he very much disliked the violence of the German
Divines. He was gentle in his whole behavior, and though he was a man of too
great candor and simplicity to be refined in the Arts of Policy, yet he
managed his Affairs with great prudence; which did so much recommend him to the
King, that no ill Offices were ever able to hurt him. It is true, he had some
singular opinions about Ecclesiastical Functions and Offices, which he seemed
to make wholly dependent on the Magistrate, as much as the Civil were; but as
he never studied to get his opinion in that made a part of the Doctrine of the
Church, reserving only to himself the freedom of his own thoughts, which I have
reason to think he did afterward, either change, or at least was content to be
overruled in it: So it is clear that he held not that opinion, to get the
Kings favor by it, for in many other things, as in the business of the six
Articles, he boldly and freely argued, both in the Convocation and the House of
Peers, against that which he knew was the Kings mind, and took his life in his
hands, which had certainly been offered at a stake, if the Kings esteem of him
had not been proof against all attempts.

Assisted by Cromwell.
Next him, or rather above him, was Cromwell, who was made the Kings Vicegerent
in Ecclesiastical matters. A man of mean Birth, but Noble Qualities, as
appeared in two signal Instances, the one being his Pleading in Parliament so
zealously and successfully for the fallen and disgraced Cardinal, whose
Secretary he was, when Gardener, though more obliged by him, had basely
forsaken him. This was thought so just and generous in him, that it did not at
all hinder his Preferment, but raised his Credit higher: Such a Demonstration
of gratitude and friendship, in misfortune, being so rare a thing in a Court.
The other was his remembering the Merchant of Lucca, that had pitied and
relieved him, when he was a poor stranger there, and expressing most
extraordinary acknowledgements and gratitude, when he was afterward in the top
of his Greatness, and the other did not so much as know him, much less pretend
to any returns for passed favors, which showed that he had a noble and
generous temper; only he made too much haste to be great and rich. He joined
himself in a firm friendship to Cranmer, and did promote the Reformation very
vigorously.

The Duke of Norfolk and Gardener Opposed it.
But there was another Party in the Court, that wrestled much against it; the
head of it was the Duke of Norfolk, who though he was the Queens Uncle, yet was
her mortal enemy. He was a dextrous Courtier and complied with the King, both
in his Divorce and Separation from Rome, yet did upon all occasions persuade
the King to innovate nothing in Religion: His great friend that joined all
along with him in those Counsels, was Gardener Bishop of Winchester, who was a
crafty and politic man, and understood the King well, and complied with his
temper in every thing; he despised Cranmer, and hated all Reformation. Longland
that had been the Kings Confessor, was also managed by them, and they had a
great Party in the Court, and almost all the Churchmen were on their side.

Reasons against the Reformation.
That which prevailed most with the King, was, that himself had writ a Book in
Defense of the Faith, and they said, would he now retract that, which all
Learned men admired so much? or would he encourage Luther and his Party, who
had treated him with so little respect? If he went to change the Doctrines that
were formerly received, all the world would say he did it in spite to the Pope,
which would cast a great dishonor on him, as if his passion governed his
Religion. Foreign Princes, who in their hearts, did not much blame him for
what he had hitherto done, but rather wished for a good opportunity to do the
like, would now condemn him if he meddled with the Faith: And his own Subjects,
who complied with that which he had done, and were glad to be delivered from
Foreign Jurisdiction, and the Exactions of the Court of Rome, would not bear a
change of the Religion, but might be thereby easily set on, by the Emissaries
of the Pope or Emperor, to break out in Rebellion. These things being managed
skilfully, and agreeing with his own private opinion, wrought much on him; and
particularly, what was said about his own Book, which had been so much
commended to him, that he was almost made believe, it was written by a special
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

But on the other side Cranmer represented to him, Reasons for it.
that since he had put down the Popes Authority, it was not fit to let those
Doctrines be still taught, which had no other Foundation, but the Decrees of
Popes: And he offered upon the greatest hazard to prove, that many things, then
received as Articles of Faith, were no better grounded; therefore he pressed
the King to give order, to hear and examine things freely, that when the Popes
power was rejected, the people might not be obliged to believe Doctrines, which
had no better warrant. And for Political Counsels, he was to do the duty of a
good Christian Prince, and leave the event to God; and things might be carried
on with that due care, that the justice and reasonableness of the Kings
proceedings should appear to all the world. And whereas it was objected, that
the Doctrines of the Catholic Church ought not to be examined by any
particular Church. It was answered, that when all Christendom were under one
Emperor, it was easy for him to call general Councils, and in such
circumstances it was fit to stay for a one; and yet even then, particular
Churches did in their National Synods condemn Heresies, and reform Abuses. But
the State of Christendom was now altered, it was under many Princes, who had
different Interests, and therefore they thought it a vain expectation to look
for any such Council. The Protestants of Germany had now for above ten years
desired the Emperor to procure one, but to no effect; for sometimes the Pope
would not grant it, and at other times the French King protested against it.
The former year the Pope had sent to the King to offer a general Council, Hall.
to be held at Mantua this year, but the King found that was but an illusion;
for the Marquess of Mantua protested, he would not admit such a number of
strangers, as a Council would draw together into his Town: yet the King
promised to send his Ambassadors thither, when the Council met. But now the
King consulting his Prelates, whether the Emperor might by his Authority summon
a general Council, as the Roman Emperors had done: some of them gave the
following answer, Copied from the Original that is yet extant, A resolution of
some Bishops about the calling of a general Council.
which might have been written any time between the year, 1534. in which Thomas
Goodrick was made Bishop of Ely, and the year, 1540. in which John Clark,
Bishop of Bath and Wells, died; but I incline to think from other
circumstances, that it was written about the end of the year, 1534.

For the General Council.
Ex MSS.D.D. S^^llingfleet.
Though that in the Old time, when the Empire of Rome had his ample dominion
over the most part of the World, the First Four General Councils (the which at
all times have been of most estimation in the Church of Christ) were called and
gathered by the Emperors Commandment, and for a Godly intent: That Heresies
might be extinct, Schisms put away, good Order and Manners in the Ministers of
the Church and the people of the same established. Like as many Councils more
were called: till now of late by the negligence, as well of the Emperor, as
other Princes, the Bishop of Rome has been suffered to usurp this Power; yet
now, for so much that the Empire of Rome, and the Monarchy of the same, has
no such general Dominion; but many Princes have absolute Power in their own
Realms, and a whole and entire Monarchy, no one Prince may by his Authority
call any General Council, but if that any one or more of these Princes for the
establishing of the Faith, for the extirpation of Schisms, etc. Lovingly,
Charitably, with a good sincere Intent, to a sure place, require any other
Prince, or the rest of the great Princes, to be content to agree, that for the
Wealth, Quietness, and Tranquillity of all Christen people, by his or their
free consent, a General Council might be assembled: that Prince, or those
Princes so required, are bound by the Order of Charity, for the good Fruit that
may come of it, to condescend and agree thereunto, having no lawful Impediment,
nor just Cause moving to the contrary. The chief Causes of the General Councils
are before expressed.

In all the Ancient Councils of the Church, in matters of the Faith and
interpretation of the Scripture, no man made definitive Subscription, but
Bishops and Priests, for so much as the Declaration of the Word of God pertains
unto them.

T. Cantuarien. Cuthbertus Dunelmen. Io. Bath. wellen. Tho. Elien.


But besides this Resolution, I have seen a long speech of Cranmers, written by
one of his Secretaries. It was spoken soon after the Parliament had passed the
Acts formerly mentioned, for it relates to them as lately done; it was
delivered either in the House of Lords, the upper House of Convocation, or at
the Council Board; but I rather think, A Speech of Cranmers, about ^ Gene^al
Council.
it was in the House of Lords, for it begins, My Lords? The matter of it does
so much concern the business of Reformation, that I know the Reader will expect
I should set down the heads of it. It appears he had been Ordered to Inform the
House about these things. The Preamble of his Speech runs upon this conceit. Ex
MSS.D.D Stillingfleet.


That as Rich men flying from their Enemies, carry away all they can with them,
and what they cannot take away, they either hide or destroy it; so the Court of
Rome had destroyed so many Ancient writings. and hid the rest, having carefully
preserved every thing that was of advantage to them, that it was not easy to
discover what they had so artificially concealed: Therefore in the Canon Law,
some honest truths were yet to be found, but so mislay'd that they are not
placed where one might expect them, but are to be met with in some other
Chapters* where one would least look for them. And many more things said by the
Ancients, of the Sea of Rome, and against their Authority were lost, as appears
by the Fragments yet remaining. He showed that many of the Ancients called
every thing which they thought well done, of Divine Institution, by a large
extent of the Phrase, in which sense the passages of many Fathers that
magnified the Sea of Rome, were to be understood.

Then he showed for what end General Councils were called, to declare the Faith
and reform Errors, not that ever any Council was truly General, for even at
Nice there were no Bishops almost, but out of Egypt, Asia, and Greece, but they
were called General because the Emperor Summoned them, and all Christendom did
agree to their Definitions, which he proved by several Authorities: therefore
though there were many more Bishops in the Council of Arimini, than at Nice or
Constantinople, yet the one was not received as a General Council, and the
others were: so that it was not the number, nor Authority of the Bishops, but
the matter of their Decisions, which made them be received with so general a
Submission.

As for the Head of the Council. St. Peter and St. James had the chief
direction of the Council of the Apostles, but there were no Contests then about
Head-ship. Christ named no Head, which could be no more called a defect in him,
than it was one in God, that had named no Head to Govern the World. Yet the
Church found it convenient to have one over them, so Archbishops were set over
Provinces. And though St. Peter had been Head of the Apostles, yet as it is not
certain that he was ever in Rome, so it does not appear, that he had his
Headship for Romes sake, or that he left it there; but he was made Head for his
Faith, and not for the Dignity of any See: Therefore the Bishops of Rome could
pretend to nothing from him, but as they followed his Faith; and Liberius and
some other Bishops there, had been condemned for Heresy; and if according to
St. James, Faith be to be tried by Works, the Lives of the Popes for several
Ages gave shrewd presumptions, that their Faith was not good. And though it
were granted, that such a Power was given to the Sea of Rome, yet by many
instances, he showed that positive precepts in a matter of that nature, were
not for ever Obligatory. And therefore Gerson wrote a Book, De Auferibilitate
Papae. So that if a Pope with the Cardinals be corrupted, they ought to be
tried by a General Council, and submit to it. St. Peter gave an account of his
Baptizing Cornelius, when he was questioned about it. So Damasus, Sixtus, and
Leo, purged themselves of some scandals.

Then he showed how Corrupt the present Pope was, both in his person and
Government, for which he was abhorred, even by some of his Cardinals, as
himself had heard and seen at Rome. It is true there was no Law to proceed
against a vicious Pope, for it was a thing not foreseen, and thought scarcely
possible, but new diseases required new remedies, and if a Pope that is an
Heretic may be judged in a Council, the same reason would hold against a
Symoniacal, Covetous and Impious Pope, who was Salt that had lost its favor.
And by several Authorities, he proved, that every man who lives so, is thereby
out of the Communion of the Church; and that as the Pre-eminence of the Sea of
Rome flowed only from the Laws of men, so there was now good cause to repeal
these, for the Pope, as was said in the Council of Basil, was only Vicar of the
Church, and not of Christ, so he was accountable to the Church. The Council of
Constance and the Divines of Paris had, according to the Doctrine of the
Ancient Church, declared the Pope to be subject to a General Council, which
many Popes in former Ages had confessed. And all that the Pope can claim even
by the Canon Law, is only to call and preside in a General Council, but not to
overrule it, or have a Negative vote in it.

The Power of Councils did not extend to Princes, Dominions, or Secular
Matters, but only to points of Faith, which they were to declare, and to
Condemn Heretics: nor were their Decrees Laws, till they were Enacted by
Princes. Upon this, he enlarged much to show, that though a Council did proceed
against a King (with which they then Threatened the King) that their Sentence
was of no force, as being without their Sphere. The determination of Councils
ought to be well considered and examined by the Scriptures, and in matters
indifferent, men ought to be left to their freedom, he taxed the severity of
Victors, Proceedings against the Churches of the East, about the day of Easter.
And concluded that as a Member of the Body is not cut off, except a Gangrene
comes in it, so no part of the Church ought to be cut off, but upon a great and
inevitable cause. And he very largely showed, with what moderation and charity
the Church should proceed even against those that held errors. And the Standard
of the Councils definitions, should only be taken from the Scriptures, and not
from men's Traditions.

He said, some General Councils had been rejected by others, and it was a
tender point, how much ought to be deferred to a Council; some Decrees of
Councils were not at all obeyed. The Divines of Paris held, that a Council
could not make a new Article of Faith, that was not in the Scriptures. And as
all Gods Promises to the people of Israel, had this condition employed within
them, If they kept his Commandments; so he thought the Promises to the
Christian Church, had this condition in them, If they kept the Faith. Therefore
he had much doubting in himself as to General Councils, and he thought that
only the word of God was the Rule of Faith, which ought to take place in all
Controversies of Religion. The Scriptures were called Canonical, as being the
only Rules of the Faith of Christians; and these by appointment of the Ancient
Councils, were only to be read in the Churches. The Fathers SS. Ambrose,
Jerome, and Austin, did in many things differ from one another, but always
appealed to the Scriptures as the common and certain standard. And he cited
some remarkable passage out of St. Austin, to show, what difference he put
between the Scriptures, and all the other Writings even of the best and holiest
Fathers. But when all the Fathers agreed in the Exposition of any place of
Scripture, he acknowledged, he looked on that as flowing from the Spirit of
God, and it was a most dangerous thing to be wise in our own Conceit: Therefore
he thought Councils ought to found their decisions on the word of God, and
those expositions of it, that had been agreed on by the Doctors of the Church.

Then he discoursed very largely what a person a Judge ought to be, he must not
be Partial, nor a Judge in his own Cause, nor so much as sit on the Bench when
it is tried, lest his presence should overawe others. Things also done upon a
common error cannot bind, when the error upon which they were done, comes to be
discovered; and all human Laws ought to be changed, when a public visible
inconvenience follows them. From which he concluded, that the Pope being a
Party, and having already passed his Sentence, in things which ought to be
examined by a General Council, could not be a Judge, nor sit in it. Princes
also, who upon a common mistake, thinking the Pope Head of the Church, had
sworn to him, finding that this was done upon a false ground, may pull their
Neck out of his Yoke, as every man may make his escape out of the hands of a
Robber. And the Court of Rome was so corrupt, that a Pope, though he meant
well, as Hadrian did, yet could never bring any good design to an issue; the
Cardinals and the rest of that Court being so engaged to maintain their
Corruptions.

These were the Heads of that Discourse, which it seems he gave them in writing
after he had delivered it; but he promised to entertain them with another
Discourse, of the Power the Bishops of the Christian Church have in their Sees,
and of the Power of a Christian Prince to make them do their duty; but that I
could never see, and I am afraid it is lost.

All this I thought necessary to open, to show the State of the Court, and the
Principles that the several Parties in it went upon, when the Reformation was
first brought under Consideration, in the third Period of this Kings Reign, to
which I am now advanced.

The end of the Second Book.
EFFIGIES VERA REVERENDISSIMI D. THOMAE CRANMERI ARCHIEPISCOPI CANTUARI^NSIS
HHolbein pinxit

Natus 1489 July 2. Consecratus 1533 Mar. 30. Martyrio Coronatus 1556 Mar. 21.

(...)


THE HISTORY OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England. BOOK III.
Of the other Transactions about Religion and Reformation, during the rest of
the Reign of King Henry the 8th.

THe King having passed through the Traverses and tossings of his Suit of
Divorce, 1535.
and having with the concurrence, both of his Clergy and Parliament, The r^^^
of the King^ Reign (...) troublesome.
brought about what he had projected, seemed now at ease in his own Dominions.
But though matters were carried in Public Assemblies smoothly and
successfully, yet there were many secret discontents, which being fomented,
both by the Pope, and the Emperors Agents, wrought him great trouble; so that
the rest of his life, was full of vexation and disquiet.

All that were zealously addicted to that which they called the Old Religion,
did conclude, that whatever firmness the King expressed to it now, was either
pretended out of Policy, for avoiding the Inconveniences, which the fears of a
Change might produce: or though he really intended to perform what he
professed; yet the Interests in which he must embarque, with the Princess of
Germany against the Pope and the Emperor, together with the Power that the
Queen had over him, and the credit Cranmer and Crom^ell had with him, would
prevail on him to change some things in Religion. And they looked on these
things, as so complicated together, that the change of any one must needs make
way for change in more, since that struck at the Authority of the Church, and
left people at liberty to dispute the Articles of Faith. This they thought was
a Gate opened to Heresy. And therefore they were everywhere meeting together,
and consulting, what should be done for suppressing Heresy, and preserving the
Catholic Faith.

That zeal was much inflamed by the Monks and Friars, who clearly saw the Acts
of Parliament, By the practices of the Monks and Friars.
were so levelled at their Exemptions and Immunities, that they were now like
to be at the Kings mercy. They were no more to plead their Bulls, nor claim any
Privileges, further than it pleased the King to allow them. No new Saints from
Rome could draw more Riches or Honor to their Orders. Privileges and
Indulgences were out of doors; so that the Arts of drawing in the people, to
enrich their Churches and Houses, were at an end. And they had also secret
Intimations, that the King and the Courtiers, had an eye on their Lands, and
they gave themselves for lost, if they could not so embroyl the Kings Affairs,
that he should not adventure on so invidious a thing: Therefore both in
Confessions and Conferences, they infused into the people a dislike of the
Kings Proceedings; which though for some time it did not break out into an open
Rebellion, yet the humor still fermented, and people only waited for an
opportunity: So that if the Emperor had not been otherwise distracted, he might
have made War upon the King* with great Advantages. For many of his
discontented Subjects, would have joined with the Enemy. But the King did so
dexterously manage his Leagues with the French King, and the Princes of the
Empire, that the Emperor could never make any impressions on his Dominions.

Which provoked the King to great severities.
But those factious Spirits, seeing nothing was to be expected from any foreign
Power, could not contain themselves, but broke out into open Rebellion. And
this provoked the King to great severities; His Spirit was so fretted, by the
tricks the Court of Rome had put on him, and by the Ingratitude and seditious
practices of Reginald Pool; that he thereby lost much of his former temper and
patience, and was too ready upon slight grounds, to bring his Subjects to the
Bar. Where though the matter was always so ordered, that according to Law they
were Endicted and Judged; yet the severity of the Law bordering sometimes on
rigor and cruelty, he came to be called a cruel Tyrant. Nor did his severity
lie only on one side: but being addicted to some Tenets of the Old Religion;
and impatient of Contradiction, or perhaps blown up, either with the vanity of
his new Title, of Head of the Church, or with the praises which Flatterers
bestowed on him; he thought all persons were bound, to regulate their Belief by
his Dictates, which made him prosecute Protestants, as well as proceed against
Papists. Yet it does not appear, that Cruelty was Natural to him. For in Twenty
five years Reign, none had suffered for any Crime against the State; but Pool
Earl of Suffolk, and Stafford, Duke of Buckingham. The former he prosecuted in
Obedience to his Fathers last Commands at his death. His severity to the other
was imputed to the Cardinals Malice. The Proceedings were also legal. And the
Duke of Buckingham, had by the knavery of a Priest, to whom he gave great
credit, been made believe he had a Right to the Crown; and practices of that
nature, touch Princes so nearly, that no wonder the Law was executed in such a
case. This shows, that the King was not very jealous, nor desirous of the
Blood of his Subjects. But though he always proceeded upon Law; yet in the last
Ten years of his Life, many instances of Severity occurred, for which he is
rather to be pityed, than either imitated or sharply censured.

The former Book was full of Intrigues and foreign Transactions; the greatest
part of it being an account of a tedious Negotiation, with the subtlest and
most refined Court in Christendom, in all the Arts of humane Policy. But now
my work is confined to this Nation; and except in short touches by the way, I
shall meddle no further with the Mysteries of State; but shall give as clear an
account of those things that relate to Religion and Reformation, as I could
possibly recover. The Suppression of Monasteries, The advance and declension of
Reformation, and the Proceedings against those, who adhered to the Interests of
the Court of Rome, must be the chief Subjects of this Book. The two former
shall be opened, in the series of time as they were Transacted. But the last
shall be left to the end of the Book, that it may be presented in one full view.

After the Parliament had ended their Business, The Bishops swear the Kings
supremacy.
the Bishops did all renew their Allegiance to the King, and swore also to
maintain his Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters; acknowledging that he was the
Supreme Head of the Church of England, though there was yet no Law for the
requiring of any such Oath. The first act of the Kings Supremacy was, his
naming Cromwell Vicar General, and General Visitor of all the Monasteries and
other Privileged places. This is commonly confounded with his following
Dignity of, Lord Vicegerent in Ecclesiastical matters; but they were two
different Places, and held by different Commissions. By the one he had no
Authority over the Bishops, nor had he any Precedence; but the other, as it
gave him the Precedence next the Royal Family, so it clothed him with a
complete Delegation of the Kings whole Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs. For Two
years he was only Vicar General. But the tenor of his Commissions, and the
nature of the Power devolved on him by them, cannot be fully known. For neither
the one, nor the other are in the Rolls, though there can be no doubt made, but
Commissions of such Importance were enrolled; therefore the loss of them can
only be charged, on that search and rasure of Records made by Bonner, upon the
Commission granted to him by Queen Mary, of which I have spoken in the Preface
of this work. In the Prerogative-Office there is a subalterne Commission
granted to Doctor (afterward Secretary) Petre, on Ian. 13. in the Twenty
Seventh year of the Kings Reign, by which it appears, that Cromwells Commission
was at first conceived in very General words, for he is called the Kings
Vicegerent, in Ecclesiastical causes, his Vicar General, and
Official-Principal. But because he could not himself attend upon all these
affairs, therefore Doctor Petre is deputed under him, for receiving the
Probates of Wills; from thence likewise it appears, that all Wills, where the
Estate was 200 lib. or above, were no more to be tried or proved in the Bishops
Courts, but in the Vicar-Generals Court. Yet though he was called Vicegerent
in that Commission, he was spoken of, and writ to, by the Name of
Vicar General; but after the second Commission, seen and mentioned by the Lord
Herbert, in July 1536. he was always designed Lord Vicegerent.

The next thing that was everywhere labored with great industry, was, to
engage all the rest of the Clergy, chiefly the Regulars, to own the Kings
Supremacy; To which they generally submitted. Anti^. Oxon. Lib. 1. Page 258

The Original Letter is in Cut. Lib. Cl^^. E. 4. F^b. 15.

The Francis can Friars refuse it.


In Oxford the Question being put whether the Pope had any other Jurisdiction
in England, than any other foreign Bishop, it was referred to Thirty Doctors
and Batchelors, who were empowered to set the University-Seal to their
Conclusion, they all agreed in the Negative, and the whole University being
examined about it man by man assented to their determination. All the
difficulty that I find made, was at Richmond, by the Franciscan Friars, where
the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield (Rowland Lee) and Thomas Bedyl, tendered
some Conclusions to them, among which, this was one. That the Pope if Rome, has
no greater jurisdiction in this Kingdom of England, by the Law of God, than any
other Foreign Bishop. This they told them was already subscribed, by the two
Archbishops, the Bishops of London, Winchester, Duresm, Bath, and all the
other Prelates, and Heads of Houses, and all the famous Clerks of the Realm.
And therefore they desired that the Friars, would refer the matter, to the Four
Seniors of the House, and acquiesce in what they should do. But the Friars
said, it concerned their Consciences, and therefore they would not submit it to
a small part of their House, they added, that they had sworn to follow the Rule
of St. Francis, and in that they would live and die; and cited a Chapter of
their Rule, That their Order should have a Cardinal for their Protector, by
whose directions they might be governed in their obedience to the Holy See. But
to this the Bishop answered, That St. Francis lived in Italy, where the Monks
and other Regulars that had Exemptions, were subject to the Pope, as they were
in England, to the Archbishop of Canterbury. And for the Chapter which they
cited, it was showed them, that it was not written by St. Francis, but made
since his time; and though it were truly a part of his Rule, it was told them
that no particular Rule, ought to be preferred to the Laws of the Land, to
which all Subjects were bound to give Obedience, and could not be excused from
it, by any voluntary Obligation under which they brought themselves. Yet all
this could not prevail on them, but they said to the Bishop, they had professed
St. Francis's Rule, and would still continue in the Observance of it.

But though I do not find such resistance made elsewhere, yet it appears, that
some secret practices of many of those Orders against the State were
discovered, A General visitation of Monasteries, is designed.
therefore it was resolved, that some effectual means, must be taken for
lessening their credit and Authority with the people; and so a general
Visitation of all Monasteries and other Religious Houses was resolved on. This
was chiefly advised, by Doctor Leighton, Orig. Cott. Lib. E. 4.
who had been in the Cardinals service with Cromwell, and was then taken notice
of by him, as a dextrous and diligent man, and therefore was now made use of on
this Occasion. He by a Letter to Cromwell advertised him, that upon a long
Conference with the Dean of the Arches, he found the Dean was of Opinion, that
it was not fit to make any Visitation in the Kings name yet, for Two or Three
years, till his Supremacy were better received; and that he apprehended a
severe Visitation so early, would make the Clergy more averse to the Kings
Power. But Leighton on the other hand, thought nothing would so much recommend
the Supremacy, as to see such good effects of it, as might follow upon a strict
and exact Visitation. And the Abuses of Religious persons were now so great and
visible, even to the Laity, That the Correcting and Reforming these, would be a
very popular thing. He writ further, That there had been no Visitation in the
Northern parts, since the Cardinal Ordered it: Therefore he advised one, and
desired to be employed in Yorkshire. And by another Letter, dated the 4th of
June, he wrote to Cromwell, desiring, that Doctor Lee, and he, might be
employed in Visiting all the Monasteries, from the Diocese of Lincoln
Northwards; which they could Manage better, than any body else, having great
kindred, and a large acquaintance in those parts: so that they would be able to
discover, all the disorders or seditious practices in these Houses. He
complained, that former Visitations had been slight and insignificant, and
promised great faithfulness and diligence both from himself and Doctor Lee.

The Archbishop of Canterbury was now making his Metropolitical Visitation,
having obtained the Kings License for it, which says, Cranmer make^ his
Metropolitical visitation.
That he having desired, that according to the Custom, and the Prerogative of
his Metropolitical See, he might make his Visitation; The King granted him
License to do it, and required all to assist and obey him; dated the 28th of
April. Things were not yet ripe for doing great matters; so that which he now
looked to, Rot. Pat. Regn. 26. Part. 1st.
was to see that all should submit to the Kings Supremacy; and renounce any
dependence on the Pope, whose name was to be struck out of all the Public
Offices of the Church. This was begun in May 1535. Stokesly Bishop of London,
submitted not to this Visitation, Regist. Stoks, Folio 44.
till he had entered Three Protestations, for keeping up of Privileges.

In October, began the great Visitation of Monasteries, which was committed to
several Commissioners. Leighton, The Kings Visitation begun.
Lee and London were most employed. But many others were also empowered to
Visit. For I find Letters from Robert Southwell, El^ice Price, John Ap-price,
Richard Southwell, John ^age, Richard Bellasis, Walt^r Hendle, and several
others, to Cromwell: giving him an account of the Progress they made in their
several Provinces. Their Commissions, if they were passed under the great Seal,
and enrolled, have been taken out of the Rolls; for there are none of them to
be found there. Yet I incline to think, they were not under the great Seal. In
MSS. D* G. Pierpoint.
For I have seen an Original Commission for the Visitation, that was next year,
which was only under the Kings hand and Signet. From which it may be inferred,
that the Commissions this year, were of the same nature: yet whether such
Commissions, could Authorize them, to grant Dispensations, and Discharge men
out of the Houses they were in, I am not skilled enough in Law to determine.
And by their Letters to Cromwell, I find they did assume Authority for these
things. So what their Power was, I am not able to discover. But besides their
Powers and Commissions, they got Instructions to direct them in their
Visitations, and Injunctions to be left in every House, of which, though I
could not recover the Originals, yet Copies of very good Authority I have seen,
which the Reader will find in the Collection at the end of this Book. Cott.
Lib. C^^op. E. 4.
The Instructions contain 86 Articles. The substance of them was, to try,

Whether Divine Service, was kept up day and night, in the right hours?
Instructions for the Visitation.
And how many were commonly present, and who were frequently absent?

Whether the full number, according to the Foundation, was in every House? See
Collect. N^^b. 1st.
Who were the Founders? What additions have been made since the Foundation? And
what were their Revenues? Whether it was ever changed from one Order to
another? By whom? And for what Cause?

What Mortmains they had? And whether their Founders were sufficiently
Authorized to make such Donations?

Upon what suggestions, and for what Causes they were exempted from their
Diocesans?

Their Local Statutes were also to be seen and examined.

The Election of their Head was to be enquired into. The Rule of every House
was to be considered. How many professed? And how many Novices were in it? And
at what time the Novices Professed?

Whether they knew their Rule and observed it? Chiefly the three Vows of,
Poverty, Chastity and Obedience? Whether any of them kept any money without the
Masters knowledge? Whether they kept company with women, within or without the
Monastery? Or if there were any back-doors, by which women came within the
precinct? Whether they had any boys lying by them?

Whether they observed the Rules of Silence, Fasting, Abstinence, and
Hair-shirts? Or by what warrant they were dispensed with, in any of these?

Whether they did Eat, Sleep, wear their Habit, and stay within the Monastery,
according to their Rules?

Whether the Master was too cruel, or too remiss? And whether he used the
Brethren without partiality or malice?

Whether any of the Brethren were incorrigible?

Whether the Master made his accounts faithfully once a year? Whether all the
other Officers made their accounts truly? And whether the whole Revenues of
the House were employed according to the intention of the Founders?

Whether the Fabric was kept up, and the Plate and Furniture were carefully
preserved?

Whether the Covent-Seal, and the Writings of the House were well kept? And
whether Leases were made by the Master to his Kindred and Friends, to the
damage of the House? Whether Hospitality was kept, and whether at the receiving
of Novices, any money or reward was demanded or promised? What care was taken
to instruct the Novices?

Whether any had entered into the House, in hope to be once the Master of it?

Whether in giving Presentations to Livings, the Master had reserved a Pension
out of them? Or what sort of Bargains he made concerning them?

An account was to be taken, of all the Parsonages and Vicarages belonging to
every House, and how these Benefices were disposed of, and how the Cure was
served.

All these things were to be inquired after in the Houses of Monks or Friars.
And in the Visitation of Nunneries, they were to Search.

Whether the House had a good Enclosure, and if the Doors and Windows were kept
shut, so that no man could enter at inconvenient hours?

Whether any men conversed with the Sisters alone, without the Abbesses leave?

Whether any Sister was forced to profess, either by her Kindred, or by the
Abbess?

Whether they went out of their precinct without leave? And whether they wore
their Habit then?

What employment they had out of the times of Divine Service? What familiarity
they had with Religious men? Whether they wrote Love Letters? Or sent and
received Tokens or Presents?

Whether the Confessor was a discreet and learned man, and of good reputation?
And how often a year the Sisters did Confess and Communicate?

They were also to visit all Collegiate Churches, Hospitals and Cathedrals, and
the Order of the Knights of Jerusalem. But if this Copy be complete, they were
only to view their Writings and Papers, to see what could be gathered out of
them, about the Reformation of Monastical Orders. And as they were to visit,
according to these Instructions, so they were to give some Injunctions in the
Kings Name.

That they should endeavor, all that in them lay, Injunctions for all
Religious Houses.
that the Act of the Kings Succession should be observed, (where it is said,
that they had under their Hands and Seals confirmed it. This shows, that all
the Religious Houses of England had acknowledged it: See Collect. Numb. 2 d.
) and they should teach the people, that the Kings Power was Supreme on Earth,
under God, and that the Bishop of Rome's Power was Usurped by Craft and Policy,
and by his ill Canons and Decretals, which had been long tolerated by the
Prince, but was now justly taken away.

The Abbot and Brethren were declared to be absolved from any Oath, they had
Sworn to the Pope, or to any Foreign Potentate; and the Satutes of any Order,
that did bind them to a Foreign Subjection, were abrogated and ordered to be
razed out of their Books.

That no Monk should go out of the precinct, nor any woman enter within it,
without leave from the King or the Visitor, and that there should be no entry
to it, but one.

Some Rules were given about their Meals, and a Chapter of the Old or New
Testament was ordered to be read at every one, The Abbots Table was to be
served with common Meats, and not with delicate and strange Dishes; and either
he, or one of the Seniors, were to be always there to entertain strangers.

Some other Rules follow about the distribution of their Alms, their
accommodation in Health and Sickness. One or two of every House, was to be kept
at the University; that when they were well Instructed, they might come and
teach others: And every day, there was to be a Lecture of Divinity for a whole
hour: The Brethren must all be well employed.

The Abbot or Head was every day to explain some part of the Rule, and apply it
according to Christ's Law; and to show them, that their Ceremonies were but
Elements, introductory to true Christianity; and that Religion consisted not in
Habits, or in such like Rites, but in cleanness of Heart, pureness of Living,
unfeigned Faith, Brotherly Charity, and true honoring of God in Spirit and
Truth: That therefore they must not rest in their Ceremonies, but ascend by
them to true Religion.

Other Rules are added about the Revenues of the House, and against Wastes, and
that none be entered into their House, nor admitted under twenty four years of
Age.

Every Priest in the House was to say Mass daily; and in it, to pray for the
King and Queen.

If any brake any of these Injunctions, he was to be denounced to the King, or
his Visitor-general. The Visitor had also Authority to punish any, whom he
should find guilty of any Crime, and to bring the Visitor-general, such of
their Books and Writings as he thought fit.

But before I give an account of this Visitation, I presume it will not be
ungrateful to the Reader, An account of the Progress of the Monastical state in
England.
to offer him some short view of the Rise and Progress of Monastic Orders in
England, and of the state they were in at this time. What the Ancient British
Monks were, or by what Rule they were Governed; whether it was from the Eastern
Churches, that this Constitution was brought into Britain, and was either
suited to the Rule of St. Anthony, St. Pachon, or St. Basil; or whether they
had it from France, where Sulpitius tells us, St. Martin set up Monasteries,
must be left to conjecture. But from the little that remains of them, we find
they were very numerous, and were obedient to the Bishop of Caerleon, as all
the Monks of the Primitive times were to their Bishops, according to the Canons
of the Council of Chalcedon.

But upon the confusions which the Gothic Wars brought into Italy, Be^edict
and others set up Religious Houses; and more artificial Rules and Methods were
found out for their Government. Not long after that, Austin the Monk came into
England; and having Baptized Ethelbert, he persuaded him to Found a Monastery
at Canterbury, which the King, The Exemptions of Monasteries.

See Monasticon.


by his Charter, exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop and his
Successors. This was not only done by Austins consent, but he by another
Writing confirms this Foundation; and exempted both the Monastery and all the
Churches belonging to it, from his, or his Successors Jurisdictions; and most
earnestly conjures his Successors, never to give any trouble to the Monks, who
were only to be subject to their own Abbot. And this was granted, that they
might have no disturbance in the Service of God. But (whether this, with many
other Ancient Foundations, were not latter Forgeries, which I vehemently
suspect, I leave to Critics to discuss) the next Exemption, that I find, was
granted in the year 680, to the Abbey of Peterborough, by Pope Agatho, and was
Signed by Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, called the Popes Legate (this I
doubt was Forged afterward.) In the year 725, King Ina's Charter to the Abbey
of Glassenbury, relates to their Ancient Charters, and exempts them from the
Bishops Jurisdiction. King Offa Founded, and exempted the Monastery of St.
Albans, in the year 793, which Pope Honorius the 3d Confirmed, Anno 1218,
Kenulph King of Mercia founded and exempted Abington, in the year 821. Knut
Founded and exempted St. Edmundsbury in the year 1020.

About the end of the Eighth Century, the Danes began to make their descents
into England, and made everywhere great depredations; Monasteries generally
wasted and deserted.
and finding the Monks had possessed themselves, of the greatest part of the
Riches of the Nation, they made their most frequent inroads upon these places
where they knew the Richest spoil was to be found. And they did so wast and
ruin these Houses, Antiquit. Britan.
that they were generally abandoned by the Monks, who as they loved the ease
and wealth they had enjoyed formerly in their Houses, so had no mind to expose
themselves, to the persecutions of those heathenish Invaders. But when they had
deserted their Seats, the Secular Clergy came and possessed them; so that in
King Edgars time, there was scarce a Monk in all England. But are again set up
by King Edgar.
He was a most dissolute and lewd Prince, but being persuaded by Dunstan and
other Monks, that what he did toward the restoring of that decayed State,
would be a matter of great Merit, became the great Promoter of the Monastical
State in England; For he converted most of the Chapters into Monasteries; and
by his Foundation of the Priory of Worcester, it appears, he had then founded
no fewer then Forty Seven, which he intended to increase to Fifty, the number
of Pardon. Yet in his Foundations, he only exempted the Monasteries, from all
exactions or dues, which the Bishops claimed. There are Exemptions of several
rates and sizes: Some Houses were only Exempted from all Exactions; others from
all Jurisdiction or Visitations; others had only an Exemption for their
precinct; others for all the Churches that belonged to them. Edward the
Confessor exempted many of these Houses, which Edgar had founded, as Ramsey
etc. He also founded and Exempted Coventry and Westminster, and the Exemption
of the last, was likewise confirmed by Pope Nicolas, in a Bull to King Edward.
William the Conqueror Founded and Exempted the Abbey of Battle from all
Episcopal Jurisdiction.

But after that time I do not find, that our Kings exempted Abbeys from any
thing, but Episcopal Exactions; for though formerly Kings had made Laws, and
given Orders about Ecclesiastical matters, yet now the claim to an Immunity
from the Civil Jurisdiction, and also the Papal Authority, were grown to that
height, that Princes were to meddle no more with sacred things. And henceforth
all Exemptions were granted by the Popes, who claimed a Jurisdiction over the
whole Church; and assumed that Power to themselves with many other Usurpations.

All the Ancient Foundations were subscribed by the King, Arts used by the
Monks for enriching their Houses.
the Queen, and Prince, with many Bishops and Abbots, and Dukes and Earls
consenting. The Abbeys being exempted from all jurisdiction, both Civil and
Spiritual, and from all Impositions; and having generally the Privilege of
Sanctuary for all that fled to them, were at ease, and accountable to none, so
they might do what they pleased. They found also means to enrich themselves,
First by the belief of Purgatory. For they persuaded all people, that the Souls
departed, went generally thither; few were so Holy, as to go straight to
Heaven; and few so bad, as to be cast to Hell. Then people were made believe,
that the saying of Masses for their Souls, gave them great relief in their
Torments, and did at length deliver them out of them. This being generally
received, it was thought by all a piece of piety to their Parents, and of
necessary care for themselves, and their families, to give some part of their
Estates toward the enriching of these Houses, for having a Mass said every day
for the Souls of their Ancestors, and for their own, after their death. And
this did so spread, that if some Laws had not restrained their profuseness, the
greater part of all the Estates in England, had been given to those Houses. But
the Statutes of Mortmain were not very effectual restrains; for what King
soever had refused to grant a Mortmain, was sure to have an uneasy reign ever
after.

Yet this did not satisfy the Monks, but they fell upon other contrivances, to
get the best of all men's Jewels, Plate, and Furniture. For they persuaded them,
that the protection and intercession of Saints, were of mighty use to them; so
that whatsoever respect they put on the Shrines and Images, but chiefly on the
Relics of Saints, they would find their account in it, and the Saints would
take it kindly at their hands, and intercede the more earnestly for them. And
people who saw Courtiers much wrought on by presents, imagined the Saints were
of the same temper; only with this difference, that Courtiers love to have
Presents put in their own hands, but the Saints were satisfied, if they were
given to others. And as in the Courts of Princes, the new Favorite commonly
had greatest credit, so every new Saint was believed to have a greater force in
his Addresses; and therefore every body was to run to their Shrines, and make
great Presents to them. This being infused into the credulous Multitude, they
brought the richest things they had, to the places where the bodies or Relics
of those Saints were laid. Some Images were also believed, to have a peculiar
Excellency in them; and Pilgrimages and Presents to these, were much
magnified. But to quicken all this, the Monks found the means, either by dreams
and visions, or strange Miraculous stories, to feed the devotion of the people.
Relics without number, were everywhere discovered; and most wonderful
relations of the Martyrdom, and other miracles of the Saints, were made and
read in all places to the people; and new Improvements were daily made in a
Trade, that through the craft of the Monks, and the simplicity of the people,
brought in great advantages. And though there was enough got to enrich them
all, yet there was strange rivalling, not only among the several Orders, but
the Houses of the same Order. The Monks, especially, of Glassenbury, St.
Albans, and St. Edmundsbury, vied one with another, who could tell the most
extravagant stories, for the honor of their House, and of the Relics in it.

The Monks in these Houses abounding in wealth, and living at ^ase and in
idleness, They became generally corrupted.
did so degenerate, that from the Twelfth Century downward, their reputation
abated much; and the Privileges of Sanctuaries, were a general Grievance, and
often complained of in Parliaments: For they received all that fled to them,
which put a great stop to Justice, and did encourage the most criminal
offenders. They became lewd and dissolute, and so impudent in it, that some of
their farms were let, for bringing in a yearly tribute to their Lusts: nor did
they keep Hospitality and relieve the poor; but rather encouraged Vagabonds and
Beggars, against whom Laws were made, both in Edward the 3d, King Henry the
7th, and this Kings Reign.

But from the Twelfth Century, Upon which the Begging Friars grew much in
credit.
the Orders of Begging Friars were set up, and they by the appearance of
Severity and Mortification, gained great esteem. At first they would have
nothing, no real estates, but the ground on which their House stood. But
afterward distinctions were found, for satisfying their Consciences in larger
Possessions. They were not so idle and lazy as the Monks, but went about and
Preached, and heard Confessions, and carried about Indulgences, with many other
pretty little things, Agnus Del's, Rosaries, and Pebles, which they made the
World believe, had great virtue in them. And they had the esteem of the people,
wholly engrossed to themselves. They were also more formidable to Princes, than
the Monks, because they were poorer, and by consequence, more hardy and bold.
There was also a firmer union of their whole Order, they having a General at
Rome, and being divided into many Provinces, subject to their Provincials. They
had likewise the Schooll-Learning wholly in their hands, and were great
Preachers, so that many things concurred, to raise their esteem with the people
very high, yet great Complaints lay against them, for they went more abroad
than the Monks did, and were believed guilty of Corrupting Families. The
Scandals that went on them, upon their relaxing the primitive strictness of
their Orders, were a little rectified by some Reformations of these Orders. But
that lasted not long; for they became liable to much Censure, and many
visitations had been made, but to little purpose. This Concurring with their
secret practices against the King, both in the matter of his Divorce and
Supremacy, made him more willing to examine the truth of these reports; that if
they were found guilty of such scandals, they might lose their credit with the
people, and occasions be ministered to the King, to justify the Suppression of
them.

There were also two other Motives, that inclined the King to this Counsel. The
one was, The Kings secret motives for dissolving these Houses.
that he apprehended a War from the Emperor, who was then the only Prince in
the World, that had any considerable force at Sea; having both great Fleets in
the Indies, and being Prince of the Netherlands, where the greatest trade of
these parts was driven. Therefore the King judged it necessary to fortify his
Ports, and seeing the great advantages of Trade, which began then to rise much,
was resolved to encourage it: For which end he intended to build many Havens
and Harbors. This was a matter of great charge, and as his own revenue could
not defray it, so he had no mind to lay heavy Taxes on his Subjects, therefore
the Suppression of Monasteries, was thought, the easiest way of raising Money.

He also intended to erect many more Bishoprics, to which Cranmer advised him
much, that the vastness of some Diocesses, being reduced to a narrower compass,
Bishops might better discharge their duties, and oversee their Flocks,
according to the Scriptures and the Primitive Rules.

But Cranmer did on another reason, press the Suppression of Monasteries. He
found that their Foundations, and whole State, was inconsistent with a full and
true Reformation. C^anmers design in it.
For among the things to be reformed, were these Abuses, which were essential
to their Constitution; (such as the Belief of Purgatory, of Redeeming Souls by
Masses, the worship of Saints and Images, and Pilgrimages, and the like.) And
therefore those Societies, whose interest it was to oppose the Reformation,
were once to be suppressed: and then he hoped, upon new Endowments and
Foundations, new Houses should have been erected at every Cathedral, to be
Nurseries for that whole Diocese; which he thought would be more suitable, to
the primitive use of Monasteries, and more profitable to the Church. This was
his Scheme, as will afterward appear; which was in some measure effected,
though not so fully as he projected, for Reasons to be told in their proper
place.

First Monastery that was dissolved.
There had been a Bull sent from Rome, for dissolving some Monasteries, and
Erecting Bishoprics out of them, as was related in the former Book, in the
year 1532. And it seems it was upon that Authority, that in the year 1533. the
Priory of Christ's Church near Algate in London, was dissolved, and given to the
Lord Chancellor Sir Thomas Audley; (not to make him speak shriller for his
Master in the House of Commons, as Fuller mistakes it; for he had been Lord
Chancellor a year before this was given him.) The Popes Authority not being at
that time put down, nor the Kings Supremacy set up, I conjecture it was done,
pursuant to the Bull for the Dissolution of some Religious Houses; but I never
saw the Dissolution, and so can only guess, Act. 10. Rot. Parl. Regn. 25.
on what ground it was made. But in the Parliament held the former year, in
which the Kings Grant of that House, to the Lord Chancellor was confirmed, it
is said in the Preamble, That the Prior and Convent, had resigned that House to
the King the 24th of February 23d Regni. and had left their House; but no
mention is made, upon what Reason they did it.

The Proceedings of the Visitors.
But now I come to Consider, how the Visitors carried on their Visitations. Many
severe things are said of their Proceedings, nor is it any wonder, that men who
had traded so long in lies, as the Monks had done; should load those whom they
esteemed the Instruments of their Ruin, Cott. Lib. Cleop. E. 4.
with many Calumnies. By their Letters to Cromwell it appears, that in most
Houses, they found Monstrous disorders. That many fell down on their knees, and
prayed they might be discharged, since they had been forced to make vows
against their wills; with these the Visitors dispensed, and set them at
liberty. They found great Factions in the Houses, and Barbarous Cruelties
exercised by one Faction, against another, as either of them prevailed. In many
places, when they gave them the Kings injunctions, many cried out, that the
severity of them was intolerable, and they desired rather to be suppressed,
than so reformed. They were all extremely addicted to Idolatry and
Superstition. In some they found the instruments, and other tools for
multiplying and coining.

But for the Lewdness of the Confessors of Nunneries, and the great Corruption
of that State, whole Houses being found almost all with Child; for the
dissoluteness of Abbots and the other Monks and Friars, not only with whores,
but Married Women; and for their unnatural Lusts and other brutal practices;
these are not fit to be spoken of, much less enlarged on, in a work of this
Nature. The full report of this Visitation is lost, Ibid.
yet I have seen an Extract of a part of it, concerning 144 Houses, that
contains Abominations in it, equal to any that were in Sodom.

One passage that is more remarkable, I shall only set down; because upon it
followed the first Resignation of any Religious House, Some House^ resigned up
to the King.
that I could ever find. Doctor Leighton beset the Abbot of Langdens House, and
broke open his door of a sudden, and found his whore with him; and in the
Abbots Coffer, there was an habit for her, for she went for a young Brother.
Whether the shame of this discovery, or any other consideration prevailed with
him, I know not; but on the 13th of November, he, and Ten Monks Signed a
Resignation, which has an odd kind of Preamble, to be found in the Collection.
It says, that the revenue of the House, was so much endamaged, and engaged in
so much debt, Collect. Numb. 3.

Sect. 1.


that they Considering this, and what remedies might be found for it, saw, that
except the King, of whose Foundation the House was, did speedily relieve them,
it must be very quickly ruined, both as to its Spiritual and Temporal concerns;
therefore they surrender up their House to the King. They were of the Order of
Premonstre, and their House was dedicated, to the honor of the Blessed Virgin,
and St. Thomas Becket. This precedent was followed, by the like surrender, with
the same Preamble, on the 15th of November, The Original of these Resignations
are in the Augmentation Office, and enrolled, Rot. Claus. Part. ^st. Regn. 27.
by the Prior of Folkeston a Benedictin, aand on the 16th, by the Prior of
Dover, with Eight Monks. These were all of them in the County of Kent. But
neither among the Original Surrenders, nor in the Clause Rolls, are there any
other Deeds, in this year of our Lord, there are indeed in the same year of the
King, (which runs till April 1536.) four other Surrenders, with the same
Preambles. Of Merton in Yorkshire, a Covent of Augustinians, signed by the
Prior and Five Monks, the 9th of February, of Bilsingtoun in Kent, Signed by
the Prior and Two Monks, the 21st of February, of Tilty in Essex, a Covent of
Cistercians, Signed by the Prior and Five Monks, and of Hornby in Yorkshire, a
Covent of the Premonstre, Signed by the Prior and Two Monks the 23d of March.
These were all the Surrenders, that I can discover to have been made, before
the Act of Parliament, for suppressing the lesser Monasteries, passed in the
next Session that was assembled in February.

But before that, the afflicted and unfortunate Queen Katharine died, at
Kimbolton; She had been much disquieted, 1536.
because she would not lay down her Title of Queen. The death of Queen
Katharine.
Many of her servants were put from her, on that account; but she would accept
of no Service, from any that did not use her as a Queen, and call her so. The
King sent often to her, to persuade her, to more Compliance. But she stood her
ground, and said, since the Pope had judged her Marriage good, Originals. Otho.
C. 10. Cott. Lib.
she would lose her life, before she did any thing in prejudice of it. She
became more cheerful, than she had wont to be; and the Country people came
much to her, whom she received, and used very Obligingly. The King had a mind
she should go to Fotheringhay-Castle. But when it was proposed to her, she
plainly said, she would never go thither, unless she were carried as a
Prisoner, bound with Ropes. She desired leave to come nearer London; but that
was not granted. She had the jointure that was assigned her, as Princess
Dowager; and was treated with the respect due to that Dignity, but all the
Women about her, still called her Queen. I do not find she had any thoughts of
going out of England; though her Life in it was but Melancholy. Yet her care to
support her Daughters Title, made her bear all the Disgraces, she lay under.
The Officious and practicing Clergy, that were for the Court of Rome, looked on
her as the Head of their Party, and asserted her Interests much. Yet she was so
watched, that she could not hold any great Correspondence with them; though in
the matter of the Maid of Kent, she had some Meddling.

When she sicken'd, she made her Will; and appointed her Body to be buried, in
a Convent of Observant Friars, (who had done and suffered most for her;) and
Ordered Five Hundred Masses to be said for her Soul; and that one should go a
Pilgrimage, to our Lady of Walsingham, and give Two Hundred Nobles by the way
to the poor. Some other small Legacies, she left to her Servants. When the King
heard she was sick, he sent a kind Message to her; and the Emperors Ambassador
went to see her, and to cheer her up, but when she found her sickness like to
prove Mortal; she made one about her, write a Letter in her name, to the King.
In the Title she called him, Her dear Lord, King and Husband. She advised him
to look to the health of his Soul. She forgave him, all the Troubles he had
cast her into. She recommended their Daughter Mar^ to him, and desired he would
be a Loving Father to her. She also desired, that he would provide Matches for
her Maids, who were but Three; and that he would give her Servants one years
Wages, more than was due to them And Concluded lastly, I make this Vow, That
mine eyes desire you above all things. By another Letter, she recommended her
Daughter to the Emperors care. On the 8th of January she dyed, in the Fiftyeth
year of her Age, Thirty Three years after she came to England. She was a devout
and pious Princess, and led a severe and mortified Life. In her Greatness, she
wrought much with her own hands, and kept her Women, well employed about her;
as appeared, when the Two Legates came once to speak with her. She came out to
them with a Skein of silk about her Neck, and told them, she had been within,
at work with her Women. She was most passionately devoted, to the Interests of
the Court of Rome, they being so interwoven with her own. And in a word, she is
represented as a most wonderful good Woman. Only I find on many occasions, that
the King complained much, of her uneasiness and peevishness. But whether the
fault was in her humor, or in the Provocations, she met with, the Reader may
conjecture. The King received the news of her death, with some regrett. But he
would not give leave to bury her, as she had ordered; but made her body be laid
in the Abbey Church of Peterborough, which he afterward Converted to an
Episcopal Cathedral. But Queen Anne did not carry her death so decently; for
she expressed too much joy at it, both in her Carriage and dress.

On the 4th of February the Parliament sat, 1536.
upon a Prorogation of 14th Months, (for in the Record there is no mention of
any intermedial Prorogation,) where a great many Laws, relating to Civil
concerns, A new Session of Parliament.
were passed. By the 15th Act, the Power that had been given by a former Act to
the King, for naming thirty two Persons, to make a Collection of Ecclesiastical
Laws, was again confirmed; for nothing had been done upon the former Act. But
there was no limitation of time in this Act, and so there was nothing done in
pursuance of it.

The great business of this Session of Parliament, The lesser Monasteries are
suppressed.
was the suppressing the lesser Monasteries. How this went thorough the two
Houses, we cannot know from the Journals, for they are lost. But all the
Historians of that time, tell us, that the report which the Visitors made to
the King, was read in Parliament; which represented the manners of these Houses
so odiously, that the Act was easily carried. The Preamble bears, That small
Religious Houses, under the number of twelve Persons, had been long and
notoriously guilty of vicious and abominable Living; and did much consume and
waste, their Churches, Lands, and other things belonging to them; and that for
above two hundred years, there had been many Visitations for reforming these
Abuses, but with no success; their vicious living increasing daily: So that
except small Houses were dissolved, and the Religious put into greater
Monasteries, there could no Reformation be expected in that matter. Whereupon
the King having received a full information of these Abuses, both by his
Visitors and other credible ways; and considering that there were diverse great
Monasteries, in which Religion was well kept and observed, which had not the
full number in them, that they might and ought to receive, had made a full
Declaration of the Premises in Parliament. Whereupon it was Enacted, That all
Houses which might spend yearly 200 l. or within it, should be suppressed, and
their Revenues converted to better uses, and they compelled to reform their
Lives. The Lord Herbert thinks it strange, that the Statute in the printed
Book, has no Preamble, but begins bluntly. Fuller tell us, that he wonders,
that Lord did not see the Record; and he sets down the Preamble, and says, The
rest follow as in the printed Statute, Chap. 27th. by a mistake for the 28th.
This shows, that neither the one, nor the other, ever looked on the Record. For
there is a particular Statute of Dissolution, distinct from the 28th Chap. And
the Preamble which Fuller sets down, belongs not to the 28th Chapter, as he
says, but to the 18th Chapter, which was never printed: and the 28th relates in
the Preamble, to that other Statute, which had given these Monasteries to the
King.

The reasons, that were pretended for dissolving these Houses, were: Reasons
for doing it.
That whereas there was but a small number of persons in them, they entered into
Confederacies together, and their Poverty set them on, to use many ill arts to
grow Rich. They were also much abroad, and kept no manner of Discipline in
their Houses. But those Houses were generally much richer, than they seemed to
be: For the Abbots raising great Fines out of them, held the Leases still low;
and by that means they were not obliged to entertain a greater number in their
House, and so enriched themselves and their Brethren by the Fines that were
raised: For many Houses then rented at two hundred pounds, were worth many
thousands, as will appear to any that compares, what they were then valued at,
(which is Collected by Speed,) with what their Estates are truly worth. When
this was passing in Parliament, Stokesl^y, Bishop of London said, These lesser
Houses were as Thorns soon plucked up, but the great Abbots were like putrified
old Oaks; yet they must needs follow, and so would others do in Christendom,
before many years were passed.

By another Act, all these Houses, their Churches, Lands, and all their Goods
were given to the King, and his Heirs and Successors, together with all other
Houses, which within a year before the making of the Act, had been dissolved or
suppressed: And for the gathering the Revenues that belonged to them, a new
Court was Erected, called the Court of the Augmentations of the Kings Revenue;
which was to consist of a Chancellor, a Treasurer, an Attorney and Solicitor,
and ten Auditors, seventeen Receivers, a Clerk, an Usher, and a Messenger. This
Court was to bring in the Revenues of such Houses as were now dissolved,
excepting only such as the King by his Letters Patent, continued in their
former state, appointing a Seal for the Court, with full Power and Authority to
dispose of these Lands so as might be most for the Kings Service.

Thus ^ell the lesser Abbeys, to the number of 376, and soon after, this
Parliament, which had done the King such eminent Service, and had now sat six
years, was dissolved, on the 14th of April.

In the Convocation, a motion was made of great consequence; That there should
be a Translation of the Bible in English, The Translation of the Bible in
English designed.
to be set up in all the Churches of England. The Clergy, when they procured
Tindalls Translation to be condemned, and suppressed it, gave out that they
intended to make a Translation into the Vulgar-Tongue: Yet it was afterward,
upon a long Consultation, Resolved, that it was free for the Church to give the
Bible in a Vulgar-Tongue, or not, as they pleased; and that the King was not
obliged to it, and that at that time it was not at all expedient to do it. Upon
which, those that promoted the Reformation, made great complaints, and said, it
was visible, the Clergy knew there was an opposition between the Scriptures and
their Doctrine. That they had first condemned Wickliffs Translation, and then
Tindalls; and though they ought to teach men the Word of God, yet they did all
they could to suppress it.

In the times of the Old Testament, the Scriptures were writ in the
Vulgar-Tongue, and all were charged to read and remember the Law. The reasons
for it.
The Apostles wrote in Greek, which was then the most common Language in the
World. Christ did also appeal to the Scriptures, and sent the people to them.
And by what St. Paul says of Timothy, it appears, that children were then early
trained up in that study. In the Primitive Church, as Nations were converted to
the Faith, the Bible was Translated into their Tongue. The Latin Translation
was very Ancient; the Bible was afterward put into the Scythian, Dalmatian and
Gothic Tongues. It continued thus for several Ages, till the state of Monkery
rose; And then, when they engrossed the riches, and the Popes assumed the
Dominion of the World, it was not consistent with these Designs, nor with the
Arts used to promote them, to let the Scriptures be much known: Therefore
Legends and strange stories of Visions, with other devices, were thought more
proper for keeping up their Credit, and carrying on their Ends.

It was now generally desired, that if there were just exceptions against what
Tindal had done, these might be amended in a New Translation. This was a
plausible thing, and wrought much on all that heard it; who plainly concluded,
that those who denied the people the use of the Scriptures in their vulgar
tongues, must needs know their own Doctrine and practices to be inconsistent
with it. Upon these grounds Cranmer, who was projecting the most effectual
means for promoting a Reformation of Doctrine, moved in Convocation, that they
should Petition the King for leave to make a Translation of the Bible. But
Gardener and all his party opposed it, both in Convocation, and in secret with
the King. It was said, that all the Heresies and extravagant Opinions, which
were then in Germany, and from thence coming over to England, The Opposition
made to it.
sprang from the free use of the Scriptures. And whereas in May the last year,
Nineteen Hollanders were accused of some Heretical Opinions; denying Christ to
be both God and man, or that he took Flesh and Blood of the Virgin Mary, or
that the Sacraments had any effect on those that received them; in which
opinions Fourteen of them remained Obstinate, and were burnt by pairs in
several places; it was complained, that all those drew their Damnable errors
from the indiscreet use of the Scriptures. And to offer the Bible in the
English tongue to the whole Nation, during these distractions, would prove, as
they pretended, the greatest Snare that could be. Therefore they proposed, that
there should be a short exposition of the most useful and necessary Doctrines
of the Christian Faith, given to the people in the English tongue, for the
Instruction of the Nation, which would keep them in a certain Subjection to the
King and the Church, in Matters of Faith.

The other party, though they liked well the publishing such a Treatise in the
vulgar tongue, yet by no means thought that sufficient; but said, the people
must be allowed to search the Scripture, by which they might be convinced that
such Treatises were according to it. These Arguments prevailed with the Two
Houses of Convocation. So they petitioned the King, that he would give order to
some, to set about it. To this, great Opposition was made at Court. Some, on
the one hand, told the King, that a diversity of opinions would arise out of
it; and that he could no more Govern his Subjects, if he gave way to that. But
on the other hand, it was represented, that nothing would make his Supremacy so
acceptable to the Nation, and make the Pope more hateful, than to let them see,
that whereas the Popes had Governed them by a blind obedience, and kept them in
darkness, the King brought them into the light, and gave them the free use of
the word of God. And nothing would more effectually extirpate the Popes
Authority, and discover the Impostures of the Monks, than the Bible in English;
in which all people would clearly discern, there was no Foundation for those
things. These Arguments, joined with the Power that the Queen had in his
affections, were so much considered by the King, that he gave order for setting
about it immediately. To whom that work was committed, or how they proceeded in
it, I know not. For the Account of these things has not been preserved, nor
conveyed to us, with that care that the Importance of the thing required. Yet
it appears that the work was carried on at a good rate: for Three years after
this, it was Printed at Paris; which shows they made all convenient have, in a
thing that required so much deliberation.

The fall of Queen Anne.
But this was the last public good Act of this unfortunate Queen; who, the
nearer she drew to her end, grew more full of good works. She had distributed,
in the last Nine Months of her Life, between Fourteen and Fifteen Thousand
Pounds to the poor, and was designing great and public good things. And by all
appearance, if she had lived, the Money that was raised by the Suppression of
Religious Houses, had been better employed than it was. In January, she brought
forth a dead Son. This was thought to have made ill Impressions on the King:
and that, as he concluded from the death of his Sons by the former Queen, that
the Marriage was displeasing to God; so he might upon this misfortune, begin to
make the like Judgment of this Marriage. Sure enough the Popish party were
earnestly set against the Queen, looking on her as the great supporter of
Heresy. And at that time, Fox then Bishop of Hereford was in Germany at
Smalcald, treating a League with the Protestant Princes, who insisted much on
the Ausburg Confession. There were many Conferences between Fox and Doctor
Barnes, The whole Popish party drove it on.
and some others, with the Lutheran Divines, for accommodating the differences
between them, and the thing was in a good forwardness. All which was imputed to
the Queen. Gardener was then Ambassador in France, and wrote earnestly to the
King, to dissuade him from entering into any Religious League with these
Princes: for that would alienate all the World from him, and dispose his own
Subjects to Rebel. The King thought the German-Princes and Divines should have
submitted all things to his Judgment, and had such an Opinion of his own
Learning, and was so puffed up with the flattering praises that he daily heard,
that he grew impatient of any opposition, and thought that his Dictates should
pass for Oracles. And because the Germans would not receive them so, his mind
was alienated from them.

But the Duke of Norfolk at Court, and Gardener beyond Sea, thought there might
easily be found a mean to accommodate the King, both with the Emperor and the
Pope, if the Queen were once out of the way; for then he might freely Marry any
one whom he pleased, and that Marriage, with the Male Issue of it, could not be
disputed: Whereas, as long as the Queen lived, her Marriage, as being judged
Null from the beginning, could never be allowed by the Court of Rome, or any of
that Party: with these reasons of State, others of affection concurred. The
Queen had been his Wife Three years; but at this time he entertained a secret
Love for Jane Seimour, who had all the charms both of Beauty and Youth in her
person; and her humor was tempered, between the severe gravity of Queen
Katharine, and the gay pleasantness of Queen Anne. The Queen perceiving this
Alienation of the Kings heart, used all possible Arts to recover that
affection, of whose decay she was sadly sensible. But the Success was quite
contrary to what she designed. For the King saw her no more with those eyes,
1535.
which she had formerly captivated; but grew jealous, and ascribed these
caresses to some other criminal affections, of which he began to suspect her.
This being one of the most memorable passages of this Reign, I was at more than
ordinary pains to learn all I could concerning it, and have not only seen a
great many Letters that were writ, by those that were set about the Queen, and
caught every thing that fell from her, and sent it to Court, but have also seen
an account of it, which the Learned Spelman, who was a Judge at that time, writ
with his own hand in his Commonplace Book, and another account of it writ by
one Anthony Anthony a Surveyor of the Ordnance of the Tower. From all which I
shall give a just and faithful relation of it, without concealing the least
circumstance, that may either seem favorable or unfavourable to her.

She was of a very cheerful temper, The Kings jealousy of her.
which was not always limited within the bounds of exact decency and
discretion. She had rallied some of the Kings Servants, more than became her.
Her Brother, the Lord Rochford, was her Friend as well as Brother; but his
spiteful Wife was jealous of him: and being a Woman of no sort of Virtue, (as
will appear afterward by her serving Queen Katharine Howard in her beastly
practices, for which she was attainted and executed,) she carried many Stories
to the King, or some about him, to persuade, that there was a familiarity
between the Queen and her Brother, beyond what so near a Relation could
justify. All that could be said for it, was only this; that he was once seen
leaning upon her Bed, which bred great suspicion. Henry Norris, that was Groom
of the Stole, Weston, and Brereton, that were of the Kings Privy-Chamber, and
one Mark Smeton, a Musician, were all observed to have much of her favor. And
their zeal in serving her, was thought too warm and diligent to flow from a
less active Principle than Love. Many circumstances were brought to the King,
which working upon his aversion to the Queen, together with his affection to
Mistress Seimour, made him conclude her guilty. Yet somewhat which himself
observed, or fancied, at a Tilting at Greenwich, is believed to have given the
Crisis to her Ruin. It is said, that he spied her let her Handkerchief fall to
one of her Gallants to wipe his face, being hot after a Course. Whether she
dropped it carelessly, or of design; or whether there be any truth in that story,
the Letters concerning her fall, making no mention of it, I cannot determine;
for Spelman makes no mention of it, and gives a very different account of the
discovery in these words. As for the evidence of this matter, it was discovered
by the Lady Wingfield, who had been a Servant to the Queen, and becoming on a
sudden infirm sometime before her death, did swear this matter to one of
her..... and here unluckily the rest of the Page is torn off. By this it seems,
there was no legal evidence against the Queen, and that it was but a Witness at
second hand, who deposed what they heard the Lady Wingfield swear. Who this
person was we know not, nor in what temper of mind the Lady Wingfield might be,
when she swore it. The safest sort of forgery, to one whose Conscience can
swallow it, is to lay a thing on a dead persons name, where there is no fear of
discovery before the great day: and when it was understood that the Queen had
lost the Kings heart, many, either out of their zeal to Popery, or design to
make their fortune, might be easily induced to carry a story of this Nature.
And this it seems was that which was brought to the King at Greenwich, who did
thereupon immediately return to Whitehall, it being the 1st of May. The Queen
was immediately restrained to her Chamber, the other Five were also seized on:
But none of them would confess any thing, but Mark Smeton, as to any actual
thing, so Cromwell writ. Upon this they were carried to the Tower. The Letters
about this Cott. Lib. Otho C. 10.
The poor Queen was in a sad condition; she must not only fall under the Kings
displeasure, but be both defamed and destroyed at once. At first she smiled and
carried it cheerfully; and said, she believed the King did this only to prove
her. But when she saw it was in earnest; she desired to have the Sacrament in
her Closet, and expressed great devotion, and seemed to be prepared for death.

The surprise and confusion she was in, raised fits of the Mother, which those
about her did not seem to understand: But Three or Four Letters, which were,
writ concerning her to Court, say, that she was at some times very devout, and
cried much; and of a sudden would burst out in Laughter, which are evident
signs of Vapors. When she heard that those who were accused with her, were
sent to the Tower, she then concluded her self lost; and said, she should be
sent thither next; and talked idly, saying, That if her Bishops were about
the King, they would all speak for her. She also said, That she would be a
Saint in Heaven, for she had done many good deeds; and that there should be no
Rain, but heavy judgments on the Land, for what they were now doing to her. Her
Enemies had now gone too far, not to destroy her. Next day she was carried to
the Tower, and some Lords, that met her on the River, declared to her what her
Offenses were. Upon which, she made deep Protestations of her Innocence, and
begged leave to see the King; but that was not to be expected. She is put in
the Tower, and pleads her Innocence.
When she was carried into the Tower, She fell down on her knees, and prayed
God to help her, as she was not guilty of the thing for which she was accused.
That same day the King wrote to Cranmer, to come to Lambeth; but ordered him
not to come into his presence. Which was procured by the Queens Enemies, who
took care, that one who had such credit with the King, should not come at him,
till they had fully persuaded him that she was guilty. Her Uncles Lady, the
Lady Boleyn, was appointed to lie in the Chamber with her. Which she took very
ill; for, upon what reason I know not, she had been in very ill terms with her.
She engaged her into much discourse, and studied to draw Confessions from her.
Whatsoever she said, was presently sent to the Court. And a Woman full of
Vapors, was like enough to tell every thing that was true, with a great deal
more; for persons in that condition, not only have no command of themselves,
but are apt to say any thing that comes in their fancy.

The Duke of Norfolk, and some of the Kings Council, were with her; but could
draw nothing from her, though they made her believe, that Norris and Mark had
accused her. But when they were gone, she fell down on her knees and wept, and
prayed often, Jesus have Mercy on me; and then fell a-laughing: when that fit
was over, she desired to have the Sacrament still by her, that she might cry
for Mercy. And she said to the Lieutenant of the Tower, she was as clear of the
company of all men, as to sin, as she was clear from him; and that she was the
Kings true wedded Wife. And she cried out, O Norris, have thou accused me? thou
art in the Tower with me, and thou and I shall dye together; and Mark, so shall
thou too. She apprehended they were to put her in a Dungeon; But confessed some
indiscreet words.
and sadly bemoaned her own, and her Mothers misery; and asked them, whether
she must dye without Justice. But they told her, the poorest Subjects had
Justice, much more would she have it. The same Letter says, that Norris had
not accused her; and that he said to her Almoner, that he could swear for her,
she was a good Woman. But she being made believe that he had accused her, and
not being then so free in her thoughts, as to consider that ordinary Artifice
for drawing out Confessions, told all she knew, both of him and Mark. Which
though it was not enough to destroy her, yet certainly wrought much on the
jealous and alienated King. She told them, that she once asked Norris, why he
did not go on with his Marriage? who answered her, that he would yet tarry some
time. To which she replied, you look for dead men's shoes; for if ought come to
the King but good, you would look to have me. He answered, if he had any such
thought, he would his head were cut off. Upon which, she said, she could undo
him if she pleased, and thereupon she fell out with him. As for Mark, who was
then laid in Irons, she said, he was never in her Chamber, but when the King
was last at Winchester; and then he came in to play on the Virginals: she said,
that she never spoke to him after that, but on Saturday before May day, when
she saw him standing in the Window, and then she asked him, why he was so sad;
he said, it was no matter: she answered, you may not look to have me speak to
you, as if you were a Nobleman, since you are an inferior person. No, no,
Madam, said he, a Look suffices me. She seemed more apprehensive of Weston,
than of any body. For on Whitsun-Munday last he said to her, that Norris came
more to her Chamber upon her account, than for any body else that was there.
She had observed, that he loved a Kinswoman of hers, and challenged him for it,
and for not loving his Wife. But he answered her, that there were Women in the
House, whom he loved better than them both; she asked who is that; your self
said he; upon which, she said, she defied him.

This Misery of the Queens, drew after it the common effects that follow
persons under such a disgrace, for now all the Court was against her, and every
one was courting the rising Queen. But Cranmer had not learned these Arts, and
had a better Soul in him, than to be capable of such baseness and ingratitude.
He had been much obliged by her, and had conceived an high opinion of her, and
so could not easily receive ill impressions of her; yet he knew the Kings
temper, and that a downright Justification of her would provoke him: therefore
he wrote the following Letter, on the 3d of May, with all the softness that so
tender a point required; in which he justified her, 1536.
as far as was consistent with Prudence and Charity. The Letter shows of what
a Constitution he was that wrote it; and contains so many things that tend
highly to her honor, that I shall insert it here, as I copied it from the
Original.

Pleases it your most Noble Grace, to be advertised, that at your Graces
Commandment by Mr. Secretary his Letters, Cranmers Letter to the King about her.

Cott. Lib.


written in your Graces name, I came to Lambeth yesterday, and do there remain
to know your Graces further pleasure. And for so much as without your Graces
Commandment, I dare not, contrary to the Contents of the said Letters, presume
to come unto your Graces Presence; nevertheless of my most bounden duty, I can
do no less than most humbly to desire your Grace, by your great Wisdom, and by
the Assistance of Gods help, somewhat to suppress the deep sorrows of your
Graces heart, and to take all Adversities of Gods hands both patiently and
thankfully. I cannot deny, but your Grace has great causes many ways of
lamentable heaviness: and also that in the wrongful estimation of the World,
your Graces honor of every part is so highly touched (whether the things that
commonly be spoken of, be true or not,) that I remember not that ever Almighty
God sent unto your Grace, any like occasion to try your Graces constancy
throughout, whether your Highness can be content to take off Gods hand, as well
things displeasant, as pleasant. And if he find in your most Noble heart such
an Obedience unto his Will, that your Grace, without murmuration and overmuch
heaviness, do accept all adversities, not less thanking him, than when all
things succeed after your Graces Will and Pleasure, nor less procuring his
Glory and Honor; then I suppose your Grace did never thing more acceptable
unto him, since your first Governance of this your Realm. And moreover, your
Grace shall give unto him occasion to multiply and increase his Graces and
benefits unto your Highness, as he did unto his most faithful Servant Job; unto
whom, after his great Calamities and heaviness, for his obedient heart, and
willing acceptance of Gods scourge and rod, Addidit ei Dominus cuncta
duplicia. And if it be true, that is openly reported of the Queens Grace, if
men had a right estimation of things, they should not esteem any part of your
Graces Honor to be touched thereby, but her Honor only to be clearly
disparaged. And I am in such a perplexity, that my mind is clean amazed. For I
never had better opinion in Woman, than I had in her; which makes me to think,
that she should not be culpable. And again, I think your Highness would not
have gone so far, except she had surely been culpable. Now I think that your
Grace best knows, that next unto your Grace, I was most bound unto her of all
creatures living. Wherefore I most humbly beseech your Grace, to suffer me in
that, which both Gods Law, Nature, and also her kindness, binds me unto; that
is, that I may with your Graces favor wish and pray for her, that she may
declare her self inculpable and innocent. And if she be found culpable,
considering your Graces goodness toward her, and from what condition your
Grace of your only mere goodness took her, and set the Crown upon her head; I
repute him not your Graces faithful Servant and Subject, nor true unto the
Realm, that would not desire the offense without mercy to be punished, to the
example of all other. And as I loved her not a little, for the Love which I
judged her to bear toward God and his Gospel; so if she be proved culpable,
there is not one that loves God and his Gospel, that ever will favor her, but
must hate her above all other; and the more they favor the Gospel, the more
they will hate her: For then there was never creature in our time that so much
slandered the Gospel. And God has sent her this punishment, for that she
feignedly has professed his Gospel in her mouth, and not in heart and deed.
And though she have offended so, that she has deserved never to be reconciled
unto your Graces favor; yet Almighty God has manifoldly declared his goodness
toward your Grace, and never offended you. But your Grace, I am sure,
knowledgeth that you have offended him. Wherefore I trust that your Grace will
bear no less entire favor unto the truth of the Gospel, than you did before:
For So Much as your Graces favor to the Gospel, was not led by affection unto
her, but by zeal unto the truth. And thus I beseech Almighty God, whose Gospel
he has ordained your Grace to be Defender of, ever to preserve your Grace from
all evil, and give you at the end, the promise of his Gospel.

From Lanbeth, the 3d day of May. After I had written this Letter unto your
Grace, my Lord Chancellor, my Lord of Oxford, my Lord of Sussex, and my Lord
Chamberlain of your Graces House, sent for me to come unto the Star Chamber;
and there declared unto me such things as your Graces pleasure was they should
make me privy unto. For the which I am most bounden unto your Grace. And what
Communication we had together, I doubt not but they will make the true report
thereof unto your Grace. I am exceedingly sorry, that such faults can be proved
by the Queen, as I heard of their relation. But I am, and ever shall be, Your
faithful Subject,

Your Graces most humble Subject, and Chaplain. T. Cantuariensis.




But Jealousy, and the Kings new affection, had quite defaced all the
remainders of esteem for his late beloved Queen. Yet the Ministers continued
practicing, to get further evidence for the Trial; which was not brought on,
till the 12th of May; and then Norris, She is brought to a Trial.
Weston, Brereton, and Smeton, were tried by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer
in Westminster Hall. They were twice indicted, and the indictments were found
by two Grand Juries, in the Counties of Kent and Middlesex: The Crimes with
which they were charged, being said to be done in both these Counties. Mark
Smeton confessed, he had known the Queen Carnally Three times: The other Three
pleaded not Guilty, but the Jury upon the evidence formerly mentioned, found
them all Guilty; and Judgment was given, that they should be drawn to the place
of Execution, and some of them to be hanged, others to be beheaded, and all to
be quartered, as Guilty of high Treason. On the 15th of May, the Queen and her
Brother the Lord Rochford (who was a Peer, having been made a Viscount when his
Father was Created Earl of Wiltshire) were brought to be Tried by their Peers:
The Duke of Norfolk being Lord high Steward for that occasion. With him sat
the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquess of Exeter, the Earl of Arundel, and Twenty
Five more Peers, of whom their Father the Earl of Wiltshire was one. Whether
this unnatural compliance was imposed on him by the Imperious King, or
officiously submitted to by himself, that he might thereby be preserved from
the Ruin that fell on his Family, is not known. Here the Queen of England by an
unheard of president was brought to the Bar, and Indicted of high Treason. The
Crimes charged on her were, that she had procured her Brother and the other
Four to lie with her, which they had done often; that she had said to them,
that the King never had her heart, and had said to every one of them by
themselves, that she loved them better than any person whatsoever. Which was to
the slander of the issue that was begotten between the King and her. And this
was Treason, according to the Statute made in the 26th year of this Reign (so
that the Law that was made for her and the issue of her Marriage, is now made
use of to destroy her). It was also added in the Indictment, that she, and her
accomplices, had conspired the Kings death; but this it seems was only put in to
swell the charge, for if there had been any evidence for it, there was no need
of stretching the other Statute, or if they could have proved the violating of
the Queen, the known Statute of the Twenty Fifth year of the Reign of Edward
the Third had been sufficient. When the Indictment was read, she held up her
hand, and Pleaded not Guilty, and so did her Brother, and did answer the
evidence was brought against her discreetly. One thing is remarkable that Mark
Smeton, who was the only person that confessed any thing, was never confronted
with the Queen, nor was kept to be an evidence against her, for he had received
his Sentence Three days before, and so could be no witness in Law: but
perhaps, though he was wrought on to confess, yet they did not think he had
confidence enough to aver it to the Queens face; therefore the evidence they
brought, as Spelman says, was the Oath of a Woman that was dead, yet this, or
rather the Terror of offending the King, so wrought on the Lords, that they
found her and her Brother Guilty: and Judgment was given, that she should be
Burnt, or Beheaded at the Kings pleasure. Upon which Spelman observes, that
whereas Burning is the death which the Law appoints for a Woman that is
attainted of Treason, yet since she had been Queen of England, they left it to
the King to determine, whether she should dye so infamous a death, or be
Beheaded; but the Judges complained of this way of proceeding, and said, such a
disjunctive in a Judgment of Treason, had never been seen. The Lord Rochford
was also Condemned to be Beheaded and Quartered. Yet all this did not satisfy
the enraged King, but the Marriage between him and her must be annulled, and
the issue illegitimated. The King remembered an Intrigue that had been between
her and the Earl of Northumberland, which was mentioned in the former Book; and
that the then Lord Piercy had said to the Cardinal, 'That he had gone so far
before witnesses, "that it lay upon his Conscience, so that he could not go
back: this it is like might be some promise he made to Marry her, per verba de
futuro, which though it was no Precontract in it self, yet it seems the poor
Queen was either so ignorant or so ill-advised, as to be persuaded afterward
it was one, though it is certain that nothing, but a Contract per verba de
praesenti, could be of any force to annul the subsequent Marriage. The King and
his Council, reflecting upon what it seems the Cardinal had told him, resolved
to try what could be made of it, and pressed the Earl of Northumberland to
confess a Contract between him and her. But he took his Oath before the Two
Archbishops, that there was no Contract, nor promise of Marriage ever between
them, and received the Sacrament upon it, before the Duke of Norfolk, and
others of the Kings Privy Council; wishing it might be to his Damnation, if
there was any such thing, (concerning which I have seen the Original
Declaration under his own hand.) Nor could they draw any Confession from the
Queen, before the Sentence, for certainly if they could have done that, the
Divorce had gone before the Trial; and then she must have been tried only, as
Marchioness of Pembroke. But now she lying under so terrible a Sentence, it is
most probable, that either some hopes of Life were given her; Upon an extorted
Confession is divorced.
or at least, she was wrought on by the Assurances of mitigating that cruel
part of her judgment, of being Burnt, into the milder part of the Sentence, of
Having her head cut off; so that she confessed a Pre-contract, and on the 17th
of May was brought to Lambeth; and in Court, the afflicted Archbishop sitting
Judge, some persons of Quality being present, she confessed some just and
lawful impediments; by which it was evident, that her Marriage with the King
was not valid. Upon which Confession, the Marriage between the King and her was
judged to have been null and void. The Record of the Sentence is burnt; but
these particulars are repeated in the Act that passed in the next Parliament,
touching the Succession to the Crown. It seems this was secretly done, for
Spelman writes of it thus; It was said, there was a Divorce made between the
King and her, upon her confessing a Precontract with another before her
Marriage with the King: so then it was then only talked of, but not generally
known.

The two Sentences that were past upon the Queen, the one of Attaindor for
Adultery, the other of Divorce because of a Precontract, did so contradict one
another, that it was apparent, one, if not both of them must be unjust; for if
the Marriage between the King and her was null from the beginning, then since
she was not the Kings wedded Wife, there could be no Adultery: and her Marriage
to the King was either a true Marriage, or not; if it was true, then the
annulling of it was unjust, and if it was no true Marriage, then the Attainder
was unjust; for there could be no breach of that Faith which was never (...):
So that it is plain, the King was resolved to be rid of her, and (...) her
Daughter, and in that transport of his fury, did not (...)* that the very
method he took, discovered the unjustice of his ^^^^eedings against her. Two
days after this, she was ordered to be Executed in the Green on Tower Hill. How
she received these tidings, and how steadfast she continued in the protestations
of her Innocence, will best appear by the following circumstances. The day
before she suffered, upon a strict search of her past Life, she called to mind,
that she had played the Stepmother too severely to Lady Mary, and had done her
many injuries. Upon which, she made the Lieutenant of the Tower's Lady sit down
in the Chair of State; Her Pr^paration for Death.
which the other, after some Ceremony, doing, she fell down on her knees, and
with many tears charged the Lady, as she would answer it to God, to go in her
name, and do, as she had done, to the Lady Mary, and ask her forgiveness for
the wrongs she had done her. And she said, she had no quiet in her Conscience
till she had done that. But though she did in this what became a Christian, the
Lady Mary could not so easily pardon these injuries; but retained the
resentments of them her whole life.

This ingenuity and tenderness of Conscience about lesser matters, is a great
presumption, that if she had been guilty of more eminent faults, she had not
continued to the last denying them, and making protestations of her Innocence.
For that same night she sent her last message to the King, and acknowledged her
self much obliged to him, that had continued still to advance her. She said, he
had, from a private Gentlewoman, first made her a Marchioness, and then a
Queen; and now, since he could raise her no higher, was sending her to be a
Saint in Heaven: She protested her Innocence, and recommended her Daughter to
his care. And her carriage that day she died, will appear from the following
Letter writ by the Lieutenant of the Tower, copied from the Original, which I
insert, because the Copier employed by the Lord Herbert has not writ it out
faithfully; for I cannot think that any part of it was left out on design.

The Lieutenant of the Towers Letter.
Sir, These shall be to advertise you, I have received your Letter, wherein you
would have strangers conveyed out of the Tower, and so they be by the means of
Richard Gressum, and William Cook, and Wytspoll. But the number of strangers
past not thirty, and not many of those; and the Ambassador of the Emperor had a
Servant there, and honestly put out: Sir, If we have not an hour certain, as it
may be known in London, I think here will be but few, and I think a reasonable
number were best, for I suppose she will declare her self to be a good woman,
for all men but for the King, at the hour of her death. For this morning she
sent for me, that I might be with her at such time as she received the Good
Lord, to the intent I should hear her speak as touching her Innocence always to
be clear. And in the writing of this, she sent for me, and at my coming she
said: Mr. Kingston, I hear say I shall not die aforenoon, and I am very sorry
therefore, for I thought to be dead by this time, and past my pain. I told her,
it should be no pain, it was so sottel. And then she said, I heard say the
Executioner was very good, and I have a little Neck, ANNA BVLLEN REGINA ANGLIAE
ELIZABETHAE REGINAE MATTER
Nata Ano. 1507 Nupsit Ano 1532 Nov 14 Elix Filian peperit Ano 1533 Sept. 7
Capite plexa Ano. 1536 May 19.

Printed for Rich: Chiswell at ye Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church yard

and put her hands about it, laughing heartily. I have seen many men, and also
women, Executed; and that they have been in great sorrow, and to my knowledge
this Lady has much joy and pleasure in death. Sir, her Almoner is continually
with her, and had been since two a Clock after midnight. This is the effect of
any thing that is here at this time, and thus Fare you well,

Yours William Kingston.


A little before Noon, being the 19th of May, she was brought to the Scaffold,
Her Execution.
where she made a short Speech to a great company that came to look on the last
Scene of this fatal Tragedy: The chief of whom, were the Dukes of Suffolk and
Richmond, the Lord Chancellor, and Secretary Cromwell, with the Lord Mayor, the
Sheriffs and Aldermen of London. She said, She was come to die, as she was
Judged by the Law; she would accuse none, nor say any thing of the ground upon
which she was judged. She prayed heartily for the King; and called him a most
merciful and gentle Prince, and that he had been always to her, a good, gentle,
Sovereign Lord: and if any would meddle with her cause, she required them to
judge the best. And so she took her leave of them, and of the world; and
heartily desired they would pray for her. After she had been some time in her
Devotions, being her last words, To Christ I commend my Soul; her Head was cut
off by the Hangman of Calais, who was brought over as more expert at Beheading
than any in England: her Eyes and Lips were observed to move after her Head was
cut off, as Spelman writes; but her Body was thrown into a common Chest of
Elme-tree that was made to put Arrows in, and was buried in the Chapel within
the Tower before twelve a Clock.

Her Brother with the other four did also suffer; none of them were Quartered,
but they were all Beheaded, except Smeton, who was Hanged. It was generally
said, that he was corrupted into that Confession, and had his Life promised
him; but it was not fit to let him live to tell Tales. Norris had been much in
the Kings favor, and an offer was made him of his life, if he would confess
his guilt, and accuse the Queen. But he generously rejected that un-handsome
proposition, and said, That in his Conscience he thought her Innocent of these
things laid to her charge; but whether she was or not, he would not accuse her
of any thing, and he would die a thousand times, rather than ruin an Innocent
Person.

These proceedings occasioned as great variety of Censures, The several
Censures that were then passed on those proceedings.
as there were diversity of Interests. The Popish Party said, the justice of
God was visible, that she who had supplanted Queen Katharine, met with the
like, and harder measure, by the same means. Some took notice of her faint
justifying her self on the Scaffold, as if her Conscience had then prevailed so
far, that she could no longer deny a thing, for which she was so soon to answer
at another Tribunal. But others thought her care of her Daughter made her speak
so tenderly; for she had observed, that Queen Katharines obstinacy had drawn
the Kings indignation on her Daughter; and therefore that she alone might bear
her misfortunes, and derive no share of them on her Daughter, she spoke in a
style, that could give the King no just offense: And as she said enough to
justify her self, so she said as much for the Kings honor, as could be
expected. Yet in a Letter that she wrote to the King from the Tower, Collect.
Numb. 4 th.
(which will be found in the Collection,) she pleaded her Innocence, in a
strain of so much Wit, and moving passionate Eloquence, as perhaps can scarce
be paralelled: certainly her spirits were much exalted when she wrote it, for
it is a pitch above her ordinary style. Yet the Copy I take it from, lying
among Cromwells other papers, makes me believe it was truly written by her.

Her carriage seemed too free, and all people thought that some freedoms and
levities in her had encouraged those unfortunate persons to speak such bold
things to her, since few attempt upon the Chastity, or make declarations of
Love, to persons of so exalted a quality, except they see some invitations, at
least in their carriage. Others thought that a free and jovial temper might,
with great Innocence, though with no discretion, lead one to all those things
that were proved against her; and therefore they concluded her chaste, though
indiscreet. Others blamed the King, and taxed his cruelty in proceeding so
severely against a person whose Chastity he had reason to be assured of, since
she had resisted his addresses near five years, till he Legitimated them by
Marriage. But others excused him. It is certain her carriage had given just
cause of some jealousy, and that being the rage of a man, it was no wonder if
a King of his temper, conceiving it against one whom he had so signally
obliged, was transported into unjustifiable excesses.

Others condemned Cranmer, as a man that obsequiously followed all the Kings
appetites; and that he had now Divorced the King a second time, which showed
that his Conscience was governed by the Kings pleasure as his Supreme Law. But
what he did was unavoidable. For whatever motives drew from her the Confession
of that Precontract, he was obliged to give Sentence upon it: And that which
she confessed, being such as made her incapable to contract Marriage with the
King, he could not decline the giving of Sentence upon so formal a Confession.
Some loaded all that favored the Reformation: and said, It now appeared what a
woman, their great Patroness and Supporter had been. But to those it was
answered, That her faults, if true, being secret, could cast no reflection on
those, who being ignorant of them, made use of her Protection. And the Church
of Rome thought not their Cause suffered, by the enraged Cruelty and Ambition,
of the cursed Irene, who had convened the second Council of Nice, and set up
the worship of Images again in the East; whom the Popes continued to court and
magnify, after her barbarous murder of her Son, with other acts of unsatiated
spite and ambition. Therefore they had no reason to think the worse of persons
for claiming the Protection of a Queen, whose faults (if she was at all
criminal,) were unknown to them when they made use of her.

Some have since that time concluded it a great evidence of her Guilt, that
during her Daughters long and glorious Reign, there was no full nor complete
vindication of her published. For the Writers of that time thought it enough to
speak honorably of her; and in general, to call her, Innocent. But none of
them ever attempted a clear discussion of the particulars laid to her charge.
This had been much to her Daughters honor, and therefore, since it was not
done, others concluded it could not be done; and that their knowledge of her
guilt restrained their Pens. But others do not at all allow of that Inference,
and think rather, that it was the great wisdom of that time not to suffer such
things to be called in question; since no wise Government will admit of a
debate about the clearness of the Princes Title. For the very attempting to
prove it weakens it more, than any of the proofs that are brought can confirm
it; therefore it was prudently done of that Queen and her great Ministers,
never to suffer any Vindication or Apology to be written. Some indiscretions
could not be denied, and these would all have been catched hold of, and
improved by the busy Emissaries of Rome and Spain.

But nothing did more evidently discover the secret cause of this Queens ruin,
than the Kings Marrying Jane Seimour; the day after her Execution. She of all
King Henry's Wives, gained most on his esteem and affection: But she was happy
in one thing, that she did not outlive his love; otherwise she might have
fallen as signally as her Predecessor had done. Upon this turn of Affairs a
great change of Counsels followed.

There was nothing now, The Lady Mary endeavors a reconciliation with her
Father.
that kept the Emperor and the King at a distance, but the Illegitimation of
the Lady Mary, and if that matter had been adjusted, the King was in no more
hazard of trouble from him: Therefore it was proposed, that she might be again
restored to the Kings favor. She found this was the best opportunity she could
ever look for, and therefore laid hold on it, and wrote an humble submission to
the King, and desired again to be admitted to his presence. But her Submissions
had some reserves in them, therefore she was pressed to be more express in her
acknowledgments. At this she stuck long, and had almost embroyled her self
again with her Father. She freely offered to submit to the Laws of the Land
about the Succession, and confessed the fault of her former Obstinacy. But the
King would have her acknowledge, that his Marriage to her Mother was incestuous
and unlawful; and to renounce the Popes Authority, and to accept him, as
Supreme Head of the Church of England. These things were of hard digestion with
her, and she could not easily swallow them; so she wrote to Cromwell, to
befriend her at the Kings hands. Upon which many Letters passed between them.
He wrote to her, that it was impossible to recover her Fathers favor, without
a full and clear Submission in all points. So in the end she yielded, and sent
the following Paper, all written with her own hand, which is set down, as it
was Copied from the Original yet extant.

The Confession of me the Lady Mary, Her submission under her own hand. Cott.
Lib. Otho. C. 10.
made upon certain points and Articles under written; in the which, as I do now
plainly, and with all mine heart, confess and declare mine inward Sentence,
Belief, and Judgment, with a due conformity of Obedience to the Laws of the
Realm; so minding for ever to persist and continue in this determination,
without change, alteration, or variance, I do most humbly beseech the Kings
Highness my Father, whom I have obstinately and inobediently offended in the
denial of the same heretofore, to forgive mine offenses therein, and to take me
to his most gracious Mercy.

First, I confess and knowledge the Kings Majesty, to be my Sovereign Lord and
King in the Imperial Crown of this Realm of England; and do submit my self to
his Highness, and to all and singular Laws and Statutes of this Realm, as
becomes a true and faithful Subject to do; which I shall also obey, keep,
observe, advance, and maintain, according to my bounden duty, with all the
power, force, and qualities, that God has endued me with, during my Life.

Item, I do recognize, accept, take, repute, and knowledge, the Kings Highness
to be Supreme Head in Earth under Christ of the Church of England, and do
utterly refuse the Bishop of Romes pretended Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction
within this Realm heretofore usurped, according to the Laws and Statutes made
in that behalf, and of all the Kings true Subjects humbly received, admitted,
obeyed, kept, and observed; and also do utterly renounce and forsake all manner
of Remedy, Interest and advantage, which I may by any means claim by the Bishop
of Rome's Laws, Process, Jurisdiction, or Sentence, at this present time, or in
any wise hereafter, by any manner of title, color, mean, or case, that is,
shall, or can be devised for that purpose.

Mary.


Item, I do freely, frankly, and for the Discharge of my duty toward God, the
Kings Highness, and his Laws, without other respect, recognize and knowledge,
that the Marriage heretofore had between his Majesty, and my Mother the late
Princess Dowager, was by Gods Law, and Man's Law, incestuous and unlawful.

Mary.


She is restored to his favor.
Upon this she was again received into favor. One circumstance I shall add,
that shows the frugality of that time. In the Establishment that was made for
her Family, there was only 40 l. a quarter assigned for her privy purse. I have
seen a Letter of hers to Cromwell, at the Christsmas - quarter, desiring him to
let the King know, that she must be at some Extraordinary expense that season,
that so he might increase her allowance, since the 40 l. would not defray the
Charge of that quarter.

The Lady Elizabeth well used by the King and Queen.
For the Lady Elizabeth, though the King divested her of the Title of Princess
of Wales, yet he continued still to breed her up in the Court, with all the
care and tenderness of a Father. And the new Queen, what from the sweetness of
her disposition, and what out of compliance with the King, who loved her much,
was as kind to her, as if she had been her Mother. Of which I shall add one
pretty evidence, though the childishness of it may be thought below the Gravity
of a History: Yet by it the Reader will see, both the kindness that the King
and Queen had for her, and that they allowed her to subscribe, Daughter. There
are two Original Letters of hers yet remaining, writ to the Queen when she was
with Child of King Edward: the one in Italian, the other in English; both writ
in a fair hand, the same that she wrote all the rest of her life. But the
conceits in that writ in English, are so pretty, that it will not be
unacceptable to the Reader, to see this first Blossom of so great a Princess,
when she was not full Four years of Age; She being born in September 1533. and
this writ in July 1537.

Although your Highness Letters be most joyful to me in absence, Her Letter to
the Queen when not Four years of Age.
yet considering what pain it is to you to write, your Grace being so great
with Child, and so sickly, your Commendation were enough in my Lords Letter. I
much rejoice at your health, with the well liking of the Country; with my
humble thanks that your Grace wished me with you till I were weary of that
Country. Your Highness were like to be combered, if I should not depart till I
were weary being with you: although it were in the worst soil in the World,
your presence would make it pleasant. I cannot reprove my Lord for not doing
your Commendations in his Letter, for he did it; and although he had not, yet I
will not complain on him, for that he shall be diligent to give me knowledge
from time to time, how his busy child does; and if I were at his birth, no
doubt I would see him beaten, for the trouble he has put you to. Mr Denny, and
my Lady, with humble thanks prays most entirely for your Grace, praying the
Almighty God to send you a most lucky deliverance. And my Mistress wishes no
less, giving your Highness most humble thanks for her commendations. Writ with
very little leisure, this last day of July.

Your Humble Daughter Elizabeth.


But to proceed to more serious matters. A new Parliament called*
A Parliament was Summoned to meet the 8th of June. If full Forty days be
necessary for a Summons, then the Writs must have been issued forth the day
before the late Queens disgrace; so that it was designed before the Justs at
Greenwich, and did not flow from any thing that then appeared. When the
Parliament met, the Lord Chancellor Audley, Iournal Procerum.
in his speech, told them, That when the former Parliament was dissolved, the
King had no thoughts of Summoning a new one so soon. But for two reasons, he
had now called them. The one was, that he finding himself subject to so many
infirmities, and considering that he was Mortal, (a rare thought in a Prince)
he desired to settle an apparent heir to the Crown, in case he should die
without Children lawfully begotten. The other was, to repeal an Act of the
former Parliament, concerning the Succession of the Crown, to the issue of the
King by Queen Anne Boleyn. He desired them to reflect on the great troubles and
vexation the King was involved in, by his first unlawful Marriage, and the
dangers he was in by his second; which might well have frighted any body from a
third Marriage. But Anne, and her Conspirators, being put to death, as they
well deserved; the King at the humble request of the Nobility, and not out of
any Carnal concupiscence, was pleased to Marry again, a Queen, by whom there
were very probable hopes of his having children: Therefore he recommended to
them, to provide an heir to the Crown by the Kings direction, who if the King
dyed without children lawfully begotten, might Rule over them. He desired they
would pray God earnestly, that he would grant the King issue of his own body;
and return thanks to Almighty God, that preserved such a King to them out of so
many eminent dangers, who employed all his care and endeavors, that he might
keep his whole people in quiet, peace, and perfect charity, and leave them so
to those that should succeed him.

But though this was the chief cause of calling the Parliament, it seems the
Ministers met with great difficulties, The Act of Succession.
and therefore spent much time, in preparing men's minds. For the Bill about the
Succession to the Crown, was not brought into the House of Lords before the
30th day of June, that the Lord Chancellor offered it to the House. It went
through both Houses without any Opposition. It contained first, a repeal of the
former Act of Succession, and a Confirmation of the two Sentences of Divorce,
the issue of both the Kings former Marriages being declared illegitimate, and
for ever excluded from claiming the inheritance of the Crown, as the Kings
Lawful heirs by lineal descent. The Attainder of Queen Anne and her Accomplices
is confirmed. Quen Anne is said, to have been inflamed with pride, and Carnal
desires of her body; and, having confederated her self with her accomplices, to
have committed diverse Treasons, to the danger of the Kings Royal person; (with
other aggravating words,) for which she had justly suffered death, and is now
attainted by Act of Parliament. And all things that had been said or done
against her, or her Daughter, being contrary to an Act of Parliament then in
force, are pardoned; and the inheritance of the Crown is established, on the
issue of Queen Jane, whether Male or Female, or the Kings issue by any other
Wife whom he might Marry afterward.

But since it was not fit to declare, to whom the Succession of the Crown
belonged after the Kings death lest the person, so designed, might be thereby
enabled to raise trouble and Commotions; therefore they considering the Kings
wise and excellent Government, and confiding in the love and affection which he
bore to his Subjects, did give him full Power to declare the Succession to the
Crown, either by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, or by his last will,
Signed with his hand; and promised all faithful obedience to the persons named
by him. And if any, so designed to succeed in default of others, should
endeavor to usurp upon those before them, or to exclude them, they are declared
Traitors, and were to forfeit all the Right they might thereafter claim to the
Crown. And if any should maintain the Lawfulness of the former Marriages, or
that the issue by them was legitimate, or refused to swear to the Kings issue
by Queen Jane, they were also declared Traitors.

By this Act it may appear how absolutely this King Reigned in England. Many
questioned much the validity of it, and (as shall afterward appear,) the Scots
said, that the Succession to the Crown was not within the Parliaments Power to
determine aboutit, but must go by inheritance to their King, in default of
issue by this King. Yet by this, the King was enabled to settle the Crown on
his Children whom he had now declared Illegitimate, by which he brought them
more absolutely to depend upon himself. He neither made them desperate, nor
gave them any further Right, than what they were to derive purely from his own
good pleasure. This did also much pacify the Emperor, since his Kinswoman was,
though not restored in blood, yet put in a capacity to succeed to the Crown.

At this time there came a new Proposition from Rome, to try if the King would
accommodate matters with the Pope. The Pope endeavored a reconciliation with
the King.
Pope Clement the Seventh dyed two years before this, in the year 1534. and
Cardinal Farnese succeeded him, called Pope Paul the Third. He had before this
made one unsuccessful attempt upon the King; but, upon the beheading of the
Bishop (and declared Cardinal) of Rochester, he had Thundered a most terrible
Sentence of Deposition against the King, and designed to commit the Execution
of it to the Emperor: Yet now, when Queen Katharine and Queen Anne, who were
the occasions of the Rupture, were both out of the way, he thought it was a
proper conjuncture to try if a Reconciliation could be effected. This he
proposed to Sir Gregory Cassali, who was no more the Kings Ambassador at Rome,
but was still his Correspondent there. The Pope desired he would move the King
in it, and let him know that he had ever favored his Cause in the former Popes
time, and though he was forced to give out a Sentence against him, yet he had
never any intention to proceed upon it to further Extremities.

But the King was now so entirely alienated from the Court of Rome, But in vain.
that to cut off all hopes of reconciliation, he procured two Acts to be passed
in this Parliament. The one was for the utter extinguishing the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome. It was brought into the House of Lords on the 4th of July:
And was read the first time the 5th, and the second time on the 6th of July,
and lay at the Committee till the 12th. And on the 14th, it was sent down to
the Commons; who, if there be no mistake in the Journal, sent it up that same
day: They certainly made great haste, for the Parliament was dissolved within
Four days.

The Preamble of this first Act contains severe Reflections on the Bishop of
Rome, (whom some called the Pope,) who had long darkened Gods word, that it
might serve his Pomp, Glory, Avarice, Ambition, and Tyranny; both upon the
Souls, Bodies, and Goods, of all Christians; excluding Christ out of the Rule
of man's Soul, and Princes out of their Dominions: And had exacted in England
great Sums, by dreams, and vanities, and other Superstitious ways. upon these
reasons his Usurpations had been by Law put down in this Nation; yet many of
his Emissaries were still practicing up and down the Kingdom, and persuading
people to acknowledge his pretended Authority. Therefore every person so
offending after the last of I^ly next to come, was to incur the pains of a
Praemunire; and all Officers, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical, were commanded to
make enquiry about such offenses, under several penalties.

On the 12th of July, a Bill was brought in, concerning Privileges obtained
from the Sea of Rome, and was read the First time. And on the 17th it was
agreed to, and sent down to the Commons, who sent it up again the next day. It
bears, that the Popes had, during their Usurpation, granted many Immunities to
several Bodies and Societies in England, which upon that Grant had been now
long in use: Therefore all these Bulls, Breves, and every thing depending on,
or flowing from them, were declared void and of no force. Yet all Marriages
celebrated by virtue of them, that were not otherwise contrary to the Law of
God, were declared good in Law; and all Consecrations of Bishops by virtue of
them, were confirmed. And for the future, all who enjoyed any Privileges by
Bulls, were to bring them in to the Chancery, or to such persons as the King
should appoint for that end. And the Archbishop of Canterbury was Lawfully to
grant anew the effects contained in them, which ^rant was to pass under the
great Seal, and to be of full force in Law.

This struck at the Abbots Rights. But they were glad to bear a Diminution of
their Greatness, so they might save the whole, which now lay at stake. By the
Thirteenth Act, they corrected an Abuse which had come in, to evade the force
of a Statute made in the Twenty First year of this King, about the Residence of
all Ecclesiastical persons in their Livings. One qualification, that did excuse
from Residence, was their staying at the University for the completing of
their Studies. Now it was found, that many dissolute Clergymen went and lived
at the Universities, not for their Studies, but to be excused from serving
their Cures. So it was Enacted, that none above the Age of Forty, that were not
either Heads of Houses, or Public Readers, should have any Exemption from
their Residence, by virtue of that Clause in the former Act. And those under
that Age should not have the Benefit of it, except they were present at the
Lectures, and performed their Exercises in the Schools.

By another Act, there was Provision made against the prejudice the Kings Heirs
might receive, before they were of Age, by Parliaments held in their Nonage;
That whatsoever Acts were made before they were Twenty Four years of Age, they
might at any time of their lives after that, Repeal and Annul, by their Letters
Patents, which should have equal force with a Repeal by Act of Parliament. From
these Acts it appears, that the King was absolute Master, both of the
affections and fears of his Subjects; when in a new Parliament called on a
sudden, and in a Session of six weeks, from the 8th of June, to the 18th of
July, Acts of this Importance were passed without any Protest or public
Opposition.

But having now opened the business of the Parliament, as it relates to the
State, I must next give an account of the Convocation, which sat at this time,
and was very busy, The Proceedings in the Convocation.
as appears by the Journal of the House of Lords, in which this is given for a
reason of many Adjournments, because the Spiritual Lords were busy in the
Convocation. It sat down on the 9th of June, according to Fullers Extract, it
being the Custom of all this Reign, for that Court to meet two or three days
after the Parliament. Hither Cromwell came as the Kings Vicar General: But he
was not yet Vicegerent. For he sat next the Archbishop; but when he had that
Dignity he sat above him. Nor do I find him Styled in any Writing Vicegerent
for some time after this; though the Lord Herbert says, he was made Vicegerent
the 18th of July this year, the same day in which the Parliament was Dissolved.

Latimer, Bishop of Worcester, preached the Latin Sermon, on these words. The
Children of this World are wiser in their Generation, than the Children of
Light. He was the most Celebrated Preacher of that time. The simplicity and
plainness of his matter, with a serious and fervent Action that accompanied it,
being preferred to more learned and elaborate Composures. On the 21st of June,
Cromwell moved, that they would Confirm the Sentence of the Invalidity of the
Kings Marriage with Queen Anne, which was accordingly done by both Houses of
Convocation. But certainly Fuller was asleep when he wrote; That Ten days
before that, the Archbishop had passed the Sentence of Divorce, on the day
before the Queen was beheaded. Whereas if he had considered this more fully, he
must have seen that the Queen was put to death a Month before this, and was
Divorced two days before she dyed. Yet, with this animadversion, I must give
him my thanks for his pains in copying out of the Journals of Convocation many
remarkable things, which had been otherwise irrecoverably lost.

On the 23d of June, the lower House of Convocation sent to the upper House a
Collection of many opinions, that were then in the Realm; which, as they
thought, were abuses, and errors, worthy of special Reformation. But they began
this Representation with a Protestation: That they intended not to do, or speak
any thing, Fuller.
which might be unpleasant to the King; whom they acknowledged their Supreme
Head, and were resolved to obey his Commands, renouncing the Popes usurped
Authority, with all his Laws and Inventions, now extinguished and abolisht, and
did addict themselves to Almighty God, and his Laws, and unto the King, and the
Laws made within this Kingdom.

There are Sixty Seven opinions set down, and are either the Tenets of the Old
Lollards, or the New Reformers, together with the Anabaptists opinions. Besides
all which, they complained of many unsavory and indiscreet expressions, which
were either feigned on design to disgrace the New Preachers, or were perhaps
the extravagant Reflections of some illiterate and injudicious persons; who are
apt upon all occasions, by their heat and folly, rather to prejudice, than
advance their party; and affect some petulant jeers, which they think witty,
and are perhaps well entertained by some others, who though they are more
judicious themselves, yet imagining that such jests on the contrary opinions
will take with the people, do give them too much Encouragement. Many of these
jests, about Confession, praying to Saints, Holy Water, and the other
Ceremonies of the Church, were complained of. And the last Articles contained
sharp reflections on some of the Bishops, as if they had been wanting in their
Duty to suppress such things. This was clearly levelled at Cranmer, Latimer,
and Shaxton, who were noted as the great Promoters of these opinions. The first
did it prudently and solidly. The second zealously and simply. And the third
with much indiscreet pride and vanity. But now that the Queen was gone, who had
either raised or supported them, their Enemies hoped to have advantages against
them, and to lay the growth of these opinions to their charge. But this whole
Project failed, and Cranmer had as much of the Kings favor as ever; for in
stead of that which they had projected, Cromwell, by the Kings order, coming to
the Convocation, Declared to them, that it was the Kings pleasure, that the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, should be Reformed by the Rules of
Scripture, and that nothing was to be maintained which did not rest on that
Authority, for it was absurd, since that was acknowledged to contain the Laws
of Religion, that recourse should rather be had to Glosses, or the Decrees of
Popes, than to these. There was at that time one Alexander Alesse, a
Scotch-man, much esteemed for his Learning and Piety, whom Cranmer entertained
at Lambeth. Antiq. Britt. in vita Cranm.
Him Cromwell brought with him to the Convocation, and desired him to deliver
his opinion about the Sacraments. He enlarged himself much to Convince them,
that only Baptism and the Lords Supper were Instituted by Christ.

Stokesley Bishop of London answered him in a long Discourse, in which he
showed he was better acquainted with the Learning of the Schools, and the
Canon Law, than with the Gospel; He was Seconded by the Archbishop of York,
and others of that Party.

But Cranmer in a long and learned Speech, showed how useless these niceties of
the Schools were, and of how little Authority they ought to be; and discoursed
largely of the Authority of the Scriptures, of the use of the Sacraments, of
the uncertainty of Tradition, and of the Corruption which the Monks and Friars
had brought into the Christian Doctrine. He was vigorously seconded by the
Bishop of Hereford, who told them, the world would be no longer deceived with
such Sophisticated stuff as the Clergy had formerly vented: The Laity were now
in all Nations studying the Scriptures, and that, not only in the vulgar
Translations, but in the original Tongues; and therefore it was a vain
imagination to think they would be any longer governed by those arts which in
the former Ages of Ignorance had been so effectual. Not many days after this,
there were several Articles brought in to the upper House of Convocation,
devised by the King himself, about which there were great debates among them.
The two Archbishops, heading two Parties, Cranmer was for a Reformation, and
with him joined Thomas Goodrich, Bishop of Ely, Shaxton, of Sarum, Latimer, of
Worcester, Fox, of Hereford, Hilsey, of Rochester, and Barlow, of St. David's.

But Lee, Archbishop of York, was a known favourer of the Popes Interests;
which, as it first appeared in his scrupling so much, with the whole
Convocation of York, the acknowledging the King to be Supreme Head of the
Church of England; so he had since discovered it on all occasions, in which he
durst do it without the fear of losing the Kings favor: So he, and Stokesley,
Bishop of London, Tonst^ll, of Duresm, Gardener, of Winchester, Longland, of
Lincoln, Sherburn, of Chichester, Nix, of Norwich, and Kite, of Carlisle, had
been still against all changes. But the King discovered, that those did in
their hearts love the Papal Authority, though Gardener dissembled it most
artificially. Sherburn, Bishop of Chichester, upon what inducement I cannot
understand, resigned his Bishopric, which was given to Richard Sampson, Dean
of the Chapel; a Pension of 400 l. being reserved to Sherburn for his Life,
which was confirmed by an Act of this Parliament. Nix, of Norwich, had also
offended the King signally, by some correspondence with Rome, and was kept long
in the Marshalsea, and was convicted and found in a Praemunire: The King
considering his great Age, had upon his humble submission discharged him out of
Prison, and pardoned him. But he died the former year; though Fuller, in his
slight way, makes him fit in this Convocation: For by the 17th Act of the last
Parliament, Act 17.27. Regni.
it appears that the Bishopric of Norwich being vacant, the King had
recommended William Abbot of St. Bennets to it; but took into his own hands all
the Lands and Manours of the Bishopric, and gave the Bishop several of the
Priories in Norfolk in exchange, which was confirmed in Parliament.

I shall next give a short abstract of the Articles about Religion, which were
after much consultation and long debating agreed to.

First, Articles agreed on about Religion.

Printed by Fuller.


All Bishops and Preachers must instruct the people to believe the whole Bible,
and the three Creeds, that made by the Apostles, the Nicene, and the
Athanasian; and interpret all things according to them, and in the very same
words, and condemn all Heresies contrary to them, particularly those condemned
by the first four general Councils.

Secondly, Of Baptism the people must be instructed; That it is a Sacrament
instituted by Christ, for the Remission of sins, without which none could
attain Everlasting Life: And that, not only those of full Age, but Infants,
may, and must be Baptized, for the pardon of Original sin, and obtaining the
gift of the Holy Ghost, by which they became the Sons of God. That none
Baptized, ought to be Baptized again. That the opinions of the Anabaptists and
Pelagians, were detestable Heresies: And that those of ripe Age, who desired
Baptism, must with it join Repentance and Contrition for their sins, with a
firm Belief of the Articles of the Faith.

Thirdly, Concerning Penance, they were to instruct the people, that it was
instituted by Christ, and was absolutely necessary to Salvation. That it
consisted of Contrition, Confession and Amendment of Life; with exterior works
of Charity, which were the worthy Fruits of Penance. For Contrition, it was an
inward shame and sorrow for sin, because it is an offense of God, which
provokes his displeasure. To this must be joined, a Faith of the mercy and
goodness of God, whereby the penitent must hope, that God will forgive him, and
repute him justified, and of the number of his Elect Children, not for the
worthiness of any merit or work done by him, but for the only Merits of the
Blood and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ. That this Faith is got and
confirmed, by the Applicatition of the Promises of the Gospel, and the use of
the Sacraments: And for that end, Confession to a Priest is necessary, if it
may be had, whose Absolution was instituted by Christ, to apply the promises of
Gods Grace to the penitent: Therefore the people were to be taught, That the
Absolution is spoken by an Authority given by Christ in the Gospel to the
Priest, and must be believed, as if it were spoken by God himself, according to
our Saviors words; and therefore none were to condemn auricular Confession,
but use it for the comfort of their Consciences. The people were also to be
instructed, that though God pardoned sin, only for the satisfaction of Christ;
yet they must bring forth the Fruits of Penance, Prayer, Fasting, Almsdeeds,
with restitution and satisfaction for wrongs done to others, with other works
of Mercy and Charity, and Obedience to Gods Commandments, else they could not
be saved; and that by doing these, they should both obtain Everlasting Life,
and mitigation of their Afflictions in this present life, according to the
Scriptures.

Fourthly, As touching the Sacrament of the Altar, people were to be
instructed, that under the Forms of Bread and Wine, there was truly and
substantially given, the very same Body of Christ, that was born of the Virgin
Mary; and therefore it was to be received with all Reverence, every one duly
Examining himself, according to the words of St. Paul.

Fifthly, The people were to be instructed, That Justification signifies
Remission of sins, and acceptance into the favor of God; that is to say, a
perfect Renovation in Christ. To the attaining which, they were to have,
Contrition, Faith, Charity, which were both to concur in it, and follow it; and
that the good works necessary to Salvation, were not only outward Civil works,
but the inward motions and graces of Gods Holy Spirit, to dread, fear, and love
him, to have firm confidence in God, to call upon him, and to have patience in
all adversities, to hate sin, and have purposes and wills not to sin again;
with such other motions and virtues, consenting and agreeable to the Law of God.

The other Articles were about the Ceremonies of the Church. First, of Images.
The people were to be instructed, That the use of them was warranted by the
Scriptures, and that they served to represent to them good Examples, and to
stir up Devotion; and therefore it was meet that they should stand in the
Churches. But that the people might not fall into such Superstition as it was
thought they had done in time past, they were to be taught, to reform such
Abuses, lest Idolatry might ensue, and that in censing, kneeling, offering, or
worshipping them, the people were to be instructed, not to do it to the Image,
but to God and his honor.

Secondly, For the honoring of Saints, they were not to think to attain these
things at their hands, which were only obtained of God, but that they were to
honor them, as persons now in glory, to praise God for them, and imitate their
virtues, and not fear to die for the Truth, as many of them had done.

Thirdly, For praying to Saints, The people were to be taught, that it was good
to pray to them, to pray for, and with us. And to correct all Superstitious
Abuses in this matter, they were to keep the days appointed by the Church for
their Memories, unless the King should lessen the number of them, which if he
did, it was to be obeyed.

Fourthly, Of Ceremonies. The people were to be taught, That they were not to
be condemned and cast away, but to be kept as good and laudable, having
mystical significations in them, and being useful to lift up our minds to God.
Such were the Vestments in the worship of God: The sprinkling holy water to put
us in mind of our Baptism and the Blood of Christ: Giving holy Bread, in sign
of our Union in Christ, and to remember us of the Sacrament: Bearing Candles on
Candlemas-day, in remembrance, that Christ was the spiritual Light: Giving
Ashes on Ash-wednes-day, to put us in mind of Penance, and of our Mortality:
Bearing Palms on Palm Sunday, to show our desire to receive Christ in our
hearts, as he entered into Jerusalem: Creeping to the Cross on Good Friday, and
kissing it, in memory of his death, with the setting up the Sepulcher on that
day: The Hallowing the Font, and other Exorcisms and Benedictions.

And lastly, As to Purgatory, They were to declare it good and charitable to
pray for the Souls departed, which was said to have continued in the Church
from the beginning: And therefore the people were to be instructed, That it
consisted well with the due order of Charity, to pray for them, and to make
others pray for them, in Masses and Exequies, and to give Alms to them for that
end. But since the place they were in, and the pains they suffered, were
uncertain by the Scripture, we ought to remit them wholly to Gods mercy:
Therefore all these Abuses were to be put away, which, under the pretense of
Purgatory, had been advanced, as if the Popes pardons did deliver Souls out of
it, or Masses said in certain places, or before certain Images, had such
efficiency: with other suchlike Abuses.

These Articles being thus conceived, and in several places corrected, and
tempered by the Kings own hand, were signed by Cromwell, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and seventeen other Bishops, forty Abbots and Priors, and fifty
Archdeacons and Proctors of the lower House of Convocation. Among whom,
Polidor Virgil and Peter Vannes, signed with the rest, as appears by the
Original yet extant. Published by the Kings Authority.
They being tendered to the King, he confirmed them, and ordered them to be
published with a Preface in his name. It is said in the Preface, that he,
accounting it the chief part of his Charge, that the Word and Commandments of
God should be believed and observed, and to maintain unity and concord in
opinion; and understanding, to his great regret, that there was great diversity
of opinion arisen among his Subjects, both about Articles of Faith and
Ceremonies, had in his own Person taken great pains and study about these
things, and had ordered also the Bishops, and other Learned men of the Clergy,
to examine them; who after long deliberation had concluded on the most special
Points, which, the King thought, proceeded from a good, right, and true
judgment, according to the Laws of God; these would also be profitable, for
establishing unity in the Church of England: Therefore he had ordered them to
be published, requiring all to accept of them, praying God so to illuminate
their hearts, that they might have no less zeal and love to unity and concord
in reading them, than he had in making them to be devised, set forth, and
published; which good acceptance should encourage him to take further pains for
the future, as should be most for the honor of God, and the profit, and the
quietness of his Subjects.

This being published, occasioned great variety of Censures. Those that desired
Reformation, And variously censured.
were glad to see so great a step once made; and did not doubt, but this would
make way for further Changes. They rejoiced to see the Scriptures, and the
ancient Creeds, made the Standards of the Faith, without mentioning Tradition,
or the Decrees of the Church. Then the Foundation of Christian Faith was truly
stated, and the terms of the Covenant between God and man in Christ were
rightly opened, without the niceties of the Schools of either side. Immediate
worship of Images and Saints was also removed, and Purgatory was declared
uncertain by the Scripture. These were great advantages to them, but the
establishing the necessity of Auricular Confession, the Corporal presence in
the Sacrament, the keeping up and doing reverence to Images, and the praying to
Saints, did allay their joy, yet they still counted it a victory, to have
things brought under debate, and to have some Grosser abuses taken away.

The other Party were unspeakably troubled. Four Sacraments were passed over,
which would encourage ill-affected people to neglect them. The gainful trade by
the Belief of Purgatory was put down; for though it was said to be good to give
Alms for praying for the dead, yet since both the dreadful Stories of the
Miseries of Purgatory, and the Certainty of Redeeming Souls out of them by
Masses, were made doubtful, the peoples Charity and bounty that way would soon
abate. And in a word, the bringing matters under dispute, was a great
Mortification to them, for all concluded, that this was but a Preamble to what
they might expect afterward.

When these things were seen beyond Sea, the Papal party made everywhere great
use of it, to show the Necessity of adhering to the Pope; since the King of
England, though, when he broke off from his Obedience to the Apostolic See, he
pretended, he would maintain the Catholic Faith entire, yet was now making
great Changes in it. But others, that were more moderate, acknowledged that
there was great temper and prudence in contriving these Articles. And it seems,
the Emperor, and the more Learned Divines about him, both approved of the
Precedent, and liked the particulars so well, that not many years after, the
Emperor published a work not unlike this, called, The Interim; because it was
to be in force in that Interim, till all things were more fully debated and
determined by a General Council, which, in many particulars, agreed with these
Articles. Yet some stricter persons censured this work much, as being a
Political dawbing, in which, they said, there was more pains taken to gratify
persons, and serve particular ends, than to assert Truth in a free and
un-biassed way, such as became Divines. This was again excused, and it was
said, that all things, could not be attained on a sudden: that some of the
Bishops and Divines, who afterward arrived at a clearer understanding of some
matters, were not then so fully convinced about them, and so it was their
ignorance, and not their Cowardice or Policy, that made them compliant in some
things. Besides, it was said, that as our Savior did not reveal all things to
his Disciples, till they were able to bear them; and as the Apostles did not of
a sudden abolish all the Rites of Judaisme, but for some time, to gain the
Jews, complied with them, and went to the Temple, and offered Sacrifices: so
the people were not to be over driven in this Change. The Clergy must be
brought out of their ignorance by degrees, and then the people were to be
better instructed; but to drive furiously, and do all at once, might have
spoiled the whole design, and totally alienated those who were to be drawn on
by degrees; it might have also much endangered the peace of the Nation, the
people being much disposed by the practices of the Friars to rise in Arms:
Therefore these slow steps were thought the surer and better method.

On the last day of the Convocation, there was another Writing brought in by
Fox Bishop of Hereford, The Convocation declares against the Council called by
the Pope.
occasioned by the Summons for a General Council to sit at Mantua, to which the
Pope had cited the King to appear. The King had made his appeal from the Pope
to a General Council, but there was no reason to expect any Justice in an
assembly so constituted, as this was like to be. Therefore it was thought fit
to publish somewhat of the Reasons why the King could not submit his matter to
the Decision of such a Council, as was then intended. And it was moved, that
the Convocation should give their sense of it.

The Substance of their Answer, (which the Reader will find in the Collection,)
was, Collect Numb. 5.
That as nothing was better Instituted by the Ancient Fathers, for the
Establishment of the Faith, the Extirpation of Heresies, the Healing of
Schisms, and the Unity of the Christian Church, than General Councils, gathered
in the Holy Ghost, duly called to an indifferent place; with other necessary
requisites: So on the other hand nothing could produce more pestiferous
effects, than a General Council called upon private malice, or Ambition, or
other carnal respects; which Gregory Nazianzen so well observed in his time,
that he thought all Assemblies of Bishops were to be eschewed, for he never saw
good come of any of them, and they had increased, rather than healed the
distempers of the Church. For the appetite of vainglory, and a contentious
humor bore down reason: Therefore they thought Christian Princes ought to
employ all their endeavors to prevent so great a mischief. And it was to be
considered, First, who had Authority to call one. Secondly, If the Reasons for
calling one were weighty. Thirdly, who should be the Judges. Fourthly, what
should be the manner of Proceeding. Fifthly, what things should be treated of
in it. And as to the first of these, they thought neither the Pope, nor any one
Prince of what dignity soever, had Authority to call one, without the Consent
of all other Christian Princes: especially such as had entire and supreme
Government over all their Subjects. This was Signed on the 20th of July, by
Cromwell, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, with 14 Bishops, and 40 Abbots,
Priors, and Clerks, of the Convocation of Canterbury. Whether this and the
former Articles were also Signed by the Convocation of the Province of York,
does not appear by any Record, but that I think is not to be doubted. This
being obtained, the King published a long and sharp Protestation against the
Council now Summoned to Mantua. The King publishes his reasons against it.
In which he shows, that the Pope had no Power to call one; for as it was done
by the Emperors of old; so it pertained to Christian Princes now. That the Pope
had no Jurisdiction in England, and so could Summon none of this Nation to come
to any such meeting. That the place was neither safe nor proper: That nothing
could be done in a Council to any purpose, Fox.
if the Pope sat Judge in chief in it, since one of the true ends, why a
Council was to be desired, was to reduce his Power within its old limits. A
free General Council was that which he much desired; but he was sure this could
not be such: And the present distractions of Christendom, and the Wars between
the Emperor and the French King, showed this was no proper time for one. The
Pope who had long refused or delayed to call one, did now choose this
Conjuncture of affairs, knowing that few would come to it, and so they might
carry things as they pleased. But the World was now awake; the Scriptures were
again in men's hands, and people would not be so tamely cozened as they had
been. Then he shows how unsafe it was, for any English man to go to Mantua,
how little regard was to be had to the Popes safe Conduct, they having so often
broken their Oaths and Promises. He also shows how little reason he had to
trust himself to the Pope, how kind he had been to that See formerly, and how
basely they had requited it: And that now these Three years past, they had been
stirring up all Christian Princes against him, and using all possible means to
create him trouble. Therefore he declared, he would not go to any Council
called by the Bishop of Rome; but when there was a General peace among
Christian Princes, he would most gladly hearken to the motion of a true General
Council: and in the meanwhile, he would preserve all the Articles of the Faith
in his Kingdom, and sooner lose his Life and his Crown, than suffer any of them
to be put down. And so he protested against any Council to be held at Mantua,
or any where else, by the Bishop of Romes Authority: That he would not
acknowledge it, nor receive any of their Decrees.

At this time Reginald Pool, who was of the Royal Blood, being by his Mother
descended from the Duke of Clarence, Brother to King Edward the Fourth,
Cardinal Pool opposes the Kings proceedings.
and in the same degree of kindred with the King by his Fathers side, was in
great esteem for his Learning, and other Excellent virtues. It seems the King
had determined to breed him up to the greatest dignity in the Church; and to
make him as Eminent in Learning, and other acquired parts, as he was for
Quality, and a Natural Sweetness and Nobleness of temper. Therefore the King
had given him the Deanery of Excester, with several other dignities, toward
his maintenance beyond Sea; and sent him to Paris, where he stayed several
years: There he first incurred the Kings displeasure. For, being desired by him
to concur with his Agents, in procuring the Subscriptions and Seals of the
French Universities, he excused himself; yet it was in such terms, that he did
not openly declare himself against the King: After that, he came over to
England, and as he writes himself, was present when the Clergy made their
Submission, and acknowledged the King Supreme Head: In which, since he was then
Dean of Exeter, and kept his Deanery several years after that, it is not to be
doubted, but that, as he was by his place obliged to sit in the Convocation, so
he concurred with the rest in making that Submission. From thence he went to
Padua, where he lived long, and was received into the Friendship and Society of
some celebrated persons, who gave themselves much to the Study of Eloquence and
of the Roman Authors. These were Centareno, Bembo, Caraffa, Sadoletti, with a
great many more, that became afterward well known over the World: But all
those gave Pool the Pre-eminence, and that justly too, for he was accounted one
of the most Eloquent men of his time.

The King called him often home to assist him in his affairs, but he still
declined it; at length finding delays could prevail no longer, he wrote the
King word, that he did not approve of what he had done, neither in the matter
of his Divorce, nor his separation from the Apostolic See. To this the King
answered, desiring his reasons why he disagreed from him, and sent him over a
Book which Doctor Sampson had writ in defense of the Proceedings in England.
Upon which he wrote his Book De unione Ecclesiastica, and sent it over to the
King; and soon after Printed it this year. And writes his Book against him.
In which Book he condemned the Kings Actions, and pressed him to return to the
obedience he owed the Sea of Rome, with many sharp reflections; but the Book
was more considered for the Author, and the Wit and Eloquence of it, than for
any great Learning, or deep reasoning in it. He did also very much depress the
Royal, and exalt the Papal Authority: He compared the King to Nebuchadonosor,
and addressed himself in the Conclusion to the Emperor, whom he conjured to
turn his Arms rather against the King than the Turk. And indeed the indecencies
of his expressions against the King, not to mention the scurrilous Language he
bestows on Sampson, whose Book he undertakes to answer, are such, that it
appears how much the Italian Air had changed him; and that his Converse at
Padua had for some time defaced that generous temper of mind, which was
otherwise so natural to him.

Upon this, the King desired him at first to come over, and explain some
passages in his Book: But when he could not thus draw him into his toils, he
proceeded severely against him, and divested him of all his Dignities; but
these were plentifully made up to him by the Popes bounty, and the Emperors. He
was afterward rewarded with a Cardinals hat, but he did not rise above the
degree of a Deacon. Some believe that the Spring of this opposition he made to
the King was a secret affection he had for the Lady Mary. The publishing of
this Book, made the King set the Bishops on work to write Vindications of his
Actions: which Stokesley and Tonstal did in a long and Learned Letter, that
they wrote to Pool. Many Books are written for the King.
And Gardener published his Book of true obedience: To which Bonner, who was
hot on the scent of Preferment, added a Preface. But the King designed sharper
tools for Pool's punishment: Yet an Attaindor in absence was all he c^uld do
against himself. But his Family and kindred felt the weight of the Kings
displeasure very sensibly.

But now I must give an account of the dissolution of the Monasteries pursuant
to the Act of Parliament, though I cannot fix the exact time in which it was
done. I have seen the Original Instructions with the Commission, given to those
who were to visit the Monasteries in and about Bristol. All the rest were of
the same kind: They bear date the 28th of April, after the Session of
Parliament was over; and the report was to be made in the Octaves of St.
Michael the Archangel. But I am inclined to think that the great concussion
and disorder things were in by the Queens death, made the Commissioners
unwilling to proceed in so invidious a matter, till they saw the Issue of the
new-Parliament. Therefore I have delayed giving any account of the Proceedings
in that matter till this place. The Instructions will be found in the
Collection. The Substance of them was as follows.

Collect (...). 6.

Inst^uctions about the dis^^^tion of Monasteries.


The Auditors of the Court of Augmentations, were the persons that were
employed. Four, or any Three of them, were Commissioned to execute the
Instructions in every particular Visitation. One Auditor, or Receiver, and one
of the Clerks of the former Visitation, were to call for Three discreet persons
in the County, who were also named by the King. They were to signify to every
House the Statute of Dissolution, and show them their Commission. Thenthey were
to put the Governor, or any other officer of the House, to declare upon Oath
the true State of it: And to require him speedily to appear before the Court of
Augmentations, and in the mean time not to meddle with any thing belonging to
the House. Then to examine how many Religious persons were in the House, and
what lives they led; how many of them were Priests, how many of them would go
to other Religious Houses, and how many of them would take Capacities and go
into the World. They were to estimate the State and Fabric of the House, and
the number of the Servants they kept: and to call for the Covent-Seal, and
Writings, and put them in some sure place, and take an Inventory of all their
Plate, and their Movable goods, and to know the value of all, that before the
1st of March last belonged to the House, and what debts they owed. They were to
put the Covent-Seal, with the Jewels and Plate in safe keeping, and to leave
the rest (an Inventory being first taken) in the Governors hands, to be kept by
them till further Order. And the Governors were to meddle with none of the
Rents of the House, except for necessary Sustenance, till they were another way
disposed of. They were to try what Leases and Deeds had been made for a whole
year before the 4th of February last. Such as would still live in Monasteries,
were to be recommended to some of the great Monasteries that lay next: and such
as would live in the world, must come to the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the
Lord Chancellor, to receive Capacities. (From which it appears that Cromwell
was not at this time Lord Vicegerent, for he granted these Capacities when he
was in that Power.) And the Commissioners were to give them a reasonable
allowance for their Journey, according to the distance they lived at. The
Governor was to be sent to the Court of Augmentations, who were to assign him a
yearly pension for his Life.

What Report those Commissioners made, or how they obeyed their Instructions,
we know not; for the Account of it is razed out of the Records. The Writers
that lived near that time represent the matter very odiously, and say; about
ten Thousand persons were set to seek for their Livings; only Forty Shillings
in Money, and a Gown, being given to every Religious man. The Rents of them
all, rose to about Thirty Two Thousand Pound: And the Goods, Plate, Jewels, and
other movables, were valued at an Hundred Thousand Pound: And it is generally
said, and not improbably, that the Commissioners were as careful to enrich
themselves, as to increase the Kings Revenue. The Churches and Cloisters were
for the most part pulled down; and the Lead, Bells, and other Materials were
sold; and this must needs have raised great discontents everywhere.

The Religious persons that were undone, went about complaining of the
Sacrilege and Injustice of this Suppression; That what the piety of their
Ancestors had dedicated to God and his Saints, Great discontents among all
sorts of people.
was now invaded and converted to secular ends. They said, the Kings severity
fell first upon some particular persons of their Orders, who were found
delinquents; but now, upon the pretended miscarriages of some Individual
persons, to proceed against their Houses, and suppress them, was an unheard of
practice. The Nobility, and Gentry, whose Ancestors had founded or enriched
these Houses, and who provided for their younger Children, or impoverished
Friends, by putting them into these Sanctuaries, complained much of the
prejudice they sustained by it. The people, that had been well entertained at
the Abbots Tables, were sensible of their loss: for generally, as they
Traveled over the Country, the Abbeys were their Stages, and were Houses of
Reception to Travelers and Strangers. The Devouter sort of people of their
persuasion, thought their friends must now lie in Purgatory without relief,
except they were at the charge to keep a Priest, who should daily say Mass for
their Souls. The poor, that fed on their daily Alms, were deprived of that
supply.

But to compose these discontents, Endeavors are used to quiet these.
first many Books were published, to show what Crimes, Cheats, and Impostures,
those Religious persons were guilty of. Yet that wrought not much on the
people; for they said, why were not these Abuses severely punished and
reformed? But must whole Houses, and the Succeeding Generations, be punished
for the faults of a few? Most of these reports were also denied, and even those
who before envyed the ease and plenty in which the Abbots and Monks lived,
began now to pity them, and condemned the proceedings against them. But to
allay this General discontent; Cromwell advised the King to sell their Lands at
very easy rates to the Gentry in the several Counties, obliging them, since
they had them upon such terms, to keep up the wonted Hospitality. This drew in
the Gentry a-pace both to be satisfied with what was done; and to Assist the
Crown for ever in the defense of these Laws: their own interest being so
interwoven with the Rights of the Crown. The commoner sort, who, like those of
old that followed Christ for the Loaves, were most concerned for the loss of a
good dinner on a Holy Day, or when they went over the Country about their
business, were now also in a great measure satisfied, when they heard that all
to whom these Lands were given, were obliged under heavy Forfeitures to keep up
the Hospitality; and when they saw that put in practice, their discontent,
which lay chiefly in their Stomach, was appeased.

And to quiet other people, who could not be satisfied with such things, the
King made use of a Clause in the Act that gave him the lesser Monasteries,
which Empowered him to continue such as he should think fit. Therefore on the
17th of August, he by his Letters Patents, did of new give back in perpetuam
Eleemosynam for perpetual Alms, Collect Numb. 3. sect. 2.
Five Abbeys. The first of these, was the Abbey of St. Mary of Betlesden of the
Cistercian order in Bedfordshire, ten more were afterward confirmed. Sixteen
Nunneries, were also confirmed; In all Thirty one Houses. The Patents (in most
of which some manors are excepted, that had been otherwise disposed of,) are
all enrolled, and yet none of our Writers have taken any notice of this. It
seems these Houses had been more regular than the rest: So that in a General
Calamity they were rather reprieved than excepted: for two years after this, in
the Suppression of the rest of the Monasteries, they fell under the common fate
of other Houses. By these new Endowments, they were obliged to pay Tenthes and
First Fruits, and to obey all the Statutes and Rules that should be sent to
them from the King, as Supreme Head of the Church. But it is not unlike, that
some presents, to the Commissioners, or to Cromwell, made these Houses outlive
this ruin: for I find great trading in Bribes at this time, which is not to be
wondered at, when there was so much to be shared.

Yet people generally incline to Rebel.
But great disorders followed upon the Dissolution of the other Houses. People
were still generally discontented. The Suppression of Religious Houses
occasioned much out-crying, and the Articles then lately published about
Religion, increased the distaste they had conceived at the Government. The old
Clergy were also very watchful to improve all opportunities, and to blow upon
every spark. And the Popes Power of deposing Kings had been for almost five
hundred years received as an Article of Faith. The same Council that
established Transubstantiation, had asserted it: and there were many
Precedents, not only in Germany, France, Spain, and Italy, but also in England,
of Kings that were Deposed by Popes, whose Dominions were given to other
Princes. This had begun in the Eighth Century, in two famous Deprivations. The
one in France, of Childeric the 3d, who was deprived, and the Crown given to
Pepin: and about the same time, those Dominions in Italy which were under the
Eastern Emperors, renounced their alleagance to them. In both these the Popes
had a great hand, yet they rather confirmed and approved of those Treasonable
Mutations, than gave the first rise to them. But after Pope Gregory the 7th's
time, it was clearly assumed, as a Right and Prerogative of the Papal Crown, to
Depose Princes, and absolve Subjects from the Oaths of Alleagance, and set up
others in their stead. And all those Emperors or Kings, that contested any
thing with Popes, sat very uneasy and unsafe in their Thrones, ever after
that. But if they were tractable to the demands of the Court of Rome, then they
might oppress their Subjects, and Govern as unjustly as they pleased: for they
had a mighty support from that Court. This made Princes more easily bear the
Popes usurpations, because they were assisted by them in all their other
Proceedings. And the Friars, having the Consciences of people generally in
their hands as they had the word given by their General at Rome, so they
disposed people, either to be obedient, or seditious, as they pleased.

Now, not only their own Interests, mixed with their zeal for the ancient
Religion, but the Popes Authority, gave them as good a Warrant to incline the
people to Rebel, as any had in former times, of whom some were Canonized for
the like practices. For in August the former year, the Pope had Summoned the
King to appear within Ninety days, and to answer for putting away his Queen,
and taking another Wife; and for the Laws he had made against the Church, and
putting the Bishop of Rochester and others to death for not obeying these Laws:
and if he did not reform these faults, or did not appear to answer for them,
the Pope Excommunicated him, and all that favored him, deprived the King, put
the Kingdom under an Interdict, forbade all his Subjects to obey, and other
States to hold Commerce with him, dissolved all his Leagues with foreign
Princes, commanded all the Clergy to depart out of England, and his Nobility to
rise in Arms against him. But now, the force of those Thunders, which had
formerly produced great Earthquakes and Commotions, was much abated; yet some
storms were raised by this, though not so violent as had been in former times.

The people were quiet till they had reaped their Harvest. The Kings
injunctions about Religion.
And though some Injunctions were published a little before, to help it the
better forward, most of the Holy days in Harvest being abolished by the Kings
Authority; yet that rather Inflamed them the more. Other Injunctions were also
published in the Kings name by Cromwell his Vicegerent, which was the first
Act of pure Supremacy done by the King. For in all that went before, he had the
Concurrence of the two Convocations. But these, it is like, were penned by
Cranmer. The Reader is referred to the Collection of Papers for them, as I
transcribed them out of the Register.

The Substance of them was, that first, all Ecclesiastical Incumbents were for
a quarter of an year after that, once every Sunday, Collect Numb. 7.
and ever after that, twice every quarter, to publish to the people: That the
Bishop of Romes usurped Power, had no ground in the Law of God: and therefore
was on good reasons abolished in this Kingdom: And that the Kings Power was by
the Law of God, Supreme over all persons in his Dominions. And they were to do
their uttermost endeavor, to extirpate the Popes Authority, and to establish
the Kings.

Secondly, They were to declare the Articles lately published, and agreed to,
by the Convocation: and to make the people know which of them were Articles of
Faith, and which of them Rules for the decent and politic Order of the Church.

Thirdly, They were to declare the Articles lately set forth, for the
Abrogation of some superfluous Holy days, particularly in Harvest time.

Fourthly, They were no more to extol Images or Relics, for superstition or
gain; nor to exhort people to make Pilgrimages, as if blessings and good things
were to be obtained of this or that Saint or Image. But in stead of that, the
people were to be instructed to apply themselves to the keeping of Gods
Commandments, and doing works of Charity; and to believe that God was better
served by them, when they stayed at home and provided for their Families, than
when they went Pilgrimages: and that the Moneys laid out on these, were better
given to the poor.

Fifthly, They were to exhort the people to teach their Children the Lords
Prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments, in English: and every Incumbent
was to explain these, one Article a day, till the people were Instructed in
them. And to take great care, that all Children were bred up to some trade or
way of Living.

Sixthly,, They must take care that the Sacraments and Sacramentals be
reverently administered in their Parishes, from which when at any time they were
absent, they were to Commit the Cure to a Learned and expert Curate; who might
instruct the people in wholesome Doctrine: that they might all see, that their
Pastors did not pursue their own profits or interests, so much as the Glory of
God, and the good of the Souls under their Cure.

Seventhly, They should not, except on urgent occasion, go to Taverns or
Alehouses: nor sit too long at any sort of Games after their Meals: but give
themselves to the Study of the Scripture, or some other honest exercise; and
remember that they must excel others in purity of life, and be examples to all
others to live well and Christianly.

Eighthly, Because the goods of the Church, were the goods of the poor; every
Beneficed person that had twenty Pound or above, and did not reside, was yearly
to distribute the Fortieth part of his Benefice to the poor of the Parish.

Ninthly, Every Incumbent that had an hundred Pound a year, must give an
Exhibition for one Scholar at some Grammar School, or University; who after he
had completed his Studies, was to be Partner of the Cure and Charge, both in
Preaching, and other duties: And so many hundred Pounds as any had, so many
Students he was to breed up.

Tenthly, Where Parsonage or Vicarage-Houses were in great decay, the Incumbent
was every year to give a fifth part of his profits to the repairing of them,
till they were finished; and then to maintain them in the State they were in.

Eleventhly, All these Injunctions were to be observed, under pain of
suspension and sequestration of the mean profits till they were observed.

These were equally ungrateful to the Corrupt Clergy, and to the Laity that
adhered to the old Doctrine. Which were much censured.
The very same opinions, about Pilgrimages, Images, and Saints departed, and
instructing the people in the Principles of Christian Religion in the Vulgar
tongue, for which the Lollards were not long ago, either burnt or forced to
abjure them, were now set up by the Kings Authority. From whence they
concluded, that whatsoever the King said of his maintaining the old Doctrine,
yet he was now changing it. The Clergy also were much troubled at this
Precedent, of the Kings giving such Injunctions to them, without the consent of
the Convocation: From which they concluded, they were now to be slaves to the
Lord Vicegerent. The matter of these Injunctions was also very uneasy to
them. The great profits they made by their Images, and Relics, and the
Pilgrimages to them, were now taken away: and yet severe Impositions and heavy
Taxes were laid on them; a fifth part for Repairs, a tenth at least for an
Exhibitioner, and a fortieth for Charity, which were cried out on as
intolerable burdens. Their Labor was also increased, and they were bound up to
many severities of Life: All these things touched the Secular Clergy to the
quick, and made them concur with the Regular Clergy in disposing the people to
Rebel.

This was secretly fomented by the great Abbots. For though they were not yet
struck at, yet the way was prepared to it; and their Houses were oppressed with
crowds of those who were sent to them from the suppressed Houses. There was
some pains taken to remove their fears. For a Letter was sent to them all in
the Kings name, to silence the reports that were spread abroad, as if all
Monasteries were to be quite suppressed. This they were required not to believe
but to serve God according to their Order, to obey the Kings Injunctions, to
keep Hospitality, and make no wastes nor dilapidations. Yet this gave them
small comfort; and as all such things do, rather increased than quieted their
jealousies and fears. So many secret causes concurring, no wonder the people
fell into mutinous and seditious practices.

The first rising was in Lincolnshire in the beginning of October, A Rebellion
in Lincolnshire.
where a Churchman, disguised into a Cobbler, and directed by a Monk, drew a
great body of men after him. About 20000 were gathered together. They swore to
be true, to God, the King, and the Commonwealth, and digested their Grievances
into a few Articles, which they sent to the King, desiring a redress of them.

They complained of some things that related to secular concerns, and some Acts
of Parliament that were uneasy to them: Their Demands.
They also complained of the suppression of so many Religious Houses: that the
King had mean persons in high places about him, who were ill Counselors: They
also complained of some Bishops who had subverted the Faith; and they
apprehended the Jewels and Plate of their Churches, should be taken away.
Therefore they desired the King would call to him the Nobility of the Realm,
and by their advice redress their Grievances: Concluding with an acknowledgment
of the Kings being their Supreme Head, and that the Tenthes and first Fruits of
all Livings, belonged to him of Right.

When the King heard of this Insurrection, The Kings answer.
he presently sent the Duke of Suffolk with a Commission to raise forces for
dispersing them: But with him he sent an answer to their Petition. He began
with that about his Counselors, and said; It was never before heard of that
the Rabble presumed to Dictate to their Prince, what Counselors he should
choose. That was the Princes work and not theirs. The Suppression of Religious
Houses was done pursuant to an Act of Parliament, and was not set forth by any
of his Counselors. The Heads of these Religious Houses, had under their own
hands confessed those horrid scandals, which made them a reproach to the
Nation. And in many Houses there were not above Four or Five Religious persons.
So it seemed they were better pleased, that such dissolute persons should
consume their Rents in riotous and idle living, than that their Prince should
have them for the Common good of the whole Kingdom. He also answered their
other Demands in the same high and commanding strain; and required them to
submit themselves to his mercy, and to deliver their Captains and Lieutenants
into the hands of his Lieutenants; and to disperse, and carry themselves as
became good and obedient Subjects, and to put an hundred of their number into
the hands of his Lieutenants, to be ordered as they had deserved.

When this answer was brought to them, it raised their Spirits higher. The
practicing Clergymen continued to inflame them. They persuaded them that the
Christian Religion would be very soon defaced, and taken away quite, if they
did not vigorously defend it: That it would come to that, that no man should
marry a Wife, receive any of the Sacraments, nor eat a piece of roast meat, but
he should pay for it: That it were better to live under the Turk, than under
such oppression. Therefore there was no cause in which they could with more
honor and a better conscience hazard their Lives, than for the Holy Faith.
This encouraged and kept them together a little longer. They had forced many of
the Gentry of the Country to go along with them. These sent a secret Message
to the Duke of Suffolk, letting him know what ill effects the Kings rough
answer had produced: That they had joined with the people only to moderate them
a little, and they knew nothing that would be so effectual as the offer of a
general pardon. So the Duke of Suffolk, as he moved toward them with the
forces which he had drawn together, It Is quieted by the Duke of Suffolk.
sent to the King to know his pleasure, and earnestly advised a gentle
composing of the matter without blood. At that same time the King was
advertised from the North, that there was a general and formidable Rising
there. Of which he had the greater apprehensions, because of their
neighborhood to Scotland; ^ new Re^^on in the (...)
whose King, being the Kings Nephew, was the Heir presumptive of the Crown,
since the King had Illegitimated both his Daughters. And though the Kings firm
Alliance with France made him less apprehensive of trouble from Scotland, and
their King was at this time in France, to marry the Daughter of Francis; yet he
did not know how far a general Rising might invite that King, to send orders to
head and assist the Rebels in the North. Therefore he resolved first to quiet
Lincolnshire. And as he had raised a great force about London, with which he
was marching in person against them; so he sent a new Proclamation, Requiring
them to return to their obedience, with secret assurances of mercy. By these
means they were melted away. Those who had been carried in the Stream,
submitted to the Kings mercy, and promised all obedience for the future:
Others, that were obstinate, and knew themselves unpardonable, fled Northward,
and joined themselves to the Rebels there: Some of their other Leaders were
apprehended, in particular the Cobbler, and were Executed.

But for the Northern Rebellion, as the parties concerned, being at a greater
distance from the Court, had larger opportunities to gather themselves into a
huge Body; so the whole Contrivance of it was better laid. One Ask Commanded in
chief. He was a Gentleman of an ordinary condition, but understood well how to
draw on and Govern a Multitude. Their march was called the Pilgrimage of Grace.
And to inveigle the people, some Priests marched before them with Crosses in
their hands. In their Banners they had a Crucifix with the Five wounds, and a
Chalice: and every one wore on his sleeve, as the badge of the Party, an Emblem
of the Five wounds of Christ, with the name Jesus wrought in the midst. All
that joined to them took an Oath, That they entered into this Pilgrimage of
Grace, for the love of God, the preservation of the Kings person, and issue,
the purifying the Nobility, and driving away all base born and ill Counselors;
and for no particular profit of their own, nor to do displeasure to any, nor to
kill any for envy; but to take before them the Cross of Christ, his Faith, the
Restitution of the Church, and the Suppression of Heretics, and their
opinions. These were specious pretenses, Which grew very formidable.
and very apt to work upon a giddy and discontented multitude. So people
flocked about their Crosses and Standards in great numbers; and they grew to be
40000 strong. They went over the Country without any great opposition. The
Archbishop of York and the Lord Darcy were in Pomfret Castle; which they
yielded to them, and were made to swear their Covenant. They were both
suspected of being secret Promoters of the Rebellion: the latter suffered for
it, but how the former excused himself I cannot give any account. They also
took York, and Hull; but though they summoned the Castle of Skipton, yet the
Earl of Cumberland, who would not degenerate from his Noble Ancestors, held it
out against all their force: and though many of the Gentlemen, whom he had
entertained at his own cost, deserted him, yet he made a brave resistance.
Scarborough Castle was also long besieged; but there Sir Ralph Evers, that
Commanded it, gave an un-exampled instance of his fidelity and courage; for
though his provisions fell short, so that for twenty days he and his men had
nothing but bread and water, yet they stood out till they were relieved.

This Rising in Yorkshire encouraged those of Lancashire, the Bishopric of
Duresm, and Westmoreland, to Arm. Against these the Earl of Shrewsbury, that he
might not fall short of the Gallantry and Loyalty of his renownd Ancestors,
made head: though he had no Commission from the King. But he knew his zeal and
fidelity would easily procure him a pardon, which he modestly asked for the
service he had done. The King sent him not only that, but a Commission to
command in chief all his forces in the North. To his Assistance he ordered the
Earl of Derby to march; and sent Courtney Marquess of Exeter, and the Earls of
Huntington, and Rutland, to join him. He also ordered the Duke of Suffolk, with
the force that he had led into Lincolnshire, to lie still there; lest they,
being but newly quieted, should break out again, and fall upon his Armies
behind; when the Yorkshire men met them before.

The Duke of Norfolk and others sent against them.
On the 20th of October, he sent the Duke of Norfolk with more forces to join
the Earl of Shrewsbury: But the Rebels were very numerous and desperate. When
the Duke of Norfolk understood their strength, he saw great reason to proceed
with much caution: for if they had got the least advantage of the Kings Troops,
all the discontents in England would upon the report of that have broken out.
He saw their numbers were now such, that the gaining some time was their ruin:
for such a great Body could not subsist long together, without much provisions;
and that must be very hard for them to bring in: So he set forward a Treaty. It
was both honorable for the King to offer mercy to his distracted Subjects, and
of great advantage to his affairs: for as their numbers did every day lessen;
so the Kings forces were still increasing. He wrote to the King, that
considering the season of the year, he thought the offering some fair
conditions might persuade them to lay down their Arms, and disperse themselves:
Yet when the Earl of Shrewsbury sent a Herald with a Proclamation, ordering
them to lay down their Arms, and submit to the Kings mercy; Ask received him
sitting in State, with the Archbishop on the one hand, and the Lord Darcy on
the other, but would not suffer any Proclamation to be made, till he knew the
Contents of it. And when the Herald told what they were, he sent him away
without suffering him to publish it. And then the Priests used all their
endeavors, to engage the people to a firm resolution of not dispersing
themselves, till all matters about Religion were fully settled.

As they went forward, they everywhere repossessed the ejected Monks of their
Houses; and this encouraged the rest, who had a great mind to be in their old
Nests again. They published also many stories among them of the growing burdens
of the (...) Government, and made them believe that Impositions would be laid
on every thing that was either bought or sold. But the King hearing how strong
they were, sent out a general Summons to all the Nobility to meet him at
Northampton the 7th of November. And the forces sent against the Rebels
advanced to Doncaster, They advance to Doncaster.
to hinder them from coming further southward; and took the Bridge, which they
fortified, and laid their forces along the River to maintain that Pass.

The Writers of that time say, that the day of Battle was agreed on; but that
the night before, excessive Rains falling, the River swelled so, that it was
unpassable next day, and they could not force the Bridge. Yet it is not likely
the Earl of Shrewsbury, having in all but 5000 men about him, would agree to a
pitched Battle with those who were Six times his number, being then 30000.
Therefore it is more likely that the Rebels only intended to pass the River the
next day, which the Rain that fell hindered: But the Duke of Norfolk continued
to press a Treaty, which was hearkened to by the other side; who were reduced to
great straits; for their Captain would not suffer them to spoil the Country,
and they were no longer able to subsist without doing that. The Duke of Norfolk
directed some that were secretly gained, or had been sent over to them as
Deserters, to spread reports among them; that their Leaders were making Terms
for themselves, and would leave the rest to be undone. This joined to their
necessities, made many fall off every day. The Duke of Norfolk finding his Arts
had so good an operation offered to go to Court, The (...) them by delays.
with any whom they would send with their demands, and to intercede for them.
This he knew would take up some time, and most of them would be dispersed
before he could return. So they sent two Gentlemen, whom they had forced to go
with them, to the King to Windsor. Upon this, the King discharged the
Rendezvous at Northampton, and delayed the sending an answer as much as could
be: But at last, hearing that though most of them were dispersed; yet they had
engaged to return upon warning* and that they took it ill that no answer came;
he sent the Duke of Norfolk to them with a general pardon, six only excepted by
name, and four others that were not named. But in this the Kings Counsels were
generally censured, for every one was now in fear, and so the Rebels rejected
the Proposition. The King also sent them word by their own Messenger That he
took it very ill at their hands, that they had chosen rather to rise in Arms
against him, than to Petition him about these things which were uneasy to
them. And to appease them a little, the King by new Injunctions, commanded the
Clergy to continue the use of all the Ceremonies of the Church. This, it is
like, was intended for keeping up the four Sacraments, which had not been
mentioned in the former Articles. The Clergy, that were with the Rebels, met at
Pomfret to draw up Articles to be offered at the Treaty that was to be at
Doncaster: where three hundred were ordered to come from the Rebels to treat
with the Kings Commissioners. So great a number was called, in hopes that they
would disagree about their Demands, and so fall out among themselves. On the
6th of December they met to treat, and it seems had so laid their matter
before, that they agreed upon these following Demands.

A general Pardon to be granted: a Parliament to be held at York; and Courts of
justice to be there; that none on the North of Trent might be brought to London
upon any Law-sute. They desired a Repeal of some Acts of Parliament: Their
Demands.
Those for the last Subsidy, for uses, for making words misprision of Treason,
and for the Clergies paying their Tenthes and first Fruits to the King. They
desired the Princess Mary might be restored to her right of Succession; the
Pope to his wonted Jurisdiction and the Monks to their Houses again: that the
Lutherans might be punished, that Audley the Lord Chancellor, and Cromwell the
Lord Privy Seal, might be excluded from the next Parliament; and Lee and
Leighton, that had visited the Monasteries, might be imprisoned for Bribery and
Extortion.

But the Lords, who knew that the King would by no means agree to these
Propositions, rejected them. Upon which the Rebels took heart again, and were
growing more enraged and desperate; so that the Duke of Norfolk wrote to the
King, that if some content were not given them, it might end very ill, for they
were much stronger than his Forces were: And both he, and the other Commanders
of the Kings Forces, in their hearts wished that most of their Demands were
granted; being persons, who though they complied with the King, and were
against that Rebellion, yet were great Enemies to Lutheranism, and wished a
Reconciliation with Rome; of which the Duke of Norfolk was afterward accused
by the Lord Darcy, as if he had secretly encouraged them to insist on these
Demands. The King seeing the humor was so obstinate, resolved to use gentler
Remedies; and so sent to the Duke of Norfolk a general Pardon, with a promise
of a Parliament, ordering him not to make use of these, except in extremity.
This was no easy thing to that Duke, since he might be afterward made to
answer for it, whether the extremity was really such, as to justify his
granting these things. But the Rebels were become again as numerous as ever,
and had resolved to cross the River, and to force the Kings Camp, which was
still much inferior to theirs in number. But Rains falling the second time,
made the Foords again unpassable. This was spoken of by the Kings Party, as
little less than a a Miracle, that Gods Providence had twice so opportunely
interposed for the stopping of the progress of the Rebels: And it is very
probable that on the other side, it made great impression on the Superstitious
multitude; and both discouraged them, and disposed them, to accept of the offer
of Pardon, and a Parliament to be soon called, for considering their other
Demands. The King signed the Pardon at Richmond, the 9th of December: by which
all their Treasons and Rebellion to that day, were pardoned, provided they made
their submission to the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of Shrewsbury, and lived
in all due obedience for the future. The King sent likewise a long answer to
their Demands, The Kings answer to them.
as to what they complained about the subversion of the Faith; He protested his
zeal for the true Christian Faith, and that he would live and die in the
defense and preservation of it. But the ignorant multitude were not to instruct
him what the true Faith was, nor to presume to correct what he and the whole
Convocation had agreed on. That as he had preserved the Church of England in
her true Liberties, so he would do still; and that he had done nothing that was
so oppressive, as many of his Progenitors had done upon lesser grounds. But
that he took it very ill of them, who had rather one Churl or two should enjoy
the Profits of their Monasteries, to support them in their dissolute and
abominable course of living, than that their King should have them for
defraying the great Charge he was at for their defense against Foreign
Enemies. For the Laws, it was high presumption in a rude multitude to take on
them to judge what Laws were good, and what not. They had more reason to think,
that he after twenty eight years Reign should know it better than they could.
And for his Government, he had so long preserved his Subjects in Peace and
Justice, had so defended them from their Enemies, had so secured his Frontier,
had granted so many general Pardons, had been so unwilling to punish his
Subjects, and so ready to receive them into mercy; that they could show no
parallel to his Government among all their former Kings. And whereas it was
said, That he had many of the Nobility of his Council, in the beginning of his
Reign, and few now; he showed them in that one instance how they were abused by
the lying slanders of some disaffected Persons: For when he came to the Crown,
there were none that were born Noble, of his Council, but only the Earl of
Surrey, and the Earl of Shrewsbury; whereas now, the Dukes of Norfolk and
Suffolk, the Marquess of Exeter, the Lord Steward, the Earls of Oxford and
Sussex, and the Lord Sands, were of the Privy Council: And for the
Spirituality, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester,
Hereford and Chichester, were also of it: And he and his whole Council judging
it necessary to have some at the board who understood the Law of England, and
the Treaties with Foreign Princes; he had by their Unanimous advice brought in
his Chancellor, and the Lord Privy Seal. He thought it strange, that they who
were but brutes, should think they could better judge who should be his
Counselors than himself and his whole Council: Therefore he would bear no such
thing at their hands; it being inconsistent with the duty of good Subjects, to
meddle in such matters. But if they or any of his other Subjects, could bring
any just complaint against any about him, he was ready to hear it; and if it
were proved, he would punish it according to Law. As for the complaints against
some of the Prelates for preaching against the Faith, they could know none of
these things but by the report of others; since they lived at such a distance,
that they themselves had not heard any of them preach. Therefore he required
them not to give credit to Lies, nor be misled by those who spread such
Calumnies and ill reports: And he concluded all with a severe Expostulation;
adding that such was his love to his Subjects, that imputing this Insurrection,
rather to their folly and lightness, than to any malice or rancour, he was
willing to pass it over more gently, as they would perceive by his Proclamation.

Now the people were come to themselves again, and glad to get off so easily;
and they all cheerfully accepted the Kings offers, 1537.
and went home again to their several dwellings. The Rebellion is quieted.
Yet the Clergy were no way satisfied, but continued still to practice amongst
them, and kept the Rebellion still on foot; so that it broke out soon after.
The Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Shrewsbury, were ordered to lie still in
the Country with their Forces, till all things were more fully composed. They
made them all come to a full submission; and first, to revoke all Oaths and
Promises made, during the Rebellion, for which they asked the Kings Pardon on
their knees; 2ly, To swear to be true to the King, and his Heirs and
Successors; 3ly, To obey and maintain all the Acts of Parliament made during
the Kings Reign. 4ly, Not to take Arms again but by the Kings Authority. 5ly,
To apprehend all Seditious persons. 6ly, To remove all the Monks, Nuns, and
Friars, whom they had placed again in the dissolved Monasteries. There were
also Orders given to send Ask their Captain, and the Lord Darcy, to Court. Ask
was kindly received, and well used by the King. He had showed great conduct in
Commanding the Rebels; and it seems the King had a mind, either to gain him to
his service, or, which I suspect was the true Cause, to draw from him a
discovery of all those, who, in the other parts of the Kingdom, had favored or
relieved them. For he suspected, not without cause, that some of the great
Abbots had given secret supplies of Money to the Rebels: For which many of them
were afterward tried and attainted. The Lord Darcy was under great
apprehensions, and studied to purge himself, 1537.
that he was forced to a Compliance with them; but pleaded, that the long and
important services, he had done the Crown for fifty years, he being then
fourscore, together with his great Age and Infirmity, might mitigate the Kings
displeasure. But he was made Prisoner. Whether this gave those who had been in
Arms, new jealousies, that the Kings Pardon would not be inviolably observed;
or whether the Clergy had of new, prevailed on them to rise in Arms, I cannot
determine: But it broke out again, though not so dangerously as before. New
risings but soon dispersed.
Two Gentlemen of the North, Musgrave and Tilby, raised a body of 8000 men; and
thought to have surprised Carlisle; but were repulsed by those within. And in
their return the Duke of Norfolk fell upon them, and routed them. He took many
prisoners, and by Martial Law hanged up all their Captains, and Seventy other
Prisoners on the Walls of Carlisle. Others at that same time thought to have
surprised Hull; but it was prevented, and the leaders of that Party were also
taken and Executed.

Many other Risings were in several places of the Country, which were all soon
repressed; the ground of them all was, that the Parliament which was promised,
was not called: But the King said, they had not kept conditions with him, nor
would he call a Parliament till all things were quieted. But the Duke of
Norfolks vigilance everywhere, prevented their gathering together in any great
Body. And after several un-succesful attempts, at length the Country was
absolutely quieted in January following. And then the Duke of Norfolk proceeded
according to the Martial Law against many whom he had taken. Ask had also left
the Court without leave, and had gone amongst them, but was quickly taken. So
he and many others were sent to several places, to be made public Examples. He
suffered at York, others at Hull, and in other Towns in Yorkshire. But the Lord
Darcy, and the Lord Hussy, were arraigned at Westminster, and attainted of
Treason* The former for the Northern, and the other for the Lincolnshire
Insurrection. The Lord Darcy was beheaded at Towerhill; and was much lamented.
The chief of the Rebels executed.
Every body thought that considering his Merits, his Age, and former services,
he had hard measure. The Lord Hussy was beheaded at Lincoln. The Lord Darcy in
his Trial, accused the Duke of Norfolk; that in the Treaty at Doncaster, he had
encouraged the Rebels to continue in their demands. This the Duke denied, and
desired a Trial by Combat, and gave some presumptions to show that the Lord
Darcy bore him ill will, and said this out of Malice. The King either did not
believe this, or would not seem to believe it: And the Dukes great diligence in
the Suppression of these Commotions set him beyond all jealousies. But after
those Executions, the King wrote to the Duke in July next, to Proclaim an
absolute Amnesty over all the North; which was received with great joy, every
body being in fear of himself: and so this threatening storm was dissipated
without the effusion of much blood, save what the sword of justice drew. At the
same time the King of Scotland returning from France with his Queen, and
touching on the Coast of England; many of the people fell down at his feet,
praying him to assist them, and he should have all. But he was, it seems, bound
up by the French King: and so went home without giving them any encouragement.
And thus ended this Rebellion, which was chiefly carried on by the Clergy,
under pretense of Religion.

And now the King was delivered of all his apprehensions that he had been in,
for some years in fear of Stirs at home. A new Visitation of Monasteries.
But they being now happily composed; as he knew it would so overawe the rest
of his discontented Subjects, that he needed fear nothing from them for a great
while; so it encouraged him to go on in his other designs, of suppressing the
rest of the Monasteries, and reforming some other Points of Religion. Therefore
there was a new Visitation appointed for all the Monasteries of England. And
the Visiters were ordered, to Examine all things that related either to their
Conversation, to their affection to the King, and the Supremacy, or to their
Superstition, in their several Houses: To discover what Cheats and Impostures
there were, either in their Images, Relics, or other miraculous things, by
which they had drawn people to their Houses on Pilgrimages, and gotten from
them any great Presents. Also to try how they were affected during the late
Commotions, and to discover every thing that was amiss in them, and report it
to the Lord Vicegerent. In the Records of the whole Twenty Eighth year of the
Kings Reign, I find but one Original Surrender of any Religious House. The
Abbot of Furnese in Lincolnshire valued at 960 lib. with Thirty Monks resigning
up that House to the King, on the 9th of April, which was very near the end of
the year of the Kings Reign, for it commenced on the 22d of April. Two other
Surrenders are enrolled that year. The one was of Bermondsey in Surrey, the
first of June in the twenty eighth of the Kings Reign. The Preamble was, that
they Surrendered in hopes of greater Benevolence from the King. But this was the
effect of some secret practice, and not of the Act of Parliament. For it was
valued at 548 lib. and so fell not within the Act. The other was of Bushlisham
or Bishtam in Berkshire, made by Barlow Bishop of St. David's, that was
Commendator of it, and a great Promoter of the Reformation. It was valued at
327 lib. But in the following year they made a quicker Progress, and found
strange Enormities in the greater Houses. It seems all the Houses under 200
lib. of Rent were not yet suppressed. For I find many within that value
afterward resigning their Houses. So that I am inclined to believe, that the
first visitation being made toward the Suppression of the lesser Monasteries,
and that (as appears by their Instructions) being not to be finished till they
had made a report of what they had done to the Court of Augmentations, who were
after the report made to determine what pensions were to be reserved to the
Abbot and other Officers; (which report was to be made in the Octaves of St.
Michael, and after that, a new Commission was to be given for their
Suppression;) when that was done, they went no further at that time, that so I
cannot think there were many Houses Suppressed when these Stirs began: and
after their first rising, it is not likely that great Progress would be made in
a business that was like to inflame the people more, and increase the number of
the Rebels. Neither do I find any Houses suppressed by virtue of the former Act
of Parliament till the twenty ninth year of the Kings Reign. Some of the great
Abbots surrender their Houses.


And yet they made no great have this year. For there are but twenty one
Surrenders all this year, either in the Rolls, or Augmentation-Office. And now,
not only small Abbeys, but greater ones, were surrendered to the King. The
Abbots were brought to do it upon several Motives. Some had been faulty during
the late Rebellion, and were liable to the Kings displeasure: and these, to
redeem themselves, compounded the matter by a Resignation of their House.
Others began to like the Reformation, and that made them the more willing to
surrender their Houses: such as Barlow Bishop of St. David's, who not only
surrendered up his own House of Bushlisham, but prevailed on many others to do
the like: Others were convicted of great disorders in their Conversation; and
these not daring to stand a Trial, were glad to accept of a Pension for life,
and deliver up their House. Others were guilty of making great wastes and
Dilapidations. For they all saw the Dissolution of their Houses approaching,
and so every one was induced to take all the care he could to provide for
himself, and his kindred; so that the Visitors found in some of the Richest
Abbeys of England, as St. Albans, and Battle, such depredations made, that at
St. Albans an Abbot could not subsist any longer, the rents were so low; and in
Battle, as all their furniture was old and torn, not worth an 100 lib. so both
in House and Chapel, they had not 400 Marks worth of Plate. In other Houses
they found not above twelve or fifteen Ounces of Plate, and no furniture at
all, but only such things as they could not embezel; as the Walls, and Windows,
Bells, and Lead. In other Houses, the Abbot and Monks were glad to accept of a
Pension for themselves during life: and so being only concerned for their own
particular interest, resigned their House to the King. Generally, the Monks had
eight Marks a year Pension, till they were provided for. The Abbots Pensions
were proportioned to the Value of their House, and to their Innocence. The
Abbots of St. Albans, and Tewksbury, had 400 Marks a year a piece. The Abbot of
St. Edmundsbury was more Innocent, for the Visitors wrote from thence, that
they could find no scandals in that House: So he (it seems) was not easily
brought to Resign his House, and had 500 Marks Pension reserved to him. And for
their inferior Officers some had 30. some 10. or 8. and the lowest 6 lib.
Pension.

In other places, upon a vacancy, either by death, or deprivation, they did put
in an Abbot only to resign up the House. For after the Kings Supremacy was
established, all those Abbots that had been formerly confirmed by the Pope,
were placed in this manner. The King granted a Conge d'elire to the Prior and
Convent, with a Missive Letter, declaring the name of the person whom they
should choose: then they returned an election to the King, who, upon that, gave
his assent to it by a Warrant under the great Seal, which was certified to the
Lord Vicegerent; who thereupon Confirmed the Election, and returned him back
to the King, to take the Oaths: upon which, the Temporalities were restored.
Thus all the Abbots were now placed by the King, and were generally picked out
to serve this turn. Others, in hope of advancement to Bishoprics, or to be
Suffragan Bishops, as the inferior sort of them were made generally, were glad
to recommend themselves to the Kings favor, by a quick and cheerful Surrender
of their Monastery. Upon some of these inducements it was, 1538.
that the greatest number of the Religious Houses were resigned to the King,
before there was any Act of Parliament made for their Suppression. In several
Houses, the Visitors, who were generally, either Masters of Chancery, or
Auditors of the Court of Augmentations, studied not only to bring them to
resign their Houses, but to Sign Confessions of their passed lewd and dissolute
lives. Of these, there is only one now extant, which (it is like) escaped the
general rasure and destruction of all Papers of that kind, in Queen Mary's
time. But from the Letters that I have seen, I perceive there were such
Confessions made by many other Houses. That Confession of the Prior and
Benedictins of St. Andrews in Northampton is to be seen in the Records of the
Court of Augmentations. In which, Confessions of horrid Crimes made in several
Houses.
with the most aggravating expressions that could be devised, they acknowledged
their past ill life, for which the Pit of Hell was ready to swallow them up.
They confessed that they had neglected the Worship of God, lived in Idleness,
Gluttony, and Sensuality, with many other woeful expressions to that purpose.

Other Houses, as the Monastery of Betlesden, Collect Numb. 3. sect. 4.
resigned with this Preamble, That they did profoundly consider, that the
manner and trade of living, which they, and others of their pretended Religion,
had for a long time followed, consisted in some dumb ceremonies, and other
Constitutions, of the Bishops of Rome, and other foreign Potentates; as the
Abbot of Cisteaux, by which they were blindly led, having no true knowledge of
Gods Laws; procuring exemptions from their Ordinary and Diocesan, by the Power
of the Bishop of Rome, and submitting themselves wholly to a foreign Power,
who never came hither to reform their abuses, which were now found among them.
But that now knowing the most perfect way of living is sufficiently declared by
Christ and his Apostles; and that it was most fit for them to be Governed by
the King, who was their Supreme Head on earth; they Submitted themselves to his
Mercy, and surrendered up their Monastery to him on the 25th of September in
the 30th year of his Reign. This writing was signed by the Abbot, the
Sub-prior, and nine Monks. There are five other Surrenders to the same purpose;
by the Gray, and White Friars of Stamford, the Gray-Friars of Coventry,
Bedford, and Ailesbury, yet to be seen. Some are resigned upon this Preamble,
That they hoped the King would of new found their House; which was otherwise
like to be ruined, both in Spirituals and Temporals. So did the Abbot of
Chertsey in Surrey, with fourteen Monks, on the 14th of July in the 29th year
of this Reign, whose House was valued at 744 lib. I have some reason to think
that this Abbot was for the Reformation, and intended to have had his House new
founded to be a House of true and well regulated devotion: And so I find the
Prior of great Malverine in Worcestershire offered such a Resignation. He was
recommended by Bishop Latimer to Cromwell, with an earnest desire that his
House might stand, not in Monkery, but so as to be converted to Preaching,
Study, and Prayer. And the good Prior was willing to compound for his House by
a Present of 500 Marks to the King, and of 200 to Cromwell. He is commended,
for being an old worthy man, a good Housekeeper, and one that daily fed many
poor people. To this Latimer adds; Alas my good Lord! Shall we not see Two or
Three in every shire changed to such remedy?

But the Resolution was taken once to extirpate all. And therefore though the
Visitors interceded earnestly for one Nunnery in Oxfordshire, Godstow, where
there was great strictness of life; and to which were most of the young
Gentlewomen of the County were sent to be bred; so that the Gentrey of the
Country desired the King would spare the House, yet all was uneffectual.

The form of most surrenders. Coll^ct. Numb. 3. Sect. 1.
The General Form, in which most of these Resignations begins, is, That the
Abbot and Brethren, upon full deliberation, certain knowledge, of their own
proper motion, for certain just and reasonable causes, specially moving them in
their Souls and Consciences, did freely, and of their own accord, give and
grant their Houses to the King. Others (it seems) did not so well like this
preamble; and therefore did, without any reason or preamble, give away their
Houses to the Visitors, as Feofees in trust for the Kings use. And thus they
went on, procuring daily more surrenders. So that in the thirtieth year of the
Kings Reign there were 159 Resignations enrolled, of which the Originals of 155
do yet remain. And for the Readers further satisfaction, Collect. Numb. 3.
Sect. 3.
he shall find, in the Collection at the end of this Book, the names of all
these Houses so surrendered, with other particulars relating to them, which
would too much weary him, if inserted in the thread of this Work. But there was
no Law to force any to make such Resignations. So that many of the great Abbots
would not comply with the King in this matter, and stood it out till after the
following Parliament that was in the 31th year of his Reign.

It was questioned by many, whether these surrenders could be good in Law,
since the Abbots were but Trustees and Tenants for Life. It was thought they
could not absolutely alienate, and give away their House for ever. But the
Parliament afterward declared the Resignations were good in Law. For by their
Foundations all was trusted to the Abbot and the Senior Brethren of the House;
who putting the Covent-Seal to any Deed, it was of force in Law. It was also
said, Diverse opinions about these.
that they thus surrendering, had forfeited their Charters and Foundations; and
so the King might seize and possess them with a good Title, if not upon the
Resignation, yet upon Forfeiture. But others thought, that, whatsoever the
Nicety of Law might give the King, yet there was no sort of equity in it, that
a few Trustees, who were either bribed, or frighted, should pass away that
which was none of theirs, but only given them in Trust and for Life. Other
Abbots were more roughly handled. Some Abbots attainted of Treason.
The Prior of Wooburn was suspected of favoring the Rebels, of being against
the Kings Supremacy, and for the Popes; and of being for the General Council
then summoned to Mantua. And he was dealt with to make a submission and
acknowledgment. In an account of a long Conference which he had with a Privy
Counselor under his own hand, I find that the great thing which he took
offense at, was, That Latimer and some other Bishops preached against the
Veneration of the Blessed Virgin, and the other Saints: and that the English
Bible then set out, differed in many things from the Latin; with several lesser
matters. So that they looked on their Religion as changed, and wondered that
the Judgments of God upon Queen Anne had not terrified others from going on to
subvert the Faith: yet he was prevailed with, and did again submit to the King,
and acknowledge his Supremacy; but he afterward joined himself to the Rebels
and was taken with them, together with the Abbot of Whaley, and two Monks of
his House; and the Abbot of Gervanx, with a monk of his House; and the Abbot of
Sawley in Lancashire, with the Prior of that House; and the Prior of
Burlington; who were all attainted of High Treason, and Executed. The Abbots of
Glastenbury and Reading, were men of great power and Wealth. The one was rated
at 3508. lib. and the the other at 2116. lib. They seeing the storm like to
break out on themselves, sent a great deal of the Plate and Money that they had
in their House, to the Rebels in the North. Which being afterward discovered,
they were attainted of High Treason a year after this; but I mention it here
for the affinity of the matter: Further particulars about the Abbot of Reading
I have not yet discovered. But there is an account given to Cromwell of the
proceedings against the Abbot of Glastenbury in two Letters which I have seen,
the one was writ by the Sheriff of the County, the other by Sir John Russell,
who was present at his Trial, and was reputed a man of as great Integrity and
Virtue as any in that time; which he seems to have left as an inheritance to
that Noble Family that has descended from him. These inform, that he was
indicted of Burglary, as well as Treason; for having broken the House in his
Monastery where the Plate was kept, and taken it out, which as Sir William
Thomas says, was sent to the Rebels. The evidence being brought to the Jury,
who (as Sir John Russel writes,) were as good and worthy men as had ever been
on any Jury in that County; they found him guilty. He was carried to the place
of Execution, near his own Monastery; where (as the Sheriff writes) he
acknowledged his guilt, and begged God and the King pardon for it. The Abbot of
Colchester was also attainted of High Treason. What the particulars were I
cannot tell. For the Record of their Attainders was lost; But some of our own
Writers deserves a severe censure, who Write it was for denying the King
Supremacy; whereas, if they had not undertaken to write the History without any
information at all, they must have seen that the whole Clergy, but most
particularly the Abbots, had over and over again acknowledged the Kings
Supremacy.

For clearing which and discovering the Impudence of Sanders Relation of this
matter, I shall lay before the Reader, the Evidences that I find of the
Submission of these and all the other Abbots to the Kings Supremacy: First, in
the Convocation, in the 22d year of this Reign, they all acknowledged the King,
Supreme Head of the Church of England. They did all also swear to maintain the
Act of the Succession of the Crown, made in the 25th year of his Reign, in
which the Popes Power was plainly condemned. For in the proceedings against
More and Fisher, it was frequently repeated to them, that all the Clergy had
sworn it. It is also entered in the Journal of the House of Lords, that all the
members of both Houses swore it at their breaking up: And the same Journals
inform us, that the Abbots of Colchester and Reading sat in that Parliament,
and as there was no Protestation made against any of the Acts passed in that
Session, 1537.
so it is often entered, that the Acts were agreed to by the Unanimous consent
of the Lords. It appears also by several Original Letters, that the heads of
all the Religious Houses in England had Signed that Position, that the Pope had
no more Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, than any foreign Bishop whatsoever. And
it was rejected by none but some Carthusians, and Franciscans of the
Observance, who were proceeded against, for refusing to acknowledge it: When
they were so pressed in it, none can imagine that a Parliamentary Abbot would
have been dispensed with. And in the last Parliament, in which the second Oath
about the Succession to the Crown was enacted, it was added, that they should
also swear the King to be the Supreme head of the Church. The Abbots of
Glassenbury and Reading were then present, as appears by the Journals, and
consented to it: So little reason there is for Imagining that they refused
that, or any other Compliance that might secure them in their Abbeys.

In particular, the Abbot of Reading had so got into Cromwels good opinion,
that in some differences between him and Shaxton Bishop of Salisbury, that was
Cromwels creature, he had the better of the Bishop. Upon which, Shaxton, who
was a proud ill-natured man, wrote an high expostulating Letter to Cromwell,
Complaining of an Injunction he had granted against him at the Abbots desire.
He also showed that in some contests between him and his Residentiaries, and
between him and the Major of Salisbury, Cromwell was always against him: he
likewise challenged him, for not answering his Letters. He tells him, God will
judge him for abusing his Power as he did; he prays God to have pity on him,
and to turn his heart, with a great deal more provoking Language. He also adds
many insolent praises of himself; and his whole Letter is as extravagant a
piece of vanity and insolence, as ever I saw. To this Cromwell wrote an answer,
that shows him to have been indeed a great man. The Reader will find it in the
Collection, and see from it how modestly and discreetly he carried his
Greatness. Collect. Numb. 8.


But how justly soever these Abbots were attainted, the seizing on their
Abbey-Lands, pursuant to those Attainders, was thought a great stretch of Law;
since the Offense of an Ecclesiastical Incumbent is a Personal thing, and
cannot prejudice the Church; no more than a secular man, who is in an Office,
does by being Attainted, bring any diminution of the Rights of his Office on
his successors. It is true there were some words cast into the thirteenth Act
of the Parliament, in the 26th year of this Reign, by which diverse Offenses
were made Treason, that seemed to have been designed for such a purpose. The
words are, that whatsoever Lands any Traitor had of any Estate of Inheritance
in use or possession, by any Right, Title or Means, should be forfeited to the
King. By which, as it is certain, Estates in Tail were comprehended, so the
Lands that any Traitor had in Possession or use, seem to be included; and that
the rather, because by some following words their heirs and Successors are for
ever excluded. This either was not thought on when the Bishop of Rochester was
Attainted, or perhaps was not claimed, since the King intended not to lessen
the number of Bishoprics, but rather to increase them. Besides, the words of
the Statute seem only to belong to an Estate of Inheritance: within which,
Church-Benefices could not be included, without a great force put on them. It Is
true the word Successor favored these seisures, except that be thought an
expletory word put in, out of form, but still to be limited to an Estate of
Inheritance. That word does also import, that such Criminals might have
successors. But if the whole Abbey was forfeited, these Abbots could have no
successors: Yet it seems the seizures of these Abbeys were founded on that
Statute, and this stretch of the Law occasioned that Explanation, which was
added of the words Estate of Inheritance, in the Statute made in Edward the
Sixth's Reign about Treasons: Where it is expressed, that Traitors should
forfeit to the Crown, what Lands they had of any Estate of Inheritance, to
which is added in their own Right, it seems, on design to cut off all Pretense
for such Proceedings for the future, as had been in this Reign. But if there
was any Illegality in these seizures, the following Parliament did at least
tacitly Justify them. For they excepted out of the Provisos made concerning
the Abbeys that were suppressed, such as had been forfeited and seized on by
any Attaindors of Treason.

Another Surrender is not unlike these, but rather less Justifiable. Many of
the Carthusian Monks of London were executed for their open denying of the
Kings Supremacy, and for receiving Books from foreign parts against his
Marriage and other proceedings; diverse also of the same House, that favored
them, but so secretly, that clear proof could not be found to convict them,
were kept Prisoners in their Cells, till they dyed. But the Prior was a worthy
man, of whom Thomas Bedyl, one of the Visitors, writes, that he was a man of
such Charity that he had not seen the like, and that the eyes of the people
were much on that House, and therefore he advised that the House might be
converted to some good use. But the Prior was made to resign, with this
Preamble, That many of that House had offended the King, so that their goods
might be justly confiscated, and themselves adjudged to a severe death: which
they desired to avoid, by an humble Submission, and Surrender of their House to
the King. But there were great Complaints made of the Visitors, as if they had
practiced with the Abbots and Priors to make these Surrenders: and that they
had conspired with them to cheat the King, and had privately embezeled most of
the Plate and furniture. The Abbess of Cheapstow complained in particular of
Doctor London one of the Visitors, that he had been corrupting her Nuns: and
generally it was cried out on, that underhand and ill practices were used.
Therefore to quiet these reports, and to give some color to justify what they
were about, all the foul Stories that could be found out were published to
defame these Houses. Battel-Abbey was represented to be a little Sodom; so was
Christ Church in Canterbury, with several other Houses. But for Whoredom and
Adultery they found Instances without number; and of many other unnatural
practices and secret Lusts, with arts to hinder Conceptions and make Abortions.
But no story became so public, as a discovery made of the Prior of the Crossed
Friars in London; who on a Friday at eleven a Clock in the day was found in bed
with a Whore. 1536.
He fell down on his knees, and prayed those who surprised him, not to publish
his shame: But they had a mind to make some advantage by it, and asked him
Money. He gave them 30 lib. which he protested was all he had, but he promised
them 30 lib. more: yet failing in the payment, a Suit followed on it: and in a
Bill which I have seen given to Cromwell, then Master of the Rolls, the case is
related.

But all stories of this Kings served only to disgrace those Abbots or Monks
that were so faulty. The Superstition and cheats of these Houses discovered.
And the people generally said, these were personal crimes which ought to be
punished: but they were no way satisfied with the Justice of the Kings
proceedings, against whole Houses for the faults of a few. Therefore another
way was thought on, which indeed proved more effectual, both for recovering the
people out of the Superstitious fondness they had for their Images and Relics,
and for discovering the secret Impostures that had been long practiced in these
Houses. And this was, to order the Visitors to examine well all the Relics,
and feigned Images, to which Pilgrimages were wont to be made. In this, Doctor
London did great service. From Reading he writes, That the chief Relics of
Idolatry in the Nation was there: an Angel with one wing, that brought over the
Spears head that pierced our Saviors side. To which he adds a long Inventory of
their other Relics, and says there were as many more as would fill Four Sheets
of Paper. He also writes from other places that he had everywhere taken down
their Images and Trinkets. At St. Edmundsbury, as John ap Rice Informed, they
found some of the Coals that Roasted St. Laurence, the Parings of St. Edmunds
Toes, St. Thomas Becket's Penknife, and Boots; with as many pieces of the Cross
of our Savior, as would make a large whole Cross. They had also Relics against
Rain, and for hindering weeds to spring. But to pursue this further were
endless, the Relics were so innumerable. And the value which the people had of
them may be gathered from this; that a piece of St. Andrews finger set in an
ounce of silver, was laid to pledge by the House of Westacre for 40 lib. but
the Visitors, when they suppressed that House, did not think fit to redeem it
at so high a rate.

For their Images, some of them were brought to London, and were there at St.
Paul's Cross in the sight of all the people, Images publicly broken.
broken; that they might be fully convinced of the juggling Impostures of the
Monks. And in particular, the Crucifix of Boxley in Kent, commonly called the
Rood of Grace; to which many Pilgrimages had been made, because it was observed
sometimes to bow, and to lift it self up, to shake, and to stir head, hands,
and feet, to roll the eyes, move the lips, and bend the brows: All which were
looked on by the abused multitude, as the effects of a Divine Power. These were
now publicly discovered to have been cheats: For the Springs were showed, by
which all these motions were made. Upon which John Hilsey then Bishop of
Rochester, made a Sermon, and Broke the Rood in pieces. There was also another
famous Imposture discovered at Hales in Glocestershire; where the Blood of
Christ was showed in a viol of Crystal, which the people sometimes saw but
sometimes they could not see it: So they were made believe, that they were not
capable of so signal a favor, 1538.
as long as they were in Mortal sin; and so they continued to make presents,
till they bribed Heaven to give them the sight of so Blessed a Relick. Pelerine
^^glese.
This was now discovered to have been the Blood of a Duck, which they renewed
every week: and the one side of the Viol, was so thick that there was no seeing
through it, but the other was clear and transparent: And it was so placed near
the Altar, that one in a secret place behind, could turn either side of it
outward. So when they had drained the Pilgrims that came thither, of all they
had brought with them, then they afforded them the favor of turning the clear
side outward; who upon that went home very well-satisfied with their journey
and the expense they had been at. There was brought out of Wales a huge Image
of wood, called Darvel Gatheren, of which one Ellis Price Visitor of the
Diocese of St. Asaph gave this account. On the 6th of April 1537. That the
people of the Country had a great Superstition for it, and many Pilgrimages
were made to it: so that the day before he wrote, there were reckoned to be
above five or six hundred Pilgrims there: Some brought Oxen and Cattle, and
some brought Money; and it was generally believed, that if any offered to that
Image, he had Power to deliver his Soul from Hell. So it was ordered to be
brought to London, where it served for fuel to burn Friar Forest. There was
an huge Image of our Lady at Worcester, that was had in great reverence; which
when it was stripped of some veils that covered it, was found to be the Statue of
a Bishop.

Barlow Bishop of St. David's did also give many advertisements of the
Superstition of his Country, and of the Clergy and Monks of that Diocese, who
were guilty of Heathenish Idolatry, gross Impiety, and Ignorance, and of
abusing the people with many evident forgeries: about which he said, he had
good evidence when it should be called for. But that which drew most Pilgrims
and presents in those parts, was an Image of our Lady with a Taper in her hand;
which was believed to have burnt nine years, till one forswearing himself upon
it, it went out: and was then much Reverenced and Worshipped. He found all
about the Cathedral so full of Superstitious conceits, that there was no hope
of working on them; therefore he proposed the Translating the Episcopal Seat
from St. David's to Caermaerden; which he pressed by many Arguments, and in
several Letters, but with no success. Then many rich Shrines of our Lady of
Walsingham, of Ipswich, and Islington, with a great many more, were brought up
to London, and burnt by Cromwels Orders.

But the richest Shrine of England, was that of Thomas Becket, Thomas Beck^t's
shrine broken.
called St. Thomas of Canterbury the Martyr: who being raised up by King Henry
the ad, to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, did afterward give that King
much trouble; by opposing his Authority, and exalting the Popes. And though he
once consented to the Articles agreed on at Clarendon, for bearing down the
Papal, and securing the Regal Power; yet he soon after repented, of that only
piece of Loyalty, of which he was guilty all the while he was Archbishop. He
fled to the Pope, who received him as a Confessor for the dearest Article of
the Roman Belief: The King and Kingdoms were Excommunicated, and put under an
Interdict upon his Account. But afterward, upon the Intercession of the French
King, King Henry and he were reconciled, and the Interdict was taken off. Yet
his unquiet Spirit could take no rest, for he was no sooner at Canterbury, than
he began to Embroyl the Kingdom again: and was proceeding by Censures against
the Archbishop of York, and some other Bishops, for Crowning the Kings Son in
his Absence. Upon the news of that, the King being then in Normandy, said, If
he had faithful Servants he would not be so troubled with such a Priest;
whereupon some zealous or officious Courtiers, came over and killed him: For
which, as the King was made to undergo a severe penance, so the Monks were
not wanting in their ordinary Arts to give out many miraculous stories
concerning his Blood. This soon drew a Canonization from Rome; and he being a
Martyr for the Papacy, was more extolled than all the Apostles or Primitive
Saints had ever been. So that for 300 years, he was accounted one of the
greatest Saints in Heaven, as may appear from the accounts in the leger-Books,
of the offerings made to the three greatest Altars in Christ's Church in
Canterbury. The one was to Christ, the other to the Virgin, and the third to
St. Thomas. In one year there was offered at Christ's Altar, 3 lib. 2 s. 6 d.
To the Virgins Altar, 63 lib. 5 s. 6 d. But to St. Thomas's Altar 832 lib. 12
s. 3 d. But the next year the odds grew greater; for there was not a penny
offered at Christ's Altar, and at the Virgins, only 4 lib. 1 s. 8 d. But at St.
Thomas's 954 lib. 6 s. 3 d. By such offerings it came, that his Shrine was of
inestimable value. There was one Stone offered there by Lewis the 7th of
France, who came over to visit it, in a Pilgrimage, that was believed the
Richest in Europe. Nor did they think it enough to give him one day in the
Calendar the 29th of December; but unusual honors were devised, for this
Martyr of the liberties of the Church greater than any that had been given to
the Martyrs for Christianity. The day of raising his body, or as they called
it, of his Translation, being the 7th of July, was not only a holy day, but
every 50th year, there was a Jubilee for 15 days together, and Indulgence was
granted, to all that came to visit his shrine: So^me^s Antiquities of
Canterbury.
as appears from the Record of the sixth Jubilee, after his Translation, Anno.
1420; which bears, that there were then about an hundred thousand strangers
come to visit his Tomb. The Jubilee began at twelve a clock on the Vigil of the
feast, and lasted 15 days, by such Arts they drew an incredible deal of wealth
to his shrine. The Riches of that, together with his disloyal practices, made
the King resolve both to un-shrine and un-Saint him at once. And then his
skull, which had been much worshipped, was found an Imposture. For the true
skull was lying with the rest of his bones in his grave. The shrine was broken
down, and carried away; the Gold that was about it, filling two Chests, which
were so heavy that they were a load to Eight strong men to carry them out of
the Church. And his bones were as some say burnt, so it was understood at Rome,
but others say they were so mixed with other dead bones, that it would have
been a Miracle indeed to have distinguished them afterward. The King also
ordered his name to be struck out of the Calendar, and the office for his
Festivity to be dashed out of all Breviaries. And thus was the Superstition of
England to Images and Relics extirpated.

Yet the King took care to qualify the distaste which the Articles published
the former year had given. New Articles about Religion published.
And though there was no Parliament in the year 1537. yet there was a
Convocation; upon the Conclusion of which, there was Printed an Explanation of
the chief points of Religion, Signed by nineteen Bishops, eight Archdeacons,
and seventeen Doctors of Divinity and Law. In which there was an Exposition of
the Creed, the seven Sacraments, the ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and
the Salutation of the Virgin, with an Account of Justification and Purgatory.
But this work was put in a better Form afterward, where the Reader will find a
more particular account of it. When all these Proceedings of the Kings were
known at Rome, all the Satirical Pens there were employed to paint him out, as
the most Infamous Sacrilegious Tyrant that ever was. Invectives against the
King Printed at Rome.
They represented him as one that made War with Heaven, and the Saints that
were there: That committed outrages on the bodies of the Saints, which the
Heathenish Romans would have punished severely for any that committed the like
on those that were dead, how mean or bad soever they had been. All his
proceedings against the Priests or Monks that were Attainted and Executed for
high Treason, were represented as the effects of savage and barbarous Cruelty.
His suppressing the Monasteries, and devouring what the Devotion of former Ages
had Consecrated to God, and his Saints, was called Ravenous and Impious
Sacrilege; nor was there any thing omitted that could make him appear to
posterity, the blackest Tyrant that ever wore a Crown. They compared him to
Pharaoh, Nabuchadonosor, Belshazar, Nero, Domitian, and Dioclesian; but chiefly
to Julian the Apostate. This last Parallel liked them best, and his Learning,
his Apostasy, and pretense of Reforming, were all thought copied from Julian;
only they said his manners were worse. These things were every day Printed at
Rome, and the Informations that were brought out of England were generally
addressed to Cardinal Pool, whose style was also known in some of them: All
which possessed the King with the deepest and most implacable hatred to him that
ever he bore to any person, and did provoke him to all these severities that
followed on his Kindred and Family.

But the malice of the Court of Rome did not stop there. Collect. Numb. 9.
For now the Pope published all these Thunders which he had threatened three
years before. The Bull of Deposition is Printed in Cherubins Bullarum Romanum,
which since many have the confidence to deny matters of fact; the Most
publicly acted, shall be found in the Collection of Papers, the substance of
it is as follows. The Pope being Gods Vicar on Earth; and according to Ieremy's
Prophecy, The Popes Bulls against the King.
set over Nations and Kingdoms, to root out and destroy; and having the supreme
power over all the Kings in the whole World; was bound to proceed to due
correction, when milder courses were ineffectual; therefore since King Henry,
who had been formerly a Defender of the Faith, had fallen from it; had contrary
to an Inhibition made, put away his Queen, and married one Anne Bollein, and
had made impious and hurtful Laws; denying the Pope to be the Supreme Head of
the Church, but assuming that Title to himself; and had required all his
Subjects under pain of death to swear it; and had put the Cardinal of Rochester
to death, because he would not consent to these Heresies; and by all these
things had rendered himself unworthy of his Regal Dignity; and had hardened his
heart (as Pharaoh did) against all the Admonitions of Pope Clement the 7th;
therefore since these his crimes were so notorious, he in imitation of what the
Apostle did to Elimas the Magician, proceeds to such Censures as he had
deserved; and with the advice of his Cardinals, does first exhort him and all
his Accomplices, to return from their errors, to annull the Acts lately made;
and to proceed no farther upon them: which he requires him and them to do,
under the pains of Excommunication and Rebellion, and of the Kings losing his
Kingdom; whom he required within 90 days, to appear at Rome, by himself or
Proxy, and his Accomplices within 60 days, to give an account of their Actions;
otherwise he would then proceed to a further sentence against them. And
Declares, that if the King and his Accomplices do not appear, he has fallen from
the right to his Crown, and they from the right to their Estates; and when they
die, they were to be denied Christian Burial. He puts the whole Kingdom under
an Interdict; and declares all the Kings Children by the said Anne, and the
Children of all his Accomplices, to be under the same pains, though they be now
under age; and Incapacitates them for all honors or employments; and declares
all the Subjects or Vassals of the Kings or his Accomplices, absolved from all
Oaths or Obligations to them, and requires them to acknowledge them no more. And
declares him and them Infamous, so that they might neither be witnesses nor
make Wills. He requires all other persons to have no dealings with him or them,
neither by Trading, nor any other way, under the pain of Excommunication; the
annulling their Contracts, and the exposing goods so Traded in, to all that
should catch them. And that all Clergymen should within five days after the
expiration of the time prefixed, go out of the Kingdom; (leaving only so many
Priests as would be necessary for Baptizing Infants, and giving the Sacrament
to such as died in Penitence) under the pains of Excommunication and
Deprivation. And Charges all Noblemen and others in his Dominions, under the
same pains, to rise up in Arms against him, and to drive him out of his
Kingdom; and that none should take Arms for him, or any way assist him: and
Declares all other Princes absolved from any Confederacies made, or to be made,
with him; and earnestly obtests the Emperor and all Kings, and requires other
Princes under the former pains, to trade no more with him; and in case of their
disobedience he puts their Kingdoms under an Interdict. And requires all
Princes and Military persons, in the virtue of Holy Obedience, to make War upon
him, and to force him to return to the Obedience of the Apostolic See; and to
seize on all Goods, or Merchandises belonging to the King or his Accomplices,
wherever they could find them; and that such of his Subjects that were seized
on, should be made Slaves. And requires all Bishops, Three days after the time
that was set down was elapsed, to intimate this Sentence in all their Churches,
with putting out of Candles, and other Ceremonies that ought to be used, in the
most solemn and public manner that might be. And all who hindered the
Publication of this Sentence, are put under the same Pains. He ordained this
Sentence to be affixed at Rome, Tournay, and Dunkirk; which should stand for a
sufficient publication; and concludes, that if any should endeavor to oppose,
or enervate any of the premises, he should incur the indignatition of Almighty
God, and the Holy Apostles, St. Peter and Paul. Dated at Rome the 30th of
August, 1635. But the Pope found the Princes of Christendom liked the
precedent, of using a King in that manner, so ill, that he suspended the
Execution of this Bull till this time, that the suppression of Abbeys, and the
burning of Thomas Beckets Bones (for it was so represented at Rome, though our
writers say they were buried;) did so inflame the Pope, that he could forbear
no longer; and therefore by a new sentence he did all he could to shake him in
his Throne.

The Preamble of it was, That as our Savior had pity on St. Peter after his
fall, so it became St. Peter's successors to imitate our Savior in his
Clemency; and that therefore though he having heard of King Henry's crimes, had
proceeded to a sentence against him; (Here the former Bull was recited.) Yet
some other Princes who hoped he might be reclaimed by gentler methods, had
interposed for a suspension of the Sentence: and he being easy to believe,
what he so earnestly desired, had upon their Intercession suspended it. But now
he found they had been deceived in their hopes, and that he grew worse and
worse; and had done such dishonor to the Saints, as to raise St. Thomas of
Canterburies body, to arraign him of High Treason, and to burn his Body, and
Sacrilegiously to rob the Riches that had been offered to his Shrine, as also
to suppress St. Austins Abbey in Canterbury; and that having thrust out the
Monks, he had put in wild Beasts into their grounds, having transformed himself
into a Beast. Therefore he takes off the Suspension, and publishes the Bull,
commanding it to be executed: Declaring that the affixing it at Diepe or
Bulloign in France, at St. Andrews or Callistren, (that is Callstream, a Town
near the border of England,) in Scotland or Tuam, or Artifert in Ireland, or
any two of these, should be a sufficient Publication. Dated the 7th of
December, Anno Dom. 1538.

No man can read these Bulls, but he must conclude that if the Pope be the
Infallible and Universal Pastor of the Church, whom all are bound to obey, he
has a full authority over all Kings, to proceed to the highest Censures
possible: and since the matters of fact, enumerated in the Sentence as the
grounds of it, were certainly true; then (...) the Pope is either clothed with
the powers of Deposing Princes, or if otherwise, he lied to the world when he
pretended to it thus, and taught false Doctrine, which cannot stand with
Infallibility: And the pretended grounds of the sentence as to matter of fact,
being evidently true, this must be a just Sentence; and therefore all that
acknowledged the Infallibility of that See, were bound to obey it, and all the
Rebellions that followed, during the reign of the King or his Children, were
founded on this sentence, and must be justified by it; otherwise the Popes
Infallibility must fall to the ground. But this was to be said for the Pope,
that though he had raised the several branches of this Sentence, higher than
any of his Predecessors had ever done; yet as to the main, he had very good and
Authentic Precedents for what he did, from the Depositions of Emperors or
Kings, that were made by former Popes for about 500 years together. This I
thought needful to be more fully opened, because of the present Circumstances
we are now in; since hereby every one that will consider things, must needs see
that the belief of the Popes Infallibility does necessarily infer the
acknowledgment of their power of deposing Heretical Kings. For it is plain, the
Pope did this ex Cathedra, and as a Pastor Feeding and Correcting his Flock.

But not content with this he also wrote to other Princes, inflaming them
against the King; Particularly to the Kings of France, and Scotland. To the
last of these he sent a Breve; declaring King Henry a Heretic, a
Schismatique, a manifest Adulterer, a public Murderer, Lesley, Hist. Scot.
a Rebel, and convict of High Treason against him, the Pope his Lord; for which
Crimes he had deposed him, and offered his Dominions to him, if he would go and
invade them. And thus the breach between him and the Pope was past reconciling:
and at Rome it was declared equally meritorious to fight against him, as
against the Turk. But Card. Pool made it more meritorious in his Book. Yet the
Thunders of the Vatican had now lost their force; so that these had no other
effect but to enrage the King more against all such as were suspected to favor
their interests, or to hold any correspondence with Cardinal Pool. Therefore he
first procured a Declaration against the Popes pretensions, to be Signed by all
the Bishops of England: In which, after they declared against the Popes
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, The Clergy in England declared against these.
upon the grounds formerly touched, they concluded, That the People ought to be
Instructed, that Christ did expressly forbid his Apostles or their Successors to
take to themselves the power of the Sword, or the authority of Kings. And that,
if the Bishop of Rome, or any other Bishop assumed any such power, he was a
Tyrant and Usurper of other men's Rights, and a subverter of the Kingdom of
Christ. This was subscribed by 19 Bishops, (all that were then in England,) and
25 Doctors of Divinity and Law. It was at some time before May 1538. For Edward
Fox Bishop of Hereford, who was one that signed it died the 8th. of May that
year. There was no Convocation called by Writ for doing this. For as there is
no mention of any such Writ in the Registers, so if it had been done by
Convocation, Cromwell had signed it first; but his hand not being at it, it is
more probable that a meeting of the Clergy was called by the Kings Missive
Letters; or that, as was once done before, the Paper was drawn at London, and
sent over the Kingdom to the Episcopal Sees, for the Bishops hands to it.

There is another original Paper extant, Signed at this time by eight Bishops:
from which I conjecture those were all that were then about London. It was to
show, That by the Commission which Christ gave to Churchmen, Collect. Numb. 10.
they were only Ministers of his Gospel, to instruct the people in the purity
of the Faith: But that by other places of Scripture, the Authority of Christian
Princes over all their Subjects, as well Bishops and Priests, as others, was
also clear. And that the Bishops and Priests have charge of Souls within their
Cures, Power to administer Sacraments, and to teach the word of God: To the
which word of God, Christian Princes acknowledge themselves subject; and that in
case the Bishops be negligent, it is the Christian Princes Office to see them
do their duty. This, being Signed by John Hilsey Bishop of Rochester, must be
after the year 1537. in which he was consecrated; and Latimer and Shaxton also
Signing, it must be before the year 1539. in which they resigned. But I believe
it was Signed at the same time that the other was: And the design of it was to
refuse those Calumnies spread at Rome, as if the King had wholly Suppressed all
Ecclesiastical Offices, and denied them any divine Authority, making them
wholly dependent on the Civil Power, and Acting by Commission only from him.
And therefore they explained the limits of both these Powers, in so clear and
moderate a way, that it must have stopped the Mouths of all Opposers. But whether
there was any public use made of this Paper, I can by no means discover.

The King did also set forward the Printing of the English Bible, which was
finished this year, at London, by Grafton the Printer, who Printed 1500 of them
at his own Charge. The Bible Printed in English.
This Bible Cromwell presented to the King, and procured his Warrant, allowing
all his Subjects in all his Dominions to read it, without control or hazard.
For which, the Archbishop wrote Cromwell a Letter of most hearty thanks, dated
the 13th of August. Who did now rejoice that he saw this day of Reformation,
which he concluded was now risen in England, since the Light of Gods word did
shine over it without any Cloud. The Translation had been sent over to France
to be Printed at Paris: the workmen in England not being judged able to do it,
as it ought to be. Therefore in the year 1537. it was recommended to Bonners
care, who was then Ambassador at Paris, and was much in Cromwels favor, who
was setting him up against Gardener. He procured the King of France's leave to
Print it at Paris, in a large Volume: but upon a complaint made by the French
Clergy, the Press was stopped, and most of the Copies were seized on and
publicly burnt: but some Copies were conveyed out of the way, and the workmen
and fourms were brought over to England: New injunctions set out by the King.
where it was now finished and published. And Injunctions were given out in the
Kings name, by Cromwell to all Incumbents, to provide one of these Bibles, and
set it up publicly in the Church, Collect. Numb. 11.
and not to hinder or discourage the reading of it, but to encourage all
persons to peruse it, as being the true lively word of God, which every
Christian ought to believe, embrace, and follow, if he expected to be saved.
And all were exhorted, not to make contests about the Exposition or sense of
any difficult place, but to refer that to men of higher judgment in the
Scriptures. Then some other Rules were added, about the Instructing the people
in the Principles of Religion, by teaching the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and ten
Commandments in English: And that in every Church there should be a Sermon,
made every quarter of an year, at least, to declare to the people the true
Gospel of Christ, and to exhort them to the works of Charity, Mercy, and Faith:
and not to trust in other men's works, or Pilgrimages, to Images, or Relics, or
saying over Beads, which they did not understand; since these things tended to
Idolatry and Superstition, which of all offenses did most provoke Gods
Indignation. They were to take down all Images, which were abused by
Pilgrimages, or offerings made to them; and to suffer no Candles to be set
before any Image; only there might be Candles before the Cross, and before the
Sacrament, and about the Sepulcher: And they were to Instruct the people, that
Images served only as the Books of the un-learned, to be remembrances of the
Conversations of them whom they represented: but if they made any other use of
Images, it was Idolatry: for remedying whereof, as the King had already done in
part, so he intended to do more for the abolishing such Images, which might be
a great offense to God, and a danger to the Souls of his Subjects. And if any
of them had formerly Magnified such Images, or Pilgrimages, to such purposes;
They were ordered openly to recant, and acknowledge, that in saying such things
they had been led by no ground in Scripture; but where deceived by a vulgar
error, which had crept into the Church, through the Avarice of those who had
profit by it. They were also to discover all such as were Letters of the
reading of Gods word in English, or hindered the Execution of these Injunctions.
Then followed orders for keeping of Registers in their Parishes, for Reading
all the Kings Injunctions once every quarter at least: That none were to alter
any of the Holy Days without directions from the King: And all the Eves of the
Holy Days formerly abrogated, were declared to be no Fasting-days: The
Commemoration of Thomas Becket was to be clean omitted: The kneeling for the
Avies after Sermon were also forbidden; which were said in hope to obtain the
Popes Pardon. And whereas in their Processions they used to say so many
Suffrages with an Ora pro nobis to the Saints, by which they had not time to
say the Suffrages to God himself, they were to teach the people, that it were
better to omit the Ora pro nobis, and to sing the other Suffrages which were
most necessary and most effectual.

These Injunctions struck at three main Points of Popery: containing
encouragements to the vulgar, to Read the Scriptures in a known tongue, and
putting down all worship of Images, and leaving it free for any Curate to leave
out the Suffrages to the Saints. So that they were looked on as a deadly blow
to that Religion. But now those of that party did so Artificially comply with
the King, that no advantages could be found against any of them for their
disobedience. The King was Master at home, and no more to be disobeyed. He had
not only broken the Rebellion of his own Subjects, and secured himself by
Alliance from the dangers threatened him by the Pope; but all their expectations
from the Lady Mary were now clouded: For on the 12th of October 1537. Queen
Jane had born him a Son; who was Christened Edward; the Archbishop of
Canterbury being one of his Godfathers. Prince Edward born.
This very much encouraged all that were for Reformation, and disheartened those
who were against it. But the joy for this young Prince was qualified by the
Queens death, two days after; which afflicted the King very much: for of all
his Wives, she was the dearest to him. And his grief for that loss is given as
the reason, why he continued two years a Widower. But others thought he had not
so much tenderness in his Nature, as to be much or long troubled for any thing.
Therefore the slowness of his Marrying was ascribed to some reasons of State.
But the Birth of the Prince was a great disappointment to all those whose hopes
rested on the Lady Mary's succeeding her Father: Therefore they submitted
themselves with more than ordinary Compliance to the King.

Gardener was as busy as any in declaiming against the Religious Houses, Great
Compliances by the Popish party.
and took occasion in many of his Sermons to commend the King for suppressing
them: The Archbishop of York had recovered himself at Court: And I do not find
that he interposed in the Suppression of any of the Religious Houses, except
Hexham, about which he wrote to Cromwell, that it was a great Sanctuary when the
Scots made Inroads: And so he thought that the continuing of it might be of
great use to the King. He added in that Letter, that he did carefully silence
all the Preachers of Novelties. But some of these boasted, that they would
shortly have Licenses from the King, as he heard they had already from the
Archbishop of Canterbury; but he desired Cromwell to prevent that mischief.
This is all that I find of him.

There is a Pardon granted to Stokesly Bishop of London, on the 3d of July, in
the 30th year of his Reign being this year, for having Acted by Commission from
Rome, and sued out Bulls from thence. If these crimes were done before the
Separation from Rome, they were remitted by the General Pardon. If he took a
particular Pardon, it seems strange that it was not enrolled till now. But I am
apt to believe it was rather the Omission of a Clerk, than his being guilty of
such a Transgression about this time; for I see no cause to think the King
would have Pardoned such a Crime in a Bishop in those days. All that Party had
now by their compliance and Submission gained so much on the King, that he
began to turn more to their Councils, than he had done of late years. Gardener
was returned from France, where he had been Ambassador for some years: He had
been also in the Emperors Court, and there were violent presumptions that he
had secretly reconciled himself to the Pope, and entered into a Correspondence
with him. For one of the Legates Servants discoursed of it at Ratisbone, to one
of Sir Henry Knevets retinue (who was joined in the Embassy with Gardener,)
whom he took to be Gardiners Servant, and with whom he had an old acquaintance.
The matter was traced, and Knevet spoke with the Italian that had first let it
fall, and was persuaded of the truth of the thing: But Gardener smelling it
out, said, That Italian upon whose Testimony the whole matter depended, was
corrupted to ruin him; and complained of it to the Emperors Chancellor
Granvel: Upon which Ludovico (that was the Italian name) was put in Prison. And
it seems the King either looked on it as a Contrivance of Gardiners enemies, or
at least seemed to do so, for he continued still to employ him. Yet on many
occasions he expressed great contempt of him, and used him not as a Councellor,
but as a slave. But he was a man of great cunning, and had observed the Kings
temper exactly, and knew well to take a fit occasion for moving the King in any
thing, and could improve it dexterously. He therefore represented to the King,
that nothing would so secure him both at home, and abroad, against all the
mischief the Pope was contriving, Gardener stirs up the King against those
called Sacramentaries.
as to show great zeal against Heretics, chiefly the Sacramentaries, (by that
name they branded all that denied the Corporal presence of Christ in the
Eucharist.) And the King being all his life, zealous for the belief of the
Corporal presence* was the more easily persuaded to be severe on that Head: And
the rather because the Princes of Germany, whose friendship was necessary to
him, being all Lutherans, his proceedings against the Sacramentaries would give
them no offense.

An occasion at that time presented it self as opportunely as they could have
wished, one John Nicolson, alias Lambert, was then questioned by the
Archbishop of Canterbury for that opinion. And Lamb^rt in particular.
He had been Minister of the English Company at Antwerp; where being acquainted
with Tindal and Frith, he improved that knowledge of Religion, which was first
infused in him by Bilney: But Chancellor More ordered the Merchants to dismiss
him; so he came over to England, and was taken by some of Archbishop Warhams
officers, and many Articles were objected to him. But Warham died soon after,
and the change of Counsels that followed occasioned his Liberty. So he kept a
School at London, and hearing Doctor Tailor, afterward Bishop of Lincoln,
Preach of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, he came to him upon it, and
offered his reasons why he could not believe the Doctrine he had Preached:
Which he put in Writing, digesting them into ten Arguments. Tailor showed this
to Doctor Barnes, who as he was bred among the Lutherans, so had not only
brought over their opinions, but their temper with him: He thought that nothing
would more obstruct the progress of the Reformation than the venting that
Doctrine in England. Therefore Tailor and he carried the Paper to Cranmer, who
was at that time also of Luthers opinion, which he had drunk in from his friend
Osiander. Latimer was of the same belief. So Lambert was brought before them,
and they studied to make him retract his Paper: But all was in vain, for
Lambert by a fatal resolution appealed to the King. Who had appealed to the
King.


This Gardener laid hold on, and persuaded the King to proceed solemnly and
severely in it. The King was soon prevailed with, and both Interest and Vanity
concurred to make him improve this opportunity, for showing his zeal and
Learning. So Letters were written to many of the Nobility and Bishops, to come
and see this Trial; in which the King intended to sit in Person, and to manage
some part of the Argument. In November, on the day that was prefixed, there was
a great appearance in Westminster Hall, of the Bishops, and Clergy, the
Nobility, Judges, and the Kings Council; with an incredible number of
Spectators. The Kings Guards were all in White, and so was the Cloth of State.

And was publicly tried at Westminster.
When the Prisoner was brought to the Bar. The Trial was opened by a Speech of
Doctor Days, which was to this effect: That this Assembly was not at all
convened to dispute about any Point of Faith; but that the King being Supreme
Head, intended openly to condemn and confute that man's Heresy in all their
presence. Then the King commanded him to declare his opinion about the
Sacrament. To which Lambert began his answer with a Preface, acknowledging the
Kings great goodness, that he would thus hear the Causes of his Subjects, and
commending his great Judgment and Learning. In this the King interrupted him,
telling him in Latin, that he came not there to hear his own praises set
forth, and therefore commanded him to speak to the matter. This he uttered with
a stern Countenance; At which Lambert being a little disordered, the King asked
him again, whether was Christ's body in the Sacrament or not? He answered in
the Words of St. Austine, It was his Body in a certain manner. Arguments
brought against him.
But the King bade him answer plainly, whether it was Christ's Body or not? So
he answered, That it was not his Body. Upon which the King urged him with the
words of Scripture, This is my Body; and then he commanded the Archbishop to
confute his Opinion, who spoke only to that part of it, which was grounded on
the Impossibility of a Bodies being in two places at once. And that he confuted
from Christ's appearing to St. Paul; showing that though he is always in
Heaven, yet he was seen by St. Paul in the Air. But Lambert affirmed, that he
was then only in Heaven; and that St. Paul heard a Voice, and saw a Vision, but
not the very body of Christ. Upon this they disputed for some time: in which it
seems the Bishop of Winchester thought Cranmer argued but faintly, for he
interposed in the Argument.

Tonstals arguments run all upon Gods Omnipotency, that it was not to be
limited by any appearances of difficulties, which flowed from our want of a
right understanding of things; and our Faculties being weak, our notions of
Impossibilities were proportioned to these. But Stokesley thought he had found
out a Demonstration that might put an end to the whole Controversy; for he
showed, that in Nature we see one substance changed into another, and yet the
accidents remain. So when Water is boiled, till it evaporates into Air, one
substance is changed into another, and moisture that was the accident remains,
it being still moist. This (as one of the eyewitnesses relates) was received
with great applause, and much joy appeared in the Bishops looks upon it. But
whether the Spectators could distinguish well between Laughter for Joy, and a
scornful smile, I cannot tell: For certainly this Crotchet must have provoked
the latter rather; since it was a Sophisme, not to be forgiven any above a
Junior Sophister; thus from an accidental conversion, where the substance was
still the same, only altered in its Form and Qualities, (according to the
Language of that Philosophy, which was then most in vogue,) to infer a
substantial mutation, where one substance was annihilated, and a new one
produced in its place. But these arguments it seems disordered Lambert
somewhat; and either the Kings stern looks, the variety of the Disputants, ten,
one after another, engaging with him, or the greatness of the presence, with
the length of the action, which continued five hours, put him in some
confusion; it is not improbable but they might in the end bring him to be quite
silent. This one that was present said, flowed from his being spent and
wearied; and that he saw what he said was little considered: but others
ascribed it to his being confounded with the arguments that were brought
against him. So the general applause of the Hall, gave the victory on the Kings
side. When he was thus silent, the King asked him if he was convinced by these
arguments, and whether he would live or die? He answered, That he committed his
Soul to God, and submitted his Body to the Kings Clemency. But the King told
him, if he did not recant he must die, for he would not be a Patron of
Heretics; and since he would not do that, the King ordered Cromwell to read the
Sentence, (which he as "the Kings Vicegerent did, He is condemned.
) declaring him an Incorrigible Heretic, and condemning him to be burnt. Which
was soon after executed in Smithfield, in a most barbarous manner; for when his
Legs and Thighs were burnt to the Stumps, there not being fire enough to
consume the rest of him suddenly, two of the Officers raised up his body on
their Halberds, he being yet alive, and crying out, None but Christ, none but
Christ; and then they let him fall down into the Fire, where he was quickly
consumed to ashes. And Burned.
He was a learned and good man. His answers to the Articles objected to him by
Warham, and a Book which in his Imprisonment he wrote for justifying his
opinion, which he directed to the King; do show both great Learning for those
times, and a very good Judgment.

This being done, the party that opposed the Reformation, persuaded the King
that he had got so much reputation to himself by it, that it would effectually
refute all aspersions, which had been cast on him, as if he intended to change
the Faith: neither did they forget to set on him in his weak side, and magnify
all that he had said, as if the Oracle had uttered it: By which they said it
appeared he was indeed a Defender of the Faith, and the Supreme Head of the
Church. And he had so good a conceit of what was then done, that he intended to
pursue these severities further; and therefore soon after he resolved on
Summoning a Parliament, partly for confirming what he had done, and completing
what remained to be done further, in the suppression of the Monasteries; and
likewise for making a new Law for punishing some Opinions, which were then
spreading about the Sacrament, and some other Articles, as will soon appear.

Now the Archbishop of Canterbury's Interest at Court, suffered a great
diminution. The Popish party gain ground at Court.
His chief friend among the Bishops, was Fox Bishop of Hereford, who was much
esteemed, and employed by the King. He was a Privy-Councellor, and had been
employed in a Negotiation with the Princes of Germany, to whom he was a very
acceptable Minister. They proposed, That the King would receive the Ausburg
Confession, except in such things as should be altered in it by common Consent,
and defend it in a free Council, if any such were called; and that neither of
them should acknowledge any Council called by the Pope: That the King should be
called the Patron of their League, and they should mutually assist one another,
the King giving 100000 Crowns a year toward the defense of the League.

The Bishop of Winchester being then in France, did much dissuade the King from
making a Religious League with them; against which he gave some plausible
politic reasons, for his Conscience never strugled with a maxim of State. But
the King liked most of the propositions; The Kings correspondence with the
German Princes.
only he would not accept the Title of Defender of their League, till some
differences in the Doctrine were agreed. So they were to have sent over
Sturmius as their Agent; and Melancthon, Bucer, and George Draco, to confer
with the Kings Divines. But upon Queen Anne's fall this vanished; and though
the King entered into a Civil League with them, and had frequently a mind to
bring over Melancthon, for whom he had a great value, yet it never took effect.
There were three things in which the Germans were more positive than in any
other point of Reformation. These were, the Communion in both kinds, the
worship in a known Tongue, and an allowance for the marriage of the Clergy. All
the people had got these things in their heads; so that it was generally
believed, that if the Pope had in time consented to them, the Progress of the
Reformation had been much stopped. The express words of the Institution, and
the Novelty of the contrary practice, had engaged that Nation very early for
Communion in both kinds. Common sense made them all desire to understand what
they did and said in the Worship of God; and the lewd and dissolute practices
of the unmarried Clergy, were so public, that they thought the honor of their
Families, of which that Nation is extremely sensible, could not be secured,
unless the Clergy might have Wives of their own. But at these the King stuck
more, than at other things that were more disputable. For in all other points
that were material, he had set up the Doctrine of the Ausburg Confession; and
there was good ground to hope that the Evidence of at least two of these would
have brought over the King to a fuller Agreement, and firmer Union with them.
But the Bishop of Hereford's death gave a great blow to that design. For though
that party thought they had his room well filled, Bonners dissimulation.
when they had got Bonner to be his Successor; yet they found afterward what a
fatal mistake they committed, in raising him now to Hereford, and translating
him within a few months to London, vacant by Stokesleys death. But during the
vacancy of the Sea of Hereford, Cranmer held a Visitation in it, where he left
some Injunctions (to be found in the Collection) which chiefly related to the
encouraging of reading the Scriptures, Coll. Numb. ^2.
and giving all due obedience to the Kings Injunctions. For the other Bishops
that adhered to Cranmer, they were rather clogs than helps to him. Latimers
simplicity and weakness made him be despised: Shaxtons proud and litigious
humor drew hatred on him: Barlow was not very discreet; and many of the
Preachers whom they cherished, whether out of an unbridled forwardness of
temper, or a true zeal that would not be managed and governed by politic and
prudent measures, were flying at many things that were not yet abolished. Many
complaints were brought of these to the King. Upon which, letters were sent to
all the Bishops in the Kings name, to take care that as the People should be
instructed in the truth, so they should not be unwarily charged with too many
novelties; since the publishing these, if it was not tempered with great
discretion, would raise much contention, and other inconveniences that might
be of dangerous consequence. But it seems this Caveat did not produce what was
designed by it, or at least the opposite party were still bringing in new
Complaints: for I have seen an original Letter of Cromwels to the Bishop of
Landaffe, Coll. Numb. 13.
bearing date the 6th of January: In which he makes mention of the Kings
Letters sent to that purpose, and requires him to look to the Execution of
them, both against the violence of the new Preachers, and against those that
secretly carried on the pretended authority of the Bishop of Rome; otherwise he
threatens to proceed against him in an other manner. All these things concurred
to lessen Cranmers interest in the Court; nor had he any firm friend there but
Cromwell, who was also careful to preserve himself: There was not a Queen now in
the Kings bosom to favor their motions. Queen Jane had been their friend,
though she came in Anne Bolleyns room that had supported them most. The King
was observed to be much guided by his Wives, as long as they kept their
interest with him. Therefore Cromwell thought the only way to retrieve a design
that was almost lost, was to engage the King in an Alliance with some of the
Princes of Germany; from whence he had heard much of the Beauty of the Lady
Anne of Cleve, the Duke of Cleve's Sister, whose elder sister was married to
the Duke of Saxony.

A new Parliament.
But while he was setting this on foot, a Parliament was summoned to meet the
28th of April. To which all the Parliamentary Abbots had their Writs. The
Abbots of Westminster, St. Albans, St. Edmundsbury, St Mary York, Glassenbury,
Gloucester, Ramsey, Evesham, Peterborrough, Reading, Malmesbury, Croyland,
Selby, Thorny, Winchelcomb, Waltham, Cirencester, Teukesbury, Colchester and
Tavestoke, sat in it. On the 5th of May, the Lord Chancellor acquainted them,
that the King being most desirous to have all his Subjects of one mind in
Religion; and to quiet all Controversies about it, had commanded him to move to
them, that a Committee might be appointed for examining these different
opinions, and drawing up Articles for an agreement, which might be reported and
considered by the House. To this the Lords agreed, and named for a Committee,
Cromwell the Vicegerent, the two Archbishops, the Bishops of Duresme, Bath and
Wells, Ely, Bangor, Carlisle and Worcester: Who were ordered to go about it
with all haste, and were dispensed with for their attendance in the House, till
they had ended their business. But they could come to no agreement; for the
Archbishop of Canterbury, having the Bishops of Ely and Worcester to second
him, and being favored by Cromwell, the other five could carry nothing against
them: Nor would either party yield to the other, so that 11 days passed in
these debates.

On the 16th of May, the Duke of Norfolk told the Lords, That the Committee
that was named had made no progress, The 6 Articles are proposed.
for they were not of one mind; which some of the Lords had objected, when they
were first named. Therefore he offered some Articles to the Lords
consideration, that they might be examined by the whole House, and that there
might be a perpetual Law made for the observation of them, after the Lords had
freely delivered their minds about them. The Articles were.

First, Whether in the Eucharist, Christ's real Body was present without any
Transubstantiation? (so it is in the Journal absque Transubstantiatione) it
seems so the Corporal Presence had been established, they would have left the
manner of it indefinite. 1539.


Secondly, Whether that Sacrament was to be given to the Laity in both kinds?

Thirdly, Whether the Vows of Chastity, made either by Men or Women, ought to
be observed, by the Law of God?

Fourthly, Whether by the Law of God private Masses ought to be celebrated?

Fifthly, Whether Priests by the Law of God might marry?

Sixthly, Whether Auricular Confession were necessary by the Law of God?

Against these the Archbishop of Canterbury argued long. For the first, he was
then in his opinion a Lutheran, so he was not like to say much against it. But
certainly he opposed the second much; since there was not any thing for which
those with whom he held correspondence were more earnest, and seemed to have
greater advantages, Reasons against them.
both from Christ's own words in the Institution, and the constant practice of
the Church for 12 ages.

For the Third, It seemed very hard to suppress so many Monasteries, and set
the Religious persons at liberty, and yet bind them up to Chastity. That same
Parliament by another Act, absolved them from their vow of Poverty, giving them
Power to purchase Lands: now it was not reasonable to bind them up to some
parts of their Vow, when they absolved them from the rest. And it was no ways
prudent to bind them up from Marriage, since, as long as they continued in that
State, they were still capable to re-enter into their Monasteries, when a fair
occasion should offer; whereas they, upon their Marrying, did effectually lay
down all possible pretentions to their former Houses.

For the Fourth, The Asserting the Necessity of private Masses, was a plain
Condemnation of the Kings proceedings in the Suppression of so many Religious
Houses, which were Societies chiefly dedicated to that purpose. For if these
Masses did profit the Souls departed, the destroying so many Foundations could
not be justified. And for the living, these private Masses were clearly
contrary to the first Institution, by which that which was blessed and
consecrated was to be distributed: And it was to be a Communion, and so held by
the Primitive Church, which admitted none, so much as to see the Celebration of
that Sacrament, but those who received it: Laying Censures upon such as were
present at the rest of that office, and did not stay and Communicate.

For the Fifth, it touched Cranmer to the quick, for he was then Married. The
Scripture did in no place enjoin the Celibate of the Clergy. On the contrary
Scripture speaks of their Wives; and gives the Rules of their living with them.
And St. Paul in express words condemns all men's leaving their Wives, without
exception, saying That the man has not Power over his own body but the Wife.
In the Primitive Church, though those that were in orders did not Marry, yet
such as were Married before Orders kept their Wives, of which there were many
Instances; and when some moved in the Council of Nice, that all that had been
Married, when they entered into Orders, should put away their Wives, it was
rejected, and ever since the Greek Churches have allowed their Priests to keep
their Wives. Nor was it ever commanded in the Western Church, till the Popes
began their Usurpation. Therefore the prohibition of it being only grounded on
the Papal Constitutions, it was not reasonable to keep it up, since that
Authority on which it was built was now overthrown.

What was said concerning Auricular Confession, I cannot so easily recover. For
though Cranmer argued three days against these Articles, I can only gather the
substance of his Arguments from what himself wrote on some of these Heads
afterward. For nothing remains of what passed there, but what is conveyed to
us in the Journal, which is short and defective.

On the 24th of May the Parliament was Prorogued to the 30th, upon what reason
it does not appear. It was not to set any of the Bills backward; for it was
agreed, that the Bills should continue in the State in which they were then,
till their next meeting. When they met again; on the 30th of May being Friday,
the Lord Chancellor intimated to them, that not only the Spiritual Lords, but
the King himself, had taken much pains to bring things to an agreement which
was effected. Therefore he moved in the Kings name, that a Bill might be
brought in for punishing such as offended against these Articles. So the Lords
appointed the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Ely, and St. David's,
and Doctor Petre, a master of Chancery, (afterward Secretary of State,) to
draw one Bill; and the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Duresin, and
Winchester, and Doctor Tregonnel, another Master of Chancery, to draw another
Bill about it; and to have them both ready, and to offer them to the King by
Sunday next. But the Bill that was drawn by the Archbishop of York, and those
with him, was best liked: yet it seems the Matter was long contested, for it
was not brought to the House before the 7th of June; and then the Lord
Chancellor offered it, and it was read the first time. On the 9th of June it
had the second reading, and on the 10th it was engrossed and read the third
time. But when it passed, the King desired the Archbishop of Canterbury to go
out of the House, since he could not give his consent to it; but he humbly
excused himself, for he thought he was bound in conscience to stay and vote
against it. It was sent down to the House of Commons, where it met with no
great opposition; for on the 14th it was agreed to, and sent up again: And on
the 28th it had the force of a Law by the Royal Assent.

The Title of it was, an Act for abolishing Diversity of opinions in certain
Articles concerning Christian Religion. It is said in the Preamble, that the
King, An Act past for them.
considering the blessed effects of union, and the mischiefs of discord, since
there were many different opinions, both among the Clergy and Laity, about some
points of Religion, had called this Parliament, and a Synod at the same time,
for removing these differences, where six Articles were proposed, and long
debated by the Clergy: And the King himself had come in person to the
Parliament, and Council, and opened many things of high Learning and great
knowledge about them: And that he, with the Assent of both Houses of Parliament,
had agreed on the following Articles. First, That in the Sacrament of the Altar
after the Consecration there remained no Substance of Bread and Wine, but under
these forms, the Natural Body and Blood of Christ were present. Secondly, That
Communion in both kinds was not necessary to Salvation to all persons by the
Law of God; but that both the Flesh and Blood of Christ were together in each
of the kinds. Thirdly, That Priests after the order of Priesthood might not
Marry by the Law of God. Fourthly, That vows of Chastity ought to be observed
by the Law of God. Fifthly, That the use of private Masses ought to be
continued; which as it was agreeable to Gods Law, so men received great benefit
by them. Sixthly, That Auricular Confession was expedient, and necessary, and
ought to be retained in the Church. The Parliament thanked the King, for the
pains he had taken in these Articles: And Enacted, that if any after the 12th
of July, did speak, preach, or write against the first Article, they were to be
judged Heretics, and to be burnt without any abjuration; and to forfeit their
real and personal Estates to the King. And those who preached or obstinately
disputed against the other Articles, were to be judged Felons; and to suffer
death as Felons, without benefit of Clergy. And those, who either in word or
writing, spoke against them, were to be Prisoners during the Kings pleasure,
and forfeit their goods and Chattels to the King, for the first time: And if
they offended so the second time, they were to suffer as Felons. All the
Marriages of Priests are declared void; and if any Priest did still keep any
such woman, whom he had so Married, and lived familiarly with her, as with his
Wife, he was to be judged a Felon: And if a Priest lived carnally with any
other woman, he was upon the first Conviction to forfeit his Benefices, Goods,
and Chattels, and to be Imprisoned during the Kings pleasure; and upon the
second Conviction, was to suffer as a Felon. The women so offending, were also
to be punished in the same manner, as the Priests; and those who contemned, or
abstained from Confession, or the Sacrament, at the accustomed times, for the
first offense were to forfeit their Goods and Chattels, and be Imprisoned; and
for the second, were to be adjudged of Felony. And for the Execution of this
Act, Commissions were to be issued out to all Archbishops and Bishops, and
their Chancellors and Commissaries, and such others in the several shires as
the King should name, to hold their Sessions quarterly, or oftener; and they
were to proceed upon presentiments, and by a Jury. Those Commissioners were to
swear, that they should execute their Commission indifferently, without favor,
affection, corruption, or malice. As Ecclesiastical Incumbents were to read
this Act in their Churches once a quarter. And in the end a Proviso was added,
concerning vows of Chastity. That they should not oblige any, except such as
had taken them at or above the Age of 21 years; or had not been compelled to
take them.

This Act was received, by all that secretly favored Popery, which is
variously censured.
with great joy; for now they hoped to be revenged on all those who had
hitherto set forward a Reformation. It very much quieted the Bigots; who were
now persuaded that the King would not set up Heresy, since he passed so severe
an Act against it; and it made the total Suppression of Monasteries go the more
easily thorough. The Popish Clergy liked all the Act very well, except that
severe branch of it against their unchaste practices. This was put in by Cromwell
to make it cut with both edges. (Some of our inconsiderate Writers, who never
perused the Statutes, tell us it was done by a different Act of Parliament; but
greater faults must be forgiven them who write upon hearsay.) There was but one
comfort that the poor Reformers could pick out of the whole Act, that they were
not left to the Mercy of the Clergy, and their Ecclesiastical Courts, but were
to be tried by a Jury; where they might expect more candid and gentle dealing.
Yet the denying them the benefit of Abjuration, was a severity beyond what had
ever been put in practice before: So now they began to prepare for new storms
and a heavy persecution.

An Act about the Suppression of the greater Monasteries.
The other chief business of this Parliament was the Suppression of Monasteries.
It is said in the Preamble of that Act, That diverse Abbots. Priors, and other
Heads of Religious Houses, had, since the 4th of February in the 27th year of
the Kings Reign, without constraint, of their own accord, and according to the
due course of the Common Law, by sufficient writings of Record, under their
Covent-Seals, given up their Houses and all that belonged to them to the King.
Therefore all Houses that were since that time suppressed, dissolved,
relinquished, forfeited, or given up, are Confirmed to the King and his
Successors for ever: And all Monasteries that should thereafter be suppressed,
forfeited, or given up, are also Confirmed to the King and his Successors. And
all these Houses, with the Rents belonging to them, were to be disposed of by
the Court of Augmentations for the Kings profit; excepting only such as were
come into the Kings hands by Attaindors of Treason, which belonged to the
Exchequer. Reserving to all persons, except the Patrons, Founders, and Donors
of such Houses, the same right to any parts of them, or jurisdiction in them,
which they could have claimed if that Act had never been made. Then followed
many clauses for Annulling all Deeds and Leases, made within one year before
the Suppression of any Religious House, to the prejudice of it, or different
from what had been granted formerly. And all Churches or Chapels, which
belonged to these Monasteries, and were formerly exempted from the Visitation
or Jurisdiction of their Ordinary, are declared to be within the Jurisdiction
of the Bishop, of the Diocese, or of any other that should be appointed by the
King.

This Act passed in the House of Peers, without any Protestation made by any of
the Abbots, though it appears by the Journal that at the first reading of it,
there were eighteen Abbots present, at the second reading twenty, and seventeen
at the third reading, and the Abbots of Glastenbury Colchester and Reading,
were among those who were present; so little reason there is to think they were
attainted for any open withstanding the Kings proceedings, when they did not
protest against this Act, which was so plainly levelled at them. It was soon
dispatched by the Commons; and offered to the Royal Assent. By it, no Religious
Houses were suppressed, as is generally taken for granted; but only the
Surrenders, that either had been, or were to be made, were Confirmed. The last
Proviso for Annulling all Exemptions of Churches and Chapels, had been a great
happiness to the Church, if it had not been for that Clause; That the King
might appoint others to visit them; which in a great degree did enervate it.
For many of those who afterward purchased these Lands with the Impropriated
Tithes, got this likewise in their Grants, that they should be the Visitors of
the Churches and Chapels formerly exempted: from whence great disorders have
since followed in these Churches, which not falling within the Bishops
Jurisdiction, are thought not liable to his Censures; so that the Incumbents in
them, being under no restraints, have often been scandalous to the Church; and
given occasion to those who were disaffected to the Hierarchy, to censure the
Prelates, for these offenses which they could not punish; since the offenders
were thus excepted out of their Jurisdiction. This abuse, which first sprang
from the Ancient Exemptions that were Confirmed or Granted by the Sea of Rome,
has not yet met with an effectual Remedy.

Upon the whole matter, this Suppression of Abbeys was universally censured,
and besides the common Exceptions which those that favored the old
Superstition, made, it was questioned whether the Lands that formerly belonged
to Religious Houses, ought to have returned to the Founders and Donors by way
of Reverter, or to have fallen to the Lords of whom the Lands were holden by
way of Escheat, or to have come to the Crown. It is true, by the Roman Law, or
at least by a Judgment of the Senate in Theodosius's time, the Endowments of
the Heathenish Temples were upon a full debate, whether they should return to
the right Heirs, or be Confiscated, in the end adjudged to the Fisc or the
Emperors Exchequer; upon this reason, that by the will of the Donors, they were
totally alienated from them and their Heirs. But in England it went otherwise.
And when the Order of the Knights-Templers was dissolved, it was then judged in
favor of the Lord by Escheat. For though the Founders and Donors had totally
alienated these Lands from themselves and their heirs, yet there was no reason
from thence to conclude any thing that might wrong the Superior Lord of his
Right in the case of an Escheat. And this must have held good, if those
alienations and Endowments had been absolute without any condition. But the
Endowments being generally rather of the Nature of Covenants and Contracts, and
made in Consideration of so many Masses to be said for their Souls, then it was
most just, that, upon a nonperformance of the Condition, and when that public
Error and Cheat which the Monks had put upon the World was discovered, the
Lands should have returned to the Founders and Patrons and their Heirs and
Successors. Nor was there any grounds for the Lords to pretend to them by
Escheat, especially where their Ancestors had consented to, and confirmed those
Endowments. Therefore there was no need of Excluding them by any special
Proviso. But for the Founders and Donors, certainly if there had not been a
Particular Proviso made against them, they might have recovered the Lands which
their Ancestors had superstitiously given away; and the Surrenders which
Religious persons made to the Crown, could not have cut off their Title. But
this Act did that effectually. It is true, many of the greatest of them were of
Royal Foundation, and these would have returned to the Crown without Dispute.

On the 23 of May, in this Session of Parliament a Bill was brought in by
Cromwell, for giving the King Power to Erect new Bishoprics by his Letters
Patents. Another about the Erecting new Bishoprics.
It was read that day for the first, second, and third time; and sent down to
the Commons. The Preamble of it was, That it was known what slothful and
ungodly Life had been led by those who were called Religious. But that these
Houses might be converted to better uses; that Gods word might be better set
forth, Children brought up in Learning, Clarks nourished in the Universities,
and that old decayed Servants might have Livings, poor people might have
Almshouses to maintain them, Readers of Greek, Hebrew, and Latin, might have
good Stipend, daily Alms might be Ministered, and Allowance might be made for
mending of the highways, and Exhibition for Ministers of the Church, for these
ends, if the King thought fit to have more Bishoprics or Cathedral Churches
erected out of the Reat of these Houses; full Power was given to him to erect,
and found them; and to make Rules and Statutes for them, and such Translations
of Sees or divisions of them as he thought fit. But on this Act I must add a
singular Remark. The Preamble and material parts of it, were drawn by the King
himself; and the first draught of it under his hand is yet extant; which shows
his extraordinary application and understanding of business. But in the same
Paper there is a List of the Sees which he intended to found; of which what was
done afterward came so far short, that I know nothing to which it can be so
reasonably imputed, as the declining of Cranmers Interest at Court; who had
proposed the Erecting of new Cathedrals and Sees, with other things mentioned
in the Preamble of the Statute, as a great mean for Reforming the Church. The
Sees which the King then designed, with the Abbeys out of which they were to be
Erected, The Kings design about these.
follow, as it is in the Paper under the Kings own hand.

Essex Waltham. Hartford. St. Albans. Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire.
Dunstable. Newenham. Clowstown.
Oxford and Berkshire. Osnay and Tame. Northampton and Huntington.
Peterborough. Middlesex. Westminster. Leicester and Rutland. Leicester.
Glocestershire St. Peter's. Lancashire Fountains and the Arch-deaconry of
Richmond. Suffolk Edmonds-bury. Stafford and Salop. Shrewsbury. Nottingham and
Derby. Welbeck. Werksop. Thurgarton.
Cornwall Lanceston. Bedmynne. Wardreth.

Over these is written The Bishoprics to be made. In another corner of the
Page he writes as follows.

Places to be altered according to our device, which have Sees in them.
Christ's- Church in Canterbury, St. Swithins, Ely, Duresm, Rochester, with a
part of Leeds, Worcester, and all others having the same. Then a little below.
Places to be altered into Colleges and Schools. Burton super Trent. More is
not written in that Paper. But I wonder much that in this List Chester was
forgotten. Yet it was Erected before any of them. For I have seen a Commission
under the Privy Seal to the Bishop of Chester, to take the Surrender of the
Monastery of Hamond in Shropshire, bearing date the 24th of August this year.
So it seems the Sea of Chester was Erected and endowed before the Act passed,
though there is among the Rolls a Charter for Endowing and founding of it
afterward. Bristow is not mentioned in this Paper, though a See was afterward
Erected there. It was not before the end of the next year that these Sees were
founded; and there was in that Interval so great a Change made, both of the
Counsels and Ministers, that no wonder the things now designed were never
accomplished.

Another Act passed in this Parliament, An Act about the Kings Proclamations.
concerning the obedience due to the Kings Proclamations. There had been great
exceptions made to the Legality of the Kings proceedings, in the Articles about
Religion, and other Injunctions published by his authority, which were
complained of as contrary to Law; since by these the King had without consent
of Parliament, altered some Laws, and had laid Taxes on his Spiritual Subjects.
Upon which an Act passed, which sets forth in the preamble, the contempt and
disobedience of the Kings Proclamations, by some who did not consider what a
King by his Royal power might do; which if it continued, would tend to the
disobedience of the Laws of God, and the dishonor of the Kings Majesty, (who
may full ill bear it.) Considering also, that many occasions might require
speedy Remedies, and that delaying these till a Parliament met, might occasion
great prejudices to the Realm; and that the King by his Royal power given of
God, might do many things in such cases; Therefore it is Enacted, That the King
for the time being, with advice of his Council, might set forth Proclamations
with pains and penalties in them, which were to be obeyed as if they were made
by an Act of Parliament. But this was not to be so extended, that any of the
Kings Subjects should suffer in their Estates, Liberties, or Persons, by virtue
of it: Nor that by any of the Kings Proclamations, Laws or Customs were to be
broken and subverted. Then follow some Clauses about the publishing of
Proclamations, and the way of prosecuting those who contemned and disobeyed
them. It is also added, That if any offended against them, and in further
contempt went out of the Realm, he was to be adjudged a Traitor. This also gave
power to the Counselors of the Kings Successor, if he were under age, to set
forth Proclamations in his name, which were to be obeyed in the same manner
with these set forth by the King himself. This Act gave great power to the
Judges, since there were such Restrictions in some branches of it, which seemed
to lessen the great extent of the other parts of it; so that the Expositors of
the Law had much referred to them: upon this Act were the great changes of
Religion in the Nonage of Edward the 6th grounded.

An Act about Precedence.
There is another Act, which but collaterally belongs to Ecclesiastical affairs;
and therefore shall be but slightly touched. It is the Act of the Precedence of
the Officers of State, by which the Lord Vicegerent has the Precedence of all
persons in the Kingdom next the Royal Family: and on this I must make one
Remark, which may seem very improper for one of my profession; especially when
it is an animadversion on one of the greatest men that any age has produced,
the most Learned Mr. Seldom. He in his Titles of Honor, says, That this
Statute was never printed in the Statute-Book, and but incorrectly by another,
and that therefore he infers it Literally as is in the Record. In which there
are two mistakes. For it is Printed in the Statute-Book, that was set down in
that Kings Reign, though left out in some latter Statute-Books; and that which
he prints, is not exactly according to the Record. For as he prints it, the
Bishop of London is not named in the precedence; which is not according to the
Parliament-Roll, in which the Bishop of London has the precedence next the
Archbishop of York; and though this is corrected in a Posthumous edition; yet
in that set out by himself, it is wanting: Nor is that Omission among the
Errors of the Press, for though there are many of these gathered to be
amended, this is none of them. This I do not take notice of out of any vanity,
or humor of Censuring a man so great in all sorts of Learning; but my design
is only to let ingenious persons see, that they ought not to take things on
trust easily, no not from the greatest Authors.

These are all the public Acts that relate to Religion, which were passed in
this Parliament. Some Acts of Attainders.
With these there passed an Act of Attaindor of the Marquess of Exeter, and the
Lord Montacute, with many others, that were either found to have had a great
hand in the late Rebellion; or were discovered to hold correspondence with
Cardinal Pool, who was then trafficking with foreign Princes, and projecting a
League among them against the King. But of this I shall give a more full
account at the end of this Book; being there to open the grounds of all the
Attaindors that were passed in these last years of the Kings Reign. There is
one remarkable thing that belongs to this Act.

Some were to be attainted in absence; others they had no mind to bring to make
their answer, but yet designed to attain them. Such were the Marchioness of
Exeter, and the Countess of Sarum, Mother to Cardinal Pool, whom by a gross
mistake, Speed fancies to have been condemned without Arraignment or Trial, as
Cromwell had been by Parliament. For she was now condemned a year before him.
About the Justice of doing this there was some debate; and to clear it, Cromwell
sent for the Judges, and asked their opinions, Whether a man might be attainted
in Parliament without being brought to make his answer? They said it was a
dangerous Question. That the Parliament ought to be an example to all inferior
Courts; and that when any person was charged with a Crime, he, by the common
Rule of Justice and Equity should be heard to plead for himself. But the
Parliament being the Supreme Court of the Nation, what way soever they
proceeded, it must be good in Law; and it could never be questioned, whether
the party was brought to answer or not. And thus a very ill president was made,
by which the most innocent person in the world might be ruined. And this, as
has often been observed in the like cases, fell very soon heavily on the Author
of the Counsel, as shall appear.

When the Parliament was Prorogued, on the 28th of June, The Kings care of
Cranmer.

Antiq. Brit. in vita Cran.


the King apprehending that the Archbishop of Canterbury might be much cast
down with the Act for the six Articles, sent for him and told him; That he had
heard how much, and with what Learning he had argued against it, and therefore
he desired he would put all his arguments in writing, and bring them to him.
Next day he sent the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, and the Lord Cromwell, to
dine with him. Ordering them to assure him of the Kings constant and unshaken
kindness to him, and to encourage him all they could. When they were at Table
with him at Lambeth, they run out much on his commendation, and acknowledged he
had opposed the Act with so much Learning, Gravity and Eloquence; that even
those that differed from him were much taken with what he said, and that he
needed fear nothing from the King. Cromwell saying, that this difference the
King put between him, and all his other Counselors; that when complaints were
brought of others, the King received them, and tried the truth of them; but he
would not so much as hearken to any complaint of the Archbishop. From that he
went on to make a Parallel between him and Cardinal Wolsey: That the one lost
his Friends by his haughtiness and pride, but the other gained on his Enemies
by his gentleness and mildness. Upon which the Duke of Norfolk said, he might
best speak of the Cardinal, for he knew him well, having been his man. This
nettled Cromwell, who answered, that though he had served him, yet he never
liked his manners: and that though the Cardinal had designed, (if his attempt
for the Popedom had been successful,) to have made him his Admiral; yet he had
resolved not to accept of it, nor to leave his Country. To which the Duke of
Norfolk replied with a deep Oath, That he Lied; with other reproachful
language. This troubled Cranmer extremely, who did all he could to quiet and
reconcile them. But now the Enmity between those two great Ministers broke out
to that height, that they were never afterward hearty friends.

But Cranmer went about that which the King had commanded: and made a Book of
the reasons that led him to oppose the six Articles in which the places out of
the Scriptures, Cranmer writes his reasons against the six Articles.
the Authorities of the ancient Doctors, with the arguments drawn from these,
were all digested in a good method. This he commanded his Secretary to write
out in a fair hand, that it might be given the King. The Secretary returning
with it from Croydon, where the Archbishop was then, to Lambeth, found the Key
of his Chamber was carried away by the Archbishops Almoner: So that he being
obliged to go over to London, and not daring to trust the Book to any others
keeping, carried it with himself; where both he and the Book met with an
un-lookt-for encounter. 1538.
Some others that were with him in the Wherry, would needs go to the South-wark
side, to look on a Bear-baiting that was near the River, where the King was in
person. The Bear broke loose into the River, and the Dogs after her. They that
were in the Boat leaped out, and left the poor Secretary alone there. But the
Bear got into the Boat, with the Dogs about her, and sunk it. The Secretary
apprehending his life was in danger, did not mind his Book, which he lost in
the water. But being quickly rescued, and brought to land, he begun to look for
his Book, and saw it floating in the River. So he desired the Bear-ward to
bring it to him; who took it up, but before he would restore it, put it into
the hands of a Priest that stood there, to see what it might contain. The
Priest reading a little in it found it a Confutation of the six Articles: and
told the Bearward that whosoever claimed it, would be hanged for his pains. But
the Archbishops Secretary thinking to mend the matter, said it was his Lords
Book. This made the Bear-ward more intractable, for he was a spiteful Papist,
and hated the Archbishop; so that no offers nor entreaties could prevail with
him to give it back. Whereupon Morice, (that was the Secretaries name,) went
and opened the matter to Cromwell the next day, Cromwell was then going to Court,
and he expected to find the Bearward there, looking to deliver the Book to some
of Cranmers Enemies; he therefore ordered Morice to go along with him. Where,
as they had expected, they found the fellow with the Book about him; upon whom
Cromwell called, and took the Book out of his hands, threatening him severely for
his presumption in meddling with a Privy Counselors Book.

But though Cranmer escaped this hazard, yet in London the storm of the late
act was falling heavily on them that were obnoxious. Proceedings upon that Act.
Shaxton and Latimer, the Bishops of Salisbury and Worcester, within a week
after the Session of Parliament, as it appears, resigned their Bishoprics. For
on the 7th of July the Chapters of these Churches Petitioned the King for his
leave to fill those Sees, they being then vacant by the free Resignation of the
former Bishops. Upon which the Conge d'Elire for both was granted. Nor was this
all, but they being presented as having spoken against the six Articles, were
put in Prison, where the one lay till the King died, and the other till a
little before his death, as shall be shown in its proper place. There were also
Commissions issued out, for proceeding upon that Statute: and those who were
Commissioned for London, were all secret favorers of Popery; so they proceeded
most severely, and examined many Witnesses against all who were presented: whom
they Interrogated not only upon the express words of the Statute, but upon all
such collateral or presumptive circumstances, as might entangle them, or
conclude them guilty. So that in a very little while 500 persons were put in
prison, and involved in the breach of the Statute. Upon this not only Cranmer
and Cromwell, but the Duke of Suffolk, and Audley the Chancellor represented to
the King how hard it would be, and of what ill consequence, to execute the Law
upon so many persons. So the King was prevailed with to pardon them all; and I
find no further proceeding upon this Statute till Cromwell fell.

But the opposite Party used all the Arts possible to insinnuate themselves
into the King. And therefore, 1539.
to show how far their compliance would go, Bonner took a strange commission
from the King, on the 12th of November this year. It has been certainly
Enrolled; but it is not there now, so that I judge it was razed in that
suppression of Records, which was in Queen Mary's time. But, as men are
commonly more careless at home, Bonner has left it on Record in his own
Register. Whether the other Bishops took such Commissions from this King, I
know not. But I am certain there is none such in Cranmers Register: and it is
not likely, if any such had been taken out by him, that ever it would have been
razed. The Commission it self will be found in the Collection of Papers at the
end. The substance of it is, That since all Jurisdictions both Ecclesiastical
and Civil, Collect. Numb. 1^.
flowed from the King as Supreme Head, and he was the foundation of all power;
it became those who exercised it only ( Precario) at the Kings courtesy,
gratefully to acknowledge, that they had it only of his bounty; and to declare
that they would deliver it up again, when it should please him to call for it.
And since the King had constituted the Lord Cromwell his Vicegerent in
Ecclesiastical affairs; yet because he could not look into all those Matters,
therefore the King, upon Bonners petition, did Empower him in his own stead, to
ordain such as he found worthy, to present and give institution, with all the
other parts of Episcopal Authority, for which he is duly Commissionated; and
this to last during the Kings pleasure only. And, all the parts of the
Episcopal Function being reckoned up, it concluded with a strict Charge to the
Bishop to Ordain none but such of whose Integrity, good life and learning he
had very good assurance. For as the Corruptions of the Christian Doctrine, and
of men's manners, had chiefly proceeded from ill Pastors; so it was not to be
doubted, but good Pastors well-chosen would again reform the Christian
Doctrine, and the Lives of Christians. After he had taken this Commission,
Bonner might have been well called one of the Kings Bishops. The true reason of
this profound Compliance, was, That the Popish party apprehended that Cranmers
great interest with the King, was chiefly grounded on some opinions he had, of
the Ecclesiastical Officers being as much subject to the Kings power as all
other Civil Officers were. And this having endeared him so much to the King,
therefore they resolved to outdo him in that point. But there was this
difference, that Cranmer was once of that opinion; and if he followed it at
all, it was out of Conscience: but Bonner, against his Conscience, (if he had
any,) complied with it.

Now followed the final dissolution of the Abbeys; there are 57 Surrenders upon
Record this year. The originals of about 30 of these are yet to be seen. Thirty
seven of them were Abbeys or Priories, Dissolution of the great Abbeys.
and 20 Nunneries. The good House of Godstow now fell with the rest, though
among the last of them. Now the great Parliament Abbots surrendered apace; as
those of Westminster, St. Albans, St. Edmundsbury, Canterbury, St. Mary in
York, Selby, St. Peter's in Gloucester, Cirencester, Waltham, Winchcombe,
Malmsbury and Battle. Three others were attainted; Glassenbury, Reading, and
Colchester. The Deeds of the rest are lost. Here it will not be unacceptable to
the Reader, to know who were the Parliamentary Abbots. There were in all 28, as
they were commonly given. Fuller has given a Catalogue of them in three places
of his History of Abbeys; but as every one of these differs from the others; so
none of them are according to the Journals of Parliliament; The Lord Herbert is
also mistaken in his account. I shall not rise higher in my enquiry than this
Reign, for anciently many more Abbots and Priors sat in Parliament, beside
other Clergy that had likewise their Writs; and of whose right to sit in the
House of Commons, there was a question moved in Edward the sixths Reign, as
shall be opened in its proper place. Much less will I presume to determine so
great a point in Law, whether they sat in the House of Lords, as being a part
of the Ecclesiastical State, or as holding their Lands of the King by Baronage?
I am only to observe the matter of fact, which is, That in the Journals of
Parliament in this Reign, these 28 Abbots had their writs, Abington, St.
Albans, St. Austins Canterbury, Battle, St. Bennets in the Holm, Berdeny,
Cirencester, Colchester, Coventry, Croyland, St. Edmundsbury, Evesham,
Glassenbury, Gloucester, Hide, Malmsbury, St. Mary's in York, Peterborough,
Ramsey, Reading, Selby, Shrewsbury, Tavenstock, Te^kesbury, Thorney, Waltham,
Westminster and Winchelcomh; to whom also the Prior of St. John's may be added.
But besides all these, I find that in the 28 year of this King, the Abbot of
Burton upon Trent sat in Parliament. Generally Coventry and Burton were held
by the same man, as one Bishop held both Coventry and Litchfield, though two
different Bishoprics; but in that year they were held by two different
persons, and both had their Writts to that Parliament. The method used in the
suppression of these Houses will appear by one complete Report made, of the
Suppression of the Abbey of Tewksbury, Collect. Numb. 3. Sect. 5.
which out of many I copyed, and is in the Collection. From it the Reader will
see, what provision was made for the Abbot, the Prior, the other Officers, and
the Monks, and other servants of the House; and what Buildings they ordered to
be defaced and what to remain; and how they did estimate the Jewels, Plate, and
other Ornaments. But Monasteries were not sufficient to stop the appetite of
some that were about the King; for Hospitals were next looked after. One of
these was this year surrendered by Thomas Thirleby with two other Priests; Some
Hospitals surrendered.
he was Master of St. Thomas Hospital in Southwark, and was designed Bishop of
Westminster, to which he made his way by that Resignation. He was a learned and
modest man, but of so fickle or cowardly a temper, that he turned always with
the Stream in every change that was made, till Queen Elizabeth came to the
Crown; but then, being ashamed of so many turns, he resolved to show he could
once be firm to somewhat.

The Abbeys sold or given away.
Now were all the Monasteries of England suppressed, and the King had then in
his hand the greatest opportunity of making Royal and Noble Foundations, that
ever King of England had. But whether out of policy to give a general Content
to the Gentry, by selling to them at low rates, or out of easiness to his
Courtiers, or out of an unmeasured lavishness in his expense, it came far short
of what he had given out he would do, and what himself seemed once to have
designed. The clear yearly value of all the Suppressed Houses is cast up, in an
account then stated to be viz. 131607. lib. 6. s. 4. d. as the Rents were then
rated, but was at least ten times so much in true value. Of which he designed
to convert 18000. lib. into a Revenue for eighteen Bishoprics and Cathedrals.
But of these he only erected six, as shall be afterward shown. Great sums were
indeed laid out on building and fortifying many Ports, in the Channel, and
other parts of England, which were raised by the Sale of Abbey-Lands.

At this time many were offering projects for Noble Foundations, on which the
King seemed very earnest: But it is very likely, A project of a Semminar^ for
Ministers of State.
that before he was aware of it, he had so outrun himself in his Bounty, that
it was not possible for him to bring these to any effect. Yet I shall set down
one of the projects, which shows the greatness of his mind that designed it;
that is, of Sir Nicholas Bacon, who was afterward one of the wisest Ministers
that ever this Nation bred. The King designed to found a House for the Study of
the Civil Law, and the purity of the Latin and French Tongues: So he ordered
Sir Nicolas Bacon, and two others, Thomas De^ton, and Robert Carry, to make a
full project, of the nature, and orders of such a House, who brought it to him
in a writing; the original whereof is yet ex^ant. (...) D. D. (...)
The design of it was, that there should be frequent pleadings, and other
exercises in the Latin and French tongues: and when the Kings Students were
brought to some ripeness, they should be sent with his Ambassadors to Foreign
parts, and trained up in the knowledge of foreign affairs; and so the House
should be the Nursery for Ambassadors. Some were also to be appointed to write
the History of all Embassies, Treaties, and other foreign Transactions: as also
of all Arraignments, and public Trials at home. But before any of them might
write on these Subjects, the Lord Chancellor was to give them an Oath, that
they should do it truly, without respect of persons, or any other corrupt
affection. This noble Design miscarried. But if it had been well laid and
regulated, it is easy to gather what great and public advantages might have
flowed from it. Among which, it is not inconsiderable, that we should have been
delivered from a Rabble of ill-Writers of History, who have without due care or
enquiry, delivered to us the Transactions of that time so imperfectly, that
there is still need of enquiring into Registers and Papers for these matters.
Which in such a House had been more certainly and clearly conveyed to
posterity, than can be now expected, at such a distance of time; and after such
a rasure of Records, and other confusions, in which many of these Papers have
been lost. And this help was the more necessary, after the suppression of
Religious Houses: in most of which a Chronicle of the times was kept, and still
filled up as new Transactions came to their knowledge. It is true, most of these
were written by men of weak Judgments, who were more punctual in delivering
Fables and Trifles, than in opening observable Transactions. Yet some of them
were men of better understandings; and it is like were directed by their
Abbots, who being Lords of Parliament* understood a^fairs well: only an
invincible humor of lying, when it might raise the credit of their Religion, or
Order, or House, runs through all their Manuscripts.

One thing was very remarkable, which was this year granted, at Cranmers
Intercession. There was nothing could so much recover Reformation, that was
declining so fast, as the free use of the Scriptures; A Proclamation about the
free use of the Scriptures.
and though these had been set up in the Churches a year ago, yet he pressed,
and now procured leave, for private persons to buy Bibles, and keep them in
their Houses. So this was granted by Letters Patents directed to Cromwell,
bearing date the 13th of November. The Substance of which was, Collect. Numb.
15.
That the King was desirous to have his Subjects attain the knowledge of Gods
word, which could not be effected by any means so well, as by granting them the
free and liberal use of the Bible in the English tongue; which to avoid
dissension, he intended should pass among them only by one Translation.
Therefore Cromwell was charged to take care, that for the space of five years
there should be no Impression of the Bible, or any part of it, but only by such
as should be assigned by him. But Gardener opposed this, all he could: and one
day, in a Conference before the King, he provoked Cranmer to show any
difference between the Authority of the Scriptures, and of the Apostolical
Canons, which he pretended were equal to the other writings of the Apostles.
Upon which, they disputed for some time. But the King perceived solid Learning
tempered with great Modesty in what Cranmer said; and nothing but vanity and
affectation in Gardiner's reasonings. So he took him up sharply, and told him,
that Cranmer was an old and experienced Captain, and was not to be troubled by
fresh-men and Novices.

The great matter of the Kings Marriage came on at this time. Many reports were
brought the King of the beauty of Anne of Cleve, The King designs to Mary Anne
of Cleve.
so that he inclined to ally himself with that Family. Both the Emperor, and
the King of France, had courted him to Matches which they had projected. The
Emperor proposed the Duchess of Milan, his kinswoman, and Daughter to the King
of Denmark. He was then designing to break the League of Smalcald, and to make
himself master of Germany: And therefore he took much pains with the King, to
divide him from the Princes there; which was in great part effected by the
Statute for the six Articles: Upon which the Ambassadors of the Princes had
complained, and said, That whereas the King had been in so fair a way of union
with them, he had now broke it off, and made so severe a Law about Communion in
one kind, Private Masses, and the Celibate of the Clergy, which differed so
much from their Doctrine, that they could entertain no further correspondence
with him, if that Law was not mitigated. But Gardener wrought much on the Kings
vanity and passions; and told him that it was below his Dignity, and high
Learning, to have a Company of dull Germans and small Princes, dictate to him
in matters of Religion. There was also another thing which he often made use of,
(though it argues somewhere a great Ignorance of the Constitution of the
Empire,) That the King could not expect these Princes would ever be for his
Supremacy; since if they acknowledged that in him, they must likewise yield it
to the Emperor. This was a great mistake. For as the Princes of Germany never
acknowledged the Emperor to have a sove raignty in their Dominions; so they did
acknowledge the Diet, in which the Sovereignty of the Empire lies, to have a
Power of making or changing what Laws they pleased about Religion. 1538.
And in things that were not determined by the Diet, every Prince pretended to
it as highly in his own Dominions, as the King could do in England. But as
untrue as this Allegation was it served Gardiner's turn; for the King was
sufficiently irritated with it against the Princes, so that there was now a
great coldness in their correspondence. Yet the Project of a Match with the
Duchess of Milan failing, and these proposed by France not being acceptable,
Cromwell moved the King about an Alliance with the Duke of Cleve; who, as he was
the Emperors Neighbor in Flanders, had also a pretension to the Duchy of
Guelders, and his eldest Daughter was Married to the Duke of Saxony. So that
the King having then some apprehensions of a War with the Emperor, this seemed
a very proper Alliance to give him a Diversion.

There had been a Treaty between her Father, and the Duke of Lorrain, in order
to a match between the Duke of Lorrain's Son, and her. But they both being
under Age, it went no further than a Contract between their Fathers. Hans
Holbin having taken her Picture, sent it over to the King. But in that he
bestowed the common complement of his Art, somewhat too liberally, on a Lady
that was in a way to be Queen. The King liked the Picture, better than the
Original, when he had the occasion afterward to compare them. The Duke of
Saxony, who was very zealous for the Aus^^^^ Confession, finding the King had
declined so much from it, dissuaded the Match. But Cromwell set it on mightily;
expecting a great Support from a Queen of his own making: whose friends being
all Luth^rans, it tended also to bring down the Popish Party at Court, and
again to recover the ground they had now lost. Those that had seen the Lady did
much commend her beauty, and person. But she could speak no Language but Dutch;
to which the King was a stranger. Nor was she bred to Music, with which the
King was much taken. So that except her person had charmed him, there was
nothing left for her to gain upon him by. After some Months Treaty, one of the
Counts Palatine of the Rhine, with other Ambassadors from the Duke of Saxony,
and her Brother the Duke of Cleves, (for her Father was lately dead,) came
over, and concluded the Match.

In the end of December, she was brought over to England: Who comes over to
England.
And the King, being impatient to see her, went down Incognito to Rochester.
But when he had a sight of her, finding none of these charms which he was made
believe were in her, he was so extremely surprised, that he not only did not
like her, but took an Aversion to her, which he could never after overcome. He
swore they had brought over a Flanders Mare to him, and was very sorry he had
gone so far, but glad it had proceeded no further. And presently he resolved,
But is much disliked by the King.
if it were possible, to break off the matter, and never to yoke himself with
her. But his Affairs were not then in such a condition, that he could safely
put that affront on the Dukes of Saxony and Cleves which the sending back of
this Lady would have done. For the Germans, being of all Nations most sensible
of every thing in which the Honor of their Family is touched; he knew they
would resent such an Injury. And it was not safe for him to Adventure that at
such a time. 1539.
For the Emperor was then in Paris, whither he had gone to an Enterview with
Francis. And his Reception was not only as Magnificent as could be, but there
was all the Evidence possible of hearty Friendship and kindness. The King also
understood, that between them there was somewhat projected against himself. And
now Francis that had been as much obliged by him, as possibly one Prince could
be by another; was not only forgetful of it, but intended to take advantage
from the distractions and discontents of the English, to drive them out of
France, if it were possible. And it is not to be doubted but the Emperor would
gladly have embroyled these two Kings, that he might have a better opportunity
both to make himself Master of Germany; and to force the King of England into
an Alliance, by which the Lady Mary should be Legitimated, and the Princes of
Germany be left destitute of a Support, which made them Insolent and
Intractable. The King apprehended the Conjunction of those two great Princes
against himself, which was much set forward by the Pope; and that they would
set up the King of Scotland against him, who with that foreign Assistance, and
the discontents at home, would have made War upon great advantages; especially
those in the North of England, being ill affected to him: And therefore he
judged it necessary for his Affairs not to lose the Princes of Germany. Only he
resolved, first, to try if any Nullities or Pre-contracts could excuse him
fairly at their hands. He returned to Greenwich very Melancholy. He much blamed
the Earl of Southampton, who being sent over to receive her at Callice, had
written an high Commendation of her Beauty. But he excused himself, that he
thought the thing was so far gone, that it was decent to write as he had done.
The King lamented his condition in that Marriage; and expressed great trouble,
both to the Lord Russel, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Anthony Denny, and others about
him. The last of those told him, this was one Advantage that mean persons had
over Princes: That great Princes must take such Wives as are brought them,
whereas meaner persons go and choose Wives for themselves. But when the King saw
Cromwell, he gave his grief a freer vent to him. He, finding the King so much
Troubled, would have cast the chief blame on the Earl of Southampton, for whom
he had no great kindness: And said, when he found her so far short of what
reports and Pictures had made her, he should have stayed her at Callice, till
he had given the King notice of it. But the Earls Commission being only to
bring her over; he said, It had been too great a presumption in him, to have
interposed in such a manner. And the King was convinced he was in the right. So
now, all they had to insist on, was the clearing of that Contract that had
passed between her and the Marquess of Lorain: which the Ambassadors, who had
been with the King, had undertaken should be fully done, and brought over with
her in due form of Law. So after the Lady was brought in great State to
Greenwich, the Council met, and sent for the Ambassadors of the Duke of Cleves
that conducted her over; and desired to see what they had brought for clearing
the breach of that Contract with the Marquess of Lorrain. But they had brought
nothing, and made no account of it; saying, that the Contract was in their
Minority, when they could give no consent; and that nothing had followed on it,
after they came to be of Age. But this did not satisfy the Kings Council, who
said, these were but their words, and they must see better proofs. The Kings
Marriage was Annulled with Anne Boleyn upon a pre-contract; therefore he must
not again run the like hazard. So Olisleger and Hog^sden, the Ambassadors from
Cleve, did by a formal Instrument Protest before Cromwell, that in a peace made
between their late Master John Duke of Cleve, and Anthony Duke of Lorrain, one
of the conditions was, that this Lady being then under Age, should be given in
Marriage to Francis Son to the Duke of Lorrain, who was likewise under Age;
which Treaty they affirmed they saw and read. But that afterward Henry de
Groffe Ambassador of Charles Duke of Gueldres, upon whose mediation that peace
had been concluded, declared in their hearing, that the Espousals were Annulled
and of no effect; and that this was Registered in the Chancery of Cl^ve, of
which they promised to bring an Authentical Extract within three Months to
England. Some of the Counselors, who knew the Kings secret dislike of her
person, would have insisted more on this. But the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Bishop of Duresm, said, if there was no more than that, it could be no just
hindrance to the Solemnization of the Marriage. So the King seeing there was no
remedy, and being much pressed both by the Ministers of Cleve, 1540.
and by the Lord Cromwell, Married her on the 6th of January: But expressed so
much aversion and dislike of her, But yet Marries her.
that every body about him took notice of it. Next day the Lord Cromwell asked
him how he liked her then. He told him, He was not every man; therefore he
would be free with him: He liked her worse than he did. He suspected she was no
Maid; and had such ill smells about her, that he loathed her more than ever,
and did not believe he should ever consummate the Marriage. This was sad news
to Cromwell, who knew well how delicate the King was in these matters; And could
never love her.
and that so great a Misfortune must needs turn very heavy on him, that was the
chief Promoter of it. He knew his Enemies would draw great advantages from
this; and understood the Kings temper too well, to think his Greatness would
last long, if he could not induce the King to like the Queen better. But that
was not to be done; for though the King lived five Months with her in that
State, and very often lay in the Bed with her, yet his Aversion rather increased
than abated. She seemed not much concerned at it: and, as their Conversation
was not great, so she was of an heavy Composition, and was not much displeased,
to be delivered from a Marriage in which she had so little satisfaction. Yet
one thing shows that she wanted not Capacity. For she learned the English
Language very soon: and before her Marriage was Annulled, she spoke English
freely, as appears by some of the Depositions.

There was an Instrument brought over from Cleve, taken out of the Chancery
there; by which it appeared, That Henry de Groffe, Ambassador from the Duke of
Gueldres, had on the 15th of February in the year 1535. declared the Nullity of
the former Contract, in express words, which are set down in high Dutch, but
thus put in Latin. Sponsalia illa progressum suum non habitura (I will not
answer for the Latin,) ex quo dictus Dux Carolus admodum doleret, and
propterea quaedam fecisset, and amplius facturus esset. And Pallandus, that was
Ambassador from the Duke of Cleves in the Duke of Guelders Court, wrote to his
Master, Illustrissimum Ducem Gueldriae certo scire prima illa Sponsalia inter
Domicellam Annam fore inania and progressum suum non habitura. When this was
showed the King, his Council found great exceptions to it, upon the Ambiguity
of the word Sponsalia; it not being expressed, whether they were Espousals by
the words of the present, or of the future tense; and intended to make use of
that when there should be a fit opportunity for it.

A Parliament called.
On the 12th of April a Session of Parliament was held. The Journal shows that
neither the Abbot of Westminster, nor any other Abbot was present. After the
Lord Chancellor had opened the reasons for the Kings meeting them at that time,
as they related to the Civil Government, Cromwell as Lord Vicegerent spoke next
in the Kings name; and said, There was nothing which the King so much desired,
Where Cromwell speaks as Lord vicegerent.
as a firm union among all his Subjects, in which he placed his chief security.
He knew there were many Incendiaries, and much Cockle grew up with the Wheat.
The rashness and licentiousness of some, and the inveterate Superstition and
stiffness of others in the Ancient Corruptions, had raised great dissensions to
the sad regret of all good Christians. Some were called Papists, others
Heretics; which bitterness of Spirit seemed the more strange, since now the
Holy Scriptures, by the Kings great care of his people, were in all their
hands, in a Language which they understood. But these were grossly perverted by
both sides, who studied rather to justify their passions out of them, than to
direct their belief by them. The King leaned neither to the right nor to the
left hand, neither to the one nor the other Party, but set the pure and sincere
Doctrine of the Christian Faith only before his eyes: And therefore was now
resolved to have this set forth to his Subjects, without any corrupt mixtures;
and to have such decent Ceremonies continued, and the true use of them taught,
by which all abuses might be cut off, and Disputes about the Exposition of the
Scriptures cease, that so all his Subjects might be well instructed in their
Faith, and directed in the reverent worship of God; and resolved to punish
severely all transgressors, of what sort or side soever they* were. The King
was resolved, That Christ, That the Gospel of Christ, and the truth should have
the victory. And therefore had appointed some Bishops and Divines to draw up an
Exposition of those things that were necessary for the Institution of a
Christian-man: Who were, the two Archbishops, the Bishop of London, Duresm,
Winchester, Rochester, Hereford, and St. David's; and Doctors Thirleby,
Robertson, Cox, Day, Oglethorp, Redmayn, Edgeworth, Crayford, Symonds, Robins,
and Tresham. He had also appointed others to examine what Ceremonies should be
retained, and what was the true use of them; who were the Bishops of Bath and
Wells, Ely, Sarum, Chichester, Worcester, and Landaff. The King had also
commanded the Judges, and other Justices of the Peace, and persons commissioned
for the Execution of the Act formerly passed, to proceed against all
transgressors, and punish them according to Law. 1540.
And he Concluded with an high Commendation of the King, whose due praises, he
said, a man of far greater Eloquence than himself was, could not fully set
forth. The Lords approved of this Nomination, and ordered that these Committees
should sit constantly, on Mundays, Wedensdays, and Fridays: and no other days
they were to sit in the afternoon. But their Proceedings will require so full a
Relation, that I shall first open the other Affairs that passed in this
Session, and leave these to the last.

On the 14th of April the King created Cromwell Earl of Essex; He is made Earl
of Essex*
the Male line of the Bourchiers, that had carried that Title, being
extinguished. This shows that the true Causes of Cromwels fall must be found in
some other thing, than his making up the Kings Marriage: who had never thus
raised his Title, if he had intended so soon to pull him down.

On the 22d of April, a Bill was brought in for Suppressing the Knights of St.
John of Jerusalem. The Suppression of the Knights of St. John at Jerusalem.
Their first Foundation was to be a Guard to the Pilgrims that went to the Holy
Land. For some Ages that was extolled as the highest expression of devotion and
reverence to our Savior, to go and view the places of his abode; and chiefly
the places where he was Crucified, Buried, and ascended to Heaven. Upon which,
many entered into a Religious Knighthood, who were to defend the Holy Land, and
conduct the Pilgrims. Those were of two sorts; The Knights-Templars and
Hospitallers. The former were the greater and richer, but the other were also
very considerable. The Popes and their Clergy did everywhere animate all
Princes, and great persons, to undertake expeditions into these parts: Which
were very costly and dangerous, and proved fatal to almost all the Princes that
made them. Yet the belief of the pains of Purgatory, from which all were
delivered by the Popes Power, who went on this Expedition; such as dyed in it
being also reckoned Martyrs; wrought wonderfully on a blind and Superstitious
Age. But such as could not go, were persuaded, That if on their deathbeds they
vowed to go upon their recovery, and left some Lands to maintain a Knight that
should go thither and fight against the Infidels, it would do as well. Upon
this, great and vast Endowments were made. But there were many Complaints made
of the Templars, for betraying and robbing the Pilgrims, and other horrid
abuses, which may reasonably be believed to have been true; though other
Writers of that Age lay the blame rather on the Covetousness of the King of
France, and the Popes malice to them: Yet in a General Council the whole Order
was Condemned, and Suppressed, and such of them as could be taken, were cruelly
put to death. The Order of the Hospitallers stood, yet did not grow much after
that. They were beaten out of the Holy Land by the Sultans, and lately out of
the Isle of Rhodes, and were at this time in Malta. Their great Master depended
on the Pope and the Emperor: so it was not thought fit, to let a House that was
subject to a Foreign Power stand longer. And it seems they would not willingly
Surrender up their House, as others had done. Therefore it was necessary to
force them out of it by an Act of Parliament; which on the 22d of April was
read the first time, and on the 26th the 2d time, and on the 29th the third
time; by which both their House in England, and another they had in Kilmainam
in Ireland, were suppressed, great pensions being reserved by the Act to the
Priors, a 1000 lib. to him of St. John's near London, and 500 Marks to the
other, with very considerable allowances for the Knights, which in all amounted
near to 3000 lib. yearly. But on the 14th of May the Parliament was Prorogued
to the 25th, and a vote passed that their Bills should remain in the State they
were in.

Upon their next m^eting, as they were going on in their business, a great
Change of Court broke out. For on the 13th of June, at the Council Table, the
Duke of Norfolk in the Kings name challenged the Lord Cromwell of high Treason,
Cromwel^ (...).
and Arresting him, sent him Prisoner to the Tower. He had many Enemies among
all sorts of persons. The Nobility despised him, and thought it lessened the
greatness of their Titles, to see the Son of a Blacksmith raised so many
degrees above them. His aspiring to the Order of the Garter was thought
inexcusable vanity: and his having so many places heaped on him, as Lord Privy
Seal, Lord Chamberlain of England, and Lord Vicegerent, with the Mastership of
the Rolls, with which he had but lately parted, drew much envy on him. All the
Popish party hated him out of measure. The Suppression of the Abbeys was laid
wholly at his door: The Attaindors and all other severe proceedings were
imputed to his Counsels. He was also thought to be the person that had kept the
King and the Emperor at such distance: And therefore the Duke of Norfolk, and
Gardener, beside private Animosities, hated him on that account. And they did
not think it impossible, if he were out of the way, to bring on a Treaty with
the Emperor; which they hoped would open the way for one with the Pope. But
other more secret reasons wrought his ruin with the King. The fear he was in of
a Conjunction between the Emperor and France did now abate: For he understood
that it went no further than Complements. And though he clearly discovered,
having sent over the Duke of Norfolk to Francis, that he was not to depend much
on his friendship; yet at the same time he knew that the Emperor would not
yield up the Duchy of Milan to him, upon which his heart was much set. So he
saw they could come to no agreement. Therefore he made no great account of the
loss of France, since he knew the Emperor would willingly make an Alliance with
him: The hopes of which made him more indifferent, whether the German Princes
were pleased with what he did, or not: since he had now attained the end he had
proposed to himself in all his Negotiations with them, which was to secure
himself from any trouble the Emperor might give him. Therefore Cromwels
Counsels were now disliked, for he had always inclined the King to favor those
Princes against the Emperor. Another secret cause was, that as the King had an
unconquerable aversion to his Queen; so he was taken with the Beauty and
behavior of Mistress Katharine Howard Daughter to the Lord Edmond Howard, The
King in love with Mistress Katharine Howard.
a Brother of the Duke of Norfolks. And as this designed Match raised the
credit of her Uncle, so the ill consequences of the former drew him down who
had been the chief Counselor in it. The King also found his Government was
grown uneasy, and therefore judged it was no ill Policy to cast over all that
had been done amiss, upon a Minister who had great Power with him: 1539.
and being now in disgrace, all the blame of these things would be taken off
from the King, and laid on him, and his Ruin would much appease discontents,
and make them more moderate in censuring the King or his Proceedings. It is
said that other Particulars were charged on him, which lost him the Kings
favor. If this be true, it is like they related to the encouragement he was
said to have given to some Reformers, in the opposition they made to the six
Articles: Upon the Execution of which the King was now much set. His fall was
so secretly carried, that though he had often before looked for it, knowing the
Kings uneasy and jealous temper; yet at that time he had no apprehensions of
it, till the Storm broke upon him. In his fall he had the common fate of all
disgraced Ministers, to be forsaken by his Friends, and insulted over by his
Enemies. Only Cranmer retained still so much of his former simplicity, that he
could never learn these Court Arts. Cranmers friendship to Cromwell.
Therefore he wrote to the King about him next day, He much magnified his
diligence in the Kings service and preservation, and discovering all Plots as
soon as they were made: That he had always loved the King above all things, and
served him with great fidelity and success: That he thought no King of England
had ever such a servant; upon that account he had loved him, as one that loved
the King above all others. But if he was a Traitor, he was glad it was
discovered. But he prayed God earnestly, to send the King such a Councellor in
his stead, who could and would serve him as he had done. This shows, both the
firmness of Cranmers friendship to him, and that he had a great Soul, not
turned by the changes of men's fortunes, to like or dislike them, as they stood
or declined from their greatness. And had not the Kings kindness for Cranmer
been deeply rooted, this Letter had ruined him. For he was the most impatient
of Contradiction, in such cases, that could be. Cromwels ruin was now Decreed,
and he who had so servily complied with the Kings pleasure in procuring some to
be Attainted the year before, without being brought to make their answer, fell
now under the same severity. For whether it was that his Enemies knew, That if
he were brought to the Bar he would so justify himself that they would find
great difficulties in the Process; or whether it was that they blindly resolved
to follow that injustifiable Precedent, of passing over so necessary a Rule to
all Courts, of giving the Party accused an hearing; the Bill of Attaindor was
brought in to the House of Lords, Cranmer being absent that day, as appears by
the Journal on the 17th of June, and read the first time, and on the 19th was
read the second and third time, and sent down to the Commons. By which it
appears, how few friends he had in that House, when a Bill of that nature went
on so hastily. But it seems he found in the House of Commons somewhat of the
same measure, which ten years before he had dealt to the Cardinal, though not
with the same success. For his matter stuck ten days there. At length a new
Bill of Attaindor was brought up, conceived in the House of Commons, with a
Proviso annexed to it. They also sent back the Bill which the Lords sent to
them. But it is not clear from the Journals what they meant by these two Bills.
It seems they rejected the Lords Bill, and yet sent it up with their own,
either in respect to the Lords, or that they left it to their choice, which of
the two Bills they would offer to the Royal Assent. But though this be an
unparliamentary way of proceeding, I know no other sense which the words of the
Journal can bear, which I shall set down in the Margent, Journal Proc^^. Parag.
58. Item Billa attinc^^rae T^^me Cromwell Comitis Essex de crimine Herisis and
Laesae Majestatis, per Communes de novo concepta, and All^nsa, and (...) cum
pra^isione eidem annexa. Quae quidem Billa 1o, 2do, and 3^io, lecta est; and
provisio ejusdem concernens D^canatum Wellensem ^er lecta est, and communi
omnium Proc^rum consensu nemine discrepante expedita; and simul cum ea
referebatur Billa Atti^cturae quae prius missa erat in Do^^^ Communium.
that the Reader may Judge better concerning it. * And that very day the King
assented to it, as appears by the Letter written the next day by Cromwell to the
King.

The Act said, that the King having raised Thomas Cromwell from a base degree,
Cromwels attaindor.
to great Dignities and high Trusts, yet he had now by a great number of
Witnesses, persons of honor, found him to be the most Corrupt Traitor,
Collect. Numb. 16.
and deceiver of the King and the Crown, that had ever been known in his whole
Reign. He had taken upon him to set at liberty diverse persons put in Prison for
misprision of Treason, and others that were suspected of it. He had also
received several bribes, and for them granted Licenses to carry Money, Corn,
Horses, and other things out of the Kingdom, contrary to the Kings
Proclamations. He had also given out many Commissions without the Kings
knowledge; and being but of a base Birth, had said, That he was sure of the
King. He had granted many Passports, both to the Kings Subjects and Foreigners
for passing the Seas, without search. He being also an Heretic, had dispersed
many Erroneous Books among the Kings Subjects, particularly some that were
contrary to the Belief of the Sacrament. And when some had informed him of
this, and had showed him these Heresies in Books Printed in England, he said,
they were good, and that he found no fault in them; and said, It was as Lawful
for every Christian man to be the Minister of that Sacrament as a Priest. And
whereas the King had constituted him Vicegerent for the Spiritual affairs of
the Church, he had under the Seal of that office licensed many that were
suspected of Heresy to Preach over the Kingdom; and he had both by word and in
writing suggested to several Sheriffs, That it was the Kings pleasure they
should discharge many Prisoners, of whom some were Indicted, others apprehended
for Heresy. And when many particular complaints were brought to him of
detestable Heresies, with the names of the offenders; he not only defended the
Heretics, but severely checked the Informers: and vexed some of them by
Imprisonment, and other ways. The particulars of all which were too tedious to
be recited. And he having entertained many of the Kings Subjects about himself,
whom he had infected with Heresy, and imagining he was by force able to defend
his Treasons and Heresies; on the last of March in the 30th year of the Kings
Reign, in the Parish of St. Peter's the poor in London, when some of them
complained to him of the new Preachers, such as Barnes and others, he said;
Their Preaching was good; and said also among other things, That if the King
would turn from it, yet he would not turn: And if the King did turn, and VERA
EFFIGIES THOMAE CROMWELL ESSEXIAE COMITIS EQVES PERISCELIS
H. Holbe^n pinxit. R. White sculpsit.

Natus 1490 Regis vicarius Generalis 1536 Eques Periscelis 1537. Capite
truncatus July 18th 1540.

Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St Paul's Church yard

all his people with him, he would fight in the Fi^l^ in his own person, with
his Sword in his hand against him, and all others: And then he pulled out his
Dagger, and held it up, and said, or else this Dagger thrust me to the heart,
if I would not die in that quarrel against them all; and I trust if I live one
year or two, it shall not be in the Kings Power to resist, or let it, if he
would: and swearing a great Oath, said, I would do so indeed. He had also by
Oppression and Bribery made a great Estate to himself; and extorted much Money
from the Kings Subjects, and being greatly enriched, had treated the Nobility
with much contempt. And on the last of January in the 31th year of the Kings
Reign, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, when some had put him in
mind to what the King had raised him, he said, If the Lords would handle him
so, he would give them such a Breakfast as was never made in England, and that
the proudest of them should know it. For all which Treasons and Heresies, he
was Attainted to suffer the pains of death, for Heresy and Treason, as should
please the King, and to forfeit all his Estate and goods to the Kings use, that
he had on the last of March in the 31st year of the Kings Reign, or since that
time. There was added to this Bill, a Proviso; That this should not be hurtful
to the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and to the Dean and Chapte^ of Wells; with
whom, it seems, he had made some exchanges of Lands.

From these particulars the Reader will clearly see, Censures past upon it.
why he was not brought to make his answer, most of them relating to Orders and
Directions he had given, for which it is very probable he had the Kings
Warrant. And for the matter of Heresy, it has appeared how far the King had
proceeded toward a Reformation, so that what he did that way, was most likely
done by the Kings Order: But the King now falling from these things, it was
thought they intended to stifle him by such an Attaindor; that he might not
discover the secret Orders or directions given him for his own Justification.
For the particulars of Bribery and Extortion, they being mentioned in general
expressions, seem only cast into the heap to defame him. But for those
Treasonable words, it was generally thought that they were a Contrivance of his
Enemies: since it seemed a thing very extravagant, for a Favorite in the
height of his Greatness to talk so rudely. And if he had been guilty of it,
Bedlam was thought a fitter place for his Restraint than the Tower. Nor was it
judged likely that he having such great and watchful Enemies at Court, any such
discourses could have layn so long secret: Or if they had come to the Kings
knowledge, he was not a Prince of such a temper as to have forgiven, much less
employed and advanced a man after such discourses. And to think that during
these fifteen months, after the words were said to have been spoken, none would
have had the zeal for the King, or the malice to Cromwell, as to repeat them,
were things that could not be believed. The formality of drawing his Dagger
made it the more suspected; for this was to affix an Overt Act to these words,
which in the opinion of many Lawyers was necessary to make words Treasonable.
But as if these words had not been ill enough, some writers since have made
them worse; as if he had said, He would thrust his Dagger in the Kings heart:
About which Fuller has made another story to excuse these words, as if they
had not been meant of the King, but of another. But all that is founded on a
mistake, which, if he had looked in the Record, he had corrected.

The King designs a divorce from his Queen.
Cromwels Fall was the first step toward the Kings Divorce. For on the 24th of
June he sent his Queen to Richmond, pretending the Country air would agree
better with her. But on the 6th of July a motion was made, and assented to in
the House of Lords, that they should make an address to the King, desiring him
to suffer his Marriage with the Queen to be tried. Upon which, the Lord
Chancellor, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk,
the Earl of Southampton, and the Bishop of Duresm, were sent down to the
Commons; to represent the matter to them, and to desire their concurrence in
the Address. To which they agreed, and ordered twenty of their number to go
along with the Peers. So the whole House of Lords with these Commoners, went to
the King; and told him they had a matter of great consequence to propose to
him, but it was of that Importance that they first begged his leave to move it.
That being obtained, they desired the King would order a Trial to be made, of
the validity of his Marriage. To which the King consented, and made a deep
Protestation as in the presence of God, that he should conceal nothing that
related to it, and all its circumstances; And that there was nothing he held
dearer than the Glory of God, the good of the Commonwealth, and the
declaration of truth. So a Commission was issued out to the Convocation to try
it.

It Is referred to the convocation.
On the 7th of July it was brought before the Convocation, of which the Reader
will see a fuller account in the Collection at the end than is needful to be
brought in here. The case was opened by the Bishop of Winchester, and a
Committee was appointed to consider it; and they deputed the Bishop of Duresm,
and Winchester, and Thirleby, and Richard Leighton Dean of York, to examine the
witnesses that day. And the next day they received the Kings own Deposition;
with a long Declaration of the whole matter, Collect. Numb. 17. Collect. Numb.
18.
under Cromwels hand in a Letter to the King; and the Depositions of most of
the Privy Counselors, of the Earl of Southampton, the Lord Russel then
Admiral, of Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Anthony Denny, Doctor Chambers, and Doctor
Butts, the Kings Physicians, and of some Ladies that had talked with the Queen.
All which amounted to this; that the King expected that the Precontract with
the Marquess of Lorrain, Reasons pretended for it.
should have been more fully cleared. That the King always disliked her, and
Married her full sore against his heart; and since that time he had never
consummated the Marriage. So the substance of the whole evidence being
considered, it amounted to these three Particulars. First, That there had been
a Contract between the Marquess of Lorrain and the Queen, which was not
sufficiently cleared: for it did not yet appear whether these Espousals were
made by the Parties themselves, or in the words of the present tense. Then it
was said, That the King having Married her against his will, he had not given a
pure, inward, and complete consent: And since a man's Act is only what is
inward, extorted or forced promises do not bind. And Thirdly, That he had never
consummated the Marriage. To which was added the great interest the whole
Nation had in the Kings having more issue, which they saw he could never have
by the Queen. 1540.
This was furiously driven on by the Popish Party. And Cranmer, whether
overcome with these arguments, or rather with fear, for he knew it was
contrived to send him quickly after Cromwell, consented with the rest.
Convocation agreed to it. Collect. Numb. 19.
So that the whole Convocation without one disagreeing Vote, Judged the
marriage null, and of no force: and that both the King, and the Lady, were free
from the bond of it.

This was the greatest piece of Compliance that ever the King had from the
Clergy. It is censured.
For as they all knew there was nothing of weight in that praecontract; so they
laid down a most pernicious Precedent, for invalidating all public Treaties
and Agreements: since if one of the Parties being unwilling to it, so that his
consent were not inward, he was not bound by it, there was no safety among men
more. For no man can know whether another consents inwardly: And when a man
does any thing with great aversion, to infer from thence, that he does not
inwardly consent, may furnish every one with an excuse, to break loose from all
engagements: For he may pretend he did it unwillingly, and get his friends to
declare that he privately signified that to them. And for that argument, which
was taken from the want of Consummation; they had forgotten what was pleaded on
the Kings behalf 10 years before, That consent without Consummation, made a
Marriage complete; by which they concluded, that though Prince Arthur had not
Consummated his Marriage with Queen Katherine; yet his consent did so complete
it, that the King could not afterward lawfully marry her. But as the King was
resolved on any terms, to be rid of this Queen; so the Clergy were also
resolved not to incur his displeasure: In which they rather sought for reasons
to give some color to their Sentence, than past their judgment upon the
strength of them. This only can be said for their excuse, that these were as
just and weighty reasons, as used to be admitted by the Court of Rome for a
Divorce; and most of them being Canonists, and knowing how many Precedents
there were to be found for such Divorces, they thought they might do it as well
as the Popes had formerly done.

On the 9th of July, Sentence was given: Which was signed by both Houses of
Convocation, and had the two Archbishops Seals put to it; of which whole Trial
the Record does yet remain, having escaped the Fate of the other Books of
Convocation. The Original depositions are also yet extant.

Only I shall add here a reflection upon Cromwels misfortune, which may justly
abate the loftiness of haughty men. The day after he was attainted, being
required to send to the King a full account under his hand of the business of
his Marriage; which Account he sent, Collect. Numb. 17.
as will be found in the Collection; he Concludes it with these abject words: I
a most woeful Prisoner, ready to take the death, when it shall please God and
your Majesty: and yet the frail flesh inciteth me continually to call to your
Grace for Mercy, and Grace for mine offenses. And thus Christ save, preserve,
and keep you. Written at the Tower this Wednesday the last of June, with the
heavy heart, and trembling hand, of your Highness most heavy, and most
miserable Prisoner, and poor slave, Thomas Cromwell. And a little below that,
1529.
Most Gracious Prince, I cry for Mercy, Mercy, Mercy.

On the 10th of July the Archbishop of Canterbury reported to the House of
Lords, Report made to the Parl.
That the Convocation had judged the Marriage Null, both by the Law of God, and
the Law of the Land. The Bishop of Winchester delivered the Judgment in
Writing; which being read, he enlarged on all the reasons of it. This satisfied
the Lords, and they sent down Cranmer and him to the Commons, to give them the
same account. Next day the King sent the Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolk,
the Earl of Southampton, and the Bishop of Winchester, to let the Queen know
what was done: who was not at all troubled at it, and seemed not ill pleased.
They told her, that the King would by Letters Patents Declare her his Adopted
Sister, and give her precedence before all the Ladies of England, next his
Queen and Daughters: and assign her an Estate of 3000 lib. a year; and that she
had her choice either to live in England, The Queen consents to it.
or to return home again. She accepted the offer and under her hand declared
her consent and approbation of the Sentence; and chose to live still in
England* where she was in great honor, rather than return under that disgrace
to her own Country. She was also desired to write to her Brother, and let him
know, that she approved of what was done in her matter, and that the King used
her as a Father, or a Brother; and therefore to desire him and her other
friends not to take this matter ill, or lessen their friendship to the King.
She had no mind to do that, but said, it would be time enough when her Brother
wrote to her, to send him such an answer. But it was answered, That much
depended on the first Impressions that are received of any matter. She in
conclusion said, she would obey the King in every thing he desired her to do.
Collect. Numb. 20.
So she wrote the Letter as they desired it; and the day following, being the
12th of July, the Bill was brought into the House, for annulling the Marriage,
which went easily through both Houses.

On the 16th of July, a Bill was brought in, for moderating the Statute of the
six Articles in the Clauses that related to the marriage of the Priests, An Act
about the Incontinence of Priests.
or their Incontinency with other Women. On the 17th, it was agreed by the
whole House without a contradictory vote, and sent down to the Commons; who on
the 21th, sent it up again. By it the pains of Death were turned to forfeitures
of their Goods and Chattels, and the rents of their Ecclesiastical promotions,
to the King.

On the 20th of July a Bill was brought in concerning a Declaration of the
Christian Religion, Another about Religion.
and was then read the first, 2d, and 3d, time, and passed without any
opposition, and sent down to the Commons, who agreeing to it, sent it up again
the next day. It contained, that the King as Supreme Head of the Church, was
taking much pains for an Union among all his Subjects in matters of Religion:
and for preventing the further progress of Heresy, had appointed many of the
Bishops and the most learned Divines, to declare the principal Articles of the
Christian Belief, with the Ceremonies, and way of Gods service to be observed.
That therefore a thing of that weight might not be rashly done, or hasted
through, in this Session of Parliament; but be done with that care which was
requisite; 1540.
Therefore it was Enacted, that whatsoever was determined by the Archbishops,
Bishops, and the other Divines, now Commissionated for that effect, or by any
others appointed by the King, or by the whole Clergy of England, and published
by the Kings Authority concerning the Christian Faith, or the Ceremonies of the
Church, should be believed and obeyed by all the Kings Subjects; as well as if
the particulars so set forth had been ennumerated in this Act, any Custom or
Law to the Contrary notwithstanding. To this, a strange Proviso was added,
which destroyed the former Clause; That nothing should be done or determined by
the Authority of this Act, which was contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom. But whether this Proviso was added by the House of Commons, or
originally put into the Bill, does not appear. It was more likely it was put in
at the first by the Kings Council: for these contradictory Clauses raised the
Prerogative higher, and left it in the Judges power to determine which of the
two should be followed; by which all Ecclesiastical matters were to be brought
under Trials at Common Law: for it was one of the great designs, both of the
Ministers and Lawyers at this time, to bring all Ecclesiastical Matters to the
Cognizance of the Secular Judge.

But another Bill passed, which seems a little odd, concerning the
circumstances of that time. That whereas many Marriages had been annulled in
the time of Popery, upon the pretense of Precontracts, or other degrees of
kindred, than those that were prohibited by the Law of God: Therefore, after a
Marriage was consummated, no pretense of any pre-contract, or any degrees of
kindred or alliance, but those mentioned in the Law of God, should be brought
or made use of, to annull it; since these things had been often pretended, only
to dissolve a Marriage, when the parties grew weary of each other, which was
contrary to Gods Law. Therefore it was Enacted that no pretense of precontract,
not consummated, should be made use of to annull a Marriage duly solemnized,
and consummated; and that no degrees of kindred, not mentioned by the Law of
God, should be pleaded to annull a Marriage. This Act gave great occasion of
censuring the Kings former proceedings against Queen Anne Boleyn, since that
which was now condemned had been the pretense for dissolving his Marriage with
her. Others thought the King did it on design to remove that Impediment out of
the way of the Lady Elizabeth's succeeding to the Crown; since that judgment
upon which she was Illegitimated, was now indirectly censured: And that other
branch of the Act, for taking away all prohibitions of Marriages, within any
degrees but those forbidden in Scripture, was to make way for the Kings
Marriage with Katherine Howard, who was Cousin German to Queen Anne Boleyn; for
that was one of the prohibited degrees by the Canon Law.

The Province of Canterbury offered a Subsidy of four shillings in the pound,
of all Ecclesiastical preferments, to be paid in two years, Subsidies granted
by the Clergy,
and in that acknowledgment of the great liberty they enjoyed by being
delivered from the Usurpations of the Bishops of Rome; and in recompenc^ the
great charges of the King had been at, and was still to be at, in building
Havens, Bullwarks, and other Forts, for the defense of his Coasts, and the
security of his Subjects. This was confirmed in Parliament. But that did not
satisfy the King; who had husbanded the money that came in by the sale of
Abbey Lands, so ill, that now he wanted money, and was forced to ask a subsidy
for his Marriage of the Parliament: this was obtained with great difficulty.
For it was said, And Laiety.
That if the King was already in want, after so vast an income, especially
being engaged in no War, there would be no end of his necessities; nor could
it be possible for them to supply them. But it was answered, that the King had
laid out a great Treasure in fortifying the Coast: and though he was then in no
visible War, yet the charge he was at in keeping up the War beyond Sea, was
equal to the expense of a War; and much more to the advantage of his people,
who were kept in peace and plenty. This obtained a Tenth, and four 15ths. After
the passing of all these Bills, and many others that concerned the public,
with several other Bills of Attaindor, of some that favored the Popes
Interests, or Corresponded with Cardinal Pool; which shall be mentioned in
another place, the King sent in a General Pardon, with the Ordinary Exceptions;
and in particular, excepted Cromwell, the Countess of Sarum, with many others,
then in person; Some of them were put in for opposing the Kings Supremacy, and
others for transgressing the Statute of the six Articles; On the 24th of July
the Parliament was dissolved.

Cromwe^s Death.
And now Cromwell, who had been six weeks a Prisoner, was brought to his
Execution. He had used all the endeavors he could for his own preservation.
Once he wrote to the King in such melting terms, that he made the Letter to be
thrice read, and seemed touched with it. But the charms of Katharine Howard,
and the endeavors of the Duke of Norfolk and the Bishop of Winchester at
length prevailed. So a Warrant was sent to cut off his Head, on the 28th of
July at Tower Hill. When he was brought to the Scaffold, his kindness to his
Son made him very cautious in what he said; he declined the purging of himself,
but said, he was by Law condemned to die, and thanked God for bringing him to
that death, for his offenses. He acknowledged his Sins against God, and his
offenses against his Prince, who had raised him from a base degree. He declared
that he died in the Catholic Faith, not doubting of any Article of Faith, or
of any Sacrament of the Church: and denied that he had been a Supporter of
those who believed ill opinions: He confessed he had been seduced, but now died
in the Catholic Faith, and desired them to pray for the King, and for the
Prince, and for himself: and then prayed very fervently for the remission of
his past sins, and admittance into Eternal Glory: and having given the Sign,
the Executioner cut off his Head very barbarously.

His Character.
Thus fell that great Minister, that was raised merely upon the strength of his
natural parts. For as his Extraction was mean, so his Education was low: All
the learning he had, was, that he had got the New Testament in Latin by heart.
His great wisdom, and dexterity in business, raised him up through several
steps, till he was become as great as a Subject could be. He carried his
greatness with wonderful temper and moderation; and fell under the weight of
popular Odium, rather than Guilt. The disorders in the Suppression of Abbeys
were generally charged on him. Yet when he fell, no Bribery, nor cheating of
the King, could be fastened on him; though such things came out in swarms on a
disgraced Favorite, when there is any ground for them. By what he spoke at his
death, he left it much doubted of what Religion he dyed. But it is certain he
was a Lutheran. The term Catholick-Faith used by him in his last speech seemed
to make it doubtful, but that was then used in England, in its true sense, in
Opposition to the Novelties of the Sea of Rome, as will afterward appear, on
another occasion. So that his Profession of the Catholich-Faith was strangely
perverted, when some from thence Concluded that he dyed in the Communion of the
Church of Rome. But his praying in English, and that only to God through
Christ, without any of these tricks that were used when those of that Church
died, showed he was none of theirs, With him the Office of the Kings
Vicegerent in Ecclesiastical affairs died, as it rose first in his person: and
as all the Clergy opposed the seting up a new Officer, whose Interest should
oblige him to oppose a Reconciliation with Rome, so it seems none were fond to
succeed in an Office, that proved so fatal to him that had first carried it.
The King was said to have lamented his death, after it was too late; but the
fall of the new Queen, that followed not long after, and the miseries which
fell also on the Duke of Norfolk, and his Family, some years after, were looked
on as the Scourges of Heaven, for their cruel prosecution of this unfortunate
Minister.

With his fall, the progress of the Reformation, which had been by his
endeavors so far advanced, was quite stopped. For all that Cranmer could do
after this, was to keep the ground they had gained. But he could never advance
much further. Designs against Cranmer.
And indeed every one expected to see him go next. For, as one Gostwick Knight
for Bedfordshire, had named him in the House of Commons, as the Supporter and
Promoter of all the Heresy that was in England; so the Popish party reckoned
they had but half done their work, by destroying Cromwell; and that it was not
finished till Cranmer followed him. Therefore all possible endeavors were used
to make discoveries of the Encouragement, which, as was believed he gave to the
Preachers of the condemned Doctrines. And it is very probable, that had not the
Incontinence of Katherine Howard (whom the King declared Queen on the 8th of
August,) broken out not long after, he had been Sacrificed the next Session of
Parliament.

But now I return to my proper business, to give an account of Church Matters
for this year; with which these great Changes in Court had so great a Relation,
that the Reader will excuse the digression about them.

Upon Cromwels fall, Gardener, and those that followed him, made no doubt but
they should quickly recover what they had lost of late years. So their greatest
attempt was upon the Translation of the Scriptures. The Convocation Books (as I
have been forced often to lament,) are lost; so that here I cannot stir, but as
Fuller leads me: who assures the World that he Copied out of the Records with
his own Pen what he published. And yet I doubt he has mistaken himself in the
year; and that which he calls the Convocation of this year, was the Convocation
of the year 1542. For he tells us that their 7th Session was the 10th of March.
Now in this year the Convocation did not sit down till the 13th of April, but
that year it sat all March. So likewise he tells us of the Bishops of
Westminster, Gloucester, and Peterborough, bearing a share in this Convocation:
whereas these were not Consecrated before Winter, and could not sit as Bishops
in this Synod. And besides, Thirleby sat at this time in the lower House; as
was formerly shown in the Process about Anne of Cleves Marriage. So that their
attempt against the new Testament belongs to the year 1542.

A Commission sits about Religion.
But they were now much better employed, though not in the way of Convocation.
For a select number of them sat by virtue of a Commission from the King
confirmed in Parliament. Their first work was to draw up a Declaration of the
Christian Doctrine, for the necessary erudition of a Christian man. They
thought that to speak of Faith in general, ought naturally to go before an
Exposition of the Christian Belief; and therefore with that they began.

The Church of Rome, that designed to keep her Children in ignorance, An
Explanation of Faith.
had made no great account of Faith: which they generally taught, consisted
chiefly in an Implicit Believing whatever the Church proposed; without any
explicit knowledge of particulars. So that a Christian Faith, as they had
explained it, was a Submission to the Church. The Reformers finding that this
was the Spring of all their other errors, and that which gave them color and
Authority; did on the other hand set up the strength of their whole Cause on an
Explicit believing the truth of the Scriptures, because of the Authority of
God, who had revealed them. And said, that as the great Subject of the Apostles
Preaching, was Faith, so that which they everywhere taught, was to read and
believe the Scriptures. Upon which followed nice Disputing, what was that
saving Faith by which the Scriptures say we are Justified. They could not say
it was barely crediting the Divine Revelation, since in that sense the Devils
believed. Therefore they generally placed it, at first, in their being assured
that they should be saved by Christ's dying for them. In which, their design was
to make Holiness and all other Graces necessary requisites in the Composition
of Faith; though they would not make them formally parts of it. For since
Christ's death has its full virtue and effect upon none but those who are
regenerate, and live according to his Gospel; none could be assured that he
should be saved by Christ's death, till he first found in himself these
necessary qualifications which are delivered in the Gospel. Having once settled
on this phrase, their followers would needs defend it, but really made it worse
by their Explanations. The Church of Rome thought they had them at great
advantages in it, and called them Solifidians, and said they were against good
works: though whatever unwary expressions some of them threw out, they always
declared good works indispensably necessary to Salvation. But they differed
from the Church of Rome, in two things that were material: There was also a
third, but there the difference was more in the manner of expression. The one
was, what were good works. The Church of Rome had generally delivered, that
works which did an immediate honor to God or his Saints, were more valuable,
than works done to other men: and that the honor they did to Saints in their
Images, and Relics, and to God in his Priests, that were dedicated to him,
were the highest pieces of Holiness: as having the best Objects. This was the
foundation of all that Trade, which brought in both Riches and Glory to their
Church. On the other hand, the Reformers taught that justice and mercy, with
other good works done in obedience to Gods Commandments, were only necessary.
And for these things so much magnified at Rome, they acknowledged there ought
to be a decent splendour in the worship of God: and good provision to be made
for the encouragement of those who dedicated themselves to his Service in the
Church: and that what was beyond these, was the effect of Ignorance and
Superstition. The other main difference was about the Merit of good works:
which the Friars had raised so high, that people were come to think they bought
and sold with Almighty God, for Heaven, and all other his blessings. This the
Reformers judged was the height of Arrogance: And therefore taught that good
works were indeed absolutely necessary to Salvation: but that the purchase of
Heaven was only by the Death and Intercession of Jesus Christ. With these
material differences they joined another that consisted more in words. Whether
Obedience was an essential part of Faith. The Reformers said it certainly
accompanied and followed Faith: but thought not fit to make it an Ingredient in
the nature of Faith. These things had been now much canvassed in disputes: And
it was thought by many, that men of ill lives made no good use of some of the
Expressions of the Reformers, that separated Faith from good works, and came to
persuade themselves, that if they could but attain to a firm assurance, That
they should be saved by Christ, all would be well with them. Therefore now when
they went about to state the true Notion of Faith, Cranmer commanded Doctor
Redmayn, who was esteemed the most learned and judicious Divine of that time,
to write a short Treatise on these Heads: which he did with that solidity and
clearness, that it will sufficiently justify any advantageous Character that
can be given of the Author; and according to the Conclusions of that Treatise
they laid down the nature of Faith, thus: That it stands in two several senses
in Scripture, The one is a persuasion of the truths, both of natural and
revealed Religion, wrought in the mind by Gods holy Spirit: And the other is
such a belief as begets a submission to the will of God, and has Hope, Love,
and Obedience to Gods Commandments joined to it: which was Abraham's Faith, and
that which according to St. Paul wrought by Charity, and was so much commended
in the Epistle to the Hebrews. That this was the Faith which in Baptism is
professed, from which Christians are called the Faithful: And in those
Scriptures where it is said, That we are justified by Faith, they declared, we
may not think that we be justified by Faith, as it is a separate virtue from
Hope and Charity, Fear of God, and Repentance; but by it is meant Faith,
neither only, nor alone, but with the foresaid virtues coupled together;
containing (as is aforesaid) the Obedience to the whole Doctrine and Religion
of Christ. 1539.
But for the Definition of Faith, which some proposed, as if it were a
certainty that one was Predestined, they found nothing of it, either in the
Scriptures, or the Doctors: and thought that could not be known: for though God
never failed in his Promises to men, yet such was the frailty of men, that they
often failed in their promises to God, and so did forfeit their right to the
promises, which are all made upon conditions that depend on us.

Upon this occasion I shall digress a little, to show with what care Cranmer
considered so weighty a point. Cranmers Opinion about it.
Among his other Papers, I find a Collection of a great many places out of the
Scripture, concerning Justification by Faith, together with a vast number of
Quotations, out of Origin, Basil, Jerome, Theodoret, Ambrose, Austin, Prosper,
Chrysostom, Gennadius, Beda, Hesychins, Theophylact, and Oecumenius; together
with many later writers, such as Anselm, Bernard, Peter Lombard, Hugo
Cardinalis, Lyranus, and Bruno; in which the sense of those Authors in this
Point did appear; all drawn out with his own hand. To this is added another
Collection of many places of the Fathers, in which they speak of the merit of
good works: and at the end of the whole Collection he writes these words, This
Proposition that we be justified by Christ only, and not by our good works; is
a very true and necessary Doctrine of St. Paul's, and the other Apostles, taught
by them, to set forth thereby the Glory of Christ, and the Mercy of God through
Christ.And after some further discourse to the same purpose, he concludes,
although all that be justified must of necessity have Charity, as well as
Faith; yet neither Faith nor Charity be the worthiness nor merits of our
Justification: but that is to be ascribed only to our Savior Christ: who was
offered upon the cross for our sins, and rose again for our Justification. This
I set down to let the World see that Cranmer was not at all concerned in those
niceties, which have been so much enquired into since that time, about the
instrumentality of Faith, in Justification; all that he then considered, being
that the glory of it might be ascribed only to the Death and Intercession of
Jesus Christ.

They explain the Apostles Creed.
After this was thus laid down, there followed an Explanation of the Apostles
Creed; full of excellent matters; being a large Paraphrase on every Article of
the Creed, with such serious and practical Inferences, that I must acknowledge,
after all the practical Books we have had, I find great Edification in reading
that over and over again. The Style is strong, nervous, and well-fitted for the
weakest capacities. There is nothing in this that is controverted between the
Papists and the Reformers; except the Definition of the Holy Catholic Church,
which they give thus. That it comprehends all Assemblies of men over the whole
World, that receive the Faith of Christ: who ought to hold an unity of Love,
and Brotherly agreement together, by which they become members of the Catholic
Church. Upon which a long excursion is made, to show the unjustice and
unreasonableness of the plea of the Church of Rome; who place the unity of the
Catholic Church, in a submission to the Bishop of their City; without any
ground from Scripture, or the Ancient writers.

From that they proceeded to Examine the seven Sacraments: 1540.
And here fell in stiff debates, which remain in some Authentic Writings, that
give a great light to their proceedings. The seven Sacraments.
The method which they followed was this. First, the whole business they were
to consider, was divided into so many heads; which were proposed as Queries,
and these were given out to so many Bishops and Divines: And at a prefixed time
every one brought his opinion in writing, upon all the Queries. So concerning
the s^ven Sacraments, the Queries were given out to the two Archbishops, the
Bishops of London, Rochester, and Carlisle, (though the last was not in the
Commission,) And to the Bishops of Duresm, Hereford, and St. David's. With great
maturity.
For though the Bishop of Winch^ster was in this Commission, yet he did nothing
in this particular; but I Imagine that he was gone out of Town, and that the
Bishop of Carlisle was appointed to supply his absence. The Queries were also
given to Doctor Thirleby, then Bishop Elect of Westminster, to Doctor
Robertson, Day, Redmayn, Cox, Leighton, (though not in the Commission)
Symmonds, Tresham, Coren, (though not in the Commission,) Edgeworth, Oglethorp,
Crayford, Wilson, and Robins. When their answers were given in, two were
appointed to compare them, and draw an Extract of the particulars, in which
they agreed or disagreed: which the one did in Latin, and the other in
English; only those who compared them, it seems, doing it for the Archbishop
of Canterbury, took no notice of his Opinions in the Extract they made. And of
these, the Original answers of the two Archbishops, the Bishops of London,
Rochester, and Carlisle, and these Doctors, Day, Robertson, Redmayn, Cox,
Leighton, Symmonds, Tresham, Coren, Edgeworth, and Oglethorp, are yet extant.
But the Papers given in by the Bishops of Duresm, Hereford, and St. David's, and
the Elect of Westminster, and Doctors, Crayford, Wilson, and Robins, though
they are mentioned in the Extracts made out of them, yet are lost. Collect.
Numb. 21.
This the Reader will find in the Collection; which, though it be somewhat
large, yet I thought such pieces were of too great Importance, not to be
communicated to the World; since it is perhaps as great an Evidence of the
ripeness of their proceedings, as can be showed in any Church, or any Age of
it. And though other Papers of this sort do not occur in this Kings Reign; yet
I have reason to conclude from this Instance, that they proceeded with the same
maturity in the rest of their deliberations. In which I am the more confirmed,
because I find another instance like this, in the Reformation that was further
carried on in the succeeding Reign of Edward the 6th; of many Bishops and
Divines giving in their opinions under their hands, upon some heads then
examined and changed. In Cranmers Paper some singular opinions of his about the
nature of Ecclesiastical Offices will be found; but as they are delivered by
him with all possible modesty, so they were not established as the Doctrine of
the Church, but laid aside as particular conceits of his own, and it seems that
afterward he changed his opinion. For he Subscribed the Book that was soon
after set out; which is directly contrary to those opinions set down in these
Papers. Cranmer was for reducing the Sacraments to two, but the Popish party
was then prevalent, so the old number of seven wa^ agreed to.

1539.
Baptism was explained in the same manner that had been done three years before,
in the Articles then set out: only the matter of Original Sin was more enlarged
on.

Secondly, Penance was formally placed in the absolution of the Priest; which
by the former Articles was only declared a thing desirable, and not to be
contemned if it might be had; yet all merit of good works was rejected, though
they were declared necessary: and sinners were taught to depend wholly on the
Sufferings of Christ; with other good directions about Repentance.

Thirdly, In the Explanation of the Eucharist, Transubstantiation was fully
asserted: as also the Concomitancy of the Blood with the Flesh; so that
Communion in both kinds was not necessary. The use of hearing Mass, though one
did not Communicate, was also asserted. To which were added ver^ good Rules
about the disposition of mind that ought to accompany this Sacrament.

Fourthly, Matrimony was said to be Instituted of God, and Sanctified by
Christ: The degrees in the Mosaical Law were declared obligatory, and none
else: and the Bond of Marriage was declared not separable on any account.

Fifthly, Orders were to be administered in the Church, according to the
New Testament: but the particular forms, of Nominating, Electing, Presenting,
or appointing Ecclesiastical Ministers, was left to the Laws of every Country,
to be made by the assent of the Prince. The Office of Churchmen was to Preach,
Administer the Sacraments, to bind and loose, and to pray for the whole Flock:
But they must execute these, with such limitation as was allowed by the Laws of
every Kingdom. The Scripture, they said, made express mention only of the two
Orders of Priests and Deacons. To these the Primitive Church had added some
Inferior degrees, which were also not to be contemned. But no Bishop had any
Authority over other Bishops by the Law of God. Upon which followed a long
Digression, confuting the pretensions of the Bishops of Rome; with an
Explanation of the Kings Authority in Ecclesiastical matters; which was before
hand set down in another place, to show what they understood by the Kings being
Supreme Head of the Church.

Sixthly, Confirmation was said to have been used in the Primitive Church, in
Imitation of the Apostles; who by laying on their hands conferred the
Holy Ghost, in an extraordinary manner. And therefore was of great advantage,
but not necessary to Salvation.

Seventhly, Extream-unction was said to have been derived from the practice of
the Apostles, mentioned by St. James, for the health both of Body, and Soul:
And though the sick person was not always recovered of his bodily sickness by
it, yet remission of sins was obtained by it; and that which God knew to be
best for our bodily condition, to whose will we ought always to submit. But
this Sacrament was only fruitful to those who by penance were restored to the
State of Grace.

Then followed an Explanation of the Ten Commandments, which contains many
good rules of Morality, The ten Commandments.
drawn from every one of them. The 2d Commandment Gardener had a mind to have
shortened, and to cast it into the first. Cranmer was for setting it down as it
was in the Law of Moses. But a temper was found: 1540.
it was placed as a Distinct Commandment, but not at full length; the words,
For I the Lord thy God, etc. being left out, and only those that go before
being set down. In the Explanation of this Commandment, Images were said to be
profitable for putting us in mind of the great blessings we have received by
our Savior, and of the virtues and holiness of the Saints, by which we were to
be stirred up to imitate them: So that they were not to be despised, though we
be forbidden to do any godly honor to them. And therefore the Superstition of
preferring one Image to another, as if they had any special virtue in them, or
the adorning them richly, and making Vows and Pilgrimages to them, is
condemned; yet the Censing of Images, and Kneeling before them, are not
condmned: but the people must be taught, that these things were not to be done
to the Image it self, but to God and his honor. To the third Commandment, they
reduced the Invocation of Gods name for his Gifts. And they condemned the
Invocation of Saints, when such things were prayed for from them, which were
only given by God. This was the giving his Glory to Creatures: yet to pray to
Saints as Intercessors is declared lawful, and according to the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church. Upon the 4th Commandment a Re^t from labor every 7th day is
said to be Ceremonial, and such as only obliged Jews: but the Spiritual
signification of Rest among Christians, was to abstain from Sin, and other
Carnal pleasures. But besides that, we were also bound by this Precept
sometimes to cease from labor, that we may serve and worship God both in
public and private: And that on the days appointed for this purpose, people
ought to examine their lives, the past week, and set to amendment, and give
themselves to prayer, reading, and meditation. Yet in cases of necessity, such
as saving their Corn, or Cattle, men ought not superstitiously to think that it
is a Sin to work on that day; but to do their work without scruple. Then follow
very profitable Expositions of the other Commandments, with many grave and
weighty admonitions concerning the duties by them enjoined, and against those
sins which are too Common in all Ages.

After that, an Explanation of the Lords Prayer was added. The Lords Prayer.
In the preface to which, it is said, that it is meet and requisite that the
unlearned people should make their Prayers in their Mother Tongue; whereby they
may be the more stirred to Devotion, and to mind the things they prayed for.
Then followed an Exposition of the Angels Salutation of the Blessed Virgin: In
which, the whole History of the Incarnation of Christ was opened, and the Ave
Maria explained; which Hymn was chiefly to be used, The Ave Maria.
in Commemoration of Christ's Incarnation, and likewise to set forth the praises
of the Blessed Virgin. The next article is about Free Will, which they say must
be in man, otherwise all Precepts and Exhortations are to no purpose. They
defined it a power of the will, joined with Reason, whereby a reasonable
creature, without constraint, in things of reason, Free Will.
discerns and wills good and evil; but chooses good by the assistance of
Gods grace and evil of it self. This was perfect in the State of Innocence, but
is much impaired by Adams Fall, and now by an especial grace (offered to all
men, but enjoyed only by those who by their free will do accept the same,) it
was restored, that with great watchfulness we may serve God acceptably. And as
many places of Scripture show, That free will is still in man, so there be many
others which show that the grace of God is necessary, that does both prevent
us, and assist us, both to begin, and perform every good work. Therefore all
men ought most gratefully to receive and follow the motions of the Holy Ghost,
and to beg Gods grace with earnest devotion, and a steadfast Faith: which he
will grant to all that so ask it, both because he is naturally good, and he has
promised to grant our desires. For he is not the author of Sin, nor the Cause
of man's Damnation; but this men draw on themselves, who by vice have corrupted
these Natures which God made good. Therefore all Preachers were warned so to
moderate themselves in this high point, that they neither should so preach the
Grace of God as to take away Free Will, nor so extol Free Will, as injury might
be done to the Grace of God.

After this they handled Justification. Having stated the miseries of man by
nature, Justification.
and the guilt of Sin, with the unspeakable goodness of God in sending Christ
to redeem us by his death, who was the Mediator between God and man; They next
show how men are made partakers of the blessings which he has procured.
Justification is the making of us righteous before God, whereby we are
reconciled to him, and made heirs of Eternal life: that by his Grace we may
walk in his ways, and be reputed just and righteous in the day of Judgment, and
so attain Everlasting Happiness. God is the chief cause of our Justification:
yet man prevented by Grace is by his free-consent and obedience a worker toward
the attaining his own Justification. For though it is only procured through the
merits of Christ's death, yet every one must do many things to attain a right
and claim to that which, though it was offered to all, yet was applied but to a
few. We must have a steadfast Faith, true Repentance, real purposes of
amendment; committing Sin no more, but serving God all our lives; which if we
fall from, we must recover it, by Penance, Fasting, Alms, Prayer, with other
good works, and a firm Faith, going forward in mortification and obedience to
the Laws of God: It being certain that men might fall away from their
Justification. All curious reasonings about Predestination were to be set
apart; there being no certainty to he had of our Election, but by feeling the
motions of Gods Spirit in us, by a good and virtuous life, and persevering in
it to the end. Therefore it was to be taught, that as on the one hand we are
justified freely by the free Grace of God, so on the other hand, when it is
said We are justified by Faith, it must be understood of such a Faith, in which
the fear of God, Repentance, Hope, and Charity, be included, all which must be
joined together in our Justification: and though these be imperfect, yet God
accepts of them freely thorough Christ.

Next, good works were explained, which were said to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation. Good Works.
But these were not only outward corporal works, but inward Spiritual works, as
the Love and Fear of God, Patience, Humility, and the like. Nor were they
Superstitions, and men's Inventions, such as those in which Monks and Friars
exercised themselves: nor only moral works done by the power of Natural reason:
but the works of Charity, flowing from a pure heart, a good Conscience, and
Faith unfeigned; which were meritorious toward the attaining of Everlasting
life. Other works were of an Inferior sort; such as Fasting, Almsdeeds, and
other fruits of Penance. And the merit of good works is reconciled with the
freedom of Gods mercies to us, since all our works are done by his Grace; so
that we have no cause of boasting, but must ascribe all to the Grace and
goodness of God. The last Chapter is about Prayers for Souls departed, which is
the same that was formerly set out in the Articles three years before.

All this was finished and set forth this year, All this set forth in a Book,
with a Preface written by those of the Clergy who had been employed in it:
declaring with what care they had examined the Scriptures, and the ancient
Doctors, out of whom they had faithfully gathered this Exposition of the
Christian Faith. To this the King added another Preface some years after, And
published by the Kings Authority.
declaring that although he had cast out the darkness, by setting forth the
Scriptures to his people, which had produced very good effects; yet, as
hypocrisy and superstition were purged away, so a Spirit of presumption,
dissension, and carnal liberty was breaking in. For repressing which he had by
the advice of his Clergy, set forth a Declaration of the true knowledge of God,
for directing all men's belief and practice; which both Houses of Parliament had
seen, and liked very well. So that he verily trusted it contained a true and
sufficient Doctrine, for the attaining everlasting life. Therefore he required
all his people, to read and print in their hearts, the Doctrine of this Book.
He also willed them to remember, that as there were some Teachers, whose Office
it was to instruct the people; so the rest ought to be taught, and to those it
was not necessary to read the Scriptures: and that therefore he had restrained
it from a great many, esteeming it sufficient for such to hear the Doctrine of
the Scriptures taught by their Preachers, which they should lay up in their
hearts, and practice in their lives. Lastly, he desired all his Subjects to
pray to God to grant them the Spirit of Humility, that they might read and
carry in their hearts the Doctrine set forth in this Book. But though I have
joined the account of this Preface, to the Extract here made of the Bishops
Book, yet it was not prefixed to it, till above two years after the other was
set out.

When this was published, It is variously censured.
both parties found cause in it both to be glad and sorrowful. The Reformers
rejoiced to see the Doctrine of the Gospel thus opened more and more; for they
concluded that Ignorance and prejudices, being the chief supports of the
Errors they complained of; the instructing people in Divine Matters, even
though some particulars displeased them, yet would awaken and work upon an
inquisitive humor that was then a-stirring; and they did not doubt but their
Doctrines were so clear, that Inquiries into Religion would do their business.
They were also glad to see the Morals of Christianity so well cleared, which
they hoped would dispose people to a better taste of Divine matters; since they
had observed that purity of Soul does mightily prepare people for sound
opinions. Most of the Superstitious conceits and practices, which had for some
ages embased the Christian Faith, were now removed; and the great fundamental
of Christianity, the Covenant between God and man in Christ, with the
conditions of it, was plainly and sincerely declared. There was also another
principle laid down, that was big with a further Reformation: for every
National Church was declared a complete Body within it self, with power to
reform heresies, correct abuses, and do every thing else that was necessary for
keeping it self pure, or governing its members. By which there was a fair way
opened for a full discussion of things afterward, when a fitter opportunity
should be offered. But on the other hand, the Popish party thought they had
gained much. The seven Sacraments were again asserted, so that here much ground
was recovered, and they hoped more would follow. There were many things laid
down, to which they knew the Reformers would never consent. So that they, who
were resolved to comply with every thing that the King had a mind to, were
pretty safe. But the others, who followed their persuasions and consciences
were brought into many snares; and the Popish party was confident that their
absolute compliance, which was joined with all possible submission and
flattery, would gain the King at length: and the stiffness of others, who would
not give that deference to the Kings judgment and pleasure, would so alienate
him from them, that he would in the end abandon them; for with the Kings years
his uneasiness and peevishness grew mightily on him.

The dissolution of the Kings Marriage with Anne of Cleves, had so offended the
Princes of Germany, that though upon the Ladies account, they made no public
noise of it; yet there was little more intercourse between the King and them,
especially Cromwell falling, that had always carried on the correspondence with
them. And as this intercourse went off, so a secret Treaty was set on foot
between the King and the Emperor: yet it came not to a Conclusion till two
years after.

The other Bishops that were appointed to examine the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, Corrections of the Mass Book and other Offices. Ex M S S. D.D.
Stillingfl^^t.
drew up a Rubric and Rationale of them: which I do not find was printed, but
a very Authentical M S. of a great part of it was is extant. The alterations
they made were inconsiderable, and so slight, that there was no need of
reprinting, either the Missals, Breviaries, or other Offices; for a few rasures
of these Collects in which the Pope was prayed for, of Thomas Beckets Office,
and the Offices of other Saints, whose days were by the Kings Injunctions no
more to be observed, with some other Deletions, made, that the old Books did
still serve. For whether it was, that the Change of the Mass-Books, and other
public Offices, would have been too great a Charge to the Nation; or whether
they thought it would have possessed the people with an opinion that the
Religion was altered, since the Books of the ancient worship were changed;
which remaining the same, they might be the more easily persuaded, that the
Religion was still the same; there was no new impression of the Breviaries,
Missals, and other Rituals, during this Kings Reign. Yet in Queen Mary's time
they took care that Posterity should not know how much was dashed out or
changed. For as all Parishes were required to furnish themselves with new
complete Books of the Offices; so the dashed Books were everywhere brought in,
and destroyed. But it is likely that most of those Scandalous Hymns and
Prayers, which are addressed to Saints in the same style, in which good
Christians worship God, were all struck out; because they were now condemned,
as appears from the Extract of the other Book set out by the Bishops.

But as they went on in these things, the Popish party, whose Counsels were
laid very close, and managed with great dexterity, A Persecution of Protestants.
chiefly by the Duke of Norfolk and Gardin^r, pursued the ruin of those whom
they called Heretics: knowing well that if the King was once set against them,
and they provoked against the Government, he would be not only alienated from
them, but forced, for securing himself against them, to gain the hearts of his
other Subjects by a Conjunction with the Emperor, and by his means with the
Pope. The first on whom this design took effect, were Doctor Barnes, Mr.
Gerard, and Mr. Jerome, all Priests; who had been among the earliest Converts
to Luther's Doctrine. Barnes had in a Sermon at Cambridg, Of Barnes and others.
during the Cardinals greatness, reflected on the Pomp and State in which he
lived, so plainly, that every body understood of whom he meant. So he was
carried up to London; but by the interposition of Gardener and Fox, who were
his friends, he was saved at that time, having abjured some opinions that were
objected to him. But other accusations being afterward brought against him, he
was again Imprisoned, and it was believed that he would have been burnt. But he
made his escape and went to Germany, where he gave himself to the study of the
Scriptures and Divinity. In which he became so considerable, that not only the
German Divines, but their Princes, took great notice of him: and the King of
Denmark sending over Ambass^dors to the King, he was sent with them; though
perhaps Fox was ill informed, when he says he was one of them. Fox Bishop of
Hereford, being at Smalcald in the year 1536. sent him over to England; where
he was received and kindly entertained by Cromwell, and well used by the King.
And by his means the correspondence with the Germans was chiefly kept up. For
he was often sent over to the Courts of the several Princes. But in particular,
he had the misfortune to be first employed in the project of the Kings Marriage
with the Lady Anne of Cleves; for that giving the King so little satisfaction,
all who were the main promoters of it fell in disgrace upon it.

But other things concurred to destroy Barnes. In Lent this year Bonner had
appointed him and Gerrard, and Jerome, turns in the Course of Sermons at St.
Paul's Cross: they being in favor with Cromwell, on whom Bonner depended wholly.
But Gardener sent Bonner word, that he intended himself to preach on Sunday at
St. Paul's Cross: and in his Sermon he treated of Justification, and other
points, with many reflections on the Lutherans. Barnes, when it came to his
Turn, made use of the same Text, but preached contrary Doctrine; not without
some unhandsome reflections on Gardiners person; and he played on his name,
alluding to a Gardiners setting ill Plants in a Garden. The other two preached
the same Doctrine, but made no reflections on any person. Gardener seemed to
bear it with a great appearance of neglect and indifferency. But his friends
complained to the King of the unsufferable insolences of these Preachers, who
did not spare so great a Prelate, especially he being a Privy Councellor. So
Barnes was questioned for it, and commanded to go and give the Bishop of
Winchester satisfaction. And the Bishop carried the matter with a great show of
moderation, and acted ou^wardly in it, as became his Function: though it was
believed the matter stuck deeper in his heart, which the effects that followed
seemed to demonstrate. The King concerned himself in the matter, and did argue
with Barnes about the points in difference. But whether he was truly convinced,
or overcome rather with the fear of the King than with the force of his
reasonings; he and his two Friends, William Jerome, and Tho. Gerrard, signed a
paper, Collect. Numb. 22.
(which will be found in the Collection,) in which he acknowledged, That having
been brought before the King, for things preached by him; His Highness, being
assisted by some of the Clergy, had so disputed with him, that he was convinced
of his rashness and oversight: and promised to abstain from such indiscretions
for the future, and to submit to any orders the King should give for what was
past.

The Articles were. First, That though we are Redeemed only by the death of
Christ, in which we participate by Faith and Baptism; yet by not following the
Commandments of Christ we lose the benefits of it, which we cannot recover but
by Penance.

Secondly, That God is not the Author of Sin, or evil, which he only permits.

Thirdly. That we ought to reconcile our selves to our neighbors, and forgive,
before we can be forgiven.

Fourthly, That good works, done sincerely according to the Scriptures, are
profitable and helpful to Salvation.

Fifthly, That Laws made by Christian Rulers ought to be obeyed by their
Subjects, for conscience sake: and that whosoever breaks them breaks Gods
Commandments.

It Is not likely that Barnes could say any thing directly contrary to these
Articles: though having brought much of Luthers heat over with him, he might
have said some things that sounded ill upon these heads. There were other
points in difference between Gardener and him, about Justification; but it
seems the King thought these were of so subtle a nature, that no Article of
Faith was controverted in them: and therefore left the Bishop and him to agree
these among themselves, which they in a great measure did. So the King
commanded Barnes and his friends to preach at the Spittle in the Easter-week,
and openly to recant what they had formerly said. And Barnes was in particular
to ask the Bishop of Winchester's pardon, which he did: and Gardener being
twice desired by him, to give some sign that he forgave him, did lift up his
Finger. But in their Sermons, it was said they justified in one part what they
recanted in another. Of which complaints being brought to the King, he, without
hearing them sent them all to the Tower. And Cromwels interest at Court was
then declining so fast, that either he could not protect them, or else would
not prejudice himself by interposing in a matter which gave the King so great
offense. They lay in the Tower till the Parliament met, and then they were
attained of Heresy, without ever being brought to make their answer. Who were
condemned in Parliament.
And it seems for the Extraordinariness of the thing, they resolved to mix
attaindors for things that were very different from one Another. For four
others were by the same Act attainted of Treason, who were Gregory Buttolph,
Adam Damplip, Edmund Brindholme, and Clement Philpot, for assisting Reginald
Pool, adhering to the Bishop of Rome, denying the King to be the Supreme Head
on earth of the Church of England, and designing to surprise the Town of
Callice. One Derby Gunnings was also attainted of Treason for assisting one
Fitz-Girald a Traitor in Ireland. And after all these, Barnes, Gerard, and
Jerome, are attainted of Heresy, being, as the Act says, Detestable
Heretics, who had conspired together to set forth many Heresies, and taking
themselves to be men of learning, had expounded the Scriptures; perverting them
to their Heresies, the number of which was too long to be repeated; that having
formerly abjured, they were now incorrigible Heretics: and so were condemned
to be burned, or suffer any other death; as should please the King. And two
days after Cromwels death, being the 30th of July, They were brought to
Smithfield, where in their Execution there was as odd a mixture, as had been in
their Attaindors. For Abel Fetherston, and Powel, that were attainted by
another Act of the same Parliament, for owning the Popes Supremacy, and denying
the Kings, were carried to the place of Execution, and coupled with the other
three. So that one of each was put into a Hurdle, and carried together, which
every body condemned as an Extravagant affectation of the show of Impartial
Justice.

When they were brought to the Stake, Their Speeches at the Stake.
Barnes spoke thus to the People. Since he was to be burned as an Heretic, he
would declare what opinions he held. So he enlarged on all the Articles of the
Creed, to show he believed them all. He expressed a particular abhorrence of an
opinion which some Anabaptists held, That the Blessed Virgin was as a Saffron
Bagg; (by which indecent Simile they meant that our Savior took no substance
of her.) He explained his opinion of Good works, that they must of necessity be
done, since without them none should ever enter into the Kingdom of God. They
were commanded of God, to show forth our profession by them: but he believed,
as they were not pure nor perfect, so they did not avail to our Justification,
nor merit any thing at the hands of God; for that was to be ascribed to the
Merits of the Death and Passion of Christ. He professed great Reverence to the
Blessed Virgin and Saints. But said, he saw no warrant in Scriptures for
praying to them: nor was it certain whether they prayed for us or not; but if
the Saints did pray for those on Earth, he trusted within half an hour to be
praying for them all. Then he asked the Sheriff if he had any Articles against
them, for which they were condemned: who answered he had none. He next asked
the people, if they knew wherefore he died, or if they had been led into any
Errors by his Preaching; but none made answer. Then he said, he heard he was
condemned to die by an Act of Parliament; and it seemed it was for Heresy,
since they were to be burnt. He prayed God to forgive those who had been the
occasions of it. And in particular, for the Bishop of Winchester, if he had
sought or procured his death, he prayed God heartily to forgive him, as Christ
forgave his Murderers. He prayed earnestly for the King, and the Prince; and
exhorted the people to pray for them. He said, some had reported that he had
been a Preacher of Sedition and Disobedience: But he declared to the people,
that they were bound by the Law of God, to obey their Kings Laws with all
humility, not only for fear, but for Conscience; adding, that if the King
commanded any thing against Gods Law, though it were in their Power to resist
him, yet they might not do it. Then he desired the Sheriff to carry five
requests from him to the King.

First, That since he had taken the Abbey-Lands into his hands, for which he
did not blame him, (as the Sheriff fancied he was about to do, and thereupon
stopped him,) but was glad that Superstition was taken away; and that the King
was then a complete King, obeyed by all his Subjects, which had been done
through the Preaching of them, and such wretches as they were: yet he wished
the King would bestow these goods, or some of them, to the comfort of his poor
Subjects who had great need of them.

Secondly, That Marriage might be had in greater esteem, and that men might not
upon light pretenses cast off their Wives; and that those who were unmarried,
might not be suffered to live in Whoredom.

Thirdly, That Abominable Swearers might be punished.

Fourthly, That since the King had begun to set forth Christian Religion, he
would go forward in it, and make an end: for though he had done a great deal,
yet many things remained to be done, and he wished that the King might not be
deceived with false Teachers.

The fifth desire he said he had forgot.

Then he begged that they all would forgive him, if at any time he had said or
done evil unadvisedly: and so turned about, and prepared himself for his death.

Jerome spoke next, and declared his Faith upon every Article of the Creed; and
said that he believed all that was in the Holy Scriptures. He also prayed for
the King, and the Prince. And concluded with a very Pathetical Exhortation to
mutual Love and Charity; that they would propose to themselves the pattern of
Christ's wonderful Love, through whom only he hoped to be saved; and desired all
their Prayers for himself and his Brethren. Then Gerard declared his Faith, and
said, That if through ignorance or negligence, he had taught any error, he was
sorry for it; and asked God pardon and them, whom he had thereby offended. But
he protested, that according to his Learning and Knowledge, he had always set
forth the honor of God, and the obedience of the Kings Laws. Then they all
prayed for the pardon of their Sins, and constancy and patience in their
sufferings: And so they embraced and kissed one another, and then the
Executioners tied them to the Stake, and set fire to them.

Their death did rather encourage than dishearten their followers: who seeing
such an extraordinary measure of patience in them, were the more confirmed in
their resolutions of suffering for a good conscience, and for his name, who did
not forsake his Servants in these cruel Agonies. One difference between their
Sufferings, and the other three who were hanged for asserting the Popes
Supremacy, was remarkable; that though the others demeaned themselves toward
them with the most uncharitable and spiteful malice that was possible, (so that
their own Historian says, That their being carried with them to their
Execution was bitterer to them than death it self;) yet they declared their
hearty forgiving of their Enemies, and of Gardener in particular, who was
generally looked on as the person that procured their death: which Imputation
stuck fast to him, though by a Printed Apology he studied to clear himself of
any other concernment in it, than by giving his vote for the Act of their
Attaindor.

Now Bonner began to show his nature. Bonners cruelty
Hitherto he had acted another part. For being most extremely desirous of
Preferment, he had so complied with Cromwell and Cranmer, that they had great
confidence in him; and he being a blustering and forward man, they thought he
might do the Reformation good service, and therefore he was advanced so high by
their means. But as soon as ever Cromwell fell, the very next day he showed his
Ingratitude, and how nimbly he turned with the Wind. For Grafton the Printer,
(whom Cromwell favored much for his Printing the Bible, and who was by that
means very familiar with Bonner,) meeting him, said, he was very sorry for the
news he heard of Cromwels being sent to the Tower. Bonner answered, it had been
good he had been dispatched long ago. So the other shrunk away, perceiving the
change that was in him. And some days after that, Grafton being brought before
the Council, for some Verses which he was believed to have Printed in
commendation of Cromwell, Bonner informed the Council of what Grafton had said
to him upon Cromwels being Arrested, to make the other Charge seem the more
probable. Yet Audley the Chancellor was Graftons friend, and brought him off.
But Bonner gave the City of London quickly cause to apprehend the utmost
severities from him. For many were endicted by his procurement. Yet the King
was loath to give too many Instances of Cruelty, in this declination of his Age,
and therefore by an order from the Star Chamber they were discharged. But upon
what motives I cannot fancy, he picked out an Instance, which, if the deeper
stains of his following life had not dashed all particular spots, had been
sufficient to have blemished him for ever. There was one Richard Mekins a Boy
not above fifteen years of Age, and both Illiterate and very Ignorant, who had
said somewhat against the corporal presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
and in Commendation of Doctor Barnes. Upon this he was Endicted. The words were
proved by two witnesses, and a day was appointed for the Juries to bring in
their verdict. The day being come, the Grand Jury was called for, then the
Foreman said, they had found nothing. This put Bonner in a fury, and he
charged them with Perjury: But they said they could find nothing, for the
witnesses did not agree. The one deposed, That he had said the Sacrament was
nothing but a Ceremony: and the other, That it was nothing but a Signification.
But Bonner still persisted and told them, that he had said That Barnes dyed
Holy. But they could not find these words to be against the Statute. Upon which
Bonner cursed, and was in a great rage, and caused them to go aside again: So
they being overawed, returned and found the Indictment. Then sat the Jury upon
life and death, who found him Guilty: and he was adjudged to be burnt. But when
he was brought to the Stake, he was taught to speak much good of Bonner, and to
condemn all Heretics, and Barnes in particular, saying he had learned Heresy
of him. Thus the Boy was made to die with a lie in his mouth. For Barnes held
not that opinion of the Sacrament's being only a Ceremony or signification, but
was a zealous Lutheran: which appeared very signally on many occasions, chiefly
in Lamberts case. Three others were also burned at Salisbury upon the same
Statute, one of whom was a Priest. Two also were burned at Lincoln in one day.
Besides, a great number of persons were brought in trouble, and kept long in
Prison upon the Statute of the six Articles. But more blood I find not spilt at
this time.

In the end of this year were the new Bishoprics founded. For in December was
the Abbey of Westminster converted into a Bishops See, New Bishoprics ^ounded.
and a Deanery and twelve Prebends, with the Officers for a Cathedral and a
Quire. And in the year following on the 4th of August, the King erected out of
the Monastery of St. Werburg at Chester, a Bishopric, a Deanery, and six
Prebends. In September out, of the Monastery at St. Peter's at Gloucester the
King endowed a Bishopric, a Deanery, and six Prebendaries. And in the same
Month, the Abbey of Peterborough was converted to a Bishops seat, a Deanery, and
six Prebendaries. And to lay this whole matter together, two years after this,
the Abbey of Osney in Oxford was converted into a Bishopric, a Deanery, and six
Prebends. And the Monastery of St. Austins in Bristol was changed into the same
use. There are many other Grants also in the Rolls, both to the Bishops, and
Deans, and Chapters, of these Sees. But these Foundations will be better
understood, by their Charters: of which, since the Bishopric of Westminster is
least known, because long ago suppressed, I have chosen to set down the Charter
of that See; which the Reader will find in the Collection: And they running all
in the same style, one may serve for the rest. Collect. N^mb. 23.
The Substance of the Preamble is, That the King being moved by the Grace of
God, and intending nothing more than that true Religion, and the sincere
worship of God, should not be abolished, but rather restored to the Primitive
sincerity, and reformed from these abuses with which the profession and the
lives of the Monks had so long and so lamentably corrupted Religion; had, as
far as humane Infirmity could foresee, designed that the word of God might be
sincerely Preached, the Sacraments purely administered, good Order kept up, the
Youth well Instructed, and old people relieved, with other public Almsdeeds.
And therefore the King Erected and Endowed these Sees. The day after these
several Grants, there followed a Writ to the Archbishop, containing, that the
King had appointed such a person to be Bishop of that See, Requiring him to
Consecrate and Ordain him in due form. Then the Priories at most Cathedrals,
such as Canterbury, Winchester, Duresm, Worcester, Carliste, Rochester, and
Ely, were also converted into Deanries, and Colleges of Prebends, with many
other Officers, and an allowance of Charity to be yearly distributed to the
poor.

But as all this came far short of what the King had once intended, so Cranmers
Design was quite disappointed. Cranmer's design miscarries.
For he had projected that in every Cathedral there should be provision made
for Readers, of Divinity, and of Greek, and Hebrew, and a great number of
Students to be both exercised in the daily worship of God, and trained up in
Study and Devotion; whom the Bishop might transplant out of this Nursery, into
all the parts of his Diocese. And thus every Bishop should have had a College
of Clergymen under his eye, to be preferred according to their merit: he saw
great disorders among some Prebendaries, and in a long Letter, the Original of
which I have seen, he expressed his regret that ^hese Endowments went in such a
Channel. Yet now his Power was not great at Court, and the other party run down
all his motions. But these who observed things narrowly, judged that a good
mixture of Prebendaries, and of young Clerks bred up about Cathedrals, under
the Bishops eye, and the Conduct and Direction of the Dean and Prebendaries,
had been one of the greatest Blessings that could have befallen the Church:
Which not being sufficiently provided of Houses for the Forming of the minds
and manners of those who are to be received into Orders, has since felt the ill
effects of it very sensibly. Against this, Cranmer had projected a Noble
Remedy, had not the Popish party then at Court, who very well apprehended the
advantages such Nurseries would have given to the Reformation, born down this
Proposition, and turned all the Kings Bounty and Foundations another way.

These new Foundations gave some credit to the Kings proceedings, and made the
Suppression of Chantries and Chapels go on more smoothly. But those of the
Roman party beyond Sea, These Foundations censured.
censured this, as they had done all the rest of the Kings Actings. They said,
it was but a slight Restitution of a small part of the goods, of which he had
robbed the Church. And they complained of the Kings encroaching on the
Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Church, by dismembring Dioceses, and removing
Churches from one Jurisdiction to another. To this it was answered, that the
necessities which their practices put on the King, both to ^ortifie his Coast
and Dominions, to send money be^ond Sea for keeping the War at a distance from
himself, and to secure his quiet at home, by easy grants of these Lands, made
him that he could not do all that he intended. And for the Division of
Dioceses, many things were brought from the Roman Law, to show, That the
Division of the Ecclesiastical ^urisdiction, whether of Patriarchs, Primates,
Metropolitans, or Bishops, was Regulated by the Emperors; of which the Ancient
Councils always approved. And in England, when the Bishopric of Lincoln being
judged of too great an Extent, the Bishopric of Ely was taken out of it, it
was done only by the King, with the consent of his Clergy and Nobles. Pope
Nicolas indeed officiously intruded himself into that matter, by sending
afterward a Confirmation of that which was done. But that was one of the great
Arts of the Papacy, to offer Confirmations of things that were done without the
Popes. For these being easily received by them, that thought of nothing more
than to give the better countenance to their own Acts, the Popes afterward
founded a Right on these Confirmations. 1541.
The very receiving of them was pretended to be an acknowledgment of a Title in
the Pope. And the matter was so artificially managed, that Princes were noozed
into some approbation of such a pretense, before they were aware of it. And
then the Authority of the Canon Law prevailing, Maxims were laid down in it, by
which the most tacit and inconsiderate Acts of Princes, were construed to such
senses, as still advanced the greatness of the Papal pretensions.

This business of the new Foundations being thus settled, the matters of the
Church were now put in a method: and the Bishops Book was the standard of
Religion. So that whatsoever was not agreeable to that, was judged Heretical,
whether it leaned to the one side, or the other. But it seems that the King by
some secret Order had chained up the party, which was going on in the Execution
of the Statute of the six Articles, that they should not proceed capitally.

Thus matters went this year, and with this, the Series of the History of the
Reformation, The State of the Court at this time.
made by this King, ends: for it was now digested and formed into a Body. What
followed was not in a Thread, but now and then some remarkable things were done:
sometimes in favor of the one, and sometimes of the other party. For after
Cromwell fell, the King did not go on so steadily in any thing as he had done
formerly. Cromwell had an Ascendant over him, which after Cardinal Wolseys fall
none besides himself ever had. They knew how to manage the Kings uneasy and
imperious humor: But now none had such a Power over him. The Duke of Norfolk
was rich and brave, and made his Court well, but had not so great a Genius; so
that the King did rather trust and fear, than esteem him. Gardener was only a
Tool, and being of an abject Spirit, was employed, but not at all reverenced by
the King. Cranmer retained always his candor and simplicity, and was a great
Prelate; but neither a good Courtier, nor a Statesman. And the King esteemed
him more for his virtues, than for his dexterity and cunning in business. So
that now the King was left wholly to himself; and being extreme humorous and
impati^nt, there were more errors committed in the last years of his
Government, than had been for his whole Reign before France forsook him,
Scotland made War upon him, which might have been fatal to him, if their King
had not dyed in the beginning of it, leaving an Infant Princess, but a few days
old, behind him. And though the Emperor made peace with him, yet it was but an
hollow agreement. Of all which I shall give but slender hints, in the rest of
this Book; and rather open some few particulars, than pursue a Continued
Narration, since the matter of my Work fails me.

In May the 33d year of the Kings Reign, a new Impression of the Bible was
finished, The Bible in English set up in all Churches.

Collect. Numb. 24.


and the King by Proclamation, Required all Curates and Parishioners of every
Town and Parish, to provide themselves a Copy of it before All-Hallowtide:
under the penalty of forfeiting forty Shillings a month, after that, till they
had one. He declared that he set it forth, to the end that his people might by
Reading it, perceive the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God: Observe his
Commandments, obey the Laws, and their Prince, and live in Godly Charity among
themselves. But that the King did not thereby intend that his Subjects should
presume to expound, or take arguments from Scripture; nor disturb Divine
Service, by reading it, when Mass was Celebrating: but should read it meekly,
humbly, and reverently, for their Instruction, Edification, and Amendment.
There was also care taken so to Regulate the Prices of the Bibles, that there
should be no exacting on the Subjects in the Sale of them. And Bonner seeing
the Kings mind was set on this, ordered six of these great Bibles to be set up
in several places of St. Paul's: that all persons who could read, might at all
times have free access to them. And upon the Pillars to which these Bibles were
chained, Collect. Nu^b. 25.
an Exhortation was set up, admonishing all that came thither to read; That
they should lay aside vainglory, hypocrisy, and all other corrupt affections,
and bring with them, Discretion, good Intentions, Charity, Reverence, and a
quiet behavior: for the Edification of their own Souls; but not to draw
multitudes about them, nor to make Expositions of what they read, nor to read
aloud, nor make noise in time of Divine Service, nor enter into Disputes
concerning it. But people came generally to hear the Scriptures read, and such
as could read, and had clear voices, came often thither with great Crowds about
them. And many set their Children to School, that they might carry them with
them to St. Paul's, and hear them read the Scriptures. Nor could the people be
hindered from entering into disputes about some places: for who could hear the
words of the Institution of the Sacrament, Drink ye all of it, or St. Paul's
Discourse against worship in an unknown tongue, and not from thence be led to
consider, that the people were deprived of the Cup, which by Christ's express
Command was to be drunk by all; and that they were kept in a worship, to which
the unlearned could not say Amen, since they understood not what was said,
either in the Collects or Hymns? So the King had many Complaints brought him,
of the Abuses that were said to have risen from the Liberty given the people to
read the Scriptures. Upon which, Bonner, (no doubt having obtained the Kings
leave,) set up a new Advertisement; in which he complained of these Abuses, in
the reading the Bible: for which he threatened the people, that he would remove
these Bibles out of the Church, if they continued as they did, to abuse so high
a favor. Yet these Complaints produced no further severity at this time. But
by them the Popish party afterward obtained what they desired. This Summer the
King turned the Monastery of Burton upon Trent, into a Collegiat Church for a
Dean and four Prebends: and the Monastery of Thornton in Lincolnshire into
another, for a Dean and four Prebends. 1541.
In this year Cranmer took it into Consideration, A^tiq. Brit. in R^g. P^lo.
to what excess the Tables of the Bishops had risen, whereby those Revenues
that ought to have been applied to better purposes, A Rule about Churchmens
housekeeping.
were wasted on great Entertainment which though they passed under the decent
name of Hospitality, yet were in themselves both too high and expensive, and
proved great hindrances to Church-mens Charity, in more necessary and
profitable Instances. He therefore set out an Order, for Regulating that
Expense: by which, an Archbishops Table was not to exceed six dishes of meat,
and four of Bellaria.
Banquet; a Bishops, five dishes of meat, and three of Banquet; a Deans or
Archdeacons Table was not to exceed four dishes, and two of Banquet; and other
Clergymen might be served only with two dishes. But he that gives us the
account of this, laments that this Regulation took no effect. And complains
that the people expecting generally such splendid Housekeeping from the
Dignified Clergy, and not considering how short their Revenues are, of what
they were anciently: they out of a weak Compliance with the Multitude, have
disabled themselves from keeping Hospitality, as our Savior ordered it, not
for the Rich, but the Poor; not to mention the other ill effects that follow
too sumptuous a Table.

In the end of this year, the Tragical fall of the Queen put a stop to all
other proceedings. The King goes to ^ork.
The King had invited his Nephew the King of Scotland, to meet him at York, who
was resolved to come thither. The King intended to gain upon him all he could,
and to engage him to follow the Copy he had set him, in Extirpating the Popes
Supremacy, and Suppressing Abbeys, and to establish a firm agreement in all
other things. The Clergy of Scotland feared the ill effects of that Interview,
especially their King being a Prince of most extraordinary parts, who, had he
not blemished his Government with being so extremely addicted to his pleasures,
was the Greatest Prince that Nation had for several Ages. He was a great Patron
of Learning, and Executor of Justice: he used in person and Incognito, to go
over his Kingdom, and see how Justice was everywhere done. He had no very good
opinion of the Religious Orders, and had encouraged Buchanan to write a severe
and witty Libel against the Franciscan Friars. So that they were very
apprehensive that he might have been wrought on by his Uncle. Therefore they
used all their endeavors to divert his Journey. But the French King, that had
him fast engaged to his Interests, falling then off from the King, wrought more
on him. So instead of meeting the King at York, where magnificent preparations
were made for his Reception, he sent his Excuse; which provoked his Uncle, and
gave occasion to a breach that followed not long after.

But here I shall crave the Readers leave to give a full representation of the
state of Religion at this time in Scotland, An account of the State of Scotland.
and of the footing the Reformation had got there: Its neighborhood to
England, and the union of these Kingdoms, first in the same Religion, and since
under the same Princes, together with the intercourse that was both in this and
the next Reign, between these Nations, seem not only to justify this
Digression, but rather to challenge it as a part of the History, without which
it should be defective. And it may be the rather expected from one, who had his
Birth and Education in that Kingdom.

The Correspondence between that Crown and France was the cause that what
Learning they had, The beginings of Learning there.
came from Paris: where our Kings generally kept some Scholars, and from that
great Nursery they were brought over, and set in the Universities of Scotland
to propagate Learning there. From the year 1412, in which Wardlaw Archbishop
of St. Andrews first founded that University, Learning had made such a
progress, that more Colleges were soon after founded in that City.
Universities were also founded both at Glasgow, and Aberdeen, which have since
furnished that Nation with many eminent Scholars in all professions. But at the
time that Learning came into Scotland, the knowledge of true Religion also
followed it: And of the Reformation.
and in that same Archbishops time, one John Resby, an English man, a follower
of Wickliffs opinions, was charged with Heresy. Archbishop Spotswood.
Forty Articles were objected to him, of which two are only mentioned. The one
was, that The Pope is not Christ's Vicar. The other was, that he was not to be
esteemed a Pope, if he was a man of wicked life. For maintaining these, he was
burnt Anno 1407. 24 years after that, one Paul Cra^ came out of Germany, and
being a Bohemian and an Hussite, Lesley.
was infusing his Doctrine into some at St. Andrews, which being discovered, he
was judged an obstinate Heretic, and burnt there, Anno 1432. And to encourage
people to prosecute such persons, Fogo, who had discovered him, was rewarded
with the Abbey of Melross soon after.

It does not appear that those Doctrines, which were called Lollardies in
England, had gained many followers in Scotland, till near the end of that
Century. But then it was found that they were much spread over the Western
parts: which being in the neighborhood of England, those who were persecuted
there, might perhaps fly into Scotland, and spread their Doctrine in that
Kingdom. Spotswood.
Several persons of Quality were then charged with these Articles, and brought
to the Archbishop of Glasgows Courts. But they answered him with such
confidence, that he thought fit to discharge them; with an admonition to take
heed of new Doctrines, and to content themselves with the Faith of the Church.

At this time the Clergy in Scotland were both very ignorant and dissolute in
their manners. The Clergy were both ignorant and cruel.
The Secular Clergy minded nothing but their Tithes, and did either hire some
Friars to Preach, or some poor Priests to sing Masses to them at their
Churches. The Abbots had possessed themselves of the best seats, and the
greatest wealth of the Nation: and by a profuse Superstition, almost the one
half of the Kingdom fell into the hands of the Churchmen. The Bishops looked
more after the affairs of the State, than the concerns of the Church; and were
resolved to maintain by their cruelty, what their Predecessors had acquired by
fraud and impostures. And as Lesly himself confesses, there was no pains taken
to instruct the people in the principles of Religion; nor were the Children at
all Catechized, but left in ignorance: and the ill lives of the Clergy, who
were both covetous and lewd, disposed the people to favor those that preached
for a Reformation. The first that suffered in this Age was Patrick Hamilton, a
person of very noble blood: Patrick Hamilton's sufferings.
his Father was Brother to the Earl of Arran, and his Mother Sister to the Duke
of Albany; so nearly was he on both sides related to the King. He was provided
of the Abbey of Fern in his youth; and being designed for greater preferments,
he was sent to travel: but as he went thorough Germany, he contracted a
friendship with Luther, Melanction, and others of their Persuasion; by whose
means he was instructed in the points about which they differed from the Church
of Rome. He returned to Scotland, that he might communicate that knowledge to
others with which himself was so happily enlightened. And little considering,
either the hindrance of his further Preferment, or the other dangers that might
lie in his way, he spared not to lay open the Corruptions of the Roman Church,
and to show the Errors that had crept into the Christian Religion. He was a
man both of great learning, and of a sweet and charming conversation, and came
to be followed and esteemed by all sorts of people.

The Clergy being enraged at this, invited him to St. Andrews, that there might
be Conferences held with him, about those points which he condemned. And one
Friar Campbel, Prior of the Dominicans, who had the reputation of a Learned
man, was appointed to treat with him. They had many Conferences together, and
the Prior seemed to be convinced in most points; and acknowledged there were
many things in the Church that required Reformation. But all this while he was
betraying him; So that when the Abbot looked for no such thing, he was in the
night time made Prisoner, and carried to the Archbishops Castle. There several
Articles were objected to him, about Original Sin, Free Will, Justification,
Good Works, Priestly Absolution, Auricular Confession, Purgatory, and the Popes
being Antichrist. Some of these he positively adhered to, the others he thought
were disputable points; yet he said he would not condemn them, except he saw
better reasons than any he had yet heard. The matter was referred to 12 Divines
of the University, of whom Friar Campbel was one. And within a day or two they
censured all his Tenets as Heretical, and contrary to the Faith of the Church.
On the first of March Judgment was given upon him, by Beaton Archbishop of St.
Andrews, with whom sat the Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bishop of Dunkeld,
Brichen and Dunblan, five Abbots, and many of the inferior Clergy. They also
made the whole University, old and young, sign it. He was declared an obstinate
Heretic, and delivered to the Secular Power.

The King had at that time gone a Pilgrimage to Ross, and the Clergy fearing
lest nearness of blood, with the Intercessions which might be made for him,
should snatch this prey out of their hands, proceeded that same day to his
Execution. So in the afternoon he was brought to the Stake before St. Salvators
College. He stripped himself of his Garments, and gave them to his man; and
said, he had no more to leave him, but the example of his death. That he prayed
him to keep in mind. For though it was bitter and painful in man's Judgment, yet
it was the entrance to Everlasting life, which none could inherit that denied
Christ before such a Congregation. Then was he tied to a Stake, and a great
deal of fuel was heaped about him: which he seemed not to fear. but continued
lifting up his eyes to heaven, and recommending his soul to God. When the train
of Powder was kindled, it did not take hold of the Fuel, but only scorched his
hand, and the side of his face. This occasioned some delay, till more powder
was brought from the Castle; during which time the Friars were very
troublesome, and called to him to turn, and pray to our Lady, and say Salve
Regina. None was more officious than Friar Campbel. The Abbot wished him often
to let him alone, and give him no more trouble. But the Friar continuing to
importune him; he said to him, Wicked man, thou know that I am not an
Heretic, and that it is the truth of God for which I now suffer. So much thou
did confess to me in private: and thereupon I appeal thee to answer before
the Judgment Seat of Christ. By this time more powder was brought and the fire
was kindled. He cried out with a loud voice, How long, O Lord, shall darkness
oppress this Realm? how long will thou suffer this Tyranny of Men? and died
repeating these words, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. The patience and constancy
he expressed in his sufferings, made the Spectators generally conclude that he
was a true Martyr of Christ: in which they were the more confirmed, by Friar
Campbells falling into great despair soon after, who from that turned frantic,
and died within a year.

On this I have insisted the more fully, because it was indeed the beginning of
the Reformation in Scotland; and raised there an humor of inquiring into
points of Religion, which did always prove fatal to the Church of Rome. In the
University it self many were wrought on, The Kings Con^essor fav^urs the
Re^ormation.
and particularly one Seaton a Dominican Friar who was the Kings Confessor. He
being appointed to preach the next Lent at St. Andrews, insisted much on these
points: That the Law of God was the only Rule of Righteousness, that Sin was
only committed when Gods Law was violated, that no man could satisfy for Sin,
and that pardon was to be obtained by unfeigned repentance and true faith. But
he never mentioned Purgatory, Pilgrimages, Merits, nor Prayers to Saints; which
used to be the Subjects on which the Friars insisted most on these occasions.
Being gone from St. Andrews, he heard that another Friar of his own Order had
refuted these Doctrines. So he returned, and confirmed them in another Sermon;
in which he also made some reflections on Bishops that were not Teachers,
calling them Dumb-Dogs. For this he was carried before the Archbishop; but he
defended himself, saying, that he had only in St. Paul's words said a Bishop
should teach, and in Esaias words, that such as did not teach were Dumb-doggs:
but having said this in the general, he did not apply it to any Bishop in
particular. The Archbishop was netled at this answer, yet resolved to let him
alone till he should be brought into disgrace with the King. And that was soon
done, for the King being a licentious Prince, and Friar Seaton having often
reproved him boldly for it, he grew weary of him. The Clergy perceiving this,
were resolved to fall upon him. So he withdrew to Berwick, but wrote to the
King, that if he would hear him make his defense, he would return and justify
all that he had taught. He taxed the cruelty of the Clergy, and desired the
King would restrain their Tyranny, and consider that he was obliged to protect
his Subjects from their severity and malice. But receiving no satisfactory
answer, he lived in England, where he was entertained by the Duke of Suffolk as
his Chaplain. Not long after this, one Forest, Forrest's sufferings.
a simple Benedictin Monk was accused for having said that Patrick Hamilton had
died a Martyr: yet since there was no sufficient proof to convict him; a Friar
one Walter Lainge was sent to confess him, to whom in Confession he
acknowledged, he thought Hamilton was a good man, and that the Articles for
which he was condemned, might be defended. This being revealed by the Friar,
was taken for good evidence. So the poor man was condemned to be burnt as an
Heretic. As he was led out to his Execution, he said, Fie on falsehood, fie on
Friars, revealers of Confession; Let never man trust them after me: they are
despisers of God, and deceivers of men. When they were considering in what
place to burn him, a simple man, that attended the Archbishop, advised to burn
him in some low Cellar; for said he, the smoke of Mr. Patrick Hamilton has
infected all those on whom it blew.

A further persecution in S^otland.
Soon after this, Abbot Hamiltons Brother and Sister were brought into the
Bishops Courts: but the King, who favored this Brother, persuaded him to
absent himself. His Sister and six others being brought before the Bishop of
Ross, who was deputed by the Archbishop to proceed against them, the King
himself dealt with the Woman to abjure, which she and the other six did. Two
others were more resolute, The one was Normand Gowrlay, who was charged with
denying the Popes Authority in Scotland, and saying there was no Purgatory: The
other was David Straiton. He was charged with the same Opinions. They also
alleged that he had denied that Tithes were due to Churchmen: and that when
the Vicar came to take the Tith out of some Fish-boats that belonged to him, he
alleged the Tith was to be taken where the stock grew, and therefore ordered
the tenth fish to be cast into the Sea, and bade the Vicar to seek them there.
They were both judged obstinate Heretics, and burnt at one Stake the 27th of
August, 1534. Upon this persecution some others who were cited to appear fled
into England. Those were Alexander Alesse, John Fife, John Mackbee, and one
Mackdowgall. The first of these was received by Cromwell into his Family, and
grew into great favor with King Henry, and was commonly called his Scholar; of
whom see what was said Page 214. But after Cromwels death, he took Fife with
him, and they went into Saxony, and were both Professors in Leipsick. Mackbee
was at first entertained by Shaxton Bishop of Salisbury; but he went afterward
into Denmark, where he was known by the name of Doctor Maccabeus, and was
Chaplain to King Christian the second.

But all these violent proceedings were not effectual enough to quench that
light which was then shining there. The progress of the Re^ormation.
Many by searching the Scriptures came to the knowledge of the Truth: and the
noise of what was then doing in England, awakned others to make further
enquiries into matters of Religion. Pope Clement the 7th apprehending that King
Henry might prevail on his Nephew to follow his example, Lesley.
wrote Letters full of earnest exhortations to him to continue in the Catholic
Faith. Upon which King James called a Parliament, and there in the presence of
the Popes Nuncio, declared his zeal for that Faith and the Apostolic See. The
Parliament also concurred with him in it; and made acts against Heretics, and
for maintaining the Popes authority. That same Pope did afterward send to
desire him to assist him in making war against the King of England; for he was
resolved to divide that Kingdom among those who would assist him in driving out
King Henry. But the firm peace at that time between the King of England and the
French King, kept him quiet from any trouble, which otherwise the King of
Scotland might have given him. Yet King Henry sent the Bishop of St. David's,
with the Duke of Norfolks Brother, Lord William Howard to him, so unexpectedly,
that they came to him at Sterlin before he had heard of their being sent. The
Bishop brought with him some of the Books that had been writ for the justifying
King Henry's proceeding; and desired that King would impartially examine them.
Buchanan.
But he put them into the hands of some about him that were addicted to the
interests of Rome, who without ever reading them, told him they were full of
pestilent Doctrine and Heresy.

The secret business they came for, was, to persuade that King to concur with
his Uncle, and to agree an Interview between them: and they offered him in
their Masters name the Lady Mary in Marriage, and that he should be made Duke
of York, and Regni Angli^i Vicarius.
Lord Lieutenant of all England. But the Clergy diverted him from it, and
persuaded him rather to go on in his design of a match with France. And their
Counsels did so prevail, that he resolved to go in person, and fetch a Queen
from thence. On the first of January 1537. he was married to Magdalen, daughter
to Francis the First. But she being then gone far in a Consumption, died soon
after he had brought her home, on the 28th of May. She was much lamented by all
persons, the Clergy only excepted: for she had been bred in the Queen of
Navarres Court, and so they apprehended she might incline the King to a
Reformation. But he had seen another Lady in France, Mary of Guise, whom he
then liked so well; that after his Queens death, he sent Cardinal Beaton into
France to treat for a match with her. This gave the Clergy as much joy as the
former marriage had raised fear; for no Family in Christendom was more devoted
to the interests of the Papacy than that was. And now the King though he had
freer thoughts himself, yet was so engaged to the pretended old Religion, that
he became a violent persecutor of all who differed from it.

The King grew very expensive, The King wholly guided by the Clergy.
he indulged himself much in his pleasures; he built four noble Palaces, which
considering that Kingdom and that Age, were very extraordinary Buildings; he
had also many natural Children: All which things concurred to make him very
desirous of Money. There were two different parties in the Court. The Nobility
on the one hand represented to him, the great wealth that the Abbots had
gathered; and that if he would do as his Uncle had done, he would thereby raise
his Revenue to the triple of what it was, and provide plentifully for his
Children. The Clergy on the other hand assured him, that if he would set up a
strict inquisition of Heretics, he would discover so many men of Estates that
were guilty, that by their Forfeitures he might raise above an hundred thousand
Crowns a year: And for his Children, the easiest way of providing for them, was
to give them good Abbeys and Priories. This they thought would engage both the
King and his Sons to maintain their Rights more steadily, if their own
Interests were interwoven with them. They also persuaded the King that if he
maintained the established Religion, it would give him a good interest in
England, and make him be set up by foreign Princes as the head of the League,
which the Pope and the Emperor were then projecting against King Henry. These
Counsels being seconded by his Queen, who was a wise and good Lady, but
wonderfully zealous for the Papacy, did so prevail with him, that as he made
four of his Children Abbots or Priors, so he gave way to the persecuting humor
of his Priests: and give Sir James Hamilton (a natural Brother of the Earl of
Arrans, in whom the Clergy put much confidence, a Commission to proceed against
all that were suspected of Heresy. In the year 1539. many were cited to appear
before a meeting of the Bishops at Edinburgh. Of those, nine abjured, many were
banished and five were burnt. Forrester, a Gentleman, Simpson, a Secular
Priest; Killore, and Beverage, two Friars; and Forest, a Canon Regular; were
burnt on the Castle-hill of Edinburgh. The last of these was a zealous constant
Preacher, which was a rare thing in those days. His Diocesan, the Bishop of
Dunkeld sent for him, and rebuked him for it; and bid him, When he found a good
Epistle, or good Gospel, that made for the liberties of the Holy Church, to
preach on that, and let the rest alone. The good man answered; he had read both
the Old Testament, and the New, and never found an ill Epistle, or ill Gospel
in any of them. The Bishop replied, that he thanked God he had lived well these
many years, and never knew either the Old or New: he contented himself with his
Portuise, and his Pontifical; and if the other would trouble himself with these
fantasies, he would repent it when he could not help it. Forest said, He was
resolved to do what he conceived was his duty, whatever might be the danger of
it. By this it appears how deliberately the Clergy at that time delivered
themselves up to Ignorance and Superstition.

Two other Martyrs.
In the same year Russel, a Franciscan Friar, and one Kennedy, a young man of 18
years of age, were brought before the Archbishop of Glasgow. That Bishop was a
learned and moderate man, and was much against these cruel proceedings: he was
also in great credit with the King, having been his Tutor. Yet he was forced by
the threatenings of his Brethren, to go on with the persecution. So those two,
Russel, and Kennedy, being brought before him, Kennedy, that was young and
fearful, had resolved to submit and abjure. But being brought to the Bar, and
encouraged by Russels discourses, he felt so high a measure of courage and joy
in his heart, that he fell down on his knees, and broke forth in these words;
Wonderful, O God, is thy love and mercy toward me a miserable wretch: for now,
when I would have denied thee, and thy Son my Savior, thou have by thine own
hand pulled me back from the bottom of Hell, and given me most Heavenly
comfort, which has removed the ungodly fear that before oppressed my mind. Now
I defy death, do what you please, I thank God I am ready. There followed a
long dispute between the Friar and the Divines that sat with the Archbishop:
but when he perceived they would hear nothing, and answered him only with
revilings and jeers, he gave it over and concluded in these words; This is your
hour and power of darkness: now you sit as Judges, and we stand wrongfully
condemned; but the day comes which will show our innocence, and you shall see
your own blindness to your everlasting confusion; Go on, and fulfill the measure
of your iniquity. This put the Archbishop in great confusion, so that he said
to those about him, that these rigorous executions did hurt the cause of the
Church more than could be well thought of; and he declared that his opinion
was, that their lives should be spared, and some other course taken with them.
But those that sat with him said, if he took a course different from what the
other Prelates had taken, he was not the Churches friend. This, with other
threatening expressions, prevailed so far on his fears, that he gave Judgment.
So they were burnt; but at their death they expressed so much constancy and
joy, that the people were much wrought on by their behavior. Russel encouraged
Kennedy, his partner in sufferings, in these words. Fear not, Brother, for he
is more mighty that is in us, than he that is in the world; the pain which we
shall suffer is short, and light; but our joy and consolation shall never have
an end. Death cannot destroy us, for it is destroyed already by him, for whose
sake we suffer. Therefore let us strive to enter in by the same strait way,
which our Savior has taken before us. With the blood of such Martyrs was the
field of that Church sown, which did quickly rise up in a plentiful harvest.

Among those that were at this time in hazard, George Buchanan was one. The
Clergy were resolved to be revenged on him for the sharpness of the Poems he
had written against them. And the King had so absolutely left all men to their
mercy, that he had died with the rest, if he had not made his escape out of
Prison: Then he went beyond Sea, and lived 20 years in that Exile, and was
forced to teach a School most part of the time; yet the greatness of his mind
was not oppressed with that mean employment. In his writings there appears, not
only all the beauty and graces of the Latin Tongue, but a vigor of mind and
quickness of thought, far beyond Bembo, or the other Italians, who at that time
affected to revive the purity of the Roman Style. It was but a feeble imitation
of Tully in them; but his style is so natural and nervous, and his reflections
on things are so solid, (besides his immortal Poems, in which he shows how well
he could imitate all the Roman Poets, in their several ways of writing, that he
who compares them, will be often tempted to prefer the Copy to the Original,)
that he is justly reckoned the greatest and best of our modern Authors. This
was the state of affairs at this time in Scotland. And so I shall leave this
digression, on which if I have stayed too long, my kindness to my native
Country must be my excuse; and now I return to the affairs of England.

The King went his progress with his fair and beloved Queen, and he when came
to York, he issued out a Proclamation, That all who had been aggrieved for want
of Justice, by any whom he had formerly employed, should come to him, and his
Counsel for redress. This was done to cast all past miscarrages on Cromwell, and
to put the people in hopes of better times. But upon his return to London, he
met with a new affliction. He was so much taken with his Queen, that on
All Saints day, when he received the Sacrament, he openly gave God thanks for
the good life he led, and trusted still to lead with her: and desired his
Ghostly Father to join with him in the same Thanksgivging to God. But this joy
lasted not long: for the next day, the Archbishop of Canterbury came to him,
and gave him a doleful account of the Queens ill Life, as it had been brought
him by one John Lassels: Who, when the King was in his Progress, had told him
that his Sister, who had been an old Servant of the Duke of Norfolks, under
whose care the Queen was brought up, said to him, that the Queen was lewd, and
that one Francis Deirham had enjoyed her often; as also one Mannock; with other
foul circumstances, not fit to be related. The Archbishop communicated it to
the Lord Chancellor, and the other Privy Counselors that were at London. They
agreed, that the Archbishop should open it to the King. But he not knowing how
to do it in Discourse, set it down in writing, and put it in the Kings hands.
When the King read it, The Queens ill life is discovered.
he seemed much perplexed; but loved the Queen so tenderly, that he looked on
it as a Forgery. And now the Archbishop was in extreme danger, for if full
evidence had not been brought, it had been certainly turned on him to his
ruin. The King imparted it to some other Counselors, and told them, that he
could not believe it, yet he would try it out, but with all possible secrecty.
So the Lord Privy Seal was sent to London, to examine Lassels, who stood to
what he had informed. Then he sent that same Lord into Sussex, where Lassels
Sister lived, to try if she would justify what her Brother had reported in her
name. And she owning it, he ordered Deirham and Mannock to be arrested upon
some other pretenses; But they being examined, not only confessed what was
informed, but revealed some other circumstances that showed the Queen had laid
aside all sense of Modesty, as well as the fear of a Discovery; three several
women having been witnesses to these her lewd practices. The report of that
struck the King into a most profound Pensiveness, and he burst out into tears,
and lamented his misfortune. The Archbishop of Canterbury and some other
Counselors, were sent to examine the Queen. She at first denied every thing,
but when she perceived it was already known, And confessed by her self and
others.
she confessed all, and set it under her hand. There were also evident
presumptions that she had intended to continue that Course of Life: for, as she
had got Deirham into her service, so she had brought one of the Women, who had
been formerly privy to their familiarities, to serve about her Bedchamber. One
Culpeper was also charged upon vehement suspicion: For when the King was at
Lincoln, by the Lady Rochfords means, he was brought into the Queens Chamber at
11 a clock in the night, and stayed there till four the next morning. The Queen
also gave him a Gold Chain, and a rich Cap. He being examined confessed the
Crime; for which, both Deirham, and he suffered. Others were also Endited of
misprision of Treason, and condemned to perpetual Imprisonment. But this
occasioned a new Parliament to be Summoned.

On the 16th of January the Parliament met: to which, the Bishops of
Westminster, 1542.
Chester, Peterborough, and Gloucester, had their Writs. The Lord Cromwell also
had his Writ, A new Parliament called.
though I do not find by any Record that he was restored in Blood. On the 28th
of January, the Lord Chancellor moved the House of Lords, to consider the case
the King was in, by the Queens ill carriage: and that there might be no ground
of suspicion or complaint, he proposed that some of their number should be sent
to examine the Queen. Whereupon the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duke of
Suffolk, the Earl of Southampton and the Bishop of Westminster, were sent to
her. How much She Confessed to them, is not very clear, neither by the Journal,
nor the Act of Parliament: which only says, that she confessed, without
mentioning the particulars. Upon this, the processes of those that had been
formerly attainted, being also brought as an Evidence, the Act passed in both
Houses. In it they Petitioned the King,

First, Not to be troubled at the matter, since 1542.
that might be a mean to shorten his Life.

Secondly, The Act about the Queen.
To pardon every thing that had been spoken against the Queen.

Thirdly, That the Queen and her Accomplices might be attainted of High Treason,
for her taking Deirham into her service; and another Woman into her Chamber,
who had known their former ill Life; by which it appeared what she intended to
do: and then admitting Culpeper, to be so long with Her, in a vile place so
many hours in the night. Therefore it is desired, that she and they, with the
Bawd, the Lady Rochford, may be Attainted of Treason; and that the Queen and
the Lady Rochford should suffer the pains of Death.

Fourthly, That the King would not trouble himself to give his assent to this
Act in his own person, but grant it by his Letters Patents under his hand and
Great Seal.

Fifthly, That the Duchess Dowager of Norfolk, Countess of Bridgwater, the
Lord William Howard and his Lady, and four other men, and five women, who were
already Attainted by the Course of Common Law, (except the Duchess of Norfolk,
and the Countess of Bridgwater,) that knew the Queens vicious Life, and had
concealed it, should be all Attainted of Misprision of Treason.

It was also Enacted, that whosoever knew any thing of the Incontinence of the
Queen, (for the time being,) should reveal it with all possible speed under the
pains of Treason. And that if the King or his Successors should intend to marry
any Woman, whom they took to be a pure and clean Maid; if she, not being so,
did not declare the same to the King, it should be High Treason: and all who
knew it, and did not reveal it, were guilty of Misprision of Treason. And if
the Queen, or the Princes Wife, should procure any by Messages, or words, to
know her carnally; or any other by Messages or words should solicit them;
they, their Counselors, and Abettors, are to be adjudged high Traitors.

This Act being assented to by the Kings Letters Patents, the Queen, and the
Lady Rochford, Censures pas^ uponit.
were beheaded on Tower Hill the 12th of February. The Queen confessed the
miscarriages of her former life, before the King married her. But stood
absolutely to her denial, as to any thing after that: and protested to Dr.
White afterward Bishop of Winchester, That she took God and his Angels to be
her Witnesses, upon the Salvation of her Soul, that she was guiltless of that
Act of defiling her Sovereigns bed, for which she was condemned. Yet the
Lasciviousness of her former Life, made people incline to believe any ill thing
that could be reported of her. But for the Lady Rochford, every body observed
Gods Justice on her; who had the chief hand, both in Queen Anne Boleyns, and
her own Husbands death: and it now appearing so evidently what sort of Woman
she was, it tended much to raise their Reputations again, in whose Fall, her
spite, and other Artifices had so great a hand. She had been a Lady of the
Bedchamber to the last four Queens: But now it was found how unworthy she was
of that Trust.

It was thought extreme cruelty to be so severe to the Queens kindred, for not
discovering her former ill life. Since the making such a discovery had been
inconsistent with the Rules of Justice or Decency. The old Duchess of Norfolk,
being her Grandmother, had bred her of a Child: and it was said, for her to
have gone, and told the King, That she was a Whore, when he intended to marry
her, as it was an unheard of thing, so the not-doing of it could not have drawn
so severe a punishment, from any but a Prince of that Kings temper. But the
King pardoned her, and most of the rest; tho some continued in Prison after the
rest were discharged.

But for the other part of this Act, obliging a Woman to reveal her own former
Incontinence; if the King intended to marry her, (which by a mistake the Lord
Herbert says was passed in another Act, taking it from Hall, and not looking
into the Record:) It was thought a piece of grievous Tyranny; since if a King,
especially one of so imperious a temper, as this was, should design such an
honor to any of his Subjects, who had failed in their former life; they must
either defame themselves, by publishing so disgraceful a secret, or run the
hazard of being afterward attainted of Treason. Upon this, those that took an
indiscreet liberty to rally that Sex injustly and severely, said, the King
could induce none that was reputed a Maid to Marry him: so that not so much
choice, as necessity, put him on Marrying a Widow about two years after this.
But this part of the Act was afterward repealed in the first Parliament of
King Edward the 6th.

There passed another Act in this Parliament, that made way for the dissolution
of Colleges, Act about Hospitals, etc.
Hospitals, and other Foundations of that nature. The Courtiers had been
practicing with the Presidents and Governors of some of these, to make
Resignations of them to the King; which were conceived in the same style that
most of the surrenders of Monasteries did run in. Eight of these were all
really procured, which are enrolled. But they could not make any great
progress, because it was provided by the Local Statutes of most of them, that
no President, or any other Fellows could make any such Deed, without the
Consent of all the Fellows in the House; and this could not be so easily
obtained. Therefore all such Statutes were annulled, and none were any more to
be sworn to the observation of them.

The Papists design to suppress the English Bible.
In the Convocation that sat at that time, which as was formerly observed,
Fuller mistakes for the Convocation in the 31st year of this King; the
Translation of the Bible was brought under examination, and many of the Bishops
were appointed to peruse it. For it seems complaints were brought against it.
It was certainly the greatest eyesore of the Popish party: and that which they
knew would most effectually beat down all their projects. But there was no
opposing it directly, for the King was fully resolved to go through with it.
Therefore the way they took, was once to load the Translation then set out,
with as many faults as they could; and so to get it first condemned, and then
to promise a new one: in the making and publishing of which, it would be easy
to breed many delays. But Gardener had another singular conceit: He fancied
there were many words in the New Testament, of such Majesty, that they were not
to be Translated; but must stand in the English Bible as they were in the
Latin. A hundred of these he put into a Writing, which was read in
Convocation. His design in this was visible; That if a Translation must be
made, it should be so daubed all through with Latin words, that the people
should not understand it much the better for its being in English. A taste of
this the Reader may have by the first twenty of them; Eccl^sia, Penitentia,
Pontifex, Ancilla, Contritus, Olocausta, Ius^itia, Iusti^icatio, Idiota,
El^menta, Baptizare, Martyr, Adorare, Sandalium, Simplex, Tetrarcha,
Sacramentum, Simulachrum, Gloria. The design he had of keeping some of these,
particularly the last save one, is plain enough; that the People might not
discover that visible opposition, which was between the Scriptures, and the
Roman Church in the matter of Images. This could not be better palliated, than
by disguising these places, with words that the People understood not. How this
was received Full^r has not told us. But it seems Cranmer found, that the
Bishops were resolved, either to condemn the Translation of the Bible, or to
proceed so slowly in it, that it should come to nothing. Therefore he moved the
King to refer the perusing of it to the two Universities. The Bishops took this
very ill, when Cranmer intimated it to them in the Kings name; and objected
that the Learning of the Universities was much decayed of late, and that the
two Houses of Convocation were the more proper Judges of that, where the
Learning of the Land was chiefly gathered together. But the Archbishop said he
would stick close to the Kings pleasure, and that the Universities should
examine it. Upon which, all the Bishops of his Province, except Ely and St.
David's, protested against it; and soon after the Convocation was dissolved.

Not long after this, I find, Bonner made some Injunctions for his Clergy;
which have a strain in them, (...) Inju^ctions.
so far different from the rest of his Life, that it is more probable they were
drawn by another Pen, and imposed on Bonner by an Order from the King. They
were set out in the 34th year of the Kings Reign; but the time of the year is
not expressed. The Reader will find them in the Collection at their full length.
The Substance of them is,

First, That all should observe the Kings Injunctions.

Secondly, Coll. Num^. 26.
That every Clergyman should read and study a Chapter of the Bible every day,
with the exposition of the Gloss, or some approved Doctor; which having once
studied, they should retain it in their memories, and be ready to give an
account of it, to him, or any whom he should appoint.

Thirdly, That they should study the Book set forth by the Bishops, of the
Institution of a Christian man.

Fourthly, That such as did not reside in their Benefices, should bring their
Curates to him, or his Officers, to be tried.

Fifthly, That they should often exhort their Parishioners to make no private
contracts of Marriage.

Sixthly, That they should marry none who were married before, till they were
sufficiently assured that the former Husband or Wife were dead.

Seventhly, That they should instruct the Children of their several Parishes;
and teach them to read English, that they might know how to believe, and pray,
and live according to the Will of God.

Eighthly, That they should reconcile all that were in Enmity, and in that be a
good Example to others.

Ninthly, That none should receive the Communion, who did not Confess to their
own Curates.

Tenthly, That none should be suffered to go to Taverns, or Alehouses, and use
unlawful games on Sundays, or Holy Days, in time of Divine Service.

Eleventhly, That twice every quarter, they should declare the seven deadly
sins, and the Ten Commandments.

Twelfthly, That no Priest should go but in his Habit.

Thirteenthly, That no Priest should be admitted to say Mass, without showing
his Letters of Orders to the Bishop or his Officers.

Fourteenthly, That they should instruct the People to beware of Blasphemy, or
Swearing by any part of Christ's Body; and to abstain from Scolding and
Slandering, Adultery, Fornication, Gluttony or Drunkenness; and that they
should present at the next Visitation, those who were guilty of these sins.

Fifteenthly, That no Priest should use unlawful games, or go to Alehouses or
Taverns, but upon an urgent necessity.

Sixteenthly, No Plays or Enterludes to be Acted in the Churches.

Seventeenthly, That there should be no Sermons Preached, that had been made
within these two hundred or three hundred years. But when they Preached, they
should explain the whole Gospel and Epistle for the day, according to the mind
of some good Doctor allowed by the Church of England: and chiefly to insist on
these places that might stir up the people to good works, and to prayer; and to
explain the use of the Ceremonies of the Church. That there should be no
railing in Sermons; but the Preacher should calmly and discreetly set forth the
excellencies of Virtue, and the vileness of Sin; and should also explain the
Prayers for that day, that so the People might pray with one heart; and should
teach them the use of the Sacraments, particularly of the Mass; but should
avoid the reciting of Fables, or Stories for which no good Writer could be
vouched; and that when the Sermon was ended, the Preacher should in few words
resume the substance of it.

Eighteenthly, That none be suffered to Preach under the degree of a Bishop,
who had not obtained a License, either from the King, or him their Ordinary.

These Injunctions, especially when they are considered at their full length,
will give great light into the temper of men at that time: and particularly
inform us of the design and method of Preaching, The manner of Preaching at
that time.
as it was then set forward. Concerning which the Reader will not be ill
pleased to receive some information. In the time of Popery there had been few
Sermons but in Lent: for their discourses on the Holydays, were rather
Panegyricks on the Saint, or the vain magnifying of some of their Relics,
which were laid up in such or such places. In Lent there was a more solemn and
serious way of Preaching; and the Friars, who chiefly maintained their credit
by their performances at that time, used all the force of their skill and
industry to raise the People into heats, by passionate and affecting
discourses. Yet these generally tended to raise the value of some of the Laws
of the Church, such as Abstinence at that time, Confession, with other Corporal
Severities; or some of the little devices, that both inflamed a blind Devotion,
and drew Money; such as Indulgences, Pilgrimages, or the enriching the Shrines,
and Relics of the Saints. But there was not that pains taken to inform the
People of the hatefulness of Vice, and the excellency of Holiness, or of the
wonderful Love of Christ, by which men might be engaged to acknowledge and obey
him. And the design of their Sermons was rather to raise a present heat, which
they knew afterward how to manage, than to work a real Reformation on their
Hearers. They had also intermixed with all Divine Truths so many Fables, that
they were become very extravagant; and that alloy had so embased the whole,
that there was great need of a good discerning, to deliver People from those
prejudices, which these mixtures brought upon the whole Christian Doctrine.
Therefore the Reformers studied with all possible care, to instruct the People
in the Fundamentals of Christianity, with which they had been so little
acquainted. From hence it came, that the People ran after those New Preachers
with wonderful zeal. It is true, there seem to be very foul and indiscreet
re^lections on the other Party, in some of their Sermons. But if any have
applied themselves much to observe what sort of men, the Friars, and the rest
of the Popish Clergy were at that time; they shall find great excuses for those
heats. And as our Savior laid open the Hypocrisies and Impostures of the
Scribes and Pharisees, in a style which such corruptions extorted; so there was
great cause given to treat them very roughly: tho it is not to be denied, but
those Preachers had some mixtures of their own resentments, for the cruelties
and ill usage which they received from them. But now that the Reformation made
a greater progress, much pains was taken to send eminent Preachers over the
Nation: not confining them to particular charges, but sending them with the
Kings License, up and down to many places. Many of these Licenses are enrolled,
and it is likely that many were granted that were not so carefully preserved.
But provision was also made for peoples daily Instruction: and because in that
ignorant time, there could not be found a sufficient number of good Preachers,
and in a time of so much juggling, they would not trust the Instruction of the
people to every one; Therefore none was to Preach except he had gotten a
particular License for it, from the King, or his Diocesan. But to qualify
this, a Book of Homilies was Printed: in which the Gospels and Epistles of all
the Sundays, and Holidays of the year were set down, with an Homily to every
one of these, which is a plain and practical Paraphrase on those parcels of
Scripture. To these are added many serious exhortations, and some short
explanations of the most obvious difficulties, that show the Compiler of them
was a man both of good judgment and learning. To these were also added,
Sermons upon several occasions; as for Weddings, Christnings, and Funerals; and
these were to be read to the people by such as were not Licensed to Preach. But
those who were Licensed to Preach, being often accused for their Sermons, and
Complaints being made to the King by hot men on both sides; they came generally
to write and read their Sermons. From thence the reading of Sermons grew into a
practice in this Church: in which, if there was not that heat, and fire, which
the ^ryars had showed in their Declamations, so that the passions of the
Hearers were not so much wrought on by it; yet it has produced the greatest
Treasure of weighty, grave and solid Sermons, that ever the Church of God had;
which does in a great measure compensate that seeming ^atness to vulgar ears,
that is in the delivery of them.

The Injunctions take notice of another thing, which the sincerity of an
Historian obliges me to give an account of, Plays and Er^erludes then act^d.
tho it was indeed the greatest blemish of that time. These were the
Stage Plays and Enterludes, that were then generally acted, and often in
Churches. They were representations of the corruptions of the Monks, and some
other feats of the Popish Clergy. The Poems were ill contriv^d, and worse
expressed; if there lies not some hidden wit in these Ballads, (for verses they
were not,) which at this distance is lost. But from the representing the
immoralities and disorders of the Clergy, they proceeded to act the Pageantry
of their Worship. This took with the people much, who being provoked by the
miscarriages and cruelties of some of the Clergy, were not ill pleased to see
them and their Religion exposed to public scorn. The Clergy complained much of
this; and said it was an introduction to Atheism, and all sort of Irreligion.
For if once they began to mock sacred things, no stop could be put to that
petulant humor. The grave and learned sort of Reformers disliked and condemned
these courses, as not suitable to the genius of true Religion: but the political
men of that party, made great use of them, encouraging them all they could; for
they said, Contempt being the most operative and lasting affection of the mind,
nothing would more effectually drive out many of those Abuses, which yet
remained, than to expose them to the contempt and scorn of the people.

War between England and Scotland.
In the end of this year a war broke out between England and Scotland, set on by
the instigation of the French King; who was also beginning to be an uneasy
Neighbor to those of the English pale about Callice. The King set out a long
Declaration, in which he very largely laid out the pretensions the Crown of
England had, to an Homage from the Kings of Scotland. In this I am no fit
person to interpose; the matter being disputed by the learned men of both
Nations. The Scots said it was only for some Lands their Kings had in England*
that they did Homage: as the Kings of England did for Normandy and Guienne, to
the Kings of France. But the English Writers cited many Records, to show that
the Homage was done for the Crown of Scotland. To this the Scots replied, that
in the Invasion of Edward the first, he had carried away all their ancient
Records; so these being lost, they could only appeal to the Chronicles that lay
up and down the Nation in their Monasteries: That all these affirmed the
contrary, and that they were a free Kingdom; till Edward the first taking
advantage of their disputes about the Succession to their Crown, upon the death
of Alexander the third, got some of the Competitors to lay down their
pretensions at his feet, and to promise Homage: That this was also performed by
John Balliol, whom he preferred to the Crown of Scotland; but by these means he
lost the hearts of the Nation, and it was said, that his Act of Homage could
not give away the Rights of a free Crown and People. And they said, that
whatsoever submissions had been made since that time, they were only extorted
by force; as the effects of Victory and Conquest, but gave no good right, nor
just Title. To all this the English Writers answered* That these submissions by
their Records, (which were the solemn Instruments of a Nation, that ought never
to be called in question,) were sometimes freely made; and not by their Kings
only, but by the consent of their States. In this uncertainty I must leave it
with the Reader.

But after the King had opened this Pretension, he complained of the disorders
committed by the Scots; of the unkind returns he had met with from their King
for his care of him, while he was an Infant; taking no advantage of the
confusions in which that Kingdom then was, but on the contrary, protecting the
Crown, and quieting the Kingdom. But that of ^ate many depredations and acts of
hostility had been committed by the Scots: and though some Treaties had been
begun, they were managed with so much shufling and inconstancy, that the King
must now try it by a War. Yet he concluded his Declaration ambiguously, neither
keeping up nor laying down his Pretensions to that Crown: but expressing them
in such a manner, tha^ which way soever the success of the War turned, he might
be bound up to nothing, by what he now declared.

But whatsoever justice might be in the Kings Title, or Quarrel, his Sword was
much the sharper. Duke of (...) inroad into Scotlan^*
He ordered the Duke of Norfolk to march into Scotland, about the end of
October, with an Army of 30000 men. Hall tells us, they burnt many Towns, and
names them. But these were only single Houses, or little Villages; and the best
Town he names is K^lso, which is a little open Market Town. Soon after they
returned back into England; whether after they had spoiled the Neighboring
Country, they felt the incoveniencies of the season of the year, or whether
hearing the Scots were gathering, they had no mind to go too far, I cannot
determine; for the Writers of both Nations disagree, as to the reason of their
speedy return. But any that knows the Country they spoiled, and where they
stopped* must conclude that either they had secret Orders only to make an Inroad,
and destroy some Places that lay along the River of Tweed, and upon the Border,
which done, without driving the Breach too far, to retire back; or they must
have had apprehensions of the Scottish Armies coming to lie in these Moors and
Hills of Sa^trey, or Lammer-Moor, which they were to pass if they had gone
farther: and there were about 10000 men brough^ thither, but he that commanded
them was much blamed for doing nothing; his excuse was that his number did not
equal theirs. About the end of November, the Lord M^x^ell brought an Army of
15000 men together, with a Train of Artillery of 24 pieces of Ordnance. And
since the Duke of Norfolk had retired toward Berwick, they resolved to enter
England on the Western side by Solway Frith. The King went thither himself, but
fatally left the Army, and yet was not many miles from them when they were
defeated. The truth of it was, that King, who had hitherto raised the greatest
expectation, was about that time disturbed in his fancy, thinking that he saw
apparitions, particularly of one, whom it was said, he had unjustly put to
death; so that he could not rest, nor be at quiet. But as his leaving the Army
was ill advised, so his giving a Commiss^on to Oliver Sinclar, that was his
Minion, to command in Chief, did extremely disgust the Nobility. They loved not
to be commanded by any but their King, and were already weary of the insolence
of that Favorite, who being but of ordinary birth, The Scottish Army defeated.
was despised by them; so that they were beginning to separate. And when they
were upon that occasion in great disorder, a small body of English, not above
500 Horse appeared. But they apprehending it was the Duke of Norfolks Army,
refused to fight, and fell in confusion. Many Prisoners were taken, the chief
of whom were, the Earls of Glencairn, and Cassillis, the Lords Maxwell,
Sommervell, Oliphant, Gray, and Oliver Sinclar; and about 200 Gentlemen and 800
soldiers; and all the Ordnance and Baggage was also taken. The news of this
being brought to the King of Scotland, increased his former disorders: and some
few days after, he dyed leaving an infant Daughter, but newly born, to succeed
him.

Many Prisoners taken.
The Lords that were taken Prisoners, were brought to London, where after they
had been charged in Council, how unkindly they had used the King, they were put
in the keeping of some of the greatest quality about Court. But the Earl of
Cassillis had the best luck of them all. For being sent to Lamb^th, where he
was a Prisoner upon his parole, Cranmer studied to free him from the darkness
and fetters of Popery; in which he was so successful, that the other was
afterward a great Promoter of the Reformation in Scotland. The Scots had been
hitherto possessed with most extraordinary prejudices against the Changes that
had been made in England: which concurring with the ancient Animosities between
the two Nations, had raised a wonderful ill opinion of the Kings proceedings.
And though the Bishop of St. David's ( Barlow,) had been sent into Scotland with
the Book of the Institution of a Christian Man, to clear these ill impressions;
yet his endeavors were unsuccessful. The Pope, at the instance of the French
King, and to make that Kingdom sure, made David Beaton, Archbishop of St.
Andrews, a Cardinal; which gave him great Authority in the Kingdom: so he with
the rest of the Clergy diverted the King from any correspondence with England,
and assured him of Victory if he would make War on such an Heretical Prince.
The Clergy also offered the King 50000 Crowns a year, toward a War with
England; and possessed all the Nation with very ill thoughts of the Court and
Clergy there. But the Lords that were now Prisoners, (chiefly the Earl of
Cassillis, who was best instructed by his Religious Host;) conceived a better
opinion of the Reformation; and carried home with them those seeds of knowledge,
which produced afterward a very fruitful Harvest. On all these things I have
dwelt the longer, that it might appear, whence the inclination of the Scottish
Nobility to Reform, did take its first rise, though there was afterward in the
Methods by which it was advanced, too great a mixture of the heat and
forwardness that is natural to the Genius of that Country.

When the news of the King of Scotlands death, and of the young Queens birth
that succeeded him, came to the Court, the King thought this a very favorable
conjuncture to unite and settle the whole Island. But that unfortunate Princess
was not born under such happy Stars, though she was Mother to him, in whom this
long-desired Union took effect. The Lords that were then Prisoners began the
motion; and that being told the King, 1543.
he called for them to Hampton Court, in the Christmas-time; and said now an
opportunity was put in their hands, to quiet all troubles that had been between
these two Crowns, by the Marriage of the Prince of Wales to their young Queen:
In which he desired their assistance, and gave them their Liberty, they leaving
hostages for the performance of what was then offered by them. They all
promised their Concurrence, and seemed much taken with the greatness of the
English Court, which the King always kept up, not without affectation: they
also said, they thought God was better served there than in their own Country.
So on New-years-day they took their journey toward Scotland; but the sequel of
this will appear afterward.

A Parliament was summoned to meet the two and twentieth of January, which sat
to the 12th of May. 1543.
So the Session begun in the 34th and ended in the 35th year of the Kings
Reign; from whence it is called in the Records, the Parliament of the 34th and
35th year. Here both the Temporality and Spirituality gave great Subsidies to
the King, of six shillings in the Pound, to be paid in three years. A new
Parliament.
They set forth in their Preambles, The expense the King had been at, in his
War with Scotland, and for his other great and urgent occasions, by which was
meant a War with France, which broke out the following Summer. But with these,
there passed other two Acts of great importance to Religion. The Title of the
first was, An Act for the advancement of True Religion, and abolishment of the
contrary. The King was now entering upon a War; so it seemed reasonable to
qualify the severity of the late Acts about Religion, that all might be quiet
at home. Cranmer moved it first; Cranmer promotes a Reformation.
and was faintly seconded by the Bishops of Worcester, Hereford, Chichester,
and Rochester, who had promised to stick to him in it. At this time a League
was almost finished between the King and the Emperor, which did again raise
the Spirits of the Popish Faction. They had been much cast down ever since the
last Queens fall. But now that the Emperor was like to have an Interest in
English Councils, they took heart again; and Gardener opposed the Archbishops
motion with all possible earnestness. And that whole Faction fell so upon it,
that the timorous Bishops not only forsook Cranmer, but Heath of Rochester, and
Skip of Hereford, were very earnest with him to stay for a better opportunity:
But he generously preferred his Conscience to those arts of Policy, which he
would never practice; and said, he would push it as far as it would go. So he
plied the King, and the other Lords so earnestly, that at length the Bill
passed, though clogged with many Provisoes, and very much short of what he had
designed.

The Preamble set forth, that there being many dissensions about Religion, the
Scriptures, An Act about it.
which the King had put into the hands of his People, were abused by many
seditious persons, in their Sermons, Books, Plays, Rithmes, and Songs: from
which great Inconveniences were like to arise. For preventing these, it was
necessary to establish a Form of sincere Doctrine, conformable to that which
was taught by the Apostles. Therefore all the Books of the Old and New
Testament, of Tindals Translation (which is called Crafty, False, and Untrue,)
are forbidden to be kept o^ used, in the Kings Dominions: with all other Books,
contrary to the Doctrine set forth in the year 1540. with Punishments and
Fines, and Imprisonment upon such as sold or kept such Books. But Bibles that
were not of Tindals Translation were still to be kept, only the Annotations, or
Preambles, that were in any of them, were to be cut out, or dashed; and the
Kings Proclamations, and Injunctions, with the Primmers and other Books Printed
in English, for the instruction of the people before the year 1540, were still
to be in force: and among these, Chancers Books are by name mentioned. No Books
were to be Printed about Religion, without the Kings Allowance. In no Plays,
nor Enterludes, they might make any Expositions of Scripture; but only reproach
Vice, and set forth virtue in them. None might read the Scripture in any open
Assembly, or expound it; but he who was Licensed by the King or his Ordinary;
with a Proviso, that the Chancellors in Parliament, Judges, Recorders, or any
others, who were wont in public occasions to make Speeches, and commonly took
a place of Scripture for their Text, might still do as they had done formerly.
Every Nobleman, or Gentleman, might cause the Bible to be read to him, in or
about his House, quietly and without disturbance. Every Merchant that was a
Householder, might also read it. But no Woman, nor Artificers, Apprentices,
Journeymen, Serving-men, under the degree of Yeomen; nor no Husbandmen, or
Laborers, might read it. Yet every Noble Woman, or Gentlewoman, might read it
for her self: and so might all other persons, but those who were excepted.
Every person might read and teach in their Houses, the Book set out in the year
1540. with the Psalter, Primmer, Paternoster, the Ave, and the Creed in
English. All Spiritual persons, who preached or taught contrary to the Doctrine
set forth in that Book, were to be admitted, for the first conviction, to
renounce their errors; for the second to abjure, and carry a Faggot; which if
they refused to do, or fell into a third offense, they were to be burnt. But
the Laity, for the third offense, were only to forfeit their Goods and
Chattels, and be liable to perpetual Imprisonment. But these offenses were to
be objected to them, within a year after they were committed. And whereas
before, the Party accused was not allowed to bring Witnesses for his own
Purgation; this was now granted him. But to this a severe Proviso was added,
which seemed to overthrow all the former favor; that the Act of the six
Articles was still in the same force, in which it was before the making of this
Act. Yet that was moderated by the next Proviso; That the King might at any
time hereafter at his pleasure change this Act or any Provision in it.

This last Proviso was made stronger by another Act, made for the due execution
of Proclamations, in pursuance of a former Act to the same effect, of which
mention was made in the 31st year of the Kings Reign. By that former Act there
was so great a number of Officers of State, and of the Kings Household, of
Judges, and other persons, to sit on these Trials, that those not being easily
brought together, the Act had never taken any effect. Therefore it was now
appointed, that nine Counselors should be a sufficient number for these
Trials. At the passing of that Act the Lord Montjoy protested against it, which
is the single Instance of a Protestation against any public Bill, through this
Kings whole Reign.

The Act about Religion, freed the Subjects from the fears under which they
were before. For now the Laity were delivered from the hazard of burning; and
the Spirituality were not in danger, but upon the third Conviction. They might
also bring their own witnesses, which was a great favor to them. Yet that high
power which was given the King, of altering the Act or any parts of it, made,
that they were not absolutely secured from their fears, of which some instances
afterward appeared. But as this Act was some mitigation of former severities,
so it brought the Reformers to depend wholly on the Kings Mercy, for their
Lives: since he could now chain up, or let loose, the Act of the six Articles
upon them, at his pleasure.

Soon after the end of this Parliament, A League between the King and Emperor.
a League was sworn between the King and the Emperor, on Trinity Sunday;
Offensive, and Defensive, for England, Calais, and the places about it, and for
all Flanders; with many other particulars, to be found in the Treaty set down
at large by the Lord Herbert. There is no mention made of the Legitimation of
the Lady Mary; but it seems it was promised, that she should be declared next
in the Succession of the Crown, to Prince Edward, if the King had no other
Children; which was done in the next Parliament, without any reflections on her
Birth; and the Emperor was content to accept of that, there being no other
terms to be obtained. The Popish party, who had set up their rest on bringing
the King and Emperor to a League, and putting the Lady Mary into the
Succession, no doubt pressed the Emperor much to accept of this: which we may
reasonably believe was vigorously driven on by Bonner, who was sent to Spain,
an Ambassador for concluding this Peace, by which also the Emperor gained much;
for having engaged the Crowns of England, and France in a War, and drawn off
the King of England from his League with the Princes of Germany, he was now at
more leisure to prosecute his designs in Germany.

But the negotiation in Scotland succeeded not to the Kings mind, though at
first there were very good appearances. The Cardinal, by forging a Will for the
dead King, A Treaty for a match with the Queen of Scotland.
got himself and some of his party to be put into the Government. But the Earl
of Arran ( Hamilton,) being the nearest in blood to the young Queen, and being
generally beloved for his Probity, was invited to assume the Government: which
he managed with great moderation, and an universal applause. He summoned a
Parliament which confirmed him in his Power, during the Minority of the Queen.
The King sent Sir Ralph Sadler to him, to agree the Marriage, and to desire him
to send the young Queen into England. And if private ends wrought much on him,
Sadler was empowered to offer another Marriage of the Kings second Daughter,
the Lady Elizabeth, to his Son. The Earl of Arran was himself inclinable to
Reformation, and very much hated the Cardinal. So he was easily brought to
consent to a Treaty for the Match, which was concluded in August. By which the
young Queen was to be bred in Scotland, till she was ten years of age: but the
King might send a Nobleman, and his Wife, with other persons, not exceeding 20,
to wait on her. And for performance of this, six Noblemen were to be sent from
Scotland for Hostages. The Earl of Arran being then Governor, kept the Cardinal
under restraint till this Treaty was Concluded: But he, corrupting his Keepers
made his escape, and joining with the Queen Mother, they made a strong faction
against the Governor; all the Clergy joined with the Cardinal to oppose the
Match with England, since they looked for ruin if it succeeded. The Queen,
being a sister of Guise, and bred in the French Court, was wholly for their
Interests; and all that had been obliged by that Court, or depended on it, were
quickly drawn into the Party. It was also said to every body, that it was much
more the Interest of Scotland to match with France, than with England. If they
were united to France, The different Interests there.
they might expect an easy Government. For the French being at such distance
from them, and knowing how easily they might throw themselves into the Arms of
England, would certainly rule them gently, and avoid giving them great
Provocations. But if they were united to England, they had no remedy, but must
look for an heavier yoke to be laid on them. This meeting with the rooted
Antipathy, that by a long continuance of War, was grown up among them to a
savage hatred of the English Nation; and being inflamed by the considerations
of Religion, raised an universal dislike of the Match with England, in the
greatest part of the whole Nation; only a few men of greater Probity, who were
weary of the depredations and Wars in the Borders, and had a liking to the
Reformation of the Church, were still for it.

The French Court struck in vigorously with their Party in Scotland, and sent
over the Earl of Lenox; who, as he was next in blood to the Crown, The French
party prevails.
after the Earl of Arran, so was of the same family of the Stewarts, which had
endeared him to the late King. He was to lead the Queens party against the
Hamiltons. Yet they employed another Tool, which was John Hamilton, base
Brother to the Governor, who was afterward Archbishop of St. Andrews. He had
great power over his Brother, who being then not above four and twenty years of
age, and having been the only lawful Son of his Father in his old age, was
never bred abroad: and so understood not the Policies and arts of Courts, and
was easily abused by his base Brother. He assured him, that if he went about to
destroy Religion, by matching the Queen to an Heretical Prince, they would
depose him from his Government, and declare him Illegitimate. There could be
indeed nothing clearer than his Fathers Divorce from his first Wife. For it had
been formerly proved, that she had been married to the Lord Yesters Son, before
he married her, who claimed her as his Wife; upon which, her Marriage with the
Earl of Arran was declared Null in the year 1507. And it was ten years after,
that the Earl of Arran did Marry the Governors Mother: Of which things the
Original Instruments are yet extant. Yet it was now said that that Precontract
with the Lord Yesters Son was but a forgery, to dissolve that Marriage: and if
the Earl of Lenox, (who was next to the Crown, in case the Earl of Arran was
Illegitimated,) should by the assistance of France procure a review of that
Process from Rome, and obtain a Revocation of that Sentence, by which his
Fathers first Marriage was annulled; then it was plain that the second
marriage, with the issue by it, would be of no force. All this wrought on the
Governor much, and at length drew him off from the Match with England, and
brought him over to the French Interests. Which being effected, there was no
further use of the Ea^l of L^nnox; so he finding himself neglected, by the
Queen, and the Cardinal, and abandoned by the Crown of France, fled into
England: where he was very kindly received by the King, who gave him in
marriage his Niece, Lady Margaret Dowglass, whom the Queen of Scotland had born
to the Earl of Angus, her second Husband. From which Marriage issued the Lord
Darnly Father to King James.

When the Lords of the French Faction had carried things to their mind in
Scotland, it was next considered, what they should do to redeem the Hostages
whom the Lords, who were Prisoners in England, had left behind them. And for
this, no other Remedy could be found, but to let them take their hazard; and
leave them to the King of England's mercy: To this they all agreed, only the
Earl of Cassilis had too much Honor and Virtue to do so mean a thing.
Therefore, after he had done all he could for maintaining the Treaty about the
Match, he went into England, and offered himself again to be a Prisoner. But as
generous actions are a reward to themselves, so they often meet with that
entertainment which they deserve. And upon this occasion, the King was not
wanting to express a very great value for that Lord. He called him another
Regulus, but used him better. For he both gave him his Liberty, and made him
noble Presents, and sent him and his Hostages back, being resolved to have a
severer reparation for the injury done him. All which I have opened more fully,
because this will give a great light to the affairs of that Kingdom: which will
be found in the Reigns of the succeeding Princes, to have a great intermixture
with the affairs of this Kingdom. Nor are they justly represented by any who
write of these times; and having seen some Original Papers relating to Scotland
at that time, I have done it upon more certain information.

The King of England made War next upon France: The grounds of this War are
recited by the Lord Herbert. A War with France.
One of these is proper for me to repeat; That the French King had not deserted
the Bishop of Rome, and consented to a Reformation, as he had once Promised.
The rest related to other things, such as the seizing our Ships; The detaining
the yearly Pension due to the King; The Fortifying Ardres to the prejudice of
the English pale; The revealing the Kings secrets to the Emperor; The having
given, first his Daughter, and then the Duke of Guises Sister, in Marriage, to
his Enemy, the King of Scotland; and his confederating himself with the Turk.
And Satisfaction not being given in these particulars a War is declared.

In July the King married Katharine Parre, A new persecution of Protestants.
who had been formerly married to Nevil Lord Latimer. She was a secret Favourer
of the Reformation; yet could not divert a storm, which at this time fell on
some in Windsor. For that being a place to which the King did often retire, it
was thought fit to make some examples there. And now the League with the
Emperor, gave the Popish Faction a greater interest in the Kings Counsels.
There was at this time a Society at Windsor, that favored the Reformation.
Anthony Person a Priest, Robert Testwood, and John Marbeck Singing Men, and
Henry Filmer of the Town of Windsor, were the chief of them. But those were
much favored by Sir Philip H^bby and his Lady, and several others of the Kings
Family. During Cr^^^els power none questioned them; but after his fall they
were looked on with an ill eye. Doctor Lond^n, who had by the most servile
Flatteries insinuated himself into Crom^el, and was much employed in the
suppression of Monasteries, and expressed a particular zeal in removing all
Images and Relics which had been abused to Superstition, did now, upon
Crom^els fall, apply himself to Gardener, by whose means he was made a
Prebendary there. And to show how dexterously he could make his Court both ways,
or to make compensation for what he had formerly done, he took care to gather a
whole Book of Informations, against these in Windsor, who favored the New
Learning, (which was the modest phrase by which they termed the Reformation.)
He carried this Book to Gardener, who moved the King in Council, that a
Commission might be granted for searching suspected Houses at Windsor, in which
it was Informed there were many Books against the six Articles. The King
granted the Warrant for the Town, but not for the Castle. So those before
named, were seized on, and some of these Books were found in their houses. Dr.
Hains, Dean of Exceter, and Prebendary of Windsor, being informed against, was
also put in Prison; so was likewise Sir Philip Hobby. But there were likewise
some Papers of Notes on the Bible, and of a Concordance in English, found in
Marbecks house, written with his own hand: and he being an Illiterate man, they
did not doubt but these were other men's works, which he was writing out. So
they began with him, and hoped to draw discoveries from him. He was frequently
examined, but would tell nothing that might do hurt to any other person. But
being Examined, who wrote these Notes, he said they were his own: for he read
all the Books he could light on, and wrote out what every man had written on
any place of Scripture. And for his Concordance, he told them, that being a
poor man, he could not buy one of the Bibles, when they came first out in
English, but set himself to write one out: by which another perceiving his
Industry, suggested to him, that he would do well to write a Concordance in
English; but he said, he knew not what that was: so the other person explaining
it to him, he got a Latin Concordance, and an English Bible; and having learned
a little Latin, when he was young, he, by comparing the English with the Latin,
had drawn out a Concordance, (...) great ingeniousness.
which he had brought to the Letter L. This seemed so extravagant a thing to
Gardener, and the other Bishops that examined him, that they could by no means
believe it. But he desired they would draw out any words of the letter M. and
give him the Latin Concordance, with the English Bible, and after a little time
they should see whether he had not done the rest. So the Trial was made, and in
a days time he had drawn out three sheets of Paper, upon those words that were
given him. This both satisfied, and astonished the Bishops, wondering at the
Ingeniousness and diligence of so poor a man. It was much talked of, and being
told the King, he said Marbeck employed his time better than those that
examined him. For the others, they were kept in Prison at London, till the 24th
of July, that the King gave orders to try them at Windsor.

There was a Court held there, on the 27th of July, where Capo^ Bishop of
Sa^um, and Franklin Dean of Windsor, and Fachel Parson of Reading, and three of
the Judges, sat on those four men. Three burnt at Windsor.
They were Endited for some words spoken against the Mass. Marbeck only for
writing out an Epistle of Calvin's against it; which, he said, he copied before
the Act of the six Articles was made. The Jury was not called out of the Town,
for they would not trust it to them, but out of the Farms of the Chapel. They
were all found guilty, and so condemned to be burnt, which was Executed on
three of them the next day: only Marbeck was recommended to the Bishop of
Winchesters care, to procure his Pardon, which was obtained. The other three
expressed great composure of mind in their Sufferings, and dyed with much
Christian Resolution and Patience; forgiving their persecutors, and committing
themselves to the Mercies of God through Jesus Christ.

But in their Trial, Doctor London, and Symonds, Their Persecuters are perjured.
a Lawyer and an Informer, had studied to fish out accusations against many of
the Kings Servants, as Sir Philip Hobby, and Sir Thomas Cardine, with their
Ladies, and several others who had favored those men. With these Informations,
Okam, that had been the Clerk of the Court, was sent to Gardener: But one of
the Queens servants who had discovered the design, was before him at Court.
Upon the advertisement which he had brought, Okam was seized on at his coming
to Court, and all his Papers were examined; in which they discovered a
Conspiracy against those Gentlemen, with other Plots, that gave the King great
Offense; but the particulars are not mentioned. So Doctor London and Simmonds
were sent for, and examined upon this desertion. But they, not knowing that
their Letters were intercepted, denied there was any such Plot; and being put
to their Oaths, swore it. Then their own handwriting was produced against
them. Upon which, they being thus Perjured, were ordered to be carried on
Horseback, with their faces to the Horse tails, and Papers on their
Foreheads, for their perjury; and then to be set in the Pillory, both in
Windsor, Reading, and Newbury, where the King was at that time. This was
accordingly executed on them; but sunk so deep in Doctor Londons heart, that he
dyed soon after. From all this it will appear what sort of men the Persecutors
at that time were.

But this was a small part of what Gardener had Projected: A Conspiracy against
Cranmer.
For he looked on these, as persons unworthy of his displeasure. Cranmer was
chiefly aimed at by him. And therefore all that party were still infusing it
into the Kings mind, that it was great Injustice to prosecute poor men with so
much severity, and let the chief Supporter of Heresy stand in so eminent a
degree, and in such favor about him. At length the King, to discover the
bottom of their designs, seemed to give ear to their accusations, and desired
to hear what particulars could be objected against him. This gave them great
encouragement; for till that time, the King would let nothing be said against
Cranmer. So they concluded he would be quickly ruined, since the King had
opened his ear to their Informations. Therefore many particulars were quickly
laid together, and put into the Kings hands; who a little after that, going to
divert himself on the River, ordered his ^argem^n to Row toward Lamb^th, which
being perceived b^ some of the Archbishops ^ervants, they acquainted him with
it, who hasted down to his stairs to do his duty to the King. When the King saw
him, (...)
he called him into the Barge; and they being alone, the King lamented the
growth of Heresy, and the dissensions and confusions that were like to follow
upon it; and said, he intended to find out the chief Encourager and ^avourer of
these Heresies, and make him an Example to the rest. And he asked the
Archbishops opinion about it. Who answered him, That it was a good resolution;
but entreated the King to consider well what Heresy was, and not to condemn
those as Heretics, who stood for the Word of God, against humane Inventions.
But after some discourse, the King told him he was the man, who, as he was
informed, was the chief Encourager of Heresy; and then gave him the Articles
that were brought against him, and his Chaplains, both by some Prebendaries of
Cant^rb^ry, and the Justices of Peace in Kent. When he read them, he kneeled
down, and desired the King would put the matter to a Trial. He acknowledged he
was still of the same mind he was of, when he opposed the Six Articles; but
that he had done nothing against them. Then the King asked him about his Wife.
He frankly confessed he had a Wife; but said, That he had sent her to Germany,
upon the passing the Act against Priests having Wives. His candor and
simplicity wrought so on the King, that he discovered to him the whole Plot
that was laid against him; and said, That instead of bringing him to any Trial
about it, he would have him try it out, and proceed against those his Accusers.
But he excused himself, and said it would not be decent for him to sit Judge in
his own Cause. But the King said to him, he was resolved none other should
Judge it, but those he should name. So he named his Chancellor, and his
Register; to whom the King added another: And a Commission being given them,
they went into Kent, and sat three weeks to find out the first Contrivers of
this Accusation. And now every one disowned it, since they saw he was still
firmly rooted in the Kings esteem and favor. But it being observed, that the
Commissioners proceeded faintly, Cranmers friends moved that some man of
Courage and Authority, might be sent thither to canvass this Accusation more
carefully. So Doctor Lee Dean of York, was brought up about All-hall^^tid, and
sent into Kent. And he, who had been well acquainted with the Arts of
discovering secrets, when he was one of the visitors of the Abbeys, managed it
more vigorously. He ordered a search to be made of all suspected persons; among
whose Papers, Letters were found, both from the Bishop of Winchester, and
Doctor Lon^^^, and some of those whom Cranmer had treated with the greatest
freedom and kindness, in which the whole Plot against him was discovered. But
it was now near the Session of Parliament: and the King was satisfied with the
discovery, but thought it not fit to make much noise of it. And he received no
addresses from the Archbishop to prosecute it further: His Christian ^emper of
wind.
who was so noted for his Clemency, and following our Saviors Rule, of Doing
good for evil, that it was commonly said, The way to get his favor, was to do
him an injury. These were the only Instances in which he expressed his
resentments. Two of the Conspirators against him, 1544.
had been persons signally obliged by him: The one was the Bishop Suffragan of
Dover; the other was a Civilian, whom he had employed much in his business. But
all the notice he took of it, was to show them their Letters, and to admonish
them to be more faithful and honest for the future. Upon which he freely
forgave them, and carried it so to them afterward, as if he had absolutely
forgotten what they had contrived against him. And a person of Quality coming
to him about that time, to obtain his favor and assistance in a Suit, in which
he was to move the King, he went about it, and had almost procured it: but the
King calling to mind, that he had been one of his secret accusers, asked him
whether he took him for his friend; he answered that he did so. Then the King
said, the other was a Knave, and was his mortal Enemy; and bid him, when he
should see him next, call him a Knave to his Face. Cranmer answered, that such
Language did not become a Bishop. But the King sullenly commanded him to do it;
yet his modesty was such, that he could not obey so harsh a Command. And so he
passed the matter over. When these things came to be known, all persons, that
were not unjustly prejudiced against him, acknowledged that his behavior was
suitable to the Example and Doctrine of the meek and lowly Savior of the World:
And very well became so great a Bishop, and such a Reformer of the Christian
Religion; who in those sublime and extraordinary Instances practiced that which
he taught others to do. The year in which this fell out is not expressed by those
who have recorded it; but by the concurring circumstances, I judge it likeliest
to have been done this year.

Soon after this, the Parliament met, that was Summoned to meet the 14th of
January, in the 35th year of the Kings Reign; 1544.
in which the Act of the Succession of the Crown passed. Which contains, A new
Parliament.
That the King being now to pass the Seas, to make War upon his Ancient Enemy
the French King, Act about the Succession
and being desirous to settle the Succession to the Crown; It is Enacted that
in default of Heirs of Prince Edwards body, or of Heirs by the Kings present
Marriage, the Crown shall go to the Lady Mary, the Kings Eldest Daughter: and
in default of Heirs of her body, or if she do not observe such limitations or
conditions as shall be declared by the Kings Letters Patents under his great
Seal, or by his last Will under his hand, it shall next fall to the Lady
Elizabeth, and her heirs; or if she have none, or shall not keep the conditions
declared by the King, it shall fall to any other that shall be declared by the
Kings Letters Patents, or his last Will Signed with his hand. There was also an
Oath devised, instead of those formerly sworn, both against the Popes
Supremacy, and for maintaining the Succession in all points according to this
Act: which whosoever refused to take, was to be adjudged a Traitor; and
whosoever should, either in words, or by writing, say any thing contrary to
this Act, or to the peril and slander of the Kings heirs, limited in the Act,
was to be adjudged a Traitor. This was done, no doubt, upon a secret Article of
the Treaty with the Emperor; and did put new life into the Popish party, all
whose hopes depended on the Lady Mary. But how much this lessened the
Prerogative, 1542.
and the Right of Succession, will be easily discerned; the King in this
affecting an unusual extent of his own Power, though with the diminution of the
Rights of his ^uccessors.

There was another Bill about the qualifying of the Act of the six Articles,
that was sent diverse times from the one House to the other. It was brought to
the Lords the 1st of March, and read the first time; and stuck till the 4th,
when it was read the second time; on the 5th it was read the third time, and
passed, and was sent down to the Commons, with words to be put in, or put out
of it. On the 6th, the Commons sent it up with some alterations: And on the
8th, the Lords sent it down again to the Commons: where it lay till the 17th,
and then it was sent up with their agreement. And the Kings Assent was given by
his Letters Patents on the 29th of March. Act against Conspiracies.
The Preamble was, That whereas untrue accusations, and presentiments, might be
maliciously contrived against the Kings Subjects, and kept secret till a time
were espied to have them by malice convicted: Therefore it was Enacted, That
none should be Endited, but upon a presentment by the Oaths of twelve men, to
at least, three of the Commissioners appointed by the King: and that none
should be Imprisoned, but upon an Enditement, except by a special Warrant from
the King, and that all Presentiments should be made within one year after the
Offenses were committed; and if words were uttered in a Sermon, contrary to the
Statute, they must be complained of within forty days, unless a just cause
were given why it could not be so soon: Admitti^g also the parties Endited to
all such Challenges as they might have in any other case of Felony. This Act
has clearly a Relation to the Conspiracies mentioned the former year, both
against the Archbishop, and some of the Kings Servants.

Another Act passed, continuing some former Acts for revising the Canon Law,
and for drawing up such a body of Ecclesiastical Laws, as should have Authority
in England. This Cranmer pressed often with great vehemence; and to show the
necessity of it, drew out a short Extract of some passages in the Canon Law,
(which the Reader will find in the Collection,) to show how undecent a thing it
was, Collect. Numb. 27.
to let a Volume, in which such Laws were, be studied or considered any longer
in England. Therefore he was earnest to have such a Collection of
Ecclesiastical Laws made, as might regulate the Spiritual Courts. But it was
found more for the greatness of the Prerogative, and the Authority of the Civil
Courts, to keep that undetermined; so he could never obtain his desire during
this Kings Reign.

Another Act passed in this Parliament for the remission of a Loan of Money,
which the King had raised. This is almost copied out of an Act to the same
effect, that passed in the twenty first year of the Kings Reign: with this
addition, That by this Act, those who had got payment, either in whole, or in
part, of the Sums so lent the King, were to repay it back to the Exchequer. All
business being finished, and a general pardon passed, with the ordinary
exceptions of some Crimes, among which, Heresy is one, the Parliament was
Prorogued on the 29th of March, to the 4th of November. 1544.


The King had now a War both with France and Scotland upon him. And therefore
to prepare for it, he both enhanced the value of Money, and embased it: for
which, he that writes his vindication gives this for the reason; That the Coin
being generally embased all over Europe, he was forced to do it, lest otherwise
all the Money should have gone out of the Kingdom. He resolved to begin the War
with Scotland, and sent an Army by Sea thither, The Wars against S^otlan^
succesful^.
under the command of the Earl of Hartford, (afterward Duke of Somerset,) who
landing at Grantham, a little above Leith, burnt, and spoiled, Leith, and
Edinburgh; in which they found more riches than they thought could possibly
have been there; and they went through the Country, burning and spoiling it
everywhere, till they came to Berwick. But they did too much if they intended
to gain the hearts of that people, and too little if they intended to subdue
them. For as they besieged not the Castle of Edinburgh, which would have cost
them more time, and trouble; so they did not fortify Leith, nor leave a
Garrison in it, which was such an inexcusable Omission, that it seems their
Counsels were very weak and ill laid. For Leith being fortified, and a Fleet
kept going between it and Berwick or Tinmouth, the Trade of the Kingdom must
have been quite stopped, Edinburgh ruined, the Intercourse between France and
them cut off, and the whole Kingdom forced to submit to the King. But the
spoils this Army made, had no other effect, but to enrage the Kingdom, and
unite them so entirely to the French Interests; that when the Ea^l of L^nn^x
was sent down by the King, to the Western parts of Scotland, where his Power
lay, he could get none to follow him. And the Governor of Dunbritton Castle,
though his own Lieutenant, would not deliver that Castle to him, when he
understood he was to put it in the King of Englands hands, but drove him out;
others say, he ^^ed away of himself, else he had been taken Prisoner.

The King was now to cross the Seas: but, before he went, he studied to settle
the matters of Religion, so that both Parties might have some content. Audley
the Chancellor dying, he made the Lord Wriothesley, that had been Secretary,
and was of the Popish Party, Lord Chancellor; but made Sir William Petre, that
was Cranmers great friend, Secretary of State. He also committed the Government
of the Kingdom in his absence, to the Queen, to whom he joined the Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Hartford, and Secretary Petre.
And if there was need of any Force to be raised, he appointed the Earl of
Hartford his Lieutenant; under whose Government the Reformers needed not fear
any thing. But he did another Act, that did wonderfully please that whole
Party, which was, the Translating of the Prayers, for the Processions, and
Lita^ies, into the English tongue. This was sent to the Archbishop of
Canterbury on the 11th of June, with an Order that it should be used over all
his Province, as the Reader will find in the Collection. This was not only very
acceptable to that Party, Col^ect. Numb. 2^*
because of the thing it self; but it gave them hope, that the King was again
opening his ears to motions for Reformation, to which they had been shut now
about six years: And therefore they looked that more things of that nature
would quickly follow. 1545.
And as these Prayers were now set out in English, so they doubted not, but
there being the same reason to put all the other Offices in the vulgar tongue,
they would prevail for that too.

Things being thus settled at home, the King having sent his Forces over before
him, crossed the Seas, with much pomp, the Sails of his Ship being of Cloth of
Gold. He Landed at Calais the 14th of July. The Emperor pressed his marching
straight to Paris. But he thought it of more importance to take Bulloign, and
after two months Siege, it was surrendered to him; into which he made his Entry
with great Triumph on the 18th of September. (...)
But the Emperor having thus engaged those two Crowns in a War; and designing,
while they should fight it out, to make himself Master of G^rman^, concluded a
Treaty with the French King the very next day, being the 19th of September;
which is set down at large by the Lord Herbert. On the 30th of September the
King returned into England: in October following Bulloign was very near lost by
a surprise, but the Garrison put themselves in order, and beat back the French.
Several Inroads were made into Scotland, but not with the same success, that
the former Expedition had. For the Scots, animated with supplies sent from
France, and in^^amed with a desire of revenge, resumed their wonted courage,
and beat back the English with considerable loss.

Next year the French King, resolving to recover Bulloign, and to take Calais,
1545.
that so he might drive the English out of France, intended first to make
himself Master of the Sea. And he set out a great Fleet of an hundred and fifty
greater Ships, and sixty lesser ones, besides many Galleys brought from the
Streights. The King set out about an hundred Ships. On both sides these were
only Merchant Ships that were hired for this War. But after the French Fleet
had looked on England, and attempted to Land with ill success, both in the Isle
of Wight, and in Sussex, and had engaged in a Sea Fight for some hours; they
returned back without any considerable action: Nor did they any thing at Land.
But the Kings Fleet went to Normandy, where they made a descent, and burnt the
Country. So that this year was likewise glorious to the King. The Emperor had
now done what he long designed: And therefore being courted by both Crowns, he
undertook a Mediation, that under the Color of Mediating a peace, he might the
more effectually keep up the War.

The Princes of Germany saw what mischief was designed against them. The German
(...) peace.
The Council of Trent was now opened, and was condemning their Doctrine. A
League was also concluded between the Pope and the Emperor, for procuring
Obedience to their Canons and Decrees: And an Army was raising. The Emperor was
also setting on foot old quarrels with some of the Princes: A firm Peace was
concluded with the Turk. So that if the Crowns of England and France were not
brought to an Agreement, they were undone. They sent Ambassador, to both Courts
to mediate a Peace. With them Cranmer joined his endeavors, but he had not a
Cromwell in the Court, to manage the Kings temper; who was so provoked with the
ill Treatment he had received from France, that he would not come to an
Agreement: nor would he restore Bulloign, without which the (...) wo^ld hear of
no Peace. Cranmer had at this time almost prevailed with the King to make some
further steps in a Reformati^^. But (...), who was then Ambassador in the
Emperors Co^^^, being advertised of it, wrote to the King; That the Emperor
^ould certainly join with France against him, if he made any further Innovation
in Religion. This diverted the King from it; and in August this year the only
great Friend that Cranmer had in the Court died, Charles Duke of Su^^^lk, who
had long continued in the height of favor; which was always kept up, not only
by an agreement of humors between the King and him, but by the constant
success which followed him in all his exploits. He was a Favourer of the
Reformation, as far as could consist with his interest at Court, which he never
endangered upon any account.

Now Cranmer was left alone, without friend or support. Yet he had gained one
great Preferment in the Church, to a man of his own mind. The Archbishopric
of York falling void by Lee's death, Church resentments given to Informers.
Robert Alrich, that was Bishop of Landaff, was promoted to that See in
January; Kitchen being made Bishop of Landaff, who turned with every Change
that was made under the three succeeding Princes. The Archbishop of York set
about the Reforming of things in his Province, which had layn in great
confusion all his Predecessors time: So on the third of March he took out a
License from the King for making a Metropolitical Visitation. Dell, that was
Bishop of Worc^st^r had resigned his Bishopric the former year, (the reason of
which is not set down.) The Bishop of Rochester, Heath, was Translated to that
See: and Henry Holbeach, that favored the Reformation, was made Bishop of
Rochester. And upon the Translation of Sampson, from Chichester to Coventry and
Litchfield, Day that was a Moderate man, and inclinable to Reformation, was
made Bishop of that See. So that now Cranmer had a greater Party among the
Bishops than at any time before.

But though there were no great Transactions about Religion in England this
year, there were very remarkable things done in Scotland, though of a different
nature; which were the burning of Wishart, and some months after that, the
killing of Cardinal Beaton; the account of both which, will not (I hope) be
Ungrateful to the Reader.

Mr. George Wishart was descended of a Noble Family; he went to finish his
studies in the University of Cambridge, where he was so well instructed in the
Principles of true Religion, (...) suff^rings in S^^^land.
that returning to Scotland, Anno 1544. He Preached over the Country, against
the Corruptions which did then so generally prevail. He stayed most at Dundee,
which was the chief Town in th^se parts. But the Cardinal offended at this,
sent a threatening Message to the Magistrates; upon which one of them, as
Wishart ended one of his Sermons, Spotswood.
was so obsequious as to forbid him to Preach any more among them, or give them
any further trouble: to whom he answered, That God knew he had no design to
trouble them, but for them to reject the Messengers of God, was not the way to
escape trouble; when he was gone, God would send Messengers of another sort
among them. He had to the hazard of his Life, Preached the word of Salvation to
them, and they had now rejected him: but if it was long well with them, he was
not led by the Spirit of Truth; and if unlooked for trouble fell on them, he
bade them remember this was the Cause of it, and turn to God by Repentance.
From thence he went to the Western parts, where he was also much followed. But
the Archbishop of Glasgow, giving order, that he should not be admitted to
Preach in Churches, he Preached often in the fields: and when in some places
his followers would have forced the Churches, he checked them and said, it was
the word of Peace that he Preached, and therefore no blood should be shed about
it: But after he had stayed a month there, he heard that there was a great
Plague in Dundee, which broke out the fourth day after he had left it: upon
which, he presently returned thither and Preached often to them, standing over
one of the Gates, having taken care that the Infected persons should stand
without, and those that were clean within the Gate. He continued among them and
took care to supply the poor, and to visit the sick, and do all the Offices of
a faithful Pastor in that extremity. Once as he ended his Sermon, a Priest
coming to have killed him, was taken with the weapon in his hand, but when the
people were rushing furiously on him, Wishart got him in his Arms and saved him
from their rage, for he said he had done no harm, only they saw what they might
look for. He became a little after this more than ordinary serious and
apprehensive of his end: he was seen sometimes to rise in the night, and spend
the greatest part of it in Prayer; and he often warned his hearers, that his
Sufferings were at hand, but that few should suffer after him, and that the
Light of true Religion should be spread over the whole Land. He went to a great
many places, where his Sermons were well received, and came last to Lothian,
where he found a greater neglect of the Gospel, than in other parts, for which
he threatened them, That Strangers should chase them from their dwellings and
possess them. He was Lodged in a Gentleman of Qualities house Cockburn of
Ormeston, when in the night the house was beset by some horsemen, who were sent
by the Cardinals means to take him. The Earl of Bothwel that had the chief
Jurisdiction in the County, was with them, who promising that no hurt should be
done him, he caused the Gate to be opened, saying, The Blessed Will of God be
done. When he presented himself to the Earl of Bothwel, he desired to be
proceeded with according to Law, for he said, he feared less to die openly,
than to be Murdered in secret. The Earl promised upon his honor, that no harm
should be done him: and for some time seemed resolved, to have made his words
good, but the Queen Mother and Cardinal in end prevailed with him, to put
Wishart in their hands, and they sent him to St. Andrews, where it was agreed
to make a Sacrifice of him. Upon this the Cardinal called a meeting of the
Bishops to St. Andrews against the 27th of February, to destroy him with the
more Ceremony, but the Archbishop of Glasgow moved, that there should be a
Warrant procured from the Lord Governor for their proceedings. To this the
Cardinal consented, thinking the Governor was then so linked to their
Interests, that he would deny them nothing: but the Governor bearing in his
heart a secret love to Religion, and being plainly dealt with by a Noble
Gentleman of his name, (...) Preston, who laid before him the just and terrible
Judgments of God he might look for, if he suffered poor Innocents to be so
Murdered at the appetite of the Clergy; sent the Cardinal word not to proceed
till he himself came, and that he would not consent to his death* till the
cause was well examined; and that if the Cardinal proceeded against him, his
blood should be required at his hands. But the Cardinal resolved to go on at
his peril, for he apprehended, if he delayed it, there might be either a Legal
or a violent rescue made: so he ordered a mock Citation of Wishart to appear;
who being brought the next day to the Abbey-Church, the Process was opened with
a Sermon, in which the Preacher delivered a great deal of good Doctrine
concerning the Scriptures, being the only Touchstone by which Heresy was to be
tried. After Sermon, the Prisoner was brought to the Bar: he first fell down on
his knees, and after a short Prayer, he stood up, and gave a long account of
his Sermons, That he had Preached nothing, but what was contained in the ten
Commandments, the Apostles Creed, and the Lords Prayer; but was interrupted
with reproachful words, and required to answer plainly to the Articles ob^ected
to him. Upon which he appealed to an indifferent Judge: he desired to be tried
by the word of God and before my Lord Governor, whose Prisoner he was: but the
Indictment being read, he confessing and offering to justify, most of the
Articles objected against him, was Judged an obstinate Heretic, and Condemned
to be burnt. All the next night he spent in Prayer: In the Morning, two ^riers
came to Confess him, but he said, he would have nothing to do with them, yet if
he could, he would gladly speak with the Learned man, that Preached the day
before. So he being sent to him, after much Conference he asked him, if he
would receive the Sacrament? Wishart answered, he would most gladly do it, if
he might have it as Christ had instituted it, under both kinds; but the
Cardinal would not su^fer the Sacrament to be given him. And so breakfast being
brough^* he discoursed to those that were present, of the death of Christ, and
the ends of the Sacrament, and then having blessed and consecrated the
Elements, he took the Sacrament himself, and gave it to those that were with
him. That being done, he would taste no other thing, but retired to his
Devotion. Two hours after the Executioners came, and put on him a Coat of black
Linning, full of bags of Powder, and carried him out to the place of Execution,
which was before the Cardinals Castle. He spoke a little to the people,
desiring them not to be offended at the good word of God, for the sufferings
that followed it, it was the true Gospel of Christ that he had Preached, and
for which with a most glad heart and mind he now offered up his Life. The
Cardinal was set in state in a great Window of his Castle, looking on this sad
Spectacle. When Wishart was tied to the Stake, he cried aloud, O Savior of the
World have Mercy upon me! ^ather of Heaven I recommend my Spirit into thy Holy
hands. So the Executioners kindled the fire, but one perceiving after some
time, that he was yet alive, encouraged him to call still on God, to whom he
answered, The flame has scorched my body, yet has it not daunted my Spirit,
but he who from yonder high place (looking up to the Cardinal) behold^th us
with such pride, shall within few days lie in the same as ignominiously as now
he is seen proudly to rest himself. The Executioner drawing the Cord that was
about his neck straiter, s^opt his breath so, that he could speak no more, and
his body was soon consumed by the fire. Thus died this eminent servant and
witn^ss of Christ, on whose Sufferings I have enlarged the more, because they
proved so fatal to the interests of the Popish Clergy, for not any one thing
hastened forward the Reformation more, than this did, and since he had both his
Education and Ordination in England, a full account of him seems no impertinent
Digression.

The Clergy rejoiced much at his death, and thought (according to the constant
Maxim of all Persecutors) that they should live more at ease, now when Wishart
was out of the way. They magnified the Cardinal for proceeding so vigorously,
without, or rather against the Governor^ Orders: But the people did universally
look on him as a Martyr, and believed an extraordinary measure of Gods Spirit
had rested on him, since besides great innocence and purity of Life, his
predictions came so often to pass, that he was believed a Prophet as well as a
Saint: And the Reformation was now so much opened by his Preaching, and that
was so confirmed by his death that the Nation was generally possessed with the
love of it. The Nobility were mightily offended with the Cardinal, and said
Wisharts death was no less than Murder, since the Clergy without a Warrant from
the Secular Power, could dispose of no man's Life: So it came universally to be
said, that he now deserved to die by the Law, yet since he was too great for a
Legal Trial, the Kingdom being under the feeble Government of a Regency, it was
fit private persons should undertake it; and it was given out, that the killing
an Usurper, was always esteemed a commendable Action, and so in that state of
things, they thought secret practices might be justified. This agreeing so much
with the temper of some in that Nation, who had too much of the heat and
forwardness of their Country, a few Gentlemen of Quality, who had been ill
used by the Cardinal, conspired his death. He was become generally hateful to
the whole Nation, and the Marriage of his Bastard Daughter to the Earl of
Crawfords eldest Son, enraged the Nobility the more against him; and his
carriage toward them all was insolent and provoking. These offended Gentlemen
came to St. Andrews the 29th of May, and the next Morning, they and their
attendants, being but twelve in all, first attempted the Gate of his Castle,
which they found open, and made it sure; and though there were no fewer than an
hundred reckoned to be within the Castle, yet they knowing the passages of the
House, went with very little noise, to the Servants Chambers, and turned them
almost all out of doors; and having thus made the Castle sure, they went to the
Cardinals door. He who till then was fast asleep, suspecting nothing, perceived
at last by their rudeness, that they were not his friends, and made his door
fast against them. So they sent for fire to set to it, upon which he treated
with them, and upon assurance of Life he opened the door: but they rushing in,
did most cruelly and treacherously Murder him. A Tumult was raised in the Town,
and many of his friends came to rescue him, but the Conspirators carried the
dead body and exposed it to their view, in the same Window out of which he had
not long before looked on, when Wishart was burnt, which had been universally
censured as a most indecent thing in a Churchman, to deligh^ in such a
Spectacle. But those who condemned this Action, yet acknowledged Gods Justice
in so exemplary a punishment, and reflecting on Wisharts last words, were the
more confirmed in the opinion they had of his Sanctity. This Fact was
differently censured; some justified it and said, it was only the killing of a
mighty Robber, others that were glad he was out of the way, yet condemned the
manner of it, as treacherous and inhumane. And though some of the Preachers did
afterward fly to that Castle as a Sanctuary, yet none of them, were either
Actors or Consenters to it: it is true they did generally extenuate it, yet I
do not find that any of them justified it. The exemplary and signal ends of
almost all the Conspirators, scarce any of them dying an ordinary death, made
all people the more inclined to condemn it. The day after the Cardinal was
killed, about 140 came into the Castle and prepared for a Siege. The House was
well furnished in all things necessary, and it lying so near the Sea, they
expected help from King Henry, to whom they sent a Messenger for his
Assistance, and declared for him. So a Siege following, they were so well
supplied from England, that after five months the Governor was glad to treat
with them, apprehending much the footing the English might have, if those
within being driven to extremities, should receive a Garrison from King Henry:
They had the Governor also more at their mercy, for as the Cardinal had taken
his Eldest Son into his house, under the pretense of educating him, but really
as his Fathers Hostage, designing likewise to infuse in him a violent hatred of
the new Preachers; so the Conspirators finding him in the Castle, kept him
still to help them to better terms. A Treaty being agreed on, they demanded
their pardon for what they had done, together with an Absolution to be procured
from Rome, for the killing of the Cardinal; and that the Castle and the
Governors Son, should remain in their hands, till the Absolution was brought
over. Some of the Preachers apprehending the Clergy might revenge the Cardinals
death on them, were forced to fly into the Castle; but one of them John Rough
(who was afterward burnt in England in Queen Mary's time) being so offended at
the licentiousness of the Soldiers that were in the Castle, who were a
reproach to that which they pretended to favor, left them, and went away in
one of the ships, that brought Provisions out of England. When the Absolution
came from Rome, they excepted to it, for some words in it, that called the
killing of the Cardinal, Crimen irremissibile, an unpardonable crime; by which
they said the Absolution gave them no security, since it was null, if the Fact
could not be pardoned. The truth was, they were encouraged from England, so
they refused to stand to the Capitulation, and rejected the Absolution. But
some ships and Soldiers being sent from France, the Castle was besieged at
Land, and shut up also by Sea, and which was worst of all a Plague broke out
within it, of which many died. Upon this no help coming suddenly from England,
they were forced to deliver up the place on no better terms, than that their
Lives should be spared, but they were to be Banished Scotland and never to
return to it. The Castle was demolished according to the Canon Law, that
appoints all places where any Cardinal is killed to be razed. This was not
completed this year, and not till two years after, only I thought it best to
join the whole matter together and set it down all at once

In November following a New Parliament was held: where toward the expense of
the Kings Wars, the Convocation of the Province of Canterbury granted a
continuation of the former Subsidy of six shillings in the pound, A Parliament
sits.
to be paid in two years. But for the Temporality, a Subsidy was demanded from
them of another kind: There were in the Kingdom several Colleges, Chapels,
Chantries, Hospitals, and Fraternities, Chapters and Chanteries given to the
King.
consisting of Secular Priests, who enjoyed Pensions for saying Mass for the
Souls of those who had endowed them. Now the belief of Purgatory being left
indifferent, by the Doctrine set out by the Bishops, and the Trade of redeeming
souls being condemned; it was thought needless to keep up so many Endowments to
no purpose. Those Priests were also generally ill-affected to the Kings
proceedings, since their Trade was so much lessened by them. Therefore many of
them had been dealt with to make resignations: And four and twenty of them had
surrendered to the King. It was found also, that many of the Founders of these
Houses had taken them into their own hands, and that the Master, Wardens, and
Governors of them had made agreements for them, and given Leases of them:
Therefore now a Subsidy being demanded, all these were given to the King by Act
of Parliament; which also confirmed the Deeds that any had made to the King:
Empowering him in any time of his life to issue out Commissions for seizing on
these Foundations, and taking them into his own possession: which being so
seized on, should belong to the King and his successors for ever. They also
granted another Subsidy for the War. When all their business was done, the King
came to the House, and made a long Speech, of which I cannot sufficiently
wonder that no Entry is made in the Journals of the House of Lords; Yet it is
not to be doubted but he made it, for it was published by Hall soon after.

When the Speaker of the House of Commons had presented the Bills, with a
Speech full of respect and complement, as is usual upon these occasions; The
King answered, Thanking them for the Subsidy, The Kings speech to the Houses.
and the Bill about the Colleges and Chanteries; and assured them that he
should take care, both for supplying the Ministers, for encouraging Learning,
and relieving the Poor; and they should quickly perceive that in these things
their expectations should be answered, beyond what they either wished or
desired. And after he had expressed his affection to them, and the assurance he
had of their duty and fidelity to him, he advised them to amend one thing;
which was, that in stead of Charity and Concord, Discord and Division ruled
every where. He cited St. Paul's words, That Charity was gentle, and not
envious, nor proud. But when one called another Heretic, and the other called
him Papist, and Pharisee* were these the signs of Charity? The fault of this he
charged chiefly on the Fathers and Teachers of the Spiritualty, who preached
one against another, without Charity or Discretion; some being too stiff in
their old M^mpsimus, others too busy and curious in their new Sumpsimus; and
few Preached the Word of God truly and sincerely. And how could the poor people
live in concord, when they sowed debate among them? Therefore he exhorted them
to set forth Gods word, by true Preaching, and giving a good Example; or else
he, as Gods Vicar, and high Minister, would see these Enormities corrected,
which if he did not do, he was an unprofitable Servant and an untrue Officer.
He next reproved them of the Temporality, who railed at their Bishops and
Priests: whereas if they had any thing to lay to their charge, they ought to
declare it to the King or his Council, and not take upon them to judge such
high points. For tho they had the Scriptures given them in their Mother Tongue,
yet that was only to inform their own consciences, and instruct their Children
and Families; but not to dispute, nor from thence to rail against Priests, and
Preachers, as some vain persons did. He was sorry that such a Jewel, as the
Word of God, was so ill used; that Rithmes and Songs were taken out of it: but
much more sorry that men followed it so little; for Charity was neverfainter, a
godly life never less appeared, and God was never less reverenced and
worshipped. Therefore he exhorted them to live as Brethren in Charity together,
to love, dread, and serve God; and then the love and union between Him and them
should never be dissolved. And so exhorting them to look to the Execution of
the Laws which themselves had desired, he gave his Royal Assent to the Bills,
and dismissed the Parliament.

The King gave at this time a Commission to the Bishops of Westminster,
Worcester, and Chichester, and the Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation, Sir
Edward North, containing, That whereas the King had founded many Cathedrals, in
which he had given large allowances, both to be distributed to the poor, and to
be laid out for the mending of high ways; To Canterbury 100 pounds for the
poor, and 40 pounds for the high ways: To Rochester 20 pounds for the poor, and
20 pounds for the Highways: To Westminster, 100 pounds for the poor, and 40
pounds for the Highways: To Winchester 100 Marks for the poor, and 50 for the
Highways: To Bristol, Gloucester, Chester, Burton upon Trent, Thornton,
Peterborough, and Ely, 20 pounds a piece for the poor, and as much for the
Highways: To Worcester 40 pounds for the poor, and 40 pounds for the
Highways: To Duresm 100 Marks for the poor, and 40 pounds for the Highways:
And to Carlisle 15 pounds for the poor, and as much for the Highways: In all
about 550 pounds a year to the poor, and about 400 pounds a year for the
Highways: They were to enquire how this money was distributed; and, if they
saw cause, they might order it to be applied to any other use which they should
judge more charitable and convenient. But what followed upon this, does not
appear by the Records.

After the Parliament was dissolved, The King confirms the Rights of the
Universities.
the Universities made their applications to the King, that they might not be
included within the general words in the Act of Dissolution, of Colleges and
Fraternities. And Dr. Cox Tutor to the Prince, wrote to Secretary Paget, to
represent to the King the great want of Schools, Preachers, and Houses for
Orphans; 1546.
that Beggary would drive the Clergy to Flattery, Superstition, and the old
Idolatry: There were ravenous Wolves about the King, that would devour
Universities, Cathedrals, and Chantries, and a thousand times as much.
Posterity would wonder at such things: Therefore he desired the Universities
might be secured from their Spoils. But the King did quickly free them from
these fears.

Now I enter into the last year of this Kings Reign. The War in France was
managed with doubtful success: yet the losses were greater on the English side.
And the Forces being commanded by the Earl of Surr^^, who was brave, but
unsuccessful, he was not only blamed but recalled, and the Earl of Hertford
sent to Command in his room. But he being a man of an high Spirit, and
disdaining the Earl of Hertford, who was now preferred before him, let fall
some words of high resentment, and bitter contempt, which not long after
wrought his ruin. The King was now alone in the War, which was very chargeable
to him; and observing the Progress that the Council of Tre^t was making, where
Cardinal Pole being one of the Legates, he had reason to look for some severe
Decree to be made against himself; since none of the Heretics of Germany were
so much hated by the Court of Ro^e, as he was: Therefore he listened to the
Counsels of peace. And tho he was not old, yet he felt such decays in his
strength, that being extremely corpulent, he had no reason to think he could
live very long: Therefore that he might not leave his young Son involved in a
War of such consequence, Peace with France.
Peace was concluded in June; which was much to the Kings honor, though the
taking and keeping of Bulloign, (which by this Peace the King was to keep for
eight years,) cost him above 1300000 pounds.

Upon the peace, the French Admiral Annebault came over to England. A new
design for Reformation.
And now again a Resolution of going on with a Reformation was set on foot: for
it was agreed between the King and the Admiral, That in both Kingdoms, the Mass
should be changed into a Communion; and Cranmer was Ordered to draw a Form of
it. They also resolved to press the Emperor to do the like in his Dominions,
otherwise to make War upon him. But how this Project failed, does not appear.
The Animosities which the former War had raised between the two Kings, were
converted into a firm Friendship: which grew so strong on Francis's part, that
he never was seen glad at any thing, after he had the news of the Kings death.

Shaxtons Apostasy.
But now one of the Kings angry fits took him at the Reformers, so that there
was a new Prosecution of them. Nicholas Shaxton, that was Bishop of Salisbury,
had been long a Prisoner: but this year, he had said in his Imprisonment, in
the Counter in Bread-street, That Christ's natural Body was not in the
Sacrament, but that it was a Sign and Memorial of his Body that was crucified
for us. Upon this he was endicted, and condemned to be burnt. But the King sent
the Bishops of London, and Worcester, to deal with him to recant; which on the
9th of July he did, acknowledging, That that year he had fallen in his old age
in the Heresy of the Sacramentaries. But that he was now convinced of that
error, by their endeavors whom the King had sent to him. And therefore he
thanked the King for delivering him, both from Temporal and Eternal fire: and
subscribed a Paper of Articles, which will be found in the Collection. Upon
this, he had his pardon and discharge sent him the 13 of July, Collect. Numb.
23.
and soon after preached the Sermon at the burning of Anne Askew; and wrote a
Book in defense of the Articles he had subscribed. What became of him all
Edward the 6ths time, I cannot tell: But I find, he was a cruel prosecutor and
Burner of Protestants, in Queen Mary's days. Yet it seems those to whom he went
over, did not consider him much, for they never raised him higher than to be
Bishop Suffragan of Ely. Others were also Endicted upon the same Statute, who
got off by recantation, and were pardoned. But Anne Askews Trial had a more
bloody Conclusion.

She was nobly descended, and educated beyond what was ordinary in that age to
those of her Sex. But she was unfortunately married, to one Kyme, who being a
violent Papist, drove her out of his House, when he found she favored the
Reformation. So she came to London, The troubles of Anne Askew.
where information being given of some words, that she had spoken against the
Corporal presence in the Sacrament, she was put in Prison: upon which, great
applications were made by many of her friends, to have her let out upon Bail.
The Bishop of London examined her, and after much pains, she was brought to set
her hand to a Recantation, by which she acknowledged, That the natural Body of
Christ was present in the Sacrament, after the Consecration; whether the Priest
were a good or an ill man: and that, whether it was presently consumed, or
reserved in the Pix, it was the true Body of Christ. Yet she added to Her
subscription, that she believed all things according to the Catholic Faith,
and not otherwise. With this the Bishop was not satisfied; but after much ado,
and many importunate addresses, she was Bailed in the end of March this year.
But not long after that, she was again apprehended, and examined before the
Kings Council then at Greenwich, where she seemed very indifferent what they
did with her. She answered them in general words, upon which they could fix
nothing, and made some sharp reparties upon the Bishop of Winchester. Some
liked the wit and freedom of her discourse, but others thought she was too
forward. From thence she was sent to Newgate, where she wrote some devotions,
and Letters, that show her to have been a woman of most extraordinary parts.
She wrote to the King, That as to the Lords Supper, she believed as much as
Christ had said in it, and as much, as the Catholic Church from him did Teach.
Upon Shaxtons Recantation they sent him to her to prevail with her. But she in
stead of yielding to him, charged his Inconstancy home upon him. She had been
often at Court, and was much favored by many great Ladies there; and it was
believed the Queen had showed kindness to her. So the Lord Chancellor examined
her of what Favor or Encouragement she had from any in the Court, particularly
from the Duchess of Suffolk, the Countess of Hertford, and some other Ladies.
But he could draw nothing from her, save that one in Livery had brought her
some money, which he said came from two Ladies in the Court. But they resolved
to extort further Confessions from her. And therefore carrying her to the
Tower, they caused her to be laid on the Rack, and gave her a taste of it. Yet
she confessed nothing. That she was rackt is very certain, for I find it in an
Original Journal of the Transactions in the Tower, written by Anthony Anthony;
but Fox adds a passage that seems scarce credible, the thing is so
extraordinary, and so unlike the Character of the Lord Chancellor, who though
he was fiercely zealous for the old Superstition, yet was otherwise a great
person: it is, that he commanded the Lieutenant of the Tower to stretch her
more; but he refused to do it, and being further pressed told him plainly he
would not do it. She endures the R^ck.
The other threatened him, but to no purpose; so the Lord Chancellor throwing
off his Gown, drew the Rack so severely, that he almost tore her Body asunder:
yet could draw nothing from her, for she endured it with unusual Patience and
Courage. When the King heard this, he blamed the Lord Chancellor for his
Cruelty, and excused the Lieutenant of the Tower. Fox does not vouch any
Warrant for this, so that though I have set it down, yet I give no entire
credit to it: if it was true, it shows the strange influence of that Religion,
and that it corrupts the Noblest natures; yet the poor Gentlewomans being
Rackt, wrought no pity in the King toward her, for he left her to be proceeded
against according to the Sentence: she was carried to the Stake in Smith^ield a
little after that in a Chair, not being able to stand through the Torments of
the Rack. And is burnt with some others.
There were brought with her at the same time, one Nicolas Belenian a Priest,
John Adams a Tailor, and John Lassels one of the Kings Servants, (it is likely
he was the same person that had discovered Queen Katharine Howard's
incontinency, for which, all the Popish Party, to be sure, bore him no good
will.) They were all convicted upon the Statute of the Six Articles, for
denying the Corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament. When they were
brought thither, Shaxton, to complete his Apostasy, made a Sermon of the
Sacrament, and inveighed against their Errors. That being ended, they were tied
to the Stake; and then the Lord Chancellor sent and offered them their pardon,
which was ready passed under the Seal, if they would recant. But they loved not
their lives so well, as to redeem them by the loss of a good Conscience; and
therefore encouraging one another to suffer patiently for the Testimony of the
truth: so they endured to the last, and were made Sacrifices by fire unto God.
There were also two in S^ffolk, and one in Norfolk, burnt on the same account a
little before this.

A new design against Cr^nm^^.
But that party at Court having incensed the King much against those Heretics,
resolved to drive it further; and to work the ruin, both of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and of the Queen: Concluding, that if these attempts were
successful, they should carry every thing else. They therefore renewed their
Complaints of the Archbishop of Canterbury; and told the King, That though
there were evident proofs ready to be brought against him, yet because of his
Greatness, and the Kings Carriage upon the former Complaints, none durst appear
against him. But if he were once put in the Tower, that men might hope to be
heard, they undertook to bring full and clear Evidences of his being a
Heretic. So the King consented, That he should be the next day called before
the Council, and sent to the Tower, if they saw cause for it. And now they
concluded him ruined. But in the night, the King sent Sir Anthony Denny to
Lambeth, to bring the Archbishop to speak with him. And when he came, the King
told him what Informations had been brought against him, and how far he had
yielded to them, that he should be sent to the To^er next day: And therefore
desired to hear from himself what he had to say upon it. Cranmer thanked him,
that he had not left him in the dark, to be surprised in a matter that
concerned him so nearly. He acknowledged the Equity of the Kings proceedings;
and all that he desired, was, That he might be brought to make his answer: And
that since he was to be Questioned for some of his Opinions, Judges might be
assigned who understood those matters. The King heard this with astonishment,
The Kings great ^a^e of him.
wondering to see a man so little concerned in his own preservation. But
pleasantly told him, he was a Fool that looked to his own safety so little. For
did he think that if he were once put in Prison, abundance of ^al^e witnesses
would not be suborned to ruin him. Therefore since he did not take care of
himself, he would look to it. And so he ordered him to appear next day before
the Council, upon their Summons; and when things were objected to him, to say,
that since he was a privy Councellor, he desired they would use him, as they
would look to be used in the like case: And therefore to move that his Accusers
might be brought face to face, and things be a little better considered before
he was sent to the Tower. And if they refused to grant that, then he was to
appeal personally to the King, (who intended to be absent that day,) and in
token of it, should show them the Kings Seal-Ring which he wore on his finger,
and was well known to them all. So the King, giving him his Ring, sent him
privately home again. Next Morning a Messenger of the Council came early, and
Summoned him to appear that day before the Council. So he went over, but was
long kept waiting in the Lobby, before he was called in. At this unusual sight
many were astonished. But Doctor Buts the Kings Physician, that loved Cranmer,
and presumed more on a diseased King than others durst do, went and told the
King what a strange thing he had seen: The Primate of all England waiting at
the Council-door, among the footmen and Servants. So the King sent them word,
that he should be presently brought in; which being done, they said, That there
were many Informations against him, that all the Heresies that were in England
came from him and his Chaplains. To which he answered as the King had directed
him. But they insisting on what was before projected, he said he was sorry to
be thus used, by those with whom he had sat so long at that Board, so that he
must appeal from them to the King: And with that took out the Kings Ring, and
showed it. This put them in a wonderful confusion, but they all rose up and
went to the King; who checked them severely for using the Archbishop so
unhandsomly. He said, he thought he had a wiser Council, than now he found they
were. He protested by the Faith he owed to God, laying his hand on his Breast,
That if a Prince could be obliged by his Subject, he was by the Archbishop,
and that he took him to be the most faithful Subject he had, and the person to
whom he was most beholding. The Duke of Norfolk made a trifling excuse, and
said, They meant no harm to the Archbishop, but only to vindicate his
Innocence by such a Trial, which would have freed him from the aspersions that
were cast on him. But the King answered, he would not suffer men that were so
dear to him, to be handled in that fashion. He knew the Factions that were
among them, and the malice that some of them bore to others; which he would
either extinguish or punish very speedily. So he commanded them all to be
Reconciled to Cranmer: Which was done with the outward Ceremony of taking him
by the hand; and was most real on his part, though the other party did not so
easily lay down the hatred they bore him. Antiqu. Brit. in vita Cranmer
This I place at this time; though Parker, who related it, names no year nor
time in which it was done; but he leads us very near it, by saying, it was
after the Duke of Suffolks death; and this being the only time after that, in
which the King was in an ill humor against the Reformers, I conclude it fell
out at this time.

Another design against the Queen.
That Party finding it was in vain to push at Cranmer any more, did never again
endeavor it. Yet one Design failing, they set on another against the Queen. She
was a great Favourer of the Reformers, and had frequently Sermons in her
Privy-Chamber, by some of those Preachers; which were not secretly carried; but
became generally known: When it came to the Kings ears, he took no notice of
it. And the Queen carried her self, in all other things, not only with an exact
conduct, but with that wonderful care about the Kings person, which became a
Wife that was raised by him to so great an honor, he was much taken with her:
So that none durst adventure on making any complaints against her. Yet the
Kings distempers increasing, and his peevishness growing with them, he became
more uneasy; and whereas she had frequently used to talk to him of Religion,
and defend the Opinions of the Reformers, in which he would sometimes
pleasantly maintain the Argument; now, becoming more impatient, he took it ill
at her hands. And she had sometimes in the heat of discourse gone very far. So
one night, after she had left him, the King being displeased, vented it to the
Bishop of Winchester that stood by: And he craftily and maliciously struck in
with the Kings anger, and said all that he could devise against the Queen, to
drive his resentments higher: and took in the Lord Chancellor into the design,
to assist him. They filled the Kings head with many stories of the Queen, and
some of her Ladies: and said, They had favored Anne Askew, and had Heretical
Books amongst them; and he persuaded the King, that they were Traitors as well
as Heretics. The matter went so far, that Articles were drawn against her,
which the King Sig^ed; for without that, it was not safe for any to Impeach the
Queen. But the Lord Chancellor putting up that Paper carelessly it dropped from
him: And being taken up by one of the Queens Party, was carried to her. Whether
the King had really designed her ruin, or not, is differently represented by
the Writers who lived near that time. But she seeing his hand to such a Paper,
had reason to conclude her self lost. Yet by advice of one of her Friends, she
went to see the King. who receiving her kindly, set on a Discourse about
Religion. But she answered, that women, by their first Creation, were made
subject to men; and they being made after the Image of God, as the Women were
after their Image, ought to instruct their Wives; who were to learn of them:
and she much more, was to be taught by his Majesty, who was a Prince of such
excellent Learning, and Wisdom. Not so by St. Mary, said the King, you are
become a Doctor, able to Instruct us, and not to be Instructed by us. To which
she answered, That it seemed he had much mistaken the freedom she had taken to
argue with him, since she did it partly to engage him in discourse, and so put
over the time, and make him forget his pain; and partly to receive Instructions
from him, by which she had profited much. And is it even so? said the King,
then we are friends again. So he embraced her with great affection, and sent
her away with very tender assurances of his constant Love to her. But the next
day had been appointed for carrying her, and some of her Ladies, to the Tower.
The day being fair, the King went to take a little air in the Garden, and sent
for her to bear him company. As they were together, the Lord Chancellor came
in, having about forty of the Guard with him, to have arrested the Queen. But
the King stepped aside to him, and after a little discourse, he was heard to call
him Knave, Fool, and Beast, and he bade him get him out of his Sight. The
Innocent Queen who understood not that her danger was so near, studied to
mitigate the Kings displeasure, and interceded for the Lord Chancellor. But the
King told her, she had no reason to plead for him.

So this design miscarried, which as it absolutely disheartened the Papists, so
it did totally alienate the King from them; and in particular from the Bishop
of Winchester, whose sight he could never after this endure. But he made an
humble Submission to the King, which though it preserved him from further
punishment, yet could not restore him to the Kings favor. But the Duke of
Norfolk, The causes of the Duke of Norfolks disgrace.
and his Son the Earl of Surrey, fell under a deeper Misfortune. The Duke of
Norfolk had been long Lord Treasurer of England: He had done great services to
the Crown on many signal Occasions, and success had always accompanied him. His
Son the Earl of Surrey was also a brave and noble person, Witty and Learned to
an high degree, but did not command Armies with such Success. He was much
provoked at the Earl of Hertfords being sent over to France in his room, and
upon that had said, That within a little-while they should smart for it; with
some other expressions that savoured of Revenge, and a dislike of the King, and
a hatred of the Counselors. The Duke of Norfolk had endeavored to ally
himself to the Earl of Hertford, and to his Brother Sir Thomas Seimour,
perceiving how much they were in the Kings favor, and how great an Interest
they were like to have under the succeeding Prince. And therefore would have
engaged his Son, being then a Widower, to Marry that Earls Daughter: And
pressed his Daughter, the Duchess of Richmond, Widow to the Kings Natural Son,
to Marry Sir Thomas Seimour. But though the Earl of Surrey advised his Sister
to the Marriage projected for her, yet he would not consent to that designed
for himself, nor did the Proposition about his Sister take effect. The
Seimours, could not but see the Enmity the Earl of Surrey bore them, and they
might well be jealous of the Greatness of that Family; which was not only too
big for a Subject of it self, but was raised so high by the dependence of the
whole Popish Party, both at home and abroad, that they were like to be very
dangerous Competitors for the chief Government of Affairs if the King were once
out of the way; whose disease was now growing so fast upon him, that he could
not live many weeks. Nor is it unlikely that they persuaded the King, that if
the Earl of Surrey should marry the Lady Mary, it might embroil his Sons
Government, and perhaps ruin him. And it was suggested, That he had some such
high project in his thoughts, both by his continuing unmarried, and by his
using the Arms of Edward the Confessor, which of late he had given in his
Coat, without a Diminution. But to complete the Duke of Norfolks ruin, his
Duchess who had complained of his using her ill, and had been separated from
him about four years, turned Informer against him. His Son and Daughter were
also in ill terms together. So the Sister Informed all that she could against
her Brother. And one Mrs Holland, for whom the Duke was believed to have an
unlawful affection, discovered all she knew; but all amounted to no more, than
some passionate Expressions of the Son, and some Complaints of the Father, who
thought he was not beloved by the King, and his Counselors, and that he was
ill used, in not being trusted with the secret of affairs. And all persons
being encouraged to bring Informations against them, Sr. Richard Southwell
charged the Earl of Surre^ in some points that were of a higher nature: which
the Earl denied, and desired to be admitted, according to the Martial Law, to
fight in his shirt with Southwel. But that not being granted, he and his Father
were committed to the Tower. That which was most insisted on, was, their giving
the Arms of Edward the Confessor which were only to be given by the Kings of
England. This the Earl of Surrey justified, and said, they gave their Arms,
according to the opinion of the Kings Heralds. But all excuses availed
nothing, for his Father and he were designed to be destroyed, upon reasons of
State; for which, some colors were to be found out.

1547.
The Earl of Surrey being but a Commoner, was brought to his Trial at Guildhall;
and put upon an Inquest of Commoners consisting of nine Knights and three
Esquires, The Earl of Surrey Executed.
by whom he was found guilty of Treason, and had Sentence of death passed upon
him, which was executed on the 19th of January at Tower Hill. It was generally
condemned, as an Act of high injustice and severity, which loaded the Seimours
with a popular Odium that they could never overcome. He was much pitied, being
a man of great parts and high courage, with many other Noble Qualities.

But the King who never hated nor ruined any body by halves, resolved to
complete the misfortunes of that Family, The Dukes submission to the King.
by the Attaindor of the Father. And as all his Eminent Services were now
forgotten, so the Submissions he made, could not allay a displeasure, that was
only to be satisfied with his Life and Fortune. He wrote to the King,
Protesting his Innocence: That he had never a thought to his prejudice, and
could not imagine what could be laid to his Charge: He had spent his whole Life
in his Service, and did not know that ever he had offended any person; or that
any were displeased with him, except for prosecuting the breakers of the Act
about the Sacrament of the Altar. But in that, and in every thing else, as he
had been always obedient to the Kings Laws, so he was resolved still to obey
any Laws he should make. He desired he might be examined with his Accusers face
to face, before the King, 1547.
or at least before his Council; and if it did not appear that he was
wrongfully accused, let him be punished as he deserved. In Conclusion he begged
the King would have pity on him, and restore him to his favor; taking all his
Lands, or Goods from him, or as much of them, as he pleased. Yet all this had
no effect on the King. So he was desired to make a more formal Submission;
which he did on the 12th of January under his hand, ten Privy Counselors being
Witnesses. In it he confessed, First his discovering the Secrets of the Kings
Council. Secondly, his concealing his Sons Treason, in using to give the Arms
of St. Edward the Confessor, which did only belong to the King, and to which
his Son had no Right. Thirdly, That he had ever since his Fathers death, born
in the first quarter of his Arms, the Arms of England: with a difference of the
Labells of Silver, that are the proper Arms of the Prince; which was done in
prejudice of the King and the Prince: and gave occasion for disturbing or
interrupting the Succession to the Crown of the Realm. This he acknowledged was
high Treason, he confessed he deserved to be attainted of high Treason; and
humbly begged the Kings Mercy and Compassion. He yielded to all this, hoping by
such a Submission and Compliance to have overcome the Kings displeasure. but
his Expectations failed him.

A Parliament was called, the reason whereof was pretended to be the Coronation
of the Prince of Wales. The Parliament meets.
But it was thought the true cause of calling it, was, to Attaint the Duke of
Norfolk: for which they had not color enough, to do it in a Trial by his
Peers. Therefore an Attaindor by Act of Parliament was thought the better way.
So it was moved, that the King intending to Crown his Son, Prince of Wales,
desired they would go on with all possible haste in the Attaindor of the Duke
of Norfolk; that so these Places which he held by Patent, might be disposed of
by the King to such as he thought fit, who should Assist at the Coronation. And
upon this slight pretense, since a better could not be found; The Bill of
Attaindor was read the first time on the 18th of January: And on the 19th and
20th it was read the second and third time. The Duke of Norfolk Attainted.
And so passed in the House of Lords: and was sent down to the Commons. Who on
the 24th sent it up also passed. On the 27th the Lords were ordered to be in
their Robes, That the Royal assent might be given to it: which the Lord
Chancellor, with some others joined in Commission, did give by virtue of the
Kings Letters Patents. And it had been executed the next Morning, if the Kings
death had not prevented it. Upon what grounds this Attaindor was founded, I can
only give this Account from the 34th Act of the first Parliament of Queen Mary;
in which this Act is declared null and void, by the Common Law of the Land; for
I cannot find the Act it self upon Record. In the Act of Repeal it is said,
That there was no special matter in the Act of Attaindor, but only general
words of Treasons and Conspiracies: and that out of their care of the
preservation of the King and the Prince, they passed it. But the Act of Repeal
says also, That the only thing with which he was charged, was, For bearing of
Arms, which he and his Ancestors had born, both within and without the Kingdom:
both in the Kings presence, and in the sight of his Progenitors: which they
might Lawfully bear and give, as by good and substantial matter of Record it
did appear. It is also added, That the King dyed after the date of the
Commission, That the King only empowered them to give his Assent, but did not
give it himself: And that it did not appear by any Record, that they gave it.
That the King did not Sign the Commission with his own hand, his Stamp being
only set to it: and that not to the upper, but the nether part of it, contrary
to the Kings custom. All these particulars, though cleared afterward, I
mention now, because they give light to this matter.

As soon as the Act was passed, a Warrant was sent to the Lieutenant of the
Tower, His death prevented by the Kings.
to cut off his head the next Morning; but the King dying in the night, the
Lieutenant could do nothing on that Warrant. And it seems it was not thought
advisable, to begin the new Kings Reign with such an Odious Execution. And thus
the Duke of Norfolk escaped very narrowly. Both Parties descanted on this
differently. The Conscientious Papists said, it was Gods just Judgment on him,
(who had in all things followed the Kings pleasure, oftentimes against his own
Conscience;) That he should smart under that Power, which himself had helped so
considerably to make it be raised so high. The Protestants could not but
observe an hand of God, in measuring out such a hard measure to him, that was
so heavy on all those poor people that were questioned for Heresy. But
Cranmers carriage in this matter was suitable to the other parts of his Life,
for he withdrew to Croydon, Fox.
and would not so much as be present in Parliament, when so unjust an Act was
passed, and his absence at this time was the more considerable, since the King
was so dangerously ill, that it must be concluded it could be no slight Cause
that made him withdraw at such a time. But the Duke of Norfolk had been his
constant Enemy, therefore he would not so much as be near the public Councils,
when so strange an Act was passing. But at the same time the Bishop of
Winchester was officiously hanging on in the Court: and though he was forbid to
come to Council, yet always when the Counselors went into the Kings
Bedchamber, he went with them to the door, to make the World believe he was
still one of the number, and staying at the door till the rest came out, he
returned with them. But he was absolutely lost in the Kings Opinion.

The Emperors designs against the Protestants.
There is but one other step of Foreign business in this Reign; which was an
Embassy sent over by the Duke of Saxony, to let the King know of the League
between the Pope and the Emperor, for the Extirpation of Heresy: And that the
Emperor was making War on him, and the other Princes, in pursuance of that
League. Therefore he desired the Kings Assistance. But at the same time, the
Emperor did by his Agents everywhere disown, that the War was made upon a
Religious Account: And said it was only to maintain the Rights of the Empire;
which those Princes had affronted. So the King answered, that as soon as it did
appear to him, that Religion was the cause of the War, he would Assist them.
But that which made this so involved, was, That though at Rome the Pope
declared it was a Holy War, and ordered Prayers and Processions to be made, for
Success; yet the Emperor in all his Declarations took no notice of Religion: He
had also divided the Protestant Party, so that some of them joined with him,
and others were Neutrals. And when in Germany it self this matter was so little
understood, it was easy to abuse Strangers by giving them a wrong Account of
it.

The King was now overgrown with corpulency and fatness, The Kings sickness.
so that he became more and more unwieldy. He could not go up or down stairs,
but as he was raised up, or let down by an Engine. And an old sore in his Leg
became very uneasy to him; so that all the humors in his Body sinking down
into his Leg, he was much pained, and became exceeding froward and intractable,
to which his inexcusable severity to the Duke of Norfolk and his Son may be in
a great measure imputed. His Servants durst scarce speak to him, to put him in
mind of his approaching end. And an Act of Parliament which was made for the
security of the Kings Life, had some words in it against the Foretelling of his
death; which made every one afraid to speak to him of it: lest he in his angry
and imperious humors should have Ordered them to be Endicted upon that Statute.
But he felt nature declining apace, and so made the Will that he had left
behind him at his last going into France, be written over again; with ^his only
difference, That Gardener Bishop of Winchester, whom he had appointed one of
the Executors of his Will, and of the Counselors to his Son, till he came of
Age, was now left out: Of which when Sir Anthony Brown put the King in mind
apprehending it was only an Omission, he answered, That he knew Gardiners
temper well enough, and though he could Govern him, yet none of them would be
able to do it; and that he would give them much trouble. And when Brown at
another time repeated the motion to the King; he told him, if he spoke more of
that, he would strike him out of his Will too. The Will was said to be Signed
the 30th of December. It is Printed at large by Fuller; and the most Material
parts of it by Heylin. So I need say little of it, only the most signal Clause
in it, was, That he excluded the Line of Scotland out of the Succession, and
preferred the two Daughters of the French Queen by Charles Brandon to them. And
this leads me to discover several things concerning this Will, which have been
hitherto unknown. I draw them from a Letter written to Sir William Cecil, then
Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth, (afterward Lord Burleigh,) by William
Maitland of Leithingtoun Secretary of State to the Queen of Scotland. This
Maitland was accounted a man of the greatest parts of any in his Nation at that
time; though his Treachery in turning over to the Party that was against the
Queen, very much blemished his other Qualities: but he expiated his fault by a
real Repentance; which appeared in his returning to his duty, and losing all
afterward in her quarrel. His Letter will be found in the Collection. The
Substance and design of it, is, Collect. Numb. 30. His latter will a Forgery
to clear the Right his Mistress had to the Crown of England: in case the Queen
should die without Heirs of her Body. Therein after he had answered other
Objections, he comes to this of the Will. To it he says. That according to the
Act of Parliament, the Kings Will was to be Signed with his own hand; but this
Will was only Signed by the Stamp. Then the King never Ordered the Stamp to be
put to it: 1542.
He had been often desired to Sign it, but had always put it off; but when they
saw his death approaching, one William Clark servant to Thomas Hennage put the
Stamp to it, and some Gentlemen that were waiting without, were called in to
Sign it as Witnesses. For this he appealed to the deposition of the Lord Paget,
and desired the Marquess of Winchester, and Northampton, the Earl of Pembroke,
Sir William Petre, Sir Henry N^vil, Sir Maurice Berkley, Sir Anthony Denny,
Doctor Buts, and some others, might be examined; and that their Depositions
might be entered in the Chancery. He also appealed to the Original Will, by
which it would appear, That it was not Signed, but only Stamped; and that not
being according to the Act of Parliament, which in such extraordinary things
must be strictly taken, the Will was of no force. Thus it appears, what vulgar
Errors pass upon the World. And though for seventy five years, the Scottish Race
has enjoyed the Crown of England, and after so long a possession it is very
superfluous to clear a Title which is universally acknowledged; yet the Reader
will not be ill pleased to see how ill-grounded that pretense was, which some
managed very seditiously during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, for excluding
that Line.

But if this Will was not signed by the King, other Grant^ was certainly made
by him on his deathbed: one was to the City of London, of 500 Marks a year for
endowing an Hospital which was called Christ's Hospital; and he ordered the
Church of the Franciscans a little within Newgate to be opened, which he gave
to the Hospital. This was done the 3d of January. Another was of Trinity
College in Cambridg one of the Noblest Foundations in Christendom. He continued
in a decay till the 27 of the month; and then many signs of his approaching
end appearing, few would adventure on so unwelcom a thing as to put him in mind
of his change then imminent: but Sir Anthony Denny had the honesty and courage
to do it, and desired him to prepare for death, and remember his former life,
and to call on God for mercy through Jesus Christ. Upon which the King
expressed his grief for the Sins of his past Life, yet he said he trusted in
the mercies of Christ, which were greater than they were. Then Denny asked him
if any Churchman should be sent for; and he said, if any, it should be
Archbishop Cranmer: and after he had rested a little, finding his Spirits
decay apace, he ordered him to be sent for to Croydon, where he was then. But
before he could come, the King was Speechless. So Cranmer desired him to give
some sign of his dying in the Faith of Christ, upon which he squeezed his hand,
and soon after died; after he had Reigned 37 years, and 9 months, in the six
and fiftieth year of his age. His death was kept up three days, for the
Journals of the House of Lords show, that they continued reading Bills, and
going on in business till the 31st. and no sooner did the Lord Chancellor
signify to them that the King was dead, and that the Parliament was thereby
dissolved. It is certain the Parliament had no being after the Kings breath was
out; so their sitting till the 31st shows, that the Kings death was not
generally known all those three days. The reasons of concealing it so long
might either be, that they were considering what to do with the Duke of
Norfolk, or that the Seymours were laying their matters, 1547.
so as to be secure in the Government before they published the Kings Death. I
shall not adventure on adding any further Character of him, to that which is
done with so much Wit and Judgment by the Lord H^rbert, but shall refer the
Reader wholly to him; only adding an account of the blackest part of it, the
Attaindors that passed the last 13 years of his life: which are comprehended
within this Book, of which I have cast over the Relation to the Conclusion of
it.

In the latter part of his Reign, An account of the Kings severities against
the Popish Party.
there were many things that seem great severities, especially as they are
represented by the Writers of the Roman party; whose relations are not a little
strengthened by the faint excuses and the mistaken accounts, that most of the
Protestant Historians have made. The King was naturally impetuous, and could
not bear provocation; the times were very ticklish; his Subjects were generally
addicted to the old Superstition, especially in the Northern parts; the Monks
and Friars were both numerous and wealthy; the Pope was his implacable Enemy,
the Emperor was a formidable Prince, and being then Master of all the
Netherlands, had many advantages for the War he designed against En^land.
Cardinal Pole his kinsman, was going over all the Courts of Christendom, to
persuade a League against England; as being a thing of greater necessity and
merit than a War against the Turk. This being, without the least aggravation,
the state of affairs at that time, it must be confessed he was sore put to it.
A Superstition that was so blind and headstrong, and Enemies that were both so
powerful, so spiteful, and so industrious, made rigor necessary: nor is any
General of an Army more concerned to deal severely with Spies and
Intelligencers, than he was to proceed against all the Popes adherents, or such
as kept correspondence with Pole. He had observed in History, that upon much
less provocation than himself had given, not only several Emperors and foreign
Princes had been dispossessed of their Dominions; but two of his own Ancestors
Henry the 2d and King John had been driven to great extremities, and forced to
unusual and most indecent submissions by the means of the Popes and their
Clergy.

The Popes power over the Clergy was so absolute, and their dependence and
obedience to him was so implicit; and the Popish Clergy had so great an
interest in the superstitious multitude, whose consciences they governed, that
nothing but a stronger passion could either tame the Clergy, or quiet the
People. If there had been the least hope of impunity; the last part of his
Reign would have been one continued Rebellion; therefore to prevent a more
profuse effusion of blood, it seemed necessary to execute Laws severely in some
particular instances.

There is one calumny that runs in a thread through all the Historians of the
Popish side, which not a few of our own have ignorantly taken up, That many
were put to death for not swearing the Kings Supremacy. It is an impudent
falsehood; for not so much as one person suffered on that account; nor was there
any Law for any such Oath before the Parliament in the 28th year of the Kings
Reign, when the unsufferable Bull of Pope Paul the 3d, engaged him to look a
little more to his own safety. Then indeed in the Oath for maintaining the
successiono f the Crown, the Subjects were required under the pains of Treason,
to swear that the King was supreme head of the Church of England; but that was
not mentioned in the former Oath that was made in the 25th, and enacted in the
26 year of his Reign. It cannot but be confessed, that to enact under pain of
death that none should deny the Kings Titles, and to proceed upon that against
offenders, is a very different thing, from forcing them to swear the King to be
the Supreme Head of the Church.

Some (...) executed for denying the Kings Supremacy.
The first instance of these Capital proceedings was in Easter-Term, in the
beginning of the 27th year of his reign. Three Priors, and a Monk, of the
Carthusian Order, were then endited of Treason, for saying, that the King was
not Supreme head under Christ of the Church of England. These were John
Houghton Prior of the Charter House near London, Augustine Webster Prior of
Axholme, Robert Laurence Prior of B^v^ll, and Richard Reynolds a Monk of Sion:
this last was esteemed a learned man, for that time, and that Order. They were
tried in Westminster Hall by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer: they pleaded
not guilty, but the Jury found them guilty, and judgment was given that they
should suffer as Traitors. The Record mentions no other particulars; but the
writers of the Popish side make a splendid recital of the courage and constancy
they expressed both in their Trial, and at their Death. It was no difficult
thing for men so used to the Legend, and the making of fine stories for the
Saints and Martyrs of their Orders, to dress up such Narratives with much pomp.
But as their pleading Not Guilty to the Endictment, shows no extraordinary
resolution, so the account that is given by them of one Hall a Secular Priest
that died with them, is so false, that there is good reason to suspect all. He
is said to have suffered on the same account; but the Record of his Attaindor
gives a very different relation of it.

And Hall a Priest for conspiring against the King.
He, and Robert Feron, were endited at the same time for having said many
spiteful and Treasonable things, as that the King was a Tyrant, an Heretic, a
Robber, and an Adulterer; that they hoped he should die such a death as King
John, and Richard the 3d died; that they looked when those in Ireland and Wales
should invade England; and they were assured that three parts of four in
England would be against the King: they also said that they should never live
merrily till the King and the Rulers were plucked by the Pates, and brought to
the Pot, and that it would never be well with the Church till that was done.
Hall had not only said this, but had also written it to Feron the 10th of March
that year. When they were brought to the Bar, they at first pleaded Not Guilty;
but full proof being brought, they themselves confessed the Enditement, before
the Jury went aside, and put themselves on the Kings mercy: upon which, this
being an imagining and contriving both War against the King, and the Kings
death, judgment was given as in cases of Treason: but no mention being made of
Ferons death, it seems he had his pardon. Hall suffered with the four
Carthusians who were hanged in their habits.

Three other Monks Exe^^^d.
They proceeded no further in Easter-Term: but in Trinity-Term there was another
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, by which Humphrey Middlemore, William Exmew,
and Sebastian Nudigate, three Monks of the Charter House near London, were
Endited of Treason, 1535.
for having said on the 25 of May that they neither could nor would consent to
be obedient to the Kings Highness, as true lawful and obedient Subjects; to
take him to be Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England. They all pleaded
not-Guilty, but were found Guilty by the Jury; and Judgment was given. When
they were condemned, they desired that they might receive the body of Christ
before their death. But (as Judge Spelman writ) the Court would not grant it,
since that was never done in such cases but by Order from the King. Two days
after that, they were Executed. Two other Monks of that same Order, John
Rochester, and James Wolver, suffered on the same account at York in May this
year. Ten other Carthusian Monks were shut up within their Cells; where nine of
them dyed, the tenth was hanged in the beginning of August. Concerning those
persons I find this said in some Original Letters, that they had brought over
into England, and vented in it, some Books that were written beyond Sea,
against the Kings Marriage, and his other proceedings, which being found in
their house, they were pressed to peruse the Books that were written for the
King, but obstinately refused to do it; they had also been involved in the
business of the Maid of Kent, for which, though all the Accomplices in it, except
those whom suffered for it, were pardoned by Act of Parliament, yet such as had
been concerned in it, were still under jealousy: and it is no wonder that upon
new provocations they met with the uttermost rigor of the Law.

These Trials made way for two others that were more Signal: Fishers Trial and
death.
of the Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More. The first of these had been a
Prisoner above a year, and was very severely used: he complained in his Letters
to Cromwell, that he had neither Clothes, nor fire, being then about fourscore.
This was understood at Rome, and upon it, Pope Clement, by an Officious
kindness to him, or rather in spite to King Henry, declared him a Cardinal, and
sent him a Red-hat. When the King knew this, he sent to Examine him about it;
but he protested he had used no endeavors to procure it, and valued it so
little, that if the Hat were lying at his feet, he would not take it up. It
never came nearer him than Picardy: yet this did precipitate his ruin. But if
he had kept his opinion of the Kings Supremacy to himself, they could not have
proceeded further. He would not do that, but did upon several occasions speak
against it, so he was brought to his Trial on the 17th of June. The Lord
Chancellor, the Duke of Suffolk, and some other Lords, together with the
Judges, sat upon him by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer. He pleaded
not-Guilty, but being found Guilty, Judgment was passed on him to die as a
Traitor; but he was by a Warrant from the King, beheaded. Upon the 22d of June,
being the day of his Execution, he dressed himself with more than ordinary
care; and when his man took notice of it, he told him, he was to be that day a
Bridegroom. As he was led to the place of Execution, being stopped in the way by
the crowd, he opened his new Testament, and prayed to this purpose; that, as
that Book had been his companion and chief comfort in his imprisonment, so then
some place might turn up to him, that might comfort him in his last passage:
This being said, he opened the Book at a venture, in which these words of St.
John's Gospel turned up: This is Life eternal to know th^e the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. So he shut the Book with much
saisfaction, and all the way was repeating and meditating on them. When he came
to the Scaffold he pronounced the Te Deum, and after some other devotions his
head was cut off.

His Character.
Thus dyed John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, in the 80th year of his Age. He was
a Learned and devout man, but much addicted to the superstitions in which he
had been bred up: And that led him to great severities against all that opposed
them. He had been for many years Confessor to the Kings Grandmother, the
Countess of Richmon^; and it was believed that he persuaded her to these Noble
designs for the advancement of Learning, of Founding two Colleges in
Cambridge, St. John's, and Christ's College, and Divinity Professors in both
Universities. And in acknowledgment of this, he was chosen Chancellor of the
University of Cambridge. Henry the 7th gave him the Bishopric of Rochester,
which he, following the rule of the Primitive Church, would never change for a
better; he used to say his Church was his Wife, and he would never part with
her, because she was poor. He continued in great favor with the King, till the
business of the Divorce was set on foot; and then he adhered so firmly to the
Queens cause, and the Popes Supremacy, that he was carried by that, headlong
into great Errors; as appears by the business of the Maid of Kent: Many thought
the King ought to have proceeded against him rather upon that, which was a
point of State, than upon the Supremacy, which was matter of Conscience. But
the King was resolved to let all his Subjects see, there was no Mercy to be
expected by any that denied his being Supreme head of the Church; and therefore
made him and More, two Examples for terrifying the rest. This being much
censured beyond Sea, Gardener, that was never wanting in the most servile
complyances, wrote a vindication of the Kings proceedings. The Lord Herbert had
it in his hands, and tells us it was written in elegant Latin, but that he
thought it too long, and others judged it was too vehement, to be inserted in
his History.

Mores Trial and death.
On the 1st of July, Sir Thomas More was brought to his Trial. The special
matter in his Endictment, is, that on the 7th of May preceding, before
Cromwell, Bedyll, and some others that were pressing him concerning the Kings
Supremacy, he said he would not meddle with any such matter: and was fully
resolved to serve God, and think upon his passion, and his own passage out of
this World. He had also sent diverse messages by one George Gold to Fisher to
encourage him in his obstinacy; and said, the Act of Parliament is like a sword
with two edges, for if a man answer one way, it will confound his Soul, and if
he answer another way, it will confound his Body. He had said the same thing on
the third of June, in the hearing of the Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolk;
and others; and that he would not be the occasion of the shortning his own
Life. And when Rich the Kings Solicitor came to deal with him further about
it, but protested that he came not with any Authority to examine him, VERA
EFFIGIES THOMAE MORI QVONDAM TOTIUS ANGLIAE CANCELLARII DIGNISSIMI. ET.
H. Holbein pinxit R. White sculpsit.

Natus 1482 Angliae. Cancellarius - 1529 Capite truncatus An: 1535 July 6. to

Printed for Ric: Chiswell, at the Rose, and Crown, in St. Paul's Church yard

they discoursed the matter fully; Rich pressed him, 1535.
that since the Parliament had Enacted that the King was Supreme Head, the
Subjects ought to agree to it, and said Rich, what if the Parliament should
declare me King, would you not acknowledge me? I would, said More, Quia (as it
is in the Indictment) Rex per Parliamentum fieri potest, and per Parliamentum
deprivari; but More turned the Argument on Rich, and said, what if the
Parliament made an Act that God was not God; Rich acknowledged it could not
bind: but replied to More, that since he would acknowledge him King, if he were
made so by Act of Parliament, why would he not acknowledge the King Supreme
Head, since it was enacted by Parliament. To that More answered, that the
Parliament had power to make a King, and the people were bound to acknowledge
him, whom they made; but for the Supremacy, though the Parliament had Enacted
it, yet those in foreign parts had never assented to it. This was carried by
Rich to the King, and all these particulars were laid together, and judged to
amount to a denial of the Supremacy. Judge Spelman writ, that More being on his
Trial, pleaded strongly against the Statute that made it Treason to deny the
Supremacy, and argued that the King could not be Supreme Head of the Church:
When he was brought to the Bar, he pleaded not Guilty, but being found Guilty,
judgment was given against him as a Traitor. He received it with that equal
temper of mind, which he had showed in both conditions of Life, and then set
himself wholly to prepare for death; he expressed great contempt of the World,
and that he was weary of Life, and longed for death; which was so little
terrible to him, that his ordinary facetiousness remained with him even on the
Scaffold. It was censured by many as light and undecent; but others said, that
way having been so natural to him on all other occasions, it was not at all
affected; but showed that death did no way discompose him, and could not so
much as put him out of his ordinary humor. Yet his rallying every thing on the
Scaffold, was thought to have more of the Stoic than the Christian in it.
After some time spent in secret devotions, he was beheaded on the 6th of July.

Thus did Sir Thomas More end his days, in the 53d year of his age. His
Character.
He was a man of rare virtues, and excellent parts: In his youth he had freer
thoughts of things, as appears by his Vtopia, and his Letters to Erasmus; but
afterward he became superstitiously devoted to the interests and passions of
the Popish Clergy: and as he served them when he was in Authority, even to
assist them in in all their cruelties; so he employed his pen in the same
cause, both in writing against all the new opinions in general, and in
particular against Tindal, Frith, and Barnes, as also an unknown Writer, who
seemed of neither party, but reprooved the corruptions of the Clergy, and
condemned their cruel proceedings. More was no Divine at all, and it is plain
to any that reads his writings, that he knew nothing of Antiquity; beyond the
quotations he found in the Canon Law, and in the Master of the sentences: (only
he had read some of St. Austins treatises,) for upon all points of
Controversy, he quotes only what he found in these Collections; nor was he at
all conversant in the critical learning upon the Scriptures; but his peculiar
excellency in writing, was, that he had a natural easy expression, and
presented all the opinions of Popery with their fair side to the Reader,
disguising or concealing the black side of them with great Art; and was no less
dextrous in exposing all the ill consequences that could follow on the Doctrine
of the Reformers: and had upon all occasions great store of pleasant tales,
which he applied wittily to his purpose. And in this consists the great
strength of his Writings, which were designed rather for the Rabble, than for
Learned men. But for justice, contempt of money, humility, and a true
generosity of mind, he was an example to the Age in which he lived.

But there is one thing unjustly added to the praise of these two great men, or
rather feigned, on design to lessen the Kings honor; that Fisher and he penned
the book which the King wrote against Luther. This Sanders first published, and
Bellarmin and others since have taken it up upon his Authority. Strangers may
be pardoned such errors, but they are inexcusable in an English man. For in
Mores printed works there is a Letter written by him out of the Tower to
Cromwell, in which he gives an account of his behavior concerning the Kings
Divorce and Supremacy: among other particulars one is, that when the King
showed him his Book against Luther, in which he had asserted the Popes Primacy
to be of Divine right, More desired him to leave it out; since as there had
been many contests between Popes and other Princes, so there might fall in some
between the Pope and the King; therefore he thought it was not fit for the King
to publish any thing, which might be afterward made use of against himself:
and advised him either to leave out that point, or to touch it very tenderly;
but the King would not follow his counsel, being perhaps so fond of what he had
writ, that he would rather run himself upon a great inconvenience, than leave
out any thing that he fancied so well written. This shows that More knew that
Book was written by the Kings own pen; and either Sanders never read this, or
maliciously concealed it, lest it should discover his foul dealing.

These Executions so terrified all people, that there were no further
provocations given: and all persons either took the Oaths, or did so dexterously
conceal their opinions, that till the Rebellions of Lincolnshire, and the
North, broke out, none suffered after this upon a public account. But when
these were quieted, then the King resolved to make the chief Authors and
Leaders of those Commotions public examples to the rest. The Duke of Norfolk
proceeded against many of them by Martial Law, there were also Trials at common
Law of a great many more that were taken Prisoners, and sent up to London. The
Lords Darcy and H^ssie were tried by their Peers, A ^aindors af^^^ the
Reb^ll^on was qu^^^d.
the Marquis of Exceter sitting Steward. And a Commission of Oyer and Terminer
being issued out for the Trial of the rest, Sir Robert Constable, Sir John
Bulmer and his Lady, Sir Francis Pigot, Sir Stephen Hamilton, and Sir Thomas
Piercy, and Ask, that had been their Captain; with the Abbots of Whalley,
Ierveux, Bridlington, Lenton, Woburn, and Kingstead, and Mackrall the Monk,
that first raised the Lincolnshire Rebellion, with sixteen more were Indicted
of high Treason, for the late Rebellions. And after all the steps of the
Rebellion were reckoned up, it is added in the Indictment, 1537.
that they had met together on the 17th of January, and consulted how to renew
it, and prosecute it further, being encouraged by the new Risings that were
then in the North; by which they had forfeited all the favor, to which they
could have pretended, by virtue of the Indemnity that was granted in the end of
December, and of the pardons which they had taken out. They were all found
Guilty, and had judgment as in cases of Treason; diverse of them were carried
down into Lincolnshire, and Yorkshire, and executed in the places where their
Treasons were committed; but most of them suffered at London, and among others
the Lady Bulmer, Hall.
(whom others call Sir John Bulmers harlot) was burnt for it in Smithfield.

The only censure that passed on this, was, that advantages were taken on too
slight grounds to break the Kings Indemnity and pardon: Censures past upon it.
since it does not appear, that after their pardon they did any thing more than
meet and consult. But the Kingdom was so shaken with that Rebellion, that if it
had not been for the great conduct of the Duke of Norfolk, the King had by all
appearance lost his Crown. And it will not seem strange that a King,
(especially so tempered as this was,) had a mind to strike terror into the rest
of his Subjects, by some signal Examples, and to put out of the way the chief
leaders of that design: nor was it to be wondered at, that the Abbots and other
Clergymen who had been so active in that Commotion, were severely handled. It
was by their means that the discontents were chiefly fomented; they had taken
all the Oaths that were enjoined them, and yet continued to be still practicing
against the State; which, as it was highly contrary to the peaceable Doctrines
of the Christian Religion, so it was in a special manner contrary to the Rules
which they professed; that obliged them to forsake the World, and to follow a
Religious and Spiritual course of Life. 1538.


The next Example of justice was a year after this, Forests equivocation and
Heresy.
of one Forr^st an Observant Friar; he had been, as Sanders says, Confessor to
Queen Katharine, but it seems departed from her interests; for he insinuated
himself so into the King, that he recovered his good Opinion. Being an ignorant
and lewd man, he was accounted by the better sort of that House, to which he
belonged in Greenwich, a Reproach to their Order, (concerning this, I have seen
a large account in an Original Letter written by a Brother of the same House.)
Having regained the Kings good Opinion, he put all those who had favored the
Divorce under great fears, for he proceeded cruelly against them. And one
Rainscroft, being suspected to have given secret Intelligence of what was done
among them, was shut up, and so hardly used that he dyed in their hands, which
was (as that Letter relates) done by Friar Forests means. This Friar was found
to have denied the Kings Supremacy: for though he himself had sworn it, yet he
had infused it into many in Confession, that the King was not the Supreme Head
of the Church. Being questioned for these practices, which were so contrary to
the Oath that he had taken, he answered, that he took that Oath with his
outward man, Hall.
but his inward man had never consented to it. Being brought to his Trial, and
accused of several Heretical opinions that he held, he submitted himself to the
Church. 1538.
Upon this he had more freedom allowed him in the Prison; but some coming to
him diverted him from the Submission he had offered; so that when the Paper of
Abjuration was brought him, he refused to set his hand to it: upon which he was
judged an Obstinate Heretic. The Records of these Proceedings are lost, but
the Books of that time say, that he denied the Gospel; it is like it was upon
that pretense, that without the determination of the Church it had no
Authority, upon which, several writers of the Roman Communion have said
undecent and scandalous things of the holy Scriptures. He was brought to
Smithfield, where were present the Lords of the Council, to offer him his
pardon if he would abjure. Latimer made a Sermon against his errors, and
studied to persuade him to recant; but he continued in his former opinions, so
he was put to death in a most severe manner. He was hanged in a chain about his
middle, and the great Image that was brought out of Wal^s, was broken to
pieces, and served for fuel to burn him. He showed great unquietness of mind,
and ended his Life in an ungodly manner, as Hall says, who adds this Character
of him, that he had little knowledge of God and his sincere truth, and less
trust in him at his ending.

In Winter that year a correspondence was discovered with Cardinal Pole, The
proceedings against Cardinal Pools friends.
who was barefaced in his Treasonable designs against the King. His Brother Sir
Geofrey Pole discovered the whole Plot. For which the Marquess of Exceter,
(that was the Kings Cousin-german by his Mother, who was Edward the 4ths
Daughter,) the Lord Montacute, the Cardinals Brother, Sir Geofrey Pole, and Sir
Edward Nevill, were sent to the Tower in the beginning of November. They were
accused for having maintained a correspondence with the Cardinal, and for
expressing an hatred of the King, with a dislike of his proceedings, and a
readiness to rise upon any good opportunity that might offer it self.

The special matter brought against the Lord Montacute, and the Marquis of
Excet^r, who were tried by their Peers on the 2d and 3d of December, in the
30th year of this Reign, is, that whereas Cardinal Pole, and others, had cast
off their Allegiance to the King, and gone and submitted themselves to the
Pope the Kings mortal enemy, the Lord Montacute did on the 24th of July in the
28th year of the Kings Reign, a few months before the Rebellion broke out, say
that he liked well the proceedings of his Brother the Cardinal, but did not
like the proceedings of the Realm; and said, I trust to see a change of this
World; I trust to have a fair day upon those Knaves that rule about the King;
and I trust to see a merry World one day. Words to the same purpose were also
charged on the Marquess: the Lord Montacute further said, I would I were over
the Sea with my Brother, for this World will one day come to stripes: it must
needs so come to pass, and I fear we shall lack nothing so much as honest men:
he also said, he had dreamed that the King was dead, and though he was not yet
dead, he would die suddenly; one day his Leg will kill him, and then we shall
have jolly stirring; saying also, that he had never loved him from his
childhood, and that Cardinal Wolsey would have been an honest man, if he had
had an honest Master. And the King having said to the Lords he would ^eave them
one day, having some apprehensions he might shortly die, that Lord said, if he
will serve us so, we shall be happily rid; a time will come, I fear, we shall
not tarry the time, we shall do well enough. He had also said, he was sorry the
Lord Ab^rg^^^^y was dead, for he could have made ten thousand men; and for his
part he would go and live in the West, where the Marquess of Exc^ter was
strong: and had also said upon the breaking of the Northern Rebellion, that the
Lord Darcy played the fool, for he went to pluck away the Council, but he
should have begun with the head first, but I beshrew him for leaving off so
soon. These were the Words charged on those Lords, as clear discoveries of
their Treasonable designs; and that they knew of the Rebellion that brake out,
and only intended to have kept it off to a fitter opportunity: they were also
accused of Correspondence with Cardinal Pol^, that was the Kings declared
Enemy. Upon these points the Lords pleaded not Guilty, but were found Guilty by
their Peers, and so Judgment was given.

On the 4th of December were Indicted Sir Geofrey Pol^, for holding
Correspondence with his Brother the Cardinal, and saying that he approved of
his proceedings, but not of the Kings; Sir Ed^ard Nevill, Brother to the Lord
Abergaveny, for saying, the King was a Beast, and worse than a Beast; George
Crofts, Chancellor of the Cathedral of Chichester, for saying, the King was
not, b^t the Pope was, Supreme head of the Church; and John Collins, for
saying, the King would hang in H^ll one day for the plucking down of Abbeys:
All those, Sir Edward Nevill only excepted, pleaded Guilty, and so they were
condemned; but Sir Geofrey Pole was the only person of the number that was not
Executed, for he had discovered the matter. At the same time also, Cardinal
Pole, Michael Throgmorton Gentleman, John Hilliard and Thomas Goldwell Clerks,
and William P^^to a Franciscan of the Observance, were Attainted in Absence;
because they had cast off their duty to the King, and had subjected themselves
to the Bishop of Rome, Pole being made Cardinal by him; and for writing
Treasonable Letters, and sending them into England. On the 4th of February
following, Sir Nicholas Carew, that was both Master of the Horse, and Knight of
the Garter, was Arraigned for being an adherent to the Marquess of Exeter, and
having spoke of his Attaindor as unjust and cruel, he was also Attainted and
Executed upon the 3d of March. When he was brought to the Scaffold, he openly
acknowledged the errors and superstition in which he had formerly lived; and
blessed God for his Imprisonment, for he then began to relish the Life and
sweetness of Gods holy Word, which was brought him by his Keeper, one Phillips,
who followed the Reformation, and had formerly suffered for it. 1539.


After these Executions, followed the Parliament in the year 15^9, Some
Attaindors without hearing the parties.
in which not only these Attaindors that were already passed were confirmed,
but new ones of a strange and unheard of nature were Enacted. It is a blemish
never to be washed off, and which cannot be enough condemned, and was a breach
of the most sacred and unalterable Rules of Justice, which is capable of no
excuse; it was the Attainting of some persons, whom they held in custody,
without bringing them to a Trial. 1539.
Concerning which, I shall add what the great Lord Chief Justice Cook writes,
although I question not the Power of the Parliament, 4 Instit. 37.38.
for without question the Attaindor stands of force in Law, yet this I say of
the manner of proceeding, A^ferat Oblivio, si potest, si non utrumque silentium
tegat. For the more high and absolute the Jurisdiction of the Court is, the
more just and honorable it ought to be in the proceedings, and to give Example
of Justice to inferior Courts. The chief of these were the Marchioness of
Exeter and the Countess of Sarum. The special matter charged on the former, is,
her confederating her self to Sir Nicolas Carew in his Treasons; to which is
added, that she had committed diverse other abominable Treasons. The latter is
said to have confederated her self with her Son the Cardinal, with other
aggravating words. It does not appear by the Journal that any Witnesses were
examined; only that day that the Bills were read the third time in the House of
Lords, Cromwell showed them a Coat of white silk, which the Lord Admiral had
found among the Countess of Sarums Clothes, in which the Arms of England were
wrought on the one side, and the Standard that was carried before the Rebels
was on the other side. This was brought as an evidence that she approved of the
Rebellion. Three Irish Priests were also Attainted for carrying Letters out of
Ireland, to the Pope and Cardinal Pole, as also Sir Adrian Fortescue for
endeavoring to raise Rebellion, Thomas Dingley a Knight of St. John of
Jerusalem, and Robert Granceter Merchant, for going to several Foreign
Princes, and persuading them to make War upon the King, and assist the Lords
Darcy and Hussie in the Rebellion they had raised. Two Gentlemen, a Dominican
Friar, and a Yeoman, were by the same Act Attainted, for saying that, that
venomous Serpent the Bishop of Rome was Supreme Head of the Church of England.
Another Gentleman, two Priests, and a Yeoman are Attainted for Treason in
general, no particular crime being specified. Thus sixteen persons were in this
manner Attainted, and if there was any Examination of Witnesses for convicting
them, it was either in the Star Chamber, or before the Privy Council; for there
is no mention of any evidence that was brought in the Journals: There was also
much haste made in the passing this Bill: it being brought in the 10th of May,
was read that day for the first, and second time, and the 11th of May for the
third time. The Commons kept it five days before they sent it back, and added
some more to those that were in the Bill at first; but how many were named in
the Bill Originally, and how many were afterward added, cannot be known.
Fortescue and Dingley suffered the 10th of July. As for the Countess of Sarum,
the Lord Herbert saw in a Record, that Bulls from the Pope were found in her
House, that she kept correspondence with her Son, and that she forbade her
Tenants to have the new Testament in English, or any other of the Books that
had been published by the Kings Authority. She was then about seventy years of
Age, but showed by the answers she made, that she had a vigorous and masculine
mind. She was kept two years Prisoner in the Tower, after the Act had passed,
the King by that reprieve designing to oblige her Son to a better behavior;
but upon a fresh provocation by a new Rebellion in the North, she was beheaded,
and in her, the name and line of Plantagenet determined. 1540.
The Marchioness of Exceter died a natural death. In November this year were
the Abbots of Reading, Glossenbury and Colechester Attainted of Treason, of
which mention was made formerly.

In the Parliament that sat in the year 1540 they went on to follow that
strange precedent, which they had made the former year. By the 56th Act Giles
Heron was Attainted of Treason, no special matter being mentioned.

By the 57th Act, Richard Fetherstoun, Thomas Abell, and Edward Pole Priests,
and William Horn a Yeoman were Attainted, for denying the Kings Supremacy, and
adhering to the Bishop of Rome: by the same Act the Wife of one Tirrell Esquire
was Attainted, for refusing her duty of Allegiance, and denying Prince Edward
to be Prince and heir of the Crown; and one Laurence Cook of Doncaster was also
Attainted for contriving the Kings death.

By the 58th Act, Gregory Buttolph, Adam Damplip, and Edward Brindeholm Clerks,
and Clement Philpot Gentleman, were Attainted, for adhering to the Bishop of
Rome, for corresponding with Cardinal Pole, and endeavoring to surprise the
Town of Callais: By the same Act Barnes, Gerard, and Jerome, were Attainted, of
whose sufferings an account has been already given.

By the 59th Act, William Bird a Priest, and Chaplain to the Lord Hungerford
was attainted, for having said to one that was going to Assist the King against
the Rebels in the North, I am sorry thou go, see thou not how the King
plucketh down Images and Abbeys every day? and if the King go thither himself,
he will never come home again, nor any of them all which go with him, and in
truth it were pity he should ever come home again; and at another time upon
ones saying, O good Lord, I ween all the World will be Heretics in a little
time: Bird said, do thou marvel at that? I tell thee it is no marvel, for
the great Master of all is an Heretic, and such a one as there is not his like
in the World.

By the same Act the Lord Hungerford was likewise Attainted. The Crimes
specified are, that he knowing Bird to be a Traitor, did entertain him in his
house as his Chaplain; that he ordered another of his Chaplains, Sir Hugh Wood,
and one Doctor Maudlin to use Conjuring, that they might know how long the King
should live, and whether he should be victorious over his Enemies or not; and
that these three years last past he had frequently committed the detestable sin
of Sodomy with several of his Servants: All these were Attainted by that
Parliament. The Lord Hungerford was Executed the same day with Cromwell; he
dyed in such disorder that some thought he was frenetick, for he called often
to the Executioner to dispatch him, and said he was weary of Life, and longed
to be dead, which seemed strange in a man that had so little cause to hope in
his death. For Powel, Fetherstoun, and Abell, they suffered the same day with
Barnes and his friends, as has been already shown.

This year Sampson Bishop of Chichester, and one Doctor Wilson were put in the
To^er, upon suspicion of correspondence with the Pope. But upon their
submission they had their pardon and liberty. In the year 1541, five Priests
and ten secular persons, some of them being Gentlemen of Quality, 1535.
were raising a new Rebellion in Yorkshire; which was suppressed in time, and
the Promoters of it being apprehended, were Attainted and Executed, and this
occasioned the death of the Countess of Sarum, after the Execution of the
Sentence had been delayed almost two years.

The last instance of the Kings severity was in the year 1543, in which one
Gardener that was the Bishop of Winchesters kinsman and Secretary, and three
other Priests, were tried, for denying the Kings Supremacy, and soon after
Executed. But what special matter was laid to their charge, cannot be known,
for the Record of their Attaindor is lost.

The Conclusion.
These were the proceedings of this King against those that adhered to the
interests of Rome: in which, though there is great ground for just censure, for
as the Laws were rigorous, so the Execution of them was raised to the highest
that the Law could admit; yet there is nothing in them to justify all the
clamors, which that party have raised against King Henry, and by which they
pursue his memory to this day; and are far short, both in number and degrees,
of the cruelties of Queen Mary's Reign, which yet they endeavor all that is
possible to extenuate or deny.

To Conclude, we have now gone through the Reign of King Henry the 8th, who is
rather to be reckoned among the Great than the Good Princes. He exercised so
much severity on men of both persuasions, that the writers of both sides have
laid open his faults, and taxed his cruelty. But as neither of them were much
obliged to him, so none have taken so much care to set forth his good
qualities, as his Enemies have done to enlarge on his Vices: I do not deny that
he is to be numbered among the ill Princes, yet I cannot rank him with the
worst.

The End of the third Book and of the first Part.
ADDENDA.
After some of the sheets of this History were wrought off, I met with
Manuscripts of great Authority, out of which I have Collected several
particulars, that give a clear light to the proceedings in those times, which
since they came too late to my knowledge to be put in their proper places, I
shall here add them with ref^r^nces to the places to which they belong.

Ad Page 202. line 13.
THere it is said, that the Earl of Wiltshire Father to Queen Anne Boleyn was
one of the Peers that Judged her.

In this I too Implicitly followed Doctor Heylin, he seeming to write with more
than ordinary care for the Vindication of that Queen, and with such assurance,
as if he had seen the Records concerning her, so that I took this upon trust
from him. The reason of it was, that in the search I made of Attaindors, I did
not find the Record of her Trial; so I concluded, that either it was destroyed
by Order during her Daughters Reign, or was accidentally lost since that time:
And thus having no Record to direct me, I too easily followed the Printed Books
in that particular. But after that part of this History was wrought off, I by
chance met with it in another place where it was mislaid; and there I
discovered the error I had committed. The Earl of Wiltshire was not one of her
Judges; these by whom she was tried were the Duke of Suffolk, the Marquis of
Exceter, the Earls of Arundell, Oxford, Northumberland, Westmoreland, Derby,
Worcester, Rutland, Sussex, and Huntington, and the Lords Audley, Delaware,
Mountague, Morley, Dacres, Cobham, Maltravers, Powis, Mounteagle, Clinton,
Sands, Windsor, Wentworth, Burgh, and Mordant: in all twenty six, and not
twenty Eight as I reckoned them upon a Vulgar Error. The Record mentions one
particular concerning the Earl of Northumberland, that he was taken with a
sudden fit of sickness, and was forced to leave the Court before the Lord
Rochford was Tried. This might have been only Casual: but since he was once in
Love with the Queen, and had designed to Marry her (see Page. 44) it is no
wonder if so sad a change in her Condition, did raise an unusual disorder in
him.

When I had discovered the mistake I had made, as I resolved to publish this
free Confession of it; so I set my self not without some Indignation to examine
upon what Authority Doctor Heylin had led me into it. I could find no Author
that went before him in it, but Sanders; the chief design of whose writing, was
to defame Queen Elizabeth, and to blast her Title to the Crown. To that end it
was no ill piece of his skill, to persuade the World of her Mother lewdness, to
say, that her own Father was convinced of it, and condemned her for it. And
Doctor Heylin took this, as he has done many other things, too easily upon
Sanders Testimony.

Ad Page 217. line 37.
C^llect. A^denda (...). 1.
The Articles of Religion of which an abstract is there set down, are indeed
published by Full^r: but he saw not the Original, with all the Subscriptions to
it; which I have had in my hands, and therefore I have put it in the Collection
with three other Papers, which were soon after offered to the King by Cranmer.

The one is in the form of fifteen queries, concerning some abuses by which the
people had been deceived; Col^ect. Addenda N^mb. 2.
as namely, by these Doctrines, that without Contrition sinners may be
reconciled to God; that it is in the Power of the Priest, to pardon or not to
pardon sin at his pleasure; and that Gods pardon cannot be obtained without
Priestly Absolution. Also he complained that the people trusted to outward
Ceremonies; and their Curates for their own gain, encouraged them in it. It was
observed that the opinion of Clergy-mens being exempted from the secular Judge
was ill grounded; that Bishops did ordain without due care and Trial: that the
Dignified Clergy misapplyed their Revenues, did not follow their first
Institution, and did not reside upon their Benefices.

Collect. Addenda N^mb. 3.
And in fine he moves that the four Sacraments, which had been left undetermined
by the former Articles, might be examined: the outward signs and actions, the
promises made upon them, and the efficacy that was in them being well
considered.

The second Paper consists of two Resolutions, made concerning Confirmation by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Stokesley Bishop of London (by which I
perceive the way of examining matters by giving out of questions to Bishops and
Divines was sooner practiced, then when I first took notice of it page 286.)
there are several other Papers concerning Confirmation, but these are only
Subscribed: and the rest do generally follow these two Prelates who were then
the heads of two different parties. The Archbishop went on this ground, that
all things were to be tried by the Scripture; but Stokesley and almost the
whole Clergy, were for receiving the Tradition of the Church, as not much
inferior to the Scriptures, which he asserts in his Subscription.

The third Paper was offered to the King by Cranmer, to persuade him to proceed
to a further Reformation: Collect. Addenda Numb. 4.
that things might be long and well considered before they were determined,
that nothing might be declared a part of Gods faith, without good proofs from
Scripture: the departing from which rule had been the occasion of all the
Errors that had been in the Church: that now men would not be led as they had
been, but would examine matters: that many things were now acknowledged to be
truths, such as the unlawfulness of the Popes Usurped Power, for which many had
formerly suffered death. Whereupon he desires that some points might be
Examined by Scrinture, as, whether there is a Purgatory, whether departed Souls
ought to be Invocated, whether Tradition ought to be believed; whether there be
any satisfaction besides the satisfaction of Christ, whether free will may
dispose it self to grace, and whether Images ought to be kissed, or used to any
other end, but as representations of a piece of History? In all these he
desired the King would suspend his Judgment: and in particular, that he would
not determine against the Lawfulness of the Marriage of the Clergy, but would
for some time silence both parties. He also proposed that this point might by
order from the King, be examined in the Universities before indifferent Judges:
that all the Arguments against it, might be given to the Defenders twelve days
before the public disputation; and he offered, that if those who should defend
the Lawfulness of Priests Marriage, were in the Opinion of indifferent Judges
overcome, they should willingly suffer death for it; but if otherwise, all they
desired was, that in that point the King might leave them in the liberty to
which the Word of God left them.

Ad Page 249. line 18.
I have seen a much fuller paper concerning Orders and Ecclesiastical functions
(which the Reader will find in the Collection) signed by Cromwell, the two
Archbishops and eleven Bishops, Collect. Addenda Numb. 5.
and twenty Divines and Canonists, Declaring that the Power of the Keys and
other Churchfunctions is formally distinct from the Power of the Sword. That
this Power is not absolute, but to be limited by the Rules that are in the
Scripture; and is ordained only for the edification and good of the Church:
that this Power ought to be still preserved, since it was given by Christ as
the mean of reconciling sinners to God. Orders were also declared a Sacrament,
since they consisted of an outward action instituted by Christ, and an inward
grace conferred with them: But that all Inferior Orders, Ianitors, Lectors,
etc. were brought into the Church to beautify and adorn it, and were taken
from the Temple of the Jews: And that in the New Testament there is no mention
made but of Deacons or Ministers, and Priests or Bishops: nor is there
belonging to Orders any other Ceremony mentioned in the Scripture, but Prayer
and Imposition of hands. This was signed either in the year 1537 or 1538, since
it is Subscribed both by John Hilsey Bishop of Rochester, and Edward Fox Bishop
of Hereford, for the one was consecrated in 1537, and the other dyed in May
1538.

On this Paper I will add two remarks, the one is, that after this I do never
find the Inferior Degrees under a Deacon mentioned in this Church; so it seems
at this time they were laid aside. They were first set up in the Church about
the end of the second or the beginning of the third Century, in the middle of
which we find both Cornelius Bishop of Rome, and St. Cyprian mentioning them as
Orders that were then established; and it seems they were designed as previous
steps to the Sacred functions, that none might be Ordained to these, but such
as had been long before separated from a secular state of Life, and had given
good proofs of themselves in these lower degrees. But it turned in the Church
of Rome to be only a matter of form; and many took the first Tonsure, that they
might be exempted from the Secular Power, and be qualified for Commendams, and
some other Worldly advantages to which these lower Orders were sufficient, by
those Rules which the Canonists had brought in.

Another thing is, that both in this Writing and in the Necessary Erudition of
a Christian man, Bishops and Priests are spoken of as one and the same Office.
In the Ancient Church they knew none of those Subtilties which were found out
in the latter Ages. It was then thought enough that a Bishop was to be
dedicated to his function by a new Imposition of hands, and that several
Offices could not be performed without Bishops, such as Ordination
Confirmation, etc. but they did not refine in these matters, so much as to
enquire whether Bishops and Priests differed in Order and Office or only in
degree. But after the Schoolmen fell to examine matters of Divinity with
Logical and Unintelligible niceties, and the Canonists began to Comment upon
the rules of the Ancient Church, they studied to make Bishops and Priests seem
very near one another, so that the difference was but small. They did it with
different designs. The Schoolmen having set up the grand Mystery of
Transubstantiation, were to exalt the Priestly Office as much as was possible:
for the turning the Host into God was so great an action, that they reckoned
there could be no Office higher than that which qualified a man to so mighty a
Performance: therefore as they changed the form of Ordination from what it was
Anciently believed to consist in, to a delivering of the Sacred Vessels, and
held that a Priest had his Orders by that rite, and not by the Imposition of
hands; so they raised their Order or Office so high as to make it equal with
the Order of a Bishop: But as they designed to extol the Order of Priesthood,
so the Canonists had as great a mind to depress the Episcopal Order. They
generally wrote for preferment, and the way to it was to exalt the Papacy.
Nothing could do that so effectually as to bring down the Power of Bishops.
This only could justify the Exemptions of the Monks and Friars, the Popes
setting up Legantine Courts, and receiving at first Appeals, and then Original
causes before them; together with many other Encroachments on their
Jurisdiction: All which were unlawful, if the Bishops had by Divine right,
Jurisdiction in their Dioceses: Therefore it was necessary to lay them as low
as could be, and to make them think that the Power they held, was rather as
Delegates of the Apostolic See, than by a Commission from Christ or his
Apostles: So that they looked on the declaring Episcopal Authority to be of
Divine right, as a blow that would be fatal to the Court of Rome; and therefore
they did after this at Trent use all possible endeavors to hinder any such
Decision. It having been then the Common style of that Age to reckon Bishops
and Priests as the same Office, it is no wonder if at this time the Clergy of
this Church, the greatest part of them being still leavened with the old
superstition, and the rest of them not having enough of spare-time to examine
lesser matters, retained still the former phrases in this particular.

On this I have insisted the more, that it may appear how little they have
considered things, who are so far carried with their zeal against the
established Government of this Church, as to make much use of some passages of
the Schoolmen and Canonists that deny them to be distinct Offices; for these
are the very dregs of Popery, the one raising the Priests higher for the sake
of Transubstantiation, the other pulling the Bishops lower for the sake of the
Popes Supremacy, and by such means bringing them almost to an equality. So
partial are some men to their particular conceits, that they make use of the
most mischievous Topics when they can serve their turn^punc; not considering
how much further these Arguments will run if they ever admit them.

Ad Page 255. line 28.
The Princes of Germany did always press the King to enter into a Religious
League with them: the first League that was made in the year 1536 was conceived
in general terms, against the Pope as the Common Enemy, and for setting up true
Religion according to the Gospel: But they did afterward send over Ambassadors
to treat about particulars; and they having presented a Memorial of these,
there were Conferences appointed between them and some Bishops and Divines of
this Church. I find no Divines was sent over hither but Frederick Miconius
Minister of Gotha, by whom Melanthon, who could not be spared out of Germany,
sent several Letters to the King; the fullest and longest of them will be found
in the Collection. It is all to this purpose, Collect. Addenda Numb. 6.
to persuade the King to go on vigorously in the Reforming of Abuses according
to the word of God. The King sent over the particulars which they proposed in
order to a perfect agreement, to Gardener who was then at Paris: Upon which he
sent back his Opinion touching them all; the Original of which, under his own
hand I have seen, but it relates so much to the other Paper that was sent him,
which I never saw, that without it his meaning can hardly be understood, and
therefore I have not put it in the Collection. The main thing in it, at which
it chiefly drives, is to press the King to finish first a Civil League with
them, and to leave those particulars concerning Religion to be afterward
treated of. The King followed his advice so far as to write to the German
Princes to that effect. But when the King declared his resolution to have the
six Articles established, all that favored the Reformation were much alarmed
at it, and pressed their friends in Germany to interpose with the King for
preventing it. I have seen an Original Letter of Hains Dean of Exeter, in which
he laments the sad effects that would follow on that Act, which was then
preparing; that all the Corruptions in the Church rose from the establishing
some points without clear proofs from Scripture: he wished the Germans would
consider of it, for if the King and Parliament should make such a Law, this was
a President for the Emperor to make the like in the Diet of the Empire. Neither
were the German Ambassadors backward in doing their friends in England all the
service they could: for after they had held several conferences with these that
were appointed by the King to treat with them; they finding they could not
prevail with them, wrote a long and Learned Letter to the King, against the
taking away the Chalice in the Sacrament, and against private Masses and the
Celibate of the Clergy, Collect. Addenda Numb. 7.
with some other abuses which the Reader will find in the Collection, as it is
Copied from the Original which I have seen. To this I have added the Answer
which the King wrote to it: He employed Tonstall Bishop of Duresm to draw it,
Collect. Addenda Numb. 8.
for I have seen a rude draught of a great part of it written with his hand. By
both these compared together, every indifferent Reader will clearly see the
force and simplicity of the Arguments on the one hand, and the art and
shuffling that was used on the other side. As soon as the Act was past,
notwithstanding all their endeavors to the contrary, they in an Audience
before the King, represented the great concern their Masters would have, when
the King on whom they had relied so much, as the Defender of the Faith, should
proceed with the severity expressed in that Act, against those that agreed with
them in Doctrine, and pressed the King earnestly to put a stop to the Execution
of it. The King promised he would see to it, and that though he judged the Act
necessary to restrain the Insolence of some of his Subjects; yet it should not
be Executed but upon great provocation: he also proposed the renewing a Civil
League with them, without mentioning matters of Religion. To this the Princes
made answer, that the League as it was at first projected, was chiefly upon a
design of Religion, and therefore without a common consent of all that were in
their League, they could not alter it: they lamented this passing of the late
Act, but writ their thanks to the King for stopping the Execution of it, and
warned him that some of his Bishops, who set him on to these courses, were in
their hearts still for all the old Abuses, and for the Popes Supremacy, and
were pressing on the King to be severe against his best Subjects, that they
might thereby bring on a design which they could not hope to effect any other
way: they advised the King to beware of such Counsels. They also proposed that
there might be a Conference agreed on between such Divines as the King would
name, and such as they should depute, to meet either in Gueldres, Hamburgh,
Bremen, or any other place that should be appointed by the King, to examine the
Lawfulness of private Masses, of denying the Chalice, and the Prohibiting the
Marriage of the Clergy. On these things they continued treating till the
Divorce of Anne of Cleve and Cromwells fall, after which I find little
Correspondence between the King and them.

Ad Page 256. line 4.
When I mentioned the Kings Letters, directing the Bishops how to proceed in a
Reformation, Collect. Addenda Numb. 9.
I had not seen them, but I have since seen an Original of them subscribed by
the Kings hand. In these he challenged the Clergy as guilty of great
Indiscretions: that the late Rebellion had been occasioned by them; therefore
he required the Bishops to take care, that the Articles formerly published
should be exactly obeyed; and to go over their Dioceses in person, and preach
Obedience to the Laws, and the good ends of those Ceremonies that were then
retained, that the people might neither despise them, nor put too much trust in
them: and to silence all disputes and contentions concerning things
indifferent; and to signify to the Kings Council, if there were any Priests in
their Diocesses that were Married, and yet did discharge any part of the
Priestly Office. All which, will be better understood by the Letter it self,
that I have put into the Collection.

Ad Page 258. line 8.
I do there acknowledge that I knew not what Arguments were used against the
necessity of Auricular Confession: But I have made since that time, a
Considerable discovery in this particular, from an Original Letter written all
with the Kings own hand to Tonstal; by which it appears, there had been
conferences in the House, and that the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of
Winchester and Duresm had pleaded much for it, as necessary by a Divine
Institution, and that both the King and the Archbishop of Canterbury had
maintained, that though it was good and profitable, yet it was not necessary by
any precept of the Gospel: and that though the Bishops brought several texts
out of Scripture and Ancient Doctors, yet these were so clearly answered by the
King, and the Archbishop, that the whole House was satisfied with it: Yet
Tonstall drew up in a writing all the reasons he had made use of in that
debate, and brought them to the King, Collect. Addenda Numb. 10.
which will be found in the Collection, with the Anotations and reflections
which the King wrote on the Margent, with his own hand, taken from the
Original; Collect. Addenda Numb. 11.
together with the Kings Letter written in answer to them: By this it will
appear that the King did set himself much to study points of Divinity, and
examined matters with a scrupulous exactness. The issue of the debate was, that
though the Popish party endeavored to have got Auricular Confession declared
to be Commanded by Christ, as a part of the Sacrament of Penance; yet the King
overruled that, so it was enacted that Auricular Confession was necessary and
expedient to be retained in the Church of God. These debates were in the House
of Lords, which appears not only by the Kings Letter, that speaks of the House,
but by the Act of Parliament in the Preamble of which it is said, that the King
had come himself to the Parliament, and had opened several points of high
Learning to them.

Ad Page 262. line 23.
There I mention the Kings diligence in drawing an Act of Parliament with his
own hand; but since that was Printed, I have seen many other Acts and Papers,
if not Originally Penned by the King, yet so much altered by his Corrections,
that in some sort they may be esteemed his draughts. There are two draughts of
the Act of the six Articles, both corrected in many places by the King, and in
some of these the Correction is three lines long. There is another Act
concerning Precontracts of Marriage, likewise Corrected very much by his Pen.
Many draughts of Proclamations, particularly these about the use of the Bible
in English are yet extant interlined and altered with his Pen. There is a large
Paper written by Tonstall, of arguments for Purgatory, with Copious
Animadversions on it, likewise written by the King; which show that then he did
not believe there was a Purgatory. I have also seen the draught of that part of
the Necessary Erudition for a Christian man, which explains the Creed, full of
Corrections with the Kings own Pen; as also the Queries concerning the
Sacraments mentioned page 289. with large Annotations written with his hand on
the Margent, likewise an Extract all written with his own hand of passages out
of the Fathers against the Marriage of the Clergy: Collect. Addenda Numb. 12.
and to conclude there is a Paper with which the Collection ends, containing
the true Notion of the Catholic Church, which has large Emendations added with
the Kings hand, those I have set by themselves on the Margent of the Paper.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE HISTORY.
BOOK I. A Summary View of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, till the Process of
his Divorce was begun, in which the State of England, chiefly as it related to
Religion, is opened.
KING Henry's Succession to the Crown, page 1 He proceeds against Dudley and
Empson, ibid He holds a Parliament, p. 2 His great Expense, ibid Affairs beyond
Sea, p. 3 A Peace and Match with France, ibid He offers his Daughter to the
Dolphin ibid The King of Spain chosen Emperor, ib He comes to England, p. 4 A
second War with France ibid Upon Leo the 10th's death, Hadrian chosen Pope ibid
He dies and Clement the 7th succeeds ib Charles the 5th at Windsor contracted
to the Kings Daughter p. 5 But breaks his Faith ibid The Clementine League ibid
Rome taken and sacked, p. 6 The Pope is made a Prisoner, ibid. The Kings success
against Scotland, ibid. A Fac^ion in his Counsels, p. 7 Cardinal Wolseys
rising, ibid. His Preferments, p. 8 The Character of the Dukes of Norfolk and
Suffolk, p. 9 Cardinal Wolsey against Parliaments, p. 10 The Kings breeding in
Learning, ibid. He is flattered by Scollars, p. 11 The Kings Prerogative in
Ecclesiastical affairs, ibid. It was still kept up by him, p. 12 A Contest
concerning Immunities, ibid. A Public debate about them. p. 13. Hunne Murdered
in Prison, p. 14 The Proceedings upon that, p. 15 The King much courted by
Popes, p. 18 And declared Defender of the Faith, p. 19 The Cardinal absolute in
England, ibid. He designed to Reform the Clergy, ibid. And to Suppress
Monasteries, p. 20 The several kinds of Convocations, ibid. The Clergy grant a
Subsidy to the King, p. 21 Of the State of Monasteries, ibid. The Cardinal
founds two Colleges, p. 22 The first beginning of Reformation in England, p.
23 The Cruelties of the Church of Rome, ibid. The Laws made in England against
Heretics, p. 25. Under Richard the 2d, ibid. Under Henry the 4th, ibid. And
Henry the 5th; p. 26 Heresy declared by the Kings Judges, p. 27 Warhams
proceeding against Heretics, ib. The Bishop of London's proceedings against
them, p. 29 The Progress of Luthers Doctrine, p. 30 His Books were Translated
into English, p. 31 The King wrote against him, ibid. He replied, ibid.
Endeavors to suppress the New Testament, p. 32 Sir Thomas More writes against
Luther, ibid. Bilney and others proceeded against for Heresy, ibid.
BOOK II.
Of the Process of Divorce between King Henry and Queen Katherine, and of what
passed from the 19th to the 25th year of his Reign, in which he was declared
Supreme Head of the Church of England.
THe beginning of the Suit of Divorce, p. 34 Prince Arthur Married the Infanta,
ibid. And died soon after, p. 35 A Marriage proposed between Henry and her,
ibid. It is allowed by the Pope, ibid. Henry Protested against it, p. 36 His
Father dissuaded it, ibid. Being come to the Crown he Marries her, ibid. She
bore some Children, but only the Lady Mary lived, ibid. Several Matches
proposed for her, p. 37 The Kings Marriage is questioned by Foreigners, ibid.
Anno 1527.
He himself has Scruples concerning it, ib. The Grounds of these, p. 38 All his
Bishops except Fisher condemn it, ibid. The reasons of State against it, p. 39.
Wolsey goes into France, ibid. The Kings fears and hopes, ibid. Arguments
against the Bull, p. 40 Calumnies cast on Anne Boleyn, p. 41 They are false and
ill-contrived, p. 42 Her Birth and Education, p. 43 She was contr^cted to the
Lord Piercy, p. 44 The Divorce moved for at Rome, ibid. The first Dispatch
concerning it, ibid.
Anno 1528.
The Pope granted it, p. 47 And gave a Bull of dispensation, p. 48 The Popes
craft and policy, ibid. A subtle method proposed by the Pope, p. 49 Staphileus
sent from England, p. 50 The Cardinals Letters to the Pope, p. 57 A fuller Bull
is desired by the King, ibid. Gardener and Fox are sent to Rome, p. 52 The Bull
desired by them, ibid. Wolsey's earnestness to procure it, p. 53 Campegio
declared Legate, p. 54 He delays his Journey, ibid. The Pope grants the
Decretal Bull, p. 55 Two Letters from Anne Boleyn to Wolsey, ibid. Wolsey
desires the Bull may be seen by some of the Kings Council, p. 56 The Emperor
opposes the Kings business, p. 57 A Breve is found in Spain, ibid. It was
thought to be forged, ibid. Campegio comes to England, p. 58 And lets the King
see the Bull, ibid. But refuses to show it to others, ibid. Wolsey moves the
Pope that some might see it, ibid. But in vain, p. 59 Campana is sent by the
Pope to Engl. p. 60 The King offers the Pope a Guard, ibid. The Pope inclines
to the Emperor, ibid. Threatenings used to him, p. 61
Anno 1529.
HE repents the sending over a Bull, ibid. But feeds the King with Promises, p.
62 The Popes sickness, p. 63 Wolsey aspires to the Papacy, Ibid. Instructions
for promoting him, p. 64 New motions for the Divorce, p. 65 The Pope Relapses
dangerously, ibid. A new Dispatch to Rome, p. 66 Wolseys Bulls for the
Bishopric of Winton, p. 67 The Emperor Protests against the Legates, ib. Yet
the Pope promises not to recall it, ibid. The Legates write to the Pope, p. 68
Campegio led an ill life, p. 69 The Emperor moves for an Avocation, ibid. The
Popes Dissimulation, p. 70 Great contests about the Avocation. ibid. The
Legates begin the Process, p. 72 A severe charge against the Queen, ibid. The
King and Queen appear in Court, ibid. The Queens speech, p. 73. The King
declares his scruples, ibid. The Queen Appeals to the Pope, p. 74 Articles
framed and witnesses examined, ib. An Avocation pressed at Rome, ibid. The Pope
joins with the Emperor, p. 75 Yet is in great perplexities, ibid. The Avocation
is granted, p. 76 The Proceedings of the Legates, ibid. Campegio adjourns the
Court, p. 77 Which gave great offense, ibid. Wolseys danger, ibid. Anne Boleyn
returns to Court, p. 78 Cranmers Opinion about the Divorce, p. 79 Approved by
the King, p. 80 Cardinal Wolsey's fall. ibid. The meanness of his temper, p. 81
He is Attached of Treason, ibid. He dies: his Character, p. 82. A Parliament
called, ibid. Complaints against the Clergy, p. 83 The Kings debts are
discharged, ibid. The Pope and the Emperor unite, p. 84 The Women's peace, ibid.
Anno 1530.
The Emperor is Crowned at Bononia, ib. The Universities consulted in the Kings
suit of Divorce, p. 85 The answers from Oxford and Cambridge, p. 86. D. Crook
Employed in Venice, p. 87 Many in Italy wrote for the Divorce, p. 88 It was
opposed by the Pope and the Emperor, p. 89 No Money given by the Kings Agents,
ibid. Great Rewards given by the Emperor, p. 90 It is determined for the King
at Bononia, Padua, Ferrara* and Orleance. p. 91 At Paris Bourges and Tholose,
p. 92 The Opinions of some Reformers, ibid. And of the Lutherans, p. 94 The
King will not appear at Rome, ibid. Cranmer offers to defend the Divorce, p. 95
The Clergy Nobility and Gentry write to the Pope for the Divorce, ibid. The
Popes answer to them, p. 96 A Proclamation against Bulls, ibid. Books written
for the Divorce, p. 97 Reasons out of the Old and New Testament, ibid. The
Authorities of Popes and Councils, p. 98 And the Greek and Latin Fathers, p.
99 And Canonists, p. 100 Marriage is Complete by Consent, ibid. Violent
Presumptions of the Consummation of the former Marriage, ibid. The Popes
Dispensation of no force, p. 101. Bishops are not to obey his Decrees, p. 102
The Authority of Tradition, ibid. The Reasons against the Divorce, p. 103
Answers made to these, p. 104 The Queen is intractable, p. 105
Anno 1531.
A Session of Parliament, ibid. The Clergy found in a Praemunire, p. 106 The
Prerogatives of the Kings of England in Ecclesiastical affairs, ibid. The
Encroachments of Popes, ibid. Statutes made against them, p. 107 The Popes
endeavored to have those repealed, p. 109 But with no effect, p. 111 The
Clergy excused themselves, p. 112 Yet they submit and acknowledge the King
Supreme Head of the Church, ibid. The King Pardons them, p. 113 And with some
difficulty the Laity, ibid. One Attainted for Poisoning, ibid. The King leaves
the Queen, p. 114 A disorder among the Clergy, ibid. The Pope turns to the
French, p. 115 And offers his Niece to the Duke of Orleance, ibid. The Turk
invades the Empire, p. 116
Anno 1532.
THe Parliament complains of the Spiritual Courts, ibid. They reject a Bill
concerning Wards, p. 117 An Act against Annates, ibid. The Pope writes to the
King, p. 118 The Kings answer, ibid. Sir Edward Car sent to Rome, p. 119 His
Negotiation there, p. 120 He corrupts the Cardinal of Ravenna, ibid. The
Process against the King at Rome. p. 121 A Bull for new Bishoprics, ibid. The
Pope desires the King would submit to him, p. 122 A new Session of Parliament,
ibid. A Subsidy is voted, p. 123 The Oaths the Clergy swore to the Pope and to
the King, ibid. Chancellor More delivers up his Office, p. 124 The King meets
with the French King, ibid. Eliot sent to Rome, p. 125 The King Marries Anne
Boleyn, p. 126 New Overtures for the Divorce, ibid.
Anno 1533.
A Session of Parliament, ibid. An Act against Appeals to Rome, ibid.
Archbishop Warham dies, p. 127 Cranmer succeeds him, ibid. His Bulls from
Rome, p. 128 His Consecration, ibid. The Judgment of the Convocation concerning
the Divorce, p. 129 Endeavors to make the Queen Submit, p. 130 But in vain,
ibid. Cranmer gives Judgment, p. 131 Censures that pass upon it, ibid. The Pope
united to the French King, p. 133 A Sentence against the Kings proceedings.
ibid. Queen Elizabeth is born, p. 134 An Enterview between the Pope and the
French King, ibid. The King submits to the Pope, ibid. The Imperialists oppose
the agreement, p. 135 And procure a definitive Sentence, p. 136 The King
resolves to abolish the Popes Power in England, ibid. It was long disputed,
ibid. Arguments against it from Scripture, p. 137 And the Primitive Church, p.
138 Arguments for the Kings Supremacy, p. 140 From Scripture and the Laws of
England, p. 141 The Supremacy explained, p. 142 Pains taken to satisfy Fisher,
p. 143
Anno 1534.
A Session of Parliament, ibid. An Act for taking away the Popes Power, p. 144
About the Succession to the Crown, p. 145 For punishing Heretics, p. 147 The
Submission of the Clergy, ibid. About the Election of Bishops, p. 148 And the
Maid of Kent, p. 149 The Insolence of some Friars, p. 151 The Nuns speech at
her death, p. 152 Fisher is dealt with Gently, p. 153 The Oath for the
Succession taken by many, p. 154 More and Fisher refuse it, p. 155 And are
proceeded against, p. 156 Another Session of Parliament, p. 157 The Kings
Supremacy is Enacted, ibid. An Act for Suffragan Bishops, ibid. A Subsidy is
granted, p. 158 More and Fisher are Attainted, ibid. The Progress of the
Reformation, p. 159 Tindal and others at Antwerp send over Books and the New
Testament, ibid. The Supplication of the Beggars, p. 160 More answers and Frith
replies, p. 161 Cruel proceeding against Reformers, p. 162 Bilney's Sufferings,
p. 163 The Sufferings of Byfield, p. 164 And Bainham, p. 165 Articles abjured
by some, ibid. Tracy's Testament, p. 166 Frith's Sufferings, p. 167 His
Arguments against the Corporal presence in the Sacrament, ibid. His Opinion of
the Sacrament and Purgatory for which he was condemned, p. 169 His Constancy at
his death, p. 170 A stop put to Cruel proceedings, p. 171 The Queen favored
the Reformers, ibid. Cranmer Promoted it, ibid. And was Assisted by Cromwell,
p. 172. A strong party against it, ibid. Reasons used against it, ibid. And for
it, p. 173. The Judgment of some Bishops concerning a General Council, p. 174 A
speech of Cranmers of it, ibid.
BOOK III.
Of the other Transactions about Religion and Reformation, during the rest of
the Reign of King Henry the 8th.
Anno 1535.
THe rest of the Kings Reign was troublesome, p. 179 By the practices of the
Clergy, p. 180 Which provoked the King much, ibid. The Bishops swear the Kings
Supremacy, p. 181. The Franciscans only refuse it. p. 182 A Visitation of
Monasteries, ibid. The Instructions of the Visitors, p. 184 Injunctions sent by
them, p. 185 The State of the Monasteries in England and their Exemptions, p.
186 They were deserted, but again set up by King Edgar, p. 187 Arts used by the
Monks, ibid. They were generally corrupt, p. 188 And so grew the Friars, p. 189
The Kings other reasons for suppressing Monasteries, ibid. Cranmers design in
it, p. 190 The Proceedings of the Visitors, ibid. Some Houses resigned to the
King, p. 191
Anno 1536.
QVeen Katherine dies, ibid. A Session of Parliament in which the lesser
Monasteries were suppressed, p. 193 The reasons for doing it, ibid. The
Translation of the Bible in English designed, p. 194 The reasons for it, ibid.
The opposition made to it, p. 195 Queen Anns fall driven on by the Popish
party, p. 196 The King became jealous, p. 197 She is put in the Tower, p. 198
She confessed some Indiscreet words, p. 199 Cranmers Letters concerning her, p.
200 She is brought to a Trial, p. 201 And Condemned, p. 202 And also Divorced,
p. 203 She prepares for Death, p. 204 The Lieutenant of the Tower's Letters
about her. ibid. Her Execution, p. 205 The Censures made on this, ibid. Lady
Mary is reconciled to her Father and makes a full Submission, p. 207 Lady
Elizabeth is well used by the King, p. 208 A Letter of hers to the Queen, p.
209 A New Parliament is called, ibid. An Act of the Succession, p. 210 The Pope
endeavors a reconciliation, p. 211 But in vain, ibid. The Proceedings of the
Convocation, p. 213 Articles agreed on about Religion, p. 215 Published by the
Kings Authority, p. 217 But variously censured, p. 218 The Convocation declared
against the Council Summoned by the Pope, p. 219 The King publishes his reasons
against it p. 220, Cardinal Pool writes against the King, ibid. Many Books are
written for the King, p. 221 Instructions for the dissolution of Monasteries,
p. 222 Great discontents among all sorts, p. 223 Endeavors to qualify these,
ibid. The people were disposed to Rebel, p. 224 The Kings Injunctions about
Religion, p. 225 They were much censured, p. 226 A Rising in Lincolnshire, p.
227 Their Demands and the Kings Answer, ibid. It was quieted by the Duke of
Suffolk, p. 228 A great Rebellion in the North, ibid. The Duke of Norfolk was
sent against them, p. 230 They advance to Doncaster, ibid. Their Demands, p.
231 The Kings Answer to them, p. 232
Anno 1537.
THe Rebellion is quieted, p. 233 New risings soon dispersed, p. 234 The chief
Rebels Executed, ibid. A New Visitation of Monasteries, p. 235 Some great
Abbots resign, ibid. Confessions of horrid crimes are made, p. 237 Some are
Attainted, p. 238 And their Abbeys Suppressed, p. 240 The Superstition and
Cheats of these Houses discovered, p. 242
Anno 1538.
SOme Images publicly broken, ibid. Thomas Beckets shrine broken, p. 243 New
Injunctions about Religion, p. 245 In^ectives against the King at Rome, ibid.
The Popes Bulls against the King, ibid. The Clergy in England declared against
these, p. 248 The Bible is Printed in English, p. 249 New Injunctions, ibid.
Prince Edward is born, p. 250 The Compliance of the Popish party, p. 251
Lambert appealed to the King, p. 252 And is publicly tried, ibid. Many
Arguments brought against him, p. 253 He is condemned and burnt, p. 254 The
Popish party gain ground, ibid. A Treaty with the German Princes, p. 255
Bonners dissimulation, ibid.
Anno 1539.
A Parliament is called, p. 256 The six Articles are proposed, ibid. Arguments
against them, p. 257 An Act passed for them, p. 258 Which is variously
censured, p. 259 An Act about the Suppression of all Monasteries, p. 260
Another for erecting New Bishoprics, p. 262 The Kings design about these,
ibid. An Act for Obedience to the Kings Proclamations, p. 263 An Act concerning
Precedence, p. 264 Some Acts of Attaindor, ibid. The Kings care of Cranmer, p.
265 Who wrote against the six Articles, ibid. Proceedings upon that Act, p. 266
Bonners Commission for holding his Bishopric of the King, p. 267 The total
Dissolution of Abbeys, ibid. Which were sold or given away, p. 268 A Project of
a seminary for Ministers of State, p. 269 A Proclamation for the use of the
Bible, p. 270 The King designs to Marry Anne of Cleve, ibid. Who comes over,
but is disliked by the King, p. 271
Anno 1540.
But he Marries her, yet could never love her, p. 273 A Parliament is called,
p. 274 Where Cromwell speaks as Lord Vicegerent, ibid. The Suppression of the
Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, p. 275 Cromwells fall, p. 276 The King is in
love with Katherine Howard, ibid. Cranmers friendship to Cromwell, p. 277
Cromwels Attaindor, p. 278 Censures past upon it, p. 279 The Kings Divorce is
proposed, p. 280 And referred to the Convocation, ibid. Reasons pretended for
it, ibid. The Convocation agree to it, p. 281 Which was much censured, ibid. It
is Confirmed in Parliament, p. 282 The Queen consents to it, ibid. An Act about
the Incontinence of Priests, ibid. Another Act about Religion, ibid. Another
concerning Precontracts, p. 283 Subsidies granted by Clergy and Laity, ibid.
Cromwell's Death, p. 284 His Character, Ibid. Designs against Cranmer, p. 285
Some Bishops and Divines consult about Religion, p. 286 An Explanation of
Faith, ibid. Cranmers Opinion about it. p. 288 They Explain the Apostles*
Creed, ibid. And the Seven Sacraments with great care, p. 289 As also the Ten
Commandments, p. 290 The Lords Prayer, the Ave Maria and freewill, p. 291 And
Justification and Good works, p. 292 Published by the King, but much censured,
p. 293 A Correction of the Missalls, p. 294 The Sufferings of Barnes and
others, p. 295 They are Condemned unheard, p. 297 Their Speeches at their
Death, ibid. Bonners Cruelty, p. 299 New Bishoprics Founded, p. 300 Cranmers
design is defeated, p. 301 These Foundations are censured, ibid. The State of
the Court, p. 302 The Bible is set up in Churches, ibid. An Order for
Churchmens housekeeping, p. 303 The King goes to York, p. 304 The State of
Scotland, ibid. The beginning of the Reformation. p. 305 Patrick Hamiltons
Sufferings, ibid. A further Prosecution, p. 308 The Kings was wholly quieted by
the Clergy, p. 309 Some put to death, others escaped, p. 310 The Queens ill
life is discovered, p. 312
Anno 1542.
A Parliament called, ibid. An Act about the Queen much censured p. 313 A
design to suppress the English Bible, p. 314 The Bible ordered to be revised by
the Universities, p. 315. B. Bonners Injunctions, ibid. The way of Preaching at
that time, p. 316 Plays and Enterludes then Acted, p. 318 War between England
and Scotland, ibid. The Scots are defeated and their King dies, p. 320
Anno 1543.
CRanmer Promotes a Reformation, p. 321 An Act of Parliament for it, ibid.
Another about the Kings Proclamations, p. 322 A League between the King and the
Emperor, p. 323 A Match designed with Scotland, ibid. But the French party
prevailed there, p. 324 A War with France, p. 325 A Persecution of the
Reformers, Ibid. Marbecks great Ingeniousness, p. 326 Three burnt at Windsor,
p. 327 Their Persecutors are Perjured, ibid. A design against Cranmer, ibid. It
came to nothing, p. 328 His Christian behavior, ibid.
Anno 1544.
A New Parliament, ibid. An Act about the Succession, ibid. An Act against
Conspiracies, p. 330 An Act for revising the Canon Law, ibid. A discharge of
the Kings debts, ibid. The War against Scotland, p. 331 Audley the Chancellor
dies, ibid. The Prayers are put in English, ibid. Bulloign is taken p. 332
Anno. 1545.
THe Germans Mediate a peace between England and France, ibid. Some great
Church-Preferments, p. 333 Wisharts Sufferings in Scotland, ibid. Cardinal
Beaton is killed, p. 336
Anno 1546.
A New Parliament, p. 338. Chapels and Chanteries given to the King, ibid. The
Kings Speech to the Parliament, ibid. The King confirms the Rights of
Universities, p. 334 A Peace with France, p. 340 Designs of a further
Reformation, ibid. Shaxtons Apostasy, ibid. The troubles of Anne Askew, p. 341
She endures the Rack, p. 342 And is burnt with some others, ibid. A design
against Cranmer, ibid. The King takes care of him, p. 343 A design against the
Queen, p. 344 The cause of the Duke of Norfolks Disgrace, p. 345
Anno 1547.
THe Earl of Surrey is Executed, p. 346 The Duke of Norfolks Submission, ibid.
A Parliament meets, p. 347 The Duke of Norfolk is Attainted, ibid. His Death
prevented by the Kings, p. 348 The Emperors designs against the Protestants,
ibid. The Kings sickness, ibid. His Latter will a Forgery, p. 349 The Kings
severities against the Popish Party, p. 351 Some Carthusians Executed for
denying the Kings Supremacy, p. 352 And a Priest for Treason, ibid. Three Monks
Executed, ibid. Fishers Trial and Death, p. 353 His Character, p. 354 Mores
Trial and Death, ibid. His Character, p. 355 Attaind^rs after the Rebellion was
quieted, p. 356 Censures past upon it, p. 357 F. Forests Equivocation and
Heresy, ibid. The Proceedings against Cardinal Pole's friends, p. 358
Attaindors without hearing the Parties, p. 359 The Conclusion, p. 362 Addenda,
p. 363
A COLLECTION OF RECORDS AND Original Papers; With other INSTRUMENTS Referred
to in the Former History.
I. The Record of Card. Adrian's Oath of Fidelity to Henry the 7th, for the
Bishopric of Bath and Wells.
HEnricus Rex, etc. Reverend. Treat. Rolls.
in Christo Patri Domino Sylvestro Episcop. Wigorn. venerabili viro Domino
Roberto Sherbourn Ecclesiae Sancti Pauli London. decano, nostris in Romana
curia oratoribus, ac Magistro Hugoni Yowng Sacrae Theologiae Professori,
salutem. Cum omnes and singuli Archiepiscopi and Episcopi hujus nostri Inclyti
Regni, quorum omnium nominationes, and promotiones, ad ipsas supremas
dignitates, nobis attinent ex regali and peculiari quadam Praerogativa, jureque
municipali, ac inveterata consuetudine, hactenus in hoc nostro Regno inconcusse
and inviolabiliter observata, teneantur and astringantur, statim and immediate
post impetratas Bullas Apostolicas, super eorundem promotione ad ipsam nostram
nominationem, coram nobis and in praesentia nostra, si in hoc Regno nostro
fuerunt, vel coram Commissarijs nostris, ad hoc sufficienter and legittime
deputatis, si alibi moram traxerunt, non solum palam, public, and express,
totaliter cedere, and in manus nostras renunciare omnibus, and quibus^unque
verbis, clausulis, and sententiis in ipsis Bullis Apostolicis contentis, and
descriptis, quae sunt, vel quovis modo in futurumesse poterunt, praejudicialia,
sive damnosa, nobis, haeredibusque de corpore nostro legittime procreatis
Angliae regibus, Coronae aut Regno nostro, juribus vel consuetudinibus aut
Praerogativis ejusdem Regni nostri, and quoad hoc totaliter seipsos submittere
and ponere in nostra bona venia and gratia; sed etiam juramentum fidelitatis
and homagij ad Sancta Dei Evangelia, per eosdem respective corporaliter tacta,
nobis facere and praestare: Cumque nos ob praeclara merita eximiasque virtutes
quibus Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem, Dominum Adrianum tituli Sancti
Chrisogoni Presbyterum Cardinalem, abunde refertum conspicimus, obque diuturnum
and fidele obsequium per ipsum Cardinalem nobis factum and impensum, eundem ad
Ecclesias Bathon. and Wellen. invicem unitas nominavimus and promovimus, qui
idcirco and ob id quod in curia Romana continue moram trahit, non potest
commode hujusmodi renunciationem and juramentum coram nobis personaliter facere
and praestare: Hinc est quod nos de fidelitatibus vestris and provida
circumspectione, ad plenum confidentes, dedimus, and concessimus, ac per
praesentes damus and concedimus, vobis, tribus aut duobus vestrum, quorum
praefatum Episcopum Wigorn. unicum esse volumus, plenam potestatem and
autoritatem, vice and nomine nostris, hujusmodi renunciationem in manus
vestras, and juramentum ad Sancta Dei Evangelia corporaliter tacta, juxta
formam and verum tenorem, de verbo in verbum inferius descriptum, ab eodem
Reverendissimo Domino Cardinali recipiendi, exigendi, and cum effectu praestari
videndi; ipsumque Cardinalem, ut hujusmodi renunciationem and juramentum per
ipsum sic ut permittatis fiendum, and praestandum, manu and subscriptione suis
signet, and muniat, requirendi, and ut ita fiat cum effectu videndi, literas
quoque and instrumenta publica super hujusmodi renunciatione, and juramento
fieri petendi, and notarium sive notarios publicos, unum vel plures, ut ipsa
instrumenta conficiant; Necnon testes qui tunc praesentes erunt, ut veritati
testimonium perhibeant rogandi and requirendi, ipsaque juramentum vel
instrumenta taliter fienda, verum ordinem rei gerendae, and renunciationis ac
juramenti tenores in se continens vel continentia, nobis destinandi and
transmittendi; Et generaliter omnia and singula faciendi, gerendi, and
exercendi, quae in praedictis and quolibet praedictorum necessaria fuerint, seu
quomodolibet opportuna, ac quae rei qualitas exigit and requirit, and quae
nosipsi facere and exercere possemus si praesens and personaliter interessemus,
etiam si talia forent quae de se mandatum exigant magis speciale. Tenor
Renunciationis sequitur and est talis: Ego Adrianus miseratione divina tituli
Sancti Chrisogoni Presbyt. Cardinalis Episcopus Bathon. and Wellen. coram vobis
Reverendo Patre Episcopo Wigorn. Domino Roberto Shurborno decano Sancti Pauli
London. and Hugone Yowng in Theologia Professore, Commissariis ad hoc a
serenissimo atque excellentissimo Principe Domino Henrico Dei Gratia Rege
Angliae, and Franciae, and Domino Hiberniae, ejus nominisseptimo, Domino meo
supremo, sufficienter and legittime deputatis, express renuncio, and in his
scriptis manu and sigillo meis in praesentia notariorum and testium
subscriptorum munitis, totaliter cedo omnibus and quibuscunque verbis,
clausulis and sententiis, in bullis Apostolicis mihi factis de praedict.
Episcopat. Bathon. and Wellen. contentis and descriptis, quae sunt vel quovis
modo in futuru^ esse poterint praejudicialia sive damnosa praefato serenissimo
Regi, Domino meo supremo, and haeredibus suis de corpore suo legittime
procreatis Angl. Regibus, Coronae aut Regno, sive Majestatis Juribus vel
consuetudinibus, aut Praerogativis ejusdem Regni: and quoad hoc me integraliter
submitto and pono in gratia suae Celsitudinis, humillime supplicans suam
Majestatem, dignetur mihi concedere temporalia dicti Episcopatus Bathon. and
Wellen. quae recognosco tenere a sua Majestate tanquam a Domino meo Supremo.
Tenor Juramenti sequitur and est talis: Et ego idem Adrianus Cardinalis
praedictus Juro ad haec Sancta Dei Evangelia per me corporaliter tacta, quod ab
hac die and in antea, vita mea naturali durante, ero fidelis and verus ligens,
ac fidelitatem in ligencia mea pure and sincere servabo, fideleque and verum
obsequium secundum optimum posse meum faciam and impendam serenissimo Principi
Henrico ejus nominis septimo, Dei Gratia Angl. and Fran. Regi ac Domino Hiber.
Domino meo supremo, and haeredibus suis de corpore suo legittime procreatis
Angl. Regibus, contra quascunque personas, cujuscunque status, gradus,
praeeminentiae aut conditionis extiterint: nec quicquam faciam aut attemptabo
fieri, ne aut attemptari consentiam, quod in damnum, incommodum, aut
praejudicium, ipsius serenissimi Regis aut haeredum suorum praedictorum,
jurium, libertatum, Praerogativarum, privilegiorum and consuetudinum sui
incliti Regni, quovis modo cedere poterit; sed omne id quod jam scio, vel
imposterum cognoscam inhonorabile, damnosum aut praejudiciale, suae Serenitati,
aut Regno suo, seu contrarium honori aut Serenitati suae Majestatis, aut
haeredum suorum praedictorum, non solum impediam ad extremum potentiae meae,
sed etiam cum omni possibili diligentia id ostendam et significabo, ostendive
aut significari faciam eidem serenissimo Regi, omni favore, metu, promisso aut
Jurejurando cuicunque personae aut quibuscunque personis cujuscunque status,
gradus, ordinis praeeminentiae conditionisve extiterunt, quod antehac per
mefactu^ autinterpositu^ seu imposterum fiendu^ aut interponendu^, penitus
sublato and non obstantibus. Honorem insuper suae Majestati ad extremum
potentiae meae servabo, Parliamentis quoque and aliis Consiliis suae
Celsitudinis cum in ejus Regno fuero diligenter attendam; Consilium quod sua
Serenitas per se ceu literas aut nuncium suum mihi manifestabit, nemini pandam,
nisi iis quibus ipse jusserit: and si consilium meum super aliquo facto
Majestas sua postulaverit, fideliter sibi consulam, and quod magis suae
Serenitati videbitur expedire, and conducere juxta opinionem and scire meum,
dicam and aperiam, atque id si sua Serenitas mandaverit pro posse meo
diligenter faciam. Causas insuper and negotia omnia suae Serenitatis mihi
commissa, seu imposterum committenda, in Curia Romana prosequenda, pertractanda
and solicitanda, fideliter, accurate and diligenter, cum omnimoda dexteritate
prosequar, pertractabo and solicitabo: Bullasque and alias Literas Apostolicas
validas and efficaces, in debita Juris forma, super eisdem causis and negotiis
impetrare and obtinere absque fraud, dolo aut sinistra quavis machinatione
quantum in me erit, cum omni effectu enitar, operam dabo and conabor: ac easdem
taliter expeditas, cum ea quam res expostulat diligentia, suae Serenitati,
transmittam aut per alios transmitti, tradi and liberari curabo, and faciam.
Servitia quoque and homagia pro temporalibus dicti Episcopatus, quae recognosco
tenere a sua Celsitudine tanquam a Domino meo supremo, fideliter faciam and
implebo. Ita me Deus adjuvet and haec Sancta Dei Evangelia. In cujus, etc. T.R.
apud Westminster. 13 die October.

Per ipsum Regem.

II. Pope Julius's Letter to Archbishop Warham for giving K. Henry the 8th the
Golden Rose.
Julius Secundus Papa venerabili Fratri Guilielmo Archiepiscop. Cantuarien.
VEnerabilis Frater, salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Registrum Warhami
Fol. 26.
Charissimum in Christo Filium nostrum Henricum Angliae Regem Illustrissimum,
quem peculiari charitate complectimur, aliquo insigni Apostolico munere in hoc
Regnisui primordio, decorandum putantes, mittimus nunc ad eum Rosam Auream,
Sancto Chrismate delibutam, and odorifero Musco aspersam, nostrisque manibus de
more Romanorum Pontificum benedictam, quam ei a tua Fraternitate inter Missarum
solemnia per te celebranda, cum caeremoniis in notula alligata contentis, dari
volumus nostra and Apostolica benedictione.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub Annulo Piscatoris 5 April. 1510.
Pontificatus nostri Anno septimo. Sigismundus.


The Note of the Ceremonies of delivering the Rose, referred to in the Letter,
was not thought worthy to be put in the Register.

III. A Writ for Summoning Convocations.
REX, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Cantuarien. Archiepis. Tonst.
Regist. Fol. 33.
totius Angliae Primati and Apostolicae sedis Legato, salutem. Quibusdam arduis
and urgentibus negotiis, Nos, defensionem and securitatem Ecclesiae Anglicanae,
ac pacem, tranquillitatem, and bonum publicum, and defensionem Regni nostri and
subditorum nostrorum ejusdem concernentibus, vobis in fide and dilectione
quibus nobis tenemini rogando mandamus, quatenus praemissis debito intuitu
attentis and ponderatis, universos and singulos Episcopos vestrae Provinciae,
ac Decanos and Priores Ecclesiarum Cathedralium, Abbates, Priores and alios
Electivos, Exemptos and non exemptos, necnon Archidiaconos, Conventus,
Capitula, and Collegia, totumque Clerum, cujuslibet Dioceseos ejusdem
Provinciae, ad conveniendum coram vobis in Ecclesia Sancti Pauli London. vel
alibi prout melius expedire videritis, cum omni celeritate accommoda, modo
debito convocari faciatis ad tractandum, consentiendum, and concludendum super
praemissis, and aliis quae sibi clarius proponentur, tunc and ibidem ex part
nostra. Et hoc, sicut Nos et statum Regni nostri, and honorem and utilitatem
Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis, nullatenus omittatis.

Test meipso, etc. apud Westminst. 6. Feb. Anno Regni 14. Warham in his Writ
of executing this Summons, prefixes the 20 th of April for the day of their
meeting.



IV. A Writ for a Convocation summoned by Warham on an Ecclesiastical account.
WIllielmus permissione divina Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas
and Apostolicae sedis Legatus, Regist. Fitz-Williams.
venerabili confratri nostro Domino Ricardo Dei Gratia London. Episcopo,
salutem and fraternam in Domino caritatem. Cum nuper Ecclesia Anglicana, quae
majorum nostrorum temporibus, multis ac magnis libertatibus and immunitatibus
gaudere solebat, quorundam iniquorum hominum malitiis, and nequitiis fortiter
fuerit inquietata and perturbata, qui omnia quae a majoribus nostris sancte and
pie, ob tranquillitatem dictae Ecclesiae, fuerunt ordinata ac sancita, vel
prava and sinistra interpretatione prope subvertentes, vel personas
Ecclesiasticas male tractantes, ac eas contemptui habentes, dictam Ecclesiam
pene prostraverunt ac pedibus conculcarunt: Ne igitur dicta Ecclesia Anglicana
ad calamitatem insignem seu ruinam ac jacturam, and quod absit, desolationem
perveniat, quas diu eadem Ecclesia Anglicana per diversas personas, ut
praefertur prae oculis suis Deum non habentes, nec censuras Sanctae Matris
Ecclesiae timentes, sustinuit and sustinebat, prout de verisimili Reformatione
non habita in futurum sustinere debeat; Nos prout tenemur, congruum remedium in
hac part providere cupientes, and ob id ipsum Praelatos and Clerum nostrae
Cantuar. Provinciae convocare volentes; Fraternitati vestrae igitur committimus
and mandamus, quatenus omnes and singulos dictae nostrae Cant. Ecclesiae
Suffraganeos infra nostram Provinciam constitutos, and absentium Episcoporum si
quifuerunt Vicarios in Spiritualibus generales, ac Diocesium vacantium Custodes
Spiritualitatis, and Officiales citetis seu citari faciatis, peremptory, and
per eos Decanos and Priores Ecclesiarum Cath. ac singula Capitula eorundum,
Archidiaconos, Abbates and Priores, Conventus sub se habentes, and alios
Ecclesiarum Praelatos exemptos, and non exemptos, Clerumque cujuslibet
Dioceseos Provinciae nostrae antedictae, citari peremptory and praemoneri
volumus and mandamus, Quod iidem Episcopi Suffraganei, nostri Vicarii
Generales, Decani and Custodes sive Officiales, Abbates, Priores, Archidiaconi
ac caeteri Ecclesiarum Praelati, exempti and non exempti, personaliter, and
quodlibet Capitulum Ecclesiarum Cath. per unum de Capitulo graduatum, vel magis
idoneum, dictique singuli Abbates, sive Priores, Conventus sub se habentes,
nullo obstante impedimento legittimo, per unam Religiosam personam de Conventu
graduatam si quae sit, ceu alias per unam magis idoneam de eodem Conventu,
Clerusque ^ujuslibet Dioc. Provinciae antedictae per duos procuratores
graduatos ejusdem Dioc. seu alias si non fuerunt, per duos sufficientiores and
habiliores Dioc. in eorum Beneficiis realiter residentes, compareant coram
nobis aut nostris in hac part locumtenentibus, vel Commissariis si nos tunc
(quod absit) impediri contigerit in Ecclesia Cathed. Sancti Pauli London. die
Sabbat. viz. 26. mensis Januarii etc. Dat in Manerio nostro de Lambeth. primo
die mensis Novembris Anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo nono, and nostrae
Translat. Anno sexto.

V. The Preamble of the Act of Subsidy granted by the Clergy.
QUum Illustrissimus and Potentissimus Dominus noster Rex Angliae and Franciae,
Anno Dom. 1523. Regist. Cuthberti Tonstall. Folio 40*
Defensor Fidei and Dominus Hibern. semper extitit constantissimus Ecclesiae
Protector and Patronus optime meritus, atque superioribus annis, in diebus
foelicis recordationis Julij ejus nominis Papae secundi, grave Schisma in
Ecclesia Romana exortum pacavit and extinxit; and postea ipsam Ecclesiam
Romanam contra vim and potentiam Gallorum, qui tunc Italiam and Urbem Romanam
in servitutem redigere moliebantur, validissimo excercitu and bello long
omnium sumptuosissimo faeliciter defendit, and securam reddid^t: Ac praeterea
postremis his diebus Lutheranas, Haereses, in Ecclesiae Sacramenta Ecclesiaeque
statum furiose debaccantes doctissimo and nunquam satis laudato libello
contudit and superavit; vicissim tam gladio quam calamo hosts Ecclesiae
strenuissime profligans, quibus meritis suam clarissimam famam immortali
gloriae pariter consecravit, tales lauds and gratias sua incomparabili
bonitate ab Ecclesia promeruit, quales nunquam satis dignas quisquam mortaliu^
refer poterit sed Deus affatim persolvet praemia digna. Quumque idem Rex
noster and Protector illustrissimus a Rege Gallorum per Mare and per Terras,
incolas hujus Regni contra percussum foedus, promissam fidem, and suum ipsius
salvum conductum assidue infestante, and Scotos contra Regnum hoc instigante ac
suis stipendiis conducente, atque ducem Albaniae in perniciem principis
Scotorum nostri Regis ex sorore Nepotis impellente, aliasque injurias multas
and graves contra Regiam Majestatem suosque amicos and subditos quotidie
multiplicante, provocatur, irritatur atque urgetur ut bellum suscipiat, suumque
Regnum tam contra Gallos quam contra Scotos ut decet imvictissimum Principem
potenter defendat; non enim ultra pacem colere vel pacem longius expectare
convenit postquam Rex Gallorum summum Pontificem been moventem, and quae pacis
sunt suadentem, audire recusat, exercitum instruens and bellum apparans,
fortassis in multos annos duraturum: dignissimum est ob praefata tam praeclara
facinora, ut sicut Rex noster illustrissimus plus caeteris Regibus
antecessoribus suis pro Ecclesiae defensione, utilitate and honor insudavit,
and plus expensarum sustinuit; ita ad sustinenda bellorum onera imminentia, pro
Ecclesiae and totius Regni hujus defensione, per Ecclesiam tali subsidio
adjuvetur quale anterioribus Regibus nunquam antehac concessum est, nec
fortassis posterioribus Regibus unquam simile, nisi ob talia benefacta vel
extremam bellorum necessitatem postea concedetur. Quocirca ut Regia Majestas ad
fovendam and protegendam Ecclesiam, and Clerum Angliae, magis indies animetur,
and ut jura, libertates and privilegia Ecclesiae concessa benign Ecclesiae
servet, and ab aliis servari faciat, and ne praefata benefacta in ingratos
contulisse videatur.

NOs Praelati and Clerus Cant. Provinciae in hac Sacra Synodo Provinciali sive
Praelatorum and Cleri ejusdem Convocatione, in Ecclesia Cathed. Divi Pauli
London. vicesimo die mensis Aprilis Anno Dom. millesimo quingentesimo vicesimo
tertio inchoata, ac usque ad and in decimum quartum diem mensis Augusti proxime
ex tunc sequentis de diebus in dies continuata, congregati, Illustrissimo
Domino Regi perpetuo and potentissimo Fidei and Ecclesiae defensori, subsidium
dare and concedere Decrevimus, quam nostram Benevolentiam ut gratam and
acceptam habeat humillime deprecamur, protestants express, quod per
praesentem concessionem, quam tanquam novam and ante insolitam pro nostra
singulari and personali in Regiam Majestatem observantia sine exemplo donamus,
omnino nolumus Ecclesiae Anglicanae aut successoribus nostris in aliquo
praejudicium generari, nec casum hunc singularem ad sequen. trahi: Quod si
praesentem Concessionem pro exemplo and (ut vocant) pro Praesidente ad similes
unquam Concessiones exigendas accipiendam fore praesentiremus, certe in eam
omnino consentire recusassemus; quandoquidem subsidium sub modis, formis,
conditionibus, exceptionibus ac provisionibus, and protestatione super and
infrascriptis, and non aliter, neque alio modo, Damus and Concedimus, viz.
Subsidium se extendens ad Medietatem sive mediam partem valoris omnium fructuum
reddituum, and proventuum, possessionum, unius anni, omnium and singulorum
Episcopatuum, Ecclesiarum Cathed. and Collegiatarum, Dignitatum, Hospitalium,
Monast. Abbaciarum, Prioratuum aliarumque domorum Religiosarum, necnon
quorumcunque beneficiorum and Possessionum Ecclesiasticarum, etc.

VI. Bishop Tonstal's License to Sir Thomas More for reading Heretical Books.
CUthbertus permissione Divina London. Episcopus Clarissimo and Egregio viro
Domino Thomae More fratri and amico Charissimo Salutem in Domino and benedict.
Regist. Tonst. Fol. 138.
Quia nuper, postquam Ecclesia Dei per Germaniam ab haereticis infestata est,
juncti sunt nonnulli iniquitatis Filii, qui veterem and damnatam haeresim
Wyckliffianam and Lutherianam, etiam haeresis Wycliffianae alumni transferendis
in nostratem vernaculam linguam corruptissimis quibuscunque eorum opusculis,
atque illis ipsis magna copia impressis, in hanc nostram Regionem inducere
conantur; quam sane pestilentissimis dogmatibus Catholicae fidei veritati
repugnantibus maculare atque inficere magnis conatibus moliuntur. Magnopere
igitur verendum est ne Catholica veritas in totum periclitetur nisi boni and
^ruditi viri malignitati tam praedictorum hominum strenue occurrant, id quod
nulla ratione melius and aptius fieri poterit, quam si in lingua Catholica
veritas in totum expugnans haec insana dogmata simul etiam ipsissim^ prodeat in
lucem. Quo fiet ut Sacrarum Literarum imperiti homines in manu^ sumentes novos
istos Haereticos Libros, atque una etiam Catholicos ipsos refellentes, vel ipsi
per se verum discernere, vel ab aliis quorum perspicacius est judicium recte
admoneri and doceri possint. Et quia tu* Frater Clarissime, in lingua nostra
vernacula, sicut etiam in Latina, Demosthenem quendam praestare potes, and
Catholicae veritatis assertor acerrimus in omni congressu esse soles, melius
subcisivas horas, si quas tuis occupationibus suffurari potes, collocare
nunquam poteris, quam in nostrate lingua aliqua edas quae simplicibus and
ideotis hominibus subdolam haereticorum malignitatem aperiant, ac contra tam
impios Ecclesiae supplantatores reddant eos instructiores: habes ad id exemplum
quod imiteris praeclarissimum, illustrissimi Domini nostri Regis Henrici
octavi, qui Sacramenta Ecclesiae contra Lutherum totis viribus ea subvertent^^
asserere aggressus, immortale nomen Defensoris Ecclesiae in omne aevum
promeruit. Et ne Andabatarum more cum ejusmodi larvis lucteris, ignorans ipse
quod oppugnes, mitto ad te insanas in nostrate lingua istoru^ naen^as, atque
una etiam nonnullos Lutheri Libros ex quibus haec opinionu^ monstra prodierunt
Quibus abs te diligenter perlectis, facilius intelligas quibus latibulis
tortuosi serpents sese condant, quibusque anfractibus elabi deprehensi
studeant. Magni enim ad victoriam momenti est hostium Consilia explorata
habere, and quid sentiant quove tendant penitus nosse: nam si convellere pares
quae isti se non sensisse dicent, in totum perdas operam. Macte igitur virtute,
tam sanctum opus aggredere, quo and Dei Ecclesiae prosis* and tibi immortale
nomen atque aeternam in Coelis gloriam pa^es: quod ut facias atque Dei
Ecclesiam tuo patrocinio munias, magnopere in Domino obsecramus, atque ad illum
finem ejusmodi libros and retinendi and legendi facultatem atque licentiam
impertimur and concedimus. Dat. 7 die Martii, Anno 1527 and nostrae Cons. sexto.

Ad Librum Secundum.
I. The Bull for the King's Marriage with Queen Katherine.
JUlius Episcopus servus servorum Dei, Cott. libr. Vitel. B. 12.
dilecto Filio Henrico carissimi in Christo Filii Henrici Angliae Regis
illustriss. Nato, and dilectae in Christo Filiae Catharinae, Carissimi in
Christo Filii nostri Ferdinandi Regis, ac Carissimae in Christo Filiae nostrae
Elizabeth. Reginae Hispaniarum and Siciliae Catholicorum natae, illustribus,
salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Romani Pontificis praecellens Autoritas
concessa sibi desuper utitur potestate, prout personarum, negotiorum and
temporum qualitate pensata, id in Domino conspicit salubriter expedire. Oblatae
nobis nuper pro part vestra petitionis series continebat, Quod cum alias tu
Filia Catharina, and tunc in humanis agens quondam Arthurus, Carissimi in
Christo Filii nostri Henrici Angliae Regis illustrissimi primogenitus, pro
conservandis pacis and amicitiae nexibus and faederibus inter carissimum in
Christo Filium nostrum Ferdinandum, and Carissimam in Christo Filiam nostram
Elizabeth. Hispaniarum and Siciliae Catholicos, ac praefatum Angliae Reges and
Reginam, matrimonium per verba legitime de praesenti contraxissetis, illudque
carnali Copula forsan consummavissetis, Dominus Arthurus prole ex hujusmodi
Matrimonio non suscepta decessit; Cum autem, sicut eadem petitio subjungebat,
ad hoc ut hujusmodi vinclum Pacis and Amicitiae inter praefatos Reges and
Reginam diutius permaneat, cupiatis Matrimonium inter vos per verba legitime de
praesenti contrahere, supplicari nobis fecistis, ut vobis in praemissis de
opportunae Dispensationis gratia providere de benignitate Apostolica
dignaremur: Nos igitur, qui inter singulos Christi fideles, praesertim
Catholicos Reges and Principes, Pacis and Concordiae amaenitatem vigere
intensis desideriis affectamus, vosque and quemlibet vestrum a quibuscunque
Excommunicationis, Suspensionis and Interdict. aliisque Ecclesiasticis
Sententiis, Censuris, Paenis, a jure vel ab homine, quavis occasion vel causa
latis, si quibus quomodolibet innodati existitis, ad effectum praesentium
duntaxat consequendum, harum serie absolventes, and absolutos fore censentes
hujusmodi supplicationibus inclinati, vobiscum, ut impedimento affinitatis
hujusmodi ex praemissis proveniente, ac Constitutionibus and Ordinationibus
Apostolicis caeterisque contrariis nequaquam obstantibus, Matrimonium per verba
legitime de praesenti inter vos contrahere, and in eo, postquam Contractum
fuerit, etiamsi jam forsan hactenus de facto public vel clandestine
contraxeritis, ac illud Carnali Copula consummaveritis, licite remanere
valeatis, Auctoritate Apostolica tenore praesentium de specialis dono Gratiae
Dispensamus; ac vos and quemlibet vestrorum si contraxeritis (ut praefertur) ab
excessu hujusmodi, ac Excommunicationis Sententia quam propterea incurristis,
eadem Auctoritate Absolvimus, Prolem ex hujusmodi Matrimonio, sive contracto,
sive contrahendo, susceptam forsan vel suscipiendam legitimam decernendo.
Proviso quod tu (Filia Catharina) propter hoc rapta non fueris; volumus autem
quod si hujusmodi Matrimonium de facto contraxistis, Confessor, per vos and
quemlibet vestrum eligendus, paenitentiam salutarem propterea vobis injungat,
quam adimplere teneamini. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae
Absolutionis, Dispensationis and voluntatis infringere, vel ei ausu temerario
contraire; si quis autem hoc attemptare praesumpserit, indignationem
Omnipotentis Dei ac Beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit
incursurum. Dat. Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae
millesimo quingentesimo tertio, septimo Call. Januarii, Pontificatus nostri Anno
primo.

II. The King's Protestation against the Marriage.
Cotton Libr. Vitell. B. 12.
IN Dei Nomine, Amen. Coram vobis Reverendo in Christo Patre and Domino, Domino
Richardo Dei and Apostolicae sedis gratia Episcopo Wintoniensi, Ego Henricus
Walliae Princeps, Dux Cornubiae and Comes Cestriae, dico, allego and in his
Scriptis propono, Quod licet ego minorem aetatem agens, and intra annos
pubertatis notorie existens, cum Serenissima Domina Katharina Hispaniarum Regis
Filia, Matrimonium de facto contraxerim, qui quidem Contractus, quamvis
obstante ipsa minore aetate mea de se jam invalidus, imperfectus, nullus
efficaciae aut vigoris extiterit; quia tamen annis pubertatis and matura aetate
jam superveniente, Contractus ipse per tacitum Consensum, mutuam
cohabitationem, munerum aut intersignium dationem seu receptionem, vel alium
quemcunque modum jure declaratum, forsan existimari seu videri poterit
apparenter validatus aut confirmatus; Ea-propter, Ego Henricus Walliae Princeps
praedictus, jam proximus pubertati existens, and annos pubertatis attingens,
Protestor, quod non intendo eundem praetensum contractum per quaecunque per me
dicta seu dicenda, facta aut facienda, in aliquo approbare, validare, ^eu ratum
habere, sed nunc in praesenti, non vi, dolo, nec prece inductus, sed sponte and
libere, nullo modo coactus, contra hujusmodi Contractum reclamo, and eidem
dissentio, voloque and omnino intendo ab eodem contractu Matrimoniali
praetenso, melioribus modo and forma, quibus de jure melius, validius, aut
efficacius potero vel possim, penitus resilire, and eidem express dissentire,
prout in praesenti contra eundem reclamo, and eidem dissentio. Protestorque
quod per nullum dictum, factum, actum, aut gestum per me, aut nomine meo per
alium quemcunque, quandocunque aut qualemcunque, imposterum faciendum, agendum,
gerendum, aut explicandum, volo aut intendo in praefatum contractum
Matrimonialem, aut in dictam Dominam Catharinam tanquam Sponsam aut Uxorem meam
consentire. Super quibus vos omnes testimonium perhibere volo, requiro, rogo,
atque obtestor.

Per me Henricum Walliae Principem.
LEcta fuit and facta suprascripta Protestatio, per praefatum Serenissimum
Principem Dominum Henricum, coram Reverendo in Christo Patre and Domino Domino
Richardo permissione Divina Winton. Episcopo, Judicialiter pro tribunali
sedent. Et me Notarium infra scriptum ad tunc praesentem in ejus Actorum
Scribam in hac part assumente, and Testium infrascriptorum praesentiis. Anno
Dom. 1505. Indictione octava, Pontificatus Sanctissimi in Christo Patris and
Domini nostri Julii, Divina Providentia eo nomine Papae secundi Anno secundo,
Mensis vero Junii die 27; quo die Dominus Serenissimus Princeps proximus
pubertati, and annos pubertatis attingens erat, ut tunc ibidem asserebat, in
quadam bassa Camera infra Palatium Regium Richemondiae, in part occidentali
ejusdem Palatii situat. Super quibus omnibus and singulis, praesatus
Serenissimus Princeps me Notarium praememoratum Instrumentum consicere, and
testes infra nominatos testimonium perhibere requisivit instanter, and rogavit.
In quorum omnium and singulorum fidem and testimonium, praefatus Serenissimus
Princeps supra, and testes, ut praemittitur, rogati and requisiti, sua nomina
propriis manibus infra scripserunt. Ita est ut supra, quod ego Joannes Raed
manu and signo meo manuali Attestor.

Giles Daubney, C. Somerset. Thomas Rowthale. Nicholas West. Henry Marny.




III. Cardinal Wolsey's first Letter to Sir Gregory Cassali, about the Divorce.
Taken from the Original.
Cotton libr. Vitellius B. 9.
DOmine Gregori, Post meam cordatissimam Commendationem, post ultimum vestrum a
me discessum ex compendio ad vos scripsi, ut ob nonnullas maximi momenti causas
procurare differretis quod de Regiae Majestatis negotio in quibusdam nobis
traditis Commissionibus continebatur, quoad rursus vobis significarem quid ea
in re fieri vellemus. Ubi vero ad Regiam Majestatem rediissem, variis
crebrisque cum ea habitis sermonibus, adeo abunde ac distinct illi aperui quam
ex animo ac diligenter, and quam sincere and ex fide, diu noctuque exoptetis
eidem Regiae Majestati inservire; neque ullum unquam laborem, periculum aut
molestiam vos velle recusare, ut omni studio ac viribus id fideliter praestare
possitis quod illi gratum aut acceptum quoquo modo esse posse cognoveritis,
omnemque industriam vos esse adhibituros quo vestrae fidei curaeque commissa
optatum finem consequantur; quem vestrum animum propensissima voluntate sic sub
mea ^ide Regiae Majestati insinuavi, ut meam hanc relationem atque sponsionem
pectori suo constantissime adfixerit, certissimaque fiducia concepit, omnino
futurum ut nostrae tunc expectationi quacunque in re and occasion
respondeatis: Ex quo fit ut vestrae operae, curae atque prudentiae ea nunc
tractanda and procuranda committat, quibus nihil magis cordi habeat, nihil
ardentius exoptet, aut majoris sit momenti vel gravioris successus, nec ullum
habet Consiliarium, utcunque intimum, cui graviora possit committere. Quum
itaque, me intercedente and procurante, nunc vos Regia Majestas prae caeteris
ad hoc fidei adsciverit and elegerit, ut in re tam gravi fidelissima vestra
opera ac ministerio utatur, sidemque illi meam de vobis jam ei adstrinxerim,
nihil ambigens quin postquam ejus animum ac voluntatem cognoveritis,
fueritisque abunde instructi quam maximi haec quae nunc expono sunt momenti,
utpote quae potissimum concernunt Regiae conscientiae exonerationem animaeque
suae salutem, vitae conservationem and incolumitatem, Regii Stemmatis
continuationem, publicumque commodum and quietem subditorum omnium, eorum
pariter qui sub ejus imperio nunc vivunt vel qui postea unquam in hoc suo Regno
vivent; quumque perspiciam sedulum vestrum Ministerium hoc in negotio
impendendom omnino r^dundaturum esse in praecipuam vestram exaltationem and
utilitatem, postquam infelices istos jam passos successus occasionem se
obtulisse videtis, qua vestra familia hujusmodi operam huic Serenissimo
Principi navare possit, quod statum omnem vestrum in long meliorem quam antea
sit haud dubie restituturus and adaucturus, certissimum compertissimumque
habeo, quod ob has tam urgentes causas and tam graves successuros effectus,
adeo toto pectore vires omnes vestras industria ac studio tantae conficiendae
rei addicetis, ut omnia queatis ad optatum exitum perducere; atque ita
promissum fidemque meam praestabitis, tam optimum Regiae Majestatis institutum
juvabitis, ejus desiderio and expectationi omni ex part satisfacietis, and
praeter been peractae rei honorem and laudem comparandam, mercedem quoque
reportabitis tanti Principis liberalitate dignam, quae certissime cedet in
perpetuum vestrum totiusque vestrae familiae commodum and incrementum: Et quum
jam mihi persuadeam futurum omnino ut officiis actionibusque vestris sitis
promissis sponsionibusque meis omnino satisfacturi, ad id pluribus verbis
neutiquam adhortabor, proinde ad rem nunc ipsam venio. Ante hoc tempus vobis
aperui, quemadmodum Regia Majestas, partim assiduo suo studio and eruditione,
partim relatu ac judicio multorum Theologorum, and in omni Doctrinae genere
doctorum virorum asseveratione, existimans conscientiam suam non esse
sufficienter exoneratam, quod in conjugio existeret cum Regina, Deumque primo
and ante omnia ac animae suae quietem and salutem respiciens, mox vero suae
Successionis securitatem, perpendensque accurate quam gravia hinc mala
provenirent, aperte sentit quam maxim futurum sit Deo molestum, inhonorificum
sibi, and ingratum apud homines, suisque subditis periculosum, ex hoc non
sufficienti conjugio, si deprehendatur dicta Majestas sciens ac volens in eo
perstare, and vivere praeter modum debitum, juxtaque ritum and legitima
Ecclesiae Statuta: quibus igitur ex causis longo jam tempore, intimo suae
conscientiae remorsu, summique Dei rationem habens, existimat animam suam
laesam and offensam, adeo quod, quum in suis conatibus actionibusque
quibuscunque Deum potissimum sibi semper proponat, ingenti cum molestia
cordisque perturbatione in hoc Matrimonio degit; super qua re maturum sanumque
judicium consuluit clarissimorum celeberrimorumque Doctorum a liorumque
complurium in omni eruditionis genere excellentiorum virorum ac Praelatorum,
partim Theologorum, partim Jurisperitorum, tum in suo Regno, tum alibi
existentium, ut aperte vereque cognosceret, an Dispensatio antea concessa pro
se and Regina, ex eo quod Regina Fratris sui uterini Uxor antea extiterit,
valida and sufficiens foret, necne; demumque a variis multisque ex his
Doctoribus asseritur, quod Papa non potest dispensare in primo gradu
affinitatis, tanquam ex jure Divino, moraliter, naturaliterque prohibito, ac si
potest, omnes affirmant and consentiunt quod hoc non potest, nisi ex
urgentissimis and ardius causis, quales non subfuerunt, Bulla praeterea
Dispensationis fundatur and concessa est sub quibusdam rationibus falso
suggestis and enarratis, in ea namque asseritur, quod haec Regia Majestas
Matrimonium hoc cum Regina percupiebat, pro bono pacis inter Henricum septimum
Ferdinandu^ and Elizabetham, quum revera nulla tunc dissensio aut belli
suspicio esset inter dictos Principes, vel Regiam Majestatem praedictam, quae
in teneris adhuc annis, nec in discretione aut judicio constitutis agebat;
nunquam deinde assensit, aut quicquam cognovit de hujusmodi bullae
Impetratione, nec unquam hoc Matrimonium optavit, aut aliquid de eo accepit
ante bullae Impetrationem. Quocirca ab his omnibus Doctoribus atque Praelatis
judicatur hujusmodi Dispensationem non adeo validam and idoneam esse ac
efficacem, ut praedictum Matrimonium manifest justum legitimumque sit; sed
potius quod multa possunt objici, magnis probabilibusque fundata and
corroborata rationibus, in non leve periculum Regiae prolis, to^iusque Regni ac
subditorum gravem perturbationem. Adhaec, postquam Regia Majestas, qui Walliae
Princeps tunc erat, decimum quartum annum attigisset, contractus Revocatio
subsequuta est, Rege Patre express nolente quod hujusmodi Matrimonium ullo
pacto sortiretur effectum. His causis Rex hic Serenissimus, tanquam bonus and
Catholicus Princeps, timens ne ob tam diuturnam cum Regina continuationem,
indignatus and iratus Deus citius ex humanis evocave^^^ Masculam ^ Regina
susceptam prolem, graviusque a Deo supplicium expavescit si in Matrimonio hoc
non-legitimo perseveraverit; ex hac ideo occasion, intimis praecordiis hunc
Conscientiae scrupulum concepit, in animo nihilominus habens, pro animi
conscientiaeque suae quiet and salute, prolisque securitate, ad Sanctam Domini
nostri sedemque Apostolicam confugere, tantae rei remedium impetraturus
confidens, quod ob complura sua erga eam merita and officia tum calamo
ingeniique viribus, tum armis praestita, subsidia in Ecclesiae calamitatibus
prompte subministrata, Sanctissimus Dominus noster non gravabitur sua
benignitate, Authoritate ac facultate, intimum hunc Regiae Majestatis cordi
inhaerentem dolorem amovere, eumque modum ac rationem inire qua Regia Majestas
praedicta Uxorem aliam ducere, and, Deo volente, masculam prolem in suae
successionis securitatem queat ex ea suscipere, and tam certam quietem in suo
Regno constituere: Quumque ejus Sanctitas ab his nunc captiva detineatur, qui
pro virili sua forsan conabuntur impedire, turbareque hoc Regiae Majestatis
desiderium and Statutum, ipsa praeterea cogitur vias omnes excogitare, quibus
dicta Sanctitas de hac re dexterius and commodius instrui, and facilius adduci
queat ad ea concedenda, quoru^ medio and vigore Regiae Majestatis animus and
desiderium queat optatum sortiri effectum: Proinde ipsa Regia Majestas de fide,
industria, dexteritate prudentiaque vestra plenissime confidens, vult ut statim
his literis acceptis, rebus aliis omnibus quibuscunque ab eo vel a quovis alio
vobis commissis omnino posthabitis, vias modosque omnes possibiles excogitetis
quibus potestis secretissime, mutato habitu and tanquam alicujus Minister, vel
tanquam Commissionem habens a Duce Ferrariae pro nonnullis inter Pontificem and
eum componendis controversiis, vel alia qua licuerit securiori via, ad
Pontificis praesentiam and colloquium accedendi, omnibus arbitris semotis, si
fieri possit, pro vestris obeundis mandatis; quorum obtinendorum gratia, si ita
expedire judicaveritis, eam mercedem ac pecuniarum summam promittetis ac
tradetis, his qui revera volent atque poterunt hoc negotium ad effectum
per^rahere, quam summam, and ejus limitationem, judicio, prudentiaeque vestrae
integram Regia Majestas remittit; etiam si his danda foret qui Pontificem
asservant, vel cuicunque alio qui vos tuto ad secretum cum sua Sanctitate
Sermonem adducere, in locumque tutum reducere posset: Cujus rei gratia,
aliisque ad hunc finem consequendum sustinendis oneribus neces^a^iis, pecuniae
ad summam december mill ducatorum, per Mensarios Venetias transmittentur, qui
illic in promptu aderunt, persolvendae and consignandae Prothonotario Fratri
vestro, Regio illic existenti Oratori; per eumque de tempore in tempus ad vos
transmitti ea summa poterit quam huic obtinendo negotio conducere posse
existimaveritis, nihilque ambigo quin dictam pecuniam fideliter collocetis, ex
Regiae Majestatis utilitate, expectatione atque sententia. Atque ubi ad Sanctum
Dominum nostrum accesseritis, post filiales and cordatissimas Regiae Majestatis
measque devotas and humillimas commendationes, and post exhibitas a Rege
Credentiae literas, in quibus in negotii adjumentum clausula vehemens est
propria ejus manu conscripta, ut ex earum exemplo cognoscetis, ejus Sanctitati
exponetis quam grave, molestumque Regiae Majestati and mihi sit, audire
infaelicissimos eventus, calamitatemque miserandam, in qua nunc ejus Sanctitas
cum Reverendiss. Cardinalib. versatur, cum gravissimo detrimento
irreparabilique sedis Apostolicae illiusque Patrimonii jactura, ad quae mala
sublevanda and corrigenda nullum in Regia Majestate officium desiderabitur,
quod ab ullo erga Sanctam Domini nostri vel sedem Apostolicam observantissimo
Principe queat excogitari; in eoque omne meum ministerium ac studium non minus
promptum aderit, quam si ex ea re solum possem mihi coelum comparare:
quemadmodum experientia, aliqua in part, jam docuit, and Deo duce posthac
uberius comprobabit: quam rem copiosius optimisque verbis agetis, praesertim,
quum sciatis quanto and quam sincero affectu Regia Majestas ejus Sanctitatem
prosequatur, and quanta mea sit in ipsam devotio, in hisque sermonibus
insistetis prout loci, temporis, negociique ratio videbitur judicio vestro
postulare.

Secundo, Sanctissimo Domino nostro solita vestra dexteritate aperietis id quod
in his ipsis literis ad vos scripsi concernens hujus Matrimonii
insufficientiam, ab hisque rationibus and causis fundamentum capietis, quae
superius enarrantur integrumque discursum ejus Sanctitati declarabitis, non
omittentes intrinsecum dolorem, conscientiae scrupulum, Dei rationem, Masculae
prolis respectum, hujus Regni bonum, and alia omnia ut superius scripta sunt:
addentes insuper, nihil vehementius optari a tota Regni Nobilitate, subditisque
omnibus nullo discrimine, quam e Regiae Majestatis corpore Masculum haeredem a
Deo sibi dari, in perpetuam consolationem, gaudium, quietem, ac totius Regni
securitatem, posteritatisque firmissimum columen; prudentiorumque opinionem
esse, quod Deus omnipotens a tanto bono concedendo divinam suam manum
substrahit, ob errorem, culpamque in dicto Matrimonio hactenus admissam, quae
nisi mature corrigatur, graviora ex hac occasion in hoc Regno mala succedent,
quam antea unquam fuerunt audita; etenim si hoc negotium in suspenso and
indiscussum relinqueretur, hujusmodi possent quaestiones, controversiae and
contentiones ac factiones post defunctum Regem exoriti, ob Regni haereditatem,
quae non possent in multorum aevo restingui, ut antea olim ex causa long
leviori accidit, neque ex re tam ambigua, tam saevae olim depopulationes,
bella, intestinaeque controversiae exortae, and ad multum tempus continuatae
sunt, in extremum and ferme ultimum Regni excidium; quae quum tam gravia sunt,
Sanctissimus Dominus noster veluti pater and gubernator Christianitatis
prospicere ex officio debet, and quibuscunque modis potest, pro viribus adniti
and conari, ut haec Regna ac dominia quae nunc super-sunt in fide and
obedientia Ecclesiae assidue contineat, inter quae, Deo sit laus, hoc Regnum
haud recensendum est inter minima sed tanquam illud quod hactenus juvavit, and
posthac pro tuto praesidio semper haberi poterit, adversus ea quae cedere
possent in Ecclesiae Catholicae vel sanctae fidei detrimentum.

Tertio, Sanctissimo Domino nostro proponetis praesentem Ecclesiae statum,
rogabitisque ut in mentem velit redigere, quo nunc in statu suae Sanctitatis
res cum Christianis Principibus versentur, cumque privatae contentiones, quae
illi sunt cum magna eorum principum part, addita and ambitione immoderatoque
regum appetitu and ex arbitrio suo, Temporale jus omne atque Spirituale
tractandi, Ecclesiasticamque Jurisdictionem and Authoritatem invertendi, eo
certe animo ut sedis Apostolicae dignitatem extinguant; his omnibus in unum
connexis ac been consideratis, ejus Sanctitas manifest cognoscet, Principem
nullum, neque portum, aut refugium tam tutum, cui in omnem eventum queat
inhaerere, sibi relictum esse, quam haec Regia Majestas est quae nihil sibi
vendicat, nil ambit, quod praejudicio esse possit dictae Sanctitati, sed ejus,
Apostolicaeque sedis, semper fuit, est, esseque decrevit firmissimum scutum,
tutissimumque propugnaculum, ita suas actiones cum caeteris Principibus firmans
and connectens, ut semper ex ea occasion in suam hanc optimam sententiam
reliquos possit attrahere, adeo quod Regi tam optime in Sanctissimum Dominum
nostrum affecto nihil denegari debeat, uteumque maximum quod possit ab ejus
Sanctitate praestari ordinaria vel absoluta sua Authoritate; nam procul dubio,
post vias modosque omnes tentatos, omnino perspicietur omnia alia amicitiae
officia, si huic quod petitur comparentur, esse perquam exigua, and hoc amicum
officium hujusmodi futurum, ex quo reliqua queant incrementum capere, sine eo
futura alioquin parvi ac nullius fere momenti.

Tertio, probe notandum est, quod res nunc aperta and petita, a Regiaque
Majestate tantopere optata, ex tam magno conscientiae scrupulo, cordisque
remorsu oritur, ut unicuique debita sit, quantumcunque minori quam Regia
Majestas sit de Sanctissimo Domino nostro merito. Quocirca judicat, and pro re
comperta sibi persuadet, quod si ulla meritorum vel officiorum ratio habeatur,
nunc ipsius Sanctitas huic suo desiderio and petitioni benignissime
liberrimeque adjuvet, nullo prorsus dubio, difficultate, contradictione aut
mora injecta. Negotiumque hujusmodi est, ut cognita Dispensationis
insufficientia, quamvis id non requisivisset Rex, ultro proponi offerrique
debuisset ab eadem Sanctitate tanquam a Patre Spirituali, in ejus salutis and
conscientiae beneficium.

In gratiam igitur and contemplationem praemissorum omnium instantissime
vehementissimeque a Sanctissimo Domino nostro requiretis and contendetis, ut
dubio, metuque omni seposito, respicere velit ad causae statum, and ad ea quae
subsequutura videantur, rationemque habere infinitorum commodorum, quae ex hac
re suae Sanctitati Apostolicaeque sedi inde provenient, rem hanc statim, absque
temporis tractu, and causae circumstantia, nemini eam aperiens, libere
concedere and indulgere nullique communicata specialem Commissionem ad hunc
effectum and finem confectam in forma Brevis concedere, and ad me dirigere,
Facultatem addens, ut mihi liceat quos^unque voluero ad me vocare, mihique
asciscere ad procedendum in hac causa, and inquirendum de dictae Bullae ac
Dispensationis sufficientia, juxta formam ac tenorem expressum in quodam
libello hujus rei gratia confecto; quem cum his ad vos mitto, sic in debita
forma conscriptum and digestum ut non sit futurum opus quo denuo ab ullo alio
exscribatur, si forsan periculosum putaretur eam rem cuique patefacere vel in
dubium aut dilationem protractum iri negotium, si ulli ex Sanctissimi Domini
nostri officiariis committeretur rursus conscribendum; sed quod in hujusmodi
periculi eventum possit ejus Sanctitas sine ullo discrimine vel alicujus
cognitione eam dicto libello signaturam, sigillumque apponere, ut aperte inde
constet, Pontificis meram voluntatem sic esse, illiusque Signaturae ac Sigilli
vigore, legitime and sufficienter possim ego procedere ad inquisitionem de
dictae Dispensationis insufficientia, cognitionem and aliarum causarum and
rationum, quae adduci possunt pro dicti Matrimonii invaliditate.

Item cum his ad vos mitto Dispensationem in debita forma confectam and
scriptam in modum Brevis, secreto impetrandam and expediendam eidem Signaturam
vel Sigillum apponendo, vel alio quovis modo valido: Et quamvis ex hac re multa
pendeant, ob quae ista requiruntur, and quae, Deo favente, neutiquam timenda
sunt; Attamen Regia Majestas exemplo innitens, and recordationi complurium
rerum, quae olim praeteritis temporibus fuerunt injuste asserta, vel adducta,
in animo habens causas suas omnes absque ulla controversia aut difficultate ad
perfectum finem perducere, and ne ullo quovis praetextu, argumento aut color,
postmodum emergente perturbarentur, hoc a Sanctissimo Domino nostro requirit,
veluti rem necessariam, qua nullo pacto carere queat; firmiter confidens, quod
Sanctitas sua, benign atque amanter isti ejus desiderio assentiet, and
concedet sine ullo obstaculo dictam Commissionem, juxta formam quam Regia
Majestas petit and eodem tempore, atque haec omnia ita benign ac liberaliter
expedire, secretiori and validiori quo fieri possit modo, quo optatus finis
subsequi possit in eum effectum, laudabileque propositum, de quo superius
dictum est; Qua ex occasion Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum in perpetuum sibi
adstringet, indissolubilique amicitiae vinculo hanc Regiam Majestatem sibi
alligabit, quae nulli labori, periculo, opibus, Regno, subditis, nec ipsi
sanguini parcens, ab ejus Sanctitate nunquam divelletur aut eam deseret, sed
totis suis viribus constantissime semper illi adhaerebit, tum in suae
Sanctitatis and Cardinalium liberationem, tum in hostibus persequendis; ad quem
finem, magnam jam pecuniarum summam ad Regem Christianissimum misit, pro illo
Italiae exercitu continuando, and praeter id in animo statutum habet, quod nisi
Caesar de dicta Sanctitate liberanda consentire, and ad pacem devenire
voluerit, bellum gerere adversus has inferiores Caesaris Regiones and Dominia,
quo vehementius urgeat Sanctissimi Domini nostri liberationem, Ecclesiaeque in
pristinam suam dignitatem and authoritatem restitutionem, eaque de se indicia
exhibebit ut universo orbi manifestum sit futurum, dictam suam Majestatem esse
solidum perfectum amicum, filium obsequentissimum and ejus devotissimum; a qua
pectoris sui sententia, nullo thesauro, nullis opibus, nullis Regnis, seu
Ditionibus, vel occasion quacunque unquam adducetur, sed ex filiali sua
observantia and in Christianam Religionem zelo, innatoque erga sedem
Apostolicam studio, and praecipuo quodam affectu, quem Sanctissimo Domino
nostro gerit: in compensationem quoque gratitudinis, quam tam avide in hoc suo
negotio ab ejus Sanctitate expectat, decretum prorsus habet in constantissimo
hoc and indissolubili amicitiae and conjunctionis vinculo sincerissimo
perstare, id quod dicta Regia Majestas Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum
vehementissime rogat, ut probe velit in omnem partem librare, vicissemque
efficere, ut ex Regiae petitionis indulgentia palam constet parem benevolentiam
and humanitatem a Sanctissimo Domino nostro ex mutuo praestari.

Hac autem causa ipsius Sanctitati a vobis, ut dictum est, exposita and
declarata, neutiquam dubitandum est, quin benevole atque libenter statim adnuat
Regiae Majestatis expectationi and quod huic assentiet, dictam Commissionem
secreto modo ipsa concedens, neminem de ea re ut dictum est, participem
faciens; qui modus servandus est, si videritis haec effici non posse, nisi cum
periculo quin haec res eis communicetur, qui eam sint interturbaturi, vel si id
praestare fuerit. in Sanctissimi Domini nostri arbitrio, tunc ejus Sanctitas
non gravetur, per Brevia, vel per Bullas, prout validius and magis sufficiens
fore judicaverit, praemissa omnia concedere, ad quod vestram omnem industriam,
prudentiam, studium, diligentiamque adhibebitis: Sic omnia prudenter ac
circumspecte agentes, ne in discrimen deveniatur negotium hoc his detegendi,
qui illud vel impedire vel retardare forsan voluerint aut poterint, sed potius
quam ad id periculi res deducatur contenti eritis sola dictorum libellorum
Signatura, in eam formam confecta, quum ex ea palam constet, Pontificis
assensum in id actualiter concurrisse, qui postea recentioribus scriptis, si
ita opus fu^rit, firmius confirmari corroborarique poterit.

Et quoniam incertum est, utrum ante vestrum ad Pontificem accessum, ejus
Sanctitas fuerit in suam libertatem restituta, necne, quae forsan libera non
tanti faciet Regiae Majestatis amicitiam and conjunctionem, vel allegabit, se
nec audere nec posse, ex suis cum Caesare conventionibus ista concedere, nec
secreto ullo modo, vel ullo color, quod ea in re fecisset apud Caesarem
justificare, and potuisset antea in Regiae Majestatis auxilio pro sua
liberatione sperans, dum adhuc detineretur captivus; eo casu Sanctissimo Domino
nostro in mentem redigetis, quam parum fidere possit ullis sibi factis a
Caesare promissis, quum nulla in part redundare possit in commodum aut
securitatem, sed solum in extremum excidium ac detrimentum sedis Apostolicae;
and licet ad breve tempus multa videretur Caesar in ejus Sanctitatis gratiam
facturus, compertissimum tamen semper Pontifici esse debet Caesarianos ea
facere, semperque facturos, quae Caesarem possint exaltare, and tendant ad
usurpationem potius and depressionem status Ecclesiastici, quam ad ejus
continuationem, vel conservationem; and quotiens adversus Ecclesiam ista
tentarentur, Regia Majestas in hac sua petitione passa repulsam, quae alioquin
ejus Sanctitati in omnem eventum firmissime adhaesisset, and alios suos
confaederatos in eandem sententiam pertraxisset, quam, ea deficiente, in
contrarium facile possent allici, quo animo futura sit, and quam been suum
affectum and observantiam collocasse existimatura: summae est prudentiae omnia
considerare.

Haud incognitum praeterea est Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum ad Caesaris
instantiam, quum non multam ab ejus Sanctitate gratiam promeritus esset, ei
concessisse Dispensationem and Absolutionem a jurejurando ab illo praestito, de
ducenda in Conjugem Domina Principissa, nullo ut par fuisset a Regia Majestate
habito, seu petito consensu, non obstante quod Caesar in validissima forma, non
solum praestito jurejurando, sed cautione and Ecclesiasticarum censurarum and
paenarum abhibita, quod perstringeretur de dicto Matrimonio perimplendo, ac si
Pontifex contentus esse potuit, tantam ei ostendere gratitudinem, quum veluti
hostis indies certior tunc poterat haberi, and qui majora parabat quam just
posset optare, suis petitionibus, Regia Majestate inconsulta, neutiquam
parcens, quanto propensius ejus Sanctitas adnuere debet ejus Principis voto,
cujus fidem and observantiam vere filialem saepe experta est. Verum tamen si
Sanctissimus Dominus noster difficulter visus fuerit posse adduci, ut in meam
Personam dictae Commissioni assentiat, allegans quod non sum indifferens, cui
ex suae Sanctitatis honor hoc negotium committi possit, cum Regiae Majestati
sum subditus and intimus Consiliarius, tunc tamdiu persistetis ea in re, quoad
vobis visum fuerit conveniens, negotii expeditionem non ideo protrahentes, aut
differentes, sed instantes ut hujusmodi Commissio concedatur; affirmabitisque
me pro re nulla quantumlibet grandi, nullo favore, aut commodo, quicquam
effecturum esse, quod aversetur officio meo, and erga Christum praestitae
professioni, neque unquam a recto, vero, justoque tramite digressurum; Et quin
Cardinalis sim and Apostolicae sedis de latere Legatus, ejus Sanctitatis honor,
integraque conscientia, a me omnino conservaretur, ex hujusmodique concessa
Commissione, omni ex part exoneraretur. Tandem si ad hoc, nullis rationibus
Pontifex potuerit adduci, ab ejus Sanctitate requiretis, ut dictam velit
Commissionem concedere in personam Domini Staphylei Decani Rotae, qui and vir
indifferens est, and hujusmodi rei ob eruditionem accommodatus, nullo pacto
omittentes Dispensationis expeditionem, ut dictum est; and hujus rei gratia
Commissionem nunc ad vos mitto, in debita forma confectam and paratam, quae
signetur ad dictum Dominum Staphyleum directa, quam Sanctissimo Domino nostro
reddetis, casu quo alia nequeat obtineri, rogabitisque ut cum dicta
Dispensatione eam velit concedere. Et quoniam fieri possit quod dum fieret
mentio de me excipiendo, forsitan ejus Sanctitas aliquem alium quam Dominum
Staphyleum nominaret, ad quem Commissio hujusmodi dirigeretur, hoc vero in loco
tenacissime insistetis, firmiterque inhaerebitis ei rei, nec in alium aliquem
virum exterum ullo pacto consentientes, sed solum pro eodem Domino Staphyleio
instantes, ejus Sanctitatem summis precibus vehementissime rogantes, and
rationibus omnibus suadentes, ne alium ullum nominare velit, asserentes quod
quum in Instructionibus vestris non contineatur, nec de alio ullo fiat mentio,
nisi illo, me recusato, iterum atque iterum ab eadem Sanctitate petetis, ut
nomine hujus Auditoris Rotae haec fiat and expediatur commissio, vos nec audere
nec posse vobis praescriptos fines transgredi.

De Regii vero desiderii ac petitionis frustratione super dicta Commissione
obtinenda, diretis unum and idem esse, hanc illi denegare, vel alii concedere
quam in vestris Instructionibus contineatur, non quod Regia Majestas de aliorum
rectitudine aut indifferentia quicquam suspicetur, vel quod judicet eorum
aliquem affectibus obnoxium; sed quod pro re certissima credidit, quod
Sanctissimus Dominus noster in neminem tam facile condescenderet, quam in
dictae Rotae Decanum, ob idque de eo in Instructionibus vestris mentionem
fecit: sed Commissiones in debita forma cum his nominibus fieri and conscribi
jussit, quod si huic credidissemus, Dom. Staphileum habitum isti^ iri pro
suspecto, affirmare potestis me fuisse omnino missurum consimilem Commissionis
formulam, spatio relicto pro aliquo alio inscribendo nomine, aliquamque aliam
super ea re Instructionem me daturum fuisse, and haud dubie; si de nominibus
duntaxat fuerit controversia, hae rations facile poterunt Pontificem
attrahere, ut in me consentiat, vel in Staphyleum. De aliis vero neminem
admittetis, nec tamen Pontifici aperietis vos, ne id faciatis habere in
mandatis, sed superius enarratas Causas in vestram excusationem allegantes,
omnino ut vobis injungitur ea in re insistetis.

Quod si nullis modis dictam Commissionem, and Dispensationem impetrare
poteritis, ad idque nequiverit Pontifex adduci, nisi rem prius alicui ex
Cardinalibus vel Officiariis communicaverit, in eo tunc casu, ejus Sanctitati
in memoriam reducite, quot and quam gravia mala ex hujus negotii propalatione
possent provenire, si ex ea occasion aliquae contrarietates vel impedimentum
suboriretur, unde Regiae Majestatis expectatio postmodum frustaretur: Quo
igitur, si ullae injiciantur in hac re tractandae difficultates, ut Pontifex
etiam facilior ad Regium votum concedendum promptiorque reddatur, alias etiam
praeter has literas seorsim ad vos scripsi, quas una cum his accipietis, in
quibus copiose aggessi, quam multas magni momenti rations, ob quas sententia
judiciumque meum est, ne ullo pacto Pontifex hanc petitionem Regiae Majestatis
deneget; quas literas, quum in eis argumentum vehemens est, nec ob prolixitatem
taediosum aut molestum quod legatur, modum aliquem ipsius Sanctitati legendi
invenietis; spemque certam habeo, si earum summa, tenor, atque sententia
profunde perpendatur, quam satis id esse poterit ad omnem tollendam
difficultatem, quae possit obversari in dicta Commissione Dispensationeque
obtinenda, in eis contenta sigillatim exponetis adeo, quod hoc negotium con^ici
queat, Arbitris aut Consiliaribus ad id neutiquam accitis, si fieri possit: si
tamen Pontifex speraverit se posse haec omnia eos celare qui huic rei forsan
voluerint refragari, and omnino decreverit aliquos Cardinales vel Officiarios
istius causae participes facere, omnem tunc industriam statim adhibebitis, ut
his cognitis eorum gratiam and favorem ea in re vobis comparetis, partim eis
respectus, and causas omnes in meis literis contentas, etiam in causae commodum
facientes, uberius exponentes, partim vero eam remunerationem illis dantes,
quae judicio vestro conveniens habebitur, dummodo optatum res sortiatur
effectum. Et ut omnia queatis praestare commodius cum his, meas literas
accipietis quas ad Cardinalem Sanctorum Quatuor and Collegium Cardinalium
scribo, easque reddetis ut expedire censueritis, plane confidens nihil a vobis
omissum iri, ut hac in re eorum gratiam atque favorem queatis obtinere, in quem
eventum ea munera offeretis, quae convenientia visa fuerint, Regiaque Majestas
quicquid ejus nomine promiseritis, id fidelissime, uberrimeque praestabit, pro
quarum rerum expeditione, illis pecuniis uti poteritis per literas C^mbii
Venetias transmissis, quousque suffecerint, necessariumque vos existimaveritis
rei impetrandae. Et quum ambiguum sit an vobis li^uerit hoc tempore ad
Pontificis praesentiam accedere, hujusmodi accessus defectus, si aliae rem ad
bonum exitum perducendi rations non excogitarentur, causa esse posset
longioris morae, and totius rei impedimento; proinde Regia Majestas, ut modos
omnes experiatur, nec uni sol^ inhaereat, haec eadem in mandatis dedit Domino
Secretario, quem non procul ab Urbe esse intelleximus, quemadmodum in his
aliisque meis brevioribus literis continentur, ita quod alter vestrum, vel
uterque, si fi^ri possit, ad Pontificis praesentiam accessum habeat; nihil
tamen, sub s^e Domini Secretarii, vestrae vos diligentiae aut industriae
omittetis, nec ille sub spe vestra, in re hac modis omnibus promovenda,
remissior erit, sed nihil conjunctim aut divisim intentatum relinquetis. Quod
si uterque vestrum ad Pontificem admittatur, alter de altero nescius, id non
oberit, sed multum prosiciet, etiam si ante alterius adventum negotium hoc
alter impetrasset; sed si aliquis vestrum cognoverit causam hanc expeditam
esse, omniaque pro certo impetrata esse, tunc labori and sumptibus Pontificem
pro eadem re accedendi parcere poteritis, neque in eam amplius ingerere, neque
necessarium aut opportunum erit, ut pro ulla alia re in praesentia quam pro hac
apud Sanctissimu^ Dominu^ nostru^ agatis, sed solum nunc procurabitis de
Commissione and Dispensatione juxta formam ad vos missam obtinenda, necnon de
profestinatio^e illa, quam co^p^ndio ad vos dedi, in quibus omnibus and
singulis apt tractandis Regia Majestas magnam fiduciam in vestra prudentia
collocavit, in quibu^, cum tam magni sint momenti, ex Regiae Majestatis
sententia nunc vobis maxim elaborandum est.

Denique quum intelligam Dominum Lautrek nonnihil mirari, quod Regiae
Majestatis istic agentes, nullam suorum mandatorum partem cum eo con^erunt, ad
eum nunc scribo, and nonnulla Domino Roberto Jernyngham ei exponenda committo
concernentia actiones cum Ferrariae Duce, and alia quaedam eodem Domino
Lautrek; significans, vos missos esse ad dictas causas juvandas, and Pontificis
liberationem promovendam, quemadmodum ex literarum ad Dominum Jernyngham
exemplo cognoscetis: expediens itaque fuerit, ut prae se feratis, vos dictae
rei gratia missos esse, ne forsan Dominus Lautrek in falsam aliquam conjecturam
aut suspicionem incideret, quae communibus rebus nocere posset, and in
vestrarum quoque actionum impedimentum redundare.

Illud deinde reticere nolui, quod si ullo pacto vobis liceat ad Sanctissimi
Domini nostri praesentiam accedere, nihil omittatis in favorem and gratiam
Reverendi Domini Datarii, de cujus animo nihil dubitamus, comparandam, eique
asseretis, quod quum in nostris omnibus occurrentiis illius opera ac Patrocinio
semper usi fuerimus, ipse vero tanta semper side ac sedulitate omnia effecerit
quae nobis grata and optata esse cognovit, ut nostram omnem operam suis rebus
reddiderit, promptissimam, and suae utilitatis and exaltationis cupidissimam.
Quocirca haec Regia Majestas hac in re, qua nullam magis cordi habet, nec
gravioris momenti quicquam sibi accidere posse judicat, ex animi sui sententia
conficienda, post Sanctissimum Dominum nostrum, in Domino Datario spem omnem
collocavit, qui ex hac occasion, si operam suam ad optatum usque exitum
interponere non gravetur, Regiae Majestatis animum and pectus, sic omni ex
part promerebitur, ut dicta Majestas non solum omnia curatura sit, quae ex
Domini Veronensis commodo and ornamento fuerint, sed eam etiam munificentiam
and gratitudinem addet, quae majorem vel integram partem, a captivitate
Redemtionis persolvendae compensabit; In me vero non aliam fidem and amicitiam
experietur, quam ab ullo fratre posset expectare. Et been valete.

Londini ex meis Aedibus. Die quinto December. M. D. XXVII. Vester tanquam frater
Amantiss. T. Cardinalis Eborac.

Rome Ian. 1. 1528. IV. Two Letters of Secretary Knights to the Cardinal and
the King, giving an account of his Conference with the Pope about his Divorce.
Taken from the Originals.
PLease it your Grace to understand, Cotton Libr. Vitell. B. 10*
That immediately upon the receipt of your Graces Letters, severally directed
unto Mr. Gregory and me; he and I resorted unto the Pope his Holiness, making
congra^ulation of his restitution unto liberty on yours and his behalf, to his
singular comfort and consolation; and so much the more, because that I was the
first that made like salutation in any great Princes Name; He being well
assured that I spoke the same on the behalf of his two chief, sincere, and
unfeigned Friends: Wherefore with great high thanks, and long discourse, with
rehearsal of the King's and your Merits and Acts, in most virtuous and
Catholic manner, employed for his restitution, and your continual and
effectual study how the Sea Apostolic might recover the pristine Reputation
and Dignity; He confirmed as much as I had spoken. After this Mr. Gregory and I
entered into our Charge, showing at length the high deserts of the Princes and
Realm of England, the devotion of the same toward the Church; how expedient it
was, as well for the Sea Apostolic, as for the said Realm, to foresee and
provide that all occasions of Dissension and War were extinct and put away;
which for lack of Heir Male of our Sovereign's Line, and Stem, should
undoubtedly follow, with other considerations at length contained in our
Instructions. We desired his Holiness to commit the knowledge of the
Dispensation that was obtained in time of Julius, of famous memory, for
Matrimony to be had between the King and the Widow, Relict late of Prince
Arthur; and that we might have it in form as that was that your Grace sent
hither. His Holiness answered, That our sayings had great likelihood of truth,
for lacking of Issue Male of the King's Stem, considering the nature of Men
being prone unto Novelties, and disposed unto Parties and Factions. The Realm
of England would not only enter into their accustomed Divisions, but also would
owe or do small devotion unto the Church; Wherefore his Holiness was right well
content and ready to adhibit all Remedy that in him was possible as this time
would serve. And because he was not expert in making of Commissions, he would
consult with the Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor, and use his advice, which we
should shortly know.

We perceiving that the obtaining of our Charges after the King's and your
Graces pleasure, depended much upon the Advice of Sanctorum Quatuor, did
prevent his going unto the Pope and delivering your Grace's Letters with
Recommendations accordingly, we desired him to be good and favorable unto our
Requests in the King's behalf; and for the better obtaining of our desires, we
promised to see unto him with a competent reward. And this communication had,
we showed unto him the Commission, which he said could not pass without
perpetual dishonor unto the Pope, the King, and your Grace; and a great part
of such Clauses as be omitted, he has touched and laid reason for the same in
a Writing, which I do send unto your Grace with this. Considering his great
Experience, Wisdom, Learning, and the entire affection that he bears unto the
King and your Grace; and that it was far from the King's desire, and nothing
for your purposes, that I should first have sent the said Cardinal's Sayings
unto your Grace, and abide answer, and eft-soons prevent to do the same:
Considering also that the said King desires a Commission convenient and
sufficient, we desired him to make the minute of one, which he gladly did: When
it was made, the Pope said, That at his being in the Castle of St. Angelo, the
General of the Observants in Spain, required his Holiness, in the Emperor's
Name, not to grant unto any Act that might be preparative, or otherwise, to
Divorce to be made between the King and the Queen: and moreover desired an
Inhibition, that the said Cause should not come in knowledge before any Judge
within the King's Dominions. The Pope answered that Inhibitio non datur nisi
post litem motam. And as unto the first his Holiness was content, if any like
thing were demanded, to advertise the Emperor before, that he did let it pass;
and this was in a manner for his Holiness being in Captivity. But his Holiness
being yet in Captivity, as your Grace reports, and esteems him to be as long
as the Almaines and Spaniards continues in Italy; he thought if he should
grant this Commission, that he should have the Emperor his perpetual Enemy,
without any hope of reconciliation: Notwithstanding he was content rather to
put himself in evident ruin, and utter undoing, then the King, or your Grace,
should suspect any point of ingratitude in him, heartily desiring cum suspiriis
and lachrimis, that the King and your Grace, which have always been fast and
good unto him, will not now suddenly precipitate him for ever; which should be
done, if immediately upon delivering of the Commission your Grace should begin
Process. He intends to save all upright thus: If Monsieur de Lautrech would
set forwards, which he says daily that he will do, but yet he does not, at his
coming the Pope's Holiness may have good color to say, He was required by the
Ambassador of England of a like Commission. And denying the same, because of
his promise unto the General, he was eft-soons by Monsieur de Lautrech, to
grant the said Commission, inasmuch as it was but a Letter of Justice. And by
this color he would cover the Matter, so that it might appear unto the
Emperor, That the Pope did it not as he that would gladly do displeasure unto
the Emperor, but as an indifferent Prince that could not nor might deny
Justice, specially being required by such Personages; and immediately he would
dispatch a Commission, bearing date after the time that Monsieur Lautrech had
been with him or nigh unto him. The Pope most instantly beseeches your Grace,
to be a mean that the King's Highness may accept this in a good part, and that
he will take patience for this little time, which as it is supposed will be but
short, and (in omnem eventum) I do bring a Commission with me, and a
Dispensation, which I trust the King and your Grace will like well.

We have given unto my Lord Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor 4000 Crowns, and unto
the Secretary 30 Crowns.

With this Your Grace shall receive a Letter from the Pope's Holiness, Item, a
Counsel of Oldrand. that gives light unto the King's Cause. I shall make the
most diligence homeward that I can. Our Lord Jesus preserve Your Grace.

At Orvieto, this first day of January. Your most humble Servant and Chaplain,
W. Knight.

Rome Ian. 1. 1528.
To the KING.
PLease it your Highness to understand, That as soon as the Pope was at
liberty, and came unto Orvieto, I resorted unto his Holiness with all
diligence; and at my coming unto him, did make congratulation on your Highness
behalf; forasmuch as he was restored unto his Liberty, which he accepted very
joyfully and thankfully, giving unto your Highness manifold and high thanks for
your great goodness, as well proved in his adversity, as when he was in his
most felicity. After this he rehearsed my being at Rome, how dangerous it was,
inasmuch as when my being there was detect, espial was made, and I was not
passed out of Rome by the space of two hours, or two hundred Spaniards invaded
and searched the House. He showed also that he had received all such Letters as
I at my being in Rome did send unto his Holiness; whereby he did perceive the
Effect of your Highness desire concerning your Dispensation: And albeit he did
send me word that I should depart, and his Holiness would send unto me the said
Dispensation fully speed. Nevertheless he trusted that your Highness would be
content to tarry for a time: for the General of the Observants in Spain being
lately in Rome, had required him, according unto his Instructions, that he
should suffer nothing to pass that might be prejudicial or against the Queen,
directly or indirectly, but that the Pope should first advertise thereof
certain of the Caesarians here. And forasmuch as this Dispensation might
encourage your Grace to cause my Lord Legate Auctoritate Legationis to hear and
decern in the Cause that your Highness intends, and his Holiness stands as
yet in manner in captivity and perplexity: His Holiness therefore besought your
Grace to have patience for a time, and it should not be long e're your Highness
should have, not only that Dispensation, but any thing else that may lie in his
power. I replied unto this, That his Holiness had once granted it, and that I
had dispatched a Post, and made relation thereof, by my Writings, unto your
Highness; so that I could not imagine by what reason I might persuade unto you
that he would perform the promise that he had once broken. In conclusion; He
was content that your Highness should have it, but he would have it delivered
with this condition; That the Prothonotary and Gambora and I, should beseech
your Highness not to attempt any thing in your Cause against the Queen, till
such time as the Pope were frankly at his Liberty; which could not be as long
as the Almaynes and Spaniards did thus reign in Italy; and promise made, we
should deliver the Dispensation: and in my poor judgment, it was best always to
be in possession of this Dispensation. After this he showed the Minute unto the
Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor, willing him to reform it according to the style of
this Court; which done, he showed it unto me, and after said, That he thought
good I should depart, because I rode but competent Journies, and the
Prothonotary Gambora should follow by Post and bring the Bull with him, which
is of the same form and substance that your Highness's Minute is of: And if
there be any thing omitted, or to be added, his Holiness is always content to
reform it, and to put it under the same date that the same Dispensation now
bears; the Copy whereof I do send unto your Highness with this, the
Commission General and Protestation being void, because they were conceived
durante captivitate only. And here, on my behalf, none other thing being to be
done, I took my leave of the Pope and departed. At my coming unto Scarperii
near unto Bonony, I did meet with Thadeus this Courier, which brought certain
Expeditions Triplicat; the one unto the Prothonotar Gambora, the other unto
Gregory de Cassali, and the third unto me; among which was a general Commission
Triplicat, the one to be committed to my Lord Legate; and if that could not be
obtained, because my Lord Legate might be thought partial, then the same to be
committed unto Staphileius. Item; There was a Copy of a Dispensation, where I
perceived, by your Grace's Letter, that your pleasure was to have your
Dispensation in form, after the minute that Barlow brought, which was then
sped, and already passed; so remained nothing to be sped, but the Commission
your Highness pleases. This knowing, I caused my Servants to continue their
Journey, and with one Servant and this Courier, I returned unto Orvieto with
Posthorses; where Mr. Gregory and I, with much Business, have obtained a
Commission directed unto my Lord Legate, not in the form that was conceived in
England, but after such manner as is sufficient for the Cause, and as I trust
shall content your Highness; wherein the Lord Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor, has
taken great pains to pen, as well your Dispensation as the Commission; for
which, and that hereafter he may do unto your Highness the better service, Mr.
Gregory and I have rewarded him with 4000 Crowns, of such Money as your Highness
has caused to be made unto Venice for the furtherance of your Causes. But
albeit that every thing is passed according to your Highness pleasure, I cannot
see, but in case the same be put in execution at this time, the Pope is utterly
undone, and so he says himself. The Imperialists do daily spoil Castles and
Towns about Rome; Monsieur de Lautrek is yet at Bonony, and small hope is of
any great Act that he intends. The Caesarians have taken within these three
days, two Castles lying within six miles of this: and the Pope being in this
perplexity, not assured of any one Friend but of your Highness, that lies too
far off; if he do at this time any displeasure unto the Emperor, he thinks he
is undone for ever; wherefore he puts his Honor and Health wholly into your
Highness Power and Disposition. This morning I return homewards, and Gregory de
Cassali goes in my Company as far as unto Florence; and from thence he goes
unto Monsieur de Lautrek, to solicit him forwards, if it may be. The Holy
Ghost send your Highness a prosperous New Year, and many.

At Orvieto, the first day of January* Your most humble Subject, Servant, and
Chaplain* W. Knight.

Rome 10. Ian. 1528. V. A part of an Original Letter from the same Person to
Cardinal Wolsey, by which it appears that the Dispensation was then granted and
sent over.
Cotton Libr. V^^el. B. 10.
YOur Grace commands, That I should send the Commission and Dispensation with
diligence, in case they were sped, before the receipt of your Graces Letters
sent at this time. Wherefore the Prothonotar Gambora and I being commanded sub
poena Excommunicationis to deliver the same, with a certain Request to be made
to the King's Highness and his Grace, at the time of delivery; I send the same
at this time unto Gambora, requiring him in any wise to make diligence toward
the King's Highness, and not to abide my coming; the Request and Cause thereof
your Grace shall perceive by mine other Letters adjoined herewith. And
supposing that when your Grace has seen my Letters, and the Dispensations, and
considered this time well, it may chance that the King and your Grace will be
rather well content with that that is passed, without suing for any other thing
that could not be obtained without long tract, and peradventure not so. Your
Grace has committed as much unto Gregory de Cassali at this time, as unto me,
which being near unto the Pope, will without fail do his best diligence: And if
it shall be thought good unto the King's Highness, and your Grace, that I do
return unto Orv^eto, I shall do as much as my poor Carcass may endure, and
thereby at Turine I shall abide the knowledge of your Grace's pleasure. The
Datary has clean forsaken the Court, and will serve no longer but only God and
his Cure. The Cardinal Campegius continues in Rome sore vexed with the Gout;
The Cardinals Pisane, Tri^^l^is, Vrsine, Gadis and Cesis, remains for
Hostages. The Cardinals, Monte, Sanctorum Quatuor, Ridulph, Ravenna, and
Perusino, be with the Pope; the rest abides absent. Our Lord Jesus preserve
your Grace.

At Aste the 10 th day of January. Your most humble Beadsman and Servant, W.
Knight.

Orvieto the 13th of January. VI. Gregory Cassali's Letter about the Method in
which the Pope desired the Divorce should be managed. Taken from a Copy written
by Cardinal Wolsey's Secretary.
Cotton libr. Vitel. ^. 10.
HEri and hodie ad multam diem sum alloquutus Sanctu^ Dominu^ nostru^ de
mittendo legato, insequens ordinem a Reverendissimo Domino Eboracen. suis
literis 27 December. mihi praescriptum. Pontifex ostendit se cupidissimum
satisfaciendi Regiae Excellentiae, cui omnia se debere fatetur, and nunc habuit
mecum longum de hac re colloquium, ut inveniatur modus omnia, been, firm and
secure faciendi, quo facto and tueri possit; ideoque consulere voluit judicium
Cardinalis Sanctorum Quatuor and Symonettae, qui excellentior and Doctior
Auditor Rotae est, cum quibus sub sigillo Confessionis egit, ut ex eorum
consilio inveniatur modus, ad moram tollendam, and causam secure peragendam:
Atque ita Pontifex cum illis, in hoc quod sequitur, se revolvit, videturque
optimus, verus and securus modus, and me rogavit, ut nullo pacto dicam hoc
obtinuisse ab ejus Sanctitate sicuti revera obtinui, nam Caesariani eum statum
pro suspecto allegarent, sed quod dicam me habuisse a Cardinali Sanctorum
Quatuor, and a dicto Auditore. Dicunt quod Rex deberet committere istic causam
Cardinali, ratione Commissionis quam attulit Secretarius, vel propria
Authoritate Legationis, quod facere potest; and ubi causa fuerit commissa, si
Rex conscientiam suam persentiat coram Deo exoneratam, and quod recte possit
facere quod quaerit, quia nullus Doctor in mundo est, qui de hac re melius
decernere possit quam ipse Rex, itaque si in hoc se resolverit, ut Pontifex
credit, statim causam committat, aliam Uxorem ducat, litem sequatur, mittatur
public pro Legato, qui Consistorialiter mittetur, ita enim maxim expediret:
nam Cardinalis Sanctorum Quatuor and Symonetta dicunt hoc certum esse, quod si
Regina citetur illa nihil volet respondere, nisi quod protestabitur locum and
judices suspectos esse, and Caesariani petent a Pontifice per viam Signaturae,
justitiae Inhibitionem, qua Rex aliam nullam possit Uxorem capere, and si
capiat proles non sit legitima donec causa non definiatur, and petent
Commissionem qua Causa audiatur in Curia; de Inhibitione vero Pontifex non
potest negare, neque and Commissionem nisi injustitia and mera vis inferatur,
adversus quam omnis mundus exclamaret. Quod si Rex aliam Uxorem ceperit hoc non
possunt petere, and si petant, negabit Pontifex quod jure possit, nec aliud
dicere poterunt vel allegare, nisi quod Cardinalis Eboracen. and Cardinalis
mittendus and locus sit suspectus, and petere quod Causa videatur hic, in quo
si deducatur, statim feretur sententia quam Pontifex maturabit, non servatis
terminis propter momentum negotii and alias rations, quas sciet Pontifex
adducere, and ita hic obtinebuntur sententiae quae per totum Orbem
approbabuntur, quibus nullus Hispanus aut Germanus poterit contradicere, and
mittentur in Angliam declarandae per Cardinales prout Rex voluerit, and hoc
etiam non obstante Pontifex mittet Cardinalem.

Tandem hic est modus rebus omnibus secure medendi, ad quem sequendum vos
Pontifex hortatur, and rogat ut nihil dicatur quod ab eo procedat. Iste modus
non videtur inutilis, quia hic Auditor asserit, non aliter esse faciendum si
been volumus; and quia Reverendissimus Cardinalis Dominus Eboracen. instat pro
celeritate, interim accersiri poterit qualiscunque Legatus Rex voluerit, and
magis satisfiet vulgo in mittendo Legato, veluti ad definiendam causam, and hic
etiam ut dixi omnia sient quae super id Rex petierit.

Praeter^a Pontifex, id quod fecit ut me resolverem ad has literas scribendum,
contentus est mittere quemcunque Cardinalem ego petiero, sed ait oportere ut
aliquis mittatur habilis, id est Doctor in Jure, vel in Theologia, qui sunt
isti Campegius, Caesarinus, Senensis, Cesis, Araceli, Monte, qui senex est and
immobilis; Caesis in obsidem ivit Neapolim, Caesarinus Episcopatum, habet in
Hispania, Araceli podagra laborat and Frater est, Senensis est Imperialis and
non valde prudens, Campegius esset maxim ad propositum, sed Romae est locum
tenens Pontificis, unde non posset discedere, continuantibus discordiis inter
Germanos and Hispanos, neque auderet egredi a castro; sed hoc periculum and
dubium brevi expedietur, nam intra octo dies Caesariani cogentur sibi consulere
ut eant in Regnum, si Dominus Lautrek ^o progrediatur, vel ibunt Senas per iter
Florentiae, and tunc Campegius poterit exire, and si Rex ita jusserit statim
accingetur itineri. Pontifex jussit ut scribam, quod nunquam ingenio aut studio
d^erit in excogitando ut adimpleat desiderium and voluntatem Regis, and quod
solum ista proponit pro meliori securitate, ne ista fiant quae postea referri
debeant, quod pareret dilationem and difficultatem, and quantum ego possim
conjicere Pontifex exoptat satisfacere Regiae voluntati. Pontifex denuo
replicavit quod se totum rejicit in Brachia Regiae Majestatis, and quod certus
est quod Caesar nunquam hoc illi ignoscet, and quod ex hac occasion vocabit
eum ad Concilium, vel nihil aliud quaeret nisi ut eum omni statu and vita
privet; and dicta Sanctitas parvam spem habet in Gallis, nisi quantum
operabitur per Regiam Majestatem and Reverendissimum Dominum Eboracen. Ad quod
Respondi, illum ex praeteritis and praesentibus posse judicare futura. Tandem
affirmo, quod si semel tollatur Caesarianorum metus, poteritis ex arbitrio
vestro disponere de sede Apostolica.

Cardinalis Campegius ad Pontificem scripsit, quod sunt tres dies ex quo frater
Generalis communicaverat secum negotium Regiae Majestatis, and quod dixerat ut
ad ejus Sanctitatem scriberet, ut omnino faceret aliquam Inhibitionem ne causa
istic tractaretur. Ad quod Pontifex non respondit, sed respondebit, se nihil de
eo posse facere, quia non pendet causa.

Januar. 1528. ad Collegium. VII. A Duplicat. The King's Letter to the College
of Cardinals; from which it appears how much they favored his Cause.
Cotton libr. Vitel. B. 10.
HEnricus Rex, Reverendissimis in Christo Patribus Dominis Episcopis Patribus
and Diaconis S. R. E. Cardinalibus and Amicis nostris Charissimis salutem.
Nihil unquam tam grande esse posse putavimus, quin de ista Sancta sede,
vestrarumque Reverendissimarum Dominat* summa erga nos benignitate, illud
semper audacter nobis fuerimus polliciti, quod certe S. Sanctum istud
Collegium, quotiens ullam nobis gratificandi occasionem oblatam habuit,
cumulatissime praestitit: Caeterum benevolentiam istam vestram, and singular
in nos studium, nunc long superavit, alacritas, quam in nostra omnium
gravissima causa, juvanda ac promovenda, in publico Consistorio, amantissime
omnes exhibuistis, quo certe beneficio sic Sacro isti Collegio Sanctissimaeque
isti sedi adstrictos nos fatemur, ut vehementissime optemus gratiam, vel
sanguine ipso, public ac privatim Reverendissimis Dominat. vestris quoque
posse refer. Quocirca iterum eas impense rogamus, ut in suo erga nos affectu
perseverare non graventur, efficiemusque (Deo been juvante) ut brevi
perspiciant, apud gratum and memorem Principem, Sanctaeque Romans Ecclaesiae
observantissimum, sua se beneficia and officia collocasse. Interim vobis quas
possumus ex animo, tum his literis, tum per Oratorem istic nostrum immortales
gratias Reverendissimis vestris Dominis agimus, existimetisque quicquid a nobis
praestari queat, id suo ornamento and commodo promptissimum futurum.

Febr. 10. 1528. VIII. A duplicate of the Cardinal's Letter to the Pope, about
the the Divorce; corrected with his own hand.
BEatissime Pater, post humillimam Commendationem, C^tt. libr. Vitel. B. 10.
and Sanctissimorum pedum oscula, doleo atque gravissime excrucior, quod ea
quae tanta solicitudine, literis and nunciis apud Beatitudinem vestram ago,
nequeam, ut unice and rerum omnium maxim vellem, prius tractare, hoc est,
negotium Potentissimi Domini mei Regis, negotium inquam rectissimum,
honestissimum acsanctissimum, in quo procurando non aliter me interpono, quam
in ejus Regiae Majestatis salute tuenda, in hoc Regno conservando, in publica
tranquillitate fovenda, in Apostolica Autoritate, in mea denique vita and anima
protegenda debeo. Beatissime Pater, ad vestrae Sanctitatis genua provolutus,
obsecro and obtestor, ut si me Christianum virum, si bonum Cardinalem, si S.
Sancto isto Senatu dignum, si Apostolicae sedis membrum non stupidum and
inutile, si recti, justitiaeque cultorem, si fidelem Creaturam suam, si demum
aeternae salutis cupidum me existimet, nunc velit mei Consilii and
intercessionis rationem habere, and pientissimis hujus Regis precibus, benign,
prompteque adnuere: quas nisi rectas, sanctas ac justas esse scirem, omne prius
supplicii genus ultro subirem, quam eas promoverem, pro hisque ego vitam meam
and animam spondeo. Alioquin vereor (quod tamen nequeo tacere) ne Regia
Majestas humano, divinoque jure (quod habet ex omni Christianitate suis his
actionibus adjunctum) freta, postquam viderit sedis Apostolicae gratiam, and
Christi in terris Vicarii clementiam desperatam, Caesaris in^uitu, in cujus
manu neutiquam est tam Sanctos conatus reprimere, ea tunc moliatur, ea suae
causae perquirat remedia, quae and non solum huic Regno, sed etiam aliis
Christianis Principibus, occasionem subministrarent, sedis Apostolicae
Autoritatem and Jurisdictionem imminuendi, and vilipendendi, non absque
Christianae Reip. perturbatione: Quibus malis potest vestra Sanctitas sua
auto^itate and prudentia mederi. Haec loquor ut Christianus, and ut
devotissimum istius Sedis membrum sincere suadeo; non affectus, non Principis
amor, non servitutis vinculum me impellit, sed sola rectitudine ad id adducor.
Caeterum animi solicitudo non sinit plura exprimere. Vestra Sanctitas in tam
justo Regis voto adnuendo, si^ ejus Majestatis animum sibi devinciet and
conservabit, ut non solum ipse and ego, sed omnes ejus subditi sint ad omnem
occasionem, opes, vires, and sanguinem in Sanctitatis vestrae, Apostolicae
Sedis beneficium, libentissime profusuri. Mitto ad Beatitudinem vestram hujus
rei gratia, Dominum Stephanum Gardinerum, Primarium Secretissimorum Consiliorum
Secretarium, mei dimidium, and quo neminem habeo cariorem; referet ille cuncta
distinctius, meum pectus aperiet. Vestram igitur Sanctitatem humillime rogo, ut
eum loquentem me loqui existimares, and eam fidem quam praesenti mihi haberet,
illi and Domino Edwardo Foxo Regio familiari in omnibus praestare, and me a tam
anxia expectatione liberare dignetur.

IX. Cardinal Wolsey's Letter to Gregory Cassali, directing him to make
Presents at Rome.
Cotton Libr. Vitell. B. 10.
TAnta deinde sunt, tamque magna officia, quae Reverendissimus Dominus Sanctorum
Quatuor, tum erga Regiam Majestatem, tum erga me, nunquam non amantissime
exhibuit, ut quum ea in agendis gratiis assequi conamur, id animo facilius
complecti, quam exteriori ullo propensae nostrae in eum voluntatis testimonio
indicare queamus: ad nostrique in eum summum studii and affectionis cumulum,
nunc tantum accessit, quantum vix unquam possit a nobis exsolvi; licetque de
ejus Reverendissim. Dominat. ingenti Regiae Majestati, and mihi gratificandi
ardore nunquam addubitaverim, sic tamen pectus suum, in Regiae Majestatis
promovenda juvandaque causa, sic in meis seorsim curandis expediendisque
negotiis, operam, fidem, autoritatemque suam interposuit, ut non minora semper
efficeret, quam nos optare potuerimus: quo certe nomine, ita utrumque nostrum,
suo suorumque omnium commodo and ornamento devinxit, ut non prius conquieturi
sumus quam aliquo indicio rebus ipsis nostram vicissim gratitudinem fuerimus
testati; quot enim modis and quanta sollicitudine Reverendissimus Sanctorum
Quatuor de nobis sit optime meritus, res praestita indicat, and Dominus
Stephanus Secretarius meus suo Sermon ac relatu assidue praedicat; and quamvis
minusculum illud olim oblatum recusaverit, non tamen Regiae Majestati
satisfactum esse potest, nisi memoris sui animi pignus aliquod exhibuerit.
Quocirca cum eodem Reverendissimo Domino dexterime agite, ut in familiari
aliquo colloquio eliciatis, quibus rebus ille maxim oblectetur, mihique quam
primum significate, number illi, aulea, Vasa aurea, aut equi maxim probentur,
efficiamque ne putet apud Principem inhumanum aut ingratum sua se officia
collocasse. Intellexi quoque ex eodem Domino Stephano, quam ardenter idem
Dominus Sanctorum Quatuor cupiat aedificium Sancti Petri absolvi, veluti
monumentum illud Religionis ac pietatis perpetuo futurum, quod certe ejus animi
consilium, ut Sanctum ita dignissimum censeo, ut Christianorum Principum
liberalitatem quam plurimum mereatur; meo igitur nomine affirmabitis, sic meam
me esse operam apud hunc Serenissimum Regem interpositurum, ut palam constet
omnibus, me Ecclesiae membrum non omnino inutile aut stupidum esse.

De aliis vero rebus, in quibus S. D. N. benignitatem and Reverendissimi Domini
Sanctorum Quatuor opera and Patrocinio Regiae Majestati and mihi in praesentia
est opus, per Dominum Stephanum copiose vos instruo, iterum atque iterum
impense rogans, ut solita vestra diligentia and sedulitate ex nostra
expectatione eas curare conficereque velitis.

Rome Feb. 1527. X. The Decretal Bull that was desired in the King's Cause.
DIlecto, etc. Salutem and Apostolicam Benedict. Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 12.
Sedis Apostolicae Suprema Autoritas potestatis suae copiam sic omnibus
exhibet, ut pro causarum, personarum and temporum qualitate remedia singulis ad
aedificationem subministrare, and causas ad Canonum Sanctiones expensas
aequissima certissimaque lance trutinans, laborantibus conscientiis and
fluctuantibus consulere, summamque ipsis tranquillitatem statuere contendat.
Cum itaque Clarissimus in Christo Filius noster Henricus Octavus Angliae Rex,
Fidei Defensor, and Dominus Hiberniae, sua nobis conquestione monstraverat,
quod cum Annos ab hinc december and octo nobilem Mulierem Catharinam Ferdinandi
quondam Hispaniarum Regis Filiam, Illustris Principis Arthuri Fratris sui
defuncti quondam Uxorem, hortatu, suasu, ac consiliis eorum, quibus se totum in
prima Regni sui Administratione crediderat, quadam sedis Apostolicae
Dispensatione praetensa sibi bona fide Matrimonio copulasset, ac ab eo tempore
hactenus cum eadem tanquam cum Uxore cohabitasset, prole interim foemina
suscepta and superstite ex eadem, ac jam tandem post desperatam prolem
Masculam, de stabilienda and confirmanda ejusdem Filiae suae successione
cogitaret, lustratisque Scriniis dictam super Matrimonio praefato
Dispensationem faceret proferri, doctorumque Virorum judicia examinari, cujus
quidem Dispensationis tenor sequitur, and est talis, etc.

Quidam Sanctionum and Canonum Ecclesiasticorum consulti, datum dictae cum
narratis ejusdem conferentes, aliasque nonnullas circumstantias quae tum ante
dictae Dispensationis impetrationem, quae etiam post eandem impetratam
intervenerunt, ponderantes, tum quod causa quae in Bulla pretensa est pacis
continuandae, viz. quae ipsa tum coaluerat, foederibus percussis firma
constiterat, mutuis etiam populorum commerciis aucta, nullum suae violationis
timorem incutiens, qui justus and non omnino vanus dici posset, nec
urgentissima proinde nec evidentissima videretur, qualem prohibitionis
relaxatio exigat and requirat; tum quod preces falsae erant dum narrabatur
Praedecessori nostro, eundem Carissimum Filium nostrum tum cupere cum dicta
charissima Domina Catharina contrahere Matrimonium, ad hoc ut pacis foedera
diutius continuarentur, cum eo tempore, ut a^^erit, impetrationem prorsus
ignoraret, and per aetatis immaturitatem, duodecimum, viz. annum non
excedentis, affectum hujusmodi inducere non potuerat; tum quod Protestatione
postmodum interveniente and vim Renunciationis habente, Dispensatio tunc per
Renunciationem extincta videretur; Denique quod principes inter quos foedera
conservarentur, ante mandatam executioni Bullam fatis concesserant; Bullam
ipsam, tum ex surreptionis and obreptionis vitiis, quam aliis etiam de Causis
minus validam and inefficacem esse renunciarunt and retulerunt, scrupulum dicti
Regis animo conscientiaeque gravem injicentes, eamque illi opinionem
inducentes, ut Matrimonium praedictum non consistere, neque ^actenus jure
constitisse judicaret. Porro autem cum frequentius apud se, ut asserit, animo
volveret ac meditaretur, quales exitus hujusmodi nuptiae prae^atae habuerunt,
ex quibus, viz. aliquot partus masculi imperfecti parumque vitales prodiere,
atque ideo se omni spe successoris prorsus destitui, quo suam familiam ad
paucoredactam conservaret, occurente simul memoriae Divina interminatione quae
Fratris sui turpitudinem revelanti, and illius Uxorem contra S. Sancta Dei
praecepta accipienti inscribitur, praesertim ubi Dispensatio non interveniat,
quae ex omni sua part valeat and consistat, nonnullis etiam affirmantibus
nostram non eatenus protestatem patere ut in ea specie gratiam faciamus,
etiamsi ut scribit de nostrae potestatis plenitudine non dubitet, just
duntaxat legitimeque interpositae, quam summam in terris agnoscit and
veneratur, ad improbandas illas nuptias tantum undique videt consensum ut illas
animo abhorreat, nec aliorum rationibus posset dissuaderi quin abominandas eas
judicet, and Divinae Majestati odiosas. Denique idem Carissimus Filius noster
debita cum instantia nos precibus sollicitaverit, quatenus personae suae and
Regni nobis semper devotissimi rationem habentes, maturo judicio ab angustiis
liberemus, quibus se usu praesentis Matrimonii per legem conscientiae privatum,
nec ad aliud per leges publicas ante sententiam admissum, vehementer
conqueritur comprehensum esse. Nos igitur considerantes quot, quanta, tum in
Sedem Apostolicam, tum in fidem Christianam officia prae caeteris exhibuerit,
promeritus eo nomine ut nostrae vicissim potestatis gratiam uberrimam and
promptissimam referat, aliamque illius causam atque privati esse, ex qua
nimirum pendeat salus plurimorum, nec posse dictae causae decisionem diutius
proferri and protelari sine gravi discriminis periculo, dicti vero Principis
cruciatu maxima quae nos ex gratitudinis vicissitudine minueret debeamus, qua
decet festinatione procedi facientes ut ad finem celerrime perducatur, de
Consilio Fratrum nostrorum, quorum in hac causa tam gravi atque urgenti
judicium adhibuimus, ac etiam eorum quos and Sacrae Theologiae peritissimos and
juris Ecclesiastici callentissimos desuper consulendos audiendosque putavimus,
quoniam vitia and defectus praedictos ejusmodi esse comperimus, quae pensata
praesatae Prohibitionis natura, vires ipsius Bullae merito enervarent; quo
magis, viz. attestemur and palam faciamus, quanta animi cura and solicitudine
praefati Carissimi Filii nostri conscientiam hujusmodi scrupulis and
difficultatibus impediri, implicari atque vexari sustineamus, cum alioquin te
dilectum Filium nostrorum Cardin. Eboracen. in illa Provincia and Apostolicae
Sedis Legatum, a praeclaris animi tui virtutibus, ad justitiam vero and
aequitatem propensissimo sincerissimoque affectu nobis sic commendatum and
cognitum habeamus, ut tibi merito soli omnem nostram Autoritatem, cum in hac
Causa expedienda, tum etiam in reliquis committendam putaverimus, dignissimus
quidem nobis existimatus, qui parts nostras tractes and vices absentis posses
supplere: Te tamen Dilectu^ Filiu^ -- a nobis specialiter istu^ destinandum
duximus, ut conjunctim in hac causa procedere possitis, ita nihilomimus propter
incertum casuum eventum mandatam Authoritatem temperantes, ut altero vestrum
nolente aut impedito alter omnia exequi and causam fine debito valeat
terminare. Vobis ut praefertur conjunctim and ut praefertur divisim, ad
cognoscendum and procedendum summarie and de plano, sine strepitu and figura
judicii, ac de and super viribus dictae Bullae sive Dispensationis inquirendum,
ipsamque Bullam sive Dispensationem, si de vitiis praedictis aut eorum aliquo
tali probatione constiterit, quae licet aliis minus clara videatur, animo tamen
Religioso, conscientiaeque vestrae, aut ejus vestrum qui i^ h^c Causa
processerit, divisim ut praefertur, satisfecerit, and verisimile apparuerit,
vel pacem quae in Bulla praetenditur sine hujus Matrimonii contractu consistere
potuisse and continuari, vel dictum Charissimum Filium nostrum, ut allegabatur,
non cupiisse contrahere Matrimonium ad hoc ut pacis foedera conservarentur, vel
denique Principes in Bulla nominatos, inter quos foedera per illud Matrimonium
continuatum iri allegabatur, ante mandatam executioni Bullam fatis concessisse,
ipsam nullam, minus validam, ex surreptione and obreptione inefficacem, irritam
and inanem fuisse, semper and esse pronuntiandam and declarandam; Matrimonium
autem praedictum, quod ejusdem virtute consistere videtur, nullum simul ac
minus legitimum esse, ac pro nullo minusque legitimo haberi deberi decernendum;
ipsos porro contrahentes ab omni contractu Matrimoniali hujusmodi liberos, a
consortio conjugali quod hactenus observarunt separari deberi, sententiendum
and autoritate nostra separandum. Denique utrumque ad contrahendum cum alio vel
alia, novum conjugium in^undi, licentiam and facultatem tribuendum and
concedendum, citra omnem recusationem, aut appellationis interpositionem,
committimus and demandamus vices nostras; ac vos conjunctim, and altero vestrum
nolente ut praefertur aut impedito, divisim, ad praemissa exercenda and
expedienda, plenae finalique executioni demandanda, Vicarios nostros and
nostrum Vicarium, aut si quo alio nomine uti poterimus, quod demandatam in
praedictis Autoritatem ampliaret, cum omni potestatis plenitudine tam absolutae
quam ordinariae, quatenus vel ad praefati Matrimonii congruam dissolutionem,
vel novi contrahendi firmam Constitutionem, expedire videbitur aut pertinere;
ita etiam ut Autoritate praesentis Commissionis nostrae, cum omnibus illis
Canonibus, ad validiorem efficacioremque processus vestri firmitatem poteritis
dispensare, quaecunque eidem obstare putabuntur, omnemque defectum quacunque ex
causa contingentem nostrae Autoritatis interpositione, Dispensatione Apostolica
supplere possitis and valeatis, tam prolem ex primo Matrimonio susceptam
propter bonam fidem Parentum, si ita expedire visum fuerit, legitimam
decernendo, pronuntiando and promulgando, quam ex secundo Matrimonio
suscipiendam; legitimitatem etiam utriusque prolis, censuris and poenis
Ecclesiasticis quibuscunque, per modum decreti aut Sanctionis perpetuae
muniendo and vallando, omnibus validioribus and efficacioribus modis and formis
quae de jure concipi and excogitari poterunt, facimus, constituimus and
ordinamus per praesentes: and quicquid per vos conjunctim, ut praefertur, aut
divifim procedentes, per cognitionem judiciariam and summariam, aut
extrajudiciariam, processus quoscunque faciendo, pronunciando aut promulgando,
eosdemve executioni mandando, Dispensationes quascunque aut gratias in
praemissis concedendo and faciendo, and generaliter in aliquibus praedictorum
potestatem nostram vel ordinariam vel absolutam exercendo, ut praefertur,
actum, gestum, decretum, dispensatum, pronuntiatum, mandatum, aut executum
fuerit, id omne and totum, cum primum poterimus, ratum, gratum and firmum
habentes, in validissima and efficacissima forma confirmabimus, nec eorum
aliqua unquam in^irmabimus aut infringemus, aut eorum alicui contraveniemus,
nec interim revocabimus; declarantes etiam and protestants per praesentes,
nostrae intentionis esse, ut praesens Commissio, sive Delegatio Autoritatis
nostrae, perpetuo effectu gaudeat, and usque ad finalem praedictorum
conclusionem extremumque terminum duret and consistat, non obstantibus
quibuscunque decretis, sententiis, mandatis, rescriptis, literis aut Brevibus
in contrarium, deinceps per nos tanquam irritatoriis, derogatoriis aut
revocatoriis praesentis Concessionis nostrae, emittendis, destinandis aut
promulgandis; quibus omnibus express per praesentes derogantes, and illa omnia
pro nullis, cassis, irritis and inanibus reputantes, ac talia esse and haberi,
istisque omnino anteriora judicari, praesentia vero semper posteriora, and post
illa repetita, emissa and destinata, censeri ac tanquam ultima and posteriora
contrariis sic deinceps emittendis derogare debere, and caeteris contrariis non
obstantibus quibuscunque.

Rome Ian. 1528. XI. The Cardinal's Letter to John Cassali about it; Taken from
a Duplicate written by his Secretary.
REverende Domine Protonotari, tanquam Frater Amantissime, cum aliis meis
literis copiose ad vos perscripsi Regiae Majestatis animum, Cott. libr. Vitel.
B. 10.
and desiderium super his rebus quas vobis in praesentia commisit, suo nomine
S. D. N. declarandas.

Nunc vero ob humillimam sinceramque meam Devotionem, quae ex jure and officio
non solum ejus Sanctitati, sed miseris Ecclesiae sublevandis rebus,
dignitatique Apostolicae restituendae adstringor, his literis vos instruam
super quibusdam rebus, praecipue and accurate notandis and considerandis, quas
post humillimam, reverentissimamque meam Commendationem dictae Sanctitati, meo
nomine sigillatim, speciatim declarabitis; and cum causam concernant, quam
Regia Majestas nunc maxim optat and requirit, eandem Sanctitatem
vehementissime rogabitis, ut cuncta legere and been notare non gravetur.

Primo itaque indolens infaelicem adversumque praesentium rerum successum, in
quo S. D. N. Cardinaliumque Collegium versatur, diuque ac noctu mente volvens,
quo pacto quibusve modis, totis meis viribus, omni sumptu molestiaque neglecta,
and cum proprii sanguinis vitaeque effusione, ministerium aliquod impendere,
tantaeque afflictioni solamen afferre, and Ecclesiae Sanctissimi Domini nostri
collapso statui opitulari, in quam rem haud dubie quoadque vita suppetet
incumbam; mihique in hac cogitatione versanti, in mentem recordationemque
subiit, mirus quidem and grandis affectus. qui Divina sic disponente
Providentia, ex instanti assiduaque mea opera provenit, ut hunc optimum Dominum
meum Regem inducerem, eique persuaderem quod ad arctissimam istam intimamque
cordis and animi conjunctionem deveniret erga, S. D. N. Ecclesiaeque and sedis
Apostolicae tutelam ac patrocinium suscipiendum, memoriaeque succurrunt
innumerae rations a me adductae, ut Regiam Majestatem, quae Caesari
tenacissime inhaerebat, adducerem, ad S. D. N. defensionem, rerumque Italicarum
tutelam amplectendam, ac inter omnes allegatas rations, nulla fuit validior
aut vehementior, vel quae Regiae Majestatis pectus magis permoveret, quam
intima securitas, perfectaque constantia, quam ei assidue indesinenterque
insinuavi de ejus Sanctitatis vera optimaque and flagranti correspondentia in
amore perpetuo indissolubilique amicitia, animo and voluntate, petitionibus
semper suae R. Majest. and desideriis concedendis, quoad Ecclesiae Thesaurus
and Autoritas ejus Sanctitati Christi Vicario concessa permittit, vel quoad se
extendit, seu possit extendere; super idque omnia uberrime promisi, meam etiam
salutem, fidem, honorem animamque adstringens, quod omnia ex ipsius Regiae
Majestatis votis, in omne tempus praestarentur, absque ulla prorsus occasion
aut scrupulo, ab hujusmodi indulgendis petitionibus digrediendi, adeo quod
Regia Majestas, ex hoc meo asseveranti relatu, hunc propensum S. D. N. in se
animum perspiciens, mihique ejus Sanctitatis nomine, veluti Legato, and Sedis
Apostolicae membro loquenti, firmam, certamque fidem adhibens, periculis
omnibus post^abitis, laboribus sumptibusque spretis, nullaque sui Regni aut
subditorum habita ratione, animum adfixit, prorsusque statutum and decretum in
omnibus se adjungere, atque perpetuo and constanter cum S. D. N. in affectu
concurrere, in eoque certum habeo velle decrevisseque perstare, ad mortem
usque, nisi forsan ex eventibus, long diversis a meo promisso and ejus
expectatione, occasio subministretur suam Regiam Majestatem ab hoc animi sui
decreto amovendi. Id si illi accideret (quod avertat Deus) merito mihi posset
adscribere perfidiam, levitatem, violationemque promissionis, quo casu quid mox
officii aut ministerii possem Sanctissimo Domino nostro praestare, aut quae
fides in Ecclesiae rebus mihi haberetur, singulari ejus Sanctitatis prudentiae
judicandum relinquo: nunquam enim meo in arbitrio posthac esset, quicquam
alicujus momenti hinc efficere, in ejus Sanctitatis commodum, hac nunc in re
Regiae Majestatis concepta spe, aut expectatione frustrata.

Est secundo accurate considerandum quantopere hoc negotium Regiae Majestati
intersit, and quanti sit momenti, unde namque, praeter Conscientiae Regiae
exonerationem, omnis quoque Regiae lineae, and stemmatis continuatio pendet;
huic adnectitur totius Regni faelicitas, vel excidium, hic securitas and salus
little consistit, qui sub Regis sunt Imperio, and qui ullo unquam tempore
nascentur in ejus Regno, qua ex re oriri potest occasio, and fomes
tranquillitatis perpetuae, aut discordiae bellique atrocissimi in universum
Christianum orbem, quae omnia majoris sunt momenti, and vigilantius
prospicienda quam cujusque Principis vel Principissae gratia, favor and
expectatio.

Tertio, Causa ex se est hujusmodi ut in animam meam spondere ausim, ejus
concessionem, futuram non solum in conscientiae, honorisque Pontificis
exonerationem coram Deo and hominibus, sed in Coelis quoque gratam, acceptamque
extituram: In hac deinde re secreta insunt nonnulla, secreto S. D. N.
exponenda, and non credenda literis, quas ob causas, morbosque nonnullos,
quibus absque remedio Regina laborat, and ob animi etiam conceptum scrupulum,
Regia Majestas nec potest, nec vult ullo unquam posthac tempore, ea uti, vel ut
Uxorem admittere, quodcunque advenerit. Non exigua praeterea habenda est ratio
eorum, quae aliis meis literis continentur, concernentia, quae pro ingenti
thesauro S. D. N. habere queat, tam certam Regiae Majestatis amicitiam, cum
ejus Sanctitate constantissime conjunctam futuram in prosperis and adversis, in
quas etiam parts amicos suos omnes pertraxit, and assidue pertrahit: ad
Ecclesiae defensionem, Sanctissimi Domini nostri conservationem, causas omnes
suas and actiones dirigens; possentque hi omnes, Regia Majestate deficiente, in
contrarium verti, and, ut vera loquar, nullum Principem video in quo S. D. N.
possit, quam in Regia Majestate before aut perfectius confidere, vel cujus
medio Apostolicae sedis status in pristinam suam dignitatem queat certius
restitui, cum absque ejus subsidio, nisi solus Deus ex immensa sua bonitate
manum citissime apponat, omnino imminutus iri videatur. Quod si Sanctissimus
Dominus noster nunc (quod absit) in his Regiis petitionibus durum se, aut
difficilem se exhibuerit, mihi certe molestissimum est futurum vivere diutius,
ob innumera mala, quae inde subsecutura videntur, hoc praesertim firmo, tutoque
Regio subsidio tam ingrate abjecto; hocque solum, and certum, and salubre
remedium videtur tantae corrigendae calamitati superesse, quo neglecto omnia
corruant necesse est. Hac autem in re S. D. N. sua erga Regiam Majestatem animi
gratitudine comprobata, poterit de illius amicitia and conjunctione quaecunque
volet sibi polliceri, adversus eos omnes, qui ejus Autoritatem aut dignitatem
voluerint oppugnare. Tandem his causis rationibusque omnibus in unum congestis,
mecum ipse reputans, quam multa gravissimi momenti in hujus conjugii
Dissolutione occurrant, in tanta aquitate justoque fundamento posita, ob quae
haec Dissolutio nec possit absque gravissimo detrimento, nec debeat diutius
protrahi aut intermitti; videns quoque quid allegari possit and allegabitur
omnino ad Regiae Majestatis conscientiam coram Deo purgandam, etiamsi id a S.
D. N. neutiquam admittatur, quae in hujusmodi allegationibus confisa, ve^eor ne
in tanta rerum extremitate constituta, potius quam ingentia mala, quae hinc
apertissime imminent, succedant, dicta Regia Majestas ex duobus malis minus
malum eligat, and soli suae puraeque conscientiae in^^ns, id agat, quod nunc
tam reverenter a Sedis Apostolicae Authoritate exigit, unde Sedis contemptus
indies gravior excresceret, hoc praesertim tempore admodum periculoso: quae
omnia sunt a S. D. N. summa sua prudentia alte consideranda, nullo prorsus
dubio aut difficultate in re tam gravi mature concedenda interjecta; nec eam
retardare debet cujusquam mortalis instantia, contemplatio vel satisfactio,
praesertim quum in multis aliis rebus, forsan non tam manifestis and
apparentibus, Sanctitas sua liberalem, facilemque erga alios se saepe
praestiterit; cui humillima reverentia praemissa meo nomine dicetis, quod haec
loquor tamquam fidele, utcunque Ecclesiae indignum membrum, omnia excogitans
quae possent in Ecclesiae augmentum and existimationem cedere, ea etiam
admovens and consulens ut evitentur, quae cessura videantur in contrarium.
Quocirca Sanctissimo Domino nostro affirmabitis, quod praemissis omnibus tam
maximi momenti existentibus probe consideratis, non veluti Mediator aut
Intercessor, ob privatum illum affectum quem Regiae Majestatis causis, ut mei
juris est, promovendis gero, sed tanquam is qui in re tanta and ex tam certa
scientia and cognitione, velim Sanctissimo Domino nostro suadere, ut quod nunc
petitur omnino concedat, idque suaderem etiam si in hoc Regnum nunquam
venissem, neque hic commune quicquam haberem; rogoque, precor, and obtestor
ejus Sanctitatem, ut omni dubio, respectu, metuque deposito, nullo pacto neget
aut differat ea concedere aut adnuere, quae Regia Majestas urgentissimas ob
causas tanta nunc animi sollicitudine exposcit; sed his potius benignius
liberaliterque adnuat, and omnia concedere non gravetur in pleniorem modum qui
hujus rei gratia possit excogitari, compertissimumque sibi sua Sancti^as
habeat, se id effecturum, quod coram Deo and hominibus justum omnino habebitur,
actissimeque Regiam Majestatem devinciet ad suae Sanctitatis, Ecclesiae
Apostolicaeque Sedis, causasque omnes pro viribus juvandas protegendasque, nec
ea in re, ulli labori, sumptui* Regno vel subditis parcet, nec (si opus fuerit)
propriam Personam exponere recusabit, in ea opinione constantissime permansura,
in eandemque sententiam Gallorum Regem and alios confaederatos attrahet, tum
pro suae Sanctitatis and Cardinalium liberatione, tum pro Sedis Apostolicae
Authoritatis and dignitatis restitutione; and praeterquam quum dicta Sanctitas
mei humillimae suae Creaturae fidem and existimationem conservabit, quo in
omnem eventum and necessitatem ea possim hic facilius commodiusque tractare
quae in Ecclesiae commodum, beneficium and securitatem cessura videbuntur, in
quae officia omnem meam industriam, zelum, studiumque adhibebo, hunc quoque
Serenissimum Regem in perpetuum sibi lucrifaciet. Quod si harum rerum rationem
non habuerit, vereor ne sit futurum in mea potestate, ut ullo modo hanc Regiam
Majestatem vel alium ullum Principem ad ea adducam, quae Sanctissimo Domino
nostro solatio aut subsidio esse possunt. Sed confido ab ipsius Sanctitate
tantam malorum occasionem sublatam iri, gratissimo, benignissimo, liberrimoque
animo, omnia ut petuntur concessuram esse, nullo objecto impedimento,
contradictione aut mora.

Romae Ian. 20. 1528. XII. Staphileus's Letter to the Cardinal, that shows how
much he was persuaded of the justice of the King's Cause. The Original.
REverendissime and Illustrissime Domine D. mihi colendissime, Cotton Libr.
Vitell. B. 10.
post humillimam co^mendationem D. V. Reverend. dignabitur intelligere,
qualiter quintadecima die post recessum nostrum a Londino conscendimus navem,
retenti interim in portu ob tempestatem Maris and contrarios ventos: interim in
itinere fui cum Reverendo Domino Roffen. and disputavimus materiam multum,
copiose, and satis prolixe, in praesentia Domini Doctoris Marmeduci, qui
intellexit omnia ex utraque part ab utroque dicta and saepius replicata; penes
quem autem steterit victoria, vel saltem, uter nostrum validius certaverit,
D.V. Reverend. percipiet ex fideli relatione praefati D. Marmeduci. Unum
certifico D.V. Reverend. quod pro uno mediocri Episcopatu desiderassem quod
huic nostrae Disputationi interfuisset Serenissimus Rex noster and D.V. and
Regina, pro intelligentia veritatis and pro modo disputandi: etenim commendo
humiliter D. V. Reverend. istum bonum virum, bonum servitorem ac diligentem
Serenissimae Regiae Majestatis and D.V. Reverendiss. Quibus me quoque
humillimum ac ex toto devotissimum eorum servum quam humillime possum ex toto
cord meo semper commendo, praestiturus utrique fideliss. and amantiss.
obsequium in rebus and negotiis mihi commissis and committendis. Been valeat
D.V. Reverendiss. quae dignabitur tenere me semper in bona gratia Serenissimi
Regis nostri, qui est decus and ornamentum Regiae Dignitatis.

Ex Bononia 20 Jan. 1528. D. V. Reverendiss. Humillimus Servitor Episcopus
Staphileus.

Ad Campegium, 1528. XIII. The Cardinal's Letter to Campegius, taken from the
Draught of it; Corrected with his own hand.
Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 10.
REverendissime in Christo Pater, grata semper huic Regiae Majestati extiterunt
Vestrae Reverend. Dominat. officia, sed gratissimum omnium illud fuit, quod
tanta fide and sedulitate in ipsius promovenda causa ab ea fuisse praestitum ex
Reverendi Domini Jerdonen. sermon cognovit: quam optimi amoris significationem
toto pectore amplexatur, jussitque ut suis nominibus ingentes vestrae
Reverendissimae D. gratias haberemus: Cui ego eo quoque nomine maxim quoque me
debere fateor, nulla enim in re magis obnoxium me sibi potest efficere, quam si
totis suis viribus, omni gratia and Authoritate adnitatur, quo negotium hoc ex
Regiae Majestatis sententia quam citissime conficiatur; hujusmodi enim est ut
nullum gravius possit accidere, dilationem nullam patitur, utpote quod totius
hujus Regni conservationem, Regiae sobolis continuationem and ejus animi
salutem in se contineat: causa quidem manifestior est quam disputatione egeat,
and sanctior quam debeat in controversiam adduci, hanc unam gratiam and nunc
primum a Sede Apostolica votis omnibus petit, and eam tum ex rei justitia, tum
ex sua in S. D. N. filiali devotione, spem concepit, ut nullo pacto sibi
persuadeat unquam fieri posse ut sua expectatione frustretur, quam scit vestrae
R. D. opera ac pio patrocinio maxim posse juvari.

Iterum igitur atque iterum Reverendissimam D. vestram obsecro, ut postquam
recenti and claro hoc testimonio purgavit quicquid antea in Regiam Majestatem
fide sinistre fuerat ad nos delatum, and nostrum animum sibi totum devinxit,
non gravetur nunc strenue in hoc Regio promovendo negotio ad optatum usque
finem perseverare, quod ita cor nostrum premit, ut vel proprio sanguine id
vellemus posse a S. D. N. impetrare. Caetera, vestra Reverendissima D. uberius
ac distinctius cognoscet ex Reverendo Domino Episcopo Jerdonensi, and ex Domino
Stephano Gardinero intimo meo servo, and Domino Edwardo Foxo Regio familiari,
quibus rogo ut certissimam in omnibus fidem velit habere. Et faelicissime
valeat.

Maii 7. 1528. XIV. The Cardinal's Letter to G. Cassali, desiring a Decretal
Bull to be sent over. A Duplicate.
Cotton libr. Vitel. B. 10.
MAgnifice Domine Gregori, etc. Ingentem Serenissima Regia Majestas and ego
laetitiam concepimus, quum tum ex Domini Stephani literis, tum vero ex Domini
Foxi relatu cognovimus, quanta fide, industria, ac vigilantia usi sitis in
ejusdem Regiae Majestatis conficiendo negotio, quem vestrum animum, etsi saepe
antea arduis in rebus exploratissimum certissimumque haberemus, hoc tamen tam
claro testimonio nihil a vobis omissum perspicimus, quod votum nostrum utcunque
juvare potuisset. Caeterum quum nonnulla adhuc meo aliorumque Doctiss. virorum
judicio superesse videantur, ad Regiae Majestatis causam securissime
stabiliendam finiendamque de quibus ad D. Stephanum in praesentia perscribo;
Vos iterum atque iterum rogo, ut de illis impetrandis apud S. D. N. una cum
Domino Stephano vestram gratiam and Authoritatem, quam apud ejus Sanctitatem
maximam esse and audio and gaudeo, pro viribus interponatis, maxim autem ut in
Commissione illa Decretali a S. D. N. nullis Arbitris seu consultoribus
admissis concedenda, and secreto ad me mittenda, omnes vires ingenii,
prudentiae diligentiaeque vestrae adhibeatis, affirmabitisque and in salutem
animamque meam eidem S. D. N. spondebitis, quod dictam Bullam secretissime
nullis mortalium oculis conspiciendam apud me asservabo, tanta fide and
cautione, ut ne minimum quidem ex ea re periculum, vel periculi metum ejus
Sanctitas sit sensura; non enim eo consilio aut animo eam Commissionem
impetrari tam vehementer cupio, ut vel illius vigore ullius processus aut aliud
praeterea quicquid ageretur, vel eadem public privatimve legere illa ulli
exhiberetur, sed ut hac quasi arrha and pignore summae paternaeque S. D. N.
erga Regiam Majestatem benevolentiae apud me deposito, quum videat nihil illi
denegaturum quod petiverit, perspiciatque tantum fidei ejus Sanctitatem in me
reposuisse, sic mea apud dictam Majestatem augeatur Authoritas, ut quanquam
vires omnes suas opesque Apostolicae Sedis conservationi and in pristinum
statum reparationi sic sponte dicaverit, me tamen suasore and consultore omnia
in posterum, and in sanguinis effusionem sit concessura and effectura, quae in
ejusdem Sedis and suae Beatitudinis securitatem, tranquillitatem and commodum,
quaquam ratione cedere poterunt.

XV. The Brieve of Pope Julius for the King's Marriage; suspected to be forged.
JUlius Papa Secundus. Dilecte Fili and dilecta in Christo Filia, Cotton Libr.
Vitel. B. 12.
salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Romani Pontificis praecellens
Authoritas concessa sibi desuper utitur potestate, prout (personarum,
negotiorum and temporum qualitate pensata) id in Domino conspicit expedire.
Oblatae nobis nuper pro part vestra petitionis series continebat, quod cum
alias tu Filia Catharina, and tunc in humanis agens quondam Arthurus Carissimi
in Christo Filii nostri Henrici Angliae Regis illustrissimus primogenitus, pro
conservandis pacis and amicitiae nexibus and foederibus inter praefatum Angliae
Regem, and Carissimum in Christo Filium nostrum Ferdinandum Regem, and
Carissimam in Christo Filiam nostram Elizabeth. Reginam Catholicos Hispaniarum
and Siciliae, Matrimonium per verba legitime de praesenti contraxeritis,
illudque carnali copula consummaveritis, quia tamen Dominus Arthurus, prole ex
hujusmodi Matrimonio non suscepta, decessit, and hujusmodi vinculum pacis and
connexitatis inter praefatos Reges and Reginam ita firmiter verisimiliter non
perduraret, nisi etiam illud alio affinitatis vinculo confoveretur and
confirmaretur, ex his and certis aliis causis, desideratis Matrimonium inter
vos per verba legitime de praesenti contrahere: Sed quia desiderium vestrum in
praemissis adimplere non potestis, Dispensatione Apostolica desuper non
obtenta, nobis propterea humiliter supplicari fecistis, ut vobis providere in
praemissis de Dispensationis gratia and benignitate Apostolica dignaremur. Nos
igitur qui inter singulos Christi fideles, praesertim Catholicos Reges and
Principes, pacis and concordiae amaenitatem vigere intensis desideriis
affectamus, his and aliis causis animum nostrum moventibus, hujusmodi
supplicationibus inclinati, vobiscum, ut aliquo impedimento affinitatis
hujusmodi ex praemissis proveniente non obstante Matrimonium inter vos
contrahere, and in eo postquam contractum fuerit, remanere, libere and licite
valeatis, Authoritate Apostolica per praesentes Dispensamus; and quatenus
forsan jam Matrimonium inter vos de facto public vel clandestine
contraxeritis, ac carnali copula consummaveritis, vos and quemlibet vestrum ab
excessu hujusmodi, ac Excommunicationis sententia quam propterea incurristis,
eadem Authoritate absolvimus, ac etiam vobiscum ut in hujusmodi Matrimonio sic
de facto contracto remanere, seu illud de novo contrahere, inter vos libere and
licite valeatis, similiter Dispensamus, prolem ex hujusmodi Matrimonio sive
contracto sive contrahendo suscipiendam legitimam decernendo. Volumus autem, si
hujusmodi Matrimonium de facto contraxistis, Confessor, per vos and quemlibet
vestrum eligendus, paenitentiam, quam adimplere teneamini, propterea vobis
injungat.

Dat. Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris, die 26 December. millesimo
quingentesimo tertio. Pont. nostri Anno primo. Sigismundus.

XVI. A part of the Cardinal's Letter to G. Cassali, desiring leave to show the
Decretal Bull to some of the King's Council. A Duplicate.
ILlud igitur video maxim necessarium superesse ut Decretalis Bulla, quam
Reverendissimus Dominus Legatus secum defert, secreto legenda exhibeatur
nonnullis ex Regis Consultoribus, Cotton Libr. Vitell. B. 10.
eo quidem consilio, non ut in judicium proferatur, vel ad causam definiendam
adhibeatur, sed solum ut perspicientes illi, quorum prudentia and Autoritas non
parva es^, nihil a me fuisse omissum, quod causam Regis possit securissimam
redere, omniaque fuisse a S. D. N. concessa, quae in causae firmamentum ullo
pacto queant excogitari facilius, ubi Regiae Majestatis securitati, Regni
quieti, and perpetuo totius rei stabilimento undique consultum viderint, in
sententiam nostram deveniant, summaque cum diligentia in Autoritate Apostolica
ad Dei gloriam conjuncta rectissime absolvantur. Proinde, Domine Gregori,
iterum atque iterum vos impense rogo, quod ad S. D. N. genua devoluti ejus
Beatitudinem meo nomine obsecretis, ut hoc reliquum meae fidei meaeque
dexteritati de Bulla Decretali ostendenda committere velit, quam rem sic
moderabor, ut nullum prorsus periculum, nullum damnum, nullum odium queat
unquam sibi, vel Sedi Apostolicae provenire; hocque tam instanter precor, ut
pro salute mea conservanda petere queam ardentius nihil.

XVII. John Cassali's Letter about a Conference he had with the Pope. An
Original.
Reverendissime ac Illustrissime Domine D. mi Colendissime, etc.
QUum Tabellarius D. Vestrae Reverendissimae cum ejus mandatis literisque die
2. November. datis Bononiam ad Equitem fratrem pervem^et, Cotton libr. Vitel. B.
10.
neque ipse tunc posset prae debilitate properatis itineribus Romam venire, ne
ad eam rem longioris temporis moram interponeret, misit per dispositos equos D.
Vicentium Cassalium fratrem nostrum patruelem, volens ipsum statim subsequi;
venit igitur D. Vincentius Cassalius. At ego Vestrae Dominationis
Reverendissimae literis lectis ac perpensis, S.D.N. adivi, and ea quae D. V.
Reverendissima scripserat, diligenter ejus Sanctitati exposui, ipsasque etiam
literas recitavi, quae prudentissime and efficacissime omnia explicabant. Atque
hujusmodi verbis sum loquutus.

Non locus hic nec tempus postulat, Beatissime Pater, ut ego nunc commemorem,
quanto amore, quanto animi affectu, quibusque officiis illa Regia Majestas
Apostolicam Sedem Sanctitatemque Vestram sit ubique omni tempore prosequuta,
quantaque observantia and fide Reverendissimus Dominus Eboracen. semper
coluerit; nec recensendum hic videtur, quot labores, quot incommoda subiverint,
quae officia, quas multoties impensas effecerint, quaerentes Ecclesiasticum
statum, Christianam Religionem, and Catholicam Fidem protegere ac conservare:
Nec vestra Sanctitas ignorare debet, quibus laboribus, quantis precibus, quot
tabellariis, quot oratoribus missis, quot non dicam literis, sed voluminibus
conscriptis, post multa insuper Jurisperitorum consilia, tum ex Anglia allata,
tum hic etiam formata, fuerit tandem a vestra Sanctitate impetratum, ut res eo,
quo fuit pacto, componeretur: Qua ratione Regiae Majestatis desiderio
indulgebatur, and Beatitudinis vestrae honori ac conscientiae, justitiaeque and
aequitati consulebatur: At nunc Sanctitas Vestra animadvertit illos, praeter
omnium nostrum spem and opinionem, omni auxilio penitus esse destitutos:
Reverendiss. Campegius non modo non ostendit, se adeo urgentibus precibus
Serenissimi Regis obtemperare velle, sed ut primum ad Colloquium venit, rem
totam pervertit, Regiam Majestatem a Divortio dissuasit, perinde ac si ei
Legatio demandata fuerit, ut Serenissimo Regi ex part Reginae persuadere
debeat, ut se a Divortio abstineat, adeo ut non possit Regia Majestas stimulum
hunc Conscientiae ex suo pectore evellere, semperque in ea mentis perturbatione
illi sit permanendum, ut omnibus horis cogitet successorem sui Regni ex suo
sanguine defuturum. Neque adhuc Reverendissimus Campegius ullam significationem
dedit, velle se ad id exequendum descendere, quod priore illa generali
Commissione continetur; verum, quod pejus etiam est, quum multis precibus Bulla
Decretalis in hac causa Regia impetrata fuerit, promiseritque Vestra Sanctitas
se permissurum ut Serenissimo Regi ac Reverendiss. D. Eboracen. ostenderetur,
and eorum manibus crederetur, quam ipsi aliquibus ex Secretissimis Consiliariis
ostenderent, ut Serenissimus Rex de totius negotii aequitate instructior
fieret, noluit Reverendissimus Campegius eam credere Serenissimo Regi, aut
Reverendissimo Domino Eboracen. suo in ea causa Collegae. Cur autem velit
Vestra Sanctitas Regiam Majestatem in eam spem adduxisse, ut deinde ho^ pacto
illam frustretur ac deludat. Tunc S. D. N. injecta in meum brachium manu, me
ulterius loqui prohibuit, se ira accensum non abscondens, dixit, Non parum sibi
de D. V. Reverendissima conquerendum esse, atque sub ejus fide se deceptum
esse; Bullam Decretalem dedisse, ut tantum Regi ostenderetur, concremareturque
statim: ad hoc me (inquit) multis ille magnisque precibus protraxit, ostendens,
si id non daretur, manifestam suae saluti ruinam impendere; nunc autem eam
Bullam, quae debuit esse Secretissima, vult divulgare, neque unquam se
promisisse concessurum ut Consiliariis ostendatur: literas (inquit) ipsas
Reverendissimi Eboracen. proferre possum, quibus id tantum, quod dixi, petit,
and ipsum Equitem Cassalium testem volo, quod Dominus Stephanus Gardinerus and
ipse nil aliud a me postulaverunt, nec si postulassent, quicquam amplius
obtinuissent; atque utinam aliter rem petissent, eam namque facile denegassem,
nec ad hanc paenitentiam venissem, ex qua vel unius digiti jactura (modo fieri
possit) quod factum fuit revocarem, video enim quantum mali ex eo mihi
subeundum sit. Quum S. D. N. haec and similia contra suum morem dixisset, ego
in eam sententiam subsequutus, sciendum esse, quod D. V. Reverendissima petit,
non esse ab eo, quod ejus Sanctitas constitutum fuisse dicit alienum, nec D. V.
Reverendissima hanc rem divulgari velle, aut secundum eam Bullam sententiam
ferri; Caeterum Regiae Majestati and sibi tradi, ut possent aliquibus
fidelioribus carioribusque Consiliariis ostendere, ut ipsi de re tota fiant
instructiores, quod perinde arcanum erit, ac si in nullius notitiam devenisset.
An non (inquam) Sanctitas Vestra plerosque habet, quibus quum aliquid arcanum
crediderit, putet id non minus celatum esse, quamsi uno tantum pectore
contineretur, quod multo magis Serenissimo Angliae Regi evenire debet, cui
singuli in suo Regno sunt subjecti, neque etiamsi velint, possunt Regi non esse
fidelissimi: Ve namque illis si vel parvo momento ab illius voluntate
recederent, quid hoc praeterea obesse potest? an non sic petitum, sic
constitutum fuit? quae ratio Sanctitatem Vestram propositum mutare cogit? Ibi
Pontifex iracundus, and concitatior etiam quam paulo ante; Haud (inquit) ita
fuit constitutum, nec me latet, quid de ea Bulla facere cogitent and cujusmodi
ex eo mihi damnum redundaturum sit; firmum igitur illud habeatis, me
decrevisse, neque sententiam muto, nolle quicquam amplius hac in re permittere.
At ego, nolit (quaeso) Vestra Sanctitas sic ex certa animi sententia loqui, ac
potius in his literis Reverendissimi Domini Eboracen. consideret damna, ruinas,
haereses, quae Vestrae Sanctitatis culpa in illo Regno orirentur: Regia enim
Majestas male a Vestra Beatitudine tractata, injuria, and ignominia affecta,
studium and voluntatem, quam semper optimam in Sedem Apostolicam habuit, in
contrariam partem convertere posset, hoc est Dominationi Vestrae toto pectore
considerandum. Esto quod de hujus negotii aequitate disceptatum non sit,
concedamus etiam hanc rem malam, and mali exempli futuram (quod quidem secus
esse judicaverunt omnes) an non Vestra Sanctitas novit pleraque quae non bona
sunt praeferri nonnunquam a nobis solere, ne pejora patiamur; atque hoc tum
aliis in rebus, tum imprimis haeresium evitandarum causa providendum est, quas
videmus, quum semel altiores radices egerint, non posse amplius extirpari:
atque ibi ad illius pedes genibus flexis, eam precibus omnibus sum obtestatus,
ut amicitiam potentissimi Regis conservare, observantiam Dominationis Vestrae
Reverendissimae erga ejus Sanctitatem, nostramque servitutem respicere vellet;
relicta namque Regiae Majestatis amicitia, religionis imminutio subsequeretur,
and Regni illius a tam antiqua cum Sede Apostolica conjunctione dissolutio, ac
Dominationis Vestrae Reverendissimae gratia and Autoritas apud Sereniss. Regem
non suo merito deficeret, ejusque fortasse salus periclitaretur; Nos autem qui
semper Beatitudini Vestrae inservivimus, pro qua tot bonis officiis functi
sumus, and tantum operae perfecimus, ad integram amicitiam inter Regiam
Majestatem and Vestram Sanctitatem conservandam, in medio nostrarum actionum,
Regni illius damna and calamitatem, nostramque certissimam ruinam
conspiceremus. Ad haec S. D. N. and brachiorum and totius corporis agitatione,
animum commotum ostendens, Volo (inquit) ego ruinam, quae mihi modo immineat
considerare, and idipsum quod feci valde me angit; Si haereses, vel alia mala
oritura sunt, quaenam in eo mea culpa erit, satis meae conscientiae fuerit me
vacasse culpa, cui essem obnoxious, si hoc etiam quod nunc ex me petitur
concederem: Nec Reverendissimus Dominus Eboracensis, nec vos ullam causam de me
conquerendi habetis, quicquid nunc pollicitus sum praestiti, neque aliud
unquam, etsi mihi faciendi esset facultas, Regia Majestas and Reverendissimus
Dominus Eboracen. a me petierunt, quod non promptissime concesserim, ut quisque
facile intelligat, quanti eos semper fecerim; ad aliqua etiam Vestri causa
faciliorem me praebui. Caeterum ubi vertitur meae conscientiae integritas omnia
posthabenda censeo, agaut per se ipsi quod volunt, Legatum remittant eo
praetextu, quod in causam ulterius procedi nolint, and deinceps ut ipsi volent
rem conficiant, modo ne me autore injuste quicquam agatur. Tunc ego, Nonne
Vestra Sanctitas vult, ut ex vigore Commissionis procedatur? quod quum velle
affirmasset, dixi, igitur Reverendissimus Campegius Sanctitatis Vestrae
voluntati adversatur, Divortium enim Regi dissuasit; At Pontifex, ego (inquit)
illi imposui, ut Divortium Regi dissuaderet, persuaderet Reginae; quod autem ad
Commissionem pertinet, si requiratur, exequetur. Sumus ergo (inquam) concordes,
Beatissime Pater, quod quum ita sit, quid nocere poterit Decretalem Bullam
aliquibus secretissimis ac juramento addactis Consiliariis ostendisse: Tum
quassans caput, Scio (inquit) quid de ea facere constituant, verum nondum
Campegii literas ex Anglia legi, quapropter die crastino ad me redibitis. Hoc
pacto S. D. N. primo die me dimisit. Ad fuit his sermonibus Dominus Vincentius
Cassalius, quem ob equitem fratrem huc missum dixi, qui equitem ipsum
excusavit, quod quamvis ille animadverteret negotium hoc tanti momenti esse, ut
etiam cum vitae discrimine Romam per dispositos equos sibi properandum esse
videret, nihilominus supersedisse videns quod si id fecisset necesse sibi
futurum domi, and in lectulo permanere potius, quam de re tanta coram ejus
Sanctitate agere. Atque interim Dominus Vincentius multas rations ad
persuadendum, equitis Cassalii nomine adhibuit, quas eodem pacto ejus Sanctitas
in sequentem diem rejecit.

Postridie ejus diei signatura habita est, cui ego tanquam referendarius
interfui, in vesperumque est protracta, nec judicavi opportunum Pontificem
signaturae munere defessum aggredi, quum praesertim ejus Sanctitas diceret se
nondum Campegii literas perlegisse. Res igitur iterum in diem proximum rejecta
fuit, quo postea horam commodam nactus Pontificem adivi, quumque omnium
Capitum, quae D. V. Reverendissimae literis continebantur, quasi summam
effecissem, ne quicquam per oblivionem praeterirem, ab ea primum part coepi,
in qua dicitur suam Sanctitatem concessisse Commissionem generalem in
amplissima forma, and promisisse ferendam sententiam, se ratificaturum.
Pontifex hoc verum esse affirmavit, dicens se contentum esse, ut ad sententiam
procedatur; Qua vero part est, ejus Sanctitatem Bullam Decretalem concessisse,
ut secretiores Regiae Majestatis Consiliarios instrueret, id a veritate long
remotum dixit, posseque ad id se literas D. V. Reverendissimae ostendere: Atque
ea repetivit, quae priore die super hoc dixerat, viz. Dominum Stephanum
Gardinerum and Equitem Cassalium se testes habere, hanc Bullam non ea
condition petitam fuisse ut ostenderetur cuiquam, praeterquam Serenissimo Regi
and D. V. Reverendissimae, and Campegium nunc ad se scribere tantundem
effecisse, quo facto ex conventione Bullam comburi debere, promissurum quoque
se dixit, ut si quae allegantur, probentur, ad sententiam ferendam procedatur,
se id ratum habiturum. Quumque ego quaesissem an vellet, quae fierent per eam
Bullam comprobare, minime id oportere dixit; negavit quoque eam Consiliariis
ostendendam esse, qui tametsi rem bonam non judicarent, approbarent tamen super
ejus Sanctitatis Conscientiam; ac saepius interim repetivit, non esse amplius
in ea re commorandum. Ad aliam igitur partem deveni, in qua D. V.
Reverendissima dicit, Reverendissimum Campegium Divortium inter Regem
Serenissimum and Reginam conatum dissuadere: Tum Pontifex Campegium scribere
dixit, eo se etiam functurum officio, ut Reginae Divortium persuaderet, quam ab
eo alienam invenerit; modeste tamen eam, ait, locutam fuisse, and Consiliarios
petiisse, qui ex Hispania denegati fuerint, ex Flandria autem concessi. Dixit
etiam S. D. N. se literas ad Regem, Reverendissimo Campegio ex suo Chirographo
dedisse, ut Regia Majestas fidem his haberet, quae Reverendissimus Campegius
suae Sanctitatis nomine diceret. Ad illam deinde partem deveni, ubi est: Causam
Regis perinde differt, ac si nolit ad judicium, sententiamque in partem suae
Majestatis ferendam descendere, donec S. D. N. certiorem prius effecerit, de
his ad hanc causam concernentibus, quae ibi vidit and audivit. Ad haec
respondit, Campegium quandocunque requisitus fuerit, processurum, neque de
supersedendo Commissionem habere; se tantum injunxisse, ut quum procedi coeptum
esset, se certiorem faceret, ne tamen interim morae aliquid interponeretur. At
ubi est nullo pacto adduci vult, ut mihi suo Collegae Commissionem hanc
Decretalem credat: Dixit verum id esse, ideo factum ne pluribus palam fieret,
eaque condition qua petitum fuit, ostensam nequicquam amplius expectandum, ea
repetens, quae prius etiam circa hoc dixerat. At ego, videat Sanctitas vestra
quod ex his verbis, quae hic scripta sunt loquor, quae dicunt Sanctitatem
Vestram Commissionem Decretalem concessisse, ea condition ut aliquibus Regiis
Consiliariis ostenderetur. Tum Pontifex ite rum excandescens; Ostendam (inquit)
literas ipsius Reverendissimi Eboracen. nec loquor mendacia, and non minus meis
verbis, literisque prioribus Reverendissimi Eboracen. fides est habenda, quam
his quas nunc affertis. Tum ejus Sa nctitatem mitigari quaesivi, si minus
urgenter mandata exequerer, quo niam id a me fieri oportet. Quod ad Regni
ruinas, damna, calamitates, scandala, and diminutionem Religionis, multa in
eandem sententiam dixit, in quam primo die locutus fuit; quum diceret, Egregium
vero decus Serenissimo huic Regi fuerit, si ipse, qui Fidei Defensor and sit
and appelletur, qui libros etiam pro ejus defensione ediderit, eandem nunc
impugnare cogatur; Ad haec quam recte sint venturi, viderint ipsi. Eo autem
loco, in quo dicebatur aliquid de Regio negotio, inter Generalem Fatrum de
observantia, and ejus Sanctitatem convenisse, and eo autore foedus inter ejus
Sanctitatem and Caesarianos componendum, Dixit, id ostendere, quod de Regio
negotio nihil promiserit, quod quicunque pollicitus sit, and quin poterit
habita ratione suae conscientiae, re ipsa praestare velit: In eo autem quod de
Pace tractanda affertur, dixit, se nullum modum in tali negotio invenire, neque
se adhuc scire, quod iste Generalis ullas pacis conditiones sit allaturus;
atque ea insuper addidit, quae meis literis die 15 November. datis D. V.
Reverendissimae significavi.

Aliis deinde diebus S. D. N. saepissime sum alloquutus, qui decrevit cum
Reverendissimis de Monte and Sanctorum Quatuor Cardinalibus de his rebus
omnibus loqui, praeterquam de Bulla Decretali, de qua cum nemine vult ullam
fieri mentionem, jussitque ex omni Scriptura ejus memoriam eximi. De reliquis
itaque rebus omnibus loquutus sum cum his duobus Cardinalibus qui dixerunt
Pontificem contentum fore, ut ad sententiam procedatur, tametsi id plerisque
alienum videatur, deque eo nonnulli ex Cardinalibus cum obtrectatione
loquuntur, and Caesaris Orator ne procedatur Protestatur, voluntque fieri in
Curia Causae advocationem, Commissionemque cum Inhibitione ad parts; dicuntque
hi duo Reverendissimi, quod quae postulant illi, justa sunt, nec minimo cuique
denegari possent, nolle tamen Regiae Majestatis causa S. D. N. quicquam ex eo
quod factum sit, immutare.

Quum alio etiam die Pontificem otiosum nactus essem, multa cum ejus
Sanctitate, de rebus praeteritis disserui, deque eo, quod ego ad ejus
utilitatem cum Venetis egissem, quoniam scirem Serenissimi Regis, and D. V.
Reverendissimae voluntatem esse, ut quotiescunque occasio daretur, pro suae
Sanctitatis commodo omnia fierent: Exposui deinde quantopere elaborassem pro
negotio Cerviae and Ravennae, utque multa Gallici Oratores egissent a D. V.
Reverendissima potissimum instigati; Addidi etiam efficacissima verba, quibus
usus est Dominus Stephanus Gardinerus. Ad omnia S. D. N. respondit, se ea de re
Regiae Majestati, ac D. V. Reverendissimae gratias habere, and mihi quoque
gratias egit; dixitque, non tamen omnes simul tantum efficere potuistis, ut
mihi mae civitates redderentur. Scitis autem conditiones foederis in quo ego
quoque eram, f^isse, ut quum quis nostrum injuria afficeretur, ab eo caeteri
confoederati injuriam propulsarent, quod multo magis pro me faciendum erat,
quum qui in ipso foedere essent mihi injuriarentur; Et inde Caesariani volunt
mihi persuadere Venetos non fuisse id facturos, si putassent Regi Angliae aut
Christianissimo displiciturum: Neque interim desistunt, multa, magnaque mihi
polliceri, unde ego, quod alias etiam dixi, id quod affertur, quum aliter
facere nequeam, accipere cogar. Illudque etiam vos scire volo promissum mihi
fuisse, si legatus hic in Angliam mitteretur, futurum ut mihi civitates a
Venetis restituerentur. Tum ego, non omnia, Beatissime Pater, adhuc sunt
perfecta, Rex enim potentissimus omnino operam dabit, ut illae civitates
Beatitudini Vestrae restituantur: An non, quae ejus Majestas scribit Vestra
Sanctitas animadvertit? Cui videndum imprimis est, ne de ipsa Serenissimo Regi
sit conquerendum; and ex hac occasion iterum ad Regiam Causam redii. At ejus
Sanctitas dixit, se omnia quae potuisset pro Regia Majestate and D. V.
Reverendissima fecisse, facturamque etiam libenter.

Nonne igitur (inquam) posset ratio aliqua inveniri qua concederetur eam Bullam
aliquibus ex Secretioribus Consiliariis ostendi posse? Tum Pontifex, non
(inquit) Non potest hoc fieri, nec a me impetrari; quod si ullo modo fieri
potuisset, minime tam multas magnasque preces a Serenissimo Rege, and
Reverendissimo Domino Eboracen. expectassem; quumque quibusdam validis
Argumentis instarem, prohibuit me ulterius de hujusmodi re loqui. Nolui ego
unquam dicere, equitem fratrem brevi esse venturum, ne Pontifex rem in illius
adventum protraheret, ea tantum de causa, ut moram interponeret.

Omnibus deinde aliis diebus super eodem negotio institi, nunquam tamen
Pontifex sententiam suam ulla ex part immutare voluit; tantum illud decrevit,
Nuntium mittere velle, qui suam sententiam verbis explicaret: quumque nulla
mihi amplius spes relinqueretur quicquam amplius impetrandi, tum demum dixi,
Equitem fratrem Romae futurum sequenti die, qui quum adeo gravis momenti rem,
cerneret, noluerit suae valetudini consulere, and quod is minime putasset, suae
servitutis in ejus Sanctitatem merita hoc modo male tractanda fuisse. Gratum
sibi dixit Pontifex Equitis adventum fore, quodque cum ipso and constituerentur
omnia, negans tamen se ullo pacto id quod nunc petitur concessurum. Venit
itaque Eques frater, qui non secus ac si nunquam quisquam de hac re cum
Pontifice egisset, singula de integro tractavit, omnibus his modis and
rationibus tentatis quae excogitari poterunt. Quae omnia minutim Dominus
Vincentius Cassalius noster patruelis, quem ad ipsum mittimus, verbis coram
explicabit, egoque ne D. V. Reverendissimae jam nimis molestus sim, de hac
ulterius non scribam.

Quod ad Wintoniensem Expeditionem spectat, multum hi Reverendissimi Domini
Cardinales offendebantur, nunc ab ipsis pecuniarum remissiones postulari, quum
depraedata eorum bona sint, ipsique propter id ad Paupertatem redacti. Quibus
ego ostendi, majus emolumentum ad ipsos venturum, si D. V. Reverendissima unam
Ecclesiam acciperet, alteram deponeret, quam si alter tantum Wintoniensis
Ecclesiae expeditionem faceret; neque D. V. Reverendissimam nimis hanc
permutationem optare dixi, quum Wintoniensis non multo Ecclesiae Dunelmensi sit
ditior. Ad haec dixerunt, quod libentius D. V. Reverendissimae quam cuiquam
alteri erunt gratisicaturi, quoniam ipsa de sede Apostolica sit semper been
merita, non tamen se vereri, quin D. V. Reverendissima Wintoniensem Ecclesiam
illius Regni primariam sit acceptura. Ego quum Pontificem, and deinde
Cardinales eos qui magis rebus nostris student ambissem, effeci ut Pontifex, de
ea re in Consistorio referret, quod ejus Sanctitas effecit, multis etiam
additis laudibus D. V. Reverendissimae, quibus aliqui Cardinales, and maxim
Neapolitani, responderunt ea quae superius dixi. Illud tandem decreverunt, quod
quum D. V. Reverendissima solvere debeat, pro expeditione Wintoniensis
Ecclesiae, and pro retentione Ecclesiae Eboracensis and Abbatiae Sancti Albani,
habita ratione totius summae, ejus pars dimidia V. D. Reverendissimae
condonaretur, and ut ad 13 vel 14 millia aureorum remittant, and non multo plus
eo, quod pro Wintonien. tum Ecclesia deberet solvere. Id Reverendissimis
Cardinalibus ideo displicebat, quoniam nollent res hujusmodi in exemplum trahi,
quum praesertim Magnus Franciae Cancellarius, ipse quoque in magna quadam
Expeditione, idipsum in praesentia flagitat, quod isti concedere nolunt.

Caetera ex Domini Vincentio D. V. Reverendissima copiosius coram intelligat;
Quae been valeat.

Dat. Romae die 17 December. 1528. Humillimus servus Jo. Cassalius Prothonotar.

XVIII. The Pope's Letter to the Cardinal, giving Credence to Campana. An
Original.
Dilecto Filio nostro Thomae Sanctae Ceciliae Presbytero Cardinali Eboracen. In
Regno Angliae, nostro and Sedis de Latere Legato.
DIlecte Fili noster, salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Cotton Libr.
Vitell. B. 10*
Existimavimus non tam commode per literas responderi posse his, de quibus
postremo Oratores Carrissimi in Christo Filii nostri istius Regis nobiscum
egerunt; Itaque proprium hominem Franciscum Campanam familiarem nostrum istuc
mittimus, ex quo sua Serenitas ac Circumspectio tua before intelligent quae
nobis occurrant, tam de rebus ad pacem and public ad universam Christianitatem
spectantibus, quam super privatis Serenitatis suae, de quibus nobis per literas
and Oratores vestros significastis, quas quidem summopere cordi habemus.
Circumspectionem tuam hortamur, ut sibi ac Serenitati suae persuadeat nos
paternam benevolentiam atque animum gessisse and gerere erga Serenitatem suam,
ab eodemque amore proficisci omnia quaecunque illi significamus, ut pluribus
Circumspectionem tuam, quam merito multum amamus, exponet Dilect. Fill. Card.
Campegius, Legatus una tecum noster, ac dictus Franciscus, quibus plenissimam
fidem habebitis.

Datum Romae 15. Decembris M. D. XXVIII. J. Clemens manu propria.

December. 1. 1528. XIX. A part of Peter Vannes his Instructions, directing him
to threaten the Pope. An Original.
-- ANd Peter, as of himself, shall apart say unto his Holiness; Sir, I being
an Italian, cannot but with a more fervent zeal and mind than any other, study
and desire the Weal, Honor, and Safety of your Holiness and the Sea
Apostolic; which compels me to show unto your Holiness, frankly, what I see
in this matter. Surely, Sir, in case your Holiness continuing this particular
respect of fear of the Emperor, do thus delay, protract, and put off the
accomplishment of the King's so instant desire in this Matter, and not impart
to his Majesty therein bounteously of the Treasure and Goods of the Church, and
the Sea Apostolic, quantum potestis ex Thesauro Ecclesiae and ex plenitudine
Potestatis ac Autoritate a Deo vel ab Ecclesia collata. I see assuredly, that
it will be a means so to alienate the fast and entire mind which his Highness
bears to your said Holiness, as not not only thereby his Grace, Nobles, and
Realm, but also many other Princes his Friends and Confederates, with their
Nobles and Realms, shall withdraw their Devotion and Obedience from your
Holiness, and the Sea Apostolic, studying how they may acquit this your
Ingratitude, in the highest cause that can be devised, showed, and so long
continued with the semblable. And therefore, Sir, at the reverence of Almighty
God, cast not from you the heart of this noble virtuous Prince, who finally
cannot fail, the Peace had, which Christendom may not long forbear, to have in
his puissance, such a stay as may be able, in the highest and largest manner,
to recompense his Friends, and to acquit the contrary.

Henry R.

XX. The Cardinal's Letter to the Ambassadors about his promotion to the
Popedom. An Original.
Magnifico Equiti Domino Gregorio Cassalio ac Domino Petro Vanni, Serenissimi
Domini Angliae and Franctae Regis in Romans Curia oratoribus.
Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 10.
MAgnifice Domine Gregori and Domine Petre salutem. Sicuti incommodissimus
totius Reipublicae Christianae, ac potissimum Regis Majestatis negotiis S. D.
N. obitus accidit, ita etiam vos non latere puto quantum periculi and
discriminis hujus Serenissimi Regis saluti and honori, ac Regni sui quieti ab
hac futuri Pontificis Electione immineat, and quantopere vobis adnitendum, ac
vestro studio, diligentia, industria and prudentia occurrendum and obstandum
sit, ne aliquis eligatur Pontifex alienus ab hac Regia Majestate; and quid pro
me promovendo facere ac tractare debeatis, cumulate per communes meas literas
vos admonui: nec oportet per has quicquid aliud replicare, quas solum ad vos
scribere volui, ut significem vobis me totum hoc gravissimum and omnium maximum
negotium, de quo acturi estis, vestrae prudentiae, fidei, and dexteritati, quam
longo temporis usu exploratissimam habeo, committere and credere, speroque vos
spei and opinioni meae de vobis conceptae omnino responsuros, and been valete.

Londini die 6 Feb. 1528. Vester amantissimus Frater T. Cardin. Eborac.

XXI. An Information given to the Pope about the Divorce. An Original.
Adnotatio Summaria eorum quae aliis libellis fusius explicata S. D. N. tum
licere, tum expedire, persuadent, ut in Causa Regiae Majestatis Sententiam
divortii ferat.
PRimum licet atque etiam expedit dirimere hoc Matrimonium, Cotton libr. Vitel.
B. 11.
quod juri tum divino tum humano repugnat.

Divinum enim jus duci prohibet Uxorem fratris, quin hic fratris Uxorem ductam
fuisse sit notorium.

Humanum vero jus, duo hujus Matrimonii impedimenta continet, alterum
Affinitatis, quod divino jure inductum severissime sancivit; alterum publicae
Honestatis, and justitiae, quod promulgavit Deus, si ex definitione Matrimonii,
divini, humanique juris commutatio interveniret, quibusnam auspiciis hoc
Matrimonium constare dicemus, quod utroque jure adversante ac repugnante,
contractum est, coit, and utcumque consistit?

Sed cessavit, inquiunt, in hac specie juris utriusque prohibitio per gratiam
and Dispensationem summi Pontificis.

Respondetur quidem istis multis modis. Primo non esse videri, quod nullum est,
nullum autem haberi quod sine Autoritate legitima fiat; denique Pontificis
Autoritatem non eatenus pertinere, ut in gradibus divina lege prohibitis
dispensare possit: non opinionibus Scripturientium, qui Pontificis Authoritatem
imminutam velint, sed ipsius Pontificis sententia constat, quem suae
Jurisdictionis modum, and optime novisse and ampliare velle potius quam
restringere credendum est; quae quum ita sint, etiam si humani juris prohibitio
per Dispensationem sublata videatur, manet nihilominus immotum, quod divinum
est, si ipsis contra seipsos credimus Pontificibus.

Deinde, ut posse Pontifices dispensare fateamur, and in ea part tribuamus
plus Authoritatis quam ipsi sibiipsis audeant arrogare, tamen non passim, non
quocunque modo, non temere, and sine omni consideratione, posse eos dispensare;
atque fatendum est ne suo testimonio Dissipatores verius, quam Dispensatores
appellentur. Itaque ut causam urgentissimam and evidentissimam, tum etiam
manifestissimam debet habere Dispensatio, precibus denique veris, non ementitis
atque confictis inniti.

In Dispensatione autem, quo constat hoc Matrimonium, verbis quidem pacis causa
proponitur, sed non ideo quia sic refertur, re ipsa subsistit, Pontificis facta
non ad verborum superficiem, sed rei ipsius solidam veritatem expendi convenit.

Certum est, pacem multis modis, tum firmissimam fuisse unoque Matrimonio
conciliatam, pactorum denique ac foederum vi constantem, istud necessario
Matrimonium non desiderasse, and jam Dispensationem sine causa intervenisse
dicimus, and consequenter nullam esse, manereque adhuc divinam prohibitionem
atque adeo and humanam.

Porro etiam, si aliqua sit, and causam haberet, tum mendaciis conflata est,
subreptitia and obreptitia merito appellanda, jure tum divino, tum humano
reprobata.

Nam quum quod alioqui Canonibus cautum sit, ipsius etiam Dispensationis
proaemium contineat, Romani Pontificis Autoritatem concessa sibi desuper uti
potestate, prout personarum, causarum, and temporum qualitate pensata, id in
Domino salubriter conspicit expedire; Quomodo potuit S. D. N. hujus Serenissimi
Regis qualitates pensare quas ignoravit? Neque enim de aetate quicquam, quae in
contrahendo hoc Matrimonio praecipua qualitas erat, narrabatur, and tamen illum
annum eo tempore duodecimum non excessisse notorium est; and tacita ad hunc
modum aetate, mendacium pro causa suggestum est manifestissimum; Cupiisse, viz.
tunc Serenissimum Regem contrahere Matrimonium, ad hoc ut pacis foedera
continuarentur: facti veritas est, tum quid ageretur ignorasse, and etiamsi tum
scivisset, tamen non fuisse verum quod cuperet ad hoc ut pacis foedera
continuarentur, aetas ostendit, quae per communis juris dispositionem
discretionem non admittit; cupere quidem affectus est, caeterum cupere
contrahere Matrimonium, ad hoc ut pacis foedera continuarentur, judicii est and
discretionis. Porro autem, quum de continuandis inter duos Principes foederibus
ageretur, alter ante mandatam exequutioni Bullam fatis concessit, and re
integra, causa, si quae fuit, cessavit.

Sed producitur aliud Breve tenoris tam efficacis ut istas Objectiones non
admittat.

Sed manet nihilominus eorum sententia, qui Pontificem non posse dispensare
affirmant, secundum quos nec Breve nec Bulla consistit; deinde Breve falsum
esse, and pro falso judicari deberi, multis rationibus convincitur; denique
falsum cum sit, and tamen prioris Bullae errores corrigat, illam opinionem
merito confirmet, ne prior Dispensatio efficax videatur, vel eorum judicio, qui
hoc Matrimonium defendere studuerunt, viz. qui veris allegationibus diffisi, ad
falsas and confictas Dispensationes, vitia objecta removentes confugere coacti
sunt.

Ista, si singula minus sufficiant, saltem collata, obtineant and persuadeant
licere. Illa vero opinio multis persuasa, Pontificem, viz. non potuisse
dispensare, ut sola infirmet Dispensationem, non petitur, sed habet nihilominus
aliquid considerationis; quanquam enim refellatur a quibusdam and reprobetur,
manet tamen scripta, atque adeo testimonio ipsius Pontificis comprobata.
Perpendatur deinde causa and suggestionis veritas, si mendacium intervenisse
apparet, and quod est notorium, illam Dispensationem adversariorum factis in
novi Brevis fabricatione tacit reprobari, quis non videt ex his causis licere
ut sententia Divortii proferatur?

Postremo expedit ut id pronuntietur, quod in omnium sententias consentiat,
Reprobatio autem Dispensationis cum omnibus convenit opinionibus, sive quia
Authoritas abfuit, sive quia non recte interposita dicatur; Approbatio vero cum
istis dissentit omnibus.

Expedit ut firma sit and inconcussa Regni Successio, quae contra has opiniones
confirmari non potest.

Expedit ut conscientia Serenissimi Regis his scrupulis impedita, and turbata,
expedita and tranquilla reddatur.

Breviter, expedit votis Serenissimi Regis satisfieri, qui pro genuinis and
innatis suis virtutibus, non nisi optima cupit, and modo etiam optimo votorum
suorum compotem effici laborat; si non virtutem spectaret, caetera nihil
haberent difficultatis, sed omnium virtutum cogitationem quandam esse
animadvertens, suum justitiae decorum, quod temperantia est, quaerit, ut
justum, justo modo, obtineat and assequatur. Itaque expedit ne auxilium
denegetur, vel differatur ei qui id just implorat.

To my loving Friends Master Stephen Gardener Doctor of both Laws; Sir Francis
Brian, and Sir Gregory Cassalis, Knights; and Mr. Peter Vannes Secretary to the
King's Highness for the Latin Tongue; His Graces Orators, Residents in the
Court of Rome.
XXII. The second part of a long Dispatch of the Cardinals concerning the
Divorce. An Original.
-- AN other part of your Charge consists in expedition of the King's great
and weighty Cause of Matrimony, Cotton Libr. Vitell. B. 11.
whereupon depend so many high Consequences, as for no earthly Cause to suffer
or tolerate, tract or delay, in what case soever the Pope's Holiness be of
amendment or danger of life; nor as is aforesaid, owes to be by his Holiness
preteromitted, whether the same be in the state of Recovery, or in any doubt or
despair thereof: for one assured and principal fundamental and ground is to be
regarded, whereupon the King's Highness does plant and build his Acts and
Cogitations in this behalf, which is from the reasonable favor and justice,
being the things from the which the Pope's Holiness, in prosperis nec adversis,
may lawfully and honestly digress; and when the plainness of his Cause is well
considered, with the manifest Presumptions, Arguments, and Suspicions, both of
the insufficiency of the Bull, and falsity of the Brief, such as may lead any
Man of reason or intendment, well to perceive and know, that no sufficiency or
assured truth can be therein; How may the Pope's Holiness, ex aequo and justo,
refuse or deny to any Christian Man, much less to a Prince of so high merits,
and in a Cause whereupon depend so many consequences, to his Holiness well
known, for a vain respect of any Person, or by excuse of any Sickness,
justify, color, or defend any manner refusal, tract, or delay, used in
declaration of the truth in so great a Matter, which neither for the infinite
conveniences that thereby might ensue, admits or suffers to be delaied,
nor by other than himself, his Act or Authority, may lawfully be declared. And
well may his Holiness know, That to none it appertains more to look unto the
justness of the King's desire in this behalf, than to his Highness his self,
whose Interest, whose Cause, with the same of his Realm and Succession rests
herein; for if his Grace were minded, or would intend to do a thing inique or
injust, there were no need to recurr unto the Pope's Holiness for doing
thereof. But because his Highness and his Council, who best know the whole of
this Matter, and to whose part it belongs most profoundly to weigh and ponder
every thing concerning the same, be well assured of the truth of the Matter,
needing none other thing but for observance of his Duty toward God and his
Church, to have the same Truth also approbate and declared by him to whom the
doing thereof appertains; his Grace therefore seeing an untruth alleged,
and that so craftily as by undue and perverse ways, the same, without good
reason adhibited, may for a season bring things into confusion, does
communicate unto the Pope's Holiness presumptions and evidences enough, and
sufficient to inform the Conscience of his Holiness of the very truth: which
then, if his Holiness will not see, but either for affection, fear, or other
private cause, will hearken to every dilatory and vain allegation of such as
led upon undue grounds would color the Truth; What does his Holiness less
therein, than under a right vain color expressly deny and refuse the said
Justice, which to be done either in health or sickness, in a matter of so great
moment, is in no wise tolerable? But for the same reasons that be before
mentioned, is the thing, whether the Pope's Holiness be in hope or despair of
life, without further tract to be absolved and determined; for if Almighty God
grant his Holiness life, this Act is, and always shall be, able to bear it
self, and is meet to be an Example, a President, and a Law, in all like Cases
emerging, the Circumstances and Specialities of the same in every part
concurring as they do in this; nor can the Emperor make exceptions at the same,
when he best knowing, percase, the untruth shall see the grounds and occasions,
that of necessity and mere Justice have enforced and constrained the Pope's
Holiness thereunto; which he could not refuse to do, unless he would openly and
manifestly commit express injury and notorious injustice. For be it that the
Pope's Holiness harkening to the said frivolous and vain Allegations, would
refuse to declare the Law herein to the King's purpose, then must his Holiness,
either standing in doubt, leave and suffer the Cause to remain in suspense to
the extreme danger of the King's Realm and Succession for ever, or else declare
the Bull or Breve, or both to be good, which I suppose neither his Holiness nor
any true Christian Man can do, standing the manifest occasions, presumptions,
and apparent evidences to the contrary. Then if the matter be not to be left in
suspense, no judgment can be truly given to the approbation of the Bull or
Breve; how can the Pope's Holiness of Conscience, Honor or Virtue, living or
dying, thus procrastinate or put over the immediate finishing thereof,
according to the King's desire? or how may his Holiness find his Conscience
toward God exonerate, if either living he should be the cause of so many evils
as hereof may arise; or dying, wilfully leave this so great a Matter, by his
own default, in this confusion, incertainty and perplexity? It is not to be
supposed, that ever Prince most devout to the Sea Apostolic, could so long
tolerate so high an Injury, as being so merited toward the said See, is both
unacquitted for his kindness with any special Grace, and also denied upon his
petition of that, which is evident to be plain Justice. This thing is otherwise
to be looked upon, than for the Pope's Sickness, where most need were to put an
end unto it, to be delaied, seeing that living and amending, it is of it self
expedient and justifiable, and dying, it shall be an act both necessary,
meritorious and honorable. For this cause ye now knowing the King's mind in
this behalf, shall, if ye have not already before this time spoken with the
Pope's Holiness at length in these Matters, as the King's Grace trusts ye
have done, solicit as well by the means of Messiere Iacobo Salviati, as by
the Bishop of Verone, and otherwise as ye can think best, to have such
commodious access unto his Holiness, as ye may declare the Premises unto him;
which by your wisdoms, in as effectual and vive manner as ye can open it unto
his Holiness. It is undoubtedly to be thought the same shall rather be to his
comfort and increase of Health, than to any his trouble or unquietness; and
that his Holiness hearing these Reasons not evitable, will, whether he be in
way and hope of amendment, or otherwise, both proceed to the said indication,
and also to the Declaration of the Law, and passing of a sufficient and ample
Decretal, as has been devised in the King's said Cause, with other such
things, as by former Letters and Instructions, by the Decrees mentioned in the
same, that failing have been committed unto you, to be solicited and procured
there; in the laboring whereof, albeit since your departures from hence, the
things have, by reasons of the Pope's sore sickness, otherwise chanced than was
here supposed, by means whereof ye not instructed what to do in any such case,
were peradventure not overhasty or importune to labor these Matters, till the
Pope's Holiness might be better amended, nor could percase find the means to
have convenient access unto his presence for the same, ye must nevertheless
adhibit such diligence, as howsoever the sickness of his Holiness shall cease,
amend, or continue, these things be not for the same, or any other cause,
tracted or left in longer suspense; but finding possible means to come unto the
Pope's presence, to declare all such things unto the same, mentioned both in
the former Letters and Instructions given unto you, and also in these presents,
as may make to the purpose; and failing of often access in your own Persons to
his Holiness, ye cause the Bishop of Verone, and other such assured Friends as
ye can attain, being about him at such times as they may have with his
Holiness, to inculcate unto him the said Points and Considerations, and all
other that ye can excogitate and devise to the furtherance and advancement of
these Matters, not forbearing or sparing also, if ye shall see difficulty at
the Pope's hand, or in audience to be given to you or your Friends there, being
about his Person, to break and open after a good fashion and manner the same
unto such of the Cardinals, as ye may perceive assuredly and constantly to
favor the King's Highness, and the French King in Election of a future Pope,
in case (as God forbid) the Pope's Holiness should decease; and to show unto
the same Cardinals, all such things as you shall think meet, both for their
more ample instructions in the truth and specialities of the Matters, as well
concerning the Indication of Truce, as the King's said Cause, and the
presumptuous Reasons, and plainer Evidences, leading to the insufficiency of
the Bull, and apparent falsity of the said Breve; to the intent, that as many
of the said Cardinals as ye can win, made sure in those Matters, they may, both
in time of sickness, and also of amendment, move and induce the Pope's Holiness
thereunto, laying before him as well the Merits and Honor that may ensue by
the perfection of the Premises, as the danger imminent by the contrary: and
semblably it shall be expedient that ye win and make sure to the same purpose,
as many of the Officers of the Rota and other as ye can, who as ye write be not
accustomed, nor will give counsel to any Person but the Pope's Holiness; for
albeit, ye cannot have them to be of the King's Council, yet nevertheless they
may do as much good, or more, in training and counselling the Pope's Holiness,
upon the great Reasons that you can show unto them, to hearken unto your
Overtures in this behalf. To which purpose you shall adjure, make, and win, as
many Friends of the Cardinals, of them, and other, as ye possibly may, as for
the thing which the King's Highness and I more esteem than twenty Papalities;
and amongst other, ye shall insist, by all means and good persuasions ye can,
for the continuance there of the said Bishop of Verone, so as he may
countervail the Archbishop of Capuan; who, as it seems, is continually about
the Pope's Person, and were necessary to be met with in the labors and
persuasions, which by likelihood he makes to the hindrance of the King's
Purpose: For the better continuing of the which Bishop of Verone, not only the
King's Highness and I write unto him at this time, as by the Copy of the same
several Letters being herewith ye shall perceive, but also the French King will
do the semblable. And furthermore, to the intent that the Pope's Holiness may
well perceive, that not only the said French King minds the King's said
Cause, and takes it to heart as much as it were his own, and will effectually
join and concur with the King's Highness therein, but that also he is and will
be conformable to the said Indication; He will send thither, with all speed,
the Bishop of Bayon to further, solicit, and set forth the same; who, before
his departure from hence, which was a good season passed, was and is
sufficiently and amply instructed in all things requisite to this purpose; and
not only in these Matters, but also in such other as were written unto you by
Vincent de Cassalis, and Hercules, upon advertisement given hither that the
Pope's Holiness was deceased; so as ye may be sure to have of him effectual
concurrence and advice in the furtherance and solicitation of your Charges,
whether the Pope's Holiness amend, remain long sick, or (as God forbid) should
fortune to die; trusting, that being so well furnished by all ways that can be
devised, ye will not fail to use such diligence as may be to the consecuting
and attaining of the King's Purpose: wherein, tho ye be so amply and largely
instructed, that more cannot be, yet nevertheless having lately received from
the Bishop of Worcester a Memorial of diverse great things to be well noted and
considered, for trial of the falsity of the said Brieve, I send you herewith a
Copy of the same Memorial, to the intent ye substantially visiting and perusing
the same, may follow and put in execution such part thereof, for better trial
of the falsity, as is to be done there, like as the rest meet to be done here,
shall not fail to be executed with diligence accordingly.

Thus be ye with these, and other former Writings, sufficiently instructed what
is to be done by you there, whether the Pope's Holiness continue long in his
sickness, or whether the same fortune to decease, or soon, God willing, to
amend. There rests no more, but that ye always take for a perfect ground,
That tho to every new chance not before known, sufficient Provision and
Instruction could not be given to you at your departure, ye always note,
remember, and regard, That this the King's Cause admits nor suffers any
manner negative, tract, or delay; wherefore knowing that so well as ye do, and
also how much the Indiction of the Truce shall be commodious and necessary,
both to the King's Highness in particular, and to all Christendom in general,
by means whereof his Grace shall avoid Contribution, and other Charges of the
War, ye must now, if ever you will have thanks, laud, or praise for your
Service, employ your selves opportune and importune, to put an end to the
Points to the King's satisfaction and desire; and in every difficulty to study,
by your Wisdoms, the best and next Remedy, and not always to tract your doings,
till upon your Advertisement hither, ye shall have new knowledge from hence: For
thereby the matter it self, and also your demur there, be of overlong a
continuance, and infinite inconveniences by the same may ensue. I therefore
require you, according to the special trust and confidence that the King's
Highness and I have in you, now for ever to acquit your selves herein with all
effect possible, accordingly so as the King's Highness be not longer kept in
this perplexity and suspense, to his Graces intolerable inquietness, and the
great heaviness of all those that observe and love the same.

Furthermore, tho it so be that the King's Trust, and also mine is, Ye will by
your Wisdom find such good means and ways as ye shall not fail, God willing, to
open and declare unto the Pope's Holiness, the whole of the King's Mind, and
all and singular the Premises, with the residue abovementioned in your former
Instructions and Letters sent unto you: Yet nevertheless considering what ye
wrote of the doubt of continuance of the Pope's sickness, and to make sure for
all Events and Chances, in case his Holiness (as God forbid) should long remain
in such state, as he might either take upon him the naming of the Peace,
journying and repairing to the sacre Diet, nor also hear the whole of the
things by you to be opened and propounded touching the King's said Cause; It
has been thought to the King's Highness convenient, rather than these great
and weighty Matters should hang in longer suspense, to excogitate some other
good means and way how these Matters, so necessary, may by some ways be
conduced and brought to an end: And it is this; That the Pope's Holiness not
being able to travel to the place devised, where the Princes may be near him
for Treaty, and managing of the Peace, he do depute me and my Lord Cardinal
Campegius, conjunctim and divisim, as his Legates for that purpose, to do and
execute all such things in his Holiness's Name, as the same should do in that
behalf if he were there present; whereunto, for the well of Christendom, we
shall be contented to condescend. So always, that as has been written
heretofore unto you, before I pass or set forth to any Convention or Place, to
the intent before specified, the Kings Highness be fully satisfied and pleased
in his said matter of Matrimony, without which, neither with nor without the
Pope's presence, I will ever begin or take that Voyage: for performance
whereof, this Article following is of new devised, to be by you propounded unto
his Holiness, if the Decretals cannot be obtained, or some other thing, that ye
shall well know and perceive, by advice of expert Counsel there, to be better
to the Kings purpose than this thing now devised, and that may without tract be
passed or granted; that is to say, That his Holiness do enlarge, extend, and
amplify his Commission given to me and my Lord Legate Campegius, whereby we
jointly and severally may be sufficiently furnished and authorized, to do as
much in this cause of Matrimony, with all the emergents and dependencies upon
the same, as his Holiness may do of his ordinary and absolute Power, with
sufficient and ample Clauses, ad Decernend* and Interpretand. jura, leges, and
Rescripta quae^unque hoc Matrimonium concernentia, una cum omnibus and singulis
dubiis in eadem causa emergentibus. And further, to make out Compulsories to
any Princes, or Persons of what pre-eminence, dignity, state, or condition
soever they be, Etiam si in Imperiali, Regali, vel alia quacunque dignitate
perfulgeant, sub quibuscunque poenis, and in what Countries and places soever
they be, to exhibit and produce any manner Witness, Records, Originals,
Rescripts, or other thing, in what place, or time we, or the one of us shall
require them, or any of them in this behalf, with all and singular the
Circumstances requisite and necessary to such a Commission, after such ample
and assured manner, as the same once had, we shall not need for any Objections,
doubt, or other thing that might infringe or lack, to send of new to the Pope's
Holiness for other provision, whereby the King's said Cause might hang in any
longer tract or delay. In which case of coming to this Commission, ye Mr.
Stevins must have special regard to see the same sufficiently and substantially
penned, by advice of the most expert Men that ye can find to that purpose: For
the better doing whereof, I send unto you herewith a Copy of the said
Commission to me and my Lord Campegius, with certain Additions thereunto noted
in the Margin, such as have been here devised; and also a Copy of certain
Clauses in a Bull, to the intent ye may see how amply the same be couched, to
avoid appellations and other delays in Causes of far less moment and importance
than the King's is. Nevertheless ye must, if it shall come to the obtaining of
this new Commission, see to the penning and more fully perfecting thereof, so
as the same may be in due perfection, without needing to send eftsoons for
remedying of any thing therein, as is aforesaid; looking also substantially
whether the Chirograph of Policitation, being already in your hands, be so
couched, as the Date, and every thing considered, it may sufficiently oblige
and astringe the Popes Holiness to confirm all that we, or one of us, shall do,
by virtue of this New or the Old Commission: And if it be not of such efficacy
so to do, then must ye in this case see, that either by sufficient and ample
words to be put in this new Commission, if it may be so had, or by a new
Chirograph the Pope's Holiness may be so astringed; which Chirograph, with the
Commissions before specified, if ye obtain the same, the King's pleasure is,
That ye Sir Francis Brian shall bring hither, in all possible diligence, after
the having and obtaining thereof, soliciting nevertheless, whether the Pope be
to be facilly spoken with, or not, the immediate Indication of the Truce, as is
aforesaid, without which in vain it were for me, either with or without the
Pope, to travel for laboring and conducing of the Peace. And so by this way
should the Pope's Holiness, with his merit and sufficient justification,
proceed for the Truce, as a fundament of Universal Peace, satisfy the King's
desires, and avoid any doubt of the Emperor; forasmuch as his Holiness might
alledg, That being so extremely sick, that he was not able to know of the Cause
himself, he could no less do of justice, than to commit it unto other, seeing
that the same is of such importance as suffers no tract or delay. And
finally, the King's Highness, God willing, by this means, should have an end of
this Matter. One thing ye shall well note, which is this; Albeit this new
Device was now for doubt of the Pope's long continuance in sickness, first
excogitate; yet is it not meant, nor ye be limited to this Device, in case ye
can obtain any other, nor ye be also commanded, to prefer this before all the
other Devices: but now that ye shall see and understand what this Device is,
and knowing what thing is like or possible to be obtained there, without long
putting over of your pursuits, expend, consider, and regard well with your
self, what thing of this, or any other that may best serve to the brief and
good expedition of the King's Cause. So always that it be a thing sure,
sufficient, and available to his Grace's Purpose, that may without any further
tract be there had; and then by your Wisdom taking unto you the best Learned
Counsel that ye can have there, leave you to the expedition of that which so
may be most meet, as the times require and suffer, to the brief furnishing of
the King's said Cause to this purpose, without tract or delay, and that ye may
see is the thing, which as the matter stands, can speedily be obtained and
sped, as is aforesaid. For whether the Decretal be better than this, or this
better than that, or which soever be best, far it shall be from Wisdom to
stick, and still to rest upon a thing that cannot be obtained; but since ye
know the King's meaning, which is to have a way sufficient and good for the
speedy finishing of this Cause to his Grace's purpose, note ye now, and
consider with your self, by advice of Learned Counsel, as is aforesaid, how ye
may bring that to pass, and shall ye deserve as high thanks as can be possible.
So always that it be so well provided and looked upon, that in it be no such
limitations or defaults, as shall compel us any more to write or send for
reformation thereof: And coming to this Commission, tho percase ye can by no
means or sticking have it in every point as the Copy, which I send you with the
Annotations do purport; yet shall ye not therefore refuse it, but take it, or
any other thing as can be had, after such form as may substantially serve, and
as ye can by your wisdom and good solicitations obtain, for the speedy
finishing of the King's Cause to his purpose, as is aforesaid, which is the
scope whereunto we must tend at this time; and therefore ye be not limited or
coacted within any such bounds as ye should thereby be compelled or driven, for
lack of obtaining any thing or point mentioned in these or other your
Instructions, or former Writings, to send hither again for further knowledge of
the King's pleasure; but ye be put at liberty so to qualify, so to add, detray,
immix, change, choose or mend as ye shall think good; so always that ye take the
thing that best can be had, being such as may as effectually as ye can bring
about, serve to the King's purpose, and to put indelayed end to it, according
to his Grace's desire, without further tract, or sending thither, which is as
much as here can be said or devised. And therefore at the reverence of Almighty
God, bring us out of this perplexity, that this Virtuous Prince may have this
thing sped to the purpose desired, which shall be the most joyous thing that
this day in Earth may chance and succeed to my heart; and therefore I eftsoons
beseech you to regard it accordingly: Howbeit if the Pope's Holiness refusing
all your desires, shall make difficulty and delay therein, it is an evident
sign and token, that his Holiness is neither favorable to the King's
reasonable Petitions, nor indifferent, but should thereby show himself both
partial, and expressly averse unto his Grace; wherefore in that case finding in
his Holiness such unreasonableness, as it can in no wise be thought ye shall
do, The King's pleasure is, that ye proceed to the Protestations mentioned in
the first Instructions given to you Mr. Stevins, for you and the residue of
your Colleagues; and that ye not only be plain and round with the Pope's
Holiness therein, if ye come to his speech, but also ye show and extend unto
the Cardinals, and other that be your Friends, which may do any good with him,
the great peril and danger imminent unto the Church and See Apostolic; thereby
exhorting them, That they like virtuous Fathers have regard thereunto, and not
to suffer the Pope's Holiness, if he would thus wilfully, without reason or
discretion to precipitate himself and the said See, which by this refusal is
like to suffer ten times more detriment, than it could do for any
miscontentment that the Emperor could take with the contrary: for ye shall say,
sure they may be, and so I for my discharge declare, both to the Pope's
Holiness and to them, If this Noble and Virtuous Prince, in this so great and
so reasonable a Cause, be thus extremely denied of the grace and lawful favor
of the Church, the Pope's Holiness shall not fail for the same to lose Him and
his Realm, the French King and his Realm, with many other their Confederates;
besides those that having particular Quarrels to the Pope, and so aforesaid
will not fail, with diverse other, as they daily seek occasions, and provoke
the King's Highness thereunto, which will do the semblable, being a thing of
another sort to be regarded, than the respect to the Emperor; for two Cities,
which nevertheless shall be had well enough, and the Emperor neither so evil
contented, nor so much to be doubted herein, as is there supposed, This, with
other words mentioned in your Instructions concerning like matter, ye shall
declare unto his Holiness, and to the said Cardinals, and other being your
Friends, if it come to that point; whereby it is not to be doubted, but they
perceiving the dangers aforesaid, shall be glad to exhort and induce his
Holiness, for the well of himself and the Church, to condescend to the King's
desire; which is as much as can be here thought or devised, to be by you done
in all Events and Chances: And therefore I pray you, eft-soons, and most
instantly require you, as before, to handle this Matter with all effect
possible. Coming to this new Commission, when you shall have once attained such
thing as shall be sufficient for the King's purpose, as is aforesaid; and that
ye have it in your hands and custody, and not before, lest thereby ye might
hinder the expedition thereof, ye shall by all ways and means possible, labor
and insist, That the King's Highness, as need shall be, may use and enjoy the
benefit of the Decretal, being already in my Lord Cardinal Campegius's hands,
whereunto his Highness and I desire you to put all your effectual labor for
the attaining of the Pope's consent thereunto accordingly.

Ye shall furthermore understand, That it is thought here, in case, as God
forbid, the Pope should die before ye should have impetrate any thing that may
serve to the absolution of the King's Matter, That the College of Cardinals
have Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction, sede vacant, to inhibit, avoke, and
ex consequenti, to pass and decide the King's Matter, seeing that the same is
of so high moment and importance, concerning the surety of a Prince and his
Realm, as more amply ye shall perceive in the Chapters, ubi Periculum de
Electione, ne Romani, de Iurejurando, and capite primo de Scismaticis;
Wherefore the King's pleasure is, That ye Mr. Stevins shall diligently weigh
and ponder the effect of the said Chapters, not only with your self, but also
with such the King's Learned Counsel as ye and your Colleagues have conducted
there; and what Jurisdiction, sede vacant, the College of Cardinals have,
either by the Common Law, usage or prescription, which may far better be known
there than here: And if ye find that the Cardinals have in this the King's
Cause, and such other like Authority and Jurisdictions to inhibite, avoke and
decern, then, in casu mortis Pontificis, quod Deus avertat, ye shall specially
foresee and regard that for none Intercession or pursuit made by the Emperor
and his Adherents, they shall either inhibit or avoke: And also if before such
Death, ye shall not have obtained such thing to the Kings desire and purpose,
as these present Letters before do purport, his Grace's pleasure is, That ye
shall pursue the effectual expedition of the same, at the hands of the said
College, Sede vacant, ne res quae nullam dilationem exposcit, tantopere usque
ad Electionem novi Pontificis quoquam modo differatur; using for this purpose
all such Reasons, Allegations, and Persuasions mentioned in those Letters, and
your former Instructions, as ye shall see and perceive to serve to that effect;
and so to endeavor and acquit your self, that such things may be attained
there, as may absolve this the King's Matter, without any further tract or
delay; whereby ye shall as before highly deserve the King's and my special
thanks, which shall be so acquitted, as ye shall have cause to think your pains
and diligences therein in the best wise employed, trusting in God that
howsoever the World shall come, ye shall by one means or other bring the King's
Matter, which so highly touches his Honor and quiet of Mind, unto the desired
end and perfection.

Finally; Ye shall understand that the French King, among other things, does
commit at this time to the Bishop of Bayon, and Mr. John Ioachim to treat and
conclude the Confederation heretofore spoken of, between his Holiness and the
King's Highness, the French King, the Venetians, and other Potentates of Italy,
for a continual Army to be entertained to invade Spain in case it stand by the
Emperor, that the Peace shall not take effect: Wherefore the King's pleasure
is, That ye having conference with them at good length in that Matter, do also
for your parts, solicit, procure, and set forth the same; entering also on the
King's behalf unto the Treaty, and conclusion thereof, after such manner as
your former Instructions and Writings do purport. So as like as the French King
is determined, that his Agents shall join and concur with you in the King's
Pursuits and Causes; So ye must also concur with them in advancement of their
Affairs, the successes whereof, and of all other your doings there, it shall be
expedient ye more often notify hitherto than ye do, for many times in one whole
month no knowledge is had from you, which is not meet in those so weighty
Matters, specially considering that sometime by such as pass to Lions, ye might
find the means to send your Letters, which should be greatly to the King's and
my consolation, in hearing thereby from time to time, how the things succeed
there; I pray you therefore to use more diligence therein, as the Kings and my
special trust is in you. And heartily fare you well. From my Palace besides
Westminster, the sixth day of April.

The French King has sent hither an Ambassiate, Monsieur de Langes, Brother to
the said Bishop of Bayon, with certain clauses in his Instructions, concerning
the said Treaty of Confederation, the Copy whereof ye shall receive herewith,
for your better carrying on that Matter. Praying God to speed you well, and to
give you grace to make a good and short end in your Matters. And eft-soons fare
ye well,

Your Loving Friend, T. Cardin. Eborac.

XXIII. Another Dispatch to the Ambassadors to the same purpose. A Duplicate.
Cotton Libr. Vitell. B. 11.
RIght well beloved Friends, I commend me unto you in my hearty manner, letting
you wit, that by the hands of Thadeus bearer hereof, the King's Highness has
received your several Letters to the same, directed with the Pope's
Pollicitation mentioned in the same, and semblably I have received your
Conjunct and several Letters of the date of the 18 and 29 days of March; the 8,
19, 20, and 22 of April, to me directed, wherein ye at right good length have
made mention of such Discourses, Conferences, Audiences and Communications as
ye have had concerning your Charge, since the time of your former
Advertisements made in that behalf, with all such Answers and Replications as
have been made unto you by the Pope's Holiness, and other on his behalf
concerning the same. In the Circumstances whereof ye have so diligently,
discreetly, and substantially, acquitted your selves, as not only your firm and
fervent desire, to do unto the King's Highness special and singular service in
this his great and weighty Cause, but also your Wisdom, Learning, and perfect
dexterities, heretofore well known, has every one for his part thereby been
largely of new showed, comprobate and declared to the King's good contentment,
my rejoice and gladness, and to your great laud and praise. For the which his
Grace gives unto you right hearty thanks, and I also for my part do the
semblable; assuring you, in few words, though the time and state of things has
not suffered that your desires might at this time be brought unto effect, yet
the King's Grace well knows, perceives, and takes, that more could not have
been done, excogitated, or devised, than ye have largely endeavored your self
unto for conducing the King's purpose, which his Grace accepts, as touching
your merits and acquittal in no less good and thankful part, than if ye finding
the disposition of things in more direct state, had consecute all your pursuits
and desires: Nor ye shall doubt or think, that either the King's Highness or I
have conceived, or thought any manner negligence in you for such things as were
mentioned, in the last Letters sent unto you by Alexander, Messenger, but that
albeit his Highness had cause, as the same wrote, to marvel of your long demor,
and lack of expedition of one or other of the things committed to your charge;
yet did his Highness right well persuade unto himself the default not to be in
you, but in some other cause, whereof his Grace not knowing the same, might
justly and meritoriously be brought unto admiration, and marvel: And therefore
be ye all of good comfort, and think your perfect endeavors used, and services
done, to be employed there, as it can right well, in every part regarded and
considered.

In effect coming to the Specialities of the things now to be answered, The
King's Highness having groundly noted and considered the whole continue and
circumstances of all your said Letters and Advertisements, finds and
perceives evidently, that whatsoever Pursuits, and Instances, and Requests
have been, or shall be for this present time, made there by you on his Grace's
behalf to the Pope's Holiness, for the furtherance of the said great and
weighty Cause; and how much soever the necessity of Christendom for the good of
Peace, the importance of the Matter, the justness of the thing it self, reason,
duty, respect to good Merits, detecting of Falsities used, evident Arguments
and Presumptions to the same, or other thing whatsoever it be, making for the
King's purpose, do weigh; the Times be now such, as all that shall be done in
any of the Premises there, is apparent by such privy Intelligence and promise
as is between the Pope and the Emperor, to hang and depend upon the Emperor's
Will, Pleasure, and Arbitre, as whom the Pope's Holiness neither dare nor will
in any part displease, offend, or miscontent, nor do by himself any thing
notable therein, which he shall think or suppose to be of moment, the said
Emperor first inconsulted, or not consenting thereunto. And for that cause,
since the Emperor not only is the Adversary of Universal Peace, Letter, and
Impeacher thereof, but also, as has appeared by sundry Letters heretofore, and
now of new sent out of Spain, does show himself adverse, and enterponing
himself as a Party against the King's said great Matter; It were in manner all
one to prosecute the same at the Emperor's hands, as at the Popes, which so
totally depends upon the Emperor; and as much Fruit might be hoped of the one
as of the other, so as far discrepant it were from any wisdom in a thing so
necessary, and which as ye know must needs be brought unto an end without any
further delay, to consume and spend the time, where such express contrariety
and in manner despair appears to do good therein, and where should be none
other but continual craft, color, abuses, refuses and delays, but rather to
proceed unto the same in place, and after such form as may be a appearance of
some good and brief effect to ensue. Wherefore to show you in Counsel, and to
be reserved unto your selves, The King's Highness finding this ingratitude in
the Pope's Holiness, is minded for the time to dissemble the Matter, and taking
as much as may be had and attained there to the benefit of his Cause, to
proceed in the Decision of the same here, by virtue of the Commission already
granted unto me and my Lord Legate Campegius.

And for because that ye Mr. Stevins be largely ripened and acquainted in this
Matter, and that both the King's Highness and I have right large experience of
your entire zeal and mind to the studying and setting forth of such things
concerning the Law, as may be to the furtherance hereof; considering also that
for any great thing like to be done there herein, such Personages as be of good
Authority, Wisdom, and Experience, tho they be not learned in the Law, may with
such Counsel as ye have retained there, right well serve to the accomplishment
of such other things as shall occur, or be committed unto them on the King's
behalf, tho so many Ambassadors do not there remain and continue: His Grace
therefore willing and minding to revoke you all by little and little, except
you Sir Gregory being his Ambassador there continually residing, wills, That
after such things perfected and done, as hereafter shall be mentioned, ye Mr.
Stevins, and you Sir Francis Brian, shall take you leave of the Pope's
Holiness, and with diligence return home. For if ne had been the absence of you
Mr. Stevins, seeing that there is small appearance of any Fruit to be obtained
there, the King's Highness would have entered into Process here before this
Whitsuntide: But because his Grace would have you here present, as well for the
forming of the said Process, and for such things as be trusted that ye shall
obtain and bring with you, as also for the better knowledge to be had in sundry
Matters, wherein you may be the better ripened and informed by means of your
being in that Court: And otherwise his Highness will somewhat the longer defer
the commencement of the said Process, and respite the same, only for your
coming; which his Grace therefore desires you so much the more to accelerate,
as ye know how necessary it is, that all diligence and expedition be used in
that Matter. And so ye all to handle and endeavor your selves there, for the
time of your demor, as ye may do the most benefit and advantage that may be to
the speedy furtherance of the said Cause.

And forasmuch as at the dispatch of your said last Letters, ye had not opened
unto the Pope's Holiness, the last and uttermost Device here conceived, and to
you written in my Letters sent by the said Alexander, but that ye intended, as
soon as ye might have time and access, to set forth the same; wherein it is to
be trusted, since that thing could by no color or respect to the Emperor be
reasonably denied, ye have before this time done some good, and brought unto
perfection; I therefore remitting you to such Instructions as ye received at
that time, advertise you that the King's mind and pleasure is, ye do your best
to attain the Ampliation of the said Commission, after such form as is to you,
in the said last Letters and Instructions, prescribed; which if ye cannot in
every thing bring to pass, at the least to obtain as much to the King's
purpose, and the benefit of the Cause as ye can; wherein all good policy and
dexterity is to be used, and the Pope's Holiness by all persuasions to be
induced thereunto; showing unto the same how ye have received Letters from the
King's Highness and me, responsives to such as ye wrote of the Dates before
rehearsed; whereby ye be advertised that the King's Highness, perceiving the
Pope's strange demeanor in this his great and weighty Cause, with the little
respect that his Holiness has, either to the importance thereof, or to do unto
his Holiness at this his great necessity, gratuity and pleasure; not only
cannot be a little sorry and heavy to see himself frustrate of the future hope
and expectation that his Grace had, to have found the Pope's Holiness a most
loving, fast, near and kind Father, and assured Friend, ready and glad to have
done for his Grace, that which of his Power Ordinary or Absolute, he might have
done in this thing, which so near touches the King's Conscience, Health,
Succession, Realm, and Subjects; But also marvelleth highly, That his Holiness,
both in Matters of Peace, Truce, in this the King's Cause, and in all other,
has more respect to please and content him of whom he has received most
displeasures, and who studieth nothing more than the detriment of the Sea, than
his Holiness has either to do that which a good common Father, for the well of
the Church, Himself, and all Christendom, is bounden, and owes to do, or also
that which every thing well pondered, it were both of Congruence, Right, Truth,
Equity, Wisdom, and convenience for to do. Thinking verily that his Highness
deserved to be far otherwise entreated, and that not at his most need in things
nearest touching his Grace, and where the same had his chief and principal
confidence, thus to have his just and reasonable Petitions rejected and totally
to be converted, to the arbitre of his Enemy, which is not the way to win,
acquire and conserve Friends to the Pope's Holiness and See Apostolic, nor
that which a good and indifferent Vicar of Jesus Christ, and common Father unto
all Princes, owes and is bound to observe. Nevertheless ye shall say the
King's Highness, who always has showed, and largely comprobate himself a most
devout Son unto the Sea Apostolic, must and will take patience; and shall pray
to God to put in the Pope's mind, a more direct and virtuous intent, so to
proceed in his acts and doing, as he may be found a very Father, upright,
indifferent, loving and kind; and not thus for partial respect, fear, or other
inordinate Affection, or cause, to degenerate from his best Children, showing
himself unto them, as a Step-Father, nor the King's Highness ye shall say can
persuade unto himself, that the Pope's Holiness is of that nature and
disposition, that he will so totally fail his Grace in this Matter of so high
importance, but that by one good mean or other, his Holiness will perfectly
comprobate the entire love that always the same has showed to bear toward his
Highness, wherein ye shall desire him now to declare by his Acts the uttermost
of his intent and disposition; so as ye Mr. Stevins and Mr. Brian, who be
revoked home, do not return with void hands, or bring with you things of such
meagerness, or little substance, as shall be to no purpose: And thus by these,
or like words, seconding to the same effect, which as the time shall require,
and as he shall have cause, ye by your Wisdoms can qualify and devise, It is
not to be doubted, but that the Pope's Holiness perceiving how the Kings
Highness takes this Matter, and that two of you shall now return, will in
expedition of the said Ampliation of the Commission, and other things
requisite, strain himself to do unto the King's Highness as much gratuity and
pleasure as may be; for the better attaining whereof, ye shall also show, how
heavy and sorry I with my Lord Legate Campegius be, to see this manner of
proceeding, and the large promises which he and I so often have made unto the
King's Highness, of the Pope's fast and assured mind, to do all that his
Holiness, etiam ex plenitudine potestatis, might do, thus to be disappointed:
most humbly beseeching his Holiness on my behalf, by his high Wisdom to
consider, what a Prince this is; the infinite and excellent gratitudes which
the same has exhibited to the Pope's Person in particular, and to the Sea
Apostolic in the general; the magnitude and importance of this Cause, with the
Consequences that may follow, by the good or ill entreating of the King's
Highness in the same; wherein ye shall say, I have so largely written, so
plainly for my discharge declared the truth unto his Holiness, and so humbly,
reverently, and devoutly, made intercession, that more can I not add or
accumulate thereunto, but only pray unto God that the same may be perceived,
understood, and taken, as the exigence of the Case, and the merits of this
Noble Prince does require; trusting always, and with fervent desire, from day
to day, abiding to hear from his said Holiness some such thing as I shall now
be able constantly to justify and defend, the great things which I and my said
Lord Legate have said and attested on his Holiness behalf.

This, with all other such matter as may serve to the purpose, ye shall extend
as well as ye can, and by that means get and attain as much to your purpose for
the corroboration and surety of all things to be done here as is possible,
leaving to speak any more, or also to take or admit any rescripts for
exhibition of the Brief, advocation of the Cause, or other of the former
degrees, seeing that all which shall or can be done or attained there, shall
hang merely upon the Emperor's Will, Consent, and Arbitre: and therefore
nothing is now or hereafter to be procured, that may tend to any Act to be
done, in decision of the Cause or otherwise there, or which may bring the
adverse Party to any advantage to be taken by the favor or partiality, that
the same may have in that Court; but to convert and employ all your suit, to
that thing which may be to the most convalidation and surety of the Process,
and things to be done here, as well by attaining, as ample, large, and
sufficient words, clauses and sentences as ye can get, for ampliation of the
new Commission.

As for the defeating of any thing that may be procured to the impeachment of
the Process thereof, and the corroboration of the things to be passed, and
done, by virtue of the same. And amongst other things, whereas ye with these
last Letters, sent the Pope's Pollicitation, for the non-inhibition or avoking
of the Cause, the ratifying and confirming of the Sentence by us his Legates
herein to be given, and other things mentioned in the same, ye shall
understand, that the said Pollicitation is so couched and qualified, as the
Pope's Holiness whenever he will may resile; like-as by certain Lines and
Annotations, which in the Margin of a Copy of the said Pollicitation I send you
herewith, ye shall perceive more at large: And therefore after your other
suits, for the ampliation of the new Commission, if any such may be attained,
brought unto as good a purpose as ye can, ye shall by some good way find the
mean to attain a new Pollicitation, with such, or as many of the words and
additions newly devised as ye can get; which ye may do under this form and
color, that is to say, to show unto the Pope's Holiness, by way of sorrow and
doleance, how your Courier, to whom ye committed the conveyance of the said
Pollicitation, so chanced, in wet and water in the carriage thereof, as the
Packet wherein it was, with such Letters as were with the same, and amongst
other the Rescripts of Pollicitation, were totally wet, defaced, and not
legible; so as the Packet and Rescript was and is detained by him to whom ye
direct your Letters, and not delivered amongst the other unto the King's hands;
and unless his Holiness, of his goodness unto you, will grant you a double of
the said Pollicitation, ye see not but there shall be some notable blame
imputed unto you for not better ordering thereof, to the conservation of it
from such chance. And thus coming to a new Pollicitation, and saying, ye will
devise it as near as ye can remember, according to the former, ye by your
Wisdoms, and namely ye Mr. Stevins, may find the means to get as many of the
new and other pregnant, fat, and available words as is possible, the same
signed and sealed as the other is, to be written in Parchment; the politic
handling whereof, the King's Highness and I commit unto your good discretions;
for therein, as ye Mr. Stevins know, rests a great strength and corroboration
of all that shall be done there, in decision of the King's said Cause; and as
ye write, may be in manner as beneficial to the King's purpose, as the
Commission Decretal.

And to the intent ye may the better know how to proceed in this Business, I
advertise you that the King's Highness has now received fresh Letters out of
Spain, answering to those sent by Curson jointly with a Servant of the Queens,
for exhibition of the Original Brief here, of whose expedition you Mr. Stevins
were privy before your departure. The Letters were of sundry dates, the last
whereof is the 21 of April, at which time the Emperor was at Caesar Augusta,
upon his departure toward Barselona. In effect, the Emperor minding by his
departure thither, and other his Acts, to make a great demonstration of his
coming into Italy, who is to nothing, as the King's Ambassadors write, more
unmeet and unfurnished to that voyage, not having any Galleys there but three,
which lay on dry Land unrigged, as they have done a long time passed, none
Assembly of the States of that Land, none order, provision of Victual,
towardness in conscription of Men of War, or appearance of such thing, but that
his going to Barselona, is chiefly under pretext to attain certain old Treasure
there remaining, and to give the better reputation to his Affairs in Italy. As
to the matter of Peace and Truce, he seems not so alien from it, but that he
would, under color thereof, be glad to separate and dis-join other from the
sincerity of confidence that is between them, working somewhat with the French
King, which he himself confesses to be but abuses. On the other side, he
makes overture of Peace or Truce to be had with the King's Highness apart; and
in the mean time entertaineth the Pope's Holiness, as one whom won from the
residue of the Confederates, he thinks himself most assured of: Howbeit in
all this his Business, ye may constantly affirm, that his Compasses cannot
prevail in any thing that may be excogitate to the separation of the King's
Highness and the French King, who so entirely proceed together, that the
Emperor coming or not coming into Italy, the said French King intends to
prosecute him in the place where his Person shall be. To whom the King's
Highness now sends the Duke of Suffolk, with the Treasurer of his honorable
Household; who, if the Pope will not really and actually intend to the
maintaining of the Peace, coming to the convention of his Holiness, moved as
the case shall require, shall be furnished of a substantial number of Men of
War out of his Realm to the assistance of the said French King, if the Emperor
happen to descend in Italy. So as his things there, be not like to be in such
surety as might bring the Pope's Holiness to this extremity of fear and
respect. And all the Premises touching this knowledge had out of Spain, and the
French King's Interest with the King's Concurrence, as before; It shall be well
done ye declare to the Pope's Holiness, whereby peradventure the same shall be
removed from some part of his said overmuch respect to that part.

As to sending of the Brief, the Emperor refusing to send it into England,
shows some towardness of sending it to Rome, minding and intending to have
the King's Matter decided there and not here; howbeit all be but vain
Collusions: For as ye shall perceive by such things as be extracted out of the
Letters of the King's Orators Resident in Spain, a Copy whereof I send you
herewith, the more the said Breve comes into light and knowledge, the more
falsities be deprehended therein; and amongst other, one there is specially to
be noted, making, if it be true, a clearer and manifest proof of the same
Falsity; which because if it were perceived by the adverse Party, or any of
their Friends, Counselors, or Adherents, it might soon by a semblable falsity
be reformed, is above all other things to be kept secret, both from the Pope,
and all other there, except to your selves: for in computation of the Year of
our Lord is a diverse order observed in the Court of Rome in Bulls and Breves;
That is to say, in the Bull beginning at the Incarnation of our Lord, in the
Brief at the Nativity; So as the thing well searched, it is thought it shall be
found, that the date presupposed to be of the Breve, which is 26 December. Anno
Dom. 1503. Pontificatus Iulii anno primo, well conferred with the manner and
usages of that Court: He that counterfeited the Brieve, not knowing such
diversity between the date of the Bull and Breves, and thinking to make both
Dates of one day, dated the Breve at a day before Pope Iulii was Pope; which ye
shall more plainly perceive by the said Copy, and specially if under some good
color ye ripen your selves there, whether the year in the date of Breves
change upon Christmas day, or upon New Years day, wherein the King's pleasure
is, that ye ensearch and certify here what ye shall know and perceive. And if
ye shall by such inquiry find matter making to the purpose, as it is not
doubted but ye shall do, then for the more sure justification and proof thereof
before the Judges; It shall be expedient ye in writing make mention of such a
doubt, finding the means that it may be answered and declared in the same
Writing, by certain expert Persons of the Secretaries, and other Officers of
that Court, with subscription of their Answer and Names; whereby it may appear
here before us as Judges, as a thing true and approved: Howbeit, great
dexterity is to be used for the secrecy thereof; for if such Exceptions might
come to the knowledge of the Adverse Party, they might, as the said Orators
write, soon reform that default by detrahing one Letter, or Title, or forging a
new Brief, alleging error in the Transumpts, which might be the total
disappointment of deprehension of the falsity in that chief and principal
point. I pray you therefore to regard that Matter substantially, and to order
it by your good Wisdoms accordingly.

XXIV. The two Legates Letter to the Pope, advising a Decretal Bull. A
Duplicate.
PRioribus nostris ad Sanctitatem Vestram literis quid hic ageremus, Cotton
Libr. Vitell. B. 11.
quove in statu causa haec esset exposuimus; postea quum, and res ipsa, and
desiderium Regis admodum urgeret, ut ad Causae ipsius merita agnoscenda
accingeremur, quando in suspenso, non modo horum Regum vota, sed nec hujus
Regni firmandi ratio, diutius haberi potest, omni suasionis genere horum animis
prius adhibito, ut alterius voluntati alter cederet, eique morem gererent, cum
nihil profecerimus, ad Judicii institutionem accedentes, de modo causam ipsam
pertractandi, multa longioribus colloquiis inter nos commentati sumus; qua in
re, dum quae necessaria sunt adornantur, exhibitum est per Reginam exemplum
Brevis Julii 2. eodem tempore quo and Bulla super hac materia, dati and
scripti, sed attentiore cura and long consideratiore mente confecti, quod,
quia in substantialibus etiam ab ipsa Bulla diversum est, non modo Regium, sed
nostrum quoque animum, mire suspensum habuit, usque adeo ut de ejus veritate
plurimum suspicari libeat; nam praeter insperatam in tanta opportunitate ejus
apparitionem, incredibile videtur, ut eodem tempore idem* author, eisdem
partibus, in eadem Causa, diversa admodum ratione caverit, and permansuro
Diplomati ejusque Decreto, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, proferendo, and plumbeo
caractere excudendo dormitaverit, brevioribus vero literis, molli cera
communiendis exactissimi studii and sobriae cogitationis speciem impresserit:
ne tamen Majestas haec rem hanc damnatam priusquam exploratam habeat, quippe
quae magis in veritate quam in voto suo, Causae hujus eventum susceptura
videtur, ad ipsius Brevis exhibitionem instat, quod, quia honestum and rationi
consonum videtur, a nobis etiam probatur, propterea omni studio curamus, ut
Breve ipsum, quod in Hispaniis esse dicitur, and a quo exemplum hoc effigiatum
aiunt proferatur; atque ut hoc expeditiore cura, and ma^ore compendio
assequamur, praeter primam and summam illam de Causa cognoscendi potestatem,
quam a Sanctitate Vestra habemus, aliam quoque ad hunc specialiter articulum
habendam putamus, per quam possimus etiam per censuras, omnes etiam Regia and
Imperiali Authoritate fulgentes, monere and adigere ut dictum Breve nobis
exhibeant, sine quo causa haec nedum absolvi, sed nec commode tractari queat.
Atque hoc primum est, quod Majestas haec, in tanta animi fluctuatione qua nunc
aestuat, a nobis curandum putat, quo impetrato, Judicii via insistenres ad
Causae cognitionem procedemus; quod si non proferatur, velinutile and vitiatum,
and fide sua facile rejiciendum, prolatum fuerit, nihil prohibebit, hoc sublato
obice, quin ex officio nostro reliqua prosequamur: sin vero exhibeatur, and
veritate sua, vel adeo site con^icta fallacia, ita se tueatur ut acriori
examine id inquiri debeat, patefacto jam patronorum cavillis and calumniis
foro, quibus undis and judicii fluctibus non solum articulum hunc Brevis, sed
universam Causam implicaturi simus, nullus non viderit; neque enim deerunt quae
suspectam ipsius Brevis fidem faciant, vel ex hoc maxim, quod cum maxim Regis
and Regni hujus intersit, nihil prorsus de eo antehac auditum fuerit, nec ejus
memoria aut ratio ulla extet in Scriniis Regiis, in quibus etiam minima quaeque
ad Regnum spectantia asservari solent: nam verisimile non est in Hispaniis
majorem Anglicae rei curam fuisse quam in ipsa Anglia, neque quempiam solerti
and acri adeo ingenio fuisse, qui hujuscemodi dissidium vigesimo quinto ab hinc
anno suboriturum, and hac sola ratione sublatum iri posse divinaverit, nulla ut
diximus apud hunc Regem, and in hoc Regno talis rei memoria extante. Porro si
ex Brevi ad Bullam, and ex Bulla ad Breve transitus fiat, atque illius
jejunitatem and ariditatem insectemur, hujus praegnantia verba, and ad omnes
fere exceptiones tollendas, superstitiosam quodammodo vigilantiam conferamus,
and quae utrinque deduci poterunt in Rescriptis Apostolicis aequo animo
audiamus, periclitaturi certe sumus, ne, quod minime cupimus, Sedis Apostolicae
Authoritatem patientia nostra in discrimen rapiamus, atque dum Regno, and Regi
hinc suppetias far volumus, rem dignitatemque nostram multo minorem faciamus,
cui tum posita etiam anima, favere and adesse semper cupimus and debemus.
Propterea, Beatissime Pater, non solum pro Regis and Causae hujus commodo, sed
pro dignitate quoque Ecclesiastica and Sanctitatis Vestrae Autoritate hic
tuenda and conservanda, nullo pacto committendum ducimus, ut nobis spectantibus
and audientibus, de Potestate Romani Pontificis, de literarum Apostolicarum sub
plumbo and sub annulo scriptarum fide, and repugnantia, deque juris divini
abrogatione disceptetur, maxim in Regum causa oppugnanda and defendenda, qui,
ut sublimiore sunt fastigio collocati, ita iniquiori animo patiuntur Causae
suae casum, cum qua and dignitatem and existimationem suam diminutam iri
intelligunt, quae si ignobilium etiam animos quosque exulcerare, ipsa rerum
experientia docti cernimus, qualiter quaeso putamus Regios and generosos
affectura. Itaque quoniam hanc carybdim and hos scopulos evitasse semper tutum
erit, propterea hujusmodi incommoda quodammodo praetervecti, ubi ad litis
molestias and incertas fori fluctuationes causam deducendam perspicimus,
suadere, rogare and summis precibus parique reverentia contendere non
desinemus, ut si exhibito Brevi pura veritas ita latitaverit, quod rectumne an
falsum, vitiatum ceu adulterinum fuerit judicare ac decernere minime valeamus,
Sanctitas Vestra Causam hanc ad se avocet, non solum ut tanto discrimine, and
perplexitate nos eximat, sed ut paterno affectu Causae and Regi huic optimo
subveniat and opem ferat, atque ex Potestatis suae plenitudine and summa
prudentia finem huic rei optatum imponat, quae non sine magno hujus Regni and
Ecclesiasticae dignitatis periculo diutius trahi potest: Speramus autem
Serenissimu^ hunc Regem in hujusmodi avocandae Causae consilio facile
quieturum, salebrosa haec litium itinera and labirinthos evitaturum, modo in
fide Sanctitatis Vest^ae chyrographo manus suae testata, cognoverit, se diutius
suspenso in hac re animo detinendum non fore, atque ab hujusmodi Matrimonio se
tandem liberandum, in quo nec humano nec divino jure permanere se posse putat,
ex causis Sanctitati Vestrae forsan notis, and per hos suos nuntios longioribus
verbis explicandis. Quod si Sanctitas Vestra commodius existimaverit,
Avocatione hujusmodi posthabita, per Decretalis unius concessionem huic causae
occurri and succurri posse, in hanc quoque rationem Regis animum paratum
dabimus; and propterea concepto quodam Decretalis modulo, eum per hos ipsos
Majestatis suae nuntios mittimus, ex quibus abunde intelliget, quodque non
absque exemplo istiusmodi auxilia proponantur, and quam non temere nec absque
ratione Majestas haec desiderio huic suo inhaereat: interea vero, dum hac vel
illa ratione huic rei occurritur and Breve ipsum perquiretur, posset utique
Sanctitas Vestra iterum Reginae animum tentare, and ad Religionem emollire,
curando (ut quod maxim apud eam gratia and Autoritate esse debeant) and
literis, and precibus, and nuntiis, omnique alia ratione, hac ipsa via, sibi,
suisque rebus omnibus, atque aliis optime consulat. Cujusmodi multa, pro salute
Regni and publica cum dignitate, tum tranquillitate animo agitamus, ut tandem
optimo Regi praesidio simus, qui incredibili patientia and humanitate, nostram
and Sanctitatis Vestrae opem expectat, sed tanta obsessus cura, sollicitudine
and anxietate, ut nullus facile explicare possit, vix enim in hoc ipso, oculis
and auribus nostris credimus; cujus usque adeo nos miseret, ut nihil ingrato
magis animo audiamus quam ejus de hac re verba, querelas and cruciatum: jure,
an injuria liceat nobis hoc, Beatissime Pater, cum Sanctitate Vestra tacere, ne
praejudicium nobis aut aliis faciamus, sed quem non excitet tot annorum
Conscientiae Carnificina, quam ut transversum and modo in has and modo in illas
parts agant Theologorum disputationes, and Patrum decreta, nullus non videt;
qua in re enucleanda ita ambiguo laboratur sensu, ut jam non doctioris sed
melioris hominis lumine and pietate egeamus, and propterea factum est ut cum ab
utraque part stant assertores maximi, in illam magis Majestas sua inclinat,
quae ab offensionibus and periculis magis remota videtur. Quem praeterea non
moveat dulcis illa insitaque sobolis successio, in qua morientes and animam
exhalaturi conquiescere, natura ipsa, videmur omnes? quem insuper non accendat,
Regni atque imperii propagatio, and per solos liberos continuata quaedam
fruitio? quem denique populorum fidei ac ejus curae commissorum tranquillitas
and securitas, quae in designatis jam regibus and principibus nutritur and
vivit, non sollicitet? ita ut tanti adeoque communis boni fundamenta nulla a se
jacta, non doleat and suspiret, cum in extremis ejus diebus, extrema quoque
tempora eis adventare sentiat, atque secum omnia quodammodo in ruinam trahi?
Majores habet, Beatissime Pater, Causa haec anfractus and difficultates, quam
superficie tenus inspectantibus offerantur, in qua vel hae potissimae sunt quod
nec moram patitur, and in alteram partem non inclinat quidem, sed omnino cogit,
ni velimus ab ea praecipites and maxima cum privatae tum publicae rei jactura
cadere; nam qui vel Reginae odio, vel speratae, nec dum forsan notae, futurae
conjugis illecebra and titillatione Regem agi putant, ii excordes plane and
toto, quod aiunt, coelo errare videntur: ut enim credere dignum est, nullis
illius quamlib^t duris moribus aut injocunda consuetudine, vel ulterioris
sobolis spe desperata, Regium animum tanto periculo ad odium impelli posse; ita
nec in hominis been sani mente cadere debet, Regem hunc imbecillo adeo esse
animo, ut sensuum suadela eam abrumpere cupiat consuetudinem, in qua
adolescentiae suae florentes annos exegerit persancte adeo, ut in hac quoque
fluctuatione, non sine reverentia and honor versetur. Inest, credit omnes,
voluntati ejus non modo divinae legis timor, sed humani quoque juris ratio
eximia, haecque non privata sed publica, ad quam cum ejus animum trahant,
utriusque juris peritissimi, and Regni hujus sui proceres, and primates omnes,
nihil tamen suo, aut suorum tantum arbitrio constitutum habere cupit, sed
Apostolicae Sedis judicio; qua in re quanta sit pietate, maxim ostendit, quum
non ex magorum carminibus, and circulatorum impos^uris, aliisve malis artibus,
sed Sanctissima Pontificis manu, tanto huic vulneri suo opem petat, de quo vel
plura forte quam licuisset Sanctitati Vestrae subjecimus, quoniam haec ipsa
ulcera manibus nostris contrectavimus, and quantum vitales spiritus exhalent
cognovimus: proinde Sanctitas Vestra, pii patris and peritissimi medici more,
dum virtus adhuc stat, dum salus non desperatur, dum aeger ipse sese sustinet
and legitima petit auxilia, Regem de se and Apostolica sede optime meritum in
piaetatis suae sinu foveat, illudque ei indulgeat quod nec disputationum
immortalia dissidia, nec litium immensum chaos unquam dabit, nec sine maximo
discrimine unquam tractabitur; atque illud etiam secum reputet, quam injurium,
and cum privatis tum publicis rebus incommodum sit, extremos juris apices
consectari, quanquam non expediat ex scripto jure semper judicari; cui, quia
Pontifices and Principes miro omnium consensu, a Deo ipso praefecti, censentur
Spiritus and animae vice, merito in ambigui^, and ubi multa periclitatur
hominum salus, arbitrio suo ejus duritiem moderari possunt and debent, in quo
Sanctitas Vestra and Regem and Regnum hoc plane servaverit. Quod si alia
ratione vel aliunde paranda sibi fuerint auxilia, veremur ne de Regno and Rege
hoc actum sit, quicquid enim alia manu hui^ vulneri impositum fuerit, nihil
minus faciet quam sanitatem, seditionibus enim and tumultibus omnia exponentur,
atque imprimis Ecclesiastica Dignitas and Apostolicae Sedis Authoritas hinc
deturbabitur; quod non erit difficile, aut ingratum quibusdam, qui Rege cum
Sanctitate Vestra nunc conjunctissimo, impietatis suae venenum perbelle
dissimulant; Cujusmodi jacturam si dura haec tempora nostra fecerunt, quod
deinde sperandum sit, non videmus. Conservandus itaque Rex est, ejusque eximia
in Apostolicam Sedem voluntas and fides, ne eo a nobis abalienato, non modo
Angliae Regem, sed Fidei quoque Defensorem amittamus, cujus virtutes and
Religionem tanto plausu orbi commendavimus. Brevitati students multa
praeterimus, and praesertim quid Regni proceres, Nobiles aeque atque ignobiles
dicant, qui fremunt and acebtissime indignantur, se tamdiu suspensos haberi,
atque ab aliorum nutu and voluntate exspectare, quid de fortunis eorum omnibus
and capitibus statuant, aut decernant: atque hac potissimum via insistunt, qui
nullam aut certe diminutam hic Romani Pontificis Authoritatem vellent, quorum
plerique in his disceptationibus, quibus alter alteri, ut usu venire solet, re
in ambiguo posita, adversatur, ea dicunt quae non absque horrore referri
queant; nam inter caetera illud maxim in ore obvium habent, and praedicant, se
nunquam satis demirari, aut ridere posse quorundam ignaviam, qui patienter
audiunt, Pontificibus in Jure Divino figendo and refigendo licere, Pontifici
Pontificis ceram aut plumbum conflare non permitti; nos, ut hos scopulos and
has syrtes evitemus, nihil non agimus, and ne praeceps, huc vel illuc, Rex hic
ruat, curamus, quem in officio vix contineri posse confidimus, dum a Sanctitate
Vestra his literis rescribatur: quibus si ut speramus and cupimus aliquid
rescriptum fuerit, per quod and Regem and horum omnium animos quietiores
reddere val^amus, accedet nobis quoque vis aliqua caetera faelicius
perficiendi; sin minus, omnia in deterius itura non ambigimus. Quae ut celerius
Majestas sua cognos^at, praesentes hos nuntios suos per dispositos equos ad
Sanctitatem Vestram mittit, ex quorum sermon plura quoque intelliget quam
literae ipsae commode capere potuerunt. Ignos^et vero Sanctitas Vestra
literarum nostrarum prolixitati, quae tametsi modum excedunt, rei tamen hujus
difficultatem and periculum majori ex part minime attingunt.

May 21. 1529. Richmont. XXV. Another Dispatch to Rome. An Original.
RIght well beloved Friends, I commend me unto you in my most hearty manner, by
the hands of Alexander, Messenger; I have in good diligence received your
Letters of the 4 th of this Month; and semblably the King's Highness has
received your other Letters, sent by the same Messenger unto his Grace: By
tenor whereof it well appears that the King's Highness is now frustrate of
the good hope and expectation that his Grace and semblably I were in of the
Pope's determination, to have done for his Highness in this great and weighty
Cause of Matrimony, as his Holiness by his Chamberlain promised; not only that
which might be done of power ordinary, but also of absolute; and that ye be
utterly in despair to consecute or attain any thing to the purpose there, to
the benefit of the said Cause, with the strange demeanor that has been used
in calling you to make answer, why the supplications presented by the Emperor's
Ambassador for advocation of the Cause should not proceed; and how discreetly
and substantially ye have answered and ordered your selves therein: Affirming
finally, that as to that Matter, ye think it shall not serve to any purpose,
but only to stop your suit in the obtaining of a new Commission, and desiring
to be ascertained of the King's pleasure touching the Protestation mentioned in
your Instructions, and how the same is meant and understood, with many other
things comprised in your said Letters, right well and substantially couched and
handled; for the which the Kings Highness gives you hearty thanks, and I also
thank you in most hearty manner for my part.

Ascertaining you, that by Thadeus, Courier, upon receipt of your former
Letters sent by him, who I trust be arrived with you long before this time; I
wrote unto you the King's mind and pleasure, as well to forbear any further
pursuits of the Degrees committed unto your Charge, except only the expedition
of a new Commission and Pollicitation mentioned in the same. As also that you
Mr. Stevins, and Sir Francis Brian, should return home, like as my said Letters
purported. And forasmuch as now it appears, that there is no hope for you to
attain the said Commission and Pollicitation, the King's Highness supposing
that ye the said Mr. Stevins and Sir Francis be on your way homeward; and
perceiving that it should be necessary for his Grace to have there a
substantial Counselor of his, well learned in the Laws, as well to defend all
such things as shall be procured or set forth by the Caesareans, to the
hindrance of the King's Cause, as to let and impeach any Advocations,
Inhibitions, or other thing that may be dammageable thereunto, has dispatched
thither this Bearer and Mr. Bennet, who has commandment to show unto you, and
every of you, wheresoever he shall meet with or find you, his whole
Instructions, by tenor whereof ye shall be advertised of the King's further
mind and pleasure in that behalf; wherefore this shall be only to signify unto
you, how his Highness will that ye now forbear any further pursuit, either for
Commission, Pollicitation or Rescript to be sent to the Emperor for exhibition
of the Brief, either here or at Rome, but that following in every part the
tenor of the said Instructions, ye Mr. Stevins and Sir Francis Brian use all
the diligence possible in your Voyage homeward, and the residue of you to
intend to such things as be mentioned in the said Instructions; ascertaining
you, that whereas ye were in doubt what is meant by the Protestation spoken of
in my former Letters and your Instructions, it was none other thing than in the
same Instructions was plainly specified and declared; That is to say, Failing
of all your Requests and Pursuits touching the King's great Matter, to have
showed unto his Holiness the danger that might ensue, by losing the entire
favor of this Prince, by mean of his so strange and unkind dealing with his
Grace; howbeit, considering in what state the things now be, and how much the
Pope's Holiness seems to be inclined to the Emperors part. And yet as
appears both by your Letters, and by such other knowledge as the King has,
his Holiness would gladly conserve the King's Love and Favor, and is loath to
do any thing to the prejudice of his Cause: It is no time to come to any
rigorous or extreme words with his Holiness, but in gentle and modest manner to
show himself in such words as be mentioned in my said last Letters sent by
Thadeus; and so without irritation of him, but with conservation of his favor
to entertain his Holiness in the best manner that may be, without meddling in
any other Protestation, but only to look what may be done touching such
Protestations apart, as is mentioned in the said Instructions given to Mr.
Benet, which with these Letters shall be a sufficient information of you all
what to do in the Causes to you committed, not doubting but in all other
particular suits of Bulls, and other things committed unto you, ye Mr. Stevins
and Sir Francis Brian, have or will do your best to bring the same with you;
the expedition whereof, if they be not sped already, the King's Highness
commits to the Wisdoms of such of you as shall fortune to be in the Court of
Rome at the receipt hereof; wherein, and in all other things, his Highness
trusts, and I do the semblable, that ye will order your selves with all
effectual diligence, as the special confidence that is put in you does
appertain.

And forasmuch as the greatest thing that is to be looked unto is the importune
Suit of the Caesareans, not only to stop any further things to be granted to
the King's Highness, but also to revoke the Commission given to the Lord Legate
Campegius and to me, which should be a clear disappointment and frustration of
the King's Cause; ye shall therefore look substantially by all politic means
to withstand, that no such thing be granted; assuring the Pope and all the
Cardinals, and such other as have respect to the well of the Sea Apostolic,
that if he should do such an high injury to the King and his Realm, and an Act
so contumelious to us his Legates, and so contrarious to his Faith and Promise,
he should thereby not fail so highly to irritate the King and all the Nobles of
this Realm, that undoubtedly they should decline from the obedience of the Sea
Apostolic, and consequently all other Realms should do the semblable,
forasmuch as they should find in the Head of the same, neither justness,
uprightness, nor truth; and this shall be necessary, as the case shall require,
well to be inculked and put in his head, to the intent his Holiness by the same
may be preserved from granting, passing, or condescending to any such thing.

After these Letters perfected hither, and read unto the King's Highness,
albeit that mention is made in sundry places heretofore, that (...) well ye Mr.
Stevins, and Sir Francis Brian, if ye be not returned from the Court of Rome,
as also the rest of the King's Ambassadors, which a^ the arrival of Mr. Doctor
Bennet shall fortune to be there, shall forbea^ to make any further means or
pursuit for the New Commission and Pollicitation, but clearly to use silence
therein; yet nevertheless regarding and more profoundly considering the effect
of your Letters last sent, i^ does plainly appear, that tho after the overture
made to the Pope's Holiness of the said New Commission, the Business chanced to
be made by the Emperor's Ambassador, upon preferring a Supplication for
advocation of the Cause; which thing by your writing, Mr. Stevins, to Capisuke
was well avoided; yet was there none express refusal made by the Pope's
Holiness to condescend unto the said New Commission, but order given that you
should consult and confer with the Cardinal Anconitane and Symonette upon the
same; which Conference, by mean of the said Business, was deferred and
disappointed, without any final conclusion or resolution taken thereupon.
Wherefore inasmuch as yet there appears none utter despair of obtaining the
said New Commission and Pollicitation, with some more fat, pregnant, and
effectual Clauses than the other has; The King's pleasure is, That
notwithstanding any words before mentioned, both ye the said Mr. Stevins, and
Sir Francis Brian, if ye be not departed from the Court of Rome, do for the
time of your demur there, which the King's pleasure is, shall not be long, but
only for taking of your leave; and also the rest of the King's said Orators,
after your departure, shall, as ye shall see the case require, endeavor your
selves as much as may be, to obtain the said New Commission and Pollicitation,
foreseeing always that you handle the matter after such manner, as thereby the
Pope be not the rather induced to hearken and incline to any persuites of the
Imperials for advocation of the Cause, which were a total frustration of all
the King's intent, but so to use your selves, as ye shall see to be to the
benefit, and not to the hindrance thereof: Which done, the King's Grace does
refer the good handling of this thing to your wisdoms and discretions, neither
to leave the persuit for the said Commission and Pollicitation, if it may
without damage be followed; nor to follow it, if thereby you shall see
apparent danger of any such Advocation, or advantage to ensue to the purpose of
the Imperialists, like as his Highness doubts not, knowing now the King's
mind and pleasure, you will with wisdom and dexterity, order your selves herein
accordingly.

And furthermore, you shall in any wise dissuade the Pope for sending either by
his Nuntio, to be sent unto Spain, or otherwise, for the Original Brief: And if
the Nuntio be already passed, having charge to speak for sending the same to
the Court of Rome, then to find the means that a Commandment be by the Pope's
Holiness sent after him, not to make any mention thereof: Which done to you,
the King's said Ambassador shall have a good color to induce the Pope's
Holiness, saying, as of your self, That you have well considered your own
pursuits for producing the Brief at Rome; and because the Emperor might
per-case think that the Pope were about to arect unto him the falsity of the
said Brief, therefore you can be contented that that matter be put off, and no
mention to be made thereof by his Nuntio, or otherwise; whereunto it is not to
be doubted but the Pope's Holiness will have special regard, and facilly
condescend to your desires in that behalf.

Finally; It appears also by certain your Letters sent, as well to the King's
Highness as to me, that the Pope's Holiness is much desirous to study and find
a mean and way to satisfy the King's Highness in this behalf: Amongst which one
clause in his Letters to me is this; Tametsi enim jurisperitorum consilium
quaesiverimus, sed nihil reperimus, quod bonis or^toribus simul and justitiae
ac honori nostro satisfaceret; sed tamen agimus omnia, and tentamus omnes modos
Regiae suae Serenitati, ac circumspectioni tuae satisfaciendi. (And it is added
in the Margin, with Wolsey's hand;

Mi Petre, referas tuis literis pervelim quid tibi and mihi Pontifex dixerit de
modis excogitandis, and quomodo subridens dicebat, In nomine Patris, etc.)

Wherefore since his Holiness so plainly declared, that he seeks the ways and
means to satisfy the King's Highness, it shall be in any wise expedient, that
you the said Orators perceiving any towardness of Advocation, lay this to the
Pope's Holiness, saying, That that is not the way to satisfy his Grace; and yet
besides that, by your Wisdoms to find the means to understand and know of his
Holiness what be the ways and means, which his Holiness has studied or can
study to satisfy the King according to his writing in this behalf, whereof
they shall say his Grace is glad, and is very desirous to know and understand
the same; and as you shall perceive any towardness or untowardness in the Pope
in that behalf, so to set forth your pursuits to the best purpose accordingly.
And thus heartily fare you well.

From Richmond, the 21 day of May. Your loving Friend, T. Cardinalis Eborac.

May 31. Romae 1529. XXVI. A Letter of the Popes to the Cardinal. An Original.
Dilecto Filio nostro Thomae tituli Sanctae Ceciliae Presbytero Cardinali
Eboracensi, nostro and sedis Apostolicae Legato de latere. Clemens manu propria.
DIlecte Fili noster, salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Cotton Libr.
Vitell. B. 11.
Cum Angliae Rex ac Circumspectio vestra, vetera vestra erga nos and Sedem
Apostolicam merita novis officiis augeretis, optabamus occasionem, in qua and
vos nostrum amorem cognoscere possetis; sed molestissime tulimus eam primum
esse oblatam, in qua circumsepti angustis terminis Justitiae, non possemus
progredi quantum vellemus, studio vobis gratificandi, multis ac rationabilibus
Causis desiderium vestrum impedientibus, quod quidem Regiis Oratoribus istuc
redeuntibus demonstrare conati sumus. Sed super his and publicis negotiis
copiosius vobiscum loquetur Dilectus Filius noster Cardinalis Campegius.

Datum Romae die ultima Maii, 1529. J.

April 6. 1529. XXVII. The King's Letter to his Ambassadors, to hinder an
Avocation of the Suit. An Original.
By the King.
Henry Rex,
TRusty and right well-beloved we greet you well. Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 11

Since your departure from hence, we have received sundry your Letters to us
directed, whereof the last bears date at Rome, the 4 th day of the last
month; and have also seen such other as from time to time ye have sent to the
most Reverend Father in God, our most entirely well-beloved Counselor the Lord
Legate, Cardinal, Archbishop of York, Primate of England, and our Chancellor:
By continue whereof, we have been advertised of the Successes, as well of your
Journey thitherwards, as of such things as ye to that time had done in our
Causes to you committed; for the which your diligent advertisement, and good
acquittal, we give unto you condign thanks: ascertaining you, We do not a
little marvel, that in your said last Letters you show so much desperation of
any great favor to be had at the Pope's hand in our said Causes; considering
that neither ye then had spoken with his Holiness in the same, nor by such
Conferences as ye had had with Mr. Iacobo Salviati, or other on his behalf, we
can perceive but all good favor and towardness; tho per-case the superiority
of the Imperials, and the common fame, led you to think the contrary: Howbeit
as you know no credence is to be given unto such common report, nor we trust
the same shall prove more true, than has done the Opinion that was of the Lord
Legate Campegius now here Resident, whom we find and certainly know to be of a
far other sort in his love and inclination toward us, than was spoken, not
having such affection toward the Emperor, as in him was suspected. And to be
plain with you, if ever he had been of other mind, we have said somewhat to him
after such manner as might soon change that intention. So that little Faith is
to be given to the outward Sayings and Opinions of such People as measure every
thing at their pleasure; which we doubt not but ye right wisely do consider,
and that ye have before this time, by your diligent solicitation made to speak
with the Pope's Holiness for declaration of your Charge, proved the contrary.
Whereof we shall be glad and joyous to hear; willing and desiring you
therefore, according to the great and special confidence that we have in you,
to pretermit no time in the diligent handling and execution of your said
Charge, but by one good way or other to find the mean, if you have not already
done it, to declare the same unto the Pope, wherein the good advice and address
of the Bishop of Verone shall, We trust, do you great furtherance; and by whose
means, if ye for the Pope's extreme debility or sickness might in no wise be
often admitted unto his presence, ye may signify unto him at great length, our
whole Mind, Desire, and Intent, after such form as your Instructions and
Letters given and sent unto you in that behalf do purport: For sure ye may be,
it shall highly confer unto the benefit of our Causes, that ye have there
present one so fast and assured Friend unto us, as we trust the Bishop of
Verone is, who shall be able right largely to countervail, and meet with the
malicious practices of the Archbishop of Capua, who is thought to be one of the
chief Authors and Contrivers of the Falsities, Crafts, and Abuses, set forth to
the hindrance of our said Causes; which no Man shall more politickly and
facilly deprehend, than the said Bishop of Verone may do: And therefore he is
by you, with all good means and ways possible, to be entertained; as we doubt
not but you will have special eye and regard to the making, winning, and
conservation of as many Friends to our purpose as ye can possibly obtain; so
handling your self, as now may appear your dexterity and perfect endeavor to
conduce, with your diligent labor and policy, our Matters to the speedy,
indelayed, and desired end and effect, which ye may be sure we shall not put in
oblivion, but will have the same in remembrance accordingly. Marvelling
nevertheless, that though ye Mr. Stevins could not bring hitherto our great
Causes to perfection, ye had not in the mean season advertised us what is done
touching such Bulls as were to be sped for our other particular Matters,
whereof no mention is made in your said Letters; willing and desiring you
therefore, by your next Letters, to advertise us in what state and train the
same be; knowing right well that ye being not only by the former Letters and
Writings, but also by such as be sent unto you* at this time sufficiently and
amply instructed of our Mind and Pleasure, will now so acquit your self, as
shall correspond to the perfect expectation, and firm opinion that we have of
you, which we shall not fail to have in our tender consideration to your well,
as is aforesaid. Ye shall also, in your Conferences with the said Bishop of
Verone, understand and know of him, by what ways and means ye may best further
his advancement to the Cardinality; exhorting him, for the manifold good
effects that thereof may ensue, to conform himself to the acceptance thereof,
if it may be obtained; for doubtless his Virtue, Wisdom, Experience, Fidelity,
and other great and commendable merits well considered, we think no Man more
meet at this time to be preferred thereunto than him: And therefore our express
Mind and Pleasure is, that ye do it by all the ways and means to you possible.
And finally we will that ye show unto him how effectually we have written unto
you in that behalf, to the intent, being advanced thereunto, he may give us the
better thanks, and in every way bear to us the more perfect affection. And by
your next Letters, We will that ye advertise us what Advocates ye have on our
part, with their Names and Qualities; finding the means also, if it be
possible, to retain some notable and excellent Divine, a Friar, or other that
may, can, or will firmly stick to our Causes, in leaning to that, Quod Pontifex
ex Iure Divino non potest dispensare, etc. And of all the Successes to
advertise us, as our special trust is in you.

Given under our Signet, at our Manor of Greenwich, the 6 th of this April.
XXVIII. The King's Letter to his Ambassadors, about his appearance before the
Legates. An Original. June 23. 1529.
To our trusty and right well-beloved Counselors, Mr. William Bennet, Doctor
of both Laws; Sir Gregory de Cassalis, Knight; and Mr. Peter Vannes our
Secretary for the Latin Tongue, our Ambassadors, resident in the Court of
Rome, and to every of them. By the KING. Henry R.
TRusty and right well-beloved, we greet you well. Cotton libr. Vitel. B. 11.
By former Letters and Writings sent to you Sir Gregory and Mr. Peter, with
other of your Colleagues then being at Rome, and by such conference as was had
with you Mr. Benet before your departure, you were advertised in what state
then stood our Cause and Matter of Matrimony, and how it was intended that the
Process of the same should with diligence be commenced before the Pope's
Legates here, being authorized for that purpose. Since that time, ensuing the
deliberation taken in that behalf, the said Legates, all due Ceremonies first
observed, have directed Citations both to us and to the Queen, for our and for
her appearing before them the 18 th of this month; which appearance was duly on
either Party kept, performed, and all requisite Solemnities accomplished: At
which time the Queen trusting more in the power of the Imperialists, than in
any justness of her Cause, and thinking of likelihood, by frustratory
allegations and delays, to tract and put over the Matter to her advantage, did
protest at the said day, putting in Libels, Recusatories of the Judges; and
also made a provocation, alleging the Cause to be avoked by the Pope's
Holiness, and litis pendentiam coram eodem; desiring to be admitted for
probation thereof, and to have a term competent for the same: Whereupon day was
given by the Judges till the 21 of the same month, for declaration of their
minds and intentions thereunto; The Queen in Person, and we by our Proctor
enjoined to appear the same day, to hear what the said Judges should determine
in and upon the same. At which time both we and the Queen appeared in Person;
and notwithstanding that the said Judges amply and sufficiently declared, as
well the sincerity of their minds directly, justly to proceed without favor,
dread, affection, or partiality; as also that no such Recusation, Appellation,
or term for proving of Litis pendentiam, could or might be by them admitted:
yet she nevertheless persisting in her former wilfulness, and in her Appeal,
which also by the said Judges was likewise recused: And they minding to proceed
further in the Cause, the Queen would no longer make her abode to hear what the
said Judges would fully discern, but incontinently departed out of the Court;
wherefore she was thrice preconnisate, and called eft-soons to return and
appear; which she refusing to do, was denounced by the Judges Contumax, and a
Citation decerned for her appearance on Friday next, to make answer to such
Articles and Positions as should be objected unto her: So as now it is not to
be doubted, but that she will use all the ways and means to her possible, to
impetrate and attain such things, as well by her own pursuit, as by her
Friends, as may be to the impeachment of the rightful Process of this Cause,
either by Advocation, Inhibition, or otherwise: Wherefore seeing now in what
state this our Matter stands and depends, necessary and requisite for the
great Consequences hanging upon the same, not only for the exoneration of our
Conscience, but also for the surety of our Succession, and the well of this our
Realm and People, to be with all celerity perfected and observed. It was
thought convenient to advertise you of the Premises, to the intent ye being
well and sufficiently instructed in all things concerning the same, shall by
your wisdoms and diligences have special regard that nothing pass or be granted
there by the Pope's Holiness, which may either give delay or disappointment to
the direct and speedy process to be used in this Cause, neither by Advocation
of the Cause, Inhibition, or otherwise; but that if any such thing shall, by
the Caesareans; or by her Agents, or other, be attempted, or desired, the like
Men of Wisdom, good Zeal, Learning, and Experience, diligently procure the
stopping thereof, as well upon such Reasons and Considerations as before have
been signified unto you, as by inferring the high and extreme dishonor, and
intolerable prejudice that the Pope's Holiness thereof should do to his said
Legates; and also the contrariety both of his Bull and Commission, and also of
his Promise and Pollicitation passed upon the same; beside the notable and
excellent displeasure thereby to be done by his Holiness to us, and our Realm,
clear contrary to our merits and deserts; extending also the other dangers
mentioned in the said former Writings, apparent to ensue thereby to his
Holiness, and the Sea Apostolic, with the manifold, and in manner, in^inite
inconveniences like to follow of the same to all Christendom, and all other
such reasons, introductions and persuasions ye can make and devise for that
purpose: putting him also in remembrance of the great Commodity coming unto his
Holiness herein, by reason that this Cause being here decided, the Pope not
only is delivered from the pains that he should in this time of Disease and
Sickness, to the extreme peril of his Life sustain with the same, seeing that
it is of such moment and importance, as suffers no tract or delay; but also
his Holiness shall by such decision here eschew and avoid all displeasure that
he should not fail to have, if it were or should be passed elsewhere: which
matter is no little wisdom well to foresee and consider, and not only to
forbear to do or pass any thing derogatory or prejudicial to his said
Commission, but also by all means possible to corroborate and fortify the same,
and all such Acts judicial as shall pass by his said Legates by virtue thereof.
Like-as we doubt not but that the Pope's Holiness, of his Uprightness, Virtue,
and perfect Wisdom will do; and rather like a most loving Father and Friend,
tender and favor our good, just and reasonable Causes and Desires, putting
thereunto all the furtherance he may do, than to do or consent to be done any
thing hurtful, prejudicial, dammageable, or displeasant unto us, or this our
said Cause. And finally; If need shall be, we will ye also infer, as the case
shall require, how inconvenient it were this our Matter should be decided in
the Court of Rome; which now depends totally in the Emperor's Arbitre, having
such puissance near thereunto, that, as has been written by the Pope's own
Letters, their State and Life there is all in the Emperor's hands, whose Armies
may famish or relieve them at their pleasure. And semblably ye shall not forget
the prerogative of our Crown and Jurisdiction Royal, by the ancient Laws of our
Realm, which admits nothing to be done by the Pope to the prejudice thereof,
and also what danger they should incur that would presume to bring or present
any such thing unto the same, as in our last Letters sent by Alexander was
touched at good length. Wherein since ye be already so well and amply
instructed, knowing also how much the Matter imports and touches us, and what
profit and agreeable service ye may do unto us herein, with the high thanks
that ye may deserve for the same; We shall not be more prolix, but refer the
substantial, perfect, and assured handling hereof to your circumspections,
fidelities, and diligences, not doubting but that ye will now above all other
things, look vigilantly hereunto, and so acquit your selves in the same, as it
may well appear that your Acts shall be correspondent to our firm trust and
expectation, and no less tender this thing than ye know it to be imprinted in
the bottom of our Heart, nor then as ye know both the importance and high
moment, and also the very necessity of the Matter does require. In which doing,
beside the laud and praise that ye shall consecute thereby of all good Men, we
shall so have your acquittals in our remembrance, as ye shall have cause to
think your travels, pains, and studies herein, in the best wise collocate and
employed.

Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Bridewel, the 23 d day of June.
Rome 9 July 1529. XXIX. Doctor Bennet's Letter to the Cardinal, showing how
little they might expect from the Pope. An Original.
Cotton libr. Vitel. B. 11.
PLease it your Grace to understand, that the 6 th day of this month the Pope's
Holiness send for us: Albeit we had made great suit for audience before to his
Holiness, soon after that we had understanding that his Holiness was recovered
of this his last Sickness, into the which he fell the second day, after I had
my first audience of his Holiness, which was the 21 day of the last month: And
after our long communication and reasoning in the King's Highness Cause, which,
at length, we have written to your Grace in our common Letter, for a
confirmation of many inconveniences and dangers which we persuaded to his
Holiness, to follow both to himself and to the Sea Apostolic, in case his
Holiness should avoke the cause; I thought much convenient at that same time to
deliver the King's familiar, and likewise your Grace's Letter, and so to show
your Grace's Credence to his Holiness. After the foresaid Letters delivered,
and by his Holiness read, his Holiness showed me, that he perceived by your
Grace's Letters, that I had certain Credence to show unto him of great moment
and importance, concerning him and the Sea Apostolic. I showed to his Holiness
your Grace's Faith and observance, his Holiness does best know; most humbly
besought his Holiness to believe these undoubtedly to follow, That if his
Holiness should, at the labors of the Caesareans, avoke the Cause, he should
not alonely offend the King's Highness, which hitherto has been a stay, a
help, and a defense of the Sea Apostolic; but also by reason of this injury,
without remedy, shall alienate his Majesty and Realms, with others, from the
devotion and obedience of the Sea Apostolic. This I showed his Holiness, that
your Grace does evidently perceive to follow, in case his Holiness should
incline to the Caesareans desire on this behalf: Yea further, I said, that your
Grace most clearly perceives also by that Act, the Church of England utterly
to be destroyed, and likewise your Person; and that these your Grace, with
weeping tears, most lamentably committed unto me to show to his Holiness.
Furthermore I showed to his Holiness, that your Grace, howsoever you should
proceed in this Cause, did intend to proceed so sincerely, indifferently, and
justly, that you would rather suffer to be jointed, Joint by Joint, than either
for affection or fear, do any act either against your Conscience or Justice.
Furthermore I said, that seeing his Holiness may be so well assured, that your
Grace will do nothing but according to Justice in this Cause, he may the more
boldly deny Avocations to the Caesareans, seeing that the Queen and the Emperor
can desire but Justice, which they may have at your Grace's hand, and my Lord
Campegius, as well there as here; and by this means his Holiness should deliver
himself from great pains and unquietness of mind, which he should sustain in
case the Cause should be known here, where he should have the King's Highness
on one part, and the Emperor on the other side, daily calling upon his
Holiness. To this his Holiness most heavily, and with tears, answered and said,
That now he saw the destruction of Christendom, and lamented that his fortune
was such to live to this day, and not to be able to remedy it, (saying these
words) For God is my Judge, I would do as gladly for the King, as I would for my
self; and to that I knowledge my self most bounden, but in this case I cannot
satisfy his desire, but that I should do manifestly against Justice to the
charge of my Conscience, to my rebuke, and to the dishonor of the Sea
Apostolic; affirming, that his Counsel shows him, that seeing the Caesareans
have a Mandate or Proxy of the Queen, to ask the Avocations in her Name, he
cannot of Justice deny it, and the whole Signature be in that same opinion; so
that though he would most gladly do that thing that might be to the King's
pleasure, yet he cannot do it, seeing that Signature would be against him
whenever the Supplication should be up there: And so being late, we took our
leave of his Holiness, and departed, seeing that we could obtain nothing of the
Pope for stopping the Avocation, we consulted and devised for the deferring of
it, till such time as your Grace might make an end in the Cause there. And so
concluded upon a new Device, which at length we have written in our common
Letter, wherein I promise your Grace, Mr. Gregory has used great diligence, and
taken great labors at this time, we can do no more for our lives: And if your
Grace saw the importune labor of the Ambassadors of the Emperor's and
Ferdinandoes, you would marvel, I promise your Grace they never cease;
wherefore in staying hitherto, as we have done, it is marvel, as God knows,
whom I pray to preserve your Grace in health and prosperity ad multos annos. I
beseech your Grace most humbly to commend me to the King's Highness; and
likewise I beseech your Grace to pardon my ill writing.

At Rome, the 9 th day of July. Your daily Beadman and Servant, W. Benet.

XXX. A Letter of the Pope's to the Cardinal concerning the Avocation. An
Original. 19 Iulii, 1529.
DIlecte Fili noster, salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Cotton Libr.
Vitell. B. 11.
Difficile est nobis explicare literis, qua nostra molestia seu potius dolor
fuerimus coacti, ad Avocationem Causae istic commissae concedendam; nam etsi
res ita fuit justa ut tanto tempore differri non debuerit, tamen nos qui isti
Serenissimo Regi pro ejus singularibus erga nos and Apostolicam sedem meritis
placere in omnibus cupimus, sicut consuevimus, aegre nunc adducti sumus, ut
quamquam justitia cogente, quicquid contra ejus voluntatem concederemus. Nec
vero minus, Fili, doluimus tua causa* cui rem hanc tantae curae esse
perspeximus quantum tua erga dictum Regem fides and amor postulat; sed tamen
quod datur justitiae minus esse molestum debet, cum praesertim id fuerit tam
dilatum a nobis, omniaque antea pertentata ne ad hoc descenderemus. Itaque
optamus in hoc adhiberi a te illam tuam singularem prudentiam and aequitatem,
persuadereque te tibi id quod est, nos qui semper vobis placere quantum nobis
licuit studuimus, id quod vestro maximo merito fecimus, and semper facturi
sumus, nunc non nisi invitos and justitia coactos quod fecimus fecisse: Teque
omni studio and amore hortamur, ut dictum regem in solita erga nos benevolentia
retinere velis, eique persuadere, nihil ex hoc apud nos de benevolentia erga se
veteri imminutum unquam fore, quod recipiemus a Circumspectione tua long
gratissimum. Quemadmodum before dilectus Filius noster Cardinalis Campegius
haec circumspectioni tuae explicabit.

Dat. Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris die 19 Julii 1529. Pont.
nostri anno sexto. Blosius.

Act 26. Anno Regni 21. Henr. 8. XXXI An Act for the releasing unto the King
his Highness of suck Sums of Money as was to be required of him, by any his
Subjects, for any Manner of Loan, by his Letters Missives, or other ways or
manner whatsoever.
ITem quaedam alia billa formam cujusdam actus in se continens, exhibita est
praefato Domino Regi in Parliamento praedicto, cujus quidem billae tenor
sequiturin haec verba. The King's humble, faithful, and loving Subjects, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
considering and calling to their remembrances, the inestimable Costs, Charges,
and Expenses, which the King's Highness necessarily has been compelled to
support and sustain, since his assumption to his Crown, Estate, and Dignity
Royal; as well first for the extinction of a right dangerous and damnable
Schism sprung and risen in the Church; which by the providence of the Almighty
God, and the high prudence, and provision, and assistance of the King's
Highness, was, to the great honor, laud, and glory of his Majesty, repressed;
the Enemies then being of the Church reformed, returned, and restored to the
unity of the same, and peace over all componed and concluded, as also for the
modifying of the insatiable and inordinate ambition of those which do aspire
unto the Monarchy of Christendom, did put universal trouble, divisions in the
same, intending, if they might, not only to have subdued this Realm, but also
all the rest unto their Power and Subjection: For the resistance whereof, the
King's Highness was compelled, after the Universal Peace, by the great study,
labor, and travel of his Grace conduced, and the same by some of the
Contrahents newly violate and infringed; in showing the form of the Treaties
thereupon made again, and take Armor. And over and besides the notable and
excessive treasure and substance which his Highness in his first Wars had
employed for the defense of the Church, the Faith Catholic, and this his
Realm, and of the People and Subjects of the same, was eft-soons brought of
necessity to new, excellent, and mavelous Charges, both for the supportation
of sundry Armies by Sea and by Land; and also for diverse and manifold
Contributions outward, to serve, keep, and contain his own Subjects at home in
rest and repose; which has been so politickly handled and conduced, that when
the most part of all religious Christians have been infested with cruel Wars,
Discords, Divisions, and Dissensions, the great Heads and Princes of the World
brought unto Captivity; Cities, Towns, and Places, by force and sedition,
taken, spoiled, burnt, and sacked; Men, Women, and Children found in the same
slain and destroyed; Virgins, Wives, Widows, and Religious Women, ravished and
defloured; Holy Churches and Temples polluted, and turned unto profane use;
the Relics of the Holy Saints irreverently treated; Hunger, Dearth, and
Famine, by mean thereof in the said outward Regions, ensuing and gentily over
all, was depopulation, destruction and confusion; the King's said Subjects in
all this time, were by the high providence and politic means of his Grace
nevertheless preserved, defended, and maintained, from all these inconveniences
and dangers; and such provisions taken, by one way or other, so as reasonable
commodity was always given unto them to exercise their Traffiques of
Merchandise, and other their Crafts, Mysteries, and Occupations for their
living; which could not possibly have been brought about, unless then the
King's Highness, with continual studies, travels, and pains, and with his
infinite Charges and Expenses, had converted the peril and danger of the
Enterprises and Exploits, set forth for the reduction of the Enemies unto
Peace, from his own Subjects unto Strangers: Whereof finally such Fruit and
Effect is ensued, as by the King's policy, puissance, and means, general and
universal Peace is established amongst all Christian Princes; and this Realm
now, thanked be God, constitute in free, better, and more assured and
profitable Amity with all outward Parties, than has been at any time whereof
is memory or remembrance. Considering furthermore, That his Highness, in and
about the Premises, has been fain to employ, not only such sums of Money as
has risen and grown by any manner of contribution made unto his Grace by his
said loving Subjects, but also over and above the same, sundry other notable
and excellent Sums of his own Treasure, and yearly Revenues, which else his
Grace might have kept and reserved to his own use; amongst which manifold great
Sums so employed, his Highness also, as is notoriously known, and as does
evidently appear by the accounts of the same, has to that use and none other,
converted all such Money, as by any his Subjects and People, Spiritual and
Temporal, has been advanced unto his Grace by way of Pressed and Loan, either
particularly, or by any Taxation made of the same, being a thing so well
collocate and bestowed, seeing the said high and great Fruits and Effects
thereof ensued, to the honor, surety, well, perfect commodity, and perpetual
tranquillity of this said Realm, as nothing could better nor more to the
comfort of his said Subjects be desired, studied, or imagined; Of one mind,
consent and assent, and by Authority of this present Parliament, do for
themselves, and all the whole Body of the Realm whom they do represent, freely,
liberally, and absolutely, give and grant unto the King's Highness, by
Authority of this present Parliament, all and every Sum and Sums of Money, which
to them, and every of them, is, ought, or might be due, by reason of any Money,
or any other thing, to his Grace at any time heretofore advanced, or paid, by
way of Pressed or Loan, either upon any Letter or Letters under the King's Privy
Seal, general or particular, Letter, Missive, Promise, Bond, or Obligation of
payment, or by any Taxation, or other Assessing, by virtue of any Commission or
Commissions, or by any other mean or means whatsoever it be heretofore passed
for that purpose, and utterly, frankly, liberally, and most willingly and
benevolently, for them, their Heirs, Executors, and Successors, do remit,
release, and quit claim, unto his Highness, his Heirs and Successors for ever,
all and every the same Sums of Money, and every parcel thereof, and all and
singular Suits, Petitions, and Demands, which they, or any of them, their
Heirs, Successors, or Executors, or the Heirs, Executors, or Successors of any
of them, have, had, or may have for the same, or any parcel thereof; most
humbly and lovingly, beseeching his Highness, for the more clear discharge for
the same, that it may be ordained and enacted by the King, our said Sovereign
Lord, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this present
Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that all Promises, Bonds,
Writings, Obligatory Letters, under the King's Privy Seal, Signet, Sign Manual,
or Great Seal passed, and other Bonds or Promises, whatsoever they be, had, or
made, to any Person or Persons, Spiritual or Temporal, Shire, City, Borough,
Waxentale, Tranship, Hamlet, Village, Monastry, Church, Cathedral, or
Collegiat, or to any Guild, Fraternity, or Body Corporate, Fellowship, or
Company, or other whatsoever, having capacity to take any Bond, especially and
generally, jointly or severally, touching or concerning the same Pressed or Loan,
or every of them, or the repaiment of any Sum or Sums of Money for the same, be
from henceforth void and of none effect. Cui quidem billae probe and ad plenum
intellectae per dictum Dominum Regem ex assensu and Authoritate Parliamenti
praedicti taliter est responsum. Le Roy remercie Les Seigneurs and ses communes
de leur bonne cueurs en faifant cest grant, and icelle se Majeste accept and
tout le contenu, and cest escriture a grant and aprove avecques tous les
articles en ceste escripture specifies.

XXXII. A Letter from Gardener and Fox, about their Proceedings at Cambridg. An
Original.
Feb. 1530. from Cambridg by Stephen Gardener. To the King's Highness.
Pleases it your Highness to be advertised, Cotton Libr. Vitell. B. 13.
That arriving here at Cambridg upon Saturday last past at noon, that same
night, and Sunday in the Morning, we devised with the Vice Chancellor, and
such other as favors your Grace's Cause, how and in what sort to compass and
attain your Grace's Purpose and Intent; wherein we assure your Grace, we found
much towardness, good will, and diligence, in the Vice Chancellor and Dr.
Edmunds, being as studious to serve your Grace as we could wish or desire:
Nevertheless there was not so much care, labor, study, and diligence employed
on our Party, by them, our self, and other, for attaining your Grace's Purpose,
but there was as much done by others for the let and empeachment of the same;
and as we assembled they assembled, as we made Friends they made Friends, to
let that nothing should pass as in the Universities Name; wherein the first
day they were Superiors, for they had put in the ears of them, by whose Voices
such things do pass, multas fabulas, too tedious to write unto your Grace. Upon
Sunday at afternoon were assembled, after the manner of the University, all the
Doctors, Batchellors of Divinity, and Masters of Art, being in number almost
two hundred: In that Congregation we delivered your Grace's Letters, which were
read openly by the Vice Chancellor. And for answer to be made unto them, first
the Vice Chancellor calling apart the Doctors, asked their Advice and Opinion;
whereunto they answered severally, as their Affections led them, and res erat
in multa confusione. Tandem they were content Answer should be made to the
Questions by indifferent Men: But then they came to Exceptions against the
Abbot of St. Benets, who seemed to come for that purpose; and likewise against
Dr. Reppes, and Dr. Crome; and also generally against all such as had allowed
Dr. Cranmer's Book, inasmuch as they had already declared their Opinion. We
said thereunto, That by that reason they might except against all; for it was
lightly, that in a Question so notable as this is, every Man Learned has said
to his Friend as he thinks in it for the time; but we ought not to judge of
any Man, that he sets more to defend that which he has once said, than
Truth afterward known. Finally; The Vice Chancellor, because the day was much
spent in those altercations, commanding every Man to resort to his Seat apart,
as the manner is in those Assemblies, willed every Man's mind to be known
secretly, whether they would be content with such an Order as he had conceived
for answer to be made by the University to your Grace's Letters; whereunto that
night they would in no wise agree. And forasmuch as it was then dark night, the
Vice Chancellor continued the Congregation till the next day at one of the
Clock; at which time the Vice Chancellor proponed a Grace after the form herein
enclosed; and it was first denied: When it was asked again, it was even on both
Parties, to be denied or granted; and at the last, by labor of Friends to
cause some to depart the House which were against it, it was obtained in such
form as the Schedule herein enclosed purporteth; wherein be two Points which we
would have left out; but considering by putting in of them, we allured many,
and that indeed they shall not hurt the Determination for your Grace's part, we
were finally content therewith. The one Point is that where it was first, that
quicquid major pars of them that be named decreverit, should be taken for the
Determination of the University. Now it referred ad du^s parts, wherein we
suppose shall be no difficulty. The other Point is, That your Grace's Question
shall be openly disputed, which we think to be very honorable; and it is
agreed amongst us, That in that Disputation, shall answer, the Abbot of St.
Benets, Dr. Reppes, and I Mr. Fox, to all such as will object any thing or
reason against the conclusion to be sustained for your Grace's part. And
because Mr. Doctor Clyss has said, That he has somewhat to say concerning the
Canon Law; I your Secretary shall be adjoined unto them for answer to be made
therein. In the Schedule which we send unto your Grace herewith, containing the
names of those who shall determine your Grace's Question, all marked with the
Letter A. be already of your Grace's Opinion; by which we trust, and with other
good means, to induce and obtain a great part of the rest. Thus we beseech
Almighty God to preserve your most Noble and Royal Estate.

From Cambridg the day of February. Your Highness's most humble Subjects and
Servants, Stephen Gardener, Edward Fox.


The Grace purposed and obtained, Feb. 1530.
Placet vobis ut A. Vicecancellarius. Doctores. A. Salcot. The Abbot of St.
Benets. Watson. A. Repps. Tomson. Venetus, de isto been speratur. A. Edmunds.
Downs. A. Crome. A. Wygan. A. Boston.
Magistri in Theologia. Middelton. A. Heynes. Mylsent. de isto been speratur.
A. Shaxton. A. Latimer. A. Simon. Longford. De isto been speratur. Thyxtel.
Nicols. Hutton. A. Skip. A. Goodrich. A. Heth. Hadway, de isto been speratur.
Dey. Bayne. A.A. Duo Procuratores.



HAbeant plenam facultatem and Authoritatem, nomine totius Universitatis,
respondendi Literis Regiae Majestatis in hac Congregatione lectis, ac nomine
totius Universitatis definiendi and determinandi quaestionem in dictis literis
propositam: Ita quod quicquid duae parts eorum praesentium inter se
decreverint, respondendi dictis literis, and definierint ac determinaverint
super quaestione proposita, in iisdem habeatur, and reputetur pro Responsione,
Definitione and determinatione totius Universitatis, and quod liceat
Vicecancellario, Procuratoribus and Scrutatoribus, literis super dictarum
duarum partium definitione and determinatione concipienda sigillum commune
Universitatis apponere; sic quod disputetur Quaestio public and antea legatur
coram Universitate absque ulteriori gratia desuper petenda aut obtinenda.

Your Highness may perceive by the Notes, that we be already sure of as many as
be requisite, wanting only three; and we have good hope of four; of which four
if we get two, and obtain of another to be absent, it is sufficient for our
purpose.

July 1. 1530. XXXIII. A Letter from Crook out of Venice, concerning the
Opinions of Divines about the Divorce. An Original.
Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 13.
PLease it your Highness to be advertised, That as this day I obtained the
Common Seal of the University of Padua, in substantial and good form; for all
the Doctors were assembled upon Sunday, and the Case was amongst them solemnly
and earnestly disputed all Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, and this
present Friday in the morning again; and thereupon they concluded with your
Highness, and desired a Notary to set his Sign and Hand unto an Instrument, by
Leonicus and Simonetus devised, in corroboration of your Cause, and thereby to
testify that this Instrument was their Deed, Device, Act, and Conclusion; and
for the more credence to be given to the said Instrument, they caused the
Chancellor of the Potestate here to set his Hand and Seal for the approbation
of the Authority of the Notary: A Copy of all the which things I send unto your
Highness by this Bearer, in most humble wise beseeching the same to be
advertised, that the General of the Blackfriars has given a Commandment, That
no Black-Frier dispute the Pope's Power: Notwithstanding Prior Thomas Omnibonus
procures daily new Subscriptions, and will do till the Brief of contrary
Commandment shall come unto his hands.

My fidelity binds me to advertise your Highness, that all Lutherans be
utterly against your Highness in this Cause, and have let as much with their
wretched Power, Malice, without Reason or Authority, as they could and might,
as well here, as in Padua and Ferrara, where be no small Companies of them. I
doubt not but all Christian Universities, if they be well handled, will
earnestly conclude with your Highness. And to obtain their assent, as well
through Italy, France, Almagne, Austrich, Hungary, and Scotland, I think it
mavelous expedient, for the preferment of this your most honorable and high
Cause; As from the Seigniory and Dominion of Venice toward Rome, and beyond
Rome, I think there can be no more done than is done already, albeit, gracious
Lord, if that I had in time been sufficiently furnished with Money. Albeit I
have beside this Seal procured unto your Highness an hundred and ten
Subscriptions, yet it had been nothing in comparison of that that I might
easily and would have done; and at this hour I assure your Highness, that I
have neither Provision nor Money, and have borrowed an hundred Crowns, the which
also are spent about the getting of this Seal; of the which my need, and diverse
impediments in your Highness's Cause here, I have advertised your Highness by
many and sundry Letters, and with the same sent diverse Books and Writings, part
to Hierom Molins a Venetian, and factor to Mappheus Bernardus, by the hands of
your Subject Edmund Herwell, part directed to Mr. Tuke, whereof I am nothing
ascertained whether they be exhibited unto your Highness or not, to no little
discomfort unto me; notwithstanding I have reserved a Copy of all things,
Letters, and other, and herein enclosed a Bill, specifying by whom and to whom
I directed my said Letters, in most humble wise, beseeching your most Royal
Clemency, to ponder my true, sure, and good endeavors, and not to suffer me to
be destitute of Money, to my undoing, and utter loss of your most high Causes
here; for of my self I have nothing whereby to help my self. And thus the most
Blessed Trinity keep and preserve your Highness in his most Royal Estate.

At Venice, the first day of July at night, Anno -- 30. R. Crook.

XXXIV. The Judgment of the Universities concerning the King's Marriage; taken
from the Printed Edition of them. London, 1532.
Censura Facultatis Sacrae Theologiae a^mae Universitatis Parisiensis.
DEcanus and Facultas Sacrae Theologiae almae Universitatis Parisiensis,
omnibus, ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, salutem in eo, qui est vera
Salus. Cum nuper suborta magnae difficultatis controversia super invaliditate
Matrimonii, inter Serenissimum Henricum Octavum Angliae Regem, Fidei
Defensorem, and Dominum Hiberniae, ac Illustrissimam Dominam Catharinam Angliae
Reginam, clarae memoriae Ferdinandi Regis Catholici Filiam contracti, and
carnali copula consummati, illa etiam nobis Quaestio in justitia and veritate
discutienda and examinanda proposita fuerat, videlicet, Anducere relictam
fratris mortui sine liberis sic esset jure divino and naturali prohibitum, ut
interveniente summi Pontificis Dispensatione, non posset fieri licitum, ut quis
Christianus relictam fratris ducat, and habeat in Uxorem; Nos Decanus and
Facultas antedicta, cogitantes, quam esset pium and sanctum, nec-non debito
charitatis, and nostrae Professioni consentaneum, ut his, qui in lege Domini
secura, tranquillaque conscientia vitam hanc ducere, and transigere cupiant,
viam justitiae ostenderemus, noluimus tam justis and piis votis deesse. Hinc
more solito, apud aedem S. Mathurini per juramentum convenientes, and solemni
Missa cum Invocatione Spiritus Sancti ob hoc celebrata, nec-non praestito
juramento de deliberando super praefata quaestione, secundum Deum and
Conscientiam; Post varias and multiplices Sessiones, tam apud aedem S.
Mathurini, quam apud Collegium Sorbonae, ab octava Junii usque ad secundum
Julii habitas, and continuatas, perscrutatis prius excussisque quam
diligentissime, ac ea qua decuit, reverentia and Religione, Sacrae Scripturae
Libris eorumque probatissimis interpretibus, nec-non Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae
generalibus ac Synodalibus Concilii Decretis and Constitutionibus longo usu
receptis and approbatis: Nos praedicti Decanus and Facultas de praedicta
Quaestione disserentes, and ad eam respondentes, sequentes unanime judicium and
consensum Majoris partis totius Facultatis, Asseruimus and Determinavimus,
prout and in his Scriptis per praesentes Asserimus and Determinamus, quod
praedictae nuptiae cum Relictis fratrum decedentium sine liberis, sic naturali
jure pariter and divino sunt prohibitae, ut super talibus Matrimoniis
contractis, sive contrahendis, Summus Pontifex dispensare non possit. In cujus
nostrae Assertionis and Determinationis fidem and testimonium, sigillum nostrae
Facultatis cum signo nostri Notarii, seu Bedelli praesentibus apponi curavimus.
Datum in generali nostra Congregatione per juramentum celebrata apud S.
Mathurinum.

Anno Dom. Millesimo quingentesimo trigesimo, Mensis vero Julii die secundo.
Censura Facultatis Decretorum almae Universitatis Parisiensis.
IN Nomine Domini Amen. Cum proposita fuisset coram nobis Decano and Collegio
Consultissimae Facultatis Decretorum Parisiensis Universitatis Quaestio; An
Papa possit Dispensare, quod Frater possit in Uxorem ducere, sive accipere
relictam Fratris sui, Matrimonio consummato per Fratrem praemortuum? Nos
Decanus and Collegium praefatae Facultatis, post multas Disputationes and
Argumenta hinc inde super hac materia facta ac habita, cum magna and longa
librorum, tam divini, quam Pontificii and Civilis, jurium revolutione
consulimus, and dicimus, Papam non posse in ^acto proposito dispensare. In
cujus rei testimonium, has praesentes Sigillo nostrae Facultatis, and signo
nostri scribae primi Bedelli muniri fecimus.

Datum in Congregatione nostra apud Sanctum Joannem Lateranensem, Parisiis die
vicesima tertia mensis Maii, Anno Dom. millesimo quingentesimo trigesimo.
Censura almae Universitatis Aurelianensis.
CUm ab hinc aliquod tempus nobis Collegio Doctorum Regentium almae
Universitatis Aurelianensis propositae fuerint, quae sequntur Quaestiones,
videlicet; Si jure divino liceat fratri Relictam fratris (quam Fratriam vocant)
accipere Uxorem? Item and si hoc sit eo jure vetitum, utrum divinae Legis
prohibitio Pontificali Dispensatione remitti possit? Nos praedictum Collegium,
post multas ad praedictorum dubiorum Disputationem (de more nostro) factas
Sessiones and Congregationes, postque Juris tum Divini tum Canonici locos (quod
facere potuimus) examinatos, and omnibus mature atque exact pensatis and
consideratis: Desinivimus, praedictas nuptias citra divinae legis injuriam
attentari non posse, etiamsi summi Pontisicis accedat indulgentia, vel
permissus. In cujus rei testimonium praesens publicum Instrumentum a Scriba
praefatae almae Universitatis subsignari fecimus, ejusdemque Sigillo communiri.
Actum in Sacello Beatae Mariae Boninuncii Aurelianensis.

Anno Dom. Millesimo quingentesimo vigesimo nono, die quinto Mensis Aprilis.
Censura Facultatum Iuris Pontificii and legum Almae Universitatis Andegavensis.
CUm certo ab hinc tempore nobis Rectori and Doctoribus Regentibus in
Pontificia and legum disciplina almae Universitatis Andegavensis sequentes
Quaestiones propositae fuerint, scilicet, Utrum Jure Divino pariter and
naturali illicitum sit homini Christiano Relictam fratris sui, etiam absque
liberis, sed Matrimonio jam consummato defuncti, ducere Uxorem? Et an Summo
Pontifici liceat super hujusmodi nuptiis dispensare? Nos praefati Rector and
Doctores, post plures ad Disputationem hujusmodi quaestionum, and veritatem
comperiendam factas, ex more, Congregationes and Sessiones, postque varios
Juris tam Divini, quam humani locos, qui ad eam rem pertinere videbantur,
discussos, multas quoque rations in utramque partem adductas and examinatas,
omnibus fideliter consideratis, and matura deliberatione praehabita, Definimus
neque Divino neque Naturali Jure permitti homini Christiano, etiam cum Sedis
Apostolicae Authoritate seu Dispensatione super hoc adhibita, Relictam fratris,
qui etiam sine liberis post consummatum Matrimonium decesserit, Uxorem accipere
vel habere. In quorum omnium supradictorum fidem, praesens publicum
Instrumentum a Scriba seu Notario praefatae Almae Universitatis subsignari
jussimus, ejusdemque Universitatis Magno Sigillo muniri. Actum in aede sacra
Divi Petri Andegavensi, in Collegio nostro.

Anno Domini Millesimo quingentesimo tricesimo, die septimo Maii.
Censura almae Universitatis Bituricensis.
NOs cum Decano Theologiae, Facultas in Universitate Bituricensi (ut Doctoris
Gentium Pauli exemplo plerisque locis auspicemur scriptum nostrum a precatione)
omnibus dilectis Dei in quibus vocati estis, Lectores Charissimi, quique ad
quos scribimus, Gratia vobis and pax a Deo Patre and Domino nostro Jesu
Christo. Dum complerentur dies inter Octavas Pentecostes, and essemus omnes
pariter in eodem loco, corpore and animo congregati, sedentesque in domo dicti
Decani; facta est nobis rursus Quaestio eadem, quae saepius antea, non quidem
parva, hunc in modum: An rem faciat illicitam necne, frater accipiens Uxorem a
praemortuo fratre relictam, consummato etiam Matrimonio? Tandem rei ipsius
veritate disquisita and perspecta, multo singulorum labor, and Sacrorum
iterata atque iterata revolutione codicum, unusquisque nostrum non fascinatus,
quo minus veritati obediret, caepit, prout Spiritus Sanctus dedit, suum hoc
unum arbitrium eloqui, absque personarum acceptione, in veritate comperi,
personas memoratas in Capite Levitici octavo supra decimum prohibitas esse jure
ipso naturali, authoritate humana minime relaxabili, and vetitas, ne invicem
Matrimonium contrahant, quo fit fraternae turpitudinis abominabilis Revelatio.
Et hoc nobis signum nostri Bedelli Notarii publici, cum Sigillo dictae supra
nostrae Facultatis praesentibus appenso. Die decimo Junii, Anno vero a Christi
Nativitate, Millesimo quingentesimo tricesimo. Ut autem nostrae scriptionis pes
and caput uni reddantur formae, quemadmodum sumus auspicati a precatione, ita
claudamus illius quo utimur exemplo. Gratia Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
charitas Dei, and communicatio Sancti Spiritus sit cum omnibus vobis. Amen.

Censura Almae Universitatis Tholosanae.
TRactabatur in nostra Tholosana Academia perquam difficilis Quaestio, Liceatne
fratri eam, quae jam olim defuncto fratri Uxor fuerat (nullis tamen relictis
liberis) in Matrimonio sibi conjungere? Accedebat and alius scrupulus, qui nos
potissimum torquebat, Si Romanus Pontifex, cui est commissa gregis Christiani
cura, id sua, quam vocamus, Dispensatione permittat, tunc saltem liceat? Ad
utramque Quaestionem agitandam Doctores omnes Regentes, qui tunc Tholosae
aderant, coegit Rector in Concilium, neque id semel tantum sed etiam iterum:
Quippe existimavit praecipitari non oportere Consilia, indigereque nos tempore,
ut aliquid maturius agamus. Demum, cum in unum locum convenissent omnes, tum
Sacrarum Literarum disertissimi Interpretes, tum utriusque Censurae
Consultissimi, denique qui quavis in re and judicio and oratione viri
foelicibus ingeniis non mediocriter exercitati essent, ac sese Sacrosanctis
Conciliis parere velle, Sanctorumque Patrum haud quaquam piis animis violanda
Decreta imitari jurassent, and unusquisque suam sententiam protulisset, atque
in utramque partem diffuse decertatum esset; tandem in eam Sententiam sic
frequentius itum est, ut uno omnium ore Alma nostra Universitas animis
sincerissimis nulloque fermento vitiatis censuerit, Jure Divino pariter and
Naturali Uxorem relictam fratris sui nemini licere accipere. At postquam id
lege eadem non licet, responsum est, non posse Pontificem aliquem ea lege
solvere. Nec huic sententiae refragari potest, quod cogeretur olim frater
Uxorem demortui fratris accipere. Nam hoc sigura erat, atque umbra futurorum,
quae omnia adveniente luce and veritate Evangelii evanuerunt. Haec quoniam ita
se habent, in hanc formam redegimus, and per Notarium, qui nobis est a
Secretis, signari, sigillique autentici ejusdem nostrae Almae Universitatis
jussimus Appensione Communiri.

Tholosae. Kal. October. Ann. a Christo nato M.D.XXX.
Censura Facultatis Sacrae Theologiae Universitatis Bononiensis.
CUm Deus Optimus Maximus veterem Legem ad morum vitaeque informationem ac
institutionem ore suo tradiderit, idemque humanitate sumpta, mortalium
Redemptor Deus novum condiderit Testamentum, sed ad dubia, quae in multis
emergebant, tollenda declarandaque contulerit, quae ad hominum perfectionem
elucidata nonnihil conferunt; nostras parts semper fore duximus hujusmodi
sanctissima Patris a^terni documenta sectari, and in rebus arduis ac
dubitabilibus, superno illustratos lumine, nostram far sententiam, ubi causa
mature consulta, multisque hinc inde rationibus, scriptisque Patrum dilucidata
fuerit, nihil quod possumus, in aliquo temere ferentes. Cum itaque nos,
praestantes quidam and clarissimi viri, obnixe rogarint, ut subsequentem casum
maxima diligentia pers^rutaremur, nostrumque subinde in eum judicium ferremus
aequissime, soli veritati innitentes, in unum omnes Almae Universitatis hujus
Doctores Theologi convenimus, casu prius per unumquemque nostrum sigillatim
domibus propriis examinato, summaque solertia per dies plurimos contracto:
Illud una mox vidimus, examinavimus, contulimus, ad amussimque singula quaeque
pertractantes ponderavimus, rations quascunque contrarias, quas fieri posse
censuimus, in medium afferentes atque solventes, etiam ipsius Reverendissimi D.
D. Card. Cajetani, necnon Deuteronomicam Dispensationem de fratris suscitando
semine, and reliquas tandem omnes sententias oppositas, quae ad id negotii
facere viderentur. Quaesitum est igitur a nobis, An ex sola Ecclesiae
institutione vel etiam Jure Divino prohibitum fuerit, ne quis Relictam a a
fratre sine liberis in Uxorem ducere valeat? Quod si utraque lege ne fieri
possit, cautum est; An quenquam possit Beatissimus Pontifex super ejusmodi
contrahendo Matrimonio dispensare? Qua diligentissime (ut diximus) ac
exactissime seorsim palamque examinata, ac pro viribus nostris, optime discussa
Quaestione, Censemus, Judicamus, dicimus, constantissime Testamur and indubie
affirmamus, huj^smodi Matrimonium, tales nuptias, tale conjugium horrendum
fore, execrabile, detestandum, viroque Christiano, immo etiam cuilibet insideli
prorsus abominabile, esseque a Jure naturae divino and humano diris paenis
prohibitum. Nec posse Sanctissimum Papam (qui tamen fere omnia potest) cui
collatae sunt a Christo claves Regni Coelorum: Non inquam posse aliqua ex causa
super hujusmodi contrahendo Matrimonio, quenquam dispensare. Ad hujus
Conclusionis veritatem tutandam, omnes in omnia loca and tempora parati sumus.
In quorum fidem has scripsimus, almaeque nostrae Universitatis ac Sacri
Venerabilium Theologorum Collegii Sigillo munivimus, solita nostra generali
subscriptione Signantes.

Bononiae in Ecclesia Cathedrali, decima Junii, Anno Dom. M.D.XXX. sub Divi
Clementis 7. Pontificatu.
Censura Facultatis Sacrae Theologiae Almae Universitatis Pataviensis.
TEstantur, qui Catholicam fidem astruunt, Deum Optimum Maximum legis veteris
praecepta filiis Israel ad exemplar vitae ac morum nostrorum institutionem ore
proprio tradidisse, eundemque trabea humanitatis indutum, Redemptorem omnium
factum, Novum Testamentum condidisse, and nedum propter hoc, sed ad dubia
quaecunque emergentia removenda, dilucidandaque nobis misericorditer
condonasle, quae ad nostri perfectionem enucleata fructus uberes conferunt and
salutares. Nostrum semper fuit eritque per saecula (uti Christicolas decet)
hujusmodi celebratissima Summi Pontificis instituta sectari, and in quibusque
dubitationibus, ac arduis Quaestionibus supernaturali lumine freti, nostrum
proferre Judicium, ubi res ipsa optime considerata, multisque hinc inde
demonstrationibus, atque Patrum Authoritatibus mature declarata fuerit, temere
quoad possumus nihil omnino judicantes. Cum igitur nos, quidam oratores
clarissimi, suppliciter exorarint, ut subsequentem casum diligentissime
perscrutari dignaremur, atque nostram ferremus exinde sententiam, soli veritati
simpliciter attendentes: Qua ex re omnes hujus Almae Universitatis Doctores
Theologi in simul convenimus, re ipsa prius per nostrum quemlibet
particulariter propriis domibus examinata, summaque cum solertia enucleata, mox
in unum redacti cuncta consideravimus, examinavimus, omniaque sigillatim
ponderavimus, Argumenta quaecunque contraria, quae fieri quoquomodo posse
putavimus, adducentes, atque integerrime dissolventes, necnon Deuteronomicam
Dispensationem de Fratris suscitando semine, and reliquas omnes rations atque
sententias oppositas, quae ad id facere videbantur: Quaestio igitur talis fuit
exposita, An ex sola Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae institutione, vel etiam de Jure
Divino prohibitum fuerit, ne quis Relictam fratris absque liberis in Uxorem
ducere valeat? Quod si utrobique fieri nequeat cautum est, An Beatissimus
Pontifex super hujusmodi contrahendo Matrimonio quenquam dispensare legitime
possit? Quo exactissime (ut dictum est) seorsim publiceque discusso, ac pro
viribus dilucidato quaesito, Dicimus, Judicamus, Decernimus, Attestamur, atque
veridice Affirmamus, Matrimonium hujusmodi, tale conjugium and tales nuptias
nullas esse, immo detestabiles, atque execrandas Christiano cuilibet esse,
prophanas, and, ut scelus abominandas, crudelissimis paenis, jure naturae,
divino and humano* clarissime esse prohibitas. Nec Beatissimum Pontificem, cui
claves Regni coelestis a Christo Dei Filio sunt collatae, ulla ex causa posse
super tali Matrimonio contrahendo quenquam juridice dispensare. Cum illa, quae
sunt a Jure Divino prohibita, non subsint ejus potestati, nec in illa gerit
vicem Dei, sed solum super ea, quae sunt commissa jurisdictioni hominum. Ad
cujus Sententiae ac Conclusionis veritatem tutandam and ejusdem certissimam
defensionem, Nos omnes unanimes semper and ubique parati sumus. In quorum fidem
has nostras fecimus, Almae Universitatis nostrae, ac Sacri Reverendorum
Theologorum Collegii Sigillo solito communivimus.

Datum Paduae in Ecclesia Hermitarum S. Augustini, die primo Julii, M.D.XXX.
XXXV. The Judgment of the Lutheran Divines about the King's Marriage, ex MSS.
R. Smith, London.
EX hac Collatione in qua audivimus Argumenta de Controversia Divortii
Serenissimi and Illustrissimi Regis Angliae, Franciae, etc. proposita and
diligenter agitata a Reverendo D. D. Edwardo Hereford. Episcopo, D. Nicolao
Archdiacono and D. D. Barnes, intelleximus Serenissimum Regem maximis and
gravissimis Causis adductum, superatum and conclusum esse, ut in hoc negotio
Matrimonii sui faceret quod fecit: Nam hoc manifestum est and negare nemo
potest, quod Lex Levit. tradita Lev. 18. v. 20. prohibet ducere fratris Uxorem,
etc. sed Divina, naturalis, and moralis Lex est intelligenda tam de vivi quam
de mortui fratris Uxore, and quod contra hanc legem nulla contraria lex fieri
aut constitui possit, sicut and tota Ecclesia semper hanc Legem retinuit, and
judicavit hujusmodi nuptias incestas esse, sicut testantur Synodorum Decreta
and Sanctissimorum Patrum Clarissimae Sententiae, and has nuptias prohibent and
vocant incestas etiam jura Civilia. Proinde and nos sentimus, and hanc Legem de
non ducenda Uxore fratris in omnibus Ecclesiis servandam esse veluti divinam,
naturalem, and moralem Legem; Nec in nostris Ecclesiis vellemus dispensare aut
permittere, praesertim ante factum, ut ejusmodi nuptiae contraherentur, and
hanc Doctrinam possumus and volumus Deo volente facile defendere. Caeterum
quantum ad Divortium pertinet, nondum sumus plene persuasi ut sententiam
nostram far possimus, An post Contractum Matrimonium in hoc casu Serenissimi
Regis debuerit fieri Divortium. Rogamus igitur Seren. Regem ut aequo animo
ferat, differri nostram Sententiam in hac re donec erimus certiores.

XXXVI. An Abstract of the Grounds of the Divorce. Written in the beginning,
Thomas Cantuarien, with his own hand.
Articuli ex quibus plane admodum demonstratur Divortium inter Henr. 8. Angliae
Regem Invictiss. and Serenissimam Catharinam necessario esse faciendum.
1. AFfinitas quae Divino and Naturali Jure impedit ne Matrimonium contrahatur,
and contractum dirimit, Cotton Libr. Vesp. B. 5.
solo nuptiali foedere inducitur.

2. Substantia Matrimonii, verum perfectumque conjugium, sola conjugali
pactione, and non carnali copula efficitur.

3. Vir and Uxor solo foedere conjugali, Deo inprimis operante, una men's and
una caro fiunt.

4. Carnalis Copula affinitatem solo Jure Ecclesiastico repertam inducit.

5. Affinitas sola Carnis concubitu orta Sanctione humana solum impedit, ne
Matrimonium contrahatur, and contractum dissolvit.

6. Carnalis Copula Matrimonium necessario reddit consummatum.

7. Potest Matrimonium Carnali Copula consummari, etiam Uxoris Virginitate
irrecuperabili non amissa.

8. Serenissimam Catharinam ab Illustrissimo Principe Arthuro relictam Virginem
non fuisse affirmamus.

9. Sereniss. Catharinam ex Judiciis quam plurimis attestantibus, and violentam
praesumptionem inducentibus, ab eodem Illustrissimo Principe Arthuro corruptam,
atque Matrimonium inter eos consummatum fuisse non dubitamus.

10. Serenissima Catharina, praesumptione violenta hujusmodi constante,
Virginitatem suam Juramento praesertim publico probare nequit.

11. Judex eandem Serenissimam Catharinam, super ea causa jurare volentem, ad
juramentum jure quidem admittere non potest.

12. Henrici octavi Angliae Regis Invictissimi and Serenissimae Catharinae
praetensum Matrimonium, lege Divina and naturali prohibente, nullum omnino
fuisse neque esse posse Censemus.

XXXVII. A Bull sent to the Archbishop of Canterbury, against the Statutes of
Provisors. Ex M S. D. Petyt.

MArtinus Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, venerabili Fratri Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Si quam districto Dei
Judicio de commissis tibi ovibus rationem redditurus es, aliquando cogitares,
si meminisses and tu quae pastoralis officii cura esse debet, quantumque
Ecclesiae Romanae, a qua dignitatem and auctoritatem vendicas, jus atque
honorem tueri obligatus es, in considerationem duceres; profecto non usque adeo
dormitares neque negligeres: Surrexisses jamdudum, and post oves jam long
aberrantes inclamares, ac pro viribus resisteres iis, qui jura ac privilegia a
summo Ecclesiarum capite omnium Christo, Ecclesiae Romanae tradita, sacrilego
vel ausu violant atque contemnunt. Numquid ideo Pontificalis Dignitas tibi
commissa est ut hominibus praesis, opes cumules, and quae tua sunt non quae
Jesu Christi quaerere debeas? Si id existimas vehementer erras, and a Christi
intention long abes, qui cum Beato Petro oves suas committeret, nil ei aliud
nisi ut illas pasceret indixit, priusque non semel, sed bis ac tertio, an ab eo
diligeretur expostulans. Estne haec in Christum dilectio quam habes? Estne hoc
amare ac pascere oves? Itane debitum quo Ecclesiae Romanae astringeris, recte
exsolvis? En ante oculos tuos ab ovili errantes in praecipitium labuntur oves,
nec illas revocas neque reducis. In conspectu tuo herbas pergunt pestiferas
pascere, nec illas prohibes, immo (quod abominabile est) tuis quasi manibus
hujusmodi praebes mortiferum cibum. Te vidente, lupus illas dispergit, and
taces tanquam canis mutus non valens latrare. Aspicis simul and Christi and
Ecclesiae and sedis Apostolicae mandata, auctoritatem, reverentiamque
contemptui haberi, nec semel unum murmuras verbum, clauculum saltem, si nolles
palam. An ignoras ante aeterni tribunal judicis hujusmodi reatus and culpae
usque ad minimum quadrantem redditurum te rationem? number credis, si qua tuo
neglectu perierit ovium (pereunt autem multae) de tuis manibus sanguis earum
exigetur? Quid per os Ezechielis Dominus comminatur, memorare and extimesce.
Ipse, inquit, Speculatorem Domini posuit te Deus, si videris gladium venientem,
and non insonueris buccina, and aliquis perierit, sanguinem ejus de manibus
tuis requiram; haec dicit Dominus. Qualis autem and qualis iniquitatis and
abominationis gladius in Angliae Regnum, atque oves tuas descenderit, tuo
judicio (si ratione uteris) relinquimus. Perlege illud Statutum Regium, si
tamen Statutum, si tamen Regium dici fas est. Nam quomodo Statutum, quod
Statuta Dei and Ecclesiae destruit? Quomodo Regium? quod Instituta peremit?
contra illud quod scriptum est, Honor Regis Judicium diligit. Et judica,
venerabilis Frater and Christian Episcope, ac Catholice Praesul, si justum, si
aequum, si a Populo Christiano servari est. Imprimis per illud execrabile
Statutum ita Rex Angliae de Ecclesia cum Provisionibus and Administrationibus
disponit, quasi Vicarium suum Christus eum instituisset. Legem condit super
Ecclesias, beneficia, Clericos and Ecclesiasticum statum, ad se suamque
laicalem Curiam nonnullas causas Spirituales and Ecclesiasticas jubet
introduci; and ut uno verbo concludamus, ita de Clericis statuit, de Ecclesiis
and Ecclesiastico Statu, quasi Ecclesiae claves in manibus haberet, and non
Petro, sed sibi hujusmodi cura commissa foret. Praeter hanc nefandam
Dispositionem, vipereas quasdam contra Clericos adjecit poenas, quae ne quidem
contra Judaeos vel Saracenos, per ullum de Statutis suis, promulgatae
inveniuntur. Possunt ad Angliae Regnum cujuslibet generis homines libere
proficisci; soli acceptantes beneficia Auctoritate Summi Pontificis, Vicarii
Jesu Christi, jubentur exulari, capi, incarcerari, omnibusque bonis exui,
executoresque literarum Apostolicarum, Procuratores, Notarii, ac quicunque alii
Censuram seu Processum ab Apostolica sede in Regnum mittentes aut deferentes,
ultimo supplicio deputantur, projectique extra protectionem Regis exponuntur ab
omnibus captivandi. Vide si audita est unquam similis Statuti iniquitas:
Consideret prudentia tua, si Regem aut Regnum hujusmodi Statuta decent: Cogita
si te talia inspicientem silere oporteat, and non magis clamare, contradi^^re,
and pro viribus resistere. Estne ista silialis Reverentia? Estne ista
Christiana devotio quam Regnum Angliae suae Matri Ecclesiae ac Se^i Apostolicae
exhibet? Potestne Catholicum Regnum dici, ubi hujusmodi statuuntur profanae
leges and observantur, ubi prohibetur adiri Vicarius Christi, ubi oves suas
Successor Apostoli Petri pascere juxta mandatum Domini non permittitur?
Christus dixit Petro suisque Successoribus, Pasce oves meas; Statutum autem
Regni pascere ipsas non sinit, sed vult ut Rex ipse pascat, devolvendo ad eum
in certis casibus Apostolicam Auctoritatem. Christus aedificavit supra Petrum
Ecclesiam; sed Regni Statutum, id prohibet: Nam non patitur Petri Cathedram de
Ecclesia prout judicaverit, expedire, ordinare vel dissponere. Christus voluit
quod quicquid summus Pontifex in terris solverit aut ligaverit, solutum
ligatumve esset in coelis; Statutum huic divinae voluntati non assentit: Nam si
quos Sacerdotes ad ligandum solvendumque animas Christi Vicarius in Regnum
contra Statuti tenorem destinaret, non modo ipsos non admittit Statutum sed
exulare jubet, bonis privari, aliisque poenis affligi, and censuram seu
Processum Apostolicum in Regnum deferens, tanquam Sacrilegus capite punitur.
Quid ad hoc tua Discretio respondebit? Estne hoc Catholicum Statutum? Potestne
sine Christi in^uria, sine Evangelii transgressione, sine animae interitu
tolerari aut observari? Cur igitur non clamas, and quasi tuba exaltas vocem
tuam, annuncians populo tuo peccata sua, Dom^i Israel scelera eorum, ne sanguis
eorum de manibus tuis requiratur. Quod and si omnes quibus populorum cura
commis^a est, facere teneantur, quanto magis id tibi erit necessarium exequi,
cui populos and populorum ministros, oves and ovium pastores, tuae solicitudini
Romana deputavit Ecclesia, a qua and Primatum and Sedis Apostolicae legationem
super Anglicanas Ecclesias suscepisti, and ipsius gloriosissimi Martyris Beati
Thomae olim Cantuariae Archepiscopi Successor effectus es, qui adversus similia
decertans Statuta, holocaustum se Deo offerens pro liberate Ecclesiastica
occubuit. Tu certe ob haec, omnium primus qui vexillo assumpto in aciem prodire
deberes, and fratres Co-episcopos tuos tuo exemplo in certamine sistere, primus
omnium terga vertis, and aliquos qui forte resistendi impetum caperent, tua
sive pusillanimitate, sive dissimulatione, sive (ut omnes attestantur) evidenti
praevaricatione a bono proposito dejicis. Itaque si de te queritur Ecclesia, si
in te omnis culpa transfertur, non mirari sed dolere, immo potius teipsum
corrigere debes, and debitum quo ovium jure astrictus es audacter exolvere: pro
qua re efficienda, si velis quam potes operam adhibere, non magnum certamen
subeundum est. Persuade tuo pro officio and Auctoritate tua, secularibus, and
eos veritatem instrue. Ostende eis peccatum quo observantes praedictum Statutum
illaq^^antur: Et erunt (ut omnes asserunt) prava in directa, and aspera in vias
planas. Ne ergo, si tacueramus and nos, tuam aliorumque desidiam dissimulantes
similis apud omnipotentem Deum culpae reos efficiat, neve ovium nostrarum
sanguis (si neglexerimus) de manibus nostris exigatur, tuam fraternitatem qua
pos^umus instantia, toto cord, totoque affectu hortamur, monemus, requirimus,
and in virtute Sanctae obedientiae, and sub Excommunicationis poena cui (si
neglexeris) ipso facto te subjicimus, districte praecipiendo mandamus, quatenus
quamprimum ad locum ubi Consiliarii Charissimi in Christo Filii nostri Henri^i
Angliae Regis Illustris convenient, personaliter accedas, eosque tam
Ecclesiasticos quam Seculares pro sapientia tua, quam tibi Dominus
inspiraverit, rationibus ac monitionibus reddas instructos, ut praedictum
Statutum in proximo Parliamento tollant penitus and aboleant: Cum enim Divinae
and Humanae rationi, veteris ac Novi Testamenti, Conciliorum, Sanctorum Patrum,
Summorum Pontificum Decretis, ipsius denique Universalis Ecclesiae observantiae
evidentissime contradicat, nec sine interitu salutis aeternae quovis modo
servari possit. Illudque inter alia dicere non omittas, qualiter Ecclesiasticae
libertatis violatores, facientesque Statuta aut consuetudines contra libertatem
servari, Officiales, Rectores and Consiliarii, locorum ubi hujusmodi Statuta
vel consuetudines editae fuerunt vel servatae, Ac etiam qui secundum praedicta
judicaverint, ipso jure Excommunicationem incurrunt, quae quantum sit Christi
fidelibus metuenda, ipsis plene poteris declarare. Idem sub poena eadem te
facere volumus cum Parliamentum inchoabitur, tam erga praedictos Consiliarios
quam Communitates, and alios qui vocem in ipso habuerint Parliamento. Insuper
ut pluribus viis honori Dei and Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae, and animarum saluti
provideatur, sub simili poena mandes ac praecipias omnibus tam Rectoribus
Ecclesiarum, quam aliis officium praedicationis obtinentibus, Secularibus and
Religiosis, ut frequenter in sermonibus suis populos de praedicta materia
instruere non omittant. Volumus autem ut quicquid super praedictis feceris per
tuas literas (quibus saltem duae graves personae, quae ipsis requisitionibus
per te faciendis interfuerint, se subscribant) nos certiores efficias.

Dat. Romans apud Sanctos Apostolos quinto die Decembris, Pontificatus nostri
Anno decimo.
XXXVIII. A Letter to King Henry the Sixth for Repealing that Statute.
MArtinus Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, Charissimo in Christo Filio Henrico
Regi Angliae Illustri, salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Quum post multos
nuncios ad tuam Serenitatem pro abolitione illius detestabilis Statuti contra
libertatem Ecclesiasticam editi olim transmissos, postremo dilectum filium
Magistrum Julianum causarum curiae Camerae Apostolicae Auditorem, pro eadem
causa destinassemus; per ipsum tua Celsitudo tunc nobis respondit, quod
quamprimum commode possit, Parliamentum, sine quo idem nequit aboleri Statutum,
convocaret, and in eo quod sibi possibile foret pro nostrae requisitionis
implemento faceret, Protestans quod Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae sedisque
Apostolicae Juribus ac Privilegiis nullo modo detrahere aut derogare
intendebat: Nos ob hoc, sicut deinde aliis literis tibi significavimus, usque
ad id tempus cum patientia expectare decrevimus, sperantes quod in Verbo Regio
nobis pollicitus fueris, id tempore suo exequi non differres; itaque quicquid
ex part nostra hactenus faciendum fuit, omnem mansuetudinis and patientiae
modum experientes jam fecimus. Et licet gravibus interim per aliquos de Regno
tuo lacessiti sumus injuriis, volumus tamen (ne quid contra promissum fieri
videretur) usque ad id tempus (non sine rubore Sedis Apostolicae) expectare, ut
merito illud verbum Evangelicum jam dici possit, Quid debui huic vineae facere
and non feci? Tu vero, Fili Charissime, cum ipsius Parliamenti jam tempus
instet, quod ex tua part agendum restat, juxta promissionem tuam ac verbum
Regium implere non omittas, ad quod and Jure Divino and Humano tanquam
Christianissimus Princeps obligatus, sine cujusvis requisitione pro tua and
tuorum subditorum salute and honor facere teneris: praesertim quum talia
obtuleramus, ob quae nec tibi nec dicto Regno ex praedicti Statuti abolitione
praejudicium ullum redundare possit; providere enim iis omnibus quae causam
Statuto dedisse dicuntur, jam saepe nostro nomine oblatum est, and nunc de novo
offerimus. Jam igitur cum nulla quaevis contradicendi occasio praetendi possit,
speramus in dicto Parliamento tuam Serenitatem ita facturam, ut praedictum tam
execrabile Statutum penitus de eodem Regno tollatur. Quod si feceris, salvabis
primum tuam, tum vero multorum animas, quae ob dictum Statutum gravi crimine
illaqueatae tenentur: Providebis deinde tuo and ipsius Regni honori, quod
utique propterea non modicum est notatum: Demum nos ac sedem ipsam semper tuis
justis desideriis obligabis. Super iis autem omnibus and de nostra intention
plene per literas nostras instructo, dilecto Filio magistro Joanni de Obizis in
dicto Regno Nuncio and Collectori nostro, dabis credentiae fidem plenam.

Dat. Romans die decimo tertio Octobris, Pontificatus nostri Anno decimo.
XXXIX. A Letter to the Parliament upon the same occasion.
MArtinus Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, venerabilibus Fratribus and dilectis
Filiis, Nobilibus viris Parliamenti Regni Angliae, salutem and Apostolicam
Benedictionem. Multis nunciis ac frequentibus exhortationibus, pro debito
pastoralis officii, vos ac Regnum vestrum hactenus admonuimus, ut pro salute
animarum vestrarum, and ipsius Regni honor, quoddam detestabile Statutum
contra Divinum and Humanum Jus editum, quod sine interitu salutis aeternae
nullatenus servari potest, aboleretur. Et quoniam id sine Parliamento tolli non
posse, ex part Charissimi in Christo Filii nostri Henrici Regis Angliae
illustris, Dilecto Filio Magistro Juliano Causarum curiae Camerae Apostolicae
Auditori, tunc Nuncio nostro, responsum extitit, in quo (quam primum posset)
convocato, quod sibi possibile foret pro nostrae Requisitionis executione se
facturum, idem Rex pollicitus est, protestans Juribus ac Privilegiis Sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae and Sedis Apostolicae in nullo velle detrahere aut derogare.
Nos volentes solita erga vos mansuetudine uti, decrevimus usque ad ipsius
Parliamenti tempus expectare, sperantes quod tam Rex juxta suam Regiam
Promissionem, quam vos pro salute animarum vestrarum, Sancte ac Catholice
secundum nostram Requisitionem concludetis. Itaque cum Parliamentum (ut fertur)
jam instet, vos omnes, quorum animas nostrae curae Dominus noster Jesus
Christus commisit, hortamur, monemus, obsecramus, ut unanimes vestrarum
animarum salutem, ac conscientiarum puritatem prae caeteris rebus amantes,
praedictum abominabile Statutum (quod qui observat vel observari faciat salvari
non potest) penitus tollatur, and de Regno in perpetuum aboleatis. Quod si quis
forsitan vobis contrarium persuadere audeat, quicunque ille sit, Saecularis vel
Ecclesiastici Status, tanquam hostem animarum vestrarum and honorum, nullatenus
audite; nec eum virum Catholicum^ reputetis, qui adversus Romanae Ecclesiae
Auctoritatem, Juraque and Privilegia Sedi Apostolicae Divinitus concessa,
aliquid machinari praesumpserit, quibus ipse Rex vester Illustris nolle
ullatenus derogare public protestatus est. Nos quidem ipsi sumus ab
omnipotenti Deo Jesu Christo super vos and Universalem Ecclesiam constituti,
cujus Doctrinae ac persuasioni sine ulla contradictione omnimodam fidem vos and
quilibet Christianus habere debetis: Nos tamen, etsi indignos, oves suas
pascere Christus voluit, clavesque aperiendi ac solvendi Coelos tradidit. Et si
quis nos audit, servi Christi testimonium Christianum audit; and si quis nos
spernit, Christum spernere convincitur. Et quoniam de vobis ac singulis
Christianis in districto Dei Judicio rationem reddituri sumus, ideo vos pro
salute vestra tam saepe tamque efficaciter admonemus; and ne quisquam sub
alicujus damni temporalis praetextu vos ab hac nostra Catholica Doctrina
submoveat, ecce nos promptos paratosque offerimus, omnibus causis, propter quas
dictum Statutum conditum esse praetenditur, salubriter providere, ita ut nec
Regno nec cuiquam privatae personae praejudicium aliquod ex ipsius Statuti
abolitione possit accidere. Super his omnibus and nostra intention plene
instructo dilecto Filio Magistro Joanni de Obizis, in dicto Regno Nuntio and
Collectori nostro, dabitis Credentiae plenam fidem.

Dat. Romae apud Sanctos Apostolos tertio die Octobris, Pontificatus nostri
Anno decimo.
XL. An Instrument of the Speech the Archbishop of Canterbury made to the
House of Commons about it.
DIe Veneris, penultimo mensis Januarii, Anno Domini secundum cursum and
computationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae millesimo quadringentesimo decimo septimo,
indictione sexta, Pontificatus Sanctissimi in Christo Patris and Domini nostri
Domini Martini Divina Providentia Papae quinti Anno undecimo, Reverendissimi in
Christo Patres and Domini, Domini, Henricus Dei Gratia Cantuariensis and
Johannes Eboracensis Archiepiscopi, necnon Reverendiss. Patres W. Londinensis,
Benedictus Menevensis, Philippus Eliensis, Jochen and W. Norvicensis, Episcopi,
and cum eis venerabiles Patres and viri religiosi Westmonasterii and Radingiae
Abbates de palatio regio Westmonasteriensi de Camera, viz. Ubi tam Domini
Spirituales quam Temporales in Parliamento adtunc tento negotia Regni
tractaverint and tractare solebant, recedentes, and dimissis ibi Dominis
Temporalibus, in simul transierunt ad viros illos qui pro communitate Regni ad
Parliamentum hujusmodi venerant in loco solito, viz. in Refectorio Abbatiae
Westmonasteriensis praedictae personaliter existentes, and incontinenter eisdem
Dominis Spiritualibus cum reverentia debita, prout decuit a viris hujusmodi
communitatem Regni facientibus and repraesentantibus, receptis: Praefatus
Reverendissimus Pater Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis causam adventus sui and
con-fratrum suorum ad tunc exponere coepit in vulgari; Protestando primitus,
and protestabatur idem Dominus Cantuariensis vice sua and confratrum suorum
praedictorum, quod pro dicendo tunc ibidem non intendebat ipse Reverendissimus
Pater, aut aliquis confratrum suorum, Domino Regi Angliae aut Coronae suae vel
communitati Regni in aliquo derogare, and sic adhaerendo Protestationi suae
hujusmodi, idem Reverendissimus Pater prosequebatur and exposuit solemniter
causam adventus sui and con-fratrum suorum, sumpto quasi pro themate, Reddite
quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo. Super quo procedendo, ea
quae ad Jurisdictionem Ecclesiasticam, and ea quae ad Caesaream pertinebant,
notabiliter and ad longum declaravit, materiam Provisionis and pro Statuti
illius contra Provisores editi abolitione, cum bona and matura deliberatione
prosequendo, and in processu declarationis hujusmodi jura nonnulla and Sacrae
Scripturae Auctoritates convenientes allegavit, pro jure Domini nostri Papae in
Provisionibus habendis, sicut Sancti Praedecessores sui summi Pontifices in
Regno Angliae and alibi per Universalem Christianitatem habuerunt, ipseque
Dominus Papa modernus in caeteris Regnis habet and possidet in praesenti: Unde
praemissis, Bullisque and literis Apostolicis, quas pro hac re idem Dominus
Papa jam tarde ad Regnum transmiserat, diligenter consideratis, and quod dictus
Dominus noster Papa tot Ambassiatas and nuncios solemnes ad prosequendum jus
suum and Ecclesiae libertatem in praemissis, non absque laboribus magnis,
periculis and expensis; de Curia Romana ad Regnum Angliae destinavit, idem
Reverendissimus Pater Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, nomine suo and confratrum suorum
ad tunc ibidem praesentium, and absentium in dicto Parliamento per Procuratores
comparentium, ad quos ut asseruit divisim saltem principalis cura animarum
totius Communitatis Regni pertinere dignoscitur, dictos viros omnes and
singulos tunc praesentes, Communitatem (ut praemittitur) repraesentantes,
requisivit and in Domino exhortabatur, quatenus ob salutem animarum suarum
totiusque Regni prosperitatem and pacem, materiam praedictam sic ponderarent,
and taliter in eodem Parliamento super eadem deliberarent, ut Sanctissimus
Dominus noster Papa placari, ac Regis zelum ad Sedem Apostolicam totiusque
Regni devotionem in hac part habere posset materiam commendandi. Et addidit
ultra hujusmodi Requisitionem and Exhortationem praefatus Reverendissimus Pater
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis; and ex cord, ut apparuit, exposuit lacrymando,
pericula per censurarum, viz. Ecclesiasticarum and etiam Interdicti
fulminationem, and alias tam Regi quam Regno (quod absit) verisimiliter
eventura alia, in casu quo responsio Parliamenti illius, in materia tunc
declarata, grata non foret Domino Papae and accepta, sic dicendo; Forte videtur
quibusdam vestrum, quod haec quae Regni Praelatos potissime concernunt ex cord
non profero, Sciatis pro certo, and in fide, qua Deo teneor and Ecclesiae,
affirmo coram vobis, quod magis mihi foret acceptum nunquam confer aut etiam
habere aliquod beneficium Ecclesiasticum, quam aliqua talia pericula seu
processus meo tempore in Ecclesiae Anglicanae Scandalum venirent. Ulterius idem
Reverendissimus Pater express declaravit, qualiter dictus Dominus noster Papa
in diversis Bullis suis obtulit and promisit, se and Sedem Apostolicam, ad
quascunque causas and occasiones editionis Statuti praedicti rationabile,
remedium apponere, and materias causarum and occasionum hujusmodi Statuti in
toto tollere and abolere; and sic Requisitione, Exhortatione and periculorum
hujusmodi expositione finitis, Reverendissimi Patres Cantuar. and Eborac.
Archiepiscopi, cum confratribus suis Episcopis and Praelatis praedictis,
recesserunt, Regni Communitate, seu saltem dictis viris Communitatem Regni
repraesentantibus remanentibus, and circa materiam eis expositam tractantibus,
praesentibus, and Declarationem, Requisitionem, and Exhortationem, hujusmodique
periculorum expositionem per dictum Dominum Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem (ut
praemittitur) factas audientibus, venerabilibus viris Richardo Coudray
Archidiacono Norwici in Ecclesia Norwicensi, Magistro Joanne Forster Canonico
Lincolnensi, etc. and Johanne Boold Notario Publico and multis aliis.

Act. 33. Anno Regni vicesimo tertio. XLI. An Act concerning Restraint of
payment of Annates to the Sea of Rome.
FOrasmuch as it is well perceived, by long approved experience, that great and
inestimable Sums of Money have been daily conveyed out of this Realm, to the
impoverishment of the same; and specially such sums of Money as the Pope's
Holiness, his Predecessors, and the Court of Rome, by long time have heretofore
taken of all and singular those Spiritual Persons which have been named,
elected, presented, or postulated to be Archbishops or Bishops within this
Realm of England, under the Title of Annates, otherwise called First Fruits.
Which Annates, or First Fruits, have been taken of every Archbishopric, or
Bishopric, within this Realm, by restraint of the Pope's Bulls, for
Confirmations, Elections, Admissions, Postulations, Provisions, Collations,
Dispositions, Institutions, Installations, Investitures, Orders, Holy
Benedictions, Palles, or other things requisite and necessary to the attaining
of those their Promotions; and have been compelled to pay, before they could
attain the same, great Sums of Money, before they might receive any part of the
Fruits of the said Archbishopric, or Bishopric, whereunto they were named,
elected, presented, or postulated; by occasion whereof, not only the Treasure
of this Realm has been greatly conveyed out of the same, but also it has
happened many times, by occasion of death, unto such Archbishops, and Bishops,
so newly promoted, within two or three years after his or their Consecration,
that his or their Friends, by whom he or they have been helped to advance and
make payment of the said Annates, or First Fruits, have been thereby utterly
undone and impoverished. And for because the said Annates have risen, grown,
and increased, by an uncharitable Custom, grounded upon no just or good title,
and the paiments thereof obtained by restraint of Bulls, until the same
Annates, or First Fruits, have been paid, or Surety made for the same; which
declares the said Paiments to be exacted, and taken by constraint, against all
equity and justice. The Noble Men therefore of the Realm, and the Wise, Sage,
Politic Commons of the same, assembled in this present Parliament, considering
that the Court of Rome cease not to tax, take, and exact the said great Sums
of Money, under the Title of Annates, or First Fruits, as is aforesaid, to the
great damage of the said Prelates, and this Realm; Which Annates, or
First Fruits, were first suffered to be taken within the same Realm, for the
only defense of Christian People against the Infidels, and now they be claimed
and demanded as mere duty, only for lucre, against all right and conscience.
Insomuch that it is evidently known, that there has passed out of this Realm
unto the Court of Rome, sithen the second year of the Reign of the most Noble
Prince, of famous memory, King Henry the Seventh, unto this present time, under
the name of Annates, or First Fruits, paid for the expedition of Bulls of
Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics, the sum of eight hundred thousand Ducats,
amounting in Sterling Money, at the least, to eightscore thousand pounds,
besides other great and intolerable Sums which have yearly been conveyed to
the said Court of Rome, by many other ways and means, to the great
impoverishment of this Realm. And albeit, that our said Sovereign the King, and
all his natural Subjects, as well Spiritual as Temporal, been as obedient,
devout, Catholic and humble Children of God, and Holy Church, as any People be
within any Realm christened; yet the said exactions of Annates, or First Fruits,
be so intolerable and importable to this Realm, that it is considered and
declared, by the whole Body of this Realm now represented, by all the Estates
of the same assembled in this present Parliament, that the King's Highness
before Almighty God, is bound, as by the duty of a good Christian Prince, for
the conservation and preservation of the good Estate and Commonwealth of this
his Realm, to do all that in him is to obviate, repress, and redress the said
abusions and exactions of Annates, or First Fruits. And because that diverse
Prelates of this Realm being now in extreme Age, and in other debilities of
their Bodies* so that of likelihood, bodily death in short time shall or may
succeed unto them; by reason whereof great sums of Money shall shortly after
their deaths, be conveyed unto the Court of Rome, for the unreasonable and
uncharitable Causes abovesaid, to the universal damage, prejudice, and
impoverishment of this Realm, if speedy remedy be not in due time provided: It
is therefore ordained, established, and enacted, by Authority of this present
Parliament, That the unlawful payment of Annates, or First Fruits, and all
manner Contributions for the same, for any Archbishopric, or Bishopric, or
for any Bulls hereafter to be obtained from the Court of Rome, to or for the
foresaid purpose and intent, shall from henceforth utterly cease, and no such
hereafter to be paid for any Archbishopric, or Bishopric, within this
Realm, other or otherwise than hereafter in this present Act is declared; And
that no manner, Person, nor Persons hereafter to be named, elected, presented,
or postulated to any Archbishopric, or Bishopric, within this Realm, shall
pay the said Annates, or First Fruits, for the said Archbishopric, or
Bishopric, nor any other manner of Sum or Sums of Money, Pensions or Annates
for the same, or for any other like exaction, or cause, upon pain to forfeit to
our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, all manner his
Goods and Chattels for ever, and all the Temporal Lands and Possessions of the
same Archbishopric, or Bishopric, during the time that he or they which
shall offend, contrary to this present Act, shall have, possess, or enjoy, the
Archbishopric, or Bishopric; wherefore he shall so offend contrary to the
form aforesaid. And furthermore it is enacted, by Authority of this present
Parliament, That if any Person hereafter named and presented to the Court of
Rome by the King, or any of his Heirs or Successors, to be Bishop of any See or
Diocese within this Realm hereafter, shall be let, deferred, or delayed at
the Court of Rome from any such Bishopric, whereunto he shall be so
represented, by means of restraint of Bulls Apostolic, and other things
requisite to the same; or shall be denied, at the Court of Rome, upon
convenient suit made, any manner Bulls requisite for any of the Causes
aforesaid, any such Person or Persons so presented, may be, and shall be,
consecrated here in England by the Archbishop, in whose Province the said
Bishopric shall be, so always that the same Person shall be named and presented
by the King for the time being to the same Archbishopric: And if any Persons
being named and presented, as aforesaid, to any Archbishopric of this Realm,
making convenient suit, as is aforesaid, shall happen to be let, deferred,
delayed, or otherwise disturbed from the same Archbishopric, for lack of
Pall, Bulls, or other to him requisite, to be obtained in the Court of Rome in
that behalf, that then every such Person named and presented to be Archbishop,
may be, and shall be, consecrated and invested, after presentation made, as is
aforesaid, by any other two Bishops within this Realm, whom the King's
Highness, or any of his Heirs or Successors, Kings of England for the time
being, will assign and appoint for the same, according and in like manner as
diverse other Archbishops and Bishops have been heretofore, in ancient time by
sundry the King's most noble Progenitors, made, consecrated, and invested
within this Realm: And that every Archbishop and Bishop hereafter, being named
and presented by the King's Highness, his Heirs or Successors, Kings of
England, and being consecrated and invested, as is aforesaid, shall be
installed accordingly, and shall be accepted, taken, reputed, used, and obeyed,
as an Archbishop or Bishop of the Dignity, See, or Place whereunto he so shall
be named, presented, and consecrated requires; and as other like Prelates of
that Province, See, or Diocese, have been used, accepted, taken, and obeyed,
which have had, and obtained completely, their Bulls, and other things
requisite in that behalf from the Court of Rome. And also shall fully and
entirely have and enjoy all the Spiritualities and Temporalities of the said
Archbishopric, or Bishopric, in as large, ample, and beneficial manner, as
any of his or their Predecessors had, or enjoyed in the said Archbishopric,
or Bishopric, satisfying and yielding unto the King our Sovereign Lord, and to
his Heirs and Successors, Kings of England, all such Duties, Rights, and
Interests, as before this time had been accustomed to be paid for any such
Archbishopric, or Bishopric, according to the Ancient Laws and Customs of
this Realm, and the King's Prerogative Royal. And to the intent our said Holy
Father the Pope, and the Court of Rome, shall not think that the pains and
labors taken, and hereafter to be taken, about the writing, sealing,
obtaining, and other businesses sustained, and hereafter to be sustained, by
the Offices of the said Court of Rome, for and about the Expedition of any
Bulls hereafter to be obtained or had for any such Archbishopric, or
Bishopric, shall be irremunerated, or shall not be sufficiently and condignly
recompensed in that behalf. And for their more ready expedition to be had
therein, it is therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every
Spiritual Person of this Realm, hereafter to be named, presented, or
postulated, to any Archbishopric or Bishopric of this Realm, shall and may
lawfully pay for the writing and obtaining of his or their said Bulls, at the
Court of Rome, and ensealing the same with Lead, to be had without payment of
any Annates, or First Fruits, or other charge or exaction by him or them to be
made, yielden, or paid for the same, five pounds Sterling, for and after the
rate of the clear and whole yearly value of every hundredth pounds Sterling,
above all charges of any such Archbishopric, or Bishopric, or other money, to
the value of the said five pounds, for the clear yearly value of every hundredth
pounds of every such Archbishopric, or Bishopric, and not above, nor in any
other wise, any things in this present Act before written notwithstanding. And
forasmuch as the King's Highness, and this his High Court of Parliament,
neither have, nor do intend to use in this, or any other like cause, any manner
of extremity or violence, before gentle courtesy or friendship, ways and means
first approved and attempted, and without a very great urgent cause and
occasion given to the contrary, but principally coveting to disburden this
Realm of the said great exactions, and intolerable charges of Annates, and
First Fruits, have therefore thought convenient to commit the final order and
determination of the Premises, in all things, unto the King's Highness. So
that if it may seem to his high wisdom, and most prudent discretion, meet to
move the Pope's Holiness, and the Court of Rome, amicably, charitably, and
reasonably, to compound, other to extinct and make frustrate the payments of
the said Annates, or First Fruits; or else by some friendly, loving, and
tolerable composition to moderate the same in such wise as may be by this Realm
easily born and sustained; That then those ways and compositions once taken,
concluded, and agreed, between the Pope's Holiness and the King's Highness,
shall stand in strength, force, and effect of Law, inviolably to be observed.
And it is also further ordained, and enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament, That the King's Highness at any time, or times, on this side the
Feast of Easter, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God, a thousand five
hundred and three and thirty, or at any time on this side the beginning of the
next Parliament, by his Letters Pattents under his Great Seal, to be made, and
to be entered of Record in the Roll of this present Parliament, may and shall
have full power and liberty to declare, by the said Letters Patents, whether
that the Premises, or any part, clause, or matter thereof, shall be observed,
obeyed, executed, and take place and effect, as an Act and Statute of this
present Parliament, or not. So that if his Highness, by his said Letters
Patents, before the expiration of the times above-limited, thereby do declare
his pleasure to be, That the Premises, or any part, clause, or matter thereof,
shall not be put in execution, observed, continued, nor obeyed, in that case
all the said Premises, or such part, clause, or matter, as the King's Highness
so shall refuse, disaffirm, or not ratify, shall stand and be from henceforth
utterly void and of none effect. And in case that the King's Highness, before
the expiration of the times afore-prefixed, do declare by his said Letters
Patents, his pleasure and determination to be, that the said Premises, or
every clause, sentence, and part thereof, that is to say, the whole, or such
part thereof as the King's Highness so shall affirm, accept, and ratify, shall
in all points stand, remain, abide, and be put in due and effectual execution,
according to the purport, tenor, effect, and true meaning of the same; and to
stand and be from henceforth forever after, as firm, steadfast, and available in
the Law, as the same had been fully and perfectly established, enacted, and
confirmed, to be in every part thereof, immediately, wholly, and entirely
executed, in like manner, form, and effect, as other Acts and Laws; The which
being fully and determinately made, ordained, and enacted in this present
Parliament: And if that upon the foresaid reasonable, amicable and charitable
ways and means, by the King's Highness to be experimented, moved, or
compounded, or otherwise approved, it shall and may appear, or be seen unto his
Grace, that this Realm shall be continually burdened and charged with this, and
such other intolerable Exactions and Demands, as heretofore it has been. And
that thereupon, for continuance of the same, our said Holy Father the Pope, or
any of his Successors, or the Court of Rome, will, or do, or cause to be done
at any time hereafter, so as is above rehearsed, unjustly, uncharitably, and
unreasonably vex, inquiet, molest, trouble, or grieve our said Sovereign Lord,
his Heirs or Successors, Kings of England, or any of his or their Spiritual or
Lay-Subjects, or this his Realm, by Excommunication, Excomengement,
Interdiction; or by any other Process, Censures, Compulsories, Ways, or Means;
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the King's Highness, his Heirs
and Successors, Kings of England, and all his Spiritual and Lay-Subjects of the
same, without any scruples of Conscience, shall and may lawfully, to the honor
of Almighty God, the increase and continuance of virtue and good example within
this Realm, the said Censures, Excommunications, Interdictions, Compulsories,
or any of them notwithstanding, minister, or cause to be ministered, throughout
this said Realm, and all other the Dominions or Territories belonging or
appertaining thereunto; All and all manner Sacraments, Sacramentals,
Ceremonies, or other Divine Services of the Holy Church, or any other thing or
things necessary for the health of the Soul of Mankind, as they heretofore at
any time or times have been virtuously used or accustomed to do within the
same; and that no manner such Censures, Excommunications, Interdictions, or any
other Process or Compulsories, shall be by any of the Prelates, or other
Spiritual Fathers of this Region, nor by any of their Ministers or Substitutes,
be at any time or times hereafter published, executed, nor divulged, nor
suffered to be published, executed, or divulged in any manner of ways. Cui
quidem Billae praedictae and ad plenum intellectae per dictum Dominum Regem ex
assensu and Autoritate Parliamenti praedicti taliter est Responsum.

Le Roy le Volt Soit Baille aux comunes A cest Bille Les comunes sont assentes.

MEmorand. quod nono die Julii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici vicesimo quinto, idem
Dominus Rex per Literas suas Patentes sub magno sigillo suo sigillat. Actum
praedictum ratificavit and confirmavit, and actui illo assensum suum regium
dedit, prout per easdem Literas Patentes, cujus tenor sequitur in haec verba,
magis apt constat.

Here follows the King's Ratification, in which the Act is again recited and
ratified.

XLII. The King's last Letter to the Pope. A Duplicate.
To the Pope's Holiness, 1532.
AFter most humble commendations, Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 13.
and most devout kissing of your blessed Feet. Albeit that we have hitherto
differred to make answer to those Letters dated at Bonony, the 7 th day of
October; which Letters of late were delivered unto us by Paul of Cassali: Yet
when they appear to be written for this Cause, that we deeply considering the
Contents of the same, should provide for the tranquillity of our own
Conscience, and should purge such Scruples and Doubts conceived of our Cause of
Matrimony; We could neither neglect those Letters sent for such a purpose, nor
after that we had diligently examined and perpended the effects of the same,
which we did very diligently, noting, conferring, and revolving every thing in
them contained, with deep study of mind, pretermit ne leave to answer unto
them. For since that your Holiness seems to go about that thing chiefly, which
is to vanquish those Doubts, and to take away inquietations which daily do
prick our Conscience; insomuch as it does appear at the first sight to be done
of Zeal, Love, and Piety, we therefore do thank you of your good will. Howbeit
since it is not performed in Deed, that ye pretend, we have thought it expedient
to require your Holiness to provide us other Remedies; wherefore forasmuch as
your Holiness would vouchsafe to write unto us concerning this Matter, we
heartily thank you, greatly lamenting also both the chance of your Holiness,
and also ours, unto whom both twain it has chanced in so high a matter of so
great moment to be frustrated and deceived; that is to say, That your Holiness
not being instructed, nor having knowledge of the Matter, of your self, should
be compelled to hang upon the Judgment of others, and so put forth and make
answers, gathered of other Men, being variable and repugnant among themselves.
And that we being so long sick, and exagitate with this same Sore, should so
long time in vain look for Remedy; which when we have augmented our aegritude
and distress, by delay and protracting of time, ye do so cruciate the Patient
and Afflicted, as who sees it should much avail to protract the Cause, and
thorough vain hope of the end of our desire to lead us whither ye will. But to
speak plainly to your Holiness; Forasmuch as we have suffered many Injuries,
which with great difficulty we do sustain and digest; albeit that among all
things passed by your Holiness, some cannot be laid, alleged, nor objected
against your Holiness, yet in many of them some default appears to be in you,
which I would to God we could so diminish, as it might appear no default; but
it cannot be hid, which is so manifest, and tho we could say nothing, the thing
it self speaks. But as to that that is affirmed in your Letters, both of
God's Law, and Man's, otherwise than is necessary and truth, let that be
ascribed to the temerity and ignorance of your Counselors, and your Holiness
to be without all default, save only for that ye do not admit more discreet and
learned Men to be your Counselors, and stop the mouths of them which liberally
would speak the Truth. This truly is your default, and verily a great fault,
worthy to be alienate and abhorred of Christ's Vicar, in that ye have dealt so
variably, yea rather so inconstantly and deceivably. Be ye not angry with my
words, and let it be lawful for me to speak the Truth without displeasure; if
your Holiness shall be displeased with that we do rehearse, impute no default
in us, but in your own Deeds; which Deeds have so molested and troubled us
wrongfully, that we speak now unwillingly, and as enforced thereunto. Never was
there any Prince so handled by a Pope, as your Holiness has entreated us.
First; When our Cause was proponed to your Holiness, when it was explicated and
declared before the same; when certain Doubts in it were resolved by your
Counselors, and all things discussed, it was required that answer might be
made thereunto by the order of the Law. There was offered a Commission, with a
promise also that the same Commission should not be revoked; and whatsoever
Sentence should be given, should straight without delay be confirmed. The
Judges were sent unto us, the Promise was delivered to us, subscribed with your
Holiness's hand; which avouched to confirm the Sentence, and not to revoke the
Commission, nor to grant any thing else that might let the same; and finally
to bring us in a greater hope, a certain Commission Decretal, defining the
Cause, was delivered to the Judges hands. If your Holiness did grant us all
these things justly, ye did injustly revoke them; and if by good and truth the
same was granted, they were not made frustrate nor annihilate without fraud; so
as if there were no deceit nor fraud in the Revocation, then how wrongfully and
subtly have been done those things that have been done! Whether will your
Holiness say, That ye might do those things that ye have done, or that ye might
not do them? If ye will say that ye might do them, where then is the Faith
which becomes a Friend, yea, and much more a Pope to have, those things not
being performed, which lawfully were promised? And if ye will say that ye might
not do them, have we not then very just cause to mistrust those Medicines and
Remedies with which in your Letters ye go about to heal our Conscience,
especially in that we may perceive and see those Remedies to be prepared for
us, not to relieve the Sickness and Disease of our Mind, but for other means,
pleasures, and worldly respects? And as it should seem profitable, that we
should ever continue in hope or despair, so always the Remedy is attempted; so
that we being always a-healing, and never healed, should be sick still. And
this truly was the chief cause why we did consult and take the advice of every
Learned Man, being free, without all affection, that the Truth (which now with
our labor and study we seem partly to have attained) by their judgments more
manifestly divulged, we might more at large perceive; whose Judgments and
Opinions it is easy to see how much they differ from that, that those few Men
of yours do show unto you, and by those your Letters is signified. Those few
Men of yours do affirm the prohibition of our Marriage to be inducted only by
the Law positive, as your Holiness has also written in your Letters; but all
others say the prohibition to be inducted, both by the Law of God and Nature:
Those Men of yours do suggest, that it may be dispensed for avoiding of
slanders; The others utterly do contend, that by no means it is lawful to
dispense with that, that God and Nature has forbidden. We do separate from our
Cause the Authority of the Sea Apostolic, which we do perceive to be destitute
of that Learning whereby it should be directed; and because your Holiness does
ever profess your ignorance, and is wont to speak of other Men's mouths, we do
confer the sayings of those, with the sayings of them that be of the contrary
Opinion; for to confer the Reasons it were too long. But now the Universities
of Cambridg, Oxford, in our Realms; Paris, Orleance, Biturisen, Andegavon, in
France; and Bonony in Italy, by one consent; and also diverse other of the most
famous and Learned Men, being freed from all affection, and only moved in
respect of verity, partly in Italy, and partly in France, do affirm the
Marriage of the Brother with the Brother's Wife, to be contrary both to the Law
of God and Nature; and also do pronounce that no Dispensation can be lawful or
available to any Christian Man in that behalf: But others think the contrary,
by whose Counsels your Holiness has done that, that sithence ye have confessed
ye could not do, in promising to us as we have above rehearsed, and giving that
Commission to the Cardinal Campege to be showed unto us; and after, if it so
should seem profitable to burn it, as afterward it was done indeed as we have
perceived. Furthermore, those which so do moderate the Power of your Holiness,
that they do affirm, That the same cannot take away the Appellation which is
used by Man's Law, and yet is available to Divine Matters everywhere without
distinction. No Princes heretofore have more highly esteemed, nor honored the Sea Apostolic than we have; wherefore we be the more sorry to be provoked to
this contention, which to our usage and nature is most alienate and abhorred.
Those things so cruel we write very heavily, and more glad would have been, to
have been silent if we might, and would have left your Authority untouched with
a good will, and constrained to seek the verity, we fell, against our Will,
into this contention; but the sincerity of the Truth prohibited us to keep
silence, and what should we do in so great and many perplexities? For truly if
we should obey the Letters of your Holiness, in that they do affirm that we
know to be otherwise, we should offend God and our Conscience, and we should be
a great slander to them that do the contrary, which be a great number, as we
have before rehearsed: Also, if we should dissent from those things which your
Holiness does pronounce, we would account it not lawful, if there were not a
Cause to defend the Fact, as we now do, being compelled by necessity, lest we
should seem to contemn the Authority of the Sea Apostolic. Therefore your
Holiness ought to take it in good part, tho we do somewhat at large and more
liberally speak in this Cause, which does so oppress us, specially forasmuch as
we pretend none atrocity, nor use no rethorick in the exaggerating and
increasing the indignity of the Matter; but if I speak of any thing that
touches the quick, it proceeds of the mere verity, which we cannot nor ought
not to hide in this Cause, for it touches not Worldly Things but Divine, not
frail but eternal; in which things no feigned, false, nor painted Reasons, but
only the Truth, shall obtain and take place: and God is the Truth to whom we
are bound to obey rather than to Men; and nevertheless we cannot but obey unto
Men also, as we were wont to do, unless there be an express cause why we should
not; which by those our Letters we now do to your Holiness: and we do it with
charity, not intending to spread it abroad, nor yet further to impugn your
Authority, unless ye do compel us; albeit also, that that we do, does not
impugn your Authority, but confirms the same, which we revocate to its first
foundations; and better it is in the middle way to return, than always to run
forth headlong and do ill. Wherefore if your Holiness do regard or esteem the
tranquillity of our Mind, let the same be established with verity, which has
been brought to light by the consent of so many Learned Men; So shall your
Holiness reduce and bring us to a certainty and quietness, and shall deliver us
from all anxiety, and shall provide both for us and our Realm, and finally
shall do your Office and Duty. The residue of our Affairs we have committed to
our Ambassadors to be propounded unto you, to whom we beseech your Holiness to
give credence, etc.

XLIII. A Promise made for engaging the Cardinal of Ravenna. An Original.
Rome, Februar. 7. 1532.
Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 13.
EGo Willielmus Benet Serenissimi Domini mei D. Henrici Octavi Angliae, etc.
Regis, in Romana Curia Orator, habens ad inscripta ab ipso Rege potestatem and
facultatem, prout constat per ipsius Majestatis Literas Patentes datas in Regia
sua Greenewici die penultima December. M. D. XXXI. manu sua propria
suprascriptas, and secreto sigillo suo sigillatas; Quoniam in ipsius Regis
arduis negotiis expertus sum singularem and praeclaram operam Reverendissimi in
Christo Patris and Domini D. Henrici Sancti Eusebii S. R. E. Presbyteri
Cardinalis Ravennae, quibus and deinceps uti cupio, ut eandem semper voluntatem
and operam sua Dominatio Reverendissima erga ipsum regem praestet, libere
promitto eidem Cardinali nomine dicti mei Regis, quod sua Majestas provideri
faciet eidem Cardinali, de aliquo Monasterio seu Monasteriis aut aliis
beneficiis Ecclesiasticis in Regno Galliae primo vacaturis, usque ad valorem
annuum sex millium ducatorum: Et insuper promitto quod Rex Angliae praedictus
praesentabit, seu nominabit eundem Cardinalem ad Ecclesiam Cathedralem primo
quovis modo vacaturam, seu and ad praesens vacantem, in Regno Angliae, and de
illa ei provideri faciet; and casu quo Ecclesia primo vacatura hujusmodi, ceu
ad praesens vacans, non sit Ecclesia Eliensis, promitto etiam quod succedente
postea vacatione Ecclesiae Eliensis, Rex Angliae transferri faciet eundem
Cardinalem, si ipsi Cardinali magis placuerit, ab illa alia Ecclesia de qua
provisus erit, ad Ecclesiam Eliensem: and dictorum Monasteriorum and
Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum in Regno Galliae, and Ecclesiae Cathedralis in
Regno Angliae possessionem pacificam, cum fructuum perceptione, ipsum
Cardinalem assequi faciet: Et haec omnia libere promitto, quod Rex meus
supradictus plenissime and sine ulla prorsus exceptione ratificabit and
observabit and exequetur; in quorum fidem praesentes manu mea propria scripsi
and subscripsi, sigilloque munivi.

Dat. Romans die septimo Februarii, M. D. XXXII.
XLIV. Bonner's Letter about the proceedings at Rome. An Original. This is all
written with his own hand, and was sent over by him to the King.

Rome, April 29. 1532.
Pleases it your Highness; This is to advertise the same, Cotton Libr. Vitel.
B. 13.
That sithen we William Benet, Edward Karne, and Edmond Bonner, sent our
Letters of the 7 th of this present to your Highness; There has been two
Disputations public, the one the 13 th of this, the other the 20 th day of the
same, according to the order given and assigned, which was three Conclusions to
be disputed every Consistory; and what was spoken, as well by your Highness's
Counsel, for the justification of the Conclusion purposed the said 13 th, as
also for the impugnation thereof by the Party adverse, with Answers made
thereunto by your Highness's said Counsel as fully as were any wise deduced,
your said Highness shall perceive by the Books sent herewithal containing the
same; and also the Justifications, Objections, and Answers, made in the 6 th of
this present, according as I Edward Karne in my said Letters promised. The
Copies of all the which Justifications, Objections, and Answers, after that
they were fully noted and deduced in writing, and maturely considered by your
Highness's Learned Counsel, I Edward Karne did bring to the Pope's Holiness,
and to the Cardinals, for their better information; and likewise did of the
first, alwise before the Consistory, according to the order assigned at the
beginning; looking in likewise that the Queen's Counsel should do this same,
but as yet they have done nothing therein, tho your Ambassadors and I have
called upon the Pope many times for the same. And as concerning such things as
were spoken and done for either part in the Disputation of the 20 th day, it is
not possible for us, by reason of the shortness of time, to reduce all in good
order, and to send the same to your Highness at this time; nevertheless with
all speed it shall be made ready, and sent to your Highness by the next
Courier. After the Disputation done, the said 13 th day of this present, the
Advocate of the Party adverse did alledg, That we did seek this Disputation but
only to defer the Process; protesting therefore, That the Queen's Counsel would
dispute no more; and desiring therefore the Pope's Holiness, and the whole
Consistory, to make Process in the principal Cause. Whereunto I Edward Karne
said, That the Pope's Holiness, with the whole Senate, had granted the
Disputations upon the Matters, and given an order that the Conclusions
published should be disputed according to the same. Whereupon I desired that
forasmuch as there remained sixteen Conclusions not disputed, (which to propose
and justify, with your Highness's Counsel, I would be ready at all times) that
if the Party adverse knowing the Conclusions to be Canonical, would not confess
them, and thereby avoid Disputations, that then the said Party should dispute
them, and upon the refusal of both the same, the Matters excusatories to be
admitted byhis Holiness, especially because the said Party adverse has nothing
material that could be perceived to let the same. The Pope's Holiness
answered, That he would deliberate upon the demand of both Parties. The 16 th
of this present, the Datary on the Pope's behalf sent unto me Edward Karne an
Intimation for disputation of the Consistory to be kept the 20 of this present,
and that I should send the Conclusions not disputed, that they might be in the
said Consistory disputed; adding withal, that the said Consistory should be,
ultimus and peremptorius terminus quoad alias Disputationes. Of the which
Intimation your Highness shall receive a Copy herewith. Upon this, with the
advice of your Ambassadors and Counsel here, I repaired unto the said Datary,
and brought unto him three Conclusions to be disputed, with a Protestation, De
non recedendo ab ordine hactenus observato, according to the Proem of the said
Conclusions, the Copy whereof your Highness shall receive herewith. Afterward,
with the same Conclusions and Protestation, I went to Cardinal de Monte, who
said, at the beginning, That all the Consistory cries out upon the
Disputations, and that we had been heard sufficiently, and that it was enough
that we should have the fourth Disputation; adding withal, That it was a thing
never seen before after such sort; and that it stood not with the honor of the Sea to have such Disputations in the Consistory, to the great disquieting of
the Pope and the Cardinals, especially considering the manner that is used, and
that all the Conclusions be touched which should content us. To this I
answered, and desired his most Reverend Lordship to call to his remembrance,
what he had promised to your Highness's Ambassadors and me, in the Castel-Angel
upon Shrove-Sunday, the Pope being present, and allowing the same, contented
that all the Conclusions should be disputed singulariter; and that I should at
my pleasure, from time to time, choose the Conclusions to be disputed. And how
also afterward, viz. 17 Febr. the Pope's Holiness, Cardinal Ancona, and his
Lordship, not going from that promise, gave direction for three Conclusions to
be disputed every Consistory; the choice whereof to be at my liberty (according
to the Copy of the said Order which I sent to your Highness with my Letters, of
the date of the 22 of the last): And furthermore, that what time the order to
dispute three Conclusions in a Consistory was sent unto me, and I required to
send the Conclusions first to be disputed according to the said order; I did,
to avoid all manner of doubts, protest before I would accept it, and in the
deliverance of the said Conclusions, that I would not otherwise accept it, but
that all the Conclusions, according to the order promised in Castel-Angel,
should be disputed and examined singulariter, and that standing, and not
otherwise, I delivered my said Conclusions according to the Order of the 17 th
of February; which Order the Pope's Holiness hitherto had approved and
observed, and from that I neither could nor would go from: And where he said
that we had been heard sufficiently; I said, that Audience and Information of
less than the one half of a Matter could not be sufficient; and if they
intended to see the truth of the whole, every point must be discussed. And as
for the crying out of the Cardinals, I said, They had no cause so to do, for it
was more for the honor of the Sea Apostolic, to see such a Cause as this is,
well and surely tried, so that the Truth may appear, and the Matters be well
known, than to proceed praecipitanter, as they did at the beginning of this
Matter, before they well knew what the Matter was. And as touching the
disquieting the Pope's Holiness, and the said Cardinals, I said, your Highness
for their pains was much beholden unto them; nevertheless, I said, that they
might on the other side ponder such pains as your Highness has taken for them,
in part declared by me; which was much more than for them to sit in their
Chairs two or three hours in a week, to hear the justice of your defense in
this cause. And as touching the manner used in the said Disputation, I said,
his Lordship knew well that it was by the Party adverse, which all manner of
ways goes about to fatigate and make weary the Consistory of the Disputations,
specially in chiding, scolding, and alleging Laws and Decisions that never
were, nor spoken of by any Doctor, and vainly continuing the time, to the
intent that the Pope's Holiness, and the Cardinals, dissolving the Consistory,
and not giving audience, the said Party, without Law, Reason, or any good
ground, might attain their desire, and keep under the Truth, that it should not
appear; and if any thing was sharply spoken of our Party, I said it was done
only for our defense, and to show the errors and falsity of the Queen's
Advocates in their Allegations, wherein, I said, they should not be spared. And
forasmuch as on the behalf of your Highness there was nothing spoken but that
which was grounded upon Law, and declared in what place, so that it cannot be
denied; I desired his Lordship that he would continue his goodness in this
Matter, as your Highness's especial trust was he would do; and that we might
always, as we were accustomed, have recourse unto the same in all our Business
for his good help and counsel. His Lordship not yet satisfied, said, That as
concerning the Order, the Pope's Holiness might interpretate and declare what
he meaned by it; and as touching the Conclusions, they were superfluous,
impertinent, and calumnious, only proposed to defer the Matter. I answered, and
said, That to interpretate the said Order, where it is clear out of doubt, the
Pope's Holiness considering the promise made on Shrove-Sunday, with my
Protestation foresaid, and the execution of the said Order to that time, in
diverse Consistories observed, could not by right interpretate the said Order,
admitting disputation upon all the Conclusions; and of this I said, That if
such alterations were made, without any cause given of your Highness's Party,
there was little certainty to be reckoned upon amongst them. And as touching
the superfluity and impertinency of the said Conclusions, I said, That that was
the saying of the Party adverse, that did not understand the same Conclusions.
And further, that such Conclusions as were clamorously, by the Advocates of the
Party adverse, alleged to be superfluous, his Lordship in the Disputation and
trial thereof in the Consistory, did manifestly perceive that it was not so.
And where it was alleged the said Conclusions to be calumnious, and laid in to
defer the Process. I answered, That we might well alledg again the Counsel of
the Party adverse, the thing against us alleged, and say truly, that we were
calumniously dealed withal, seeing the matters were so just and clear, and yet
not admitted. Then his Lordship went further, and said, that Impedimentum
allegatum erat perpetuum, because your Highness, ex causa reipublicae, could
not come out your Realm, and quia dignitas vestra est perpetua; and also quod
Causa requirit celeritatem. To this, I said, that his Lordship mistook the
Matter, for we said not in the Matters that your Highness could not go out of
your Realm to no place, but we said, that the same could not go, ad loca tam
remota, as Rome is; so that it was not perpetuum impedimentum. And to the other
I showed him a Text, and the common opinion of Doctors in a Cause of Matrimony,
being inter Regem and Reginam, which took away the thing that he had said. Then
his Lordship said, That it was enough that the place were sure to the
Procurator by the Chapter, Cum olim de testibus. I said, That that Chapter did
not prove that Allegation, and that they mistook the Text that so did
understand it, for the Alternative that is in that Text is not referred ad
locum tutum, but ad ordinem Citationis inchoandae in persona principali, aut
ejus procuratore; and so Petrus de Anchorano understands that Text; and
otherwise understanding the same it should be against the Chapter, Ex part de
appellatione, and the common opinion there. Then he said that Aretine says,
Quod sufficit quum locus sit tutus procuratori. I said, that under his favor,
Aretine says the contrary, for he says, Quod partibus debet locus tutus
assignari si poterit, and si non poterit partibus, detur procuratoribus. Then
his Lordship said to me, That I knew well he began to set forward these
Disputations, and that he would do the best he could for the furtherance
thereof.

The 19 th of this present I went with your Highness's Ambassadors to the Pope,
and delivered his Holiness in writing those things that were done in the
Disputation of the 13 th of this: And then your Ambassadors were in hand with
the Pope to alter the Intimation, and to put out the term peremptory, and other
that were exclusory of further Disputations to be had upon the same
Conclusions. The Pope's Holiness said, That Disputations was no act Judicial
requiring to be in the Consistory; and therefore he said, he would call certain
Congregations of Cardinals, on Friday and Monday following, to hear the
Disputations. Then I William Benet said, That that could not stand very well
with the Decree of the Intimation, which was peremptory for any further
Disputations after the 20 th of this present; and therefore I spoke that the
same term peremptory might be put out of the Intimation, alleging withal, that
upon the said Friday or Monday it was no time to hear the Disputation, being so
nigh after; and that his Holiness hitherto has observed the Consistory for the
Disputations, which Consistory cannot be unto after Easter, if the manner of
the Court be observed. Then the Pope said, he might call a Consistory when he
would, as he has done in making of Cardinals, an Act much more solemn than a
Disputation. To that, I said, his Holiness might so do if he would; howbeit, it
should be praeter solitum morem: and therefore desired his Holiness to consider
therein the order before assigned, and that this term peremptory would not
stand with the order. His Holiness then willed we should inform the Cardinals,
Anchona, and de Monte, and so we did; Anchona showed himself somewhat
reasonable, and was contented the term peremptory should be put out. De Monte
said that the Pope would promise to hear the Conclusions disputed in
Congregations, calling thereto certain Cardinals, so that the term peremptory
should not be prejudicial. Then I Edward Karne desired him, that if the said
term should not be prejudicial, that it might be stricken out, for I told him
plainly that I would not stand to words, the writing showing the contrary;
adding withal, that I would not dispute in this term, tanquam peremptorio, but
would manifestly show and protest, That I, with other your Highness's Counsel,
were ready to defend the Conclusions published, according to the order given,
and hitherto observed; alleging also, that the Conclusions being justified,
the Matters ought to be admitted; and that if the Pope's Holiness and the
Cardinals would not give audience to me and your Highness's said Counsel, for
the manifest trial and showing of the truth, they should give us cause to
complain upon them, and to cry out, usque ad Sidera, your Highness's
Ambassadors all affirming the same. Then the said Cardinal de Monte said, that
the Pope's Holiness would provide for the Disputations, notwithstanding the
term peremptory assigned, and said also, that in the Morning he would speak
with the Pope, and give your Ambassadors and me an answer.

In the morning, which was the 20 th of this present, the said Cardinal would,
that nothing of the Decree of Intimation should be manifested, because the
other part had a Copy thereof, but would the Pope's Holiness to give an order
that the word peremptory should be only for Disputations to be had in the
Consistory, and not in Congregations, in which Congregations, the Conclusions
remaining might be disputed; and tho they had drawn out this Order, yet because
it was nothing plain, neither certain to be conformable to the former Order, I
would have had the said Cardinal to speak to the said Datary for to make it as
before: and he was then contented, howbeit the Pope's Holiness commanded all the
Cardinals to their places, so that I could not have the said Order, and was
driven thereby either to dispute and accept the term, tanquam peremptorium, or
else to fly the Disputations, giving occasion to the adverse Party to say, that
I diffided in the justness of the Matters, and defense of the Conclusions.
Whereupon your Highness's Ambassadors and we, with other your Learned Counsel,
concluded, that I Edward Karne should protest, De non consentiendo in termino,
tanquam peremptorio, and afterward to proceed to the proposing of the
Conclusions, and so I did by mouth according to the tenor of a Copy, which
here withal your Highness shall receive. When I had protested, and the Pope had
spoken this word Acceptamus, the Queen's Advocate began to protest that they
would dispute no more, and desired his Holiness to proceed in the principal
Cause. Then I Edward Karne said, That the Pope's Holiness did well perceive,
that the Conclusions were published and proposed, not only for them to dispute,
but also for all other, come who would, for the information of his Holiness,
and the whole Consistory. And therefore I said, that tho they would not
dispute, yet I was there, with other your Highness's Learned Counsel, to
propose the Conclusions, according to the Order given, justifying them to be
Canonical, and ready to defend them against all those that would gainsay them;
and thereupon desired the Pope's Holiness, that tho the Counsel of the Party
Adverse would not dispute, yet I with your Highness's Learned Counsel might be
heard again; against which my desire the Queen's Advocate made great
exclamations, till at the last the Pope commanded him to silence, and willed us
to go to the Conclusions, which we did.

And here now it is determined, That we shall have no more Disputations in the
Consistory, but the rest of the Conclusions to be disputed in Congregations
before the Pope, purposely made for the same; and what therein shall be
determined or done, your Highness from time to time shall thereof by us be
advertised, and of all other our doings in that behalf.

And as concerning the Letters which your Highness sent by Francis the Courier,
of the last of February, as well to the Pope, as to me Edward Karne, for the
admission of me and the Matter excusatory, we shall, according to your
Highness's pleasure and order assigned, in the common Letter sent unto us by
your said Highness, proceed and do therein as may be most beneficial and
profitable for the same.

And thus most humbly we commend us to your Highness, beseeching Almighty God
to preserve the same in felicity and health many years.

At Rome the 28 th of March 1532. Your Highness's most humble Subjects,
Servants, and Chaplains, William Benet, Edward Karne, Edmond Bonner.


XLV. Another Letter concerning the Process at Rome. An Original.
Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 13.
Pleases it your Highness, sithen our Letters of the 23 of March, here has
been great labor, and soliciting, to bring the Disputation public out of the
Consistory kept once in the week, into the Congregations, to be observed and
kept before the Pope's Holiness and the Cardinals, in such place, and as often as
should please them; to the intent, as we perceived, that the said Disputation
might be the sooner ended, and not take such effect as it was devised for. And
upon this great importune labor, I, Edward Karne, was monished oftentimes to
send Conclusions to be proposed in the said Congregations, as well in
Palm Sunday week, as in Easter-week, as appears by the Copies of the
Intimations sent herewithal to your Highness: Upon which Intimations I
delivered certain Conclusions, according to the order taken at the beginning,
with a Protestation devised by your Grace's Counsel here, De non recedendo ab
eodem ordine, and de proponendo easdem Conclusiones in Consistorio, juxta
eundem ordinem and non aliter. That notwithstanding the Pope's Holiness caused
me to be monished again, cum Comminatione, that if I would not come in, cum
Advocatis, the third day of April, procederet ad ulteriora protestatione me a
praevia non obstante. Whereupon, with the advice of your said Learned Counsel,
I conceived a Protestation, and the same delivered to the Pope's Holiness the
said third day in the morning, protesting as it was therein contained, and
causing it to be registered by the Datary; of the which Protestation your
Highness shall also receive a Copy herewithal. This notwithstanding, the Pope's
Holiness, the said third day in the afternoon made a Congregation, where the
said Protestation was examined; and after the Treaty had upon the same, we were
in conclusion remitted again to the Consistory, there to be heard, as much as
the Consistory intends to hear, upon the Conclusions that are published;
which was much more beneficial to us, than to have had all proposed in
Congregations to have been kept, as is before. And by this means the Matter was
shifted off, and deferred unto the 10 th of this month; at which time the
Pope's Holiness kept the Consistory. And one Mr. Providal, a singular good
Clerk, which came from Bonony for the furtherance of your Highness's Cause,
very compendiously, and after good fashion and handling, to the great
contentation, as appeared, of the Audience there, purposed three Conclusions,
of the which two concerned the habilitation of me Edward Karne, to lay in the
Matters Excusatory: And the third was, that the Cause ought to be committed,
extra curiam, ad locum tutum utrique parti: Of the which Conclusions, and also
his Sayings, the said 10 th day, your Highness shall receive a Copy
here-withal. And forasmuch as at the said Consistory, neither the Imperials,
neither yet the Queens Counsel did appear; I, Edward Karne, with the advice of
your Highness's Counsel, said to the Pope's Holiness, after the Proposition
made by Mr. Providel, that his Holiness might perceive well, that if the Party
adverse had any good matter to alledg, against such things as were deduced for
the justification of the Conclusions, and matter Excusatory, and did not
diffide of their part, they would not have absented themselves, or shrunken
from the Disputations, which they before had accepted and taken; wherefore I
accused their contumacy and absence, desiring that it might be enacted, and
thereupon departed from the Consistory, for that day dissolved.

The 14 th of this present, the Pope's Holiness caused Intimation to be made
unto me, of the Consistory to be kept the 17 th of the same; willing me to be
there, cum Advocatis, to dispute all the Conclusions not proposed and disputed:
Upon the which Intimation, I delivered to the Datary three Conclusions, the 19,
the 20, and the 21 in order, with a Protestation devised by your Learned
Counsel, sent here-withal to your Highness: And in the said Consistory, Mr.
Providel did also alledg for the justification of the Matters and Conclusions;
and over that answered to such Objections as he thought the Party adverse to
make foundation upon, and that very compendiously, being sorry that the
Imperials, and Queen's Counsel, did not come in to dispute the said
Conclusions, and the sayings of the said Mr. Providel in the said Consistory,
with my Protestation also, in not agreeing to the term, as peremptory, your
Highness shall perceive in writing sent here-withal.

As concerning the seven Conclusions yet remaining undisputed, we think the
Pope's Holiness will hear us no further in the Consistory; saying, that the
Part adverse will not abide the Disputations, nor come in to the same:
Nevertheless to take otherwise out of the Consistory, with the Cardinals
Information, his Holiness is well contented.

And verily, Sir, to study, labor, set forward, and call upon such things as
may confer to the advancement of the Matter, and your Highness's Purpose, there
shall not want, neither good will, neither diligen^ to the uttermost, that we
can excogitate or desire, as hitherto surely neither Party has failed;
trusting in God that thereby, if Justice be not oppressed, some good effect
shall follow, to the good contentation of your Highness. With these Presents,
your Highness shall also receive a Copy of all things that were spoken, as well
for your Highness's behalf, as by the Party adverse, in the Consistory, the 20
th day of March.

And thus most humbly we commend us to your Highness, beseeching Almighty God
long to continue the same in his most Royal Estate.

At Rome, the 29 th of April. Your Highness's most humble Subjects, and poor
Servants, Edward Karne. Edmond Bonner.

XLVI. A Letter from Benet and Cassali about the Process. An Original.
SErenissime and Invictissime Domine noster Supreme, salutem. Tribus
Superioribus Consistoriis ante vacationes habitis, Cotton Libr. Vitel. B. 13.
de Causa Excusatoria actum fuit; sed quid illud fuerit quod in primo egerunt
rescire non potuimus, quia Cardinales poena Excommunicationis prohibiti fuerant
quicquam revelare. Secundo etiam aliquid super eadem causa tractarunt, quod
itidem nos celaverunt. Sed ultimo illo, quod die octavo Julii Congregatum fuit,
ita ut inferius patebit, constituerunt. Quum ergo postero die Pontificem
adivissemus, ut quod decretum foret cognosceremus, ab eo sic accepimus; nolle
se ore suo, propterea quod Jurisperitus non sit, Consistorii deliberationem
pronunciare; quocirca die sequenti ad ipsum rediremus, quoniam vellet
Cardinales Montem and Anconitanum id ipsum nobis proferre: Et nihilominus idem
quod deinde ex ipsis Cardinalibus audivimus tunc explicavit, noluit tamen nobis
esse Responsi loco. Igitur sicut dixerat, redivimus, and nobis duo illi
Cardinales sic retulerunt summum Dominum and Cardinales decrevisse, literas
Exhortatorias cum a Pontifice, tum a Collegio Cardinalium, Majestati vestrae
scribendas esse, quibus vestram Majestatem adhortarentur, ut velit hic ad
Causam Procuratorem constituere, idque per totum Octobrem proximum facere.
Pontifex praeterea suadebat ut ad idem nos Majestatem Vestram cohortaremur,
iidemque fecerunt Cardinales, volentes omnes ambiguitates and dubitationes
tollere. Respondimus, velle quod nobis injungebatur Majestati Vestrae scribere;
verum illud non posse reticere quod erga Majestatem Vestram inique actum
videbatur; quum neque Excusator admissus, neque ipsius allegationes forent
probatae ac receptae, id quod tam saepe instantissime petitum fuerat. Praeterea
non posse nos non valde mirari, ac etiam summopere conqueri, quod quum pro
comperto haberemus juris esse id fieri, esset nihilominus denegatum; quum
praesertim petendo Mandatum procuratorium, tacit viderentur rejicere
Excusatorem, and per ipsum allegata. Sic autem illi nobis Responderunt, neque
Excusatorem fuisse rejectum, neque per ipsum allegata, sed in eodem, quo prius,
statu permanere; hoc autem excusatorium negotium minime, ut nobis judicibus
clarum, sed dubium videri. Ibique Anconitanus quaedam nostris contraria
adduxit, quae D. Karne suis literis recenset. Dicebant quoque in hac re
favorabilius nos, quam adversarios fuisse tractatos; illud etiam addentes, quod
si procuratorium mandatum mittatur, justitia optime ministrabitur, ac etiam
quatenus fieri possit, favorabiliter; idque and Pontifex and Cardinales ambo
constanter asseverabant. Quum vero nos saepius diceremus, excusatorem admitti
debuisse, dixerunt, si recte considerare velimus, nos idem ipsum re habuisse;
si enim (aibant), Procurator hic constituatur, literae Remissoriae and
Compulsoriae decernentur, ad testes in partibus examinandos. Itemque vir
aliquis probus ad id delegabitur ad utramque partem, testesque scil.
examinandos, ita ut processus in partibus fiat; Atque hoc pacto nos id consequi
quod desideramus, quoniam quod ad totius causae decisionem pertinet, ex eo quod
de Pontificis potestate cognoscendum, and de jure Divino disceptandum sit, ac
aliis etiam de causis, ipsam Decisionem Pontifici integram semper reservari
nihilominus oporteret, quamvis causam alibi quam Romae cognosci permissum
fuisset. Nobis certe visum est, haud parum esse quod obtinuimus, long enim
pejora timebamus, quum nemo in urbe esset, qui non crederet Excusatorem una cum
suis allegationibus rejectum iri. Hunc quidem eventum rei Caesariani aegerrime
tulerunt. Optime valeat Majestas Vestra.

Romae die 13 Julii 1532. Vestrae Regiae Majestatis Hier. Episcopus Wigornien.
W. Benet. Gregorio Cassali.

XLVII. The Sentence of Divorce.
Anno Incarnationis millesimo quingentesimo tricesimo tertio, Indictione sexta,
Clementis Papae decimo, mensis Maii vicesimo tertio, in Ecclesia Conventuali
Monasterii Sancti Petri Dunstabliae, Ordinis Sancti Augustini Lincoln. Dioces.
nostri Cantuarien. Provinciae.
In an Inspeximus Rot. Pat. 25. Reg. 2 d. Part.
IN Dei Nomine, Amen. Nos Thomas Permissione Divina Cantuarien. Archiepiscopus,
totius Angliae Primas, and Apostolicae Sedis Legatus, in quadam causa
inquisitionis de and super viribus Matrimonii inter Illustrissimum and
Potentissimum Principem and Dominum nostrum Henricum Octavum Dei Gratia Angliae
and Franciae Regem, Fidei Defensorem and Dominum Hiberniae, ac Serenissimam
Dominam Catharinam nobilis memoriae Ferdinandi Hispaniarum Regis Filiam
contracti and consummati, quae coram nobis in judicio ex officio nostro mero
aliquandiu vertebatur, and adhuc vertitur, and pendet indecisa, rite and
legitime procedentes, visis primitus per nos and diligenter inspectis,
articulis sive capitulis in dicta causa objectis and ministratis, una cum
responsis eis ex part dicti Illustrissimi and Potentissimi Principis Henrici
Octavi factis and redditis, visisque and similiter per nos inspectis plurimorum
Nobilium and aliorum testium fide dignorum dictis and dispositionibus in eadem
causa habitis and factis, visisque praeterea and similiter per nos inspectis,
quamplurium fere totius Christiani orbis Principalium Academiarum Censuris ceu
Conclusionibus Magistralibus, etiam tam Theologorum quam Jurisperitorum
responsis and opinionibus, utriusque denique Provinciae Anglicanae Consiliorum
Provincialium assertionibus and affirmationibus, aliisque salutaribus monitis
and doctrinis super dicto matrimonio desuper respective habitis and factis;
visisque ulterius, and pari modo per nos inspectis, pactis seu foederibus pacis
and amicitiae inter perennis famae Henricum septimum nuper Regem Angliae, and
dictum nobilis memoriae Ferdinandum nuper Regem Hispaniae desuper initis and
factis; visis quoque peramplius, and diligenter per nos inspectis, omnibus and
singulis actis, actitatis, literis, processibus, instrumentis, scripturis,
monumentis, rebusque aliis universis in dicta causa quomodolibet gestis and
factis, ac aliis omnibus and singulis per nos visis and inspectis, atque a
nobis cum diligentia and maturitate ponderatis and recensitis, servatisque
ulterius per nos in hac part de jure servandis, necnon partibus praedictis,
videlicet praefato illustrissimo and potentissimo Principe Henrico Octavo per
ejus Procuratorem idoneum coram nobis in dicta causa legitime comparente, dicta
vero Serenissima Domina Catharina per contumaciam absente, cujus absentia
Divina repleatur praesentia, de Consilio Jurisperitorum and Theologorum, cum
quibus in hac part communicavimus, ad sententiam nostram definitivam sive
finale Decretum nostrum in dicta causa ferendam sive ferendum sic duximus
procedendum, and procedimus in hunc modum. Quia per acta actitata, deducta,
proposita, exhibita, and allegata, probata pariter and confessata,
articulataque, capitulata, partis responsa, testium depositiones, and dicta
instrumenta, monumenta, literas, scripturas, censuras, conclusiones
Magistrales, opiniones, consilia, assertiones, affirmationes, tractatus and
foedera pacis, processus, res alias, and caetera promissa coram nobis in dicta
causa respective habita, ges^a, facta, exhibita and producta; Necnon ex eisdem,
and diversis aliis ex causis and considerationibus, argumentisque and
probationum generibus variis, and multiplicibus, validis quidem and
efficacibus, quibus animum nostrum hac in part ad plenum informavimus, plene
and evidenter invenimus and comperimus dictum Matrimonium inter praefatos
Illustrissimum and Potentissimum Principem and Dominum nostrum Henricum
Octavum, ac Serenissimam Dominam Catharinam, ut praemittitur, contractum and
consummatum, nullum and omnino invalidum fuisse and esse, and Divino Jure
prohibente contractum and consummatum extitisse: Idcirco nos Thomas
Archiepiscopus Primas and Legatus antedictus, Christi nomine primitus invocato,
ac solum Deum prae oculis nostris habentes, pro nullitate and invaliditate
dicti Matrimonii pronunciamus, decernimus and declaramus, ipsumque praetensum
Matrimonium fuisse and esse nullum and invalidum, ac Divino Jure prohibente
contractum and consummatum, nulliusque valoris aut momenti esse, sed viribus
and firmitate juris caruisse and carere, praefatoque Illustrissimo and
Potentissimo Principi Henrico Octavo and Serenissimae Dominae Catharinae non
licere in eodem praetenso Matrimonio remanere, and pronunciamus, decernimus and
declaramus; ipsosque Illustrissimu^ and Potentissimum Principem Henricum
Octavum ac Serenissimam Dominam Catharinam, quatenus de facto and non de jure
dictum praetensum Matrimonium ad invicem contraxerunt and consummarunt, ab
invicem separamus and divorciamus, atque sic separatos and divorciatos, necnon
ob omni vinculo Matrimoniali respectu dicti praetensi Matrimonii liberos and
immunes fuisse and esse, pronunciamus, decernimus and declaramus, per hanc
nostram sententiam definitivam, sive hoc nostrum finale Decretum, quam sive
quod ferimus and promulgamus in his scriptis. In quorum praemissorum fidem and
testimonium, has literas nostras testimoniales, sive praesens publicum
sententiae vel Decreti instrumentum, exinde fieri ac per Notarios Publicos
subscriptos, scribas and actuarios nostros in ea part specialiter assumptos,
subscribi and signari, nostrique sigilli appensione jussimus and fecimus
communiri.

He likewise passed Judgment ( confirming the King's Marriage with Queen Ann)
at Lambeth, May, 28 1533. which is in the same Inspeximus.



Act 5. Anno Regni 25. XLVIII. An Act concerning the Deprivations of the
Bishops of Salisbury and Worcester.
WHere before this time the Church of England, by the King's most noble
Progenitors, and the Nobles of the same, have been founded, ordained, and
established, in the Estate and degree of Prelatie Dignities, and other
Promotions Spiritual, to the intent and purpose that the said Prelates, and
other Persons, having the said Dignities and Promotions Spiritual, continually
should be abiding, and Reseants upon their said Promotions within this Realm;
and also keep, use, and exercise Hospitality, Divine Services, teaching and
preaching of the Laws of Almighty God, to such Persons as were and have been
within the precinct of their Promotions or Dignities, for the Wealth of the
Souls of their Givers and Founders, greatly to the honor of Almighty God. Of
the which said Spiritual Persons, the King's Highness, and his most noble
Progenitors, have had right honorable, and well-learned Personages, apt, meet,
and convenient, for to guide and instruct his Highness, and his most noble
Progenitors, in their Counsels, concerning as well their Outward as Inward
Affairs, to be devised and practiced for the utility and preservation of this
Realm; by reason whereof the Issues, Revenues, Profits, and Treasure, rising
and coming of the said Spiritual Promotions and Dignities, were and should be
spent, employed, and converted within this Realm, to the great profit and
commodity of the King's Subjects of the same. And where also by the laudable
Laws and Provisions of this Realm, before this time made, it has been
ordained, used, and established, that no Person nor Persons, of whatsoever
Estate, Degree, or Quality he or they were, should take or receive within this
Realm of England, to Farm, by any Procuracy, Writ, Letter of Attorney,
Administrations, by Indenture, or by any other Mean, any Benefice, or other
Promotion within this Realm, of any Person or Persons, but only of the King's
true and lawful Subjects, being born under the King's Dominions. And also that
no Person or Persons, of what estate and degree soever he or they were, by
reason of any such Farm, Procuracie, Letter of Attorney, Administration,
Indenture, or by any other mean, as is aforesaid, should carry, conveigh, or
cause to be carried and conveyed out of this Realm, any Gold, Silver,
Treasure, or other Commodity, by Letter of Exchange, or by way of Merchandise,
or otherwise, for any of the Causes aforesaid, to the profit or commodity of
any Alien, or other Stranger, being born out of this Realm, having any such
Promotion Spiritual within the same, without license of the King's Highness, by
the advice of his Council, as by the same Laws, Statutes, and Provisions, more
plainly at large it may appear; which said laudable Laws, Statutes, and
Provisions, were made, devised, and ordained, by great policy and foresight of
the King's most noble Progenitors, the Nobles and Commons of this Realm, for
the great profit, utility, and benefit of the same, to the intent that the
Gold, Silver, Treasure, Riches, and other Commodity of the same, by the
occasion aforesaid, should not be exhausted, employed, converted, and otherwise
transported out of this Realm and Dominions of the same, to the use, profit,
and commodity of any Stranger being born out of this Realm, or the Dominions of
the same; But only to be spent, and used, and bestowed within the same, to the
great comfort and consolation of the Subjects of this Realm. Notwithstanding
which said wholesome Laws, Statutes, and Provisions, the King's Highness being a
Prince of great benignity and liberality, having no knowledge, nor other due
information, or instruction of the same Laws, Statutes, and Provisions,
heretofore has nominated, and preferred, and promoted, Laurence Campegius
Bishop of Sarum, with all the Spiritual and Temporal Possessions, Promotions,
and other Emoluments and Commodities in any wise belonging or appertaining to
the same: And also has nominated, preferred, and promoted, Hierome, being
another Stranger, born out of the King's said Realm and Dominions, to the Sea
and Bishopric of Worcester, with all the Spiritual and Temporal Promotions,
and other Emoluments and Commodities, in any wise belonging or appertaining to
the same. Which said two Bishops, and namely the Bishop of Sarum, nothing
regarding their Duties to Almighty God, nor their Cures of the said
Bishoprics, eversith or for the more part of the time of their said Promotions
or Profections into the same, have been, and yet be resident, dwelling and
abiding at the Sea of Rome, or elsewhere, in other parts beyond the Sea, far
out and from any of the King's said Dominions; by reason whereof, the great
Hospitality, Divine Service, teaching and Preaching the Laws, and Examples of
good living, and the other good and necessary effects before rehearsed, have
been many years bypast, and yet continually be, not only withdrawn, decayed,
hindered, and minished, but also great quantity of Gold, Silver, and Treasure,
to the yearly sum and value of 3000 l. at the least, have been yearly taken and
conveyed out of this Realm, to the singular profit, and great enriching of
the said Bishops, and daily is like to be conveyed, transported, and sent,
contrary to the purport and effect of the said former wholesome Laws and
Statutes, to the great impoverishing of this Realm, as well presently as for to
come, if speedy remedy be not had therefore in brief time provided. In
consideration whereof, be it enacted by the Authority of this present
Parliament, that the said two several Sees and Bishoprics of Salisbury and
Worcester, and either of them from henceforth, shall be taken, reputed, and
accounted in the Law to be utterly void, vacant, and utterly destitute of any
Incumbent, or Prelate, etc.

XLVIII. A Letter from Cromwell to Fisher, about the Maid of Kent, Anno 34, or
end of 35.
MY Lord, Cotton Libr. Cleopat. E. 4.
in my right hearty wise I commend me to your Lordship, doing you to
understand, that I have received your Letters dated at Rochester, the 18 th day
of this Month; in which ye declare what craft and cunning ye have to persuade,
and to set a good Countenance upon an ill Matter, drawing some Scriptures to
your purpose; which well weighed, according to the places whereout they be
taken, make not so much for your purpose as ye allege them for; and where in
the first Leaf of your Letters ye write, that ye doubt nothing, neither before
God nor before the World, if need shall that require, so to declare your self,
whatsoever has been said of you, that ye have not deserved such heavy words,
or terrible threats, as has been sent from me unto you by your Brother.

How ye can declare your self before God and the World, when need shall require,
I cannot tell; but I think verily that your Declaration made by these Letters,
is far insufficient to prove that ye have deserved no heavy words in this
behalf. And to say plainly, I sent you no heavy words, but words of great
comfort, willing your Brother to show you how benign and merciful the Prince
was: And that I thought it expedient for you to write unto his Highness, and to
recognize your Offenses, and desire his pardon, which his Grace would not deny
you now in your age and sickness; which my counsel I would you had followed,
rather than to have written these Letters to me, excusing your self although there
were no manner of default in you. But, my Lord, if it were in an other manner
of case than your own, and out of the Matter which ye favor, I doubt not but
that ye would think him that should have done as ye have done, not only worthy
heavy Words, but also heavy Deeds; for where ye labor to excuse your self of
your Hearing, Bribing, and concealing of the Maiden's false and feigned
Revelations, and of your manifold sending of your Chaplains unto her, by a
certain intent which ye pretend your self to have had, to know by communing
with her, or by sending your Chaplains to her, whether for Revelations, Word of
God, or no, alleging diverse Scriptures that ye were bound to prove them, and
to receive them after they were proved. My Lord, whether ye have used a due
means to try her and her Revelations, or no, it appears by the process of
your own Letters. For where you write that ye had conceived a great opinion of
the holiness of this Woman, for many considerations rehearsed in your Letters,
comprised in six Articles; whereof the first is grounded upon the bruit and
fame of her; the second, upon her entering into Religion after her trances and
diffiguration; the third, upon rehearsal that her Ghostly Father being Learned
and Religious, should testify that she was a Woman of great holiness; the
fourth, upon the report that diverse other virtuous Priests, Men of good
Learning and Reputation, should so testify of her, with which Ghostly Father,
and Priests, ye never spoke, as ye confess in your Letters; the fifth, upon the
praises of my late Lord of Canterbury, which showed you, as ye write, that she
had many great Visions; the sixth, upon the saying of the Prophet Amos, Non
faciet Dominus Deus Verbum, nisi revelaverit secretum suum ad servos suos
Prophetas. By which Considerations ye were induced to the desire to know the
very certainty of this Matter, whether these Revelations which were pretended
to be showed to her from God, were true Revelations or not. Your Lordship in
all the sequel of your Letters, show not that ye made no further trial upon the
truth of her and her Revelations, but only in communing with her, and sending
your Chaplains to her with idle Questions, as of the 3 Mary Magdalens, by which
your communication and sending, ye tried out nothing of her falsehood, neither
(as it is credibly supposed) intended to do as ye might have done, in any wise
more easily than with communing with her, or sending to her; for little
credence was to be given to her, affirming her own feigned Revelations to be
from God; for if credence should be given to every such lewd Person as would
affirm himself to have Revelations from God, what readier way were there to
subvert all Common-Weals and good orders in the World?

Verily, my Lord, if ye had intended to trace out the truth of her, and of her
Revelations, ye would have taken an other way with you; first, you would not
have been converted with the vain Voices of the People, making bruits of her
Trances and Diffiguration, but like a wise, discreet, and circumspect Prelate,
ye should have examined (as other since) such sad and credible Persons as were
present at her Traunces and Diffigurings, not one or two, but a good number, by
whose testimony ye should have proved, whether the Bruits of her Traunces and
Diffigurations were true or not. And likewise ye should have tried by what
craft and persuasion she was made a Religious Woman; and if ye had been so
desirous, as ye pretended, to enquire out the truth or falsehood of this Woman,
and of her Revelations; it is to be supposed ye would have spoken with her
good, religious, and well-learned Ghostly Father e're this time, and also with
the virtuous and well-learned Priest, (as they were esteemed) of whose reports
ye would have been informed by them which heard them speak; or ye would also
have been minded to see the Book of her Revelations, which was offered you, of
which ye might have had more trial of her and her Revelations, than of a
hundred communications with her, or of as many sendings of your Chaplains unto
her. As for the late Lord of Canterbury's saying unto you, That she had many
great Visions, it ought to move you never a deal to give credence unto her or
her Revelations; for the said Lord knew no more certainty of her, or of her
Revelations, than he did by her own report. And as touching the saying of Amos
the Prophet, I think verily the same moved you but a little to hearken unto
her; for sithence the Consummation and the end of the Old Testament, and sithen
the Passion of Christ, God has done many great and notable things in the
World, whereof he showed nothing to his Prophets that has come to the knowledge
of Men. My Lord, all these things moved you not to give credence unto her, but
only the very matter whereupon she made her false Prophesies; to which matter
ye were so affected, as ye be noted to be in all matters which ye enter once
into, that nothing could come amiss that made for that purpose. And here I
appeal your Conscience, and instantly desire you to answer, Whether if she had
showed you as many Revelations for the confirmation of the King's Graces
Marriage, which he now enjoys, as she did to the contrary, ye would have
given as much credence to her as the same done, and would have let the trial of
her and her Revelations, to overpass those many years, where ye dwelt not from
her but twenty miles in the same Shire where her Traunces, and Diffigurings,
and Prophesies in her Traunces were surmised, and reported. And if percase ye
will say (as it not unlike but ye will say, minded as ye were wont to be) that
the matter be not like, for the Law of God, in your opinion, stands with the
one and not with the other: Surely, my Lord, I suppose there had been no great
cause more to trust the one more than the other; for ye know by Scriptures of
the Bible, that God may by his Revelation dispense with his own Law, as with
the Israelites spoiling the Egyptians, and with Jacob to have four Wives, and
such other. Think you, my Lord, that any indifferent Man, considering the
quality of the Matter, and your Affections, and also the negligent passing over
of such lawful Trials as ye might have had of the said Maiden, and her
Revelations, is so dull, that cannot perceive and discern that your communing,
and often sending to the said Maid, was rather to hear and bruit many of her
Revelations, than to try out the truth or falsehood of the same. And in this
Business, I suppose, it will be hard for you to purge your self before God, or
the World, but that ye have been in great default in hearing, believing, and
concealing such things as tended to the destruction of the Prince; and that her
Revelations were bent and purposed to that end, it has been duly proved before
as great Assembly and Council of the Lords of this Realm, as has been seen
many years meet out of a Parliament. And what the said Lords deemed them worthy
to suffer, which said, heard, believed, and concealed those false Revelations,
be more terrible than any threats spoken by me to your Brother.

And where ye go about to defend, that ye be not to be blamed for concealing
the Revelations concerning the King's Grace, because ye thought it not
necessary to rehearse them to his Highness, for six Causes following in your
Letters; before I show you my mind concerning these Causes, I suppose that
albeit you percase thought it not necessary to be showed to the Prince by you,
yet that your thinking shall not be your Trial, but the Law must define whether
ye oughted to utter it or not.

And as to the first of the said seven Causes; Albeit she told you that she had
showed her Revelations concerning the King's Grace to the King her self; yet
her saying, or others, discharged not you, but that ye were bound, by your
fidelity, to show to the King's Grace that thing which seemed to concern his
Grace and his Reign so nighly: for how knew you that she showed these
Revelations to the King's Grace, but by her own saying, to which ye should have
given no such credence, as to forbear the utterance of so great Matters
concerning a King's Weal? And why should you so sinisterly judge the Prince,
that if ye had showed the same unto him, he would have thought that ye had
brought that tale unto him, more for the strengthening and confirmation of your
Opinion, than for any other thing else. Verily, my Lord, whatsoever your
Judgment be, I see daily such benignity and excellent humanity in his Grace,
that I doubt not but his Highness would have accepted it in good part, if ye
had showed the same Revelations unto him, as ye were bounden by your fidelity.

To the second Cause; Albeit she showed you not that any Prince, or other
Temporal Lord, should put the King's Grace in danger of his Crown; yet there
were ways enough by which her said Revelations might have put the King's Grace
in danger, as the foresaid Council of Lords have substantially and duly
considered: And therefore albeit she showed you not the means whereby the
danger should ensue to the King, yet ye were nevertheless bounden to show him
of the danger.

To the third; Think you, my Lord, that if any Person would come unto you, and
show you, that the King's destruction were conspired against a certain time,
and would fully show you that he were sent from his Master to show the same to
the King, and will say further unto that, he would go straight to the King;
were it not yet your duty to certify the King's Grace of this Revelation, and
also to enquire whether the said Person had done his foresaid Message or no?
Yes verily, and so were ye bound, tho the Maiden showed you it was her Message
from God to be declared by her to the King's Grace.

To the fourth; Here ye translate the temporal Duty that ye owe to your Prince,
to the spiritual Duty of such as be bound to declare the Word of God to the
People, and to show unto them the ill and punishment of it in another World;
the concealment whereof pertains to the Judgment of God, but the concealment
of this Matter pertains to other Judges of this Realm.

To the fifth; There could no blame be imputed to you, if ye had showed the
Maidens Revelation to the King's Grace, albeit they were afterward found false,
for no Man ought to be blamed doing his Duty: And if a Man would show you
secretly, that there were a great Mischief intended against the Prince, were ye
to be blamed if ye showed him of it; albeit it was a feigned talk, and the said
mischief were never imagined.

To the sixth; Concerning an Imagination of Mr. Pary, it was known that he was
beside himself, and therefore they were not blamed that made no report thereof;
but it was not like in this case, for ye took not this Maiden for a mad Woman,
for if ye had, ye would not have given unto her so great credence as ye did.

To the final, and seventh Cause; Where ye lay unto the charge of our
Sovereign, that so has unkindly entreated you with grievous Words, and
terrible Letters, for showing his Grace truth in his great Matter, whereby ye
were discomforted to show unto him the Maidens Revelations: I believe that I
know the King's Goodness, and natural Gentleness so well, that his Grace would
not so unkindly handled you, as your unkindly writings him, unless ye gave him
other Causes than be expressed in your Letters. And whatsoever the King's Grace
has said or written unto you heretofore, yet notwithstanding ye were
nevertheless bounden to utter to him those pernicious Revelations.

Finally; Where ye desire, for the Passion of Christ, that ye be no more
twitched in this matter, for if ye be put to that strait, ye will not lose your
Soul, but ye will speak as your Conscience binds you, with many more words of
great courage. My Lord, if ye had taken my counsel sent unto you by your
Brother, and followed the same, submitting your self, by your Letters, at the
King's Grace, for your offenses in this behalf, I would have trusted that ye
should never be quykkrand in this matter more. But now, where ye take upon you
to defend the whole Matter, as ye were in no default, I cannot so far promise
you: And surely, my Lord, if the Matter come to trial, your own confession in
this Letter, besides the Witness which be against you, will be sufficient to
condemn you: Wherefore, my Lord, I will eft-soons advise you, That laying apart
all such excuses as ye have alleged in your Letters, which in my opinion be of
small effect, as I have declared, ye beseech the King's Grace, by your Letters,
to be your Gracious Lord, and to remit unto you your negligence, oversight,
and offense, committed against his Highness in this behalf; and I dare
undertake that his Highness shall benignly accept you into his gracious favor,
all matters of displeasure past before this time forgotten and forgiven. As
touching the speaking of your Conscience, It is thought that ye have written
and have spoken as much as ye can, and many things, as some right probably
believes, against your own Conscience: and many report, that at the last
Convocation, ye spoke many things which ye could not well defend; and therefore
it is not greatly feared what ye can say or write in that Matter, howsoever ye
be qukkrane and startled. And if ye had taken, etc.

L. A Renunciation of the Pope's Supremacy; signed by the Heads of six
Religious Houses.
QUum ea sit non solum Christianae Religionis and pietatis ratio, sed nostrae
etiam obedientiae regula, ut Domino nostro Henrico ejus nominis pro Dominio
Regio Octavo, cui uni and soli post Christum Iesum Salvatorem nostrum debentur
omnia, non modo omnimodam in Christo, and eandem sinceram perpetuamque animi
devotionem, fidem, observantiam, honorem, cultum, reverentiam praestemus, sed
etiam de eadem fide and observantia nostra rationem quotiescunque postulabitur
reddamus, and palam omnibus si res poscat libentissime testemur: Norint
universi ad quos praesens scriptum pervenit, quod nos Priores and Conventus
fratrum, viz. praedicatoris Langley Regis ordinis Sancti Dominici Minorum de
Ailsbury, Ordinis Sancti Francisci praedicatorum Dunstopliae, Ordinis antedicti
Minorum de Bedford, Ordinis Sancti Francisci Fratrum Carmelitarum de Hechyng,
Ordinis Beatae Mariae Minorum de Morea, Ordinis Sancti Francisci, uno ore and
voce, atque unanimi omnium and singulorum consensu and assensu, hoc scripto
nostro sub sigillis nostris communibus, and in domibus nostris capitularibus
dato, pro nobis and successoribus nostris omnibus singulis, in perpetuum
profitemur, testamur and fideliter promittimus and spondemus, nos dictos
Priores and Conventus and Successores nostros, omnes and singulos, integram,
inviolatam, sinceram perpetuamque fidem, observantiam and obedientiam semper
praestituros erga Dominum Regem nostrum Henricum Octavum, and erga Serenissimam
Reginam Annam Uxorem ejusdem, and erga castum Sanctumque Matrimonium nuper non
solum inter eosdem just and legitime contractum, ratum and consummatum, sed
etiam tam in duabus Convocationibus Cleri, quam in Parliamento Dominorum
Spiritualium and Temporalium atque Communium in eodem Parliamento Congregatorum
and praesentum determinatum, and per Thomam Cantuarien. Episcopum solenniter
confirmatum, and erga quamcunque aliam ejusdem Henrici Regis nostri Uxorem,
post mortem praedictae Annae nunc Uxoris suae legitimae ducendam, and erga
sobolem dicti Domini Regis Henrici ex praedicta Anna legitime tam progenitam
quam progignendam, and erga sobolem dicti Domini Regis ex alia quacunque
legitima Uxore post mortem ejusdem Annae legitime progignendam, and quod eadem
populo notificabimus, praedicabimus and suadebimus, ubicunque dabitur locus and
occasio. Item, quod confirmatum ratumque habemus semperque perpetuo habituri
sumus, quod praedictus Rex noster Henricus est Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae.
Item, quod Episcopus Romanus, qui in suis Bullis Papae nomen usurpat and summi
Pontificis Principatum sibi arrogat, nihilo majoris neque Auctoritatis aut
jurisdictionis habendus sit, quam caeteri quivis Episcopi in Anglia alibi in
sua cujusque Diocese. Item, quod soli dicto Domino Regi and Successoribus suis
adhaerebimus, atque ejus and Proclamationes, insuper omnes Angliae leges atque
etiam Statuta omnia, in Parliamento and per Parliamentum decreta, confirmata,
stabilita and ratificata, perpetuo manutenebimus, Episcopi Romani legibus,
decretis and Canonibus, si qui contra legem Divinam and Sacram Scripturam esse
invenientur, in perpetuum renunciantes. Item, quod nullus nostrum omnium in
ulla vel privata vel publica concione quicquam ex Sacris Scripturis desumptum
ad alienum sensum detorquere praesumet, sed quisquis Christum ejusque vera,
praedicabit Catholice and Orthodoxe. Item, quod unusquisque in suis orationibus
and comprecationibus de more faciendis, primum omnium Regem, tanquam Supremum
Caput Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Deo and populi precibus commendabit; deinde Reginam
cum sua sobole, tum demum Archiepiscopum Cantuarien. cum caeteris Cleri
Ordinibus, prout videbitur. Item, quod omnes and singuli praedicti Priores and
Conventus and Successores nostri, Conscientiae and Jurisjurandi Sacro firmiter
obligamur, quod omnia and singula praedicta sideliter and in perpetuum
observabimus. In cujus rei testimonium huic Instrumento, vel scripto nostro,
communia sigilla nostra appendimus, and nostra nomina propria quisque manu
subscripsimus, Sacris in Domibus nostris Capitularibus, die quinto Mensis Maii,
Anno Christi millesimo quingentesimo trigesimo quarto, Regni vero Regis nostri
Henrici Octavi vicesimo sexto.

Ego Frater Richardus Ingerth Prior Conventus, and Praedicator Langley Regis,
cum consensu omnium Fratrum Conventus praedicti, non coactus sed sponte
subscribo. Ego Frater Edwardus Tryley Sacrae Theologiae Bacalaureus, and
Conventus Ailsberiae, cum assensu omnium Fratrum Conventus praedicti, non
coactus sed sponte subscribo. Ego Frater Joannes Cotton, Prior Conventus
Praedicatorum Dunstabliae, cum assensu omnium Fratrum Conventus praedicti, non
coactus sed sponte subscribo. Ego Frater Joannes Wyatt, Sacrae Theologiae
Doctor Conventus Bed. una cum assensu omnium Fratrum, sponte hoc scribo and non
coactus. Ego Frater Joannes Sutler, Prior Conventus Carmelitarum Hicchiae, cum
Assensu omnium Fratrum Conventus praedicti, non coactus sed sponte subscribo.
Ego Frater Joannes Chapmanus, Sacrae Theologiae Bacalaureus, Magister immerito
Conventus Mare, cum assensu omnium Fratrum, mea sponte subscribo.

Another Declaration to the same purpose, Mutatis Mutandis, is made by the
Prioress of Bedford in Kent, of the Order of St. Dominick, May 4. 1534. Regn.
vicesimo sexto. Rot. Clausa.

LI. A Mandate for the Consecration of a Suffagran Bishop. Rot. Pat. 2. par. 27
Regni.
REX Reverendissimo in Christo Patri and perdilecto Consiliario nostro Thomae
Cantuariensi Episcopo salutem. Reverendus Pater and dilectus Consiliarius
noster Richardus Norvicensis Episcopus nobis significavit, quod Diocesis sua
Episcopi Suffraganei solatio, qui suae sollicitudinis partem sustinere
consuevit, destituta est and existit; and ideo reverendos Patres Gregorium
Abbatem Monasterii Beatae Mariae de Leystone, and Thomam Mannynge Priorem
Monasterii Beatae Mariae de Butley, Norvicen. Dioc. Ordine Sacerdotali rite
insignitos, and legitimo Matrimonio natos, and in aetate legitima constitutos,
virosque in Spiritualibus and Temporalibus multum circumspectos, quibus de
Canonicis nihil obviant instituta, quo minus (ut asserunt) ad Episcopalem
Suffraganei Dignitatem admitti possint and deberent, nobis per suas literas suo
magno sigillo munitas praesentavit, humiliter and devote supplicans, quatenus
nos alterum ipsorum sic praesentatorum ad aliquam sedem Episcopi Suffraganei
infra Provinciam Cantuariensem existentem nominare, ipsique sic nominato
stylum, Titulum and Dignitatem hujusmodi sedis donare dignaremur: unde nos ex
gratia nostra speciali and mero motu nostris, dictum Reverendum Patrem Thomam
Manynnge Priorem Monasterii Beatae Mariae de Butley praedicti, alterum ex
dictis, Praesentamus in Episcopum Suffraganeum Sedis Gips vici Norvicen.
Diocesantedictae, nominamus, eique Stilum, Titulum and Dignitatem ejusdem Sedis
Episcopi Suffraganei damus and conferimus. Atque haec vobis tenore
praesentamus, significamus, requirentes vos, quatenus eundem Patrem sic per nos
nominatum, in Episcopum Suffraganeum ejusdem Sedis Gips vici consecretis, eique
Benedictionem ac omnia Episcopalia Insignia conferatis; caeteraque omnia and
singula quae vestro in hac part incumbunt officio pastorali, juxta modum and
formam Statuti Parliamenti in vicesimo sexto Anno Regni nostri apud.
Westmonasterium nuper editi peragetis.

T. R.
apud Westminster. 6. die Martii 27. Regn.
Ad Librum Tertium.
I. Instructions for the General Visitation of the Monasteries.
Articuli Regiae Inquisitionis, in Monasticam vitam agentes, exponendi, and
praecipue in exemptos a jurisdictione Diocaesana, jam tantum Regiae Majestati
and ejus jurisdictioni subditos and subjectos, ac hujus inclyti sui Regni
Statutis and legibus, nullisque aliis penitus, obnoxios and astrictos.

1. IN primis; Whether Divine Service be solemnly sung, said, Cott. Libr.
Cleop. E. 4.
observed, and kept in this Monastery, according to the Number and the
Abilities thereof, by Night and by Day, in due time and hours? and how many be
present commonly at Mattins, and other Service, and who be absent, and so
accustomed to be, without cause or sickness?

2. Item; How many Monks, Cannons Regulars, or Nuns, be within this Monastery,
and how many there ought to be, and whether the number be complete according to
the Founder's Will, or the Statutes, Ordinances, and laudable custom of this
House; and whether the number be augmented or diminished now of late?

3. Item; Who were the first Founders of this House?

Fundationem primam, secundam, tertiam, and quotquot habent, exhibeant. 4.
Item; Whether this House has had any increase of Lands given to it sithence
the first Foundation thereof? by whom? by how many? and when?

5. Item; To what Sum of Money those Revenues and Rents of this House do extend
and amount unto yearly?

6. Item; Whether this House was ever translated from on habit and order to
another? by whose Authority? and for what Cause?

Translationem exhibeant. 7. Item; How the Lands and Possessions appertaining
unto this Monastery, given by the first Founder, and all other Lands given
sithence the first Foundation, were granted, given, and established, and so
first brought to Morte main? whether by the only Authority of the Giver, or by
the Authorization of the Prince for that time reigning, and by what tenor and
form ye hold them?

Donationem and Confirmationem exhibeant. 8. Item; What evidence have you to
show for all and singular your Lands, Manors, Tenements, and other your
Possessions Mortisate, and given unto you, and this your Monastery?

9. Item; Wherefore, for what Causes and Considerations ye were exempt from
your Diocesan? and what was your Suggestion and Motive at the obtaining of your
said Exemption?

Exemptionem exhibeant. 10. Item; Whether ye have any private, peculiar, or
local Statutes, Confirmations, Ordinances, or Rules, made only for the behoof,
good order, and singular weal of this House, besides the Rules of your
Profession? and whether they were made either by your Founders before your
Exemption, or by the good Fathers of this House, with the whole consent of the
Brethren, being sins your exemption: to what use they were made, and how ye
observe them?

Statuta illa localia, and alia quotquot habent, exhibeant. 11. Item; By what
way and form the Master of this House was elected and chosen? And whether all
the Brethren having, or ought to have by the Law, Statutes, or laudable custom
of this House, Voices in the Election, were present in the same Election, or
lawfully called or cited to it?

12. Item; Whether any Persons Excommunicate, Suspended, or Interdicted, did
give Voices in the same Election?

13. Item; Within what time after the Election was made and done, the Master of
this House was confirmed? and by whom?

14. Item; Whether unto the Confirmation, all that had Interest, or that would
object against the same, were lawfully cited, monished, and called?

Exhibeat Electionem, Confirmationem, and Titulum suae Incumbentiae. 15. Item;
What Rule the Master of this House, and other the Brethren, do profess?

16. Item; How many be Professed, and how many be Novices; and whether the
Novices have like Habit, or use to wear an Habit distinct from the Habit of the
Brethren Professed?

17. Item; Whether ye do use to profess your Novices in due time, and within
what time and space after they have taken the Habit upon them?

18. Item; Whether the Brethren of this House do know the Rule that they have
professed, and whether they keep their Profession according to that their Rule,
and Custom of this House; and in especial, the three substantial and principal
Vows, that is to say, Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience?

19. Item; Whether any of the Brethren use any propriety of Money, or of Plate,
in their Chambers; or of any other manner thing unwarre of the Master, and
without his knowledge and license, or by his sufferance and knowledge? and for
what cause?

20. Item; Whether ye do keep Chastity, not using the company of any suspect
Woman within this Monastery, or without? And whether the Master, or any Brother
of this House be suspected upon Incontinency, or defamed for that he is much
conversant with Women?

21. Item; Whether Women uses and resorteth much to this Monastry by
back-ways, or otherwise? and whether they be accustomably, or at any time
lodged within the Precinct thereof?

22. Item; Whether the Master, or any Brother of this House, uses to have any
Boys or young Men laying with him?

23. Item; Whether the Brethren of this House keep their Obedience, being ready
at their Master's Commandment, in all things honest, lawful, and reasonable?

Sequuntur Regulae Caeremoniales. 24. Item; Whether ye do keep silence in the
Church, Cloister, Fraitrie, and Dormitorie, at the hours and time specified in
your Rule?

25. Item; Whether ye do keep Fasting and Abstinence, according to your Rules,
Statutes, Ordinances, and laudable Customs of this House?

26. Item; Whether ye abstain from Flesh in time of Advent, and other times
declared and specified by the Law, Rules, and laudable Customs of this House?

27. Item; Whether ye wear Shirts and Sheets of Woollen, or that ye have any
Constitution, Ordinance, or Dispensation, granted or made to the contrary, by
sufficient and lawful Authority?

Profitentes Regulam Benedicti quam arctissime tenentur ad praedicta
Caeremonialia observanda. 28. Item; Whether ye do sleep altogethers in the
Dormitorie, under one Roof, or not?

29. Item; Whether ye have all separate Beds, or any one of you does lay with
an other?

30. Item; Whether ye do keep the Fraitry at Meals, so that two parts, or the
least, the two part of the whole Covent be always there, unless the Master at
every one time dispense with you to the contrary?

31. Item; Whether ye do wear your Religious habit continually, and never leave
it off but when ye go to bed?

32. Item; Whether every Brethren of this House have lightly departed hence,
and has gone to any other House of like Order and Profession, without special
Letters and License of their Master?

33. Item; Whether the Master and Brethren of this House have received and
admitted any Brother of another House, without special License and Letters of
his Master and Head?

34. Item; Whether any of you, sithence the time of your Profession, has gone
out of this House to his Friends, or otherwise?

35. Item; How oftimes he did so, and how long at every time ye ^arried forth?

36. Item; Whether ye had special license of your Master so to go forth, or not?

37. Item; Whether at every time of your being forth, ye changed or left off
your habit, or every part thereof?

38. Item; Whether ye, or any of you be, or has been, in manifest Apostasy,
that is to say, Fugitives or Vagbonds?

39. Item; For what cause or occasion ye have so gone forth and been in
Apostasy? and whether the cause of your going forth was by reason of the great
cruelty of your Master, or by his negligence, not calling you home to your
Cloister?

40. Item; Whether ye be weekly shaven, and do not nourish or suffer your Hair
to be long? and whether ye wear your Apparel according to the Rule, not too
excessive, nor too exquisite; and in like wise the trappo's of your Horses, and
other your bearing Beasts?

41. Item; Whether the Master and Head of this House do use his Brethren
charitably, without partiality, malice, envy, grudg, or displeasure more showed
to one than to another?

42. Item; Whether he do use his Disciplines, Corrections, and Punishments upon
his Brethren, with mercy, pity, and charity, without cruelty, rigorousness, and
enormous hurt, no more favoring one than another?

43. Item; Whether any Brother, or Religious Person of this House, be
incorrigible?

44. Item; Whether the Master of this House do use his Brethren charitably when
they be sick and diseased? and whether in time of their sickness he do procure
unto them Physicians, and all other necessaries?

45. Item; Whether he make his Accounts (as he ought to do) once every year
before his Brethren, and chiefly the Seniors and Officers, to the intent they
may be made privy to the state and condition of the House, and know perfectly
the due administration thereof?

46. Item; Whether the Prior, Subprior, Sellerar, Kitchener, Terrure,
Sacristen, or any suchlike Officer, having Administration of every manner
Revenues of this House, do make his whole and true Account, according as he is
bound to do, not applying any thing by him received to his own proper use or
commodity?

47. Item; Whether any Religious Person of this House do bear, occupy, or
exercise more Offices than one, for, and to his own singular commodity,
advantage, or profit, by the partial dealing of the Master?

48. Item; Whether all and singular the Revenues and Profits of this House be
converted and employed to the behove and use thereof, and of the Brethren, and
according to the Founder's mind and Giver?

49. Item; Whether the Master do make sufficient reparations upon his
Monastery, as the Church and all other housing thereto adjoined, and also upon
all other the Lands, Granges, Farms, and Tenements belonging to the same, and
whether he suffer any dilapidation, decay, or ruin in any part of them?

50. Item; Whether there be any Inventory made of all and singular the
Movables, Goods, which from time to time have been, and yet be in this House,
as of Jewels, Relics, Ornaments, Vestiments, ready Money, Plate, Bedding, with
other Utensils; also of Corn, Chattels, and other Commodities, to the intent
the state and condition of this House may be always known?

51. Item; That ye express truly and sincerely the whole state and condition of
this House, as in Money, Plate, Cattle, Corn, and other Goods?

52. Item; Whether this Monastery be indebted? to whom? and for what cause?

53. Item; Whether any of the Lands be sold, or mortgaged? and for what Sums?

54. Item; Whether any be let to Farm by the Master of this House for term of
years, and for how many years? and specially whether they be letten for small
Sums, or for less Sums than they were wont to be letten for, to the intent to
have great sums of ready Money before hand?

55. Item; Whether he do enforce, compel, or constrain his Brethren, or any of
them, to consent to the sealing of any Leases, Grants, Farm-Holds, Annuities,
Corrodies, or any other Alienations?

56. Item; Whether the Plate and Jewels, or any part or parcel thereof, or of
any other moveable Goods of this House be laid to pledge, sold, or alienated for
a time, or for ever? for what cause, and to whom? or otherwise imbezled, or
consumed?

57. Item; Whether the Master of this House be wont to give under his Seal of
Office, or Covent-Seal, Farms, Corrodies, Annuities, or Offices, to his
Kinsfolk, Alliances, Friends, or Acquaintance, for term of years, or otherwise,
to the hurt, hindrance, damage, and impoverishment of this House?

58. Item; Whether he be wont to grant any Patent, or Covent-Seal, without the
consent of his Brethren?

59. Item; Whether the Covent-Seal of this House be surely and safely kept
under three Keys; that is to say, one remaining and being in the custody of the
Master, and the other two in the custody of two Seniours?

60. Item; Whether the Muniments and Evidences of the Lands, Rents, and
Revenues of this House, be safely kept from Vermin and Moistness?

61. Item; Whether the Master do keep Hospitality according to the ability of
his House, and in like manner as other Fathers hereof have done heretofore?

62. Item; Whether the Master of this House, in receiving any Novice, being of
willing and toward mind to enter into Religion, has demanded or received, or
convented to receive any Money, Rewards, or any other temporal Commodities of
him so entering, or willing to enter, or of any other his Friends? and whether
for not promising, granting, or giving such Rewards or Gifts, any has been
repelled and not received?

63. Item; Whether the Novices, and other received into Religion, have a
Preceptor and Master deputed unto them to teach them Gramar and good Letters?

64. Item; Whether any Seniour of this House be deputed to declare, inform, and
instruct them their Rules, and whereunto they shall be bounden to observe and
keep, after their Profession?

65. Item; Whether any of you have taken upon him the Habit and Profession of
your Religion, chiefly for the intent, hope, or trust to be made Head and
Master of this House?

66. Item; Whether the Master of this House, in giving any Advocation,
Nomination, Presentation, or Collation of any Parsonage, Vicarage, Chapel, or
Benefice of the Patronage and Gift this House, do take, or use to take any
manner Pension, Portion, or other Commodity or Gains; or else does make any
Convention or Compaction, whereby any lucre may ensue to him in that behalf?

67. Item; Whether he do receive, or use to receive, the Fruits and Revenues of
every such Benefice vacant, or use to borrow any Money of him to whom he
intends to give such Benefice unto, expressly covenanting or intending, that
he so obtaining the said Benefice, shall freely and clearly remit the said Money
so borrowed?

68. Item; What, and how many Benefices the Master of this House does occupy
and keep in his own hands?

69. Item; Whether the same Benefices be appropriate and united to this House
by sufficient authority?

70. Item; Whether the Master of this House does make distributions amongst the
Parishoners of the Benefices appropriate, and does keep and observe all and
singular other Provisions and Ordinances specified and expressed in the
Appropriations of the same Benefices?

Exhibeant omnes and singulas Appropriationes, una cum Ordinationibus and
Dotationibus Vicariatuum. 71. Item; Whether he do promote unto such Benefices
as be of his Gift, sufficient and able Persons in Learning, Manners, and Virtue?

72. Item; Whether any Brother of this House do serve any Parish Church, being
appropriate and united to the same, and how many Churches appropriate be so
served?

73. Item; Whether the Master of this House has and possesses any Benefice
with Cure, or any other Dignity with his Abbey?

Si aliquod tale habet, Dispensationem exhibeat. 74. Item; Whether the Master
of this House at any time since he was first made Abbot, or Master, did know or
believe that he was Suspended, or Excommunicate, either by the Law, or by any
Judge; and whether he knowing or supposing himself so to be, did sing Mass in
the mean time, and before he was absolved?

In Visitatione Monialium ad Praemissa addantur haec. 75. Item; Whether this
Monastery has good and sufficient Enclosure, and whether the Doors and Windows
be diligently kept shut, so that no Man can have any entry into the same, or
any part thereof, at inconvenient times?

Propter quod necessarium erit Visitatori circumire Monasterium, ac videre and
rimare dispositionem aedificiorum, and an sint aliqua loca pervia per quae
secret intrari possit; and una secum habeat Abbatissam cum duabus aut tribus
senioribus Monialibus, a quibus tum interroget, an ostia Monasterii singulis
quibusque noctibus sub clavibus clausa teneantur, and quae earum Monialium
senio confectarum, vel an Abbas ipsa clavium custodiam tempore nocturno habeant
and teneant: nam non est tutum clavium custodiam Iunioribus committere. 76.
Item; Whether Strangers, both Men and Women, uses commonly to have
communication with the Sisters of this House, without license of the Abbess or
Prioress, specially in secret places, and in the absence of their Sisters?

77. Item; Whether any Sister of this House were professed for any manner of
compulsion of her Friends and Kinsfolks, or by the Abbess or Prioress?

78. Item; Whether any of the Sisters of this House uses to go forth any
whither out of the Precinct thereof, without special license of their Abbess or
Prioress?

79. Item; Whether any Sister does use her Habit continually out of her Cell?

80. Item; Wherein every one of you occupies her self, beside the time of
Divine Service?

81. Item; Whether any Sister of this House has any familiarity with Religious
Men, Secular Priests, or Laymen, being not near of kin unto them?

82. Item; Whether any Sister of this House has been taken and found with any
such accustomably so communing, and could not show any reasonable cause why
they so did?

83. Item; Whether any of you does use to write any Letters of Love, or
lascivious fashion to any Person, or receive any such, or have any privy
Messengers coming and resorting unto you, or any of you, with Token or Gifts,
from any manner secular Person or other?

84. Item; Whether any of you does use to speak with any manner of Person, by
night or by day, by Grates or back Windows, or other privy Places within this
Monastry, without license of your Head?

85. Item; Whether the Confessor of this House be a discreet Man, of good
learning, virtue and honest behavior, of good name and fame, and whether he
has been always so taken?

86. Item; How oftimes in the year the Sisters of this House uses to be
Confessed and Communicate?

Restat pro Ecclesiis Collegiatis, Hospitalibus, Ecclesiis Cathedralibus,
Parrochialibus, Ecclesiis, Episcopo, and Archiepiscopo, pro ordine
Ierosolomitarum? Exhibeant omnia scripta, munimenta, Inventaria, Scedulas
quascunque, unde aliquid cognitionis eorum reformationi Monasteriorum, sive
domorum utilitati, necessariae explicari, aut quoquo modo colligi possit.

II. General Injunctions to be given on the King's Highness's behalf, in all
Monastries and other Houses, of whatsoever Order or Religion they be.
FIrst; That the Abbot, Prior, or President, Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 4.
and all other Brethren of the Place that is visited, shall faithfully, truly,
and heartily, keep and observe, and cause teach, and procure to be kept and
observed of other, as much as in them may lie, all and singular Contents, as
well in the other of the King's Highness Succession, given heretofore by them,
as in a certain Profession lately sealed with the Common Seal, and subscribed
and Signed with their own hands: Also that they shall observe and fulfill, by
all the means that they best may, the Statutes of this Realm, made, or to be
made, for the suppression and taking away of the usurped and pretensed
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome within this Realm: and for the assertion and
confirmation of the Authority, Jurisdiction, and Prerogative of our most noble
Sovereign Lord the King, and his Successors; and that they shall diligently
instruct their Juniors and Youngers, and all other committed to their Cure,
That the King's Power is by the Laws of God most excellent of all under God in
Earth; and that we ought to obey him before all other Powers, by God^^
Prescript; and that the Bishop of Rome's Jurisdiction or Authority heretofore
usurped, by no means is founded or established by Holy Scripture: but that the
same, partly by the craft and deceit of the same Bishop of Rome, and by his
evil and ambitious Canons and Decretals; and partly by the toleration and
permission of Princes, by little and little has grown up; and therefore now,
of most right and equity, is taken away and clean expelled out of his Realm.

Also, that the Abbot, Prior, or President and Brethren, may be declared, by
the King's Supreme Power and Authority Ecclesiastical, to be absolved and
loosed from all manner Obedience, Oath, and Profession by them heretofore
perchance promised, or made, to the said Bishop of Rome, or to any other in his
stead, or occupying his Authority; or to any other Foreign Prince, or Person:
And nevertheless let it be enjoined to them, that they shall not promise or
give such Oath or Profession to any such Foreign Potentate hereafter. And if
the Statutes of the said Order Religious, or Place, seem to bind them to
Obedience, or Subjection, or any other Recognizance of Superiority to the said
Bishop of Rome, or to any other Foreign Power, Potentate, Person or Place, by
any ways; such Statutes, by the King's Graces Visitors, be utterly annihilate,
broken, and declared void and of none effect; and that they be in no case
bounden or obligate to the same, and such Statutes to be forthwith utterly put
forth and abolished out of the Books, or Muniments of that Religion, Order or
Place, by the President and his Brethren.

Also, that no Monk, or Brother of this Monastery, by any means go forth of the
Precinct of the same.

Also, that Women, of what state or degree soever they be, be utterly excluded
from entering into the Limits or Circuit of this Monastery, or place, unless
they first obtain license of the King's Highness, or his Visitor.

Also, that there be no entering into this Monastery but one, and that by the
great fore-gate of the same, which diligently shall be watched and kept by some
Porter specially appointed for that purpose, and shall be shut and opened by
the same both day and night, at convenient and accustomed hours; which Porter
shall repel all manner Women from entrance into the said Monastery.

Also, that all and singular Brethren, and Monks of this Monastery, take their
refections altogether in a place called the Misericorde, such days as they eat
Flesh, and all other days in their Refectory; and that at every Mess there sit
four of them, not of duty demanding to them any certain, usual, or accustomed
duty or portion of Meat as they were wont to do; but that they be content with
such Victuals as is set before them, and there take their Refections soberly,
without excess, with giving due thanks to God; and that at every such
Refection, some Chapter of the New Testament, or Old, by some of the said
Brethren, be read and recited to the other, keeping silence, and giving
audience to the same.

Also, that the Abbot and President do daily prepare one Table for himself and
his Guests thither resorting, and that not over-sumptuous and full of delicate
and strange Dishes, but honestly furnished with common Meats; At which Table,
the said Abbot, or some Senior in his stead, shall sit to receive, and gently
entertain the Strangers, the Guests.

Also, that none of the Brethren send any part of his Meat, or the leavings
thereof to any Person, but that there be assigned an Almoner, which shall
gather the Leavings, both of the Covent and Strangers Tables, after that the
Servants of the House have had their convenient Refections, and distribute the
same to poor People; amongst whom special consideration be had of such, before
other, as be Kinsfolk to any of the said Brethren, if they be of like power and
debility as other be; and also of those which endeavor themselves, with all
their will and labor, to get their living with their hands, and yet cannot
fully help themselves for their chargeable Household, and multitude of Children:
yet let not them be so cherished, that they shall leave labor and fall to
idleness; with consideration also specially to be had of them, which by
weakness of their Limbs and Body be so impotent that they cannot labor; and by
no means let such Alms be given to valiant mighty and idle Beggars and
Vagabonds, as commonly use to resort about such places; which rather, as
drove-Beasts and Mychers, should be driven away and compelled to labor, than
in their idleness and lewdness, against the form of the King's Graces Statute
in this behalf made, cherished, and maintained, to the great hindrance and
damage of the Commonweal.

Also, that all other Almses or Destributions due, or accustomed to be made, by
reason of the Foundation, Statutes, or customs of this place, be made and
given, as largely and as liberally as ever they were at any time heretofore.

Also, that the Abbot, Prior, or President, shall find Wood and Fuel
sufficient to make Fire in the Refectory, from Allhallow-even to Good Friday.

Also, that all the Brethren of this House, except the Abbot, and such as be
sick, or evil at ease, and those that have fulfilled their Iubilee, lie
together in the Dormitory, every one by himself, in several Beds.

Also, that no Brother, or Monk, of this House, have any Child or Boy laying,
or privily accompanying with him, or otherwise haunting unto him, other than to
help him to Mass.

Also, that the Brethren of this House, when they be sick, or evil at ease, be
seen unto, and be kept in the Infirmary duly, as well for their sustenance of
Meat and Drink, as for their good keeping.

Also, that the Abbot, or President, keep and find in some University, one or
two of his Brothers, according to the Ability and Possessions of this House;
which Brethren, after they be learned in good and holy Letters, when they
return home, may instruct and teach their Brethren, and diligently preach the
Word of God.

Also, that every day, by the space of one hour, a Lesson of Holy Scripture be
kept in this Covent, to which all, under pain by this said President to be
moderated, shall resort; which President shall have Authority to dispense with
them, that they, with a low and treatable voice* say their long hours, which
were wont to be sung.

Also, that the Brethren of this House, after Divine Service done, read or hear
somewhat of Holy Scripture, or occupy themself in some such like honest and
laudable exercise.

Also, that all and every Brethren of this House shall observe the Rule,
Statutes, and laudable Customs of this Religion, as far as they do agree with
Holy Scripture and the Word of God. And that the Abbot, Prior, or President of
this Monastery, every day shall expound to his Brethren, as plainly as may be,
in English, a certain part of the Rule that they have professed, and apply the
same always to the Doctrine of Christ, and not contrariwise; and he shall teach
them, that the said Rule, and other their Principles of Religion (so far as
they be laudable) be taken out of Holy Scripture; and he shall show them the
places from whence they were derived; and that their Ceremonies, and other
observances of Religion, be none other things than as the first Letters or
Principles, and certain Introductions to true Christianity, or to observe an
order in the Church. And that true Religion is not contained in Apparel, manner
of going, shaven Heads, and such other marks; nor in silence, fasting,
up-rising in the night, singing, and such other kind of Ceremonies, but in
cleanness of mind, pureness of living, Christ's Faith not feigned, and
brotherly Charity, and true honoring of God in Spirit and Verity: And that
those abovesaid things were instituted and begun, that they being first
exercised in these, in process of time might ascend to those as by certain
steps, that is to say, to the chief point and end of Religion: and therefore
let them be diligently exhorted, that they do not continually stick and
surcease in such Ceremonies and Observances, as tho they had perfectly
fulfilled the chief and outmost of the whole true Religion; but that when they
have once past such things, they endeavor themselves to higher things, and
convert their minds from such external Matters, to more inward and deeper
Considerations, as the Law of God and Christian Religion does teach and show.
And that they assure not themselves of any Reward or Commodity any wise, by
reason of such Ceremonies and Observances, except they refer all such to
Christ, and for his sake observe them; and for that they might thereby the more
easily keep such things as he has commanded, as well to them as to all
Christian People.

Also, that the Abbot and President of this Place shall make a full and true
reckoning and account of his Administration every year to his Brethren, as well
of his Receipts as Expenses; and that the said Account be written in a great
Book remaining with the Covent.

Also, that the Abbot and President of this House shall make no waste of the
Woods pertaining to this House, nor shall set out unadvisedly any Farms or
Reversions, without the consent of the more part of the Convent.

Also, that there be assigned a Book and a Register that may copy out into that
Book all such Writings, word by word, as shall pass under the Convent-Seal of
this House.

Also, that no Man be suffered to profess, or to wear the Habit of Religion in
this House e're he be 24 years of Age complete; And that they entice nor allure
no Man with suasions and blandyments to take the Religion upon him.

Item, that they shall not show no Relics, or feigned Miracles, for increase
of Lucre, but that they exhort Pilgrims and Strangers to give that to the Poor,
that they thought to offer to their Images or Relics.

Also, that they shall suffer no Fairs, or Markets, to be kept or used within
the limits of this House.

Also, that every Brother of this House that is a Priest, shall every day in
his Mass, pray for the most happy and most prosperous estate of our Sovereign
Lord the King, and his most noble and lawful Wife Queen Ann.

Also, that if either the Master, or any Brother of this House, do infringe any
of the said Injunctions, any of them shall denounce the same, or procure to be
denounced, as soon as may be, to the King's Majesty, or to his Visitor-General,
or his Deputy. And the Abbot, or Master, shall minister spending Money, and
other Necessaries, for the way to him that shall so denounce.

Other Spiritual Injunctions may be added by the Visitor, as the place and
nature of the Comperts shall require, after his discretion.

Reserving Power to give more Injunctions, and to examine and discuss the
Comperts, to punish and reform them that be convict of any notable Crime, to
search and try the Foundations, Charters, Donations, Appropriations and
Muniments of the said Places; and to dispose all such Papistical Escripts as
shall be there found, to the Right Honorable Mr. Thomas Cromwell
General-Visitor to the King's said Highness, as shall seem most expedient to
his high wisdom and discretion.

III. Some Particulars relating to the Dissolution of Monasteries.
Section I. The Preamble of the Surrender of the Monastery of Langden.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, etc. Willielmus Dyer, Abbas Monasterii Beatae
Mariae Virginis and S. Thomae Martyris de Langden, in Com. Kent, and ejusdem
loci Conventus, Ordinis Praemonstrat. capitulum dictae domus plene facientes,
ejusdemque domus (quae in suis fructibus, redditibus, provenien. even. and
emolumen. non mediocriter deteriorata est, and quasi in totum diminuta,
ingentique aere alieno obruta, oppressa, and gravata extitit) statum usque adeo
matura deliberatione, and diligenti tractatu, considerantes, ponderantes, and
pensantes, quod nisi celeri remedio, regia provisione huic Monasterio sive
Prioratui (quippe quod de ejus fundatione and personatu existit) brevi
succuratur and provideatur, funditus in Spiritualibus and Temporalibus
annihiletur, per praesentes damus and concedimus, etc.

The rest follows in the ordinary form of Law: but the ordinary Preamble in
most Surrenders is.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus, etc. Nos -- Salutem. Sciatis quod nos, deliberate,
certa scientia, and mero motu, nostris, ex quibusdam causis, justis, and
rationabilibus, nos, animas and conscientias nostras, specialiter moventibus,
ultro and sponte dedisse and concessisse, Domino Regi, etc.

But it seems some few Houses, though they were prevailed with to surrender,
yet would not do it with such a Preamble, for there are about twenty Surrenders
without any Preamble at all, made to John London Clerk, ad usum Domini Regis.

Section II.
A List of Religious Houses, which by the King's Letters Patents were of new
founded and preserved from the dissolution of Lesser Monasteries.
ST. Mary of Betlesden, Buckinghamshire, Cistercians. Anno Regni 28.
17 August. St. Mary of Huntington, Augustians. 17 August. Chertsey,
Cambridg-shire, Benedict. Nuns. 17 August. St. Mary in Winton, Southamp. shire,
Benedict. Nuns. 17 August. Grace-dieu, Leichestershire, August. Nuns. 17
August. St. Michael Hull, Yorkshire, Carthusians. 27. St. Clare of Denby,
Cambridg-shire, Nuns. 28. Kymme, Lincolnshire, Augustine. 2. September. St. Ann
Marrick, Yorkshire, Benedict. Nuns. 9. St. Mary of Bindon, Dorset-shire,
Cistercians. 16. November. St. Mary Harpa, Westmor. Praemonstrat. 16. St. Mary
of Hynnings, Lincolnshire, Cisterc. Nuns. 27. St. Mary de-la-Pray, Northamp.
shire, Nuns. 13. December. St. Mary of Kelling, Yorkshire, Nuns. 14. St. Mary
of Cockersand, Lancash. Praemonstrat. Nuns. 19. De-la-val, Yorkshire, Carthus.
2. January. St. Mary Newstead, Nottinghamsh. August. Nuns. 2. Wormsley,
Herefordsh. August. 27. St. Mary of Alnewick, Northumb. Praemonst. 30.
Bellalanda, Yorksh. Cisterc. 30. St. John Bapt. Egglestone, Yorksh. 30. St.
Mary de Nith, Glamorgansh. Cisterc. 30. St. Mary Ulnestock, Leicestersh. 30.
St. Mary of Dale, Derbysh. August. 30. St. Katharine of Polesloo, Devonsh.
Benedict. Nuns. 30. St. Mary Lacock, Wiltsh. August. Nuns. 30. St. Mary
Chester, Nuns. 30. St. Mary of Studley, Oxfordsh. Nuns. 30. St, Mary of Canon
Leigh, Devonsh. Nuns. 12. February. Cockhill, Worcestersh. August. Nuns. 5.
March. St. Bartholomew, New Castle, Nuns. 30. St. Mary of Wallingwells, Yorksh.
April.
The Grants for these Houses are all in the 28 year of the King, to be held in
perpetuam eleemosynam, and are enrolled in the 1 st, 2 d, 4 th, and 5 th parts
of the Patent Rolls for that Year.

Section III.
A List of all the Surrenders of Abbeys, which are yet extant in the
Augmentation Office.
LAngden, Praemonst. signed by the Abbot and 10 Monks, Com. Kent. 13. November.
Regni 27.
Folkeston, Benedict. the Prior, Kent. 15. Dover, the Prior, 8 Monks, Kent. 16.
Merten, August. the Prior, and 5 Friars, Yorksh. 9. February. Hornby, Premonst.
the Prior and two Monks. 23. Tilty, Cisterc. the Abbot and 5 Monks, Essex. 28.
Bilsington, the Prior and two Monks, Kent, 21.
These are all enrolled Rot. Claus. Part 1st. Regni 28.

Furnesse, the Abbot and 30 Monks, Lancashire. 9. April. Bermondsey, the Abb.
Surrey. 1. June. Bushlisham, Bp of St. David's, Commendator, Berk. 5. July.
The Originals of these two last are lost, but enrolled Rot. Claus. Part 2d.
Regn. 28.
Lanthony, August. the Prior and 21 Monks, Glocestsh. 10. May. Regni 29.
Abbington, Bened. the Abbot and 25 Monks, Berksh. 29. Charterhouse, the Prior.
London. 10. June. Chertsey, -- the Abbot and 14 Monks, 6. July. Wardon,
Cisterc. the Abbot and 14 Monks, Bedfordsh. 4. December. St. Austins Canterb.
the Abbey-Seal. 5. Westacre, August. the Prior and 8 Monks, Norfolk, 14.
January. Kingswood, Cisterc. Glocestsh. the Abbot and 13 Monks. 1. February.
Coxhall, Cisterc. the Abbot, Essex. 5. St. Andrew, Bened. Northampt. the Prior
and 12 Fr. 2. March. Holmcultrin -- the Abbot and 25 Monks, Cumberland, 6.
Butley, August, the Commend. and 8 Monks, Suffolk. 7. Stradford-Langthorn,
Cisterc. the Abbot and 14 Mon. Essex. 8. Southwick, August. Hampsh. 7. April.
Kennelworth, Bened. the Prior and 16 Mon. Warwicksh. 14. Merton, August. the
Abbot and 14 Monks, Surrey, 16. Pont-Robert, Cisterc. the Abbot and 8 Monks,
Sussex, 16. Belloloco, Cisterc. the Abbot and 19 Monks, Hampsh. 17.
Besides these, the following Surrenders are enrolled.
Jews, Cluniac. Sussex, the Prior. 16. November. Castle-Acre, Cluniac.
Norfolk, the Prior. 22. Titchfield, Praemonst. the Commend. Southamptsh. 18.
December. Muchelling, Bened. Sommersetsh. the Abbot. 3. January. Boxley,
Cisterc. Kent, the Abbot. 26. Walden, Bened. Essex the Bpp. Suffr. of
Colchester, Commend. 2^. March.
Almost all these Abbeys were above the value of two hundred pound, so that
they were not within the Statute for suppressing the lesser Abbeys, but the
Abbots were prevailed on by other Motives to surrender their Houses to the King.
Batle, Bened. Sussex, the Abbot and 16 Monks. Regni 30.
27. May. Thurgarton, August. Yorksh. the Prior and 8 Frat. 14. June.
Bushlisham, Bened. Berksh. the Abbot and 15 Monks. 19. Axiholm, Carthus.
Lincolnsh. the Prior and 8 Monks. 23. Rupa, Cisterc. Yorksh. the Abbot and 17
Monks. 23. Walbeck, Praemonst. Nottingsh. the Abbot and 18 Mon. 20. Huntington
Cannons, Aug. the Prior and 8 Cannons. 11. July. Lincoln, Gilbertines the
Prior, and 15 Monks. 14. Feversham, Cluniac. Kent, the Abbot and 8 Monks. 8.
Bordesley, Cisterc. Worcestsh. the Abbot and 19 Monks. 17. Cumbermore, August.
Chesh. the Abbot. 27. St. Austins, Canterb. Bened. the Abbot and 30 Monks. 30.
St. James, Northamptonsh. Bened. the Abbot Elect and 5 Monks. 25. August.
Fordham, Gilbertines, Cambridgsh. the Prior and 3 Frat. 1. September. Chateras,
Black-Nuns, Cambridgsh. the Abbess and 10 Nuns. 3. Val-royal, Chessh. the Abbot
and 14 Monks. 7. Croxton, Premonst. Leicestersh. the Abbot and 22 Mon. 8.
Haughmond, Cannons, Shropsh. the Abbot and 10 Mon. 9. Tudburry, Bened.
Staffordsh. the Prior and 8 Monks. 14. De-la-pray, no Subscriptions, only the
Common Seal. 16. Rostiter, August. Staffordsh. the Abbot and 8 Monks. 16.
Crockesden, Cisterc. Staffordsh. the Abbot and 12 Mon. 17. Hilton, Cisterc.
Staffordsh. the Abbot and 8 Monks. 18. Semperingham, * Gilbertines, the Prior
and 8 Monks. In the Houses of this Order there were Cloisters for both Sexes.
St. Gilbert L. of Semperingham founded it: the Bpp. of Laudaff was at this time
Commendator of the whole Order.
18. Sulby, Praemonst. Northamp. sh. the Abbot and 11 Mon. 20. Haberholm, Gilb.
Lincolnsh. the Prior and 6 Cann. 24. Betlesden, Cisterc. Bedfordsh. Abbot and
11 Monks. 25. Cately, Gilb. Lincolnsh. the Prior. 25. Bolington, Gilb.
Lincolnsh. the Prior and 9 Monks. 26. Thelsford, the Holy Trinity, Warwicksh.
Prior and 3 Mon. 26. Sixhill, Gilb. Lincolnsh. the Commend. and 8 Monks. 27.
Thetford, August. Norfolk, the Prior. 27. Alvinghame, Gilb. Lincolnsh. the
Prior and 27 Monks. 29. Ormesby, Gilb. the Prior and 6 Frat. 30. Linn
Carmelites, The Prior and 10 Fra. 30. Linn Dominicans, The Prior and 11 Fra.
Norfolk. 30. Linn August. The Prior and 14 Fra. 30. Linn, Francisc. the Warden
and 9 Frat. 1. October. Ailesbury, Francisc. Buckinghamsh. the Warden and 6
Frat. 1. Coventry, Carm. Warwicksh. the Prior and 13 Frat. 1. Newstead Gilb.
the Prior and 5 Monks. 2. Mattersey, Gilb. the Prior and 4 Monks. 3. Coventry,
Franc. Warden and 10 Frat. 5. Marmond, Cannons, Cambridgsh. the Prior and 1
Monk. 5. Stamford, August. Lincolnsh. the Prior and 5 Frat. 6 Stamford,
Dominic. the Prior and 9 Frat. 7. Grinsbey, Francisc. Lincolnsh. the Prior and
5 Frat. 9. Miraval, Cisterc. Warwicksh. the Abbot and 9 Monks. 13. Shouldham,
Gilb. Norfolk, the Prior, 9 Monks, 7 Nuns. 15. Braywood, Black-Nuns,
Staffordsh. the Prioress. 16. Lilleshull, August. Shropsh. the Abbot and 10
Monks. 16. Stafford, August. the Prior and 5 Monks. 16. Northampton, Dominic.
the Prior and 7 Frat. 16. Northallerton, Carmel. Yorksh. the Prior and 9 Frat.
17. Warwick, Dominic. the Prior and 6 Frat. 20. Northampton, Carmel. the Prior
and 8 Frat. 20. Weatheral, Dominic. Cumberland, the Prior. 20. Chicksand, Gilb.
Bedfordsh. the Prior, 6 Monks, 18 Nuns, 22. Darley, August. Derbysh. the Abbot
and 13 Monks. 22. Dale, Premonst. Derbysh. the Abbot and 16 Monks. 24. Repton,
August. Derbysh. the Subprior and 8 Monks. 25. Grace-dieu, August. Nuns,
Leicestersh. the Prioress. 27. Northampton, Francisc. the Warden and 10 Frat.
28. Northampton, August. the Prior and 9 Frat. 28. Mallen Nuns, Kent, the
Abbess and 10 Nuns. 29. Bardeny, Bened. Lincolnsh. the Abbot and 13 Monks. 1.
November Barnwell, August. Can. Cambridgsh. the Prior and 6 Monks. 8.
Leicester, Francis. the Warden and 7 Frat. 10. Dominic. the Prior. 10. August.
the Prior. 10.
London, Dominic. the Bp of Rochest. Commend. and 15 Frat. 10. August. the
Prior and 12 Frat. 12. Francis. the Warden and 25 Frat. 12. Cross-Friers, 6
Frat. 13.
Doncaster, Carm. Yorksh. the Prior and 6 Friars. 13. Werksop, August. Notting.
sh. the Prior and 15 Friars. 14. Pipewell -- Lincolnsh. the Abbot and 13 Monks.
15. Wigemore -- Herefordsh. the Commend. and 10 Friars. 18. York, August. the
Prior and 7 Friars. 18. Doncaster. Francisc. Guardian, 6 Friars, 3 Novices. 20.
Monkbreton, Bened. Yorksh. the Prior and 13 Monks. 21. St. Helens London, a
Nunnery, no hands, only the Seal. 25. Pomfret, Dominic. Yorksh. the Prior, 7
Friars, 1 Novice. 26. York, Carmel. the Prior, 9 Friars, 3 Novices. 27.
Francis. the Guardian, 15 Friars, 5 Novices. 27. Dominic. the Prior, 6 Friars,
4 Novices. 27. Gilbertines, the Prior, 3 Monks. 28. August. the Prior, 9
Friars, 4 Novices. 28.
Bellalanda, Cisterc. Yorksh. the Abbot and 24 Monks. 30. November. Dunnington,
the Order of the Trinity, Berksh. the Minister. 30. Ryeval, Cisterc. Yorksh.
the Abbot and 23 Monks. 3. December. St. Albans, Bened. Herfordsh. the Abbot
and 37 Monks. 5. Ansham, Bened. Oxfordsh. the Prior and 8 Monks. 4. Kirkham,
August. Yorksh. the Prior and 17 Friars. 8. Notely -- Yorksh. the Abbot and 17
Monks. 9. Ellerton, Gilber. Yorksh. the Prior and 4 Friars. 11. York, the H.
Trin. the Minister and 10 Priests. Yarom, Dominic. the Prior, and 5 Friars, 6
Novices. Darby, Dominic. the Prior and 5 Friars. 3. January. Semperingham,
Gilber. the Commend. and 3 Monks. 6. Newcastle, Francis. the Warden, with 8
Friars, and 2 Novices. 9. Newcastle, August. 9. Newcastle, Dominic. the Prior
and 12 Friars. 10. Newcastle, Carmel. the Prior, 7 Friars, and 2 Novices. 10.
Walknell, Newcastle, H. Trin. the Prior. 10. Tinmouth, Bened. Northumberl.
Prior, 15 Prebend. 3. Nov. 12. Warwick, Bened. the Prior and 12 Monks. 15.
Coventry, Carthus. the Prior and 7 Monks. 16. York, August. the Prior and 17
Fellows. 17. Brednestock, Wiltsh. the Prior and 13 Monks. 18. Richmond, Yorksh.
Francis. the Prior and 14 Friars. 19. Lacock, Wiltsh. Nunnery, the Abbess. 21.
Comb, Warwicksh. Cisterc. the quondam Abbot, 13 Monks. 21. Kenisham, Summer.
sh. August. the Abbot and 10 Monks. 23. Bolton, Yorksh. August. the Prior and
14 Friars. 29. Cockersand, Lank. sh. Premons. the Abbot and 22 Monks. 29.
Pollsworth, Warwicksh. Nunnery, no Hands, only the Seal. 31. Nottingham,
Carmel. the Prior and 6 Friars. 5. February. Francis. the Prior and 7 Friars. 5.
Athelny, Summer. sh. Bened. the Abbot and 8 Monks. 8. Taunton, Summer. sh.
August. the Prior and 12 Monks. 10. Buckland, Summer. sh. Nunnery, the
Prioress. 10. Dunkeswell, Summer. sh. Cisterc. 12. Polleslow, Devonsh. Nunnery,
the Prioress. 14. Witham, Summer. sh. Carthus. the Prior and 12 Monks. 15.
Bushsham, Devonsh. 19. Cannonleigh, Devonsh. Nunnery, no Hands but the Seal.
19. Hartland, Devonsh. August. the Abbot and 4 Monks. 21. Torry, Premonst.
Devonsh. the Abbot and 15 Monks. 23. Launceston, Cornwall, August. the Prior and
8 Monks. 24. Buckfast, Devonsh. Cister. the Abbot with 10 Monks. 25. Buckland,
Devonsh. Cister. the Abbot. 27. Bodmyn, Cornwall, August. the Prior and 8 Monks.
27. Edingdon, Wiltsh. August. the Rector and 12 Monks. 28. Plimptone, Canons,
August. Devonsh. the Prior and 18 Monks. 1. March. St. Germans, Can. Aug.
Cornwall, the Prior and 7 Monks. 2. Ford, Cister. Devon. the Abbot and 13 Monks.
8. Midleton, Bened. Devonsh. Abbot and Bp. Suff. of Shafts. 12 Mo. 11.
Abbots-bury, Bened. Dorsetsh. the Prior and 10 Monks. 12. Tarent, Nunnery,
Dorsetsh. the Abbess and 18 Nuns. 13. Bindon, Cisterc. Dorsetsh. the Abbot and
7 Monks. 14. Cerne, Bened. Dorsetsh. the Abbot and 16 Monks. 15. Sherburne,
Bened. Dorsetsh. the Abbot and 16 Monks. 18. March. Montecute, Cluniac. Summer.
sh. the Abbot and 13 Monks. 20. Tavenstock, Bened. Summer. sh. the Abbot and 20
Monks. 20. Shaf^sbury Nunnery, Dorsetsh. the Abbess. 23. Willton Nunnery,
Wiltsh. the Abbess. 25. Hinton, Carthus. Sommersetsh. the Prior and 19 Monks.
31. Brutton Cannons-August. So^mer. sh. the Abbot and 14 Monks. 1. April. Hide,
Bened. Hampsh. Bp. Bangor Commend. and 21 Mon. in April, but no date.
Without date there are four.
Franciscans Cambr. the Guardian and 23 Frat. Dominicans Cambr. the Prior and
15 Fr. Thetford Dominic. the Prior. Sancta Maria de Pratis, the Abbot and 19
Monks.
Hospitals resigned this Year.
St. Thomas Southwark, the Master and one Brother. 25. July. St. John Wells,
the Master and 3 Brothers. 3. February. Bridgwater, the Master and 7 Brothers.
3. St. John Exon, the Master and 2 Brothers. 20.
All the former Resignations have the Covent Seals put to them, except those of
some few Houses of Begging Friars, which perhaps had no Seals; they are also
enrolled in the 1 st, 2 d, 3 d, and 5 th Claus. Rolls of that Year. There are
likewise some few more enrolled, of which the Originals are lost, which follow.

Hales-Owen, Premonst. Sallop. the Abbot. 9. June. Clattercott. Gilbert. the
Prior. 22. August. Bedford, Francis. the Warden. 3. October. Stamford, Francis.
the Warden. 8. Derleyghs, Cisterc. Staffordsh. the Abbot. 20. Pipeldeth,
Cisterc. Northam. sh. the Abbot. 5. November. De-la-pray Nunnery, Northam. sh.
the Abbess. 16. December. Northallerton. Carmel. Yorksh. the Prior. 20. Pulton
Gilbert. the Prior. 16. January. Newburg, August. Yorksh. 22. Bath Cathedral,
Bened. 27. Brusyard Nunnery, Suffolk, the Abbess. 17. February. Newham,
Cisterc. Devonsh. the Abbot. 8. March.
Here follow the Resignations made in the 31 Year of the King's Reign, of which
the Originals are yet extant.
KImme Can. August. Lincolnsh. the Prior and 9 Monks. 6. July. Bevoll Carthus.
Notting. sh. the Prior and 7 Monks. 8. Irthforth Nunnery, Lincolnsh. the
Prioress and 17 Nuns. 9. Nuncotton Nunnery, Yorksh. without Subscriptions. 11.
Hynings Nunnery, Lincolnsh. no Subscriptions. 11. Fosse Nunnery, Lincolnsh. the
Prioress. 11. Newstead Premonst. Notting. sh. the Prior and 11 Monks. 21. St.
Osith. Can. August. Essex. the Abbot and 16 Monks. 28. Elistu Nunnery,
Bedfordsh. the Abbess. 26. Agust. Hamond, a Commission to the Bp. of Chester to
take the Surrender of it. 31. Swine Nunnery, Yorksh. no Subscriptions. 3.
September. Haughmond Can. August. Sallop. the Abbot and 10 Mon. 9. Nunnkeling
Nunnery, Yorksh. no Subscription but the Seal. 10. Nunniton Nunnery, the
Prioress, 27 Crosses for Subscript. 12. Ulnescroft, Liecestersh. the Prior and
11 Friars. 15. Marrick Nunnery, Yorksh. the Prioress. 15. Burnham Nunnery,
Bucks, the Abbess and 9 Nuns. 19. St. Bartholomew Smithfield, the Prior. 25.
October. Edmundsbury Bened. Suffolk, the Abbot and 44 Monks. 4. November. A
Commission for the surrender of St. Allborrough, Chesh. 7. Berkin Nunnery,
Essex, the Abbess. 14. Tame, Oxfordsh. Bp. * Reonen. and 16 Monks. What this
See was I cannot conjecture.
16. Osney, ibid. id. and 12 Monks. 17. Godstow Nunnery, Oxfordsh. subscribed by
a Notary. 17. Studley Nunnery, Oxfordsh. signed as the former. 19. Thelsford,
Norfolk, the Prior and 13 Monks. 16. February. Westminster Bened. the Abbot and
27 Monks. 16. January. A Commission to the Arch-Bpp. of Canterb. for taking the
Surrender of Christ's-Church Canterb. 20. March. And another for the surrender
of Rochester, both dated 20. March. Waltham Benedict. Essex, the Abbot and 17
Monks. 23. St. Mary Watte, Gilber. Bpp. of Landaffe Commend. 8 Friars and 14
Nuns.
There is also in the Augmentation-Office, a Book concerning the Resignations
and Suppressions of the following Monasteries.
St. Swithins Winchester. 15. November. St. Mary Winchester. 17. Wherewell,
Hampshire. 21. Christ's Church, Twinham, the Commendator thereof is called
Episcopus Neopolitanus. 28. Winchelcomb. 3. December. Ambrose Bury. 4. St.
Austins, near Bristol. 9. Billesswick, near Bristol. 9. December. Malmesbury.
15. Cirencester. 19. Hales. 24. St. Peter's, Gloucester. 2. January. Teuksbury.
9.
There are also several other Deeds enrolled, which follow.
St. Mary-Overhay, in Southwark. 14. October. St. Michael, near Kingston upon
Hall, Carthus. 9. November. Burton upon Trent. Staffordsh. 14. Hampol Nunnery,
Yorksh. 19. St. Oswald, Yorksh. 20. Kirkstall, Yorksh. 22. Pomfret, Yorksh. 23.
Kirkelles, Yorksh. 24. Ardyngton, Yorksh. 26. Fountains, Yorksh. 26. St. Mary
York. 29. St. Leonard York. 1. December. Nunnapleton Nunnery, Yorksh. 5. St.
Gelmans Selbe, Yorksh. 6. Melsey, Yorksh. 11. Malton, Yorksh. 11. Whitby,
Yorksh. 14. Albalanda, Northumb. 18. Montgrasse Carthus. Yorksh. 18. Alnewick
Premonstrat. Northumb. 22. Gisburne August. Yorksh. 22. Newshame, Dunelme. 29.
St. Cuthberts Cathedral of Duresme. 31. St. Bartholomew Nunnery, in Newcastle.
3. January. Egleliston, Richmondsh. 5. St. Mary Carlisle, Cumber. 9. Hoppa
Premonst. Westmorland. 14. St. Werburg. Chester. 20. St. Mary Chester, a
Nunnery. 21. St. Peter's Shrewsbury. 24. St. Milburg Winlock, Salop. 26.
Section IV.
IT seems there was generally a Confession made with the Surrender: Of these
some few are yet extant, though undoubtedly great care was taken to destroy as
many as could be in Queen Mary's time. That long and full one made by the Prior
of St. Andrews in Northampton, the Preamble whereof is printed by Fuller, and
is at large printed by Weaver, is yet preserved in the Augmentation-Office.
There are some few more also extant, six of these I have seen, one of them
follows.

FOrasmuch as we Richard Green, Abbot of our Monastery of our Blessed Lady St.
Mary of Betlesden, and the Convent of the said Monastery, do profoundly
consider, That the whole manner and trade of living, which we and our pretensed
Religion have practiced, and used many days, does most principally consist in
certain dumb Ceremonies, and other certain Constitutions of the Bishops of
Rome, and other Forinsecal Potentates, as the Abbot of Cistins, and therein
only noseled, and not taught in the true knowledge of God's Laws, procuring
always Exemptions of the Bishops of Rome from our Ordinaries and Diocesans:
submitting our selves principally to Forinsecal Potentates and Powers, which
never came here to reform such disorders of living and abuses. as now have been
found to have reigned amongst us. And therefore now assuredly knowing, that the
most perfect way of living, is most principally and sufficiently declared unto
us by our Master Christ, his Evangelists and Apostles, and that it is most
expedient for us to be governed and ordered by our Supreme Head, under God, the
King's most noble Grace, with our mutual assent and consent, submit our selves,
and every one of us, to the most benign Mercy of the King's Majesty; and by
these presents do surrender, etc.

The Surrender follows in common form, Signed by the Abbot, Subprior, and 9
Monks, 25. September. Regni 30.

There are others to the same purpose Signed by the Guardian and seven
Franciscans at Alisbury, the 1st of October. By the Franciscans at Bedford the
3d of October. The Franciscans in Coventry the 5th of October. And the
Franciscans in Stamford the 8th of October. And the Carmelites in Stamford on
the same day, which I shall also insert, the former four agreeing to it.

FOrasmuch as we the Prior and Friars of this House of Carmelites in Stamford,
commonly called the White Friars in Stamford, in the County of Lincoln, do
profoundly consider that the perfection of Christian living does not consist in
some Ceremonies, wearing of a white Coat, disguising our selves after strange
fashions, dockying and becking, wearing Scapulars and Hoods, and other-like
Papistical Ceremonies, wherein we have been most principally practiced and
noseled in times past; but the very true way to please God, and to live a true
Christian Man, without all hypocrisy and feigned dissimulation, is sincerely
declared to us by our Master Christ, his Evangelists, and Apostles; being
minded hereafter to follow the same, conforming our self to the Will and
Pleasure of our Supreme Head, under God, on Earth, the King's Majesty; and not
to follow henceforth, the superstitious Traditions of any Forinsecal Potentate
or Power, with mutual assent and consent, do submit our selves unto the Mercy
of our said Sovereign Lord, and with the like mutual assent and consent do
surrender, etc.

Signed by the Prior and 6 Friars.

Section V. Of the manner of suppressing the Monasteries after they were
Surrendered.
THe Reader will best understand this by the following account of the
Suppression of the Monastery of Teuksbury, copied from a Book that is in the
Augmentation-Office, which begins thus:

THe Certificate of Robert Southwell Esquire, William Petre, Edward Kairne, and
John London, Doctors of Law; John Ap-rice, John Kingsman, Richard Paulet, and
William Bernars, Esquires, Commissioners assigned by the King's Majesty, to
take the Surrenders of diverse Monasteries, by force of his Grace's Commission
to them, 6, 5, 4, or 3 of them, in that behalf directed; bearing date at his
Highness's Palace of Westminster, the 7 th day of November. in the 31 year of the
Reign of our most dread Sovereign Lord Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God,
King of England, and of France, Defender of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in
Earth immediately under Christ Supreme Head of the Church of England, of all
and singular their Proceedings, as well in and of these Monasteries by his
Majesty appointed to be altered, as of others to be dissolved, according to the
tenor, purport, and effect of his Graces said Commission; with Instructions to
them likewise delivered, as hereafter ensues.

Com. Gloucester.

Teuksbury late Monastery Surrendered to the use of the King's Majesty, and of
his Heirs and Successors for ever made; bearing date under the Covent-Seal of
the same late Monastery, the 9 th day of January, in the 31 year of the Reign
of our most dread victorious Sovereign Lord, King Henry the Eighth: and the
said day and year clearly dissolved and suppressed.

The clear yearly value of all the Possessions belonging to said late
Monastery. As well Spiritual as Temporal, over and besides 136 l. 8 s. 1 d. in
Fees, Annuities, and Custodies, granted to diverse Persons by Letters Pattents
under the Covent-Seal of the said late Monastery for term of their lives. l. s.
d. 1595: 15: 06

Pensions assigned to the late Religious dispatched; that is to say, to l. s.
d. John Which, late Abbot there 266 13 04 551 06 08 John Beley late Prior there
16 00 00 I. Bromesgrove late Prior of Delehurst 13 06 08 Robert Circester Prior
of St. James 13 06 08 Will. Didcote Prior of Cranborne 10 00 00 Robert
Cheltenhem B. D. 10 00 00 Two Monks 8 l. a piece 16 00 00 One Monk 07 00 00 27
Monks 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. each 180 00 00 And so remains clear l. s. d. 1044 08 10

Records and Evidences Belonging to the late Monastery Remains in the Treasury
there under the Custody of John Whittington Knight. the Keys whereof being
delivered to Richard Paulet Receiver.

Houses and Buildings assigned to remain undefaced. The Lodging called the
Newark, leading from the Gate to the late Abbots Lodging, with Buttery, Pantry,
Cellar, Kitching, Larder, and Pastry thereto adjoining. The late Abbot's
Lodging, the Hostery, the great Gate entering into the Court, with the Lodging
over the same; the Abbot's Stable, Bakehouse, Brewhouse and Slaughterhouse, the
Almry, Barn, Derryhouse, the great Barn next Aven, the Maltinghouse, with the
Garnees in the same, the Oxhouse in the Barton, the Barton-gate, and the
Lodging over the same. Committed to the custody of John Whittington Knight.
Deemed to be superfluous. The Church, with Chapels, Cloister, Chapter House,
Misericord, the two Dormitories, the Infirmary, with Chapels and Lodgings
within the same; the Work-hay, with another House adjoining to the same, the
Covent-Kitching, the Library, the old Hosteory, the Chamberers Lodging, the
new-Hall, the old Parlor adjoining to the Abbot's Lodging; the Cellarers
Lodging, the Poultry-house, the Gardner, the Almary, and all other Houses and
Lodgings not above reserved. Committed as abovesaid. Leads remaining upon The
Quire, Isles, and Chapels annexed the Cloister Chapter-houser, Frater, St.
Michaels Chapel, Halls, Fermory, and Gate House, esteemed to 180 Foder. Bells
remaining In the Steeple there are eight poize by estimation 14600 weight.
Jewels reserved to the use of the King's Majesty. Miters garnished with gilt,
rugged Pearls, and counterfeit Stones. 2. Plate of Silver reserved to the same
use. Silver gilt 329 ounces, Silver parrel gilt 605 ounces. Silver white 497
ounces.
1431. Ornaments reserved to the said use. One Cope of Silver Tissue, with one
Clesible, and one Tunicle of the same; one Cope of Gold Tissue, with one Cles.
and two Tunicles of the same. Sum of all the Ornaments, Goods, and Chattels
belonging to the said late Monastery. Sold by the said Commissioners, as in a
particular Book of Sales thereof made ready to be showed, as more at large may
appear. l. s. d. 194 08 00 Payments To the late Religious and Servants
dispatched To 38 late Religious Persons of the said late Monastery of the King's
Mat. reward. 80 13 04 To an 144 late Servants of the said late Monastery, for
their Wages and Liveries. 75 10 00 Payments For debts owing by the said late
Monastery, To diverse Persons for Victuals and Necessaries of them had to the
use of the said Monastery, with 10 l. paid to the late Abbot there, for and in
full payment of 124 l. 5 s. 4 d. by him to be paid to certain Creditors of the
said late Monastery, by Covenants made with the aforesaid Commissioners. 18 12
00And so remains clear -- 19 12 08

Then follows a List of some small Debts owing to and by the said Monastery.

Then follows a List of the Livings in their Gift.

Com. Glocest. Four Parsonages and 10 Vicarages. Com. Wigorn. Two Parsonages
and 2 Vicarages. Com. Warwic. Two Parsonages. Com. Will. Bristol. Five
Parsonages and 1 Vicarage. Com. Wilts. 00 2 Vicar. Com. Oxon. One Pars. and 2
Vicar. Com. Dors. Four Pars. and 2 Vicar. Com. Summers. Three Pars. Com. Devon.
00 1 Vicar. Com. Corub. 00 2 Vicar. Com. Glamorg. and Morgan. 00 5 Vicar.
In all 21 Parsonages and 27 Vicarages.

IV. Queen Ann Boleyn's last letter to King Henry.
SIR,
Cotton Libr. Otho C. 10.
YOur Grace's displeasure, and my Imprisonment, are things so strange unto me,
as what to write, or what to excuse, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you send
unto me (willing me to confess a Truth, and so obtain your favor) by such an
one whom you know to be mine ancient professed Enemy. I no sooner received this
Message by him, than I rightly conceived your meaning; and as if, as you say,
confessing a Truth indeed may procure my safety, I shall with all willingness
and duty perform your Command.

But let not your Grace ever imagine that your poor Wife will ever be brought
to acknowledge a Fault, where not so much as a thought thereof preceded. And to
speak a Truth, never Prince had Wife more loyal in all duty, and in all true
affection, than you have ever found in Ann Boleyn, with which Name and Place I
could willingly have contented my self, if God, and your Grace's pleasure had
been so pleased. Neither did I at any time so far forget my self in my
Exaltation, or received Queenship, but that I always looked for such an
alteration as now I find; for the ground of my preferment being on no surer
Foundation than your Grace's Fancy, the least alteration, I knew, was fit and
sufficient to draw that Fancy to some other Subject. You have chosen me, from a
low estate, to be your Queen and Companion, far beyond my desert or desire. If
then you found me worthy of such honor, Good your Grace let not any light
Fancy, or bad counsel of mine Enemies, withdraw your Princely Favor from me;
neither let that Stain, that unworthy stain of a disloyal heart toward your
good Grace, ever cast so foul a blot on your most dutiful Wife, and the
Infant-Princess your Daughter: Try me, good King, but let me have a lawful
Trial, and let not my sworn Enemies sit as my Accusers and Judges; yea, let me
receive an open Trial, for my Truth shall fear no open shame; then shall you
see, either mine innocence cleared, your suspicion and Conscience satisfied,
the ignominy and slander of the World stopped, or my Guilt openly declared. So
that whatsoever God or you may determine of me, your Grace may be freed from an
open censure; and mine Offense being so lawfully proved, your Grace is at
liberty, both before God and Man, not only to execute worthy punishment on me
as an unlawful Wife, but to follow your Affection, already settled, on that
Party, for whose sake I am now as I am, whose Name I could some good while
since have pointed unto: your Grace being not ignorant of my suspicion therein.

But if you have already determined of me, and that not only my Death, but an
infamous slander must bring you the enjoying of your desired happiness; then I
desire of God, that he will pardon your great sin therein, and likewise mine
Enemies, the Instruments thereof; and that he will not call you to a strict
account for your unprincely and cruel usage of me, at his General
Judgment Seat, where both you and my self must shortly appear, and in whose
Judgment I doubt not (whatsoever the World may think of me) mine Innocence
shall be openly known, and sufficiently cleared.

My last and only request shall be, That my self may only bear the burden of
your Grace's displeasure, and that it may not touch the innocent Souls of those
poor Gentlemen, who (as I understand) are likewise in strait Imprisonment for
my sake. If ever I have found favor in your sight, if ever the Name of Ann
Boleyn has been pleasing in your ears, then let me obtain this request; and I
will so leave to trouble your Grace any further, with mine earnest Prayers to
the Trinity to have your Grace in his good keeping, and to direct you in all
your Actions. From my doleful Prison in the Tower this 6 th of May.

Your most Loyal and ever Faithful Wife, Ann Boleyn.

V. The Judgment of the Convocation concerning General-Councils. Published by
the L. Herbert from the Original.
AS concerning General-Councils, like-as we (taught by long experience) do
perfectly know that there never was, nor is, any thing devised, invented, or
instituted by our Forefathers, more expedient or more necessary for the
establishment of our Faith, for the extirpation of Heresies, and the abolishing
of Sects and Schisms; and finally, for the reducing of Christ's People unto one
perfect unity and concord in his Religion, than by the having of
General-Councils. So that the same be lawfully had and congregated in Spiritu
Sancto, and be also conform and agreeable, as well concerning the surety and
indifferency of the Places, as all other Points requisite and necessary for the
same, unto that wholesome and godly Institution and usage, for the which they
were at first devised and used in the Primitive Church. Even so on the other
side, taught by like experience, we esteem, repute, and judge, That there is, ne
can be any thing in the World more pestilent and pernicious to the Commonweal
of Christendom, or whereby the Truth of God's Word has in times past, or
hereafter may be sooner defaced or subverted, or whereof has and may ensue
more contention, more discord and other devilish effects, than when such
General Councils have or shall be assembled, not christianly nor charitably,
but for and upon private malice and ambition, or other worldly and carnal
Respects and Considerations, according to the saying of Gregory Nazianzenus, in
his Epistle to one Procopius, wherein he writes this Sentence following; Sic
sentio, si verum scribendum est, omnes Conventus Episcoporum fugiendos esse,
quia nullius Synodi finem vidi bonum, neque habentem magis solutionem malorum,
quam incrementum: Nam cupiditates contentionum, and gloria (sed ne putes me
odiosum ista scribentem) vincunt rationem. That is to say; I think this, if I
should write truly, That all General Councils be to be eschewed, for I never
saw that they produced any good End or Effect, nor that any Provision or
Remedy, but rather increase of Mischiefs proceeded of them. For the desire of
maintenance of Men's Opinions and ambition of Glory (but reckon not that I
write this of malice) has always in them overcomed reason. Wherefore we think
that Christian Princes, especially and above all things, ought and must, with
all their wills, power, and diligence, foresee and provide; Ne Sanctissima hac
in part majorum Instituta, ad improbissimos ambitionis aut malitiae effectus
explendos, diversissimo suo fine and sceleratissimo pervertantur: Neve ad alium
praetextum possint valere, and long diversum effectum orbi producere quam
Sanctissima rei facies prae^^se ferat. That is to say, Least the most noble
wholesome Institutions of our Elders in this behalf be, perverted to a most
contrary and most wicked end and effect; that is to say, to fulfill and satisfy
the wicked affections of Men's Ambition and Malice; or, lest they might prevail
for any other color, or bring forth any other effect than their most virtuous
and laudable countenance does outwardly to the World show or pretend. And first
of all we think that they ought principally to consider who has the Authority
to call together a General Council. Secondly, Whether the Causes alleged be so
weighty and so urgent, that necessarily they require a General Council, nor can
otherwise be remedied. Thirdly, Who ought to be Judges in the General Council.
Fourthly, What order of proceeding is to be observed in the same, and how the
Opinions or Judgments of the Fathers are to be consulted or asked. Fifthly,
What Doctrines are to be allowed or defended, with diverse other things which
in General Councils ought of reason and equity to be observed. And as unto the
first Point, We think that neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any one Prince, of
what estate, degree, or pre-eminence soever he be, may by his own Authority,
call, indite, or summon any General Council without the express consent,
assent, and agreement of the residue of Christian Princes, and especially such
as have within their own Realms and Seigniories, Imperium merum, that is to
say, of such as have the whole, entire, and supreme Government and Authority
over all their Subjects, without knowledging or recognizing of any other
supreme Power or Authority. And this to be true, we be induced to think, by
many and sundry, as well Examples as great Reasons and Authority. The which,
forasmuch as it should be overlong and tedious to express here particularly,
we have thought good to omit the same for this present. And in witness that
this is our plain and determinate Sentence, Opinion, and Judgment, touching the
Premises, we the Prelates and Clergy underwritten, being congregate together
in the Convocation of the Province of Canterbury, and representing the whole
Clergy of the same, here to these Presents subscribed our Names the 20 th of
July, in the Year of our Lord, 1536. 28. Hen. 8.

Signed by Thomas Cromwell, Thomas Cantuariensis, There were then but 17 Bishops
in the Province of Canterbury, and Rochester being vacant of the other 16.14
did sign this.
Johannes London, with 13 Bishops and of Abbots, Priors, Archdeacons, Deans,
Proctors, Clerks, and other Ministers 49.

VI. Instructions for the King's Commissioners, for a new survey, and a^
Inventory to be made of all the Demesnes, Lands, Goods, and Chattels
appertaining to any House of Religion of Monks, Cannons, and Nuns within their
Commission, according to the Articles hereafter following. The number of which
Houses in every County limited in their Commission, being annexed to the sa^d
Commission. An Original.
Henry R.

FIrst; After the Division made, one Auditor, Ex MSS. Nob. D. G. Pierpoint.
one particular Receiver, one Clerk of the Register of the last Visitation,
with three other discreet Persons to be named by the King in every County where
any such Houses be; after their repair to such House, shall declare to the
Governor, and Religious Persons of the same, the Statute of Dissolution, the
Commission, and the cause and purpose of their repair for that time.

Item; That after the Declaration made, the said Commissioners shall swear the
Governors of the Houses, or such other the Officers of the same House, or
other, as ye shall think can best declare the state and plight of the same, to
make declaration and answer to the Articles there underwritten.

Item; Of what Order, Rule, or Religion, the same House is, and whether it be a
Cell or not; and if it be a Cell, then the Commissioners to deliver to the
Governors of the House a Privy Seal, and also to injoin him, in the King's
Name, under a great pain, to appear without delay before the Chancellor of the
Augmentations of the Revenues of the King's Crown and the Council; and in the
mean time not to meddle with the same Cell, till the King's pleasure be further
known.

Item; What number of Persons of Religion be in the same, and the conversation
of their lives, and how many of them be Priests, and how many of them will go
to other Houses of that Religion; or how many will take Capacities; and how
many Servants or Hinds the same House keeps commonly, and what other Persons
have their living in the same House.

Item; To survey the quantity or value of the Lead and Bells of the same House,
as near as they can, with the ruin, decay, state, and plight of the same.

Item; Incontinently to call for the Covent-Seal, with all Writings and
Charters, Evidences and Muniments concerning any of the Possessions to be
delivered to them, and put the same in sure keeping, and to take a just
Inventory betwixt them and the Governor, or other Head-Officer, by Indenture,
of the Ornaments, Plate, Jewels, Chattels, ready Money, Stuff of Household, Coin,
as well signed as not signed, Stock and Store in the Farmor's hands, and the
value thereof, as near as they can, which were appertaining to the same Houses
the first day of March last past; and what debts the House does owe, and to
what Person; and what Debts be owing to them, and by whom.

Item; After, to cause the Covent, or Common-Seal, the Plate, Jewels, and ready
Money, to be put in safe keeping, and the residue of the Particulars specified
in the Inventory, to be left in the keeping of the Governor, or some other
Head-Officer, without wasting or consumption of the same, unless it be for
necessary expense of the House.

Item; That they command the Governor, or other receiver of the same House, to
receive no Rents of their Farms until they know further of the King's pleasure,
except such Rents as must needs be had for their necessary Food or Sustenance,
or for payment of their Servants Wages.

Item; To survey discreetly the Demesnes of the same House; that is to say,
such as have not been commonly used to be letten out, and to certify the clear
yearly value thereof.

Item; To examine the true yearly value of all the Farms of the same House,
deducting thereof Rents reserved, Pensions and Portions paid out of the same,
Synodals, and proxies; Bailiffs, Receivers, Stewards, and Auditors Fees, and
the Names of them to whom they be paid and due, and to none other.

Item; What Leases has been made to any Farmer, of the Farms pertaining to the
same House; and what Rent they reserved, and to whom, and for how many years,
and a Copy of the Indenture if they can get it, or else the Counter-pane.

Item; To search and enquire what Woods, Parks, Forests, Commons, or other
Profit belonging to any of the Possessions of the same Houses, the Number of
the Acres, the Age and Value, as near as they can.

Item; What Grants, Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Alienations, Leases of any Lands,
Tenements, Woods, or Offices, has been made by any the said Governors, of any
of the said Houses, within one Year next before the 4 th day of February last
past, and of what things, or to what value, and to whom, and for what estate.

Item; If there be any House of the Religion aforesaid omitted and not
certified in the Exchequer, then the said Commissioners to survey the same, and
to make Certificate accordingly.

Item; That they straightly command every Governor of every such House limited in
their Commission, to Sow and Till their Grounds as they have done before, till
the King's pleasure be further known.

Item; If there be any House given by the King to any Person, in any of the
said several Limits of the said Commission, the Names whereof shall be declared
to the said Commissioners, Then the said Commissioners shall immediately take
the Covent from the Governor, and take an Inventory indented of the Lead,
Bells, Debts, Goods, Chattels, Plate, Jewels, Ornaments, Stock and Store, to
the King's use; and to make sale of the Goods, Chattels, and other Implements,
Plate and Jewels only excepted.

Item; The said Commissioners in every such House, to send such of the
Religious Persons that will remain in the same Religion, to some other great
House of that Religion, by their discretion, with a Letter to a Governor for
the receipt of them; And the residue of them that will go to the World, to send
them to my Lord of Canterbury, and the Lord Chancellor for their Capacities,
with the Letter of the same Commissioners.

Item; The said Commissioners to give the said Persons that will have
Capacities, some reasonable Rewards, according to the distance of the place, by
their discretions to be appointed.

Item; The said Commissioners to command the Governor to resort to the
Chancellor of the Augmentation for his yearly Stipend and Pension.

Item; If there be any House dissolved or given up to the King by their Deed,
then the Commissioners shall order themselves in every point and purpose, as
the Houses given by the King to any other Person in form aforesaid.

Item; Every of the said Commissioners having in charge to survey more than one
Shire within the Limits of their Commission, immediately after they have
perused one Shire, parcel of their Charge, in form aforesaid, shall send to the
Chancellor of the Court for the Augmentation of the Revenues of the King's
Crown, a brief Certificate of all these Comperts, according to the Instructions
aforesaid, what they have done in the Premises, and in every County so
surveighed, then to proceed further to another County; and so as they pass the
said Counties to make like Certificate, and so forth, till their Limits be
surveighed, and there to remain till they know further of the King's pleasure.

Item; If the said Commissioners have but one County in charge, then to
certify the said Chancellor in form aforesaid, and there to remain till they
know further of the King's pleasure.

VII. Injunctions given by the Authority of the King's Highness to the Clergy
of this Realm.
Register, Craum, fol. 47.
IN the Name of God, Amen. In the Year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred
thirty six, and of the most noble Reign of our Sovereign Lord, Henry the
Eighth, King of England and France, the 28 Year, and the day of I Thomas
Cromwell Knight, Lord Cromwell, Keeper of the Privy Seal of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, and Vicegerent unto the same, for and concerning all his
Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical within the Realm, visiting by the King's
Highness's Supreme Authority Ecclesiastical, the People and Clergy of this
Deanery of by my trusty Commissary lawfully deputed and constitute for this
part, have, to the glory of Almighty God, to the King's Highness's honor, the
public Weal of this his Realm, and increase of Virtue in the same, appointed
and assigned these Injunctions ensuing to be kept and observed, of the Dean,
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and Stipendaries, resiant or having cure of Soul, or
any other Spiritual Administrations within this Deanery, under the pains
hereafter limited and appointed.

The first is; That the Dean, Parsons, Vicars, and other, having cure of Soul
any-where within this Deanery, shall faithfully keep and observe, and as far as
in them may lie, shall cause to be observed and kept of other, all and singular
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made for the abolishing and extirpation of the
Bishop of Rome's pretensed and usurped Power and Jurisdiction within this
Realm. And for the establishment and confirmation of the King's Authority and
Jurisdiction of the same, as of the Supreme Head of the Church of England; and
shall, to the uttermost of their Wit, Knowledge, and Learning, purely,
sincerely, and without any color or dissimulation, declare, manifest, and
open, for the space of one quarter of a year next ensuing, once every Sunday,
and after that at the leastwise twice every quarter, in their Sermons and
other Collations, that the Bishop of Rome's usurped Power and Jurisdiction,
having no establishment nor ground by the Law of God, was of most just causes
taken away and abolished; and therefore they owe unto him no manner of
obedience or subjection; and that the King's Power is within his Dominion the
highest Power and Potentate, under God, to whom all Men within the same
Dominions, by God's Commandment, owe most loyalty and obedience, before and
above all other Powers and Potentates in Earth.

Item; Whereas certain Articles were lately devised and put forth by the King's
Highness's Authority, and condescended upon by the Prelates and Clergy of this
his Realm in Convocation, whereof part are necessary to be holden and believed
for our Salvation, and the other part do concern and teach certain laudable
Ceremonies, Rites, and Usages of the Church, meet and convenient to be kept and
used for a decent and politic order in the same; the said Dean, Parsons,
Vicars, and other Curats, shall so open and declare in their said Sermons, and
other Collations, the said Articles unto them that be under their Cure, that
they may plainly know and discern which of them be necessary to be believed and
observed for their Salvation, and which be not necessary, but only do concern
the decent and politic order of the said Church: according to such Commandment
and Admonition as has been given unto them heretofore, by Authority of the
King's Highness in tha^ behalf.

Moreover, That they shall declare unto all such as be under their Cure, the
Articles likewise devised, put forth, and authorized of late, for and
concerning the abrogation of certain superfluous Holy Days, according to the
effect and purport of the same Articles: and persuade their Parishioners to
keep and observe the same inviolable, as things honesty provided, decreed, and
established, by common consent, and public Authority, for the Weal, Commodity,
and Profit of all this Realm.

Besides this, to the intent that all Superstition and Hypocrisy, crept into
diverse Men's hearts may vanish away, they shall not set forth or extol any
Images, Relics, or Miracles, for any superstition or lucre; nor allure the
People by any inticements to the pilgrimages of any Saint, otherwise than is
permitted in the Articles lately put forth by the Authority of the King's
Majesty, and condescended upon by the Prelates and Clergy of this his Realm in
Convocation; as though it were proper or peculiar to that Saint to give this
Commodity, or that: seeing all Goodness, Health, and Grace, ought to be both
asked and looked for only of God, as of the very Author of the same, and of
none other, for without him it cannot be given: But they shall exhort, as well
their Parishioners as other Pilgrims, that they do rather apply themselves to
the keeping of God's Commandments, and fulfilling of his Works of Charity;
persuading them that they shall please God more by the true exercising of their
bodily Labor, Travail, or Occupation, and providing for their Families, than
if they went about to the said Pilgrimages; and that it shall profit more their
Souls health, if they do bestow that on the Poor and Needy, which they would
have bestowed upon the said Images or Relics.

Also in the same their Sermons, and other Collations, the Parsons, Vicars, and
other Curats, aforesaid, shall diligently admonish the Fathers and Mothers,
Masters and Governors of Youth, being within their Cure, to teach, or cause to
be taught, their Children and Servants, even from their Infancy, their Pater
Noster, the Articles of our Faith, and the Ten Commandments, in their Mother
Tongue: And the same so taught, shall cause the said Youth often to repeat and
understand. And to the intent that this may be the more easily done, the said
Curats shall, in their Sermons, deliberately and plainly recite of the said
Pater Noster, the Articles of our Faith, and the Ten Commandments, one Clause
or Article one day, and an other another day, till those be taught and learnt
by little; and shall deliver the same in writing, or show where printed Books
containing the same be to be sold, to them that can read or will desire the
same. And thereto that the said Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Governors, do
bestow their Children and Servants, even from their Childhood, either to
Learning, or some other honest Exercise, Occupation, or Husbandry: exhorting,
counselling, and by all the ways and means they may, as well in their said
Sermons and Collations, as otherwise, persuading the said Fathers, Mothers,
Masters, and other Governors, being under their Cure and Charge, diligently to
provide and foresee that the said Youth be in no manner-wise kept or brought up
in idleness, lest at any time afterward they be driven, for lack of some
Mystery or Occupation to live by, to fall to begging, stealing, or some other
unthriftiness; forasmuch as we may daily see, through sloth and idleness,
diverse valiant Men fall, some to begging, and some to theft and murder; which
after brought to calamity and misery, impute a great part thereof to their
Friends and Governors, which suffered them to be brought up so idely in their
Youth; where if they had been well educated and brought up in some good
Literature, Occupation, or Mystery, they should, being Rulers of their own
Family, have profited, as well themselves as diverse other Persons, to the great
commodity and ornament of the Commonweal.

Also, that the said Parsons, Vicars, and other Curats, shall diligently
provide that the Sacraments and Sacramentals be duly and reverently ministered
in their Parishes; and if at any time it happened them, either in any of the
Cases expressed in the Statutes of this Realm, or of special license given by
the King's Majesty to be absent from their Benefices, they shall leave their
Cure, not to a rude and unlearned Person, but to an honest, well-learned, and
expert Curate, that may teach the rude and unlearned of their Cure wholesome
Doctrine, and reduce them to the right way that do err; and always let them
see, that neither they, nor their Vicars, do seek more their own profit,
promotion, or advantage, than the profit of the Souls that they have under
their Cure, or the Glory of God.

Also, the said Dean, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and other Priests, shall in no
wise, at any unlawful time, nor for any other cause, than for their honest
necessity, haunt or resort to any Taverns or Alehouses; And after their Dinner
and Supper, they shall not give themselves to Drinking or Riot, spending their
time idely, by Day or by Night, at Tables or Cards-playing, or any other
unlawful Game; but at such times as they shall have such leisure, they shall
read or hear somewhat of Holy Scripture, or shall occupy themselves with some
other honest Exercise; and that they always do those things which appertain to
good congruence and honesty, with profit of the Commonweal, having always in
mind, That they ought to excel all others in purity of life, and should be
examples to all other to live well and christianly.

Furthermore; Because the Goods of the Church are called the Goods of the Poor,
and at these days nothing is less seen than the Poor to be sustained with the
same; all Parsons, Vicars, Pensionaries, Prebendaries, and other Beneficed Men
within the Deanery, not being resident upon their Benefices, which may dispend
yearly 20 l. or above within this Deanery, or elsewhere, shall distribute
hereafter yearly amongst their poor Parishioners, or other Inhabitants there,
in the presence of the Churchwardens, or some other honest Men of the Parish,
the fortieth part of the Fruits and Revenues of the said Benefices: lest they
be worthily noted of Ingratitude; which reserving so many parts to themselves,
cannot vouchsafe to impart the fortieth portion thereof amongst the poor People
of that Parish, that is so fruitful and profitable unto them.

And to the intent that Learned Men may hereafter spring the more for the
execution of the Premises; Every Parson, Vicar, Clerk, or beneficed Man within
this Deanery, having yearly to dispend in Benefices, and other promotions of the
Church, an 100 l. shall give competent exhibition to one Scholar; and for as
many hundred pounds more as he may dispend, to so many Scholars more, shall
give like exhibition in the University of Oxford or Cambridg, or some
Grammer-School; which after they have profited in good Learning, may be
Partners of their Patrons Cure and Charge, as well in preaching as otherwise,
in the execution of their Offices; or may, when need shall be, otherwise profit
the Commonwealth with their Counsel and Wisdom.

Also, that all Parsons, Vicars, and Clerks, having Churches, Chapels, or
Mansions within this Deanery, shall bestow yearly hereafter upon the same
Mansions, or Chancels of their Churches being in decay, the fifth part of their
Benefices till they be fully repaired; and the same so repaired, shall always
keep and maintain in good state.

All which and singular Injunctions shall be inviolably observed of the said
Dean, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Stipendiaries, and other Clerks and beneficed
Men, under the pain of suspension and sequestration of the Fruits of their
Benefices, until they have done their duty according to these Injunctions.

VIII. Cromwell's Letter to Shaxton, Bishop of Sarum, taken from a Copy writ by
his Secretary.
MY Lord, after hearty Commendations, Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 4.
I cannot but both much marvel that you whom I have taken as mine trusty
Friend, should judge me, as I perceive by your Letters you do, and also be glad
that ye so frankly utter your Stomach to me. I would thank you for your plain
writing and free monitions, saving that you seem fuller of suspicion than it
becomes a Prelate of your sort to be: and (to say that makes me more sorry)
much worse persuaded of me than I thought any of your Learning and Judgment
could have been. I took a Matter out of your hands to mine, if upon
con^iderations mine Office bind me to do so, what cause have ye to complain? if
I had done this, either upon affection, or intending prejudice to your
estimation, you might have expostulated with me; and yet if ye then had done it
after a gentler sort, I should both sooner have amended that I did amiss, and
also have had better cause to judge your writing to me, to be of a friendly
heart toward me. If ye be offended with my sharp Letters, how can your testy
words (I had almost given them another Name) delight me? I required you to use
no extremity in your Office, durus est hic sermo, ye call it; and when ye have
done, ye begin again, even as tho all being said, all were still behind. If ye
have used none extremity, I am, I ensure you, as glad of it as I ought to be:
And though ye do not, yet upon a complaint my Office binds me to succor him
that says he is over-matched, and is compelled to sustain wrong. I was thus
informed, and by Persons to whom I gave more credit than I intend to do
hereafter, if they have abused me, as ye would make me believe they have. They
thus complaining, could I do less than grant unto them such Remedies as the
King's Highness and his Laws give indifferently to all his Subjects? Might I
not also somewhat gather, that ye proceeded the sorer against the Reader, Roger
London, when I had seen how much you desired the preferment of your Servant to
that Revenue? My Lord, you had showed your self of much more patience, I will
not say of much more prudence, if ye had contented your self with their lawful
Appeal, and my lawful Injunctions; and rather have written somewhat fully to
instruct us in this Matter, than thus to desire to conquer me by shrewd words,
to vanquish me by sharp threp of Scripture, which as I know to use travel, so I
trust to God as great a Clerk as ye be, is done already. Thus out of their
place, it becomes me not, neither yet I am wont to vaunt my self of
well-doing, I know who works all that is well wrought by me; and whereas he
is the whole Doer, I intend not to offer him this wrong, to labor, and I to
take the thanks; yet as I do not cease to give thanks, that that it has
pleased his Goodness to use me as an Instrument, and to work somewhat by me, so
I trust I am as ready to serve him in my Calling, to my little power, as ye are
pressed to write worse of me than ye ought to think. My Prayer is, That God give
me no longer life, than I shall be glad to use mine Office in aedificationem,
and not in destructionem, as ye bear me in hand I do. God, ye say, will judge
such using of Authority, meaning flatly, that I do abuse such Power as has
pleased God and the King's Highness to set me in; God, I say, will judge such
Judges as year, and charge also such thoughts as ye misuse: ye do not so well
as I would ye should do, if ye so think of me as your Letters make me think ye
do. The Crime that ye charge me withal, is greater than I may or ought to bear,
untruer, I trust, than they that would fainest, shall be able to prove. It is a
^trange thing, you say, that I neither would write, nor send you word by mouth,
what ye should do with the Popish Monks of Abington; and that the Abbot of
Redding could get streight-way my Letters to inhibit your just doings: That was
not my mind which I wrote, I did not intend to let your just doings, but
rather to require you to do justly; neither I was swift in granting my Letters
to him, albeit I am much readier to help him that complains of wrong, than
pressed to further on him that desires punishment of a Person whom I am not sure
has offended. I made you no answer, a strange thing! my Lord, I thought ye had
better known my Business, than for such a Matter to esteem me not your Friend;
you might have better judged that I was too much cumbred with other Affairs,
that those which sued for the Abbot, could better espy their time than you
could. Some Man will think it rather utter displeasure conceived before, than
that ye have any urgent occasion here to misjudg my mind toward you. As
concerning your Manor you must use your Privileges as things lent unto you, so
long as ye shall occupy them well, that is, according to the mind and pleasure
of them that gave you them. I took neither the Monk's Cause, nor any other,
into my hands, to be a bearer of any such whom their upright dealings is not
able to bear. No, you know I think, that I love such readers of Scripture as
little as ye do: would God Men of your sort were as diligent to see that in all
their Diocesses good were made, as I am glad to remove things when I know them;
if ye had taken even then but half the pains to send up such things against him
as ye now send, neither you should have had cause, no nor occasion thus easily
to divine of my good or evil-will toward you, nor I have been cumbred with
this answer. My Lord, I pray you, while I am your Friend, take me to be so; for
if I were not, or if I knew any cause why I ought not, I would not be afraid to
show you what had alienated my mind from you; so you should well perceive that
my displeasure should last no longer than there were cause. I pass over your
Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, I pray with you this first part, Our Lord have
pity upon me; the other part is not in my Prayers, That God should turn my
heart, for he is my Judge, I may err in my doings for want of knowledge, but I
willingly bear no misdoers, I willingly hurt none whom honesty and the King's
Laws do not refuse. Undo not you your self, I intend nothing less than to work
you any displeasure. If hitherto I have showed you any pleasure, I am glad of
it: I showed it to your Qualities and not to you; if they tarry with you, my
good will cannot depart from you, except your Prayer be heard, that is, My
Heart be turned. I assure you I am right-glad ye are in the place ye are in,
and will do what shall lie in me to aid you in your Office, to maintain your
Reputation, to give you credit among your Flock, and elsewhere; as long as I
shall see you faithful to your Duty, according to your Calling. I will not
become your good Lord, as your desire is, I am and have been your Friend, and
take you to be mine; cast out vain suspicion, let rash Judgment rule Men of
less wit and discretion; wilfulness becomes all Men better than a Bishop,
which should always teach us to lack gladly our own Will, because you may not
have your own Will. Here is Christus paup. facit and ditat, cum Dominus dedit
and Dominus abstulit, to what purpose? Sit nomen Domini benedictum, can never
lack his place, it becomes alwise in season; or else as great a Divine as ye
are, I would say, it were not the best Placed here, except you wist better, you
had rather lose all than any part of your will. I pray you teach Patience
better in your Deeds, or else speak as little of it as ye can. My Lord, you
might have provoked an other in my place, that would have used less patience
with you, finding so little in you; but I can take your Writings, and this Heat
off your Stomach, even as well as I can, I trust, beware of Flatterers. As for
the Abbot of Redding, and his Monk, if I find them as ye say they are, I will
order them as I shall think good; ye shall do well to do your Duty, if you so
do, ye have no cause to mistrust my Friendship; if ye do not, I must tell it
you, and that somewhat after the plainest sort, To take a Cause out of your
hands into mine, I do but mine Office, you meddle further than your Office will
bear you, thus roughly to handle me for using of mine. If ye do so no more, I
let pass all that is past, and offer you such kindness as ye shall lawfully
desire at my hands. Thus fare you well.

IX. The Sentence given out by Pope Paul the third, against King Henry.
Damnatio and Excommunicatio Henrici 8. Regis Angliae, ejusque Fautorum and
Complicum, cum aliarum poenarum adjectione.
Paulus Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei
ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
Cherubini Bullarium, Tom. 2. page 704.
EJus qui immobilis permanens sua providentia ordine mirabili dat cuncta moveri,
disponente clementia, vices, licet immeriti gerentes in terris, and in sede
justitiae constituti, juxta prophetae quoque Hieremiae vaticinium dicentis:
Ecce te constitui super gentes and Regna, ut evellas and destruas, aedifices,
plants, praecipuum super omnes Reges Universae Terrae cunctosque populos
obtinentes principatum: ac illum qui pius and misericors est, and vindictam ei
qui illam praevenit paratam temperat, nec quos impoenitentes videt severa
ultione castigat, quin prius comminetur, in assidue autem peccantes and in
peccatis perseverantes, cum excessus misericordiae fines praetereunt, ut saltem
metu poenae ad cor reverti cogantur, justitiae vires exercet, imitantes; ex
incumbenti nobis Apostolicae sollicitudinis studio per-urgemur, ut cunctarum
personarum nostrae curae caelitus commissarum salubri statui solertius
intendamus, ac erroribus and scandalis, quae Hostis antiqui versutia imminere
conspicimus, propensius obviemus, excessusque and enormia ac scandalosa crimina
congrua severitate coerceamus, and juxta Apostolum inobedientiam ovium
promptius ulciscendo, illorum perpetratores debita correctione sic compescamus,
quod eos Dei iram provocasse poeniteat, and ex hoc aliis exemplum cautelae
salutaris accedat.

Sane cum superioribus diebus nobis relatum fuisset, quod Henricus Angliae Rex,
licet tempore Pontificatus fael. record. Leonis Papae X. Praedecessoris nostri
diversorum haereticorum Errores, saepe ab Apostolica Sede and Sacris Conciliis
praeteritis temporibus damnatos, and novissime nostra aetate per perditionis
alumnum Martinum Lutherum suscitatos and innovatos, zelo Catholicae Fidei, and
erga dictam Sedem devotionis fervore inductus, non minus docte quam pie, per
quendam librum per eum desuper compositum, and eidem Leoni Praedecessori ut eum
examinaret and approbaret oblatum, confutasset, ob quod ad eodem Leone
Praedecessore ultra dicti libri, cum magna ipsius Henrici Regis laud and
commendatione, approbationem, titulum Defensoris Fidei reportaverit, a recta
Fide and Apostolico tramite devians, ac propriae salutis, famae, and honoris
immemor, postquam Charissima in Christo Filia nostra Catharina Angliae Regina
illustri sua progeny conjuge, cum qua public in facie Ecclesiae Matrimonium
contraxerat, and per plures annos continuaverat, ac ex qua, dicto constante
Matrimonio, prolem pluries susceperat; nulla legitima subsistente causa, and
contra Ecclesiae prohibitionem dimissa, cum quadam Anna Bolena, Muliere
Anglica, dicta Catharina adhuc vivente, de facto Matrimonium contraxerat, ad
deteriora prosiliens, quasdam leges ceu generales Constitutiones edere non
erubuit, per quas subditos suos ad quosdam haereticos and schismaticos
Articulos tenendos, inter quos and hoc erat quod Romanus Pontifex Caput
Ecclesiae, and Christi Vicarius non erat, and quod ipse in Anglica Ecclesia
supremum Caput existebat, sub gravibus etiam mortis poenis cogebat. Et his non
contentus, Diabolo sacrilegii crimen suadente, quamplures Praelatos, etiam
Episcopos, aliasque personas Ecclesiasticas, etiam Regulares, ne^non
Saeculares, sibi ut haeretico and schismatico adhaerere, ac Articulos
praedictos Sanctorum Patrum decretis and Sacrorum Conciliorum Statutis, imo
etiam ipsi Evangelicae veritati contrarios, tanquam tales alios damnatos
approbare, and sequi nolentes, and intrepide recusantes, capi and carceribus
mancipari. Hisque similiter non contentus, mala malis accumulando, bonae
memoriae Jo. H. S. Vitalis Presbyt. Cardinal. Roffen. quem ob fidei constantiam
and vitae Sanctimoniam ad Cardinalatus dignitatem promoveramus, cum dictis
haeresibus and erroribus consentire nollet, horenda immanitate and detestanda
saevitia, public miserabili supplicio tradi and decollari mandaverat, and
fecerat, Excommunicationis, and Anathematis, aliasque gravissimas sententias,
censuras, and poenas in literis and constitutionibus recolendae mem. Bonifacii
VIII. Honorii III. Roman. Pontificum praedecessorum nostrorum desuper editis
contentas, and alias in tales a jure latas damnabiliter incurrendo, ac Regno
Angliae, and dominiis quae tenebat, necnon regalis fastigii celsitudine ac
praefati tituli praerogativa, and honor se indignum reddendo.

2. Nos licet ex eo, quod prout non ignorabamus, idem Henricus Rex certis
censuris Ecclesiasticis, quibus a piae memoriae Clemente Papa VII. etiam
praedecessore nostro, postquam humanissimis literis and paternis
exhortationibus, multisque nunciis and mediis, primo and postremo etiam
judicialiter, ut praefatam Annam a se dimitteret, and ad praedictae Catharinae
suae verae Conjugis consortium rediret, frustra monitus fuerat, innodatus
extiterat, Pharaonis duritiam imitando, per longum tempus in clavium contemptum
insorduerat, and insordescebat, quod ad cor rediret, vix sperare posse
videremus, ob paternam tamen Charitatem, qua in minoribus constituti donec in
obedientia, and reverentia Sedis praedictae permansit, eum prosecuti fueramus,
utque clarius videre possemus, an clamor qui ad nos delatus fuerat, (quem certe
etiam ipsius Henrici Regis respectu falsum esse desideramus) verus esset,
statuimus ab ulteriori contra ipsum Henricum Regem processu ad tempus
abstinendo, hujus rei veritatem diligentius indagare.

3. Cum autem debitis diligentiis desuper factis clamorem ad nos, ut
praefertur, delatum, verum esse, simulque, quod dolenter referimus, dictum
Henricum Regem ita in profundum malorum descendisse, ut de ejus resipiscentia
nulla penitus videatur spes haberi posse, repererimus: Nos attendentes vetere
lege, crimen adulterii notatum lapidari mandatum, ac auctores Schismatis halitu
terrae absorptos, eorumque sequaces coelesti igne consumptos, Elimamque Magum
viis Domini resistentem per Apostolum aeterna severitate damnatum fuisse,
volentesque ne in districto examine ipsius Henrici Regis and subditorum suorum,
quos secum in perditionem trahere videmus, animarum ratio a nobis exposcatur,
quantum nobis ex alto conceditur, providere contra Henricum Regem, ejusque
accomplices, fautores, adhaerentes, and sequaces, and in praemissis quomodolibet
culpabiles, contra quod ex eo quod excessus, and delicta praedicta adeo
manifesta sunt and notoria, ut nulla possint tergiversatione celari, absque
ulteriori mora ad executionem procedere possemus, benignius agendo, decrevimus
infrascripto modo procedere.

4. Habita itaque super his cum venerabilibus fratribus nostris S. R. E.
Cardinalibus deliberatione matura, and de illorum consilio and assensu,
praefatum Henricum Regem, ejusque accomplices, fautores, adhaerentes, consultores
and sequaces, ac quoscunque alios in praemissis, ceu eorum aliquo quoque modo
culpabiles, tam laicos quam Clericos, etiam regulares cujuscunque dignitatis,
status, gradus, ordinis, conditionis, praeeminentiae, and excellentiae
existant, (quorum nomina and cognomina, perinde ac si praesentibus
insererentur, pro sufficienter expressis haberi volumus) per viscera
misericordiae Dei nostri hortamur, and requirimus in Domino, quatenus Henricus
Rex a praedictis erroribus prorsus abstineat, and constitutiones, seu leges
praedictas, sicut de facto eas fecit, revocet, casset, and annullet, and
coactione subditorum suorum ad eas servandas, necnon carceratione, captura, and
punitione illorum, qui ipsis constitutionibus seu legibus adhaerere, aut eas
servare noluerint, and ab aliis erroribus praedictis penitus, and omnino
abstineat, and si quos praemissorum occasion captivos habeas, relaxet.

5. Accomplices vero, fautores, adhaerentes, consultores, and sequaces dicti
Henrici Regis in praemissis, and circa ea ipsi Henrico Regi super his de
caetero non adsistant, nec adhaereant, vel faveant, nec ei consilium, auxilium,
vel favorem, desuper praestent.

6. Alias si Henricus Rex, ac fautores, adhaerentes. consultores, and sequaces,
hortationibus and requisitionibus hujusmodi non annuerint cum effectu, Henricum
Regem, fautores, adhaerentes, consultores and sequaces, ac alios culpabiles
praedictos, auctoritate Apostolica, ac ex certa nostra scientia, and de
Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine, tenore praesentium, in virtute sanctae
obedientiae, ac sub majoris Excommunicationis lata sententia, a qua etiam
praetextu cujuscunque privilegii, vel facultatis, etiam in forma
confessionalis, cum quibuscunque efficacissimis clausulis nobis and Sede
praedicta quomodolibet concessis, and etiam iteratis vicibus innovatis, ab alio
quam a Romano Pontifice, praeterquam in mortis Articulo constituti, ita tamen,
quod si aliquem absolvi contingat, qui postmodum convaluerit, nisi post
convalescentiam, monitioni and mandatis nostris hujusmodi paruerit cum effectu,
in eandem Excommunicationis sententiam reincidat, absolvi non possint.

7. Necnon rebellionis, and quoad Henricum Regem, etiam perditionis Regni, and
Dominiorum praedictorum, and tam quoad eum, quam quod alios monitos supradictos
supra and infrascriptis poenis, quas si dictis monitioni and mandatis, ut
praefertur, non paruerint, eos, and eorum singulos, ipso facto respective
incurrere volumus, per praesentes monemus; eisque and eorum cuilibet districte
praecipiendo mandamus, quatenus Henricus Rex per se, vel procuratorem legitimum
and sufficienti mandato suffultum, infra nonaginta, accomplices vero, fautores,
adhaerentes, consultores, and sequaces, ac alii in praemissis quomodolibet
culpabiles supradicti, Saeculares and Ecclesiastici etiam regulares,
personaliter infra sexaginta dies compareant coram nobis, ad se super
praemissis legitime excusandum and defendendum; alias videndum and audiendum
contra eos and eorum singulos, etiam nominatim, quos sic monemus, quatenus
expediat, ad omnes and singulos, actus, etiam sententiam definitivam,
declaratoriam, condemnatoriam, and privatoriam, ac mandatum executivum procedi.
Quod si Henricus Rex, and alii moniti praedicti intra dictos terminos eis ut
praefertur, respective praefixos non comparuerint, and praedictam
Excommunicationis sententiam per tres dies, post lapsum dictorum terminorum
animo, quod absit, sustinuerint indurato, censuras ipsas aggravamus, and
successive reaggravamus, Henricumque ipsum, privationis Regni and Dominiorum
praedictorum, and tam eum quam alios monitos praedictos, and eorum singulos,
omnes and singulas alias poenas praedictas incurrisse, ab omnibusque Christi
fidelibus, cum eorum bonis perpetuo diffidatos esse. Et si interim ab humanis
decedat, Ecclesiastica debere carere sepultura, auctoritate and potestatis
plenitudine praedictis decernimus, and declaramus, eosque anathematis,
maledictionis, and damnationis aeternae mucrone percutimus.

8. Necnon quae praefatus Henricus Rex quomodolibet, and ex quavis causa tenet,
habet, aut possidet, Quamdiu Henricus Rex, and alii moniti praedicti, and eorum
singuli in aliis per dictum Henricum Regem non tentis, habitis, aut possessis
permanserint, and triduo post eorum inde recessum, and alia quaecunque ad quae
Henricum Regem, and alios moni^os praedictos, post lapsum dictorum terminorum
declinare contigerit, Dominia, civitates, terras, castra, villas, oppida,
Metrapolitanasque, and alias Cathedrales, caeterasque inferiores Ecclesias,
necnon Monasteria, Prioratus, Domos, Conventus, and loca religiosa, vel pia
cujuscunque, etiam S. Benedict. Cluniacen. Cistercien. Praemonstraten. ac
Praedicatorum, Minorum, Eremitarum S. Augustini Carmelitarum, and aliorum
Ordinum, ac Congregationum, and Militiarum quaruncunque in ipsis Dominiis,
Civitatibus, terris, castris, villis, oppidis, and locis existentia,
Ecclesiastico supponimus Interdicto, ita ut illo durante in iis etiam praetextu
cujuscunque Apostolici indulti, Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, Prioratibus, Domibus,
Conventibus, locis, ordinibus, aut personis, etiam quacunque dignitate
fulgentibus concessi, praeterquam in casibus a jure permissis, ac etiam in
illis alias quam clausis januis, and Excommunicatis and interdictis exclusis,
nequeant Missae, aut alia divina officia celebrari.

9. Et Henrici Regis, complicumque, fautorum, adhaerentium, consultorum,
sequacium, and culpabilium praedictorum filii, paenarum, ut hic in hoc casu par
est, participes sint, omnes and singulos ejusdem Henrici Regis ex dicta Anna,
ac singulorum aliorum praedictorum filios natos, and nascituros, aliosque
descendentes, usque in eum gradum, ad quem jura poenas in casibus hujusmodi
extendunt (nemine excepto, nullaque minoris aetatis, aut sexus, vel
ignorantiae, vel alterius cujusvis causae habita ratione) dignitatibus, and
honoribus in quibus quomodolibet constituti existunt, seu quibus gaudent,
utuntur, potiuntur, aut muniti sunt, necnon privilegiis, concessionibus,
gratiis, indulgentiis, immunitatibus, remissionibus, libertatibus, and
indultis, ac dominiis, civitatibus, castris, terris, villis, oppidis, and
locis, etiam Commendatis, vel in Gubernium concessis, and quae in feudum,
emphyteusim, vel alias a Romany, vel aliis Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, and locis
Ecclesiasticis, ac secularibus Principibus, Dominiis, Potentatibus, etiam
Regibus and Imperatoribus, aut aliis privatis, vel publicis personis
quomodolibet habent, tenent, aut possident, caeterisque omnibus bonis,
mobilibus and immobilibus, juribus and actionibus, eis quomodolibet
competentibus privatos, dictaque bona feudalia, vel emphyteutica, and alia
quaecunque ab aliis quomodolibet obtenta, ad directos dominos, ita ut de illis
libere disponere possint, respective devoluta, and eos qui Ecclesiastici
fuerint, etiamsi religiosi existant, Ecclesiis etiam Cathedralibus, and
Metropolitanis, necnon Monasteriis and Prioratibus, praeposituris,
praepositatibus, dignitatibus, personatibus, Officiis, Canonicatibus and
Praebendis, aliisque beneficiis Ecclesiasticis per eos quomodolibet obtentis
privatos, and ad illa ac alia in posterum obtinenda inhabiles esse, similiter
decernimus and declaramus; eosque sic respective privatos ad illa, and alia
quaecunque similia, ac dignitates, honores, administrationes, and officia,
jura, ac feuda in posterum obtinenda, auctoritate and scientia, ac plenitudine
similibus inhabilitamus.

10. Ipsiusque Henrici Regis, ac Regni omniumque aliorum dominiorum, civitatum,
terrarum, castrorum, villarum, fortalitiorum, arcium, oppidorum, and locorum
suorum, etiam de facto obtentorum Magistratus, judices, Castellanos, Custodes
and Officiales quoscunque, necnon Communitates, Universitates, Collegia,
Feudatarios, vassallos, subditos, cives, incolas, and habitatores etiam
forenses, dicto Regi de facto obedientes, tam saeculares, quam si qui rationis
alicujus temporalitatis ipsum Henricum Regem in superiorem recognoscant, etiam
Ecclesiasticos, a praefato rege, seu ejus complicibus, fautoribus,
adhaerentibus, consultoribus, and sequacibus supradictis deputatis, a juramento
fidelitatis, jure vassallitico, and omni erga Regem, and alios praedictos
subjectione absolvimus, ac penitus liberamus. His nihilominus sub
Excommunicationis poena mandantes, ut ab ejusdem Henrici Regis, suorumque
officialium, judicum, and magistratuum quorumcunque obedientia poenitus and
omnino recedant, nec illos in superiores recognoscant, neque illorum mandatis
obtemperent.

11. Et ut alii eorum exemplo perterriti discant ab hujusmodi excessibus
abstinere, eisdem auctoritate, scientia, and plenitudine, volumus, ac
decernimus, quod Henricus Rex and accomplices, fautores, adhaerentes,
consultores, sequaces, and alii in praemissis culpabiles, postquam alias poenas
praedictas, ut praefertur, respective incurrerint, necnon praefati
descendentes, ex tunc infames existant, and ad testimonium non admittantur,
testamenta, and codicillos, aut alias dispositiones, etiam inter vivos
concedere, and facere non possint, and ad alicujus successionem ex testamento,
vel ab intestato, necnon ad jurisdictionem, seu judicandi potestatem, and ad
Notoriatus Officium, omnesque actus legitimos quoscunque ita ut eorum
processus, sive instrumenta atque alii actus quicunque, nullius sint roboris
vel momenti, inhabiles existant, and nulli ipsis, sed ipsi aliis super
quocunque debito and negotio, tam civili, quam criminali, de jure respondere
teneantur.

12. Et nihilominus omnes, and singulos Christi fideles, sub Excommunicationis,
and aliis infrascriptis poenis, monemus, ut monitos, Excommunicatos,
aggravatos, interdictos, privatos, maledictos, and damnatos praedictos evitent,
and quantum in eis est, and ab aliis evitari faciant, nec cum eisdem, seu
praefati Regis Civitatum, Dominiorum, Terrarum, Castrorum, Comitatuum,
Villarum, Fortalitiorum, Oppidorum, and locorum praedictorum civibus, incolis,
vel habitatoribus aut subditis and vassallis, emendo, vendendo, permutando, aut
quamcunque mercaturam, seu negotium exercendo, commercium, seu aliquam
conversationem, seu communionem habeant* aut vinum, granum, sal, seu alia
victualia, arma, pannos, merces vel quasvis alias mercantias, vel res per mare
in eorum navibus, triremibus, aut aliis navigiis, sive per terram cum mulis,
vel aliis animalibus, defer aut conducere, seu deferri aut conduci facere,
vel delata per illos recipere, public vel occulte, aut talia facientibus
auxiliu^, consiliu^, favorem public vel occulte, direct vel indirecte, quovis
quaesito color, perse, vel alium, seu alios quoquo modo praestare praesumant.
Quod si fecerint, ultra Excommunicationis praedictae, etiam nullitatis
contractuum quos inirent, necnon perditionis mercium, victualium, and bonorum
omnium delatorum, quae capientium siant, poenas similiter eo ipso incurrant.

13. Caeterum quia convenire non videtur, ut cum his qui Ecclesiam contemnunt,
dum praesertim ex eorum pertinacia spes corrigibilitatis non habetur, hi qui
divinis obsequiis vacant, conversentur, quod etiam illos tuto facere non posse
dubitandum est, omnium and singularum Metropolitanarum and aliarum
Cathedralium, caeterarumque inferiorum Ecclesiarum and Monasteriorum, domorum
and locorum Religiosorum, and piorum quorumcumque, etiam S. Augustini, S.
Benedicti, Cluniacen. Cistercien. Praemonstraten. ac Praedicatorum, Minorum,
Carmelitarum, aliorumque quorumcumque ordinum, and Militiarum, etiam Hospitalis
Hierosolymitani, Praelatis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Praeceptoribus, Praepositis,
Ministris, Custodibus, Guardianis, Conventibus, Monachis and Canonicis, necnon
Parochialium Ecclesiarum Rectoribus, aliisque quibuscunque personis
Ecclesiasticis in Regno and Dominiis praedictis commorantibus, sub
Excommunicationis ac privationis Administrationum and regiminum Monasteriorum,
dignitatum, personatuum, administrationum, ac officiorum, Canonicatuumque, and
Praebendarum, Parochialium Ecclesiarum, and aliorum beneficiorum
Ecclesiasticorum quorumcumque quomodolibet qualificatorum, per eos quomodolibet
obtentorum, poenis mandamus, quatenus infra quinque dies, post omnes and
singulos terminos praedictos elapsos, de ipsis Regno, and Dominiis, dimissis
tamen aliquibus Presbyteris in Ecclesiis quarum curam habuerint, pro
administrando baptismate parvulis, and in poenitentia decedentibus, ac aliis
Sacramentis Ecclesiasticis, quae tempore Interdicti ministrari permittuntur,
exeant and discedant, neque ad Regnum, and Dominia praedicta revertantur; donec
moniti, and Excommunicati, aggravati, reaggravati, privati, maledicti, and
damnati praedictis monitionibus, and mandatis nostris hujusmodi
obtemperaverint, meruerint a censuris hujusmodi absolutionis beneficium
obtinere, seu Interdictum in Regno, and Dominiis praedictis, fuerit sublatum.

14. Praeterea si praemissis non obstantibus, Henricus Rex, Accomplices,
fautores, adhaerentes, consultores, and sequaces praedicti in eorum pertinacia
perseveraverint, nec conscientiae stimulus eos ad cor reduxerit, in eorum forte
potentia, and armis confidentes, omnes and singulos Duces, Marchiones, Comites,
and alios quoscunque tam Seculares, quam Ecclesiasticos etiam forenses, de
facto dicto Henrico Regi obedientes, sub ejusdem Excommunicationis, ac
perditionis bonorum suorum (quae, ut infra dicitur, similiter capientium fiant)
poenis, requirimus and monemus, quatenus omni mora, and excusatione postposita,
eos, and eorum singulos, ac ipsorum milites and stipendiarios, tam equestres
quam pedestres, aliosque quoscumque, qui eis cum armis faverint, de Regno and
Dominiis praedictis, etiam vi armorum, si opus fuerit, expellant: ac quod
Henricus Rex, and ejus accomplices, fautores, adhaerentes, consultores, and
sequaces, mandatis nostris non obtemperantes praedicti, de Civitatibus, Terris,
Castris, Villis, Oppidis, Fortalitiis, aut aliis locis Regni and Dominii
praedictorum se non intromittant, procurent: eis sub omnibus and singulis
poenis praedictis inhibentes, ne in favorem Henrici, ejusque complicum,
fautorum, adhaerentium, consultorum, and sequacium aliorumque monitorum
praedictorum, mandatis nostris non obtemperantium, arma cujuslibet generis
offensiva, vel defensiva, Machinas quoque bellicas, seu tormenta (artellarias
nuncupata) sumant aut teneant, seu illis utantur, aut armatos aliquos praeter
consuetam familiam parent, aut ab Henrico Rege, complicibus, fautoribus,
adhaerentibus, consultoribus, and sequacibus, vel aliis in Regis ipsius favorem
paratos, quomodolibet, quavis occasion vel causa, per se vel alium seu alios,
public vel occulte, direct vel indirecte teneant, vel receptent, aut dicto
Henrico Regi, seu illius complicibus, fautoribus, adhaerentibus, consultoribus,
and sequacibus praedictis, consilium, auxilium, vel quomodolibet ex quavis
causa, vel quovis quaesito color sive ingenio, public vel occulte, direct
vel indirecte, tacit vel express, per se vel alium seu alios praemissis, vel
aliquo praemissorum praestent, seu praestari faciant quoquomodo.

15. Praeterea ad dictum Henricum Regem facilius ad sanitatem, and praefatae
Sedis obedientiam reducendum, omnes and singulos Christianos Principes,
quacumque etiam Imperiali and Regali dignitate fulgentes, per viscera
misericordiae Dei nostri (cujus causa agitur) hortamur and in Domino
requirimus, eis nihilominus, qui Imperatore and Rege inferiores fuerint, quos
propter excellentiam dignitatis a censuris excipimus, sub Excommunicationis
poena mandantes, ne Henrico Regi ejusque complicibus, fautoribus,
adhaerentibus, consultoribus, and sequacibus, vel eorum alicui, per se vel
alium seu alios, public vel occulte, direct vel indirecte, tacit vel
express, etiam sub praetextu confoederationum aut obligationum quocumque etiam
juramento, aut quavis alia firmitate roboratarum, and saepius geminatarum, a
quibus quidem obligationibus and juramentis omnibus, nos eos and eorum singulos
eisdem auctoritate and scientia ac plenitudine per praesentes absolvimus,
ipsasque confoederationes and obligationes tam factas, quam in posterum
faciendas, quas tamen (in quantum Henricus Rex and accomplices, fautores,
adhaerentes, consultores, and sequaces praedicti circa praemissa, vel eorum
aliquod se direct vel indirecte juvare possent) sub eadem poena fieri
prohibemus, nullius roboris vel momenti, nullasque, irritas, cassas, inanes, ac
pro infectis habendas fore decernimus and declaramus, consilium, auxilium, vel
favorem quomodolibet praestent, quinimo si qui illis, aut eorum alicui ad
praesens quomodolibet assistant, ab ipsis omnino and cum affectu recedant. Quod
si non fecerint postquam praesentes publicatae and executioni demandatae
fuerint, and dicti termini lapsi fuerint, omnes and singulas civitates, terras,
oppida, castra, villas, and alia loca eis subjecta, simili Ecclesiastico
Interdicto supponimus, volentes ipsum Interdictum donec ipsi Principes a
Consilio, auxilio, and favore Henrico Regi and complicibus, fautoribus,
adhaerentibus, consultoribus and sequacibus praedictis praestando destiterint,
perdurare.

16. Insuper tam Principes praedictos, quam quoscumque alios, etiam ad
stipendia quorumcumque Christi fidelium militantes, and alias quascumque
personas, tam per mare, quam per terras, armigeros habentes, similiter hortamur
and requirimus, and nihilominus eis in virtute sanctae obedientiae mandantes,
quatenus contra Henricum Regem, accomplices, fautores, adhaerentes, consultores,
and sequaces praedictos, dum in erroribus praedictis, ac adversus Sedem
praedictam, rebellione permanserint, armis insurgant, eosque and eorum singulos
persequantur, ac ad unitatem Ecclesiae, and obedientiam dictae Sedis redire
cogant and compellant; and tam eos quam ipsorum subditos and vassallos, ac
civitatum, terrarum, castrorum, oppidorum, villarum, and locorum suorum
incolas, and habitatores, aliosque omnes and singulas personas supradictis
mandatis nostris, ut praefertur, non obtemperantes, and quae praefatum Henricum
Regem, postquam censuras, and poenas praedictas incurrerit, in Dominum
quomodolibet, etiam de facto recognoverint, vel ei quovis modo obtemperare
praesumpserint, aut qui eum, ac accomplices, fautores, adhaerentes, consultores,
sequaces, ac alios non obtemperantes praedictos, ex Regno and Dominiis
praedictis, ut praefertur, expellere noluerint, ubicunque eos invenerint,
eorumque bona, mobilia and immobilia, mercantias, pecunias, navigia, credita,
res, and animalia, etiam extra territorium dicti Henrici Regis ubilibet
consistentia, capiant.

17. Nos enim eis bona, mercantias, pecunias, navigia, res, and animalia
praedicta sic capta, in proprios eorum usus convertendi, eisdem auctoritate,
scientia, and potestatis plenitudine, plenariam licentiam, facultatem and
auctoritatem concedimus, illa omnia ad eosdem capientes plenarie pertinere, and
spectare, and personas ex Regno and Dominiis praedictis originem trahentes, seu
in illis domicilium habentes, aut quomodolibet habitantes, mandatis nostris
praedictis non obtemperantes, ubicunque eos capi contigerit, capientium servos
fieri decernentes: praesentesque literas quoad hoc ad omnes alios cujuscunque
dignitatis, gradus, status, ordinis, vel conditionis fuerint, qui ipsi Henrico
Regi, vel ejus complicibus, fautoribus, adhaerentibus, consultoribus, and
sequacibus, aut aliis monitionibus, and mandatis nostris hujusmodi quoad
commercium non obtemperantibus, vel eorum alicui victualia, arma, vel pecunias
subministrare, aut cum eis commercium habere, seu auxilium, consilium, vel
favorem, per se vel alium, seu alios, public vel occulte, direct vel
indirecte, quovis modo contra tenorem praesentium praestare praesumpserint,
extendentes.

18. Et ut praemissa facilius iis quos concernunt innotescant, universis and
singulis Patriarchis, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and Patriarchalium
Metropolitan. and aliarum Cathedralium, and Collegiatarum Ecclesiarum
Praelatis, Capitulis, aliisque personis Ecclesiasticis, Saecularibus ac
quorumvis ordinum Regularibus, necnon omnibus and singulis, etiam mendicantium
ordinum Professoribus, exemptis and non exemptis, ubilibet constitutis, per
easdem praesentes sub Excommunicationis and privationis Ecclesiarum,
Monasteriorum, ac aliorum Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum, graduum quoque and
officiorum, necnon privilegiorum, and indultorum quorumcumque etiam a Sede
praedicta quomodolibet emanatorum poenis ipso facto incurrendis, praecipimus
and mandamus, quatenus ipsi ac eorum singuli, si, and postquam vigore
praesentium desuper requisiti fuerint, infra tres dies immediate sequentes,
praefatum Henricum Regem, omnesque alios and singulos, qui supradictas censuras
and poenas incurrerint, in eorum Ecclesiis, Dominicis and aliis festivis
diebus, dum major inibi populi multitudo ad divina convenerit, cum Crucis
vexillo, pulsatis campanis, and accensis, ac demum extinctis, and in terram
projectis, and conculcatis candelis, and aliis in similibus servari solitis
caeremoniis servatis, Excommunicatos public nuncient, and ab aliis nuntiari,
ac ab omnibus arctius evitar^ faciant and mandent, necnon sub supradictis
censuris and poenis, praesentes literas, vel earum transumptum, sub forma
infrascripta confectum, infra terminum trium dierum, postquam, ut praefertur,
requisiti fuerint, in Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, Conventibus, and aliis eorum
locis, publicari and affigi faciant.

19. Volentes, omnes and singulos cujuscumque status, gradus, conditionis,
praeeminentiae, dignitatis, aut excellentiae fuerint, qui quo minus praesentes
literae, vel earum transumpta, copiae, seu exemplaria, in suis civitatibus,
terris, castris, oppidis, villis, and locis legi and affigi, ac publicari
possint, per se, vel alium, seu alios, public vel occulte, direct vel
indirecte impediverint, easdem censuras and poenas, ipso facto incurrere. Et
cum fraus and dolus nemini debeant patrocinari, ne quisquam ex his, qui alicui
regimini and administrationi deputati sunt, infra tempus sui regiminis seu
administrationis praedictas sententias, censuras and poenas sustineat, quasi
post dictum tempus sententiis, censuris and poenis praedictis amplius ligatus
non existat, quemcunque qui dum in regimine, and administratione existens,
monitioni and mandato nostris, quoad praemissa vel aliquid eorum obtemperare
noluerit, etiam deposito regimine, and administratione hujusmodi, nisi
paruerit, eisdem censuris and poenis subjacere decernimus.

20. Et ne Henricus Rex ejusque accomplices, and fautores, adhaerentes,
consultores, and sequaces, aliique quos praemissa concernunt, ignorantiam
earundem praesentium literarum, and in eis contentorum praetendere valiant,
literas ipsas (in quibus omnes and singulos, tam juris, quam facti, etiam
solemnitatum, and processuum, citationumque ommissarum defectus, etiam si tales
sint, de quibus specialis, and expressa mentio facienda esset, propter
notorietatem facti, auctoritate, scientia, and potestatis plenitudine
similibus, supplemus) in Basilicae Principis Apostolorum, and Cancellariae
Apostolicae de urbe, and in partibus in Collegiatae B. Mariae Burgen. Tornacen.
and Parochialis de Dunikerke oppidorum Morinensis diaecesis, Ecclesiarum valvis
affigi, and publicari mandamus: Decernentes quod earundem literarum publicatio
sic facta, Henricum Regem, ejusque accomplices, fautores, adhaerentes,
consultores, and sequaces, omnesque alios, and singulos quos literae ipsae
quomodolibet concernunt, perinde eosarctent, ac si literae ipsae eis
personaliter lectae, and intimatae fuissent, cum non sit verisimile, quod ea,
quae tam patenter fiunt, debeant apud eos incognita remanere.

21. Caeterum quia difficile foret praesentes literas ad singula quaeque loca,
ad quae necessarium esset deferri, singula volumus and dicta auctoritate
decernimus, quod earum transumptis manu publici Notarii confectis, vel in alma
urbe impressis, ac sigillo alicujus personae in dignitate Ecclesiastica
constitutae munitis, ubique eadem fides adhibeatur, quae originalibus
adhiberetur, si essent exhibitae vel ostensae.

22. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostrae monitionis,
aggravationis, reaggravationis, declarationis, percussionis, suppositionis,
inhabilitationis, absolutionis, liberationis, requisitionis, inhibitionis,
hortationis, exceptionis, prohibitionis, concessionis, extensionis,
suppletionis, mandatorum, voluntatis, and decretorum, infringere, vel ei ausu
temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignationem
Omnipotentis Dei, ac Beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit
incursurum.

Datum Romae apud Sanctum Marcum. Anno Incarnationis Domini 1535. 3 Kal. Sept.
Pont. nostri Anno 1.
Sequitur suspensio Executionis dictae Bullae, et tandem ejus revocatio, and
Executio.
Paulus Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam.
CUm Redemptor noster ideo illum qui ipsum negaverat, Petrum, viz. Universae
Ecclesiae praeficere voluerit, ut in sua culpa disceret aliis esse miserendum,
non immerito Romanus Pontifex qui ipsius Petri in dignitate Successor existit,
debet etiam in Officio exercendae misericordiae ipsius esse Successor. Sed cum
in eum dirigitur misericordia, qui ex hoc sit insolentior, and obstinatior,
aliosque secum trahit in perditionem, debet ipse Romanus Pontifex, postposita
in eum misericordia, omnem severitatem adhibere, quo membrum illud putridum ita
a corpore separetur, ut reliqua membra absque metu contagionis salva remaneant,
praesertim cum pluribus curis adhibitis, and multo tempore in hoc consumpto
morbum quotidie magis invalescere, ipsa experientia comprobat.

1. Alias cum nobis relatum fuisset, quod Henricus Angliae Rex, praeter ea quae
Matrimonium de facto, and contra prohibitionem Ecclesiae temerarie contractum
concernebant, quasdam leges, seu generales constitutiones subditos suos ad
haeresim, and schisma trahentes ediderat, and bonae memoriae Joann. tit. Sancti
Vitalis Presbyterum Cardinalem Roffen. public damnari and capite puniri, ac
alios quamplures Praelatos, necnon alias personas Ecclesiast. Haeresi and
Schismati hujusmodi adhaerere nolentes, carceribus mancipari fecerat; Nos,
licet illi qui talia nobis retulerant tales essent, ut nullo modo de veritate
suorum dictorum ambigendum esset, cupientes tamen respectu ipsius Henrici
Regis, quem antequam in has insanias incideret, peculiari quadam charitate
prosequebamur, praedicta falsa reperiri, de eis informationem ulteriorem habere
procuravimus, and invenientes clamorem ad nos delatum verum esse, ne nostro
Officio deessemus, contra eum procedere decrevimus, juxta formam quarundam
literarum nostrarum, quarum tenor sequitur. Et est talis, etc. Omittitur
insertio, quia bulla ipsa est quae praecedit.

2. Dum autem postea ad dictarum literarum executionem deveniendum esse
statuissemus, cum nobis per nonnullos principes, and alias insignes personas
persuaderetur, ut ab executione hujusmodi per aliquantum temporis
supersederemus, spe nobis data, quod interim ipse Henricus Rex ad cor rediret
and resipiseeret; nos qui, ut hominum natura fert facile credebamus quod
desiderabamus, dictam executionem suspendimus, sperantes (ut spes nobis data
erat) ex ipsa suspensione, correctionem and resipiscentiam, non autem
pertinaciam and obstinationem, ac majorem delirationem, ut rei effectus
edocuit, proventuram.

3. Cum itaque resipiscentia and Correctio hujusmodi quam tribus fere annis
expectavimus, non solum postea sequuta non sit, sed ipse Henricus Rex quotidie
magis se in sua feritate, ac temeritate confirmans, in nova etiam scelera
proruperit, quippe cum non contentus vivorum Praelatorum and sacerdotum
crudelissima trucidatione, etiam in mortuos, and eos quidem quos in sanctorum
numerum relatos Universalis Ecclesia pluribus soeculis venerata est, feritatem
exercere non expavit, Divi enim Thomae Cantuarien. Archiepiscopi, cujus ossa,
quae in dicto Regno Angliae potissimum, ob innumera ab omnipotenti Deo illic
perpetrata miracula, summa cum veneratione in arca aurea in Civitate
Cantuarien. servabantur, postquam ipsum Divum Thomam, ad majorem Religionis
contemptum, in judicium vocari, and tanquam contumacem damnari ac proditorem
declarari fecerat, exhumari, and comburi, ac cineres in ventum spargi jussit,
omnem plane cunctarum gentium crudelitatem superans, cum ne in bello quidem
hosts victores saevire in mortuorum cadavera soliti sunt; adhaec omnia ex
diversorum Regum etiam Anglorum, and aliorum Principum liberalitate donaria,
ipsi arcae appensa, quae multa, and maximi pretii erant, sibi usurpavit, nec
putans ex hoc satis injuriae religionis intulisse, Monasterium Divo illi
Augustino, a quo Christianam fidem Angli acceperunt, in dicta civitate dicatum,
omnibus Thesauris, qui etiam multi and magni erant, spoliavit, and sicut se in
belluam transmutavit, ita etiam belluas quasi socias suas honorare voluit,
feras videlicet in dicto Monasterio, expulsis Monachis, intromittendo, genus
quidem sceleris non modo Christi fidelibus, sed etiam Turcis inauditum and
abominandum.

4. Cum itaque morbus iste a nullo quantumvis peritissimo medico alia cura
sanari possit, quam putridi membri abscissione, nec valeret cura hujusmodi,
absque eo, quod nos apud Deum causam hanc nostram efficiamus, ulterius
retardari, ad dictarum literarum (quas ad hoc ut Henricus Rex, ejusque
Accomplices, Fautores, adhaerentes, consultores, and sequaces, etiam super
excessibus per eum novissime, ut praefertur, perpetratos, intra terminum eis,
quoad alia, per alias nostras literas praedictas respective praefixas, se
excusare, alias poenis ipsis literis contentas incurrant, extendimus and
ampliamus) publicationem, and deinde, Deo duce, ad executionem procedere omnino
statuimus. Et quia a fide dignis accepimus, quod si ipsarum and praesentium
literarum publicatio Diep Rothomagen. vel Boloniae Ambianen. Dioec. Oppidis in
Franciae, aut Civitate Sancti Andreae, seu in Oppido Callistren. Sancti Andreae
Dioec. in Scotiae Regnis, vel in Thuamien. and Antiferten. Civitatibus, vel
Dioec. Dominii Hiberniae fiat, non solum tam facile, ut si in locis in dictis
literis expressis fieret, sed facilius ipsarum literarum tenor, ad Henrici, and
aliorum quos concernunt, praesertim Anglorum, notitiam deveniret; Nos volentes
in hoc opportune providere, motu, scientia, and potestatis plenitudine
praedictis decernimus, quod publicatio literarum superius inser^arum, quarum
insertioni superius factae, ac ipsis Originalibus quoad validitatem
publicationis, seu executionis praesentium, fidem adhiberi volumus, in duobus
ex locis praesentibus literis expressis, alias juxta supra insertarum, and
praesentium literarum tenore facta, etiam si in locis extra Romanam Curiam in
dictis praeinsertis literis specificatis, hujusmodi publicatio non fiat,
perinde Henricum Regem, and alios quos concernunt praesertim Anglos afficiat,
ac si Henrico Regi and aliis praedictis praesertim Anglis personaliter
intimatae fuissent.

5. Quodque praesentium transumptis, juxta modum in praeinsertis literis
expressum factis, tam in judicio quam extra, eadem fides adhibeatur, quae
Originalibus adhiberetur, si forent exhibitae, vel ostensae.

6. Non obstantibus Constitutionibus and Ordinationibus Apostolicis, necnon
omnibus illis, quae in dictis literis voluimus non obstare, caeterisque
contrariis quibuscunque.

7. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc paginam nostri Decreti, and
voluntatis infringere, vel ei ausu temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc
attentare praesumpserit, indignationem Omnipotentis Dei, ac Beatorum Petri and
Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum.

Dat. Romae apud S. Petrum, Anno Incarnationis Dominicae 1538. decimo sexto
Kal. Januarii, Pontificatus nostri anno quinto.
X. The Judgment of some Bishops concerning the King's Supremacy. An Original.
THe words of St. John in his 20 th Chap. Sicut misit me Pater, Ex MSS. D.
Stilling-fleet.
and ego mitto vos, etc. has no respect to a King's or a Princes Power, but
only to show how that the Ministers of the Word of God, chosen and sent for
that intent, are the Messengers of Christ, to teach the Truth of his Gospel,
and to loose and bind sin, etc. as Christ was the Messenger of his Father. The
words also of St. Paul, in the 20 th Chap. of the Acts; Attendite vobis and
universo gregi, in qua vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam
Dei, were spoken to the Bishops and Priests, to be diligent Pastors of the
People, both to teach them diligently, and also to be circumspect that false
Preachers should not seduce the People, as follows immediately after in the
same place. Other places of Scripture declare the highness and excellency of
Christian Princes Authority and Power; the which of a truth is most high, for
he has power and charge generally over all, as well Bishops, as Priests, as
other. The Bishops and Priests have charge of Souls within their own Cures,
power to minister Sacraments, and to teach the Word of God; to the which Word
of God Christian Princes knowledge themselves subject; and in case the Bishops
be negligent, it is the Christian Princes Office to see them do their duty.

T. Cantuarien. Ioannes London. Cuthbertus Dunelmen. Io. Batwellen. Thomas
Elien. Nicolaus Sarisburien. Hugo Wygorn. I. Roffen.


XI. Injunctions to the Clergy made by Cromwell.
Regist. Cranmer.
IN the Name of God, Amen. By the Authority and Commission of the excellent
Prince Henry, by the Grace of God, King of England and of France, Defensor of
the Faith; Lord of Ireland; and in Earth Supreme Head, under Christ, of the
Church of England. I Thomas Lord Cromwell, Privy Seal, and Vicegerent to the
King's said Highness, for all his Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical within this
Realm, do, for the advancement of the true honor of Almighty God, increase of
Virtue, and discharge of the King's Majesty, give and exhibit unto you these
Injunctions following, to be kept, observed, and fulfilled, upon the pains
hereafter declared.

First; That ye shall truly observe and keep all and singular the King's
Highness Injunctions, given unto you heretofore in my Name, by his Graces
Authority; not only upon the pains therein expressed, but also in your default
after this second monition continued, upon further punishment to be straightly
extended toward you by the King's Highness Arbitriment, or his Vicegerent
aforesaid.

Item; That ye shall provide on this side the Feast of next coming, one Book of
the whole Bible of the largest Volume in English, and the same set up in some
convenient place within the said Church that ye have Cure of, whereas your
Parishioners may most commodiously resort to the same and read it; the charge
of which Book shall be ratably born between you the Parson and the Parishioners
aforesaid, that is to say, the one half by you, and the other half by them.

Item; That you shall discourage no Man privily or apertly from the reading or
hearing of the said Bible, but shall expressly provoke, stir, and exhort every
Person to read the same, as that which is the very lively Word of God, that
every Christian Man is bound to embrace, believe, and follow, if he look to be
saved; admonishing them nevertheless to avoid all contention, altercation
therein, and to use an honest sobriety in the inquisition of the true sense of
the same, and refer the explication of the obscure places to Men of higher
judgment in Scripture.

Item; That ye shall every Sunday and Holy Day through the Year, openly and
plainly recite to your Parishioners, twice or thrice together, or oftener, if
need require, one particle or sentence of the Pater Noster, or Creed, in
English, to the intent they may learn the same by Heart; And so from day to
day, to give them one little lesson or sentence of the same, till they have
learned the whole Pater Noster and Creed, in English, by rote. And as they be
taught every sentence of the same by rote, ye shall expound and declare the
understanding of the same unto them, exhorting all Parents and Householders to
teach their Children and Servants the same, as they are bound in Conscience to
do. And that done, ye shall declare unto them the Ten Commandments, one by one,
every Sunday and Holy Day, till they be likewise perfect in the same.

Item; That ye shall in Confessions every Lent examine every Person that comes
to Confession unto you, whether they can recite the Articles of our Faith, and
the Pater Noster in English, and hear them say the same particularly; wherein
if they be not perfect, ye shall declare to the same, That every Christian
Person ought to know the same before they should receive the blessed Sacrament
of the Altar; and monish them to learn the same more perfectly by the next year
following, or else, like-as they ought not to presume to come to God's Board
without perfect knowledge of the same, and if they do, it is to the great peril
of their Souls; so ye shall declare unto them, that ye look for other
Injunctions from the King's Highness by that time, to stay and repel all such
from God's Board as shall be found ignorant in the Premises; whereof ye do
thus admonish them, to the intent they should both eschew the peril of their
Souls, and also the worldly rebuke that they might incur after by the same.

Item; That ye shall make, or cause to be made, in the said Church, and every
other Cure ye have, one Sermon every quarter of the year at least, wherein ye
shall purely and sincerely declare the very Gospel of Christ, and in the same
exhort your Hearers to the Works of Charity, Mercy, and Faith, especially
prescribed and commanded in Scripture, and not to repose their trust or
affiance in any other Works devised by Men's fantasies beside Scripture; as in
wandering to Pilgrimages, offering of Money, Candels, or Tapers, to Images, or
Relics; or kissing or licking the same over, saying over a number of Beads,
not understanded or minded on, or in suchlike superstition; for the doing
whereof, ye not only have no promise of reward in Scripture, but contrariwise
great threats and maledictions of God, as things tending to Idolatry and
Superstition, which of all other Offenses God Almighty does most detest and
abhor, for that the same diminishes most his honor and glory.

Item; That such feigned Images as ye know in any of your Cures to be so abused
with Pilgrimages or Offerings of any thing made thereunto, ye shall, for
avoiding of that most detestable offense of Idolatry, forthwith take down, and
without delay; and shall suffer from henceforth no Candles, Tapers, or Images
of Wax to be set before any Image or Picture, but only the Light that commonly
goes across the Church by the Rood-loft, the Light before the Sacrament of
the Altar, and the Light about the Sepulcher; which for the adorning of the
Church, and Divine Service, ye shall suffer to remain: still admonishing your
Parishioners, that Images serve for none other purpose, but as to be Books of
unlearned Men, that ken no Letters, whereby they might be otherwise admonished
of the lives and conversation of them that the said Images do represent; which
Images if they abuse, for any other intent than for such remembrances, they
commit Idolatry in the same, to the great danger of their Souls: And therefore
the King's Highness graciously tendering the weal of his Subjects Souls, has in
part already, and more will hereafter, travail for the abolishing of such
Images as might be an occasion of so great an offense to God, and so great a
danger to the Souls of his loving Subjects.

Item; That all in such Benefices, or Cures, as ye have, whereupon ye be not
your self Resident, ye shall appoint such Curats in your stead, as can both by
their hability, and also promptly, execute these Injunctions, and do their
duty, otherwise that ye are bounden in every behalf accordingly, and may profit
them, no less with good Examples of living, than with declaration of the Word
of God, or else their lack and defaults shall be imputed unto you, who shall
straightly answer for the same if they do otherwise.

Item; That ye shall admit no Man to preach within any your Benefices or Cures,
but such as shall appear unto you to be sufficiently licensed thereunto by the
King's Highness, or his Grace's Authority, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, or
the Bishop of this Diocese; and such as shall be so licensed, ye shall gladly
receive to declare the Word of God, without any resistance or contradiction.

Item; If ye have heretofore declared to your Parishioners any thing to the
extolling or setting forth of Pilgrimages, feigned Relics, or Images, or any
such superstitions, that you shall now openly before the same recant and reprove
the same, showing them (as the truth is) that ye did the same upon no ground of
Scripture, but as one led and seduced by a common Error and Abuse crept into
the Church, through the sufferance and avarice of such as felt profit by the
same.

Item; If ye do or shall know any Man within your Parish, or elsewhere, that is
a Letter of the Word of God to be read in English, or sincerely preached, or of
the execution of these Injunctions; or a favourer of the Bishop of Rome's
pretensed Power, now by the Laws of this Realm justly rejected and extirped; ye
shall detect and present the same to the King's Highness, or his honorable
Council, or to his Vicegerent aforesaid, or the Justice of Peace next
adjoining.

Item; That you, and every Parson, Vicar, or Curat within this Diocese, shall
for every Church keep one Book or Register, wherein he shall write the day and
year of every Wedding, Christening, and Burying, made within your Parish for
your time, and so every Man succeeding you likewise; and also there insert
every Person's Name that shall be so wedded, christened, and buried; and for
the safe keeping of the same Book, the Parish shall be bound to provide, of
their common charges, one sure Coffer with two Locks and Keys, whereof the one
to remain with you, and the other with the Wardens of every such Parish wherein
the said Book shall be laid up; which Book ye shall every Sunday take forth,
and in the presence of the said Wardens, or one of them, write and record in
the same, all the Weddings, Christenings, and Buryings, made the whole week
before; and that done, to lay up the Book in the said Coffer, as before: And for
every time that the same shall be omitted, the Party that shall be in the fault
thereof, shall forfeit to the said Church 3 s. 4 d. to be employed on the
reparation of the said Church.

Item; That ye shall every quarter of a year read these and the other former
Injunctions, given unto you by the Authority of the King's Highness, openly and
deliberately before all your Parishioners, to the intent that both you may be
the better admonished of your duty, and your said Parishioners the more incited
to ensue the same for their part.

Item; Forasmuch as by a Law established, every Man is bound to pay the Tithes;
no Man shall, by color of duty, omitted by their Curats, detain their Tithes,
and so redouble one wrong with another, or be his own Judge, but shall truly pay
the same, as has been accustomed, to their Parsons and Curats, without any
restraint or diminution; and such lack or default as they can justly find in
their Parsons and Curats to call for reformation thereof at their Ordinaries,
and other Superiors hands, who, upon complaint, and due proof thereof, shall
reform the same accordingly.

Item; That no Person shall from henceforth alter or change the order and
manner of any Fasting-day that is commanded and indicted by the Church, nor of
any Prayer, or of Divine Service, otherwise than is specified in the said
Injunctions, until such time as the same shall be so ordered and transported by
the Kings Highness's Authority; The Eves of such Saints, whose Holy Days be
abrog^ted be only excepted, which shall be declared henceforth to be no
Fasting-days; excepted also the commemoration of Thomas Becket, some-time
Archbishop of Canterbury, which shall be clean omitted, and in the stead
thereof, the Ferial Service used.

Item; That the knolling of the Avies after Service, and certain other times,
which has been brought in and begun by the pretense of the Bishop of Rome's
pardon, henceforth be left and omitted, lest the People do hereafter trust to
have pardon for the saying of their Avies, between the said knolling, as they
have done in times past.

Item; Where in times past Men have used in diverse places in their Processions,
to sing Ora pro nobis to so many Saints, that they had no time to sing the good
Suffrages following, as Parce nobis Domine, and Libera nos Domine, it must be
taught and preached, that better it were to omit Ora pro nobis, and to sing the
other Suffrages.

All which and singular Injunctions I minister unto you and your Successors, by
the King's Highness Authority to me committed in this part, which I charge and
command you by the same Authority to observe and keep upon pain of Deprivation,
Sequestration of your Fruits, or such other coercion as to the King's Highness,
or his Vicegerent for the time being shall seem convenient.

These are also in the Bp. of London's Register, Fol. 29, 30. with Bonner's
Mandate to his Archdeacons for observing them, 30 Sept. 1541. Anno Regn. 32.

XII. Injunctions given by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, to the Parsons,
Vicars, and other Curats in his Visitation, kept (sede vacant) within the
Diocese of Hereford, Anno Domini 1538.
I.
FIrst; That ye, and every one of you, shall, with all your diligence and
faithful obedience, observe, and cause to be observed, all and singular the
King's Highness Injunctions, by his Graces Commissaries given in such places as
they in times past have visited.

II.
Item; That ye, and every one of you shall have, by the first day of August
next coming, as well a whole Bible in Latin and English, or at the least a New
Testament of both the same Language, as the Copies of the King's Highness
Injunctions.

III.
Item; That ye shall every day study one Chapter of the said Bible, or New
Testament, conferring the Latin and English together, and to begin at the first
part of the Book, and so to continue until the end of the same.

IV.
Item; That ye, or none of you, shall discourage any Layman from the reading
of the Bible in English or Latin, but encourage them to that, admonishing them
that they so read it, for reformation of their own Life, and knowledge of their
Duty; and that they be not bold or presumptuous in judging of Matters before
they have perfect knowledge.

V.
Item; That ye, both in your Preaching and secret Confession, and all other
works and doings, shall excite and move your Parishioners unto such Works as
are commanded expressly of God, for the which God shall demand of them a strict
reckoning; and all other Works which Men do of their own Will or Devotion, to
teach your Parishioners that they are not to be so highly esteemed as the
other; and that for the not doing of them God will not ask any account.

VI.
Item; That ye, nor none of you, suffer no Friar, or Religious Man, to have any
Cure or Service within your Churches or Cures, except they be lawfully
dispensed withal, or licensed by the Ordinary.

VII.
Item; That ye, and every one of you, do not admit any young Man or Woman to
receive the Sacrament of the Altar, which never received it before, until that
he or she openly in the Church, after Mass, or evening Song, upon the Holy Day,
do recite, in the vulgar Tongue, the Pater Noster, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments.

VIII.
Item; That ye, and every one of you, shall two times in a quarter declare to
your Parishioners the Band of Matrimony, and what great danger it is to all Men
that uses their Bodies but with such Persons as they lawfully may by the Law
of God. And to exhort in the said Times your Parishioners, that they make no
privy Contracts, as they will avoid the extreme pain of the Laws used within
the King's Realm, by his Graces Authority.

XIII. A Letter of Cromwell's to the Bishop of Landaff, directing him how to
proceed in the Reformation. An Original.
AFter my right hearty Commendations to your Lordship, Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 4.
ye shall herewith receive the King's Highness Letters addressed unto you, to
put you in remembrance of his Highness travels, and your duty touching order to
be taken for Preaching, to the intent the People may be taught the Truth, and
yet not charged at the beginning with over-many Novelties; the publication
whereof, unless the same be tempered and qualified with much wisdom, do rather
breed Contention, Division, and contrariety in Opinion in the unlearned
Multitude, than either edify, or remove from them* and out of their hearts,
such abuses as by the corrupt and unsavory teaching of the Bishop of Rome and
his Disciples have crept in the same. The effect of which Letters albeit I
doubt not, but as well for the honesty of the Matter, as for your own
discharge, ye will so consider and put in execution, as shall be to his Graces
satisfaction in that behalf: Yet forasmuch as it has pleased his Majesty to
appoint and constitute me in the room and place of his Supreme and Principal
Ministry, in all Matters that may touch any thing his Clergy, or their doings,
I thought it also my part, for the exoneration of my Duty toward his Highness,
and the rather to answer to his Graces Expectation, Opinion, and Trust
conceived in me, and in that amongst other committed to my fidelity, to desire
and pray you, in such substantial sort and manner, to travel in the execution
of the Contents of his Graces said Letters; namely, for avoiding of Contrariety
in preaching, of the pronunciation of Novelties, without wise and discreet
qualification, and the repression of the temerity of those, that either
privily, or apertly, directly or indirectly, would advance the pretended
Authority of the Bishop of Rome; as I be not for my discharge enforced to
complain further, and to declare what I have now written unto you for that
purpose, and so to charge you with your own fault, and to devise such remedy
for the same, as shall appertain: desiring your Lordship to accept my meaning
herein, tending only to an honest, friendly, and Christian Reformation, for
avoidage of further inconvenience, and to think none unkindness, tho in this
Matter, wherein it is almost more than time to speak, I write frankly,
compelled and enforced thereunto, both in respect of my private Duty, and
otherwise, for my discharge; forasmuch as it pleases his Majesty to use me in
the lieu of a Counselor, whose Office is as an Eye to the Prince, to foresee,
and in time to provide remedy for such Abuses, Enormities, and Inconveniences,
as might else with a little sufferance engender more evil in Public Weal, than
could be after recovered, with much labor, study, diligence, and travails. And
thus most heartily fare you well.

From the Rolls, the 6 th of January. Your Lordship's Friend, Thomas Cromwell.

XIV. The Commission by which Bonner held his Bishopric of the King.
Licentia Regia concessa Domino Episcopo ad exercendam Iurisdictionem
Episcopalem.
Regist. Bonner. fol. primo.
HEnricus Octavus, Dei Gratia Angliae and Franciae Rex, Fidei Defensor, Dominus
Hiberniae, and in Terra Supremum Ecclesiae Anglicanae sub Christo Caput,
Reverendo in Christo Patri Edmundo Londonensi Episcopo Salutem. Quandoquidem
omnis jurisdicendi Autoritas, atque etiam jurisdictio omnimoda, tam illa quae
Ecclesiastica dicitur quam Saecularis, a Regia Potestate velut a Supremo
Capite, and omnium infra Regnum nostrum Magistratuum font and scaturigine,
primitus emanavit, sane illos qui jurisdictionem hujusmodi antehac non nisi
praecario fungebantur, beneficium hujusmodi sic eis ex liberalitate Regia
indultum gratis animis agnoscere, idque Regiae Munificentiae solummodo acceptum
refer, eique, quotiens ejus Majestati videbitur, libenter concedere convenit.
Quum itaque nos per dilectum Commissarium nostrum Thomam Cromwell Nobilis
Ordinis Garterii Militem, Dominum Cromwell and de Wymolden nostri privati
Sigilli Custodem, nostrumque ad quascunque causas Ecclesiasticas nostra
Authoritate, uti Supremi Capitis dictae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, quomodolibet
tractand. sive ventiland. vicem gerentem, Vicarium Generalem and Officialem
Principalem, per alias Literas Patentes sigillo nostro Majori communitas,
constituerimus and praefecerimus. Quia tamen ipse Thomas Cromwell nostris and
hujus Regni Angliae tot and tam ardnis negotiis adeo praepeditus existit, quod
ad omnem jurisdictionem nobis, uti Supremo Capiti hujusmodi competentem, ubique
locorum infra hoc Regnum nostrum praefatum, in his quae moram commode non
patiuntur, aut sine nostrorum subditorum injuria differri non possunt, in sua
persona expediend. non sufficient. Nos tuis in hac part supplicationibus
humilibus inclinati, and nostrorum subditorum commodis consulere cupientes,
Tibi vices nostras sub modo and forma inferius descriptis committendas fore,
Teque licentiandum esse decernimus, ad ordinandum igitur quoscunque infra Dioc.
tuam London. ubicunque oriundos, quos moribus and literatura praevio diligenti
and rigoroso examine idoneos fore compereris, ad omnes etiam Sacros and
Presbyteratus ordines promovendum, praesentatosque ad beneficia Ecclesiastica
quaecunque infra Dioc. tuam London. constituta, si ad curam beneficiis
hujusmodi imminentem sustinend. habiles reperti fuerunt and idonei, admittendum
ac in and de iisdem instituendum and investigandum; Ac etiam si res ita exigat
destituendum, beneficiaque Ecclesiastica quaecunque ad tuam collationem sive
dispositionem spectantia and pertinentia personis idoneis conferendum, atque
approbandum testamenta and ultimas voluntates quorumcunque tuae Diocaeseos,
bona, jura, sive credita non ultra summam centum librarum in bonis suis vitae
and mortis suarum temporibus habend, necnon administrationes quorumcunque
subditorum nostrorum tuae Dioc. ab intestato decedend. quorum bona, jura, sive
credita non ultra summam praedictam vitae and mortis suarum temporibus sese
extendent, quatenus hujusmodi testatorum approbatio atque administrationis
commissio sive concessio per praedecessores tuos aut eorum alicujus respective
Commissario^ retroactis temporibus fiebat ac fieri and committi potuit, and non
aliter committendum, Calculumque ratiocinium and alia in ea part expedienda,
causasque lites and negotia coram te aut tuis deputatis pendend. indecis.
necnon alias sive alia, quascunque sive quaecunque ad forum Ecclesiasticum
pertinentia ad te aut tuos deputatos sive deputand. per viam querelae aut
appellationis sive ex officio devolvend. sive deducend. quae extra legum
nostraru^ and statutoru^ Regni nostri offens. coram te aut tuis Deputatis
agitari, aut ad tuam sive alicujus Commissarioru^ per te vigore hujus
Commissionis nostrae deputandorum cognitionem devolvi aut deduci valiant and
(...) ^xaminand. and decidend. Ad visitandum insuper Capitulum (...) Cathedral.
London. civitatemque London. necnon omnia and (...), Abbatias and Prioratus,
Collegia and alia loca pia, tam (...) Hospitalia, quaecunque clerumque and
populum dict. Dioc. (...) Ecclesiae, Monasterii, Abbatiae, per te sive
Praedecess^^ (...) London. Episcopos visitatio hujusmodi temporibus retroactis
e^erce^i potuit, ac per te sive per eosdem de legibus and statutis ac juribus
Regni nostri exerceri potuit and potest, and non aliter: Necnon ad inquirendu^
per te, v^l alium seu alios ad id per te deputandu^ sive deputandos, tam ex
officio mero mixto quam promoto super quorumcunque excessibus, criminibus seu
delictis quibuscunque ad forum Ecclesiasticum spectantibus infra Dioc. London.
ac dilinquentes sive criminosos, juxta comperta per te in ea part per Licita
Juris remedia pro modo culpae, prout natura and qualitas delicti poposcerit,
coercendum and puniendum, caeteraque omnia and singula in Praemissis ceu aliquo
praemissorum, aut circa ea necessaria seu quomodolibet opportuna, ac alia
quaecunque Autoritatem and Jurisdictionem Episcopalem quovismodo respiciend.
and concernend. praeter and ultra ea quae tibi ex Sacris Literis divinitus
commissa esse dignoscantur, vice, nomine, and Autoritate nostris exequendum,
Tibi, de cujus sana doctrina, conscientiae puritate, vitaeque and morum
integritate, ac in rebus gerendis fide and industria plurimum confidimus, vices
nostras cum potestate alium vel alios, Commissarium vel Commissarios, ad
praemissa seu eorum aliqua surrogandi and substituendi, eosdemque ad placitum
revocand. tenore praesentium committimus, ac liberam facultatem concedimus;
Teque licentiam per praesentes ad nostri beneplaciti duntaxat duraturas, cum
cujuslibet congruae and Ecclesiasticae coercionis potestate quacunque
inhibitione in te datam praesentium emanata in aliquo non obstante Tuam
Conscientiam coram Deo strictissime onerantes, and ut summo omnium judici
aliquando rationem reddere, and coram nobis tuo cum periculo corporali
respondere intendis: te admonentes ut interim tuum officium juxta Evangelii
normam pie and sancte exercere studeas, and ne quem ullo tempore unquam vel ad
sacros ordines promoveas, vel ad curam animarum gerend. quovis modo admittas,
nisi eos duntaxat quos ad tanti and tam venerabilis Officii functionem vitae
and morum integritas certissimis testimoniis approbata, literarum scientiae and
aliae qualitates requisitae ad hoc habiles and idoneos clare and luculenter
ostenderint and declaraverint; Nam ut maxim compertum cognitumque habemus
morum omnium, and Maxim Christianae Religionis corruptelam a malis Pastoribus
in populum emanasse, sic ut veram Christi Religionem, vitaeque and morum
emendationem a bonis Pastoribus iterum delectis and assumptis in integrum
restitutum iri haud dubie speramus. In cujus rei testimonium praesentes Literas
nostras inde fieri, and Sigilli nostri quo ad Causas Ecclesiasticas utimur
appensione jussimus Communiri.

Dat. 12. die mensis November. Anno Dom. 1539. and Regni nostri Anno 31.
XV. The King's Letters Patents for printing the Bible in English.
Rot. Pat. 31. Hen. 8.
HEnry the Eighth, etc. To all and singular Printers and Sellers of Books
within this our Realm, and all other Officers, Ministers, and Subjects, these
our Letters hearing or seeing, Greeting. We let you wit, That being desirous to
have our People at all times conveni^nt, give themselves to the attaining the
knowledge of God's Word, whereby they will the better honor him, and observe
and keep his Commandments; and also do their Duties better to us, being their
Prince and Sovereign Lord: And considering that this our Zeal and Desire cannot
by any mean take so good effect, as by the granting to them the free and
liberal use of the Bible in our own natural English Tongue: so unless it be
foreseen that the same pass at the beginning by one Translation to be perused
and considered; The frailty of Men is such, that the diversity thereof may
breed and bring forth manifold Inconveniences; as when wilful and heady Folk
shall confer upon the diversity of the said Translations. We have therefore
appointed our right trusty and well-beloved Counselor, the Lord Cromwell,
Keeper of our Privy Seal, to take for us, and in our Name, special care and
charge, that no manner of Person, or Persons, within this our Realm, shall
enterprise, attempt, or set in hand to print any Bible in the English Tongue of
any manner of Volum, during the space of five years next ensuing after the Date
hereof, but only all such as shall be deputed, assigned, and admitted by the
said Lord Cromwell.

The 13 November. Tricesimo primo Regni.
XVI. The Attainder of Thomas Cromwell.
Item quaedam alia petitio, formam cujusdam actus attincturae in se continens,
exhibita est suae Regiae Majestati in Parliamento praedicto, cujus tenor
sequi^ur in haec verba.
IN their most humble-wise showing to your most Royal Majesty, Parliament
Rolls. Act 60. Anno Regni tricesimo secundo.
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all your most loving and obedient
Subjects, the Commons in this your most High Court of Parliament assembled;
That where your most Royal Majesty, our Natural Sovereign Lord, is justly,
lawfully, and really entitled to be our sole Supreme Head and Governor, of
this your Realm of England, and of the Dominions of the same; to whom, and to
none other under God, the Kingly Direction, Order, and Governance, of your most
loving and obedient Subjects, and People of this your Realm, only appertains
and belongs. And the which your most loving and obedient Subjects, your
Highness prudently and quietly, without any manner of disturbance, by a long
time most graciously has preserved, sustained, and defended: And your
Highness, for the Quietness, Wealth, and Tranquillity of your said humble and
obedient Subjects, has made, and ordained, diverse and many most godly,
virtuous, and wholesome Laws; and for due execution of the same, has not
desisted to travel in your own most Royal Person, to support and maintain, as
well the Laws of Almighty God, as the Laws by your Highness made and ordained,
by due and condign execution of the same Laws upon the Transgressors offending
contrary to the same: And your Majesty has always most virtuously studied and
labored, by all ways, and all means, to and for the setting forth thereof, in
such wise as it might be most to the Honor, Glory, and Pleasure of Almighty
God; and for the common accord and wealth of this your Realm, and other your
Dominions: And for the true execution of the same, has elected, chosen, and
made diverse, as well of your Nobles, as others, to be of your most honorable
Council, as to the honor of a Noble Prince appertains. And where your
Majesty has had a special trust and confidence in your said most trusty
Counselors, that the same your Counselors, and every of them, had minded and
intended, and finally purposed to have followed and pursued your most Godly and
Princely Purpose, as of truth the more number has most faithfully done; Yet
nevertheless Thomas Cromwell, now Earl of Essex, whom your Majesty took and
received into your trusty Service, the same Thomas then being a Man of very
base and low degree, and for singular favor, trust, and confidence, which your
Majesty bare and had in him, did not only erect and advance the same Thomas
unto the State of an Earl, and enriched him with many-fold Gifts, as well of
Goods, as of Lands and Offices, but also him, the said Thomas Cromwell, Earl of
Essex, did erect and make one of your most trusty Counselors, as well
concerning your Grace's Supreme Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical, as your most high
secret Affairs Temporal. Nevertheless your Majesty now of late has found, and
tried, by a large number of Witnesses, being your faithful Subjects, and
Personages of great Honor, Worship, and Discretion, the said Thomas Cromwell,
Earl of Essex, contrary to the singular trust and confidence which your Majesty
had in him, to be the most false and corrupt Traitor, Deceiver, and
Circumventor against your most Royal Person, and the Imperial Crown of this
your Realm, that has been known, seen, or heard of in all the time of your
most noble Reign: Insomuch that it is manifestly proved and declared, by the
Depositions of the Witnesses aforesaid, That the same Thomas Cromwell, Earl of
Essex, usurping upon your Kingly Estate, Power, Authority, and Office; without
your Grace's Commandment or Assent, has taken upon him to set at liberty
diverse Persons, being convicted and attainted of Misprision of High Treason;
and diverse other being apprehended, and in Prison, for Suspection of High
Treason; and over that, diverse and many times, at sundry places, in this your
Realm, for manifold Sums of Money to him given, most traitorously has taken
upon him, by several Writings, to give and grant, as well unto Aliens, as to
your Subjects, a great number of Licenses for conveighing and carrying of Money,
Corn, Grain, Beans, Beer, Leather, Tallow, Bells, Metals, Horses, and other
Commodities of this your Realm, contrary to your Highness's most Godly and
Gracious Proclamations made for the Commonwealth of your People of this your
Realm in that behalf, and in derogation of your Crown and Dignity. And the same
Thomas Cromwell, elated, and full of pride, contrary to his most bounden Duty,
of his own Authority and Power, not regarding your Majesty Royal; And further,
taking upon him your Power, Sovereign Lord, in that behalf, diverse and many
times most traitorously has constituted, deputed, and assigned, many singular
Persons of your Subjects to be Commissioners in many your great, urgent, and
weighty Causes and Affairs, executed and done in this your Realm, without the
assent, knowledge, or consent of your Highness. And further also, being a Person
of as poor and low degree, as few be within this your Realm; pretending to have
so great a stroke about you, our, and his natural Sovereign Liege Lord, that he
let not to say publicly, and declare, That he was sure of you; which is
detestable, and to be abhorred amongst all good Subjects in any Christian
Realm, that any Subject should enterprise or take upon him so to speak of his
Sovereign Liege Lord and King. And also of his own Authority and Power, without
your Highness's consent, has made, and granted, as well to Strangers as to
your own Subjects, diverse and many Pass-ports, to pass over the Seas, with
Horses, and great Sums of Money, without any search. And over that, most
Gracious Sovereign Lord, amongst diverse other his Treasons, Deceits, and
Falsehoods, the said Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, being a detestable
Heretic, and being in himself utterly disposed to set and sow common Sedition
and Variance among your true and loving Subjects, has secretly set forth and
dispersed into all Shires, and other Territories of this your Realm, and other
your Dominions, great numbers of false Erroneous Books, whereof many were
printed and made beyond the Seas, and diverse other within this Realm,
comprising and declaring, amongst many other Evils and Errors, manifest Matters
to induce and lead your Subjects to diffidence, and refusal of the true and
sincere Faith and Belief, which Christian Religion binds all Christian People
to have, in the most Holy and Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and other
Articles of Christian Religion, most graciously declared by your Majesty, by
Authority of Parliament* And certain Matters comprised in some of the said
Books, has caused to be translated into our maternal and English Tongue: And
upon report made unto him by the Translator thereof, that the Matter so
translated has expressly been against the said most Blessed and Holy Sacrament;
Yet the same Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, after he had read the same
Translation, most heretically has affirmed the same material Heresy so
translated, to be good; and further has said, that he found no fault therein;
and over that, has openly and obstinately holden Opinion, and said, That it
was as lawful for every Christian Man to be a Minister of the said Sacrament,
as well as a Priest. And where also your most Royal Majesty, being a Prince of
Virtue, Learning, and Justice, of singular Confidence and Trust, did constitute
and make the same Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, your Highness's Vicegerent
within this your Realm of England; and by the same, gave unto him Authority and
Power, not only to redress and reform all, and all manner of Errors, and
Erroneous Opinions, insurging and growing among your loving and obedient
Subjects of this your Realm, and of the Dominions of the same, but also to
order and direct all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Causes within your said Realm
and Dominions; the said Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, not regarding his Duty
to Almighty God, and to your Highness, under the Seal of your Vicegerent, has,
without your Grace's assent or knowledge, licensed and authorized diverse
Persons, detected and suspected of Heresies, openly to teach and preach amongst
your most loving and obedient Subjects, within this your Realm of England. And
under the pretense and color of the said great Authorities and Cures, which
your Majesty has committed unto him in the Premises, has not only, of his
corrupt and damnable Will and Mind, actually, at some time, by his own Deed and
Commandment, and at many other times by his Letters, expressly written to diverse
worshipful Persons, being Sheriffs, in sundry Shires of this your Realm, falsely
suggesting thereby your Grace's Pleasure so to have been, caused to be set at
large many false Heretics, some being there indicted, and some other being
thereof apprehended, and in ward: and commonly, upon complaints made by
credible Persons unto the said Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, of great and
most detestable Heresies committed and sprung in many places of this your
Realm, with declaration of the Specialities of the same Heresies, and the Names
of the Offenders therein, the same Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, by his crafty
and subtle means and inventions, has not only defended the same Heretics from
Punishment and Reformation; but being a fautor, maintainer, and supporter of
Heretics, diverse times has terribly rebuked diverse of the said credible
Persons being their Accusers, and some others of them has persecuted and vexed
by Imprisonment and otherwise. So that thereby many of your Grace's true and
loving Subjects have been in much dread and fear, to detect or accuse such
detestable known Heretics; the particularities and specialities of which said
abominable Heresies, Errors, and Offenses, committed and done by the said
Thomas Cromwell, being over-tedious, long, and of too great number here to be
expressed, declared, or written. And to the intent to have those damnable
Errors and Heresies, to be inculcated, impressed, and infixed in the Hearts of
your Subjects, as well contrary to God's Laws, as to your Laws and Ordinances.
Most Gracious Sovereign Lord, the same Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, has
allured and drawn unto him by Retainours, many of your Subjects sunderly
inhabiting in every of your said Shires and territories, as well erroneously
persuading and declaring to them the Contents of the false erroneous Books,
above-written, to be good, true, and best standing with the most Holy Word and
Pleasure of God; as other his false and heretical Opinions and Errors; whereby,
and by his Confederacies therein, he has caused many of your faithful Subjects
to be greatly infected with Heresies, and other Errors, contrary to the right
Laws and Pleasure of Almighty God. And the same Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex,
by the false and traitorous means above-written, supposing himself to be fully
able, by force and strength, to maintain and defend his said abominable
Treasons, Heresies, and Errors, not regarding his most bounden Duty to Almighty
God, and his Laws, nor the natural Duty of Allegiance to your Majesty, in the
last day of March, in the 30 year of our most gracious Reign, in the Parish of
St. Peter the Poor, within your City of London, upon demonstration and
declaration then and there made unto him, that there were certain new
Preachers, as Robert Barnes Clerk, and other, whereof part been now committed
to the Tower of London for preaching and teaching of lewd Learning against your
Highness's Proclamations; the same Thomas affirming the same preaching to be
good, most detestably, arrogantly, erroneously, wilfully, maliciously, and
traitorously, expressly against your Laws and Statutes, then and there did not
let to declare, and say, these most traitorous and detestable words ensuing,
amongst other words of like matter and effect; that is to say, That if the King
would turn from it, yet I would not turn; And if the King did turn, and all his
People, I would fight in the Field in mine own Person, with my Sword in my
hand, against him and all others; and then, and there, most traitorously pulled
out his Dagger, and held it on high, saying these words, Or else this Dagger
thrust me to the heart, if I would not die in that Quarrel against them all:
And I trust, if I live one year or two, it shall not lie in the King's Power to
resist or let it if he would. And further, then and there swearing by a great
Oath, traitorously affirmed the same his traitorous saying and pronunciation of
words, saying, I will do so indeed, extending up his Arm, as though he had had
a Sword in his Hand; to the most perrilous, grievous, and wicked Example of all
other your loving, faithful, and obedient Subjects in this your Realm, and to
the peril of your most Royal Person. And moreover, our most Gracious Sovereign
Lord, the said Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, has acquired and obtained into
his possession, by Oppression, Bribery, Extort, Power, and false Promises made
by him, to your Subjects of your Realm, innumerable Sums of Money and Treasure;
and being so enriched, has had your Nobles of your Realm in great disdain,
derision, and detestation, as by express words by him most opprobriously spoken
has appeared. And being put in remembrance of others, of his estate, which
your Highness has called him unto, offending in like Treasons, the last day of
January, in the 31 year of your most noble Reign, at the Parish of St. Martin
in the Field, in the County of Middlesex, most arrogantly, willingly,
maliciously, and traitorously, said, published, and declared, That if the Lords
would handle him so, that he would give them such a Breakfast as never was
made in England, and that the proudest of them should know; to the great peril
and danger, as well of your Majesty, as of your Heirs and Successors: For the
which his most detestable and abominable Heresies and Treasons, and many other
his like Offenses and Treasons, overlong here to be rehearsed and declared. Be
it Enacted, Ordained, and Established by your Majesty, with the Assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said Thomas Cromwell,
Earl of Essex, for his abominable and detestable Heresies and Treasons, by him
most abominably, heretically, and traitorously practiced, committed, and done,
as well against Almighty God* as against your Majesty, and this your said
Realm, shall be, and stand, by Authority of this present Parliament, convicted
and attainted of Heresy and High Treason, and be adjudged an abominable and
detestable Heretic and Traitor; and shall have and suffer such pains of death,
losses, and forfeitures of Goods, Debts, and Chattels, as in (...) of Heresy
and High Treason, or as in cases of either of them, at the pleasure of your
most Royal Majesty. And that the same Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, shall, by
Authority abovesaid, lose, and forfeit to your Highness, and to your Heirs and
Successors, all such his Castles, Lordships, Manors, Mesuages, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Services, Possessions, Offices,
Rights, Conditions, and all other his Hereditaments, of what names, natures, or
qualities soever they be, which he the said Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, or
any other to his use had, or ought to have had, of any Estate of Inheritance,
in Fee-Simple or Fee-Tail, in Reversion or Possession, at the said last day of
March, in the said thirtieth Year of your most Gracious Reign, or at any time
since or after, as in Cases of High Treason. And that all the said Castles,
Lordships, Manors, Lands, Mesuages, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders,
Services, Possessions, Offices, and all other the Premises forfeited, as is
abovesaid, shall be deemed, invested, and adjudged, in the lawful, real, and
actual possession of your Highness, your Heirs, and Successors for ever in the
same, and such estate, manner, and form, as if the said Castles, Lordships,
Manors, Mesuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, Services,
Possessions, Offices, and other the Premises, with their Appurtenances, and
every of them, were specially or particularly founden, by Office or Offices,
Inquisition or Inquisitions, to be taken by any Escheator, or Escheators, or
any other Commissioner or Commissioners, by virtue of any Commission or
Commissions to them, or any of them, to be directed in any County or Counties,
Shire or Shires, within this your Realm of England, where the said Castles, and
other the Premises, or any of them, been, or do lay, and returned into any of
your Majesty's Courts. Saving to all and singular, Person and Persons, Bodies
politic and corporate, their Heirs and Successors, and their Successors and
Assigns of every of them, other than the said Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex,
and his Heirs, and all and every other Person and Persons, claiming by the same
Thomas Cromwell, and to his use, all such Right, Title, Entry, Possession,
Interest, Reversions, Remainders, Lease, Leases, Conditions, Fees, Offices,
Rents, Annuities, Commons, and all other Commodities, Profits, and
Hereditaments whatsoever they or any of them might, should, or ought to have
had, if this Act had never been had nor made. Provided always, and be it
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that this Act of Attainder, ne any Offense,
ne other thing therein contained, extend not unto the Deanery of Wells, in the
County of Sommerset; nor to any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
thereunto belonging; nor be in any wise prejudicial or hurtful unto the Bishop
of Bath and Wells, nor to the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of St.
Andrew of Wells, nor to any of them, nor to any of their Successors; but that
the said Bishop, Dean, and Chapters, and their Successors, and every of them,
shall and may have, hold, use, occupy, and enjoy, all and singular their
Titles, Rights, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Services, and
all and singular other their Hereditaments, Commodities, and Profits, of what
nature, kind, or quality, or condition soever they be, in as ample and large
manner and form, as tho this Act of Attainder, or any Offense therein
mentioned, had never been had, committed, nor made; and that from henceforth
the Dean, and his Successors, Deans of the said Cathedral Church that hereafter
shall be prefected, elected, and admitted to the same, Shall, by the Authority
aforesaid, be Dean of the said Cathedral Church, fully and wholly incorporated
with the Chapter of the same, in as ample, large, and like manner and form, to
all intents and purposes, as the Deans before this time has been and used to
be, with the said Chapter of the said Cathedral Church of Wells. And that the
same Dean and Chapter, and their Successors, shall have, occupy, and enjoy, all
and singular their such Possessions, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, and Services, and all and singular their Hereditaments, of what
nature, kind, name or names they be called or known. And shall be adjudged and
deemed in actual and real possession and season of, and in the same Premises,
to all intents and purposes, according to their old Corporation, as tho this
Act of Attainder, or any thing, clause, or matter therein contained had never
been had, committed, nor made. This said Act of Attainder, or any other Act,
Provision, or any thing heretofore had or made to the contrary notwithstanding.
Cui quidem petitioni cum provisione praedict. perlect. and intellect. per
dictum Dominum Regem ex Authoritate and consensu Parliamenti praedicti sic
Responsum est,

Soit faict come il est desiro.
XVII. Cromwell's Letter to the King concerning his Marriage with Ann of Cleve.
An Original.
To the King, my most Gracious Sovereign Lord his Royal Majesty.
MOst Merciful King, and most Gracious Sovereign Lord, Cotton Libr. Otho. C. 10.
may it please the same to be advertised, That the last time it pleased your
benign Goodness to send unto me the Right Honorable Lord Chancellor, the Right
Honorable Duke of Norff. and the Lord Admiral, to examine, and also to declare
unto me diverse things from your Majesty; among the which, one special thing
they moved, and thereupon they charged me, as I would answer before God at the
dreadful day of Judgment, and also upon the extreme danger and damnation of my
Soul and Conscience, to say what I knew in the Marriage, and concerning the
Marriage, between your Highness and the Queen. To the which I answered as I
knew, declaring unto them the Particulars, as nigh as I then could call to
remembrance. Which when they had heard, they, in your Majesty's Name, and upon
like charge as they had given me before, commanded me to write to your Highness
the truth, as much as I knew in that Matter; which now I do, and the very
truth, as God shall save me, to the uttermost of my knowledge. First; After your
Majesty heard of the Lady Ann of Cleves arrival at Dover, and that her Journies
were appointed toward Greenwich, and that she should be at Rochester on
New Years Even at night, your Highness declared to me, that you would privily
visit her at Rochester, upon New-years-day, adding these words, To nourish
love; which accordingly your Grace did upon New-years-day, as is abovesaid.
And the next day, being Friday, your Grace returned to Greenwich, where I spoke
with your Grace, and demanded of your Majesty, How ye liked the Lady Ann: your
Highness answered, as me thought, heavily, and not pleasantly, Nothing so well
as she was spoken of; saying further, That if your Highness had known as much
before as ye then knew, she should not have come within this Realm; saying, as
by the way of lamentation, What Remedy? Unto the which I answered and said, I
know none but was very sorry therefore; and so God knows I was, for I thought
it a hard beginning. The next day after the receipt of the said Lady, and her
entry made unto Greenwich, and after your Highness had brought her to her
Chamber, I then waited upon your Highness into your Privy-Chamber; and being
there, your Grace called me unto you, saying to me these words, or the like, My
Lord, is it not as I told you? say what they will, she is nothing so fair as
she has been reported; howbeit she is well and seemly. Whereunto I answered
and said, By my Faith, Sir, ye say truth; adding thereunto, that I thought she
had a Queenly manner; and nevertheless was sorry that your Grace was no better
content: And thereupon your Grace commanded me to call together your Council,
which were these by name; The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Dukes of Norfolk
and Suffolk, my Lord Admiral, and my Lord of Duresme, and my self, to commune
of these Matters, and to know what Commissions the Agents of Cleves had
brought, as well touching the performance of the Covenants sent before from
hence to Dr. Wotton, to have been concluded in Cleves, as also in the
declaration how the Matters stood for the Covenants of Marriage, between the
Duke of Lorrain's Son, and the said Lady Ann. Whereupon Olisleger and Hogeston
were called, and the Matters purposed; whereby it plainly appeared, that they
were much astonished and abashed, and desired that they might make answer in
the next morning, which was Sunday: And upon the Sunday in the morning your
said Counselors and they met together early, and there eft-soons was proposed
unto them, as well touching the Commission for the performance of the Treaty
and Articles sent to Mr. Wotton, as also touching the Contracts and Covenants
of Marriage between the Duke of Lorrain's Son, and the Lady Ann, and what terms
they stood in. To which things so proposed, they answered as Men much
perplexed, That as touching Commission, they had none to treat concerning the
Articles sent to Mr. Wotton. And as to the Contract and Covenants of Marriage
they could say nothing, but that a Revocation was made, and that they were but
Spousals. And finally, after much reasoning, they offered themselves to remain
Prisoners, until such time as they should have sent unto them from Cleves the
first Articles ratified under the Duke their Masters Sign and Seal, and also
the Copy of the Revocation made between the Duke of Lorrain's Son and the Lady
Ann. Upon the which Answers, I was sent to your Highness by my Lords of your
Council, to declare to your Highness their Answer; and came to you, by the
Privy Way, into your Privy Chamber, and declared unto the same all the
Circumstances, wherewith your Grace was very much displeased, saying, I am not
well handled; insomuch that I might well perceive that your Highness was fully
determined not to have gone through with the Marriage at that time, saying unto
me these words, or the like in effect; That if it were not that she is come so
far unto my Realm, and the great Preparations that my States and People have
made for her, and for fear of making a ruffel in the World; that is, to mean to
drive her Brother into the hands of the Emperor and the French King's hands,
being now together, I would never have ne married her. So that I might well
perceive your Grace was neither content with the Person, ne yet with the
Proceedings of the Agents; And at after-dinner, the said Sunday, your Grace
sent for all your said Counselors in, repeating how your Highness was handled,
as well touching the said Articles, as also the said Matter of the Duke of
Lorrain's Son. It might, and I doubt not, did appear unto them how loath your
Highness was to have married at that time. And thereupon, and upon the
Considerations aforesaid, your Grace thought that it should be well done that
she should make a Protestation before your said Counselors and Notaries to be
present, that she was free from all Contracts; which was done accordingly. And
thereupon I repairing to your Highness, declared how that she had made her
Protestation. Whereunto your Grace answered in effect these words, or much
like; Is there none other Remedy, but that I must needs, against my Will, put
my Neck in the Yoke; and so departed, leaving your Highness in a study or
pensiveness. And yet your Grace determined the next morning to go through; and
in the morning, which was Monday, your Majesty preparing your self toward the
Ceremonies; There was one Question, Who should lead to the Church? And it was
appointed that the Earl of Essex deceased, and an Earl that came with her,
should lead her to the Church. And thereupon one came to your Highness, and
said to you, That the Earl of Essex was not come; whereupon your Grace
appointed me to be one that should lead her: And so I went into her Chamber, to
the intent to have done your Commandment; and shortly after I came into her
Chamber, the Earl of Essex was come: Whereupon I repaired back again into your
Graces Privy Chamber, and showed your Highness how he was come; and thereupon
your Majesty advanced toward the Gallery out of your Privy Chamber; and your
Grace being in and about the midst of your Chamber of Presence, called me unto
you, saying these words, or the like in sentence; My Lord, if it were not to
satisfy the World, and my Realm, I would not do that I must do this day for
none earthly thing; and therewith one brought your Grace Word that she was
coming; and thereupon your Grace repaired into the Gallery toward the Closet,
and there paused for her coming, being nothing content that she so long tarried
as I judged then. And so consequently she came, and your Grace afterward
proceeded to the Ceremonies; and they being finished, traveled the day as
appertained, and the night after the custom. And in the morning, on Tuesday, I
repairing to your Majesty into your Privy-Chamber, finding your Grace not so
pleasant as I trusted to have done, I was so bold to ask your Grace how you
liked the Queen? Whereunto your Grace soberly answered, saying, That I was not
all Men, surely, as ye know, I liked her before not well, but now I like her
much worse; for, quoth your Highness, I have felt her Belly, and her Breasts,
and thereby, as I can judge, she should be no Maid; which struck me so to the
Heart when I felt them, that I had neither will nor courage to proceed any
further in other Matters; saying, I have left her as good a Maid as I found
her: Which me thought then ye spoke displeasantly, which made me very sorry to
hear; Your Highness also after Candlemass, and before Showstie, once or twice
said, That ye were in the same case with her as ye were before, and that your
Heart could never consent to meddle with her carnally. Notwithstanding your
Highness alleged, that ye for the most part used to lay nightly, or every
second night by her, and yet your Majesty ever said, That she was as good a
Maid for you, as ever her Mother bare her, for any thing ye had ministered to
her. Your Highness showed to me also in Lent last passed, at such time as your
Grace had some communication with her of my Lady Mary, how that she began to
wax stubborn and willful, ever lamenting your fate, and ever verifying that ye
never had any carnal knowledge with her: And also after Easter, your Grace
likewise, at diverse times, and in the Whitsun-week, in your Grace's
Privy-Chamber at Greenwich, exceedingly lamented your fate, and that your
greatest grief was, That ye should surely never have any more Children for the
comfort of this Realm, if ye should so continue; assuring me, that before God
ye thought she was never your lawful Wife. At which time your Grace knows
what answer I made; which was, that I would for my part do my utmost to comfort
and deliver your Grace of your Afflictions; and how sorry I was both to see and
hear your Grace God knows. Your Grace diverse times sithen Whitsuntide, ever
alleging one thing, and also saying, That ye had as much to do to move the
consent of your Heart and Mind as ever did Man, and that you took God to
witness; but ever, you said, the Obstacle could never out of your Mind. And,
Gracious Prince, after that you had first seen her at Rochester, I never
thought in my heart that ye were or would be contented with that Marriage. And,
Sir, I know now in what case I stand, in which is only the Mercy of God and
your Grace; if I have not, to the uttermost of my remembrance, said the Truth,
and the whole Truth in this Matter, God never help me. I am sure there is, as I
think, no Man in this your Realm that knew more in this than I did, your
Highness only excepted. And I am sure, my Lord Admiral calling to his
remembrance, can show your Highness, and be my Witness what I said unto him
after your Grace came from Rochester, yea, and after your Grace's Marriage: And
also now of late, sithence Whitsuntide, and I doubt not but many and diverse of
my Lords of your Council, both before your Marriage and sithence, have
right-well perceived that your Majesty has not been well pleased with your
Marriage. And as I shall answer to God, I never thought your Grace content,
after you had once seen her at Rochester. And this is all that I know, most
gracious and most merciful Sovereign Lord, beseeching Almighty God, who ever
has in all your Causes counseled, preserved, opened, maintained, relieved,
and defended your Highness; So he will now vouchsafe to counsel you, preserve
you, maintain you, remedy you, relieve and defend you, as may be most to your
Honor, with Prosperity, Health, and Comfort of your Hearts desire. For the
which, and for the long Life, and prosperous Reign of your most Royal Majesty,
I shall, during my Life, and whiles I am here, pray to Almighty God, that he of
his most abundant Goodness will help, aid, and comfort you, after your
continuance of Nestor's Years: that that most noble Imp, the Princes Grace,
your most dear Son, may succeed you to Reign long, prosperously, and
feliciously to God's pleasure: beseeching most humbly your Grace to pardon this
my rude writing, and to consider that I a most woeful Prisoner, ready to take
the Death, when it shall please God and your Majesty; and yet the frail flesh
inciteth me continually to call to your Grace for Mercy and Grace for mine
Offenses; and thus Christ save, preserve, and keep you.

Written at the Tower this Wednesday, the last of June, with the heavy Heart,
and trembling hand, of your Highness's most heavy and most miserable Prisoner,
and poor Slave, Thomas Cromwell.
Most Gracious Prince, I cry for Mercy, Mercy, Mercy.



XVIII. The King's own Declaration concerning it. An Original.
FIrst; I depose and declare, Cotton Libr. Otho C. 10.
That this hereafter written is merely the verity intended, upon none sinister
affection, nor yet upon none hatred nor displeasure, and herein I take God to
witness. Now to the Matter I say and affirm; That when the first communication
was had with me for the Marriage of the Lady Ann of Cleves, I was glad to
hearken to it, trusting to have some assured Friend by it; I much doubting that
time, both the Emperor, France, and the Bishop of Rome; and also because I
heard so much, both of her excellent Beauty and virtuous Conditions. But when I
saw her at Rochester, the first time that ever I saw her, it rejoiced my heart
that I had kept me free from making any Pact or Bond before with her till I saw
her my self; for then I adsure you I liked her so ill, and so far contrary to
that she was praised, that I was woe that ever she came into England; and
deliberated with my self, that if it were possible to find means to break off,
I would never enter Yoke with her. Of which misliking, both the great Master,
the Admiral that now is, and the Master of the Horses, can and will here
record. Then after my repair to Greenwich, the next day after I think, and
doubt not, but that the Lord of Essex well examined, can, and will, or has
declared what I then said to him in that case; not doubting, but since he is a
Person which knows himself condemned to die by Act of Parliament, will not
damn his Soul, but truly declare the Truth, not only at that time spoken by me,
but also continually till the day of Marriage; and also many times after,
whereby my lack of consent, I doubt not, does or shall well appear; And also
lack enough of the Will and Power to consummate the same; wherein both he, my
Physicians, the Lord Privy Seal that now is, Hennage and Denny can, and I doubt
not will testify according to truth, which is, That I never for love to the
Woman consented to marry; nor yet if she brought Maidenhead with her, took any
from her by true Carnal Copulation. This is my brief, true, and perfect
Declaration.

XIX. The Judgment of the Convocation for annulling of the Marriage with Ann of
Cleve.
TEnor vero Literarum Testimonialum hujusmodi sequitur, Regist. Cranmer.
and est talis. Excellentissimo in Christo Principi, etc. Thomas Cantuarien.
and Edwardus Eboracen. Archiepiscopi, caeterique Episcopi and reliquus vestri
Regni Angliae clerus, Autoritate Literarum Commissionalium Vestrae Majestatis,
Congregati ac Synodum universalem repraesentantes, cum obsequio, reverentia and
honor debitis, salutem and foelicitatem. Cum nos humillimi and Majestatis
Vestrae devotissimi subditi, Convocati and Congregati sumus virtute
Commissionis Vestrae magno sigillo Vestro sigillat. dat. 6 Julii Anno
foelicissimi Regni Vestri tricesimo secundo, quam accepimus in haec quae
sequitur verba.

Henricus Octavus Dei Gratia Angliae, etc. Archiepiscopis Cantuarien. and
Eborac. ac caeteris Regni nostri Angliae Episcopis, Decanis, Archidiaconis, and
universo Clero, salutem. Egerunt apud nos Regni nostri proceres and populus, ut
cum nuper quaedam emerserint, quae ut illi putant ad nos Regnique nostri
successionem pertineant, inter quae praecipua est, causa and conditio
Matrimonii quod cum Illustri and Nobili Foemina Domina Anna Clevensi propter
externam quidem conjugii speciem, perplexum alioqui etiam multis ac variis
modis ambiguum videtur; Nos ad ejusdem Matrimonii disquisitionem ita procedere
dignaremur ut opinionem Vestram qui in Ecclesia nostra Anglicana scientiam
Verbi Dei and Doctrinam profitemini exquiramus, vobisque discutiendum
Autoritatem ita demandemus, ut si animis Vestris fuerit persuasum Matrimonium
cum praefata Domina Anna minime consistere aut cohaerere debere; nos ad
Matrimonium contrahend. cum alia liberos esse, Vestro, Patrum ac reliquae
deinde Ecclesiae suffragio pronuncietur and confirmetur. Nos autem qui Vestrum
in reliquis Ecclesiae hujus Anglicanae negotiis gravioribus quae Ecclesiasticam
Oeconomiam and Religionem spectant judicium amplecti solemus, ad veritatis
explicandae testimonium omnino necessarium rati sumus Causae hujusmodi
Matrimonialis seriem and circumstantias vobis exponi and communicari curare, ut
quod vos per Dei Leges licere decreveritis id demum totius Ecclesiae nostrae
Autoritate innixi licite facere and exequi audeamus. Vos itaque Convocari and
in Synodum Universalem nostra Autoritate convenire volentes, vobis conjunctim
and divisim committimus atque mandamus, ut inspecta hujus negotii veritate, ac
solum Deum prae oculis habentes, quod verum, quod justum, quod honestum, quod
sanctum est, id nobis de communi Concilio scripto annuncio renuncietis, and de
communi consensu licere definiatis: Nempe hoc unum a vobis nostro jure
postulamus, ut tanquam fida and proba Ecclesiae membra causae huic
Ecclesiasticae, quae maxima est, in justitia and veritate adesse velitis, and
eam maturime juxta Commissionem vobis in hac part factam absolvere and
expedire. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes,
Test meipso apud Westmon. sexto die Julii Anno Regni nostri tricesimo secundo.
Nos tenorem and effectum Vestrae Commissionis per omnia sequentes, postquam
matura deliberatione perpendimus and consideravimus omnes Matrimonii praetensi
inter Vestram Majestatem Illustrissimam and Nobilem foeminam Dominam Annam
Clevensem circumstantias, nobis multis modis expositas, cognitas and
perspectas, tandem ad definitionem and determinationem sequentem, quam communi
omnium consensu justorumque animorum nostrorum judicio ac recto conscientiae
dictaminae protulimus, processimus, in hunc modum and (quod tenor Vestrae
Commissionis exigit) Vestrae Nobilissimae Majestati in hoc praesenti scripto
referend. duximus, and significamus prout sequitur.

Primum itaque comperimus and consideravimus Matrimonium inter Majestatem
Vestram and Nobilem foeminam Dominam Annam Clevensem praetensam praecontracto
quodam sive sponsaliorum, sive Matrimonii, inter dictam Dominam Annam and
Marchionem Lotharingiae concluso ambiguum, plane impeditum and perplexum reddi;
Annimadvertimus enim quod quamvis Vestra Majestas in prima hujus Matrimonii
praetensi tractatione praecontractus praedicti, and de quo tum sermo multus
habebatur, discussionem and declarationem ante solemnizandum cum dicta Domina
Anna Matrimonium tanta instantia exegerit, ut pro condition contrahendi deinde
Matrimonii fuisse merito existimari possit, qua condition defecta nihil
ageretur; atque haec cum ita se haberent tamen neque ante solemnizationem illa
de praecontractu ambiguitas expedita and declarata est, cum idipsum tum
temporis Majestas Vestra denuo exposceret and efflagitaret, cui clara jam and
expedita esse omnia falso renunciabatur, neque postea quicquam efficax ut
promissum ab Oratoribus fuerat, huc transmissum est, quo scrupulus ille ex
praecontractu natus eximeretur, tolleretur aut amoveretur, adeo quidem ut
praetensum Matrimonium inter Majestatem Vestram and Dominam Annam praedictam
non modo ex conditionis defectu corruerit, sed si nulla conditio hujusmodi
omnino fuisset, certe quidem Matrimonium hujusmodi praetensum ex sola
praecontractus hujusmodi causa non explicata in suspenso manserit, in eum etiam
casum nullius vigoris omnino ac valoris pronunciandum, quo praecontractum illum
verbis de praesenti factum fuisse constiterit, id quod multis de causis est
verisimilius and merito suspectum haberi potest.

Consideravimus praeterea ex his quae allegata, affirmata and probata nobis
fuerunt, quod praetensum Matrimonium inter Majestatem vestram and Dominam Annam
praedictam internum, purum, perfectum and integrum consensum non habuit: Imo
contra quemadmodum inter ipsa tractationis initia, cum de hoc Matrimonio
ageretur, plurimus illecebrarum fucus adhibitus est, and magnus laudationum
acervus supra fidem cumulatus, ut hic perduceretur and obtruderetur ignota, ita
solemnizationis actus qui instabat a Majestate Vestra animo reluctante and
dissentiente exortus est, causis maximis and gravissimis urgentibus and
prementibus quae animum invitum and alienum perpellere merito possent.

Consideravimus etiam carnalem Copulam inter Majestatem Vestram and praedictam
Dominam Annam minime secutam esse, nec cum ea justo impedimento intercedente
consequi deinde posse. Quae omnia ex his quas audivimus probationibus vera and
certa esse existimamus. Postremo illud quoque Consideramus, quod and nobis ab
aliis propositum etiam nos verum esse fatemur, agnoscimus and approbamus, viz.
ut si Majestas Vestra (modo ne fiat divinae jussioni praejudicium) in liberate
contrahendi Matrimonii cum alia esse declaretur, maxim totius Regni beneficio
id futurum. Cum quidem Regni foelicitas omnis and conservatio, tum in Regia
Vestra persona ad Dei honorem and divinarum legum executionem conservandam
consistit, tum in vitandis etiam sinistris omnibus opinionibus and scandalis
quae de Majestatis Vestrae progeny post natam nobis ex praetenso Matrimonio
sobolem suborirentur, si praecontractus ille de quo diximus, and cujus
declaratio nulla secuta est, praedictae Dominae Annae objiceretur. His itaque
de causis and considerationibus aliisque multis non necessariis quae
exprimantur, cum separatim singulis, tum conjunctim omnibus consideratis and
perpensis, Nos Archiepiscopi and Episcopi, cum Decanis, Archiadiaconis, and
reliquo hujus Regni Clero nunc congregato, circumstantias facti ejusque
veritatem ut antedictum est considerantes, tum vero quid Ecclesia in hujusmodi
casibus and possit facere and saepenumero antehac fecerit perpendentes, tenore
praesentium declaramus and definimus, Majestatem Vestram praedicto Matrimonio
praetenso, utpote nullo and invalido, non alligari, sed alio desuper judicio
non expectato Ecclesiae suae Autoritate fretam posse arbitrio suo ad
contrahend. and consummand. Matrimonium cum quavis foemina, divino jure
vobiscum contrahere non prohibita, procedere, praetenso illo cum Domina Anna
praedicta Matrimonio non obstante.

Similiter Dominam Annam praedictam non obstante Matrimonio praetenso cum
Majestate Vestra, quod nullo pacto obstare debere Decernimus, posse arbitrio
suo cum quavis alia persona divino jure non prohibita Matrimonium contrahere.
Haec Nos Clerum and doctam Ecclesiae Anglicanae partem repraesentantes, tum
vera, justa, honesta and sancta esse Affirmamus, tum eisdem qui perfectissime,
integerrime and efficacissime ad omnem intentionem, propositum and effectum a
nobis exigi potest, Consentimus and Assentimur per praesentes. In quorum omnium
and singulorum testimonium haec scripta manuum nostrarum subscriptione,
communimus, utriusque etiam Archiepiscopi sigillo apposito.

Da^. Westmon. nono die mensis Julii Anno Dom. 1540.
XX. Ann of Cleve's Letter to her Brother.
BROTHER,
Cotton Libr. Otho. C. 10.
BEcause I had rather ye knew the Truth by mine Advertisement, than for want
thereof ye should be deceived by vain Reports, I write these present Letters
unto you, by which ye shall understand, That being advertised how the Nobles
and Commons of this Realm desired the King's Highness here to commit the
examination of the Matter of Marriage, between me and his Majesty, to the
determination of the Clergy: I did the more willingly consent thereunto, and
since the determination made, have also allowed, approved, and agreed unto the
same, wherein I have more respect, as becomes me, to Truth and good Pleasure,
than any worldly Affection that might move me to the contrary. I account God
pleased with that is done, and know my self to have suffered no wrong or
injury; but being my Body preserved in the integrity which I brought into this
Realm, and I truly discharged from all band of Consent, I find the King's
Highness, whom I cannot justly have as my Husband, to be nevertheless as a most
kind, loving, and friendly Father and Brother, and to use me as honorably, and
with as much humanity and liberality as you, I my self, or any of our Kin or
Allies could wish or desire; wherewith I am, for mine own part, so well content
and satisfied, that I much desire my Mother, You, and other mine Allies so to
understand it, accept, and take it; and so to use your self toward this Noble
and Virtuous Prince, as he may have cause to continue his friendship toward
you, which on his behalf shall nothing be empaired or altered for this Matter;
for so has it pleased his Highness to signify unto me, that like as he will
show me always a most fatherly and brotherly kindness, and has so provided for
me; so will he remain with you, and other, according to such terms as have
passed in the same knot of Amity which between you has been concluded, this
Matter notwithstanding, in such wise as neither I, ne you, or any of our
Friends shall have just cause of miscontentment. Thus much I have thought
necessary to write unto you, lest for want of true knowledge ye might otherwise
take this Matter than ye ought, and in other sort care for me than ye should
have cause. Only I require this of you, That ye so use your self, as for your
untowardness in this Matter, I fare not the worse; whereunto I trust you will
have regard.

XXI. The Resolutions of several Bishops and Divines, Ex MSS. D. Stilling-fleet.
of some Questions concerning the Sacraments; by which it will appear with what
maturity and care they proceeded in the Reformation, taken from the Originals,
under their own hands. Only in copying them, I judged it might be more
acceptable to the Reader to see every Man's Answer set down after every
Question; and therefore they are published in this method.
The first Question. What a Sacrament is by the Scripture?
THe Scripture shows not what a Sacrament is, Canterbury.
nevertheless where in the Latin Text we have Sacramentum, there in the Greek
we have Mysterium; and so by the Scripture, Sacramentum may be called
Mysterium, id est, res occulta sive arcana.

To the first; York.
In Scripture we neither find Definition nor Description of a Sacrament.

Without prejudice to the Truth, London.
and saving always more better Judgment, Cum facultate etiam melius deliberandi
in hac part. To the first Question; I think that the Scriptures do use this
word Sacrament, in diverse places, according to the Matter it treats upon,
Tobi. 12. Rev. 1. Wisd. 2.6.12. Dan. 2. Ephesians. 1.3, 5. Col. 1. 1 Timothy 10. Rev.
17. as also it does diverse other words: Yet, what a Sacrament is by definition,
or description of Scripture, I cannot find it explicated openly. Likewise as I
cannot find the definition or description of the Trinity, nor yet suchlike
things. Mary what other Men can find, being daily and of long season exercised
in Scripture, I cannot tell, referring therefore this thing to their better
knowledge.

I think that where this word, Sacramentum, Rochester.
is found in the Scripture in the Latin Translation, there in the Greek is
found this word (...), that is to say, a Mystery, or a secret thing.

What the word Sacrament betokens, or what is the definition, Carlisle.
description, or notification thereof, I have found no such plainly set out by
Scripture. But this I find, that it should appear by the same Scripture, that
the Latin word Sacramentum, and the Greek word Mysterium, be in manner always
used for one thing; as much to say as, Absconditum, Occultatum, vel in occulto.

Dr. Robertson.
Thomas Rebertson. Ad Quaestiones.

Ad primam Respondeo, vocem Sacramenti, mihi in Sacris Literis non reperiri in
hac significatione, nisi quatenus ad Matrimonium applicatur a Paulo, ubi tamen
Graece habetur Mysterium: and proinde ex meris Scripturis express definiri non
posse.

Dr. Cox.
I find not in Scripture, the definition of a Sacrament, nor what a Sacrament is.

Dr. Day.
I find no definition in Scripture of this word Sacramenium; howbeit wheresoever
it is found in Scripture, the same is in the Greek Mysterium, which signifies
a Secret, or Hid thing.

Dr. Oglethorp.
Non habetur in Scripturis, quid Sacramentum proprie sit, nisi quod subinde
Mysterium dicitur: varia enim, and in Scripturis, and in Ecclesiasticis
Scriptoribus reperitur ejus nominis significatio; ideoque definiri non potest.

Dr. Redmayn.
I find no definition of this word Sacrament, in the Scripture; nor likewise of
this word Gratia, or Lex, with innumerable more; and yet what they signify, it
is known; so the signification of this word Sacrament is plain, it is nothing
else but a secret Hid thing, or any Mystery.

Dr. Edgeworth
Like as Angelus, Coelum, Terra, be spoken of in Scripture, yet none of them
defined: So although Sacrumentum be spoken of in Scripture, yet (...) has no
definition there, but is taken diverse ways, and in diverse sig^ifications.

Dr. Symmens.
This word, Sacrament, in Scripture is not defined.

Dr. Tresham.
I say this word, Sacrament, taken in his common signification, betokens a
Mystery, and hid, or a secret thing: But if ye understand it, in his proper
signification, as we use to apply it only to the Seven Sacraments, the
Scripture shows not what a Sacrament is. And yet lest any Man might be
offended, thinking, that because the Scripture shows not what a Sacrament is,
therefore the same is a light thing, or little to be esteemed: Here may be
remembered, that there are some weighty and godly things, being also of our
Belief, which the Scripture shows not expressly what they are. As for Example;
We believe the Son is consubstantial to the Father: Item; that the Father is
unbegotten, yet the Scripture shows not what is consubstantial, nor what is
unbegotten, neither makes any mention of the words. Likewise it is true,
Baptism is a Sacrament, Penance is a Sacrament, etc. yet the Scripture shows
not what a Sacrament is.

Edwardus Leyghton.

Responsions unto the Questions. Dr. Leyghton.


To the first Question, I say; That in Holy Scripture I never found, and I
think there is no Man that will find a definition or description of this word
Sacramentum; which is as much to say in English, as, a Mystery, a secret, or a
hid thing.

I do read no definition of this word, Sacramentum, in Scripture; Dr. Coren.
but sometimes it is used in Scripture, to signify a thing secret or hid.

In primo articulo convenient omnes, non satis constare ex Scriptura,
Convenient.
quid sit Sacramentum; Plerique tamen dicunt Graece appellari, Mysterium, (i.
e.) a secret, or a hid thing.

In the Answer unto the first Question, They do all agree, Agreement.
that it is not evident by Scripture, what a Sacrament is, but Mysterium, that
is, a secret, or a hid thing.

2. Question. What a Sacrament is by the Ancient Authors?
Answers.
THe Ancient Doctors call a Sacrament, Sacrae rei Signum, Canterbury.
viz. visibile Verbum, Symbolum, atque pactio qua sumus constricti.

To the second; Of St. Augustin's words, York.
this Description following of a Sacrament may be gathered; Sacramentum est
invisibilis gratiae, visibilis forma. And this thing, that is such visible form
or sign of invisible Grace in Sacraments, we find in Scripture, although we find
not the word Sacrament, saving only in the Sacrament of Matrimony.

To the second; I find in Authors this Declaration, London.
Sacramentum est Sacrae rei signum. Also, Invisibilis Gratiae Visibilis Forma.
Also, Visibilis Forma Invisibilis Gratiae imaginem gerens and causa existens.
And of the verity and goodness of this Description or Declaration, I refer me
to the Divines, better acquainted with this Matter than I am.

I think that this word Sacrament, as it is taken of the Old Authors, Rochester.
has diverse and sundry significations, for sometimes it is extended to all
holy Signs, sometimes to all Mysteries, sometimes to all Allegories, etc.

Thomas Waldensis, who writes a solemn Work de Sacramentis, Carlisle.
causes me to say, that this word, Sacramentum in Communi, is defined of of
the Ancient Authors; who after that he had showed how that Wycliff, and before
him Berengarius has said, that Augustine defines Sacramentum thus;
Sacramentum est sacrum Signum; and Signum in this wise, Signum est res praeter
speciem quam sensibus ingerit aliquid aliud ex se faciens in cogitationem
venire. De Doctrina Christiana.
He himself, with Ancient Authors, as he says, defines it thus; Sacramentum
est invisibilis Gratiae visibilis Forma, vel, Sacramentum est Sacrae rei
Signum: Both these Descriptions (says he) be of the Ancient Fathers.

Dr. Robertson.
Sacramentum a vetustioribus, quemadmodum fert Hugo de S. Victore, and Thomas
Aquinas, nondum reperiri definitum, nisi quod Augustinus interdum vocet
Sacramenta, Sacra signa aut signacula, interdum similitudines earum rerum,
quarum sunt Sacramenta. Et Rabanus, Sacramentum dicitur, quod sub tegumento
rerum corporalium, virtus Divina secretius salutem eorundem Sacramentorum
operatur, unde and a secretis virtutibus vel Sacris, Sacramenta dicuntur.

Dr. Cox.
The Ancient Authors commonly say, That a Sacrament is, Sacrae rei Signum, or
Sacrosanctum Signaculum; but they do not utterly and properly define what it is.

Dr. Day.
The Ancient Doctors take this word, Sacramentum, diversely, and apply it to many
things.

Dr. Oglethorpe.
Ex Augustino and aliis colligitur, Sacramentum posse dici, Sacrae rei Signum,
vel, invisibilis gratiae visibilis Forma, quanquam haec posterior definitio non
conveniat omnibus Sacramentis, s^iz. tantum septem istis usitatis; sed nec his
quoque ex aequo, cum non aequalem conferant gratiam.

Dr. Redmayn.
Generally it is taken to signify every secret Mystery, and Sacramenta be
called, Sacrarum rerum signa, or, Sacra signacula: And as this word Sacrament
particularly is attributed to the chief Sacraments of the Church, this
definition of a Sacrament may be gathered of St. August. Invisibilis Gratiae
visibilis Forma. And also that a Sacrament, is a mystical or secret Work which
consists ex Verbo and elemento. And Cyprian says, Verborum solennitas and
sacri invocatio nominis, and signa institutionibus Apostolicis Sacerdotum
Ministeriis Attributa, visibile celebrant Sacramentum, rem vero ipsam Spiritus
Sanctus format and efficit.

Dr. Edgeworth
By the Ancient Authors, Sacramentum has many significations, sometimes it is
called a Secret Counsel. Tob. 12. Sacramentum Regis abscondere bonum est.
Nebuchadnezar's Dream was called Sacramentum, Dan. 2. The Mystery of Christ's
Incarnation, and of our Redemption, is so called, Ephesians. 3. and 1 Timothy 3. So
that every secret thing having some privy sense or signification, is called
Sacramentum, generally extending the Vocable: Notwithstanding in one
signification, Sacramentum accords properly to them that be commonly called
the Seven Sacraments; and has this definition taken of St. August. and others,
Invisibilis gratiae visibilis Forma, ut ipsius imaginem gerat and quodammodo
causa existat.

Dr. Symmons.
The Ancient Authors of Divinity use this word Sacrament in diverse
significations, for they call it Mysterium; and so the Scripture uses it in
many places, as 1 Timothy 3. Tobie 12. Wisd. 2. Dan. 2. Ephesians. 1. and 3. The word
Sacrament is also used for a Figure or a Sign of the Old Testament, signifying
Christ, as the Paschal Lamb, and the Brazen Serpent, and diverse other Holy
Signs. It is also taken of the Holy Authors, to be an Holy Sign, which makes
to the sanctification of the Soul, given of God against sin for our Salvation,
as it may be gathered of them; for this word Sacrament is called by them,
Sacrum Signum; but I have not read any express definition common to all
Sacraments.

This word Sacrament, in the Ancient Authors, Dr. Tresham.
is oft-times used in this general signification, and so (as is before-said) it
is a Mystery, or secret thing; and sometimes the same word is used as appliable
only unto the Seven Sacraments; and is thus described, A visible Form of an
invisible Grace: and thus also, a thing by the which, under the covering of
visible things, the godly Power does work our health.

To the second, I say; That Hugo de Sancto Victore, Dr. Leyghton.
is one of the most Ancient Authors that I ever could perceive, took upon him
to define or describe a Sacrament: Howbeit, I suppose, that this common
description which the Schoolmen use, after the Master of the Sentences, viz.
Sacramentum est invisibilis Gratiae visibilis seu sensibilis Forma, may be
gathered of St. Austin, and diverse other Ancient Author's words in many places
of their Works.

I do find no definition plainly set forth in old Authors, Dr. Coren.
notwithstanding this definition, Invisibilis Gratiae visibilis Forma, may be
gathered out of St. Augustine.

In secundo Articulo convenient omnes, Con.
Sacramentum esse sacrae rei signum. Tresham, Oglethorpus, and Edgworth, dicunt
hanc definitionem, Sacramentum est invisibilis gratiae visibilis Forma, his
septem convenire. Thurlebeus ait, non convenire omnibus septem, and aeque
pluribus posse attribui atque septem.

In the second they put many Descriptions of a Sacrament, Agreem.
as the sign of a holy Thing, a visible Word, etc. But upon this one
definition, a Sacrament is a visible Form of invisible Grace, they do not all
agree: for Doctors, Edgworth, Tresham, and Oglethorpe say, That it is
applicable only and properly unto the word Sacrament, as it signifies the
Seven Sacraments usually received. My Lord Elect of Westminster says, That it
agrees not unto all the Seven, nor yet more specially unto the Seven, than
unto any other.

3. Question. How many Sacraments there be by the Scripture?
Answers.
Canterbury.
THe Scripture shows not how many Sacraments there be, but Incarnatio Christi
and Matrimonium, be called in the Scripture Mysteria, and therefore we may call
them by the Scripture Sacramenta. But one Sacramentum the Scripture makes
mention of, which is hard to be revealed fully, as would to God it were, and
that is Mysterium Iniquitatis, or Mysterium Meretricis magnae and Bestiae.

York.
To the third; In Scripture we find no precise number of Sacraments.

London.
To the third; I find not set forth the express number, with express declaration
of this many and no more; nor yet of these expressly by Scripture which we use,
especially under the name of Sacraments, saving only of Matrimony.

Rochester.
I think that in the Scripture be innumerable Sacraments, for all Mysteries, all
Ceremonies, all the Facts of Christ, the whole Story of the Jews, and the
Revelations of the Apocalypse, may be named Sacraments.

Carlisle.
The certain number of Sacraments, or Mysteries, contained within Scripture,
cannot be well expressed or assigned; for Scripture contains more than
infallibly may be rehearsed.

Dr. Robertson.
De istis septem, quae usitate vocamus Sacramenta, nullum invenio nomine
Sacramenti appellari, nisi Matrimonium. Matrimonium esse Sacramentum, probat
Eckius, Homi. 73. and confer gratiam, ibid.

Dr. Cox.
There be diverse Sacraments by the Scripture, as in Tobie 12. Sacramentum Regis,
the King's Secret. Also Nebuchadnezars Dream, Dan. 2. is called, Sacramentum.
Incarnatio Christi, Sacramentum, Ephesians. 3. Matrimonium, Sacramentum.

Dr. Day.
Taking for Sacraments any thing, that this word, Sacramentum, does signify,
there be in Scripture a great number of Sacraments more than Seven.

Dr. Oglethorpe.
Non habetur determinatus Sacramentorum numerus in Scripturis, sunt enim
innumera fere illic, quae passim vocantur Sacramenta; cum omnis allegoria,
omneque Mysterium, dicatur Sacramentum. Quin et somnia, ac secreta, subinde
Sacramenta vocantur. Tobiae 2. Sacramentum Regis abscondere bonum est; and Dan.
2. Imploremus misericordias Dei Coeli super Sacramento isto, and somnio. Paulus
etiam Epist. 2. vocat Mysterium Incarnationis Christi Sacramentum: Et in Apoc.
1. vocat Sacramentum septem Stellarum. Ac hoc praecipue observandum venit,
nullum a septem Sacramentis receptis, hoc nomine appellari, praeter solum
Matrimonium.

As many as there be Mysteries, which be innumerable; Dr. Redmayn.
but by Scripture, I think, the Seven which be named Sacraments, may
principally bear the name.

Speaking of Sacraments generally, Dr. Edgewoat^
they be innumerable spoken of in Scripture; but properly to speak of
Sacraments, there be but Seven that may be so called, of which Matrimony is
expressly called Sacramentum, Ephesians. 5. and as I think, in the germane and
proper signification of a Sacrament; so that the indivisible knot of the Man
and his Wife in one Body, by the Sacrament of Matrimony, is the Matter of this
Sacrament; upon which, as on the literal verity the Apostle foundeth this
allegorical saying, Ego autem dico in Christo and in Ecclesia; for the mystical
sense presupposes a verity in the Letter on which that is taken* Six more
there be to which the definition does agree, as manifestly does appear by the
Scriptures with the exposition of the Ancient Authors.

In the Scripture there is no certain number of Sacraments. Dr. Symmons.


I ^ind no more of the seven, called expressly Sacraments, Dr. Tresham.
but only Matrimony, but extending the name of Sacrament in his most general
acception; there are in Scripture a great number of Sacraments, whereof the
Apostle says, Si noverint Mysteria omnia, etc.

To the third; I say, Dr. Leyghton.
that I find not in Scripture any of these seven which we commonly call
Sacraments, called Sacramentum, but only Matrimonium. But I find diverse and
many other things called Sacraments in Scripture, as in the 21 of Tobie,
Sacramentum Regis abscondere bonum est. Item Apoc. 17. Dicamus tibi
Sacramentum. Item, 1 Timothy 3. Magnum est pietatis Sacramentum, etc.

I cannot tell how many Sacraments be, by Scripture, Dr. Coren.
for they be above one hundred.

In ^ertio convenient satis: Con.
non esse certum numerum Sacramentorum per Scripturas. Redmaynus addit, But by
Scripture I think the seven which be named Sacraments, may principally bear the
name. Idem sentit Edgworth, and septem tantum. Matrimonium in Scripturis haberi
sub nomine Sacramenti plerique dicunt.

In the third they do agree, Agreement.
That there is no certain number of Sacraments by Scripture, but even as many
as there be Mysteries; and none of these seven called Sacraments, but only
Matrimony in Scripture.

4. Question. How many Sacraments there be by the Ancient Authors?
Answers.
Canterbury
BY the Ancient Authors there be many Sacraments more than seven, for all the
Figures which signify Christ to come, or testify that he is come, be called
Sacraments, as all the Figures of the Old Law, and in the New Law; Eucharistia,
Baptismus, Pascha, Dies Dominicus, lotio pedum, signum Crucis, Chrisma,
Matrimonium, Ordo, Sabbatum, Impositio manuum, Oleum, Consecratio Olei, Lac,
Mel, Aqua, Vinum, Sal, Ignis, Cinis, adapertio Aurium, vestis candida, and all
the Parables of Christ, with the Prophesies of the Apocalypse, and such others,
be called by the Doctors, Sacramenta.

York.
To the fourth; There is no precise number of Sacraments mentioned by the
Ancient Authors, taking the word Sacrament, in his most general signification.

^^ndon.
To the fourth; I find that St. Austine speaks de Baptismo, de Eucharistia, de
Matrimonio, de Ordinatione clericorum, de Sacramento Chrismatis and Vnctionis:
Also I find in the said St. Austine, that in the Old Law there were many
Sacraments, and in the New Law few.

Rochester.
I think that in the Doctors be found many more Sacraments than seven, viz.
Panis Catechumenorum, signum Crucis, Oleum, Lac, Sal, Mel, etc.

Carlisle.
That Scripture contains, by the same Holy Ghost which is Author thereof, the
Holy Doctors, and Ancient Fathers expounds; So that where in Scripture the
number of Sacraments is uncertain, it cannot be among them certain.

Dr. Robertson.
Apud Augustinum lego Sacramentum Nuptiarum, Sacramentum Baptismi, Sacramentum
Eucharistiae, quod and altaris sive panis vocat; Sacramentum Ordinationis;
Sacramentum Chrismatis, quod datur per manus impositionem Baptizatis;
Sacramentum Unctionis.

Dr. Cox.
I find in the Ancient Authors, that Baptism is called Sacramentum, Eucharistia,
Sacramentum, Matrimonium Sacramentum, Ordo Sacramentum, Chrisma Sacramentum,
Impositio Manuum per Baptismum Sacramentum, Dilectio Sacramentum, Lotio pedum
Sacramentum, Oleum, Mel, Lac, Sacramenta; and many others.

Dr. Day.
There be a great sort of Sacraments found in the Doctors, after the acception
abovesaid, more than seven.

Dr. Oglethorp.
Apud Scriptores Ecclesiasticos reperiuntur multo plura Sacramenta quam haec
septem.

Taking this word Sacrament universally for Mysteries, Dr. Redmayn.
or all secret Tokens, there be more Sacraments than can be reckoned; but the
seven by old Authors may specially obtain the name. Lotio pedum is spoken of in
old Authors as a special Sacrament used then in the Church, and as it
appears, having a great ground in the Scripture; and I think it were better
to renew that again, and so to have eight Sacraments, rather than to diminish
the number of the seven now used.

Even like as to the next Question before. Dr. Edgeworth


The ancient Authors acknowledge many more than seven; Dr. Symmons.
for they call in their Writings all Rites and Ceremonies, Sacraments.

Generally, as many as Mysteries, specially seven, Dr. Tresham.
and no more of like nature to them; for although I find not express mention
where Penance is called a Sacrament, yet I think it may be deduced and proved
by Cyprian, in his Sermon de Passione Christi, in these words. Denique
quicunque fiunt Sacramentorum Ministri, per operationem authoritas in figura
Crucis omnibus Sacramentis largitur effectum, and cuncta peragit nobis quod
omnibus nominibus eminet a Sacramentorum vicariis invocatum: At licet indigni
sint qui accipiunt, Sacramentorum tamen reverentia and propinquiorem ad Deum
parat accessum, and ubi redierint ad cor constat ablutionis donum, and redit
effectus munerum, nec alias quaeri aut repeti necesse est salutiferum
Sacramentum; in these words, redit effectus munerum; and, nec alias repeti
necesse est salutiferum Sacramentum, must needs be understood Penance, and also
that Penance is a Sacrament: For as our first access to God is by the Sacrament
Baptism, which Cyprian there following called Ablutionem primam; so if we fall
by deadly sin, we cannot repetere God again, but by Penance; which repeting (i.
e.) Penance, Cyprian calls Salutiferum Sacramentum.

To the fourth, I say; That I find in ancienter Authors, Dr. Leyghton.
every one of these seven, which we call commonly Sacraments, called
Sacramentum; as in Austin every one of them is called Sacramentum but only
Penance, which Cyprian calls Sacramentum. Also I find in the ancienter
Authors diverse other things (besides the seven) called Sacraments, as Lotio
pedum in Cyprian, etc.

More Sacraments be found in old Authors than Seven. Dr. Coren.


In quarto convenient, plura esse Sacramenta quam septem apud Authors: Con.
Redman addit; But the seven, by old Authors, may specially obtain the name.
Idem putat Edgworth, and Tresham. Lotio pedum, he thinks were better to be
renewed, and so made 8. Sacraments, than the number of the seven to be
diminished. Treshamus citat Cyprianum in Sermon. de Passione Christi pro
poenitentia, quod dicatur Sacramentum, cum alii fere omnes nusquam appellari
aiunt Sacramentum apud Authors, and hic locus aperte agit de Baptismo, quod
vocat donum ablutionis, and Sacramentum Salutiferum. In the fourth they agree,
Agreement.
That there is no determinate number of Sacraments spoken of in the old
Authors; but that my Lord of York, and Edgworth, Tresham, Redman, Crayford, and
Simmons, say, That those seven, by old Authors, may specially obtain the name
of Sacraments. The Bishop of St. David's says, That there be but four
Sacraments in the old Doctors most chiefly spoken of, and they be Baptism, the
Sacrament of the Altar, Matrimony, and Penance.

5. Question. Whether this word Sacrament, be and ought to be attributed to the
seven only? and whether the seven Sacraments be found in any of the old Authors?
Answers.
Canterbury
I Know no cause why this word, Sacrament, should be attributed to the seven
only; for the old Authors never prescribed any certain number of Sacraments,
nor in all their Books I never read these two words joined together, viz.
septem Sacramenta.

York.
To the fifth; To the first part of this Question, this word, Sacrament, is used
and applied in Scripture, to some things that be none of the seven Sacraments.
To the second part; The seven Sacraments be found in some of the ancient
Authors.

London.
To the fifth, I answer; That this word, Sacrament, in our Language commonly
has been attributed to the seven customably called Sacraments, not for that
yet, that the word Sacrament cannot be applied to any more, but for that the
seven have been specially of very long and ancient season received, continued
and taken for things of such sort.

Rochester.
I think that the name of a Sacrament, is and may be attributed to more than
seven, and that all the seven Sacraments be found in the old Authors, tho all
peradventure be not found in one Author. But I have not read Penance called by
the name of a Sacrament in any of them.

Carlisle.
Certain it is, that this word Sacrament, neither is nor ought to be attributed
to seven only, for both Scripture and ancient Authers otherwise applies it,
but yet nothing lets, but that this word Sacrament may most especially, and
in a certain due pre-eminence, be applied to the seven Sacraments, of most
ancient name and usage among Christian Men. And that the ancient Authors have
so used and applied it, affirms the said Thomas Walden. convincing Wycliffe
and Berengarius who enforced the contrary, from Cyprian, and also Augustine,
with other holy Doctors, they may so well be gathered.

Dr. Robertson.
Vocabulum, Sacramenti, in Sacris Literis, nulli Sacramentorum quod sciam
tribuitur, nisi Matrimonio: a vetustis Scriptoribus tribuitur Ceremoniis and
umbris legis, Incarnationi Christi, figuris, allegoriis, and festivitatibus:
Apud Paulum legitur divinitatis, voluntatis divinae, and pietatis Sacramentum.
Caeterum loquendo de Sacramentis his, quae sunt invisibilis gratiae collatae in
Ecclesia Christi visibilia signa, opinor non plura quam septem inveniri, hisque
magis proprie quam reliquis, sub hac ratione, tribui nomen Sacramenti.

This word Sacrament is not, Dr. Cox.
nor ought not to be attributed to these seven only. Those that we call seven
Sacraments, be found in old Authors, although some of them be seldom found
called by this name Sacrament.

This word, Sacramentum, neither is, Dr. Day.
nor ought to be so attributed unto these seven, but that it is, and may be
attributed to many more things, and so the ancienter Doctors use it. The seven
Sacraments be found in ancient Doctors under the name of Sacrament, saving that
I remember not that I have read in them Penance called a Sacrament.

Nomen commune est multis aliis rebus, Dr. Oglethorpe.
quam septem istis usitatis Sacramentis. Septem Sacramenta, seorsim and sparsim
reperiuntur in veterum monumentis.

To the seven specially and principally, Dr. Redmayn.
and in general to innumerable more. But I cannot tell whether in any old
Author might be found these two words, seven Sacraments, or this number
limited; but every one of the seven Sacraments, one by one, be found in the old
Authors.

Sacramentum in his proper signification, Dr. Edgeworth
is and ought to be attributed to the seven only; and they be all seven found
in the Authors.

This word, Sacrament, is not only to be attributed to the seven, Dr. Symmons.
but that the seven Sacraments especially conferreth Grace, the old Authors
especially accounts them by the number of seven; and these seven are found in
Authors and Scriptures, although they be not found by the name of seven.

I say, This word, Sacrament, is attributed to the seven; Dr. Tresham.
and that the seven Sacraments are found in the ancient Authors.

To the fifth I say, first, (as before) that this word, Sacramentum, Dr.
Leyghton.
is not applied or attributed in Holy Scripture to any of the seven, but only
to Matrimony. But it is attributed in Scripture and ancient Authors to many
other things besides these: Howbeit, taking this word, Sacramentum, for a
sensible sign of the invisible Grace of God given unto Christian People, as the
Schoolmen and many late Writers take it; I think that these seven commonly
called Sacraments, are to be called only and most properly Sacraments.

This word, Sacrament, may well be attributed to the seven; Dr. Coren.
and so it is found in old Authors, saving that I do not read expressly in old
Doctors, Penance to be under the name of a Sacrament, unless it be in
Chrysostom, in the Exposition ad Hebrae. Homil. 20. sect. 1. cap. 10. in
principio.

Non. Con.
In quinto praeter Herfordens. Roffens. Dayium. Oglethorpum, Menevens. and
Coxum, putant omnes nomen Sacramenti praecipue his septem convenire. Symons
addit, The seven Sacraments specially confer Grace: Eboracens. Curren, Tresham,
Symons, aiunt septem Sacramenta inveniri apud veteres, quanquam Curren and
Symons mox videntur iterum negare. Dissent.
In the fifth; The Bishops of Hereford and St. David, Dr. Day, Dr. Cox, say,
That this word, Sacrament, in the old Authors, is not attributed unto the seven
only, and ought not to be attributed. The Bishop of Carlisle alleging
Waldensis. Doctors Curren, Edgworth, Symons, Tresham say, That it is and may be
attributed. And Dr. Curren, and Mr. Symmons, seem to vary against themselves
each in their own Answers; for Dr. Curren says, That this word, Sacrament, is
attributed unto the seven in the old Doctors, and yet he cannot find that it is
attributed unto Penance. Dr. Symons says, That the old Authors account them
by the number of seven; and yet he says, That they be not found there by the
name of seven.

6. Question. Whether the determinate number of seven Sacraments be a Doctrine,
either of the Scripture, or of the old Authors, and so to be taught?
Answers.
Canterbury.
THe determinate number of seven Sacraments is no Doctrine of the Scripture, nor
of the old Authors.

York.
To the sixth; The Scripture makes no mention of the Sacraments determined to
seven precisely; but the Scripture makes mention of seven Sacraments, which be
used in Christ's Church, and grounded partly in Scripture; and no more be in
use of the said Church but seven so grounded; and some of the ancient Doctors
make mention of seven, and of no more than seven, as used in Christ's Church so
grounded; wherefore a Doctrine may be had of seven Sacraments precisely used in
Christ's Church, and grounded in Scripture.

London.
To the sixth; I think it be a Doctrine set forth by the ancient Fathers, one
from another, taking their matter and ground out of Scripture, as they
understood it; tho Scripture for all that does not give unto all the seven, the
special names by which now they are called, nor yet openly call them by the
name of Sacrament, except only (as is before-said) the Sacrament of Matrimony.

Rochester.
Albeit the seven Sacraments be in effect found both in the Scripture, and in
the old Authors, and may therefore be so taught; yet I have not read this
precise and determinate number of seven Sacraments, neither in the Scripture,
nor in the ancient Writers.

By what is here before-said, I think it does well appear, Carlisle.
that both the Scripture of God, and holy Expositors of the same, would have
the seven Sacraments both taught, and in due form exhibited to all Christian
People, as it shall also better appear by what follows.

In Scriptura tantum unum ex istis septem Sacramentum vocari invenio, Dr.
Robertson.
nimirum Matrimonium: apud veteres reperiuntur omnia haec septem, a nullo
tamen, quod sciam, nomine 7. Sacramentorum celebrari, nisi quod Eras. ait 7. a
veteribus recenseri: August. loquens de Sacramentis ad Januarium Ep. 118. ait
numerum septenarium tribui Ecclesiae proprie instar universitatis; Item
objectum fuisse Husso in Concilio Constantienti quod infideliter senserit de 7.
Sacramentis. De perfectione Number. Septenarii, vide August. lib. 1. de Civ. cap.
31.

This determinate number of seven Sacraments, Dr. Cox.
is no Doctrine of Scripture, nor of the old Authors, nor ought not to be
taught as such a determinate number by Scripture and old Authors.

Neither the Scripture, nor the ancient Authors, Dr. Day.
do recite the determinate number of the seven Sacraments; but the Doctrine of
the seven Sacraments is grounded in Scripture, and taught by the ancient
Authors, albeit not altogether.

Septenarius Sacramentorum numerus, Dr. Oglethorpe.
Doctrina est recentium Theologorum; quam illi partim ex Scriptura, partim ex
veterum scriptis, argute in sacrum hunc (ut aiunt) numerum, collegerunt.

I think, as I find by old Authors, Dr. Redmayn.
the ancient Church used all these seven Sacraments; and so I think it good to
be taught.

The determinate number of seven Sacraments, Dr. Edgworth.
is not taught in any one Process of the Scripture, nor of any one of the old
Authors of purpose speaking of them altogether, or in one Process, as far as I
can remember; albeit they all seven be there, and there spoken of in Scripture
manifestly, and so have the old Authors left them in sundry places of their
Writings; and so it ought to be taught.

Forasmuch as the Scripture teaches these seven, Dr. Symmons.
and shows special Graces given by the same, the which are not so given by
others, called Sacraments, the old Authors perceiving the special Graces, have
accounted them in a certain number, and so have been used by Doctors to be
called seven, and without inconvenience may so be taught.

I say, Dr. Tresham.
The determinate number of seven is not expressly mentioned in the Scripture,
like as the determinate number of the seven Petitions of the Prayer is not
expressly mentioned; and as I think the seven Petitions to have their ground in
Scripture, even so do I think of the seven Sacraments, to be grounded in
Scripture.

Dr. Leyghton.
To the sixth I say as before, That the old Authors call each of these seven,
Sacraments; but be it, I cannot remember that ever I read the determinate,
precise, and express number of seven Sacraments in any of the ancient Authors,
nor in Scripture. Howbeit we may find in Scripture, and the old Authors, also
mention made, and the doctrine of each of these seven, commonly called
Sacraments.

Dr. Coren.
The determinate number of seven, is a Doctrine to be taught, for every one of
them be contained in Scripture, tho they have not the number of seven set forth
there, no more than the Petitions of the Pater Noster be called seven, nor the
Articles of the Creed be called twelve.

Priori parti Quaestiones negative Respondent. Herfordens. Menevens. Con.
Roffens. Dayus, Dunelmens. Oglethorpus, Thurleby: Posteriori parti, quod sit
Doctrina conveniens respondent affirmative, Eboracen. Roffen. Carliolen.
Londinen. Dayus, Edgworth, Redmayn, Symmons, Curren: Londinen. and Redmanus non
respondent priori parti Quaestionis, nec Oglethorpus, Tresham, Robinsonus
Posteriori. Eboracen. Londin. Symmons, Curren, volunt e Scripturis peti
Doctrinam Septem. Sacramentorum. Agreement.
In the sixth, touching the determinate number of the seven Sacraments, the
Bishop of Duresme, Hereford, St. David, and Rochester, the Elect of
Westminster, Dr. Day, and Dr. Oglethorpe say, This prescribed number of
Sacraments is not found in the old Authors. The Bishop of York, Drs. Curren,
Tresham, and Symmons, say the contrary. Concerning the second part, Whether it
be a Doctrine to be taught? The Bishops of Hereford, St. David's, and Dr. Cox,
Think it ought not to be so taught as such a determinate number by Scripture.
The Bishops of York, London, Carlisle; Drs. Day, Curren, Tresham, Symmons,
Crayford, Think it a Doctrine meet to be taught: And some of them say, That it
is founded on Scripture.

7. Question. What is found in Scripture of the Matter, Nature, Effect, and
Virtue of such as we call the seven Sacraments; so as although the Name be not
there, yet whether the thing be in Scripture or no, and in what wise spoken of?
Answers.
Canterbury.
I Find not in the Scripture, the Matter, Nature, and Effect of all these which
we call the seven Sacraments, but only of certain of them, as of Baptism, in
which we be regenerated and pardoned of our sin by the Blood of Christ: Of
Eucharistia, in which we be concorporated unto Christ, and made lively Members
of his Body, nourished and fed to the Everlasting Life, if we receive it as we
ought to do, and else it is to us rather Death than Life. Of Penance also I
find in the Scripture, whereby Sinners after Baptism returning wholly unto God,
be accepted again unto God's Favor and Mercy. But the Scripture speaks not
of Penance, as we call it a Sacrament, consisting in three parts, Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction; but the Scripture takes Penance for a pure
conversion of a sinner in heart and mind from his sins unto God, making no
mention of private Confession of all deadly sins to a Priest, nor of
Ecclesiastical satisfaction to be enjoined by him. Of Matrimony also I find
very much in Scripture, and among other things, that it is a mean whereby God
does use the infirmity of our Concupiscence to the setting forth of his Glory,
and increase of the World, thereby sanctifying the Act of Carnal Conjunction
between the Man and the Wife to that use; yea, although one party be an In^idel:
and in this Matrimony is also a Promise of Salvation, if the Parents bring up
their Children in the Faith, Love, and Fear of God. Of the Matter, Nature, and
Effect of the other three, that is to say, Confirmation, Order, and extreme
Unction, I read nothing in the Scripture as they be taken for Sacraments.

To the seventh; Of Baptism, York.
we find in Scripture the Justification by the Word of Christ; we find also
that the Matter of Baptism is Water, the Effect and Virtue is Remission of
Sins. Of Confirmation, we find that the Apostles did confirm those that were
baptized, by laying their hands upon them, and that the Effect then was the
coming of the Holy Ghost into them, upon whom the Apostles laid their hands, in
a visible sign of the Gift of diverse Languages, and therewith of ghostly
strength to confess Christ, following upon the same. Of the Sacrament of the
Altar, we find the Institution by Christ, and the Matter thereof, Bread and
Wine, the Effect, Increase of Grace. Of the Sacrament of Penance, we find the
Institution in the Gospel, the Effect, Reconciliation of the sinner, and the
union of him to the Mystical Body of Christ. Of the Sacrament of Matrimony, we
find the Institution both in the Old and New Testament, and the Effect thereof,
Remedy against Concupiscence and discharge of sin, which otherwise should be in
the Office of Generation. Of the Sacrament of Order, we find, that our Savior
gave to his Apostles power to baptize, to bind and to loose sinners, to remit
sins, and to receive them, to teach and preach his Word, and to consecrate his
most precious Body and Blood, which be the highest offices of Order; and the
effect thereof Grace, we find in Scripture. Of extreme Unction, we find in the
Epistle of the Holy Apostle St. James, and of the Effects of the same.

To the seventh, I find, that St. Austin is of this sentence, London.
That where the Sacraments of the Old Law did promise Grace and Comfort, the
Sacraments of the New Law do give it indeed. And moreover he says, That that
the Sacraments of the New Law are, factu faciliora, pauciora, salubriora, and
foeliciora, more easier, more fewer, more wholsomer, and more happy.

Rochester.
The Scripture teaches of Baptism, the Sacrament of the Altar, Matrimony and
Penance manifestly: There be also in the Scripture manifest examples of
Confirmation, viz. That it was done after Baptism by the Apostles, per manuum
Impositionem. The Scripture teaches also of Order, that it was done, per
manuum Impositionem cum oratione and jejunio. Of the Unction of sick Men, the
Epistle of St. James teaches manifestly.

Carlisle.
I think verily, That of the Substance, Effect, and Virtue of these seven usual
Sacraments, that are to be taken and esteemed above others, we have plainly and
expressly by Holy Scripture. Of Baptism, That whosoever believes in Christ, and
is Christened, shall be saved; and except that one be born again of Water and
the Holy Ghost, he cannot come within the Kingdom of God. Of Matrimony, we have
in Scripture, both by name, and in effect, in the Old and New Testament, both
by Christ and his Apostle Paul. Of the Sacrament of the Altar, I find plainly
expressly, both in the Holy Gospels, and other places of Scripture. Of Penance
in like manner. Of Confirmation we have in Scripture, that when the Samaritans,
by the preaching of Philip, had received the Word of God and were Christened;
the Apostles hearing of the same, sent Peter and John unto them; who when they
came thither, they prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost: then
they laid their hands upon them, and so they received the Holy Ghost; This,
says Bid, is the Office and Duty only of Bishops. And this manner and form
(says St. Hierom) as it is written in the Acts, the Church has kept, That the
Bishop should go abroad to call for the Grace of the Holy Ghost, and lay his
hands upon them, who had been Christened by Priests and Deacons. Of the
Sacrament of Orders, we have, That Christ made his Apostles the Teachers of his
Law, and Ministers of his Sacraments, that they should duly do it, and make and
ordain others likewise to do it after them. And so the Apostles ordained
Matthias to be one of their number, St. Paul made and ordained Timothy and
Titus, with others likewise. Of the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, we have
manifestly in the Gospel of Mark, and Epistle of St. James.

Dr. Robertson.
Materia Sacramentorum est Verbum and Elementum, virtus quam Deus per illa digne
sumentibus conferat gratiam, juxta suam promissionem, nimirum quod sint Sacra
Signacula, non tantum signantia sed etiam significantia. Unde opinor constare
hanc Sacramentorum vim esse in Sacris Literis.

Dr. Cox.
I find in Scripture, of such things as we use to call Sacraments. First, Of
Baptism manifestly. Of Eucharistia manifestly. Of Penance manifestly. Of
Matrimony manifestly. Of Ordering, per manus Impositionem and Orationem
manifestly. It is also manifest, that the Apostles laid their hands upon them
that were Christened. Of the Unction of the Sick with Prayer manifestly.

Dr. Day.
Albeit the seven Sacraments be not found in Scripture expressed by name, yet
the thing it self, that is, the Matter, Nature, Effect and Virtue of them is
found there. Of Baptism in diverse places; of the most Holy Communion; of
Matrimony; of Absolution; of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, how they were
ordained per manuum Impositionem cum Oratione; Of laying the Apostles hands on
them that were Christened, which is a part of Confirmation; of Unction of them
that were sick, with Prayer joined withal.

Natura, vis, effectus, ac uniuscujusque Sacramenti proprietas, Dr. Oglethorp.
seorsim in Scriptura reperitur, ut veteres eam interpretati sunt.

As it appears in the Articles which be drawn of the said seven Sacraments.
Dr. Redmayn.


In Scripture we find of the Form of the Sacraments, Dr. Edgeworth
as the words Sacramental; and the Matter, as the Element, Oil, Chrism; and the
Patient receiving the Sacrament; and of Grace and increase of Virtue given by
them, as the Effects.

The things are contained in Scripture, as Baptism, Confirmation, Dr. Sy^^ons.
Eucharistia, Poenitentia, Extrema Vnctio, Ordo, although they have not there this
name Sacramentum, as Matrimony has; and every one of them has his Matter,
Nature, Effect and Virtue.

I think the Thing, the Matter, the Nature, the Effect, Dr. Tresham.
and Virtue of them all be in the Scripture, and all there institute by God's
Authority, for I think that no one Man, neither the whole Church has power to
Institute a Sacrament, but that such Institution pertains only to God.

To the seventh, I say, That we may evidently find in Scripture, Dr. Leyghton.
the substance of every one of the seven Sacraments, the Nature, Effect, and
Virtue of the same; as of Baptism, Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, and so
forth of the rest.

Of the Matter, Nature, Virtue, and Effect, Dr. Coren.
of such as we call Sacraments, Scripture makes mention: Of Baptism
manifestly; of the most Holy Communion manifestly; of Absolution manifestly; of
Matrimony manifestly; of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, Scripture speaks
manifestly; for they were ordered, per Impositiones manuum Presbyterii cum
Oratione and jejunio.

Convenient praeter Menevens. naturam septem Sacramentorum nobis tradi in
Scripturis. Eboracens. effectus singulorum enumerat, Con.
item Carliolens.

Londinens. non Respondet Quaestioni. Treshamus ait ideo e Scripturis tradi
nobis Sacramenta, quoniam tota Ecclesia non habet Authoritatem Instituendi
Sacramenta.

In the seventh they do agree, saving this, Agreement.
That the Bishop of St. David says, That the Nature, Effect, and Virtue of
these seven Sacraments, only Baptism, the Sacrament of the Altar, Matrimony,
Penance, are contained in the Scripture. The other say, That the Nature and
the Virtue of all the seven, be contained in the Scripture.

8. Question. Whether Confirmation, cum Crismate, of them that be Baptized, be
found in Scripture?
Answers.
Canterbury
OF Confirmation with Chrism, without which it is counted no Sacrament, there is
no mention in the Scripture.

York.
To the eighth; We find Confirmation, cum Impositione manuum in Scripture, as
before; cum Chrismate we find not in the Scripture, but yet we find Chrismation
with Oil used even from the time of the Apostles, and so taken as a Tradition
Apostolic.

London.
To the eighth; I find in Scripture, in many places, de Impositione manuum,
which I think (considering the usage commonly and so long withal used) to be
Confirmation; and that with Chrism, to supply the visible appearance of the
Holy Ghost, which Holy Ghost was so visibly seen in the Primitive Church;
nevertheless for the perfect declaration of the verity hereof, I refer it to
the judgment of Men of higher knowledge in this Faculty.

Rochester.
Although Confirmation be found in the Scripture, by Example, as I said before, yet
there is nothing written de Chrismate.

Carlisle.
The Imposition of Hands, the Holy Doctors take for the same which we call
Confirmation, done upon them which were christened before, whereof is written
in the Acts. And as for Chrisma, it should seem by Cyprian, both as touching
the confection and usage thereof, that it has a great ground to be derived out
of Scripture, tho it be not manifestly therein spoken of.

Dr. Robertson.
Res and Effectus Confirmationis continentur in Scriptura, nempe, Impositio
manuum per Apostolos Baptizatis, per quam dabatur Spiritus Sanctus. De
Chrismate nihil illic legimus, quia per id tempus Spiritus Sanctus signo
visibili descenderit in Baptizatos. Quod ubi fieri desierit, Ecclesia Chrismate
signi externi loco uti coepit.

Dr. Cox.
I find not in Scripture that the Apostles laying their hands upon them that
were baptized, did anoint them Chrismate.

Dr. Day.
Confirmation cum Chrismate I read not in Scripture, but Impositionem manuum
super Baptizatos I find there is, which ancient Authors call Confirmation; and
Inunction with Chrisma has been used from the Primitive Church.

De Impositione manuum cum Oratione, Dr. Oglethorpe.
expressa mentio est in Scripturis, quae nunc usitato nomine, a Doctoribus
dicitur, Confirmatio. Sacrum Chrisma, traditio est Apostolica, ut ex veteribus
liquet.

The Question is not simple, but as if it were asked, Dr. Redmayn.
Whether Eucharistia in infermentato, be in the Scripture, or, baptismus cum
sale. Imposition of the Apostles hands, in which was conferred the Holy Ghost
for Confirmation of them who were baptized, is found in Scripture. Chrisma is a
Tradition deduced from the Apostles, as may be gathered by Scripture, and by
the Old Authors, and the Mystery thereof is not to be despised.

This Sacrament is one, unitate integritatis, as some others be: Dr. Edgeworth
Therefore it has two parts; of which one, that is, Impositio manuum, is taken
Heb. 6. and Act. 8. The other part, that is, Chrisme, is taken of the Tradition
of the Fathers, and so used from the Primitive Church. vid. Cyp. Epist. lib. 1.
Ep. 12.

Confirmation is found in Scripture, and Confirmation cum Chrismate, Dr.
Symmons.
is gathered from the old Authors.

I say Confirmation is found in Scripture, but this additament, Dr. Tresham.
cum Chrismate, is not of the Scripture, yet is it a very ancient Tradition, as
appears by Cyp. de Vnct. Chrism.

To the eighth Question, I say, Dr. Leyghton.
That Confirmation of them that be baptized, is found in Scripture, but cum
Chrismate it is not found in Scripture, but it was used cum Chrismate in the
Church soon after the Apostles time, as it may evidently appear by the cited
Authors.

The laying of the Bishops hands upon them that be christened, Dr. Coren.
which is a part of Confirmation, is plainly in Scripture; and the Unction with
Chrisme, which is another part, has been observed from the Primitive Church,
and is called of St. Austin, Sacramentum Chrismatis. Unction of the Sick with
Oil, and the Prayer, is grounded expressly in Scripture.

Convenient omnes Confirmationem cum Chrismate non haberi in Scripturis.
Eboracens. Tresham, Coren, Day, Oglethorpe, Con.
Edgworth, Leighton, Symmons, Redman, Robinsonus, Confirmationem in Scripturis
esse contendunt; caeterum Chrisma esse traditionem Apostolicam: addit
Robertsonus, and ubi fieri desierat miraculum Consecrandi Spiritus Sancti,
Ecclesia Chrismate signi externi loco uti coepit; Convenit illi Londinens.

Carliolens. putat usum Chrismatis ex Scripturis peti posse; Putant omnes tum
in hoc Articulo, tum superiori, Impositionem manuum esse Confirmationem.

In the eighth they do agree all, except it be the Bishop of Carlisle, Agreem.
That Confirmatio cum Chrismate is not found in Scripture, but only Confirmatio
cum manuum Impositione. And that also my Lord of St. David's denies to be in
Scripture, as we call it a Sacrament. My Lord of Carl^le says, That Chrisma,
as touching the confection and usage thereof, has a ground to be derived out
of Scripture. The other say, That it is but a Tradition.

3. Question. Whether the Apostles lacking a higher Power, as in not having a
Christian King among them, made Bishops by that necessity, or by Authority
given by God?
Answers.
Canterbury.
ALL Christian Princes have committed unto them immediately of God the whole
Cure of all their Subjects, as well concerning the Administration of God's
Word, for the Cure of Souls, as concerning the ministration of things Political
and Civil Governance: And in both these Ministrations, they must have sundry
Ministers under them to supply that, which is appointed to their several
Offices. The Civil Ministers under the King's Majesty, in this Realm of
England, be those whom it shall please his Highness for the time to put in
Authority under him: As for Example; The Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord
Great Master, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Admiral, Majors, Sheriffs, etc. The
Ministers of God's Word, under his Majesty, be the Bishops, Parsons, Vicars,
and such other Priests as be appointed by his Highness to that Ministration: As
for Example, The Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Duresme, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Parson of Winwick, etc. All the said Officers and Ministers, as
well of that sort as the other, be appointed, assigned, and elected, and in
every place, by the Laws and Orders of Kings and Princes. In the admission of
many of these Officers, be diverse comely Ceremonies and Solemnities used, which
be not of necessity, but only for a good order and seemly fashion; for if such
Offices and Ministrations were committed without such solemnity, they were
nevertheless truly committed: And there is no more Promise of God, that Grace
is given in the committing of the Ecclesiastical Office, than it is in the
committing of the Civil Office. In the Apostles time, when there was no
Christian Princes, by whose Authority Ministers of God's Word might be
appointed, nor Sins by the Sword corrected, there was no Remedy then for the
correction of Vice, or appointing of Ministers, but only the consent of
Christian Multitude among themselves, by an uniform consent, to follow the
advice and persuasion of such Persons whom God had most endued with the Spirit
of Counsel and Wisdom: And at that time, forasmuch as the Christian People had
no Sword, nor Governor amongst them, they were constrained of necessity to
take such Curats and Priests, as either they knew themselves to be meet
thereunto, or else as were commended unto them by others, that were so replete
with the Spirit of God, with such knowledge in the profession of Christ, such
Wisdom, such Conversation and Counsel, that they ought even of very Conscience
to give credit unto them, and to accept such as by them were presented: and so
sometimes the Apostles and others, unto whom God had given abundantly his
Spirit, s^nt or appointed Ministers of God's Word; sometimes the People did
choose such, as they thought meet thereunto; and when any were appointed or
sent by the Apostles or others, the People of their own voluntary Will with
thanks did accept them: nor for the Supremity, Empire, or Dominion, that the
Apostles had over them to command, as their Princes and Masters, but as good
People ready to obey the advice of good Counselors, and to accept any thing
that was necessary for their edification and benefit.

To the ninth; We find in Scripture, York.
that the Apostles used the Power to make Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; which
Power may be grounded upon these words; Sicut misit me vivens Pater, sic ego
mitto vos, etc. And we verily think, that they durst not have used so high
Power, unless they had had Authority from Christ; but that their Power to
ordain Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, by Imposition of Hands requires any other
Authority, than Authority of God, we neither read in Scripture, nor out of
Scripture.

To the ninth; I think the Apostles made Bishops by the Law of God, London.
because, Acts 22. it is said, In quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit:
Nevertheless, I think if Christian Princes had been then, they should have
named by Right, and appointed the said Bishops to their Rooms and Places.

I think that the Apostles made Bishops by Authority given them from God.
Rochester.


That Christ made his Apostles, Priests, and Bishops, Carlisle.
and that he gave them Power to make others like, it seems to be the very
trade of Scripture.

Opinor Apostolos Authoritate Divina creasse Episcopos and Presbyteros, Dr.
Robertson.
ubi Publicus Magistratus permittit.

Although the Apostles had no authority to force any Man to be Priest, Dr. Cox.
yet (they moved by the Holy Ghost) had authority of God to exhort and induce
Men to set forth God's Honor, and so to make them Priests.

The Apostles made, that is to say, Dr. Day.
ordained Bishops by authority given them by God; Ioh. 20. Sicut misit me
vivens Pater, ita and ego mitto vos. Item Joan. ult. and Act. 20. and 1 Timothy 4.
Paulus ordinavit Timotheum and Titum, and praescribit quales illi debeant
ordinare. 1 Timothy 1. Tit. 1.

Apostoli autoritate and mandato Dei, Dr. Oglethorpe.
ordinabant ac instituebant Episcopos, petita ac obtenta prius facultate a
Principe ac Magistratu (ut opinor) qui tum praeerat.

Dr. Redmayn.
Christ gave his Apostles authority to make other Bishops and Ministers in his
Church, as he had received authority of the Father to make them Bishops; but if
any Christian Prince had then been, the Apostles had been, and ought to have
been obedient Subjects, and would nothing have attempted, but under the
permission and assent of their Earthly Governors: yet was it meet that they
which were special and most Elect Servants of our Savior Christ, and were sent
by him to convert the World, and having most abundantly the Holy Ghost in them,
should have special ordering of such Ministry as pertained to the planting and
increasing of the Faith; whereunto I doubt not, but a Christian Prince, of his
godly mind, would most lovingly have condescended. And it is to be considered,
that in this Question, with other like, this word, making of a Bishop, or
Priest, may be taken two ways: for understanding the Word, to ordain or
consecrate, so it is a thing which pertains to the Apostles and their
Successors only; but if by this word ( Making) be understood the appointing or
naming to the Office; so, it pertains specially to the Supreme Heads and
Governors of the Church, which be Princes.

Dr. Edgworth.
The Apostles made Bishops and Priests by authority given them of God, and not
for lack of any higher Power: Notwithstanding where there is a Christened King
or Prince, the Election, Deputation and Assignation of them, that shall be
Priests or Bishops, belongs to the King or Prince, so that he may forbid any
Bishop within his Kingdom, that he give no orders, for Considerations moving
him, and may assign him a time when he shall give Orders, and to whom: Example
of King David, 1 Chronicles. 24. dividing the Levites into 24 Orders, deputing over
every Order one chief Bishop, prescribing an Ordinal and Rule how they should
do their Duties, their Courses; and what Sacrifices, Rites, and Ceremonies,
they should use every day, as the day and time required. And his Son, King
Solomon, diligently executed, and commanded the same usages to be observed in
the Temple, after he had erected and finished it, 2 Chronicles. 8.

Dr. Symmons.
The Apostles made Bishops and Priests, by authority given them of God.

Dr. Tresham.
I say, That the Apostles had authority of God to make Bishops; yet if there had
been a Christian King in any place where they made Bishops, they would, and
ought, to have desired authority also of him, for the executing of such their
godly Acts, which no Christian King would have denied.

Dr. Leyghton.
To the ninth, I say, That the Apostles (as I suppose) made Bishops by authority
given unto them of Christ: Howbeit I think they would and should, required the
Christian Princes consent and license thereto, if there had been any Christian
Kings or Princes.

Dr. Coren.
The Apostles made Bishops and Priests by authority given them of God:
Notwithstanding if there had been a Christian King at that time, it had been
their Duties, to have had his License and Permission to do the same.

Omnes Convenient Apostolos Divinitus accepisse Potestatem creandi Episcopos;
Eboracens. addit, Con.
non opus fuisse alia authoritate Apostolis quam divina: Sic Thirleby and
Edgworth, Redmanus distinguit de Institutione Presbyteri, Ordinationem and
Consecrationem tribuit tantum Apostolicis and eorum Successoribus, nominationem
and electionem Magistratibus: Sic Londinens. Leightonus, Redman, Tresham,
Curren, aiunt petendam fuisse Potestatem a Magistratu Christiano, si tum
fuisset. Robertsonus non respondet Quaestioni, concedit enim datam esse
Apostolis Potestatem creandi Episcopos ubi Magistratus permittit. Oglethorpus
putat eos impetrasse potestatem a principibus: Carliolens. Roffens. Dayus, non
respondent ultimae Parti. In the ninth, (...)
touching the Authority of the Apostles in making Priests., the Bishop of York,
the Elect of Westminster, Dr. Edgeworth, say, That the Apostles made Priests by
their own Power, given them by God, and that they had no need of any other
Power. The Bishop of St. David says, That because they lacked a Christian
Prince, by that necessity they Ordained other Bishops. Dr. Leighton, Curren,
Tresham, and Redmayn, suppose, That they ought to have asked license of their
Christian Governors, if then there had been any.

10. Question. Whether Bishops or Priests were first? and if the Priests were
first, then the Priest made the Bishop.
Answers.
THe Bishops and Priests were at one time, and were no two things, Canterbury.
but both one Office in the beginning of Christ's Religion.

To the tenth; York.
We think that the Apostles were Priests before they were Bishops; and that the
Divine Power which made them Priests, made them also Bishops; and although their
Ordination was not by all such Course as the Church now uses, yet that they
had both Visible and Invisible Sanctification, we may gather of the Gospel,
where it is written, Sicut misit me Pater vivens, and ego mitto vos: and cum
haec dixit, insufflavit in eos and dixit, accipite Spiritum Sanctum: Quorum
remiseritis, etc. And we may well think, that then they were made Bishops, when
they had not only a Flock, but also Shepherds appointed to them to overlook,
and a Governance committed to them by the Holy Ghost to over-see both; for the
name of a Bishop, is not properly a name of Order, but a name of Office,
signifying an Overseer. And although the inferior Shepherds have also Cure to
over-see their Flock, yet for so much as the Bishops Charge is also to oversee
the Shepherds, the name of Overseer is given to the Bishops, and not to the
other; and as they be in degree higher, so in their Consecration we find
difference even from the Primitive Church.

London.
To the tenth; I think the Bishops were first, and yet I think it is not of
importance, whether the Priest then made the Bishop, or else the Bishop the
Priest; considering (after the Sentence of St. Jerome) that in the beginning of
the Church there was none (or if it were, very small) difference, between a
Bishop and a Priest, especially touching the signification.

Rochester.
I find in Scripture, That Christ being both a Priest and a Bishop, ordained his
Apostles, who were both Priests and Bishops; and the same Apostles did
afterward ordain Bishops, and commanded them to ordain others.

Carlisle.
Christ made his Apostles Exorcists, as it appears in the 10. Mat. Deacons,
Priests, and Bishops, as partly there, and after, in the 20 of St. John, Quorum
Remiseritis, etc. and where he said, Hoc facite in meam Commemorationem. In the
Acts, Caeterorum nemo audebat se conjungere illis. So that they were all these
together; and so being according to the Ordinance of Christ, who had made after
them 72 other Priests, as it appears in the 10 of St. Luke: They made and
ordained also others the seven principal Deacons, as it is showed in the 6 of
the Acts; where it is said, That they praying laid their hands upon them. In
the 13 of the Acts, certain there named at the commandment of the Holy Ghost,
severed Saul and Barnabas to that God had taken them, Fasting, Praying, and
laying their hands upon them; the which Saul, Ananias the Disciple had
baptized, laying his hand upon him, that he might be replenished with the Holy
Ghost. And Paul so made, ordained Timothy and Tite, willing them to do likewise
as he had done, and appointed to be done from City to City. James was ordained
the Bishop of Jerusalem, by Peter, John, and James. So that Example otherwise
we read not.

Dr. Robertson.
Incertus sum utri fuere priores, at si Apostoli in prima profectione Ordina^i
erant, apparet Episcopos fuisse priores, nempe Apostolos, nam postea designavit
Christus alios septuaginta duos. Nec opinor absurdum esse, ut Sacerdos
Episcopum Consecret, si Episcopus haberi non potest.

Dr. Cox.
Although by Scripture (as St. Hierome says) Priests and Bishops be one, and
therefore the one not before the other: Yet Bishops, as they be now, were after
Priests, and therefore made of Priests.

Dr. Day.
The Apostles were both Bishops and Priests, and they made Bishops, and Bishops,
as Titus and Timotheus made Priests. Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter Act. 1.
Presbyteros qui in vobis sunt, obsecro and ego Compresbyter, 1 Pet. 5. And in
the beginning of the Church, as well that word Episcopus as Presbyter, was
common and attributed both to Bishops and Priests.

Utrique primi a Deo facti, Apostoli, Episcopi; Dr. Oglethorp.
Septuaginta discipuli (ut conjectura ducor) Sacerdotes. Unde verisimile est
Episcopos praecessisse, Apostoli enim prius vocati erant.

They be of like beginning, and at the beginning were both one, as St. Hierome
and other old Authors show by the Scripture, Dr. Redmayn.
wherefore one made another indifferently.

Christ our chief Priest and Bishop, Dr. Edgeworth
made his Apostles Priests and Bishops all at once; and they did likewise make
others, some Priests, and some Bishops: and that the Priests in the Primitive
Church made Bishops, I think no inconvenience; (as Jerome says) in an Epist.
ad Euagrium. Even like as Soldiers should choose one among themselves to be
their Captain: So did Priests choose one of themselves to be their Bishop, for
consideration of his learning, gravity, and good living, etc. and also for to
avoid Schisms among themselves by them, that some might not draw the People one
way, and others another way, if they lacked one Head among them.

Christ was and is the great High Bishop, Dr. Symmons.
and made all his Apostles Bishops; and they made Bishops and Priests after
him, and so has it ever-more continued hitherto.

I say, Christ made the Apostles first Priests, and then Bishops, Dr. Tresham.
and they by this Authority made both Priests and Bishops; but where there had
been a Christian Prince, they would have desired his Authority to the same.

To the Tenth. Dr. Leyghton.
--

The Apostles were made of Christ Bishops and Priests, Dr. Coren.
both at the first; and after them, Septuaginta duo Discipuli, were made
Priests.

Menevens. Therleby, Redmanus, Coxus, Con.
asserunt in initio eosdem fuisse Episcopos and Presbyteros. Londinens.
Carliolens. Symons, putant Apostolos fuisse institutos Episcopos a Christo, and
eos postea instituisse alios Episcopos and Presbyteros, and 72 Presbyteros
postea fuisse Ordinatos: Sic Oglethorpus, Eboracens. and Tresham aiunt
Apostolos primo fuisse Presbyteros, deinde Episcopos, cum aliorum Presbyterorum
credita esset illis cura. Robertsonus incertus est utri fuere priores, non
absurdum tamen esse opinatur, ut Sacerdos consecret Episcopum, si Episcopus
haberi non potest. Sic Londinens. Edgworth, Dayus, putant etiam Episcopos, ut
vulgo de Episcopis loquimur, fuisse ante Presbyteros. Leightonus nihil
Respondet. In the tenth; Where it is asked, Agreement.
Whether Bishops or Priests were first? The Bishop of St. David, my Lord Elect
of Westminster, Dr. Cox, Dr. Redmayn, say, That at the beginning they were all
one. The Bishops of York, London, Rochester, Carlisle; Drs. Day, Tresham,
Symmons, Oglethorp, be in other contrary Opinions. The Bishop of York, and
Doctor Tresham, think, That the Apostles first were Priests, and after were
made Bishops, when the overseeing of other Priests was committed to them. My
Lords of Duresme, London, Carlisle, Rochester, Dr. Symmons and Crayford, think,
That the Apostles first were Bishops, and they after made other Bishops and
Priests. Dr. Coren and Oglethorp, say, That the Apostles were made Bishops, and
the 72 were after made Priests. Dr. Day thinks, That Bishops, as they be
nowadays called, were before Priests. My Lord of London, Drs. Edgworth and
Robertson, think it no inconvenience, if a Priest made a Bishop in that time.

11. Question. Whether a Bishop has Authority to make a Priest by the
Scripture, or no? And whether any other but only a Bishop may make a Priest?
Answers.
Canterbury.
A Bishop may make a Priest by the Scripture, and so may Princes and Governors
also, and that by the authority of God committed to them, and the People also
by their Election; for as we read that Bishops have done it, so Christian
Emperors and Princes usually have done it, and the People before Christian
Princes were, commonly did Elect their Bishops and Priests.

To the eleventh; That a Bishop may make a Priest, may be deduced of Scripture;
York.
for so much as they have all Authority necessary for the ordering of Christ's
Church, derived from the Apostles, who made Bishops and Priests, and not
without Authority, as we have said before to the ninth Question; and that any
other than Bishops or Priests may make a Priest, we neither find in Scripture
nor out of Scripture.

London.
To the eleventh, I think, That a Bishop duly appointed, has authority, by
Scripture, to make a Bishop, and also a Priest: because Christ being a Bishop
did so make himself; and because alive, his Apostles did the like.

Rochester.
The Scripture shows by example, that a Bishop has authority to make a
Priest; albeit no Bishop being subject to a Christian Prince, may either give
Orders or Excommunicate, or use any manner of Jurisdiction, or any part of his
Authority, without Commission from the King, who is Supreme Head of that Church
whereof he is a Member; but that any other Man may do it besides a Bishop, I
find no example, either in Scripture, or in Doctors.

Carlisle.
By what is said before, it appears, that a Bishop by Scripture may make
Deacons and Priests, and that we have none example otherwise.

Opinor Episcopum habere Authoritatem creandi Sacerdotem, Dr. Robertson.
modo id Magistratus publici permissu fiat. An vero ab alio quam Episcopo id
rite fieri possit, haud scio, quamvis ab alio factum non memini me legisse.
Ordin. conferr. gratiam. vid. Eck. homil. 60.

Bishops have authority, as is aforesaid, of the Apostles, Dr. Cox.
in the tenth Question, to make Priests, except in cases of great necessity.

Bishops have authority by Scripture to ordain Bishops and Priests; Dr. Day.
Joh. 20. Hujus rei gratia reliqui te Cretae ut constituas oppidatim
Presbyteros, Tit. 1. Act. 14.

Autoritas ordinandi Presbyteros data est Episcopis per verbum, Dr. Oglethorpe.
multisque aliis quos lego.

To the first part, I answer, Yea; Dr. Redmayn.
for so it appears Tit. 1. and 1 Timothy 5. with other places of Scripture. But
whether any other but only a Bishop may make a Priest, I have not read, but by
singular privilege of God; as when Moses (whom diverse Authors say was not a
Priest) made Aaron a Priest. Truth it is, that the Office of a Godly Prince is
to over-see the Church, and the Ministers thereof; and to cause them do their
duty, and also to appoint them special Charges and Offices in the Church, as
may be most for the Glory of God, and edifying of the People: and thus we read
of the good Kings in the Old Testament, David, Ioas, Ezekias, Josias. But as
for Making, that is to say, Ordaining and Consecrating of Priests, I think it
specially belongs to the Office of a Bishop, as far as can be showed by
Scripture, or any Example, as I suppose from the beginning.

A Bishop has authority by Scripture to make a Priest, Dr. Edgeworth
and that any other ever made a Priest since Christ's time I read not. Albeit
Moses who was not anointed Priest, made Aaron Priest and Bishop, by a special
Commission or Revelation from God, without which he would never so have done.

A Bishop placed by the Higher Powers, and admitted to minister, Dr. Symmons.
may make a Priest; and I have not read of any other that ever made Priests.

I say, a Bishop has authority by Scripture to make a Priest, Dr. Tresham.
and other than a Bishop, has not power therein, but only in case of necessity.

To the eleventh; I suppose that a Bishop has authority of God, Dr. Leyghton.
as his Minister, by Scripture to make a Priest; but he ought not to admit any
Man to be Priest, and consecrate him, or to appoint him unto any ministry in
the Church, without the Princes license and consent, in a Christian Region. And
that any other Man has authority to make a Priest by Scripture, I have not
read, nor any example thereof.

Dr. Coren.
A Bishop being licensed by his Prince and Supreme Governor, has authority to
make a Priest by the Law of God. I do not read that any Priest has been
ordered by any other than a Bishop.

Con.
Ad primam partem Quaestionis respondent omnes, and convenit omnibus praeter
Menevens. Episcopum habere autoritatem instituendi Presbyteros. Roffens.
Leighton, Curren, Robersonus, addunt, Modo Magistratus id permittat. Ad
secundam partem Respondent Coxus and Tresham in necessitate concedi potestatem
Ordinandi aliis. Eboracen. videtur omnino denegare aliis hanc autoritatem.
Redmayn, Symmons, Robertson, Leighton, Thirleby, Curren, Roffen, Edgworth,
Oglethorp, Carliolen, nusquam legerunt alios usos fuisse hac Potestate,
quanquam (privilegio quodam) data sit Moysi, ut Redmanus arbitratur and
Edgeworth. Nihil respondent ad secundam partem Quaestionis Londinensis and
Dayus. Agreem.
In the eleventh; To the former part of the Question, the Bishop of St. David's
does answer, That Bishops have no authority to make Priests, without they be
authorized of the Christian Prince. The others, all of them do say, That they
be authorized of God. Yet some of them, as the Bishop of Rochester, Dr. Curren,
Leighton, Robertson, add, That they cannot use this authority without their
Christian Prince does permit them. To the second part, the answer of the Bishop
of St. David's is, That Laymen have other-whiles made Priests. So does Dr.
Edgworth and Redman say, That Moses by a privilege given him of God, made Aaron
his Brother Priest. Dr. Tresham, Crayford, and Cox say, That Laymen may make
Priests in time of Necessity. The Bishops of York, Duresme, Rochester,
Carlisle, Elect of Westminster, Dr. Curren, Leighton, Symmons, seem to deny
this thing; for they say, They find not, nor read not any such example.

12. Question. Whether in the New Testament be required any Consecration of a
Bishop and Priest, or only appointing to the Office be sufficient?
Answers.
Canterbury.
IN the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a Bishop, or a Priest, needs
no Consecration by the Scripture, for election or appointing thereto is
sufficient.

York.
To the twelfth Question; The Apostles ordained Priests by Imposition of the
Hand with Fasting and Prayer; and so following their steps, we must needs
think, that all the foresaid things be necessarily to be used by their
Successors: and therefore we do also think, that Appointment only without
visible Consecration and Invocation for the assistance and power of the Holy
Ghost, is neither convenient nor sufficient; for without the said Invocation,
it bes^emeth no Man to appoint to our Lord Ministers, as of his own authority:
whereof we have example in the Acts of the Apostles; where we find, that when
they were gathered to choose one in the place of Judas, they appointed two of
the Disciples, and commended the Election to our Lord, that he would choose
which of them it pleased him, saying and praying, Lord, thou that know the
hearts of all Men, show whether of these two thou do choose to succeed in the
place of Judas. And to this purpose in the Acts we read, Dixit Spiritus Sanctus
segregate mihi Barnabam, etc. And again, Quos posuit Spiritus Sanctus regere
Ecclesiam Dei. And it appears also that in the Old Testament, in the ordering
of Priests, there was both Visible and Invisible Sanctification; and therefore
in the New Testament, where the Priesthood is above comparison higher than in
the Old, we may not think that only appointment suffices without
Sanctification, either Visible or Invisible.

To the twelfth; London.
I think Consecration of a Bishop and Priest be required, for that in the Old
Law (being yet but a shadow and figure of the New) the Consecration was
required, as appears Levit. 8. yet the truth of this I leave to those of higher
Judgments.

The Scripture speaks, de Impositione manus and de Oratione: Rochester.
and of other manner of Consecrations, I find no mention in the New Testament
expressly; but the Old Authors make mention also of Inunctions.

Upon this Text of Paul to Timothy; Carlisle.
Noli negligere gratiam quae in te est, quae data est tibi per prophetiam cum
Impositione manuum Presbyterii; St. Anselm says, This Grace to be the Gift of
the Bishops Office, to the which God of his mere goodness had called and
preferred him. The Prophesy (he says) was the inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
by the which he knew what he had to do therein. The Imposition of the hands is
that by the which he was ordained and received that Office: And therefore
(says St. Paul) God is my Witness, that I have discharged my self, showing you
as I ought to have done. Now look you well upon it whom that ye take to Orders,
lest ye lose your self thereby. Let Bishops therefore, who (as says St.
Hierome) has power to make Priests, consider well under what Law the order of
Ecclesiastical Constitution is bounden; and let them not think those words of
the Apostle to be his, but rather the words of Christ himself.

Opinor requiri Consecrationem quandam, hoc est, Dr. Robertson.
impositionem manuum, Orationem, jejunium, etc. tamen nusquam hoc munere fungi
posse, nisi ubi Magistratus invitet, jubeat, aut permittat.

By Scripture there is no Consecration of Bishops and Priests required, Dr. Cox.
but only the appointing to the Office of a Priest, cum Impositione manuum.

Consecration of Bishops and Priests I read not in the New Testament, Dr. Day.
but Ordinatio per manuum Impositionem cum Oratione is read there, as in the
places above; and the only appointment, as I think, is not sufficient.

Dr. Oglethorpe.
Praeter vocationem, ceu designationem externam, quae vel a Principe fit, vel a
populo per electionem and suffragia, requiritur Ordinatio alia per manuum
impositionem, idque per Verbum Dei.

Dr. Redmayn.
Besides the appointing to the Office, it appears that in the Primitive
Church, the Apostles used certain Consecration of the Ministers of the Church,
by imposition of Hands and Prayer, Acts 6. and with Fasting, Acts 14, etc. The
Office of Priesthood is too dangerous to set upon, when one is but appointed
only: Therefore for the confirmation of their Faith, who take in hand such
charge, and for the obtaining of farther Grace requisite in the same,
Consecration was ordained by the Holy Ghost, and has been always used from the
beginning.

Dr. Edgworth.
Deputation to the Office, is not sufficient to make a Priest or a Bishop, as
appears by David and Solomon, who deputed the 24 abovementioned to their
Offices, yet they made none of them Priests, nor any other.

Dr. Symmons.
The appointing to the Office per manuum Impositionem, is in Scripture, and the
Consecration of them has of long time continued in the Church.

Dr. Tresham.
There is a certain kind of Consecration required, which is imposition of the
Bishops hands with Prayer, and the appointing only is not sufficient.

Dr. Leyghton.
To the twelfth; I suppose that there is a Consecration required, as by
Imposition of Hands; for so we be taught by the ensample of the Apostles.

In the New Testament is required to the making of a Bishop, Impositio manuum
cum Oratione, Dr. Coren.
which I take for Consecration, and Appointment unto the Office is not
sufficient; for King David, 1 Chronicles. 24. did appoint 24 to be Bishops, who
after were consecrated; so that both the Appointment and the Consecration be
requisite.

Con.
Respondent Eboracens. Londinens, Carliolens. Leighton, Tresham, Robert^onus,
Edgeworth, Curren, Dayns, Oglethorp, Consecrationem esse requisitam. Redmanus
ait eam receptam esse ab Apostolis, atque a Spiritu Sancto institutam ad
conferendam gratiam. Dayus, Roffens. Symmons, aiunt Sacerdotium conferri per
manuum impositionem, idque e Scripturis; Consecrationem vero diu receptam in
Ecclesia: Coxus Institutionem cum manuum impositione sufficere, neque per
Scripturam requiri Consecrationem. Robertsonus addit supra alios nusquam hoc
munere fungi posse quempiam, nisi ubi Magistratus invitet, jubeat aut
permittat. Agreem.
In the twelfth Question, where it is asked, Whether in the New Testament be
required any Consecration of a Bishop, or only appointing to the Office be
sufficient? The Bishop of St. David's says, That only the appointing. Dr. Cox,
That only appointing, cum manuum Impositione, is sufficient without
Consecration. The Bishops of York, London, Duresme, Carlisle, Drs. Day, Curren,
Leighton, Tresham, Edgworth, Oglethorp, say, That Consecration is requisite.
Dr. Redmayn says, That Consecration has been received from the Apostles time,
and institute of the Holy Ghost to confer Grace. My Lord of Rochester, Dr. Day,
and Symmons, say, That Priesthood is given per manuum impositionem, and that by
Scripture; and that Consecration has of long time been received in the Church.

13. Question. Whether (if it fortuned a Christian Prince Learned, to conquer
certain Dominions of Infidels, having none but temporal learned Men with him)
if it be defended by God's Law, that he and they should Preach and Teach the
Word of God there, or no? And also make and constitute Priests, or no?
Answers.
IT is not against God's Law, but contrary they ought indeed so to do;
Canterbury
and there be Histories that witnesses, that some Christian Princes, and other
Laymen unconsecrate have done the same.

To the thirteenth; To the first part of this Question, York.
touching Teaching and Preaching the Word of God in case of such need; we think
that Laymen not ordered, not only may, but must preach Christ and his Faith to
Infidels, as they shall see opportunity to do the same, and must endeavor
themselves to win the Miscreants to the Kingdom of God, if that they can; for
as the Wise Man says, God has given charge to every Man of his Neighbor; and
the Scripture of God charge every Man to do all the good that he can to all
Men: And surely this is the highest Alms to draw Men from the Devil the
Usurper, and bring them to God the very Owner. Wherefore in this case every Man
and Woman may be an Evangelist, and of this also we have example. But touching
the second part, for case of Necessity; As we neither find Scripture, nor
Example, that will bear, that any Man, being himself no Priest, may make, that
is to say, may give the Order of Priesthood to another, and authority therewith
to minister in the said Order, and to use such Powers and Offices, as
appertains to Priesthood grounded in the Gospel: So we find in such case of
need, what has been done in one of the ancient Writers; although this authority
to ordain, after form aforementioned, be not to Laymen expressly prohibited in
Scripture; yet such a prohibition is implied, in that there is no such
authority given to them, either in Scripture or otherways; for so much as no
Man may use this or any other authority which comes from the Holy Ghost,
unless he has either Commission grounded in Scripture, or else Authority by
Tradition, and ancient use of Christ's Church universally received over all.

London.
To the thirteenth and fourteenth following; I think that necessity herein,
might either be a sufficient Rule and Warrant to determine and order such
Cases, considering that tempore necessitatis mulier baptizat, and laicus idem
facit, and audit confessionem: or else that God would inspire in the Princes
heart, to provide the best and most handsome Remedy therein: And hard were it
peradventure to find such great necessity, but either in the train of the said
Prince, or in the Regions adjoining thereunto, there might be had some Priests
for the said purposes; or, finally, That the Prince himself, godlily inspired
in that behalf, might, for so good purposes and intents, set forth the Act
indeed, referring yet this thing to the better judgment of others.

Rochester.
To the thirteenth and fourteenth following; I never read these cases, neither
in Scripture, nor in the Doctors, and therefore I cannot answer unto them by
Learning, but think this to be a good Answer for all such Questions, viz.
Necessitas non habet Legem.

Carlisle.
It is to be thought, that Christ may call, as it pleases him, inwardly,
outwardly, or by both together: So that if no Priest might be had, it cannot be
thought, but that a Christian Prince, with others learned, inwardly moved and
called, might most charitably and godlily prosecute that same their Calling in
the most acceptable Work, which is to bring People from the Devil to God, from
Infidelity to true Faith, by whatsoever means God shall inspire.

In hoc casu existimarem accersendos verbi and Sacramentorum Ministros, Dr.
Robertson.
si qui forent vicini; quin si nulli invenirentur, Principem illum Christianum
haberemus pro Apostolo, tanquam missum a Deo, licet externo Sacramento non
esset commendatus, quum Deus Sacramentis suis non sit alligatus.

Dr. Cox.
To the thirteenth, and fourteenth following; It is not against God's Law, that
the Prince, and his learned temporal Men, may Preach and Teach, and in these
cases of extreme Necessity, make and institute Ministers.

Dr. Day.
In this case (as I think) the Prince and other temporal learned Men with him,
may by God's Law, Teach and Preach the Word of God, and Baptize; and also (the
same Necessity standing) elect and appoint Men to those Offices.

Dr. Oglethorp.
In summa necessitate Baptizare and praedicare possunt and debent, haec etenim
duo, necessaria sunt media ad salutem; at ordinare (ut conjectura ducor) non
debent, sed aliunde Sacrificos accersire, quos si habere nequeant, Deus ipse
(cujus negotium agitur) vel oraculo admonebit, quid faciendum erit, vel
necessitas ipsa (quae sibiipsi est Lex) modum Ordinandi suggeret ac
suppeditabit.

Dr. Redmayn.
I think they might, in such case of Necessity; for in this case the Laymen made
the whole Church there, and the authority of preaching and ministering the
Sacraments, is given immediately to the Church; and the Church may appoint
Ministers, as is thought convenient. There be two Stories good to be considered
for this Question, which be written in the 10 th Book, of the History
Ecclesiastic; the one of Frumentius, who preached in India, and was after made
Priest and Bishop by Athanasius. And the other Story is of the King of the
Iberians, of whom Ruf^ine the writer of the Story says thus; Et nondum
initiatus Sacris fit suae gentis Apostolus. Yet nevertheless it is written
there, That an Ambassad was sent to Constantine the Emperor, that he would send
them Priests for the further establishment of the Faith there.

The Prince and his temporal learned Men, might and ought, Dr. Edgeworth
in that necessity, to instruct the People in the Faith of Christ, and to
baptize them, ut idem rex sit, and suae gentis Apostolus, and these be
sufficient for the Salvation of his Subjects. But as concerning other
Sacraments, he ought to abide and look for a special Commission from Almighty
God, as Moses had, or else to send unto other Regions where Priests or Bishops
may be had, and else not to meddle. Examples in Eccles. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 1.
de Frumentio. and cap. 2. de Ancilla captiva quae convertit gentem Hiberorum
cujus captivae monitis ad Imperatorem Constantinum totius gentis legatio
mittitur, res gesta exponitur, Sacerdotes mittere exorantur qui coeptum erga se
Dei munus implerent, etc.

I think that in such a necessity, a learned Christian Prince, Dr. Symmons.
and also temporal Men learned, be bound to preach and minister either
Sacraments, so that the same Ministers be orderly assigned by the High Power
and the Congregation.

I say, to the first part, That such a King, Dr. Tresham.
and his temporal learned Men, not only might, but were also bound to preach
God's Word in this case. And as to the second part, I say, That if there could
no Bishop be had to Institute, the Prince might in that of necessity do it.

To the thirteenth; I suppose the Affirmative thereof to be true; Dr. Leyghton.
Quamvis potestas clavium residet praecipue in Ecclesia.

In such a case, I do believe that God would illuminate the Prince; Dr. Coren.
so that either he himself should be made a Bishop, by internal working of God
(as Paul was) or some of his Subjects, or else God would send him Bishops from
other parts. And as for preaching of the Word of God, the Prince might do it
himself, and other of his learned Subjects, although they were no Priests.

In prima part Quaestionis Convenient omnes, etiam laicos, Con.
tali rerum statu, non solum posse sed debere docere. Menevens. Thirlebeus,
Leightonus, Coxus, Symmons, Tresham, Redmanus, Robertsonus, etiam potestatem
Ministrandi Sacramenta, and Ordinandi Ministros, concedunt illis. Eboracens.
hanc prorsus potestatem denegat, Coren credit Principem Divinitus illuminandum
and consecrandum fore in Episcopum interne, aut aliquem ex suis, Pauli exemplo.
Simile habet Herefordensis and Carliolensis. Dayus nihil respondet de
Ordinandis Presbyteris in hac necessitate. Agreement.
In the thirteenth; Concerning the first part, Whether Laymen may Preach and
Teach God's Word? They do all agree, in such a case, That not only they may,
but they ought to teach. But in the second part, touching the Constituting of
Priests of Laymen, my Lord of York, and Doctor Edgworth, does not agree with
the other; they say, That Laymen in no wise can make Priests, or have such
Authority. The Bishops of Duresme, St. David's. Westminster, Drs. Tresham, Cox,
Leighton, Crayford, Symmons, Redmayn, Robertson, say, That Laymen in such case
have authority to minister the Sacraments, and to make Priests. My Lords of
London, Carlisle, and Hereford, and Dr. Coren, think, That God in such a case
would give the Prince authority, call him inwardly, and illuminate him or some
of his, as he did St. Paul.

14. Question. Whether it be forefended by God's Law, that (if it so fortune
that all the Bishops and Priests of a Region were dead, and that the Word of
God should remain there unpreached, and the Sacrament of Baptism, and others
unministred) that the King of that Region should make Bishops and Priests to
supply the same, or no?
Answers.
Canterbury.
IT is not forbidden by God's Law.

York.
To the fourteenth; In this case, as we have said in the next Article before,
Teaching of the Word of God may be used by any that can and would use it, to
the Glory of God; and in this case also the Sacrament of Baptism may be
ministered by those that be no Priests; which things although we have not of
Scripture, yet the universal Tradition and practice of the Church, does teach
us: And peradventure contract of Matrimony might also be made, the
Solemnization thereof being only ordained by Law positive, and not by any
ground, either of Scripture, or of Tradition; although for very urgent causes, the
said Solemnization is to be observed when it may be observed; but that the
Princes may not Make, that is, may not Order Priests nor Bishops not before
Ordered to minister the other Sacraments, the ministry whereof in Scripture is
committed only to the Apostles, and from them derived to their Successors, even
from the Primitive Church hitherto, and by none other used, we have answered in
the thirteenth Article.

London.
Vt supra, Quaest. 13. --

Rochester.
Vt supra, Quaest. 13. --

Not only it is given of God to Supreme Governors, Carlisle.
Kings and Princes immediate under them, to see, cause, and compel all their
Subjects, Bishops, Priests, with all others, to do truly and uprightly their
bounden Duties to God, and to them, each one according to his Calling: but also
if it were so, that any-where such lacked to do and fulfill that God would have
done, right-well they might, by the inward moving and calling of God, supply
the same.

Huic Quaestioni idem Respondendum, quod priori, arbitror. Dr. Robertson.


Vt supra, Dr. Cox.
Quaest. 13. --

To this case, as to the first, I answer; Dr. Day.
That if there could no Bishops be had to order new Priests there, by the
Princes assignation and appointment; then the Prince himself might ordain and
constitute, with the consent of the Congregation, both Priests and Ministers,
to Preach and Baptize, and to do other Functions in the Church.

Si ab aliis Regionibus Sacerdotes haberi non poterint, Dr. Oglethorpe.
opinor ipsum Principem deputare posse etiam Laicos ad hoc Sacrum Officium; sed
omnia prius tentanda essent, ut supra.

To this, I think, may be answered, as to the last Question before; Dr. Redmayn.
howbeit the surest way, I think, were to send for some Ministers of the Church
dwelling in the next Regions, if they might be conveniently had.

Likewise as to the next Question before. Dr. Edgworth.


If the King be also a Bishop, as it is possible, Dr. Symmons.
he may appoint Bishops and Priests to minister to his People: but hitherto I
have not read that ever any Christian King, made Bishop or Priest.

I make the same answer, as to the 13th Question is made. Dr. Tresham.


To the fourteenth; I suppose the Affirmative to be true, Dr. Leyghton.
in case that there can no Bishops nor Priests be had forth of other Countries,
conveniently.

In this case I make answer as before, Dr. Coren.
That God will never suffer his Servants to lack that thing that is necessary:
for there should, either from other parts, Priests and Bishops be called
thither, or else God would call inwardly some of them that be in that Region to
be Bishops and Priests.

Fatentur ut prius omnes, Laicos posse Docere. Eboracens. Symmons, Con.
Oglethorp negant posse Ordinare Presbyteros, tamen concedit Eboracens.
baptizare and contrahere Matrimonia, Edgworth tantum baptizare posse; nam
sufficere dicit ad salutem. Alii omnes eandem potestatem concedunt, quam prius.
Roffens. non aliud respondet his duabus Quaestionibus, quam quod necessitas non
habeat Legem. Agreem.
In the fourteenth they agree for the most part as they did before, That Laymen
in this case may teach and minister the Sacraments. My Lord of York, Dr.
Symmons, and Oglethorp say, They can make no Priests, although Symmons said they
might minister all Sacraments, in the Question before. Yet my Lord of York, and
Edgworth, do grant, That they may Christen. The Bishops of London, Rochester,
and Dr. Crayford, say, That in such a case, Necessitas non habet Legem.

15. Question. Whether a Man be bound by Authority of this Scripture, (Quorum
Remiseritis) and suchlike, to confess his secret deadly sins to a Priest, if
he may have him, or no?
Answers.
Canterbury.
A Man is not bound, by the authority of this Scripture, Quorum R^miseritis, and
suchlike, to confess his secret deadly Sins to a Priest, although he may have
him.

York.
To the fifteenth; This Scripture is indifferent to secret and open Sins; nor
the authority given in the same is appointed or limited, either to the one, or
to the other, but is given commonly to both: And therefore seeing that the
Sinner is in no other place of Scripture discharged of the confession of his
secret Sins, we think, that this place charge him to confess the secret Sins,
as well as the open.

To the fifteenth; I think that as the Sinner is bound by this authority to
confess his open sins, London.
so also is he bound to confess his secret sins, because the special end is, to
wit, Absolutionem a peccato cujus fecit se servum, is all one in both cases:
And that all sins as touching God are open, and in no wise secret or hid.

I think that confession of secret deadly sins is necessary for to attain
absolution of them; Rochester.
but whether every Man that has secretly committed deadly sin, is bound by
these words to ask Absolution of the Priest therefore, it is an hard Question,
and of much controversy amongst learned Men, and I am not able to define
betwixt them; but I think it is the surest way, to say that a Man is bound to
Confess, etc.

Carlisle.
I think that by the mind of most ancient Authors, and most holy Expositors,
this Text, Quorum Remiseritis peccata, etc. with other-like, serves well to
this intent; That Christian Folk should confess th^^ secret deadly sins to a
Priest there to be assoiled, without which mean, there can be none other like
Assurance.

Opinor obligare, modo aliter conscientiae illius satisfieri nequeat. Dr.
Robertson.


I cannot find that a Man is bound by Scripture to confess his secret deadly
sins to a Priest, unless he be so troubled in his Conscience, Dr. Cox.
that he cannot be quieted without godly Instruction.

The Matter being in controversy among learned Men, Dr. Day.
and very doubtful, yet I think rather the truth is, That by authority of this
Scripture, Quorum Remiseritis, etc. and suchlike, a Man is bound to confess
his secret deadly sins, which grieve his Conscience, to a Priest, if he may
conveniently have him. Forasmuch as it is an ordinary way ordained by Christ in
the Gospel, by Absolution to remit sins; which Absolution I never read to be
given, sine Confessione praevia.

Confitenda sunt opinor, Dr. Oglethorpe.
etiam peccata abdita ac secreta propter Absolutionem ac conscientiae
tranquillitatem, and praecipue pro vitanda desperatione, ad quam plerumque
adiguntur multi in extremis, dum sibi ipsis de remissione peccatorum nimium
blandiuntur, nullius (dum sani sunt) censuram subeuntes nisi propriam.

I think, that although in these words Confession of privy Sins, Dr. Redmayn.
is not expressly commanded; yet it is insinuated and showed in these words, as
a necessary Medicine or Remedy, which all Men that fall into deadly sin ought,
for the quieting of their Consciences seek, if they may conveniently have such
a Priest as is meet to hear their Confession.

Where there be two ways to obtain remission of Sin, Dr. Edgeworth
and to recover Grace, a Man is bound by the Law of Nature to take the surer
way, or else he should seem to contemn his own Health, which is unnatural. Also
because we be bound to love God above all things, we ought by the same Bond to
labor for his Grace and Favor: So that because we be bound to love God, and
to love our selves in an Order to God, we be bound to seek the best and surest
Remedy to recover Grace for our selves. Contrition is one way; but because a
Man cannot be well assured, whether his Contrition, Attrition, or Displeasure
for his sin be sufficient to satisfy or content Almighty God, and able or
worthy to get his Grace: Therefore it is necessary to take that way that will
not fail, and by which thou may be sure, and that is Absolution of the
Priest, which by Christ's promise will not deceive thee, so that thou put no
step or bar in the way; as, if thou do not then actually sin inwardly nor
outwardly, but intend to receive that the Church intends to give thee by that
Absolution, having the efficacity of Christ's promise, Quorum Remiseritis, etc.
Now the Priest can give thee no Absolution from that sin that he knows not:
therefore thou art bound, for the causes aforesaid, to confess thy sin.

This Scripture, as Ancient Doctors expound it, Dr. Symmons.
binds all Men to confess their secret deadly sins.

Dr. Tresham.
I say, That such Confession is a thing most consonant to the Law of God, and it
is a wise point, and a wholesome thing so for to do, and God provokes and
allureth us thereto, in giving the active Power to Priests to assoil in the
words, Quorum Remiseritis. It is also a safer way for Salvation to confess, if
we may have a Priest: Yet I think that confession is not necessarily deduced of
Scripture, nor commanded as a necessary precept of Scripture, and yet is it
much consonant to the Law of God, as a thing willed, not commanded.

Dr. Leyghton.
To the fifteenth; I think that only such as have not the knowledge of the
Scripture, whereby they may quiet their Consciences, be bound to confess their
secret deadly sins unto a Priest: Howbeit no Man ought to contemn such
Auricular Confession, for I suppose it to be a Tradition Apostolical, necessary
for the unlearned Multitude.

Dr. Coren.
A Man whose Conscience is grieved with mortal secret sins, is bound by these
words, Quorum Remiseritis, etc. to confess his sin to a Priest, if he may have
him conveniently.

Con.
Eboracens. Londinens. Dayus, Oglethorpus, Coren, Redmayn, asserunt obligari.
Coxus, Tresham, and Robertsonus dicunt non obligari, si aliter Conscientiae
illorum satisfieri queat; Menevens. nullo modo obligari. Carliolens. and
Symmons aiunt, secundum veterum interpretationem, hac Scriptura quemvis
obligari peccatorem. Roffens. Herefordens. and Thirliby non respondent, sed
dubitant. Leightonus solum indoctos obligari ad Confessionem. Edgeworth tradit
duplicem modum remissionis peccatorum, per Contritionem sive Attritionem, and
per Absolutionem: and quia nemo potest certus esse, number attritio and dolor pro
peccato sufficiat ad satisfaciendum Deo and obtinendam gratiam, ideo tutissimam
viam deligendam, scilicet, Absolutionem a Sacerdote, quae per promissionem
Christi est certa; Absolvere non potest nisi cognoscat peccata; Ergo peccata
per Confessionem sunt illi revelanda. Agreem.
In the eleventh; Concerning Confession of our secret deadly sins. The Bishops
of York, Duresme, London, Drs. Day, Curren, Oglethorp, Redmayn, Crayford, say,
That Men be bound to confess them of their secret Sins. Drs. Cox, Tresham,
Robertson, say, They be not bound, if they may quiet their Consciences
otherwise. The Bishop of St. David's also says, That this Text binds no Man.
Dr. Leighton says, That it binds only such as have not the knowledge of
Scripture. The Bishop of Carlisle and Symmons say, That by ancient Doctors
exposition, Men be bound, by this Text, to confess their deadly sins.

16. Question. Whether a Bishop or a Priest may excommunicate, and for what
Crimes? And whether they only may Excommunicate by God's Law?
Answers.
A Bishop or a Priest by the Scripture, Canterbury
is neither commanded nor forbidden to Excommunicate, but where the Laws of any
Region gives him authority to Excommunicate, there they ought to use the same
in such Crimes, as the Laws have such authority in; and where the Laws of the
Region forbids them, there they have no authority at all; and they that be
no Priests may also Excommunicate, if the Law allow thereunto.

To the sixteenth; The power to Excommunicate, that is, York.
to dissever the Sinner from the communion of all Christian People, and so put
them out of the Unity of the Mystical Body for the time, donec resipis^at, is
only given to the Apostles and their Successors in the Gospel, but for what
Crimes, although in the Gospel does not appear, saving only for disobedience
against the Commandment of the Church, yet we find example of Excommunication
used by the Apostles in other cases: As of the Fornicator by Paul, of Hymeneus
and Alexander for their Blaspemy by the same; and yet of other Crimes mentioned
in the Epistle of the said Paul writing to the Corinthians. And again of them
that were disobedient to his Doctrine, 2 Thessalonians. 3. We find also charge given to
us, by the Apostle St. John, that we shall not commune with them, nor so much
as salute him with Ave, that would not receive his Doctrine. By which it may
appear that Excommunication, may be used for many great Crimes, and yet the
Church at this day, does not use it, but only for manifest disobedience. And
this kind of Excommunication, whereby Man is put out of the Church, and
dissevered from the Unity of Christ's Mystical Body, which Excommunication
touches also the Soul, no Man may use, but they only, to whom it is given by
Christ.

To the sixteenth; I think that a Bishop may Excommunicate, London.
taking example of St. Paul with the Corinthian; and also of that he did to
Alexander and Hymeneus. And with the Lawyers it has been a thing out of
Question, That to Excommunicate solemnly, appertains to a Bishop, although
otherwise, both inferior Prelates and other Officers, yea and Priests too in
notorious Crimes, after diverse Men's Opinions, may Excommunicate semblably, as
all others that be appointed Governors and Rulers over any Multitude, or
Spiritual Congregation.

I answer affirmatively to the first part, in open and manifest Crimes,
Rochester.
meaning of such Priests and Bishops as be by the Church authorized to use that
power. To the second part, I answer, That it is an hard Question, wherein I had
rather hear other Men speak, than say my own Sentence; for I find not in
Scripture, nor in the old Doctors, that any Man has given Sentence of
Excommunication, save only Priests; but yet I think, that it is not against the
Law of God, that a Layman should have authority to do it.

Carlisle.
Diverse Texts of Scripture seems, by the Interpretation of ancient Authors, to
show, that a Bishop or a Priest may Excommunicate open deadly sinners
continuing in obstinacy with contempt. I have read in Histories also, that a
Prince has done the same.

Dr. Robertson.
Opinor Episcopum aut Presbyterum Excommunicare posse, tanquam ministrum and os
Ecclesiae, ab eadem mandatum habens. Utrum vero id juris nulli nisi
Sacerdotibus in mandatis dari possit, non satis scio. Excommunicandum esse
opinor pro hujuscemodi criminibus, qualia recenset Paulus, 1 Cor. 5. si, is qui
frater nominatur, est fornicator, aut avarus, aut idolis serviens, aut
maledicus, aut ebriosus, aut rapax, cum hujusmodi ne cibum sumere, etc.

Dr. Cox.
A Bishop or a Priest as a public Person appointed to that Office, may
excommunicate for all public Crimes: And yet it is not against God's Law, for
others than Bishops or Priests to Excommunicate.

Dr. Day.
A Bishop or a Priest may Excommunicate by God's Law for manifest and open
Crimes: Also others appointed by the Church, tho they be no Priests, may
exercise the power of Excommunication.

Dr. Oglethorp.
Non solum Episcopus Excommunicare potest, sed etiam tota Congregatio, idque pro
lethalibus criminibus ac publicis, e quibus scandalum Ecclesiae provenire
potest. Non tamen pro re pecuniaria uti olim solebant.

Dr. Redmayn.
They may Excommunicate, as appears 1 Cor. 5. 1 Timothy 1. and that for open and
great Crimes, whereby the Church is offended; and for such Crimes as the Prince
and Governors determine, and thinks expedient, Men to be excommunicate for,
as appears in nonnullis Constitutionibus Iustiniani. Whether any other may
pronounce the Sentence but a Bishop or a Priest I am uncertain.

A Bishop, or a Priest only, may excommunicate a notorious and grievous Sinner,
Dr. Edgeworth
or obstinate Person from the Communion of Christian People, because it
pertains to the Jurisdiction which is given to Priests, Io. 26. Quorum
Remiseritis, etc. et Quorum retinetis, etc. There is one manner of
Excommunication spoken of 1 Cor. 5. which private Persons may use. Si is qui
frater nominatur inter vos est fornicator, aut avarus, aut idolis ferviens,
etc. cum hujusmodi ne cibum quidem capiatis. Excluding filthy Persons, covetous
Persons, Braulers and Quarrellers, out of their Company, and neither to eat nor
drink with them.

Dr. Symmons.
Whosoever has a place under the Higher Power, and is assigned by the same to
execute his Ministry given of God, he may Excommunicate for any Crime, as it
shall be seen to the High Power, if the same Crime be public.

A Bishop and Priest may Excommunicate by Scripture: as touching, Dr. Tresham.
for what Crimes; I say, for every open deadly sin and disobedience. And as
touching, Whether only the Priest may Excommunicate? I say, not he only, but
such as the Church authorizes so to do.

To the sixteenth, I say, Dr. Leyghton.
that a Bishop or a Priest having License and Authority of the Prince of the
Realm, may excommunicate every obstinate and inobedient Person, for every
notable and deadly sin. And further, I say, That not only Bishops and Priests
may Excommunicate, but any other Man appointed by the Church, or such as have
authority to appoint Men to that Office may Excommunicate.

A Bishop or a Priest may Excommunicate an obstinate Person for public Sins.
For So Much as the Keys be given to the whole Church, Dr. Coren.
the whole Congregation may Excommunicate, which Excommunication may be
pronounced by such a one as the Congregation does appoint, although he be neither
Bishop nor Priest.

Menevens. Herefordens. Thirleby, Dayus, Leightonus, Coxus, Con.
Symmons, Coren, concedunt authoritatem excommunicandi etiam Laicis, modo a
Magistratu deputentur. Eboracens. and Edgworth prorsus negant datum Laicis, sed
Apostolis and eorum successoribus tantum. Roffensis, Redmanus, and Robertsonus
ambigunt, number detur Laicis. Londinens. non respondet Quaestioni: Oglethorpus
and Thirliby aiunt, Ecclesiae datam esse potestatem Excommunicandi; Idem
Treshamus. In the sixteenth, Of Excommunication, they do not agree. The Bishops
of York, Duresme, and Dr. Edgworth say, That Laymen have not the authority to
Excommunicate, but that it was given only unto the Apostles and their
Successors. The Bishops of Hereford, St. David's, Westminster, Doctors, Day,
Coren, Leighton, Cox, Symmons, say, That Laymen may Excommunicate, if they be
appointed by the High Ruler. My Lord Elect of Westminster, Dr. Tresham, and Dr.
Oglethorp, say further, That the Power of Excommunication was given to the
Church, and to such as the Church shall institute.

17. Question. Whether Unction of the Sick with Oil, to remit Venial Sins, as
it is now used, be spoken of in the Scripture, or in any ancient Authors?
Answers.
Canterbury.
UNction of the Sick with Oil, to remit Venial Sins, as it is now used, is not
spoken of in the Scripture, nor in any ancient Authors.

These are the Subscriptions which are at the end of every Man's Paper.
T. Cantuarien. This is mine Opinion and Sentence at this present, which I do
not temerariously define, but do remit the judgment thereof wholly unto your
Majesty. York.
To the seventeenth; Of Unction of the Sick with Oil, and that Sins thereby be
remitted, St. James does teach us; but of the Holy Prayers, and like Ceremonies
used in the time of the Unction, we find no special mention in Scripture,
albeit the said St. James makes also mention of Prayer to be used in the
Ministry of the same.

Edward. Ebor. London.
To the seventeenth; I think that albeit it appears not clearly in Scripture,
whether the usage in extreme Unction now, be all one with that which was in the
beginning of the Church: Yet of the Unction in time of Sickness, and the Oil
also with Prayers and Ceremonies, the same is set forth in the Epistle of St.
James, which place commonly is alleged, and so has been received, to prove
the Sacrament of extreme Unction.

Ita mihi Edmundo Londinensi. Episcopo pro hoc tempore dicendum videtur, salvo
judicio melius sentientis, cui me prompte and humiliter subjicio. Rochester.
In Unction of them that be Sick with Oil, and praying for them for remission of
Sins, is plainly spoken of in the Epistle of St. James, but after what form or
fashion the said Inunction was then used, the Scripture tells not.

Written on the back of the Paper, The Bishop of Rochester's Book. Carlisle.
Extreme Unction is plainly set out by St. James, with the which makes also
that is written in the 6 th of St. Mark, after the mind of right good ancient
Doctors.

Robert Carliolen. De Unctione Infirmorum nihil reperio in Scripturis, Dr.
Robertson.
praeter id quod scribitur, Marc. 6. and Jacob. 5.

Thomas Robertson. T. Cantuarien. Unction of the Sick with Oil consecrat, as it
is now used, Dr. Cox.
is not spoken of in Scripture.

Richardus Cox. Unction of the Sick with praying for them is found in
Scripture. Dr. Day.


George Day. Opiniones non Assertiones. De Unctione Infirmorum cum oleo,
adjecta Oratione, Dr. Oglethorpe.
expressa mentio est in Scripturis, quanquam nunc addantur alii ritus,
honestatis gratia (ut in aliis Sacramentis) de quibus in Scripturis nulla
mentio.

Owinus Oglethorpus. Unction with Oil, adjoined with Prayer, Dr. Redmayn.
and having promise of Remission of Sins, is spoken of in St. James, and
ancient Authors; as for the use which now is, if any thing be amiss, it would
be amended.

I. Redmayn. It is spoken of, Dr. Edgeworth
in Mark 6. and James 5. Augustine and other ancient Authors speaks of the
same.

Edgeworth. The Unction of the Sick with Oil, to remit Sins, is in Scripture,
Dr. Symmons.
and also in ancient Authors.

Simon Matthew. Unction with Oil is grounded in the Scripture, Dr. Tresham.
and expressly spoken of; but with this Additament (as it is now used) it is not
specified in Scripture, for the Ceremonies now used in Unction, I think mere
Traditions of Man.

William Tresham. To the seventeenth, I say, Dr. Leyghton.
That Unction of the Sick with Oil and Prayer to remit Sins, is manifestly
spoken of in St. James Epistle, and ancient Authors, but not with all the Rites
and Ceremonies as be now commonly used.

T. Cantuarien. Per me Edwardum Leyghton. Unction with Oil to remit Sins is
spoken of in Scripture. Dr. Coren.


Richard Coren. Con.
Menevens. and Coxus negant Unctionem Olei (ut jam est recepta) ad remittenda
peccata contineri in Scripturis. Eboracens. Carliolens. Edgworth, Coren,
Redmayn, Symmons, Leightonus, Oglethorp aiunt, haberi in Scripturis. Roffens.
Thirleby, Robertsonus, praeterquam illud Jacobi 5. and Marci 6. nihil
proferunt. Herefordensis ambigit. Tresham vult Unctionem Olei tradi nobis e
Scripturis, sed Unctionis Caeremonias traditiones esse humanas. Agreem.
In the last; The Bishop of St. David's, and Dr. Cox, say, That Unction of the
Sick with Oil consecrate. as it is now used to remit Sin, is not spoken of in
Scripture. My Lords of York, Duresme, Carlisle, Drs. Coren, Edgworth, Redman,
Symmons, Leyghton, and Oglethorp, say, That it is found in Scripture.

XXII. Dr. Barnes's Renunciation of some Articles informed against him.
BE it known to all Men, that I Robert Barnes, Doctor of Divinity, have as well
in Writing, as in Preaching, over-shot my self, and been deceived, by trusting
too much to mine own heady Sentence, and giving judgment in and touching the
Articles hereafter ensuing; whereas being convented, and called before the
Person of my most gracious Sovereign Lord King Henry the Eighth, of England and
of France, Defensor of the Faith, Lord of Ireland, and in Earth Supreme Head
immediately under God of the Church of England; It pleased his Highness, of his
great clemency and goodness, being assisted with sundry of his most discreet
and learned Clergy, to enter such Disputation and Argument with me, upon the
Points of my oversight, as by the same was fully and perfectly confuted by
Scriptures, and enforced only for Truths sake, and for want of defense of
Scriptures to serve for the maintenance of my part, to yield, confess, and
knowledge my ignorance, and with my most humble submission, do promise for ever
from henceforth to abstain and beware of such rashness: And for my further
declaration therein, not only to abide such order for my doings passed, as his
Grace shall appoint and assign unto me, but also with my heart to advance and
set forth the said Articles ensuing, which I knowledge and confess to be most
Catholic, and Christian, and necessary to be received, observed, and followed
of all good Christian People. Tho it so be, that Christ by the Will of his
Father, is he only which has suffered Passion and Death for redemption of all
such as will and shall come unto him, by perfect Faith and Baptism; and that
also he has taken upon him gratis the burden of all their sins, which as before
will, has, or shall come to him, paying sufficient Ransom for all their sins,
and so is becomed their only Redeemer and Justifier; of the which number I
trust and doubt not but that many of us now-adays be of: yet I in heart do
confess, that after, by the foresaid means we become right Christian Folks, yet
then by not following our Master's Commandments and Laws, we do loose the
benefits and fruition of the same, which in this case is irrecuperable, but by
true Penance, the only Remedy left unto us by our Savior for the same;
wherefore I think it more than convenient and necessary, that whenever
Justification shall be preached of, that this deed be joined with all the
forepart, to the intent that it may teach all true Christian People a right
knowledge of their Justification.

By me Robert Barnes. Also I confess with my heart, That Almighty God is in no
wise Author, causer of Sin, or any Evil; and therefore whereas Scripture says,
Induravit Dominus Cor Pharaonis, etc. and such other Texts of like sense, they
ought to understand them, quod Dominus permisit eum indurari, and not
otherwise; which does accord with many of the ancient Interpreters also.

By me Robert Barnes. Further I do confess with my heart, That whenever I
have offended my Neighbors, I must first reconcile my self unto him, e're I
shall get remission of my sins, and in case he offend me, I must forgive him,
e're that I can be forgiven; for this does the Pater Noster, and other places
of Scripture teach me.

By me Robert Barnes. I do also confess with my heart, That good Works limited
by Scripture, and done by a penitent and true reconciled Christian Man, be
profitable and allowable unto him, as allowed of God for his benefit, and
helping to his Salvation.

By me Robert Barnes. Also do confess with my heart, That Laws and Ordinances
made by Christian Rulers, ought to be obeyed by the Inferiors and Subjects, not
only for fear, but also for Conscience, for whosoever breaks them, breaks God's
Commandments.

By me Robert Barnes. All and singular the which Articles before written, I the
foresaid Robert Barnes do approve and confess to be most true and Catholic,
and promise with my heart, by God's Grace, hereafter to maintain, preach, and
set forth the same to the People, to the uttermost of my power, wit, and
cunning.

By me Robert Barnes. By me William Jerome. By me Thomas Gerarde. XXIII. The
Foundation of the Bishopric of Westminster.
REx omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Cum nuper caenobium quoddam sive
Monasterium, quod (dum extitit) Monasterium Sancti Petri Westmon. vulgariter
vocabatur, omnia and singula ejus Maneria, Dominia, Mesuagia, Terrae,
Tenementa, Haereditamenta, Dotationes and Possessiones, certis de causis
specialibus and urgentibus, per Willielmum ipsius nuper Caenobii sive
Monasterii Abbatem, and ejusdem loci Conventum, nobis and haeredibus nostris in
perpetuum jamdudum data fuerunt and concessa, prout per ipsorum nuper Abbatis
and Conventus cartam sigillo suo communi sive conventuali sigillatam and in
Cancellar. nostram irrotulat. manifest liquet; quorum praetextu nos de ejusdem
nuper Caenobii sive Monasterii situ, septu and praecinctu, ac de omnibus and
singulis praedict. nuper Abbatis and Conventus Maneriis, Dominiis and
Mesuagiis, Terris, Tenementis, Haereditamentis, Dotationibus and
Possessionibus, ad praesens pleno jure seisiti sumus in dominico nostro, ut de
feodo. Nos utique sic de eisdem seisiti existen* divinaque nos clementia
inspirante nihil magis ex animo affectantes, quam ut vera religio verusque Dei
cultus inibi non modo aboleatur sed in integrum potius restituatur, and ad
primitivam sive genuinae sinceritatis normam reformetur, correctis
enormitatibus in quas monachorum vita and professio longo temporum lapsu
deplorabiter exorbitaverit, operam dedimus, quatenus humana perspicere potest
infirmitas, ut imposterum ibidem sacrorum eloquiorum documenta and nostrae
salutiferae Redemptionis sacramenta pure administrentur, bonorum morum
disciplina sincere observetur, Juventus in literis liberaliter instituatur,
senectus viribus defectis, eorum praesertim qui circa personam nostram, vel
alioquin circa Regni nostri negotia public been and fideliter nobis
servierunt, rebus ad victum necessariis condign foveatur, and denique
eleemosinarum in pauperes Christi clargitiones, viarum pontiumque reparationes,
and caetera omnis generis pietatis officia illinc exuberanter in omnia vicina
loca long lateque dimaneant, ad Dei omnipotentis gloriam, and ad subditorum
nostrorum communem utilitatem felicitatemque: Idcirco nos considerantes quod
situs dicti nuper Monasterii Sancti Petri Westmon. in quo multa tum
percharissimi patris nostri, tum aliorum Inclitorum, quondam Regum Angliae,
praeclara monumenta conduntur, sit locus aptus, conveniens and necessarius
instituendi, erigendi, ordinandi and stabiliendi sedem Episcopalem, and quandam
Ecclesiam Cathedralem de uno Episcopo, de uno Decano Presbytero, and duodecem
Praebendariis Presbyteris, ibidem, Omnipotenti Deo and in perpetuum servitium,
ipsum situm dicti nuper Monast. Sancti Petri Westmon. ac locum and Ecclesiam
ipsius in sedem Episcopalem ac in Ecclesiam Cathedral. creari, erigi, fundari
and stabiliri decrevimus, prout per praesentes decernimus, and eandem Ecclesiam
Cathedral. de uno Episcopo, de uno Decano Presbytero, and duodecim
Praebendariis Presbyteris, tenore praesentium, realiter and ad plenum creamus,
erigimus, fundamus, ordinamus, facimus, constituimus and stabilimus, perpetuis
futuris temporibus duraturam, and sic stabiliri ac in perpetuum inviolabiliter
observari volumus and jubemus per praesentes. Volumus itaque and per praesentes
Ordinamus quod Ecclesia Cathedralis praedicta sit, and deinceps in perpetuum
erit Ecclesia Cathedralis and Seeds Episcopalis, ac quod tota villa nostra
Westmon. ex nunc and deinceps in perpetuum sit Civitas, ipsamque civitatem
Westminster. vocari and nominari volumus and decernimus, ac ipsam Civitatem and totum
Commit. nostrum Midd. prout per metas and limits dignoscitur, and limitatur,
tota Parochia de Fulham in eodem Commit. de Midd. tantummodo except. ab omni
Jurisdictione, Autoritate and Dioc. Episcopi London. and successorum suorum pro
tempore existen. separamus, dividimus, eximimus, exoneramus, and omnino per
praesentes liberamus: ac omnem jurisdictionem Episcopalem infra eandem
Civitatem and Commit. Midd. exceptis praeexceptis, Episcopo Westmon. a nobis per
has Literas nostras Patentes nominand. and eligend. and Successoribus suis
Episcopis Westminster. ac praedict. Episcopat. Westminster. adjungimus and unimus, ac ex
dictis Civitate and Com. Diocesim facimus and Ordinamus per praesentes,
illamque Diocesim Westminster. in perpetuum similiter vocari, appellari, nuncupari
and nominari volumus and ordinamus. Et ut haec nostra intentio debitum and
uberiorem sortiatur effectum, Nos de scientia, moribus, probitate and virtute
dilecti nostri Consiliarii Thomae Thyrlebei Clerici, Decani Capellae nostrae
plurimum considentes, eundem Thomam Thyrleby ad Episcopatum dictae Sedis Westminster.
nominamus and eligimus, ac ipsum Thomam Episcopum Westminster. per praesentes
eligimus, nominamus, facimus, and creamus, and volumus; ac per praesentes
Concedimus and Ordinamus, quod idem Episcopatus sit corpus corporatum in re and
nomine, ipsumque ex uno corpore declaramus and acceptamus, Ordinamus, facimus
and constituimus in perpetuum, habeatque successionem perpetuam, ac quod ipse
and successores sui per nomen and sub nomine Episcopi Westminster. nominabitur and
vocabitur, nominabuntur and vocabuntur in perpetuum, and quod ipse and
successores sui per idem nomen and sub eo nomine prosequi, clamare and
placitare, ac placitari, defendere and defendi, respondere and responderi, in
quibuscunque Curiis and locis legum nostrarum, ac haeredum and successorum
nostrorum, and alibi, in and super omnibus and singulis causis, actionibus,
sectis, brevibus, demand. and querelis, realibus, personalibus and mixtis, tam
temporalibus quam spiritualibus, ac in omnibus aliis rebus, causis and materiis
quibuscunque, and per idem nomen Maneria, Dominia, Terrae, Tenementa,
Rectorias, Pensiones, Portiones, and alia quaecunque Haereditamenta,
Possessiones, proficua and emolumenta, tam spiritualia sive Ecclesiastica, quam
temporalia, ac alia quaecunque per Literas Patentes praefato Episcopo and
Successoribus suis, per nos seu haeredes nostros debito modo fiend. vel per
quamcunque aliam personam seu quascunque alias personas secundum leges nostras
and haeredum sive successorum nostrorum dand. seu concedend. capere, recipere,
gaudere and perquirere ac dare, alienare and dimittere possit and possint,
valeat and valiant, and generaliter omnia alia and singula recipere, gaudere,
and facere, prout and eisdem modo and forma quibus caeteri Episcopi infra
Regnum nostrum Angliae recipere aut facere possint, aut aliquis Episcopus infra
Regnum nostrum Angliae recipere aut facere possit, and non aliter nec ullo alio
modo. Et ulterius volumus and ordinamus, quod Ecclesia Cathedralis praedicta
sit, and deinceps in perpetuum erit Ecclesia Cathedralis and Seeds Episcopalis
dicti Thomae and successorum suorum Episcoporum Westminster. ipsamque Ecclesiam
Cathedralem honoribus, dignitatibus, and insigniis Sedis Episcopalis per
praesentes decoramus, eandemque Sedem Episcopalem praefato Thomae and
successoribus suis Episcopis Westminster. damus and concedimus per praesentes habend.
and gaudend. eidem Thomae and successoribus suis in perpetuum. Ac etiam volumus
and ordinamus per praesentes, quod praefatus Thomas and successores sui
Episcopi Westminster. praedict. omnimodam jurisdictionem, potestatem and autoritatem
ordinarias and Episcopales, infra Ecclesiam Cathedralem Westminster. and praedict.
Dioces. exercere, facere, and uti possit, and debeat, possint and debeant, in
tam amplis modo and forma, prout Episcopus London. infra Dioces. London.
secundum leges nostras exercere, facere, and uti solet, possit aut debet. Et
quod dictus Thomas Episcopus Westminster. and successores sui Episcopi Westminster.
deinceps in perpetuum habeat sigillum authenticum, seu sigilla authentica pro
rebus and negotiis suis agendis servitur. ad omnem juris effectum simili modo
and forma, and non aliter nec aliquo alio modo, prout Episcopus London. habet
aut habere potest. Et ut Ecclesia Cathedralis praedict. de personis congruis in
singulis locis and gradibus suis perimpleatur and decoretur, dilectum nobis
Willielmum Benson Sacrae Theologiae professorem primum and originalem, and
modernum Decanum dictae Ecclesiae Cathedralis, ac Simonem Haynes Sacrae
Theologiae professorem primum, and praesent. Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac
Joannem Redman secundum Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac Edwardum Leyghton tertium
Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac Antonium Belasys quartum Presbyterum
Praebendarium, ac Willielmum Britten quintum Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac
Dionysium Dalyon sextum Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac Humphredu^ Perkins
septimum Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac Thomam Essex octavum Presbyterum
Praebendarium, ac Thomam Ellforde nonum Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac Joannem
Malvern decimum Presbyterum Praebendarium, ac Willielmum Harvye undecimum
Presbyterum Prebendarium, ac Gerardum Carleton duodecimum Presbyterum
Praebendarium, tenore praesentium facimus and ordinamus. Per praesentes volumus
etiam and ordinamus, ac eisdem Decano and Praebendariis concedimus per
praesentes, quod praedictus Decanus and duodecem Praebendarii dicti sint de se
in re and nomine unum corpus corporatum, habeantque successionem perpetuam, and
se gerent, exhibebunt, and occupabunt Sedem, ordinationem, regulas and statuta,
eis per nos in quadam Indentura in posterum fiend. specificand. and declarand.
Et quod idem Decanus and Praebendarii and successores sui, Decanus and
Capitulum Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sancti Petri Westminster. in perpetuum vocabuntur,
appellabuntur; Et quod praefatus Decanus and Praebendarii Ecclesiae Cathedralis
praedictae and successores sui sint and in perpetuum erunt Capitulum
Episcopatus Westminster. sitque idem Capitulum praefat. Thomae and successoribus suis
Episcopis Westminster. perpetuis futuris temporibus annexum, incorporatum and unitum,
eisdem modo and forma quibus Decanus and Capitulum Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sancti
Pauli in Civitate nostra London. Episcopo London. aut sedi Episcopali London.
annexa, incorporata and unit. exist. ipsosque Decanum and Praebendarios unum
corpus corporatum in re and nomine facimus, creamus and stabilimus, and eos pro
uno corpore facimus, declaramus, ordinamus and acceptamus, habeantque
successionem perpetuam; Et quod ipse Decanus and Capitulum eorumque
successores, per nomen Decani and capitulum Ecclesiae Cathedralis Beati Petri
Westminster. prosequi, clamare, placitare possint and implacitare, defendere and
defendi, respondere and responderi, in quibuscunque tempore and Curiis legum
nostrarum and alibi, in and super omnibus and singulis causis, actionibus
Sectis, demand. brevibus and querelis, realibus, spiritualibus, personalibus
and mixtis, and in omnibus aliis rebus, causis and materiis, prout Decanus and
Capitulum Sancti Pauli London. agere aut facere possunt: Et per idem nomen
Maneria, Dominia, Terrae, Tenementa, and caetera quaecunque Haereditamenta,
possessiones, pro^icua, and emolumenta tam Spiritualia sive Ecclesiastica quam
temporalia, and alia quaecunque per nos per literas nostras Patentes, haeredu^
vel successoru^ nostroru^, seu per aliquam personam vel personas quascunque eis
and successoribus suis vel aliter secundu^ leges nostras, vel haeredu^ seu
successoru^ nostroru^, dand. seu concedend. capere, recipere, and perquirere,
dare, alienare, and dimittere possint and valiant, and generaliter omnia alia
and singula capere, recipere, perquirere, dare, alienare, and demittere, ac
facere and exequi, prout and eisdem modo and forma, quibus Decanus and
Capitulum praedict. Cathedralis Ecclesiae Sancti Pauli in praedicta civitate
nostra London. capere, recipere perquirere, dare, alienare, and dimittere, ac
facere aut exequi possint, and non aliter, neque aliquo alio modo: Et quod
Decanus and Capitulum Ecclesiae Cathedralis beati Petri Westminster. and successores
sui in perpetuum habebunt commune Sigillum, ad omnimodas cartas, evidentias,
and caetera scripta, vel facta sua fiend. eos vel Ecclesiam Cathedralem
praedict. aliquo modo tangen. sive continend. sigilland. Et insuper volumus and
per praesentes concedimus and ordinamus, quod praedict. Episcopus Westminster. and
quilibet successorum suorum pro tempore existen. and praedictus Decanus and
Capitulum Ecclesiae Cathedralis beati Petri Westminster. and quilibet successorum
suorum habeant plenam potestatem and facultatem faciendi, recipiendi, dandi,
alienandi, dimittendi, exequendi and agendi omnia and singula quae Episcopus
London. and Decanus and Capitulum Sancti Pauli London. conjunctim and divisim
facere, recipere, dare, alienare, dimittere, exequi aut agere possint. Volumus
etiam and ordinamus, ac per praesentes Statuimus, quod Archidiaconus Midd. qui
nunc est and successores sui sint deinceps in perpetuum separati and exonerati
and prorsus liberati a jurisdictione, potestate, jure and authoritate Episcopi
London. and successorum suorum, ac ab Ecclesia Cathedrali Sancti Pauli London.
ab omnique jure, potestate and autoritate ejusdem ipsiusque Archidiaconi, and
successores suos per praesentes separamus, exoneramus, penitus in perpetuum
liberamus, eundemque Archidiaconum and successores suos decernimus, Statuimus,
Ordinamus, ac stabilimus in simili Statu, modo, forma and jure esse, ac
deinceps in perpetuum fore, in praedicta Ecclesia Cathedrali Westminster. quibus ipse
aut aliquis praedecessorum suorum unquam fuit in Ecclesia Cathedrali Sancti
Pauli London. Statuimus etiam and ordinamus, ac per praesentes volumus and
concedimus, quod praedictus Thomas Episcopus Westminster. and successores sui
Episcopi Westminster. habeant, teneant and possideant, in omnibus and per omnia
autoritatem, potestatem, jus and jurisdictionem, de and super Archidiaconatu
Midd. and Archidiacono and successoribus suis, tam plene and integre ad omnem
effectum quam Episcopus London. qui nunc est aut aliquis praedecessorum suorum
habet aut habuit, aut habere debuit vel usus fuit. Volumus autem ac per
praesentes concedimus, tam praefato Episcopo quam Decano and Capitulo, quod
habeat and habebit, habeant and habebunt, has Literas nostras Patentes sub
magno sigillo nostro Angliae debito modo factas and sigillatas, absque fine seu
feod. magno vel parvo nobis in Hanaperio nostro seu alibi ad usum nostrorum,
proinde quoquo modo reddend. solvend. vel faciend. eo quod expressa mentio, and
caet. In cujus rei, etc.

Test Rege apud Westminster. decimo seprimo die Decembris Anno Regni Regis Henrici
Octavi trigesimo secundo.
XXIV. A Proclamation ordained by the King's Majesty, with the advice of his
Honorable Council, for the Bible of the largest and greatest Volume to be had
in every Church; devised the sixth day of May, the 33 year of the King's most
gracious Reign.
Regist. Bonner. Fol. 21.
WHereby Injunctions heretofore set forth by the authority of the King's Royal
Majesty, Supreme Head of the Church of this his Realm of England, it was
ordained, and commanded, amongst other things, That in all and singular
Parish-Churches, there should be provided, by a certain day now expired, at the
costs of the Curats and Parishioners, Bibles containing the Old and New
Testament in the English Tongue, to be fixed and set up openly in every of the
said Parish Churches; the which godly Commandment and Injunction, was to the
only intent that every of the King's Majesty's loving Subjects, minding to read
therein, might, by occasion thereof, not only consider and perceive the great
and ineffable Omnipotent Power, Promise, Justice, Mercy and Goodness of
Almighty God, but also to learn thereby to observe God's Commandments, and to
obey their Sovereign Lord, and High Powers, and to exercise Godly Charity, and
to use themselves according to their Vocations, in a pure and sincere Christian
Life, without murmur or grudging: By the which Injunctions, the King's Royal
Majesty intended that his loving Subjects should have and use the commodities
of the reading of the said Bibles, for the purpose above rehearsed, humbly,
meekly, reverently, and obediently, and not that any of them should read the
said Bibles with high and loud Voices, in time of the Celebration of the Holy
Mass, and other Divine Services used in the Church; or that any his
Lay-Subjects reading the same, should presume to take upon them any common
Disputation, Argument, or Exposition of the Mysteries therein contained; but
that every such Layman should, humbly, meekly, and reverently, read the same
for his own instruction, edification, and amendment of his Life, according to
God's Holy Word therein mentioned. And notwithstanding the King's said most
godly and gracious Commandment and Injunction, in form as is aforesaid, his
Royal Majesty is informed, That diverse and many Towns and Parishes within this
his Realm, have neglected their duties in the accomplishment thereof; whereof
his Highness marvelleth not a little; and minding the execution of his said
former most godly and gracious Injunctions, does straightly charge and command,
That the Curats and Parishioners of every Town and Parish within this his Realm
of England, not having already Bibles provided within their Parish Churches,
shall on this side the Feast of All Saints next coming, buy and provide Bibles
of the largest and greatest Volume, and cause the same to be set and fixed in
every of the said Parish Churches, there to be used as is aforesaid, according
to the said former Injunctions, upon pain that the Curat and Inhabitants of the
Parishes and Towns, shall loose and forfeit to the King's Majesty for every
month that they shall lack and want the said Bibles, after the same Feast of
All Saints, 40 s. the one half of the same forfeit to be to the King's Majesty,
and the other half to him or them which shall first find and present the same
to the King's Majesty's Council. And finally, the King's Royal Majesty does
declare and signify to all and singular his loving Subjects, that to the intent
they may have the said Bibles of the greatest Volumn, at equal and reasonable
prices, his Highness, by the advice of his Council, has ordained and taxed,
That the Sellers thereof shall not take for any of the said Bibles unbound,
above the price of ten shillings; and for every of the said Bibles well and
sufficiently bound, trimmed and clasped, not above twelve shillings, upon pain
the Seller to lose, for every Bible sold contrary to his Highness's
Proclamation, four shillings, the one Moiety thereof to the King's Majesty, and
the other Moiety to the finder and presenter of the Defaulter, as is aforesaid.
And his Highness straightly charge and commands, That all and singular
Ordinaries, having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this his Church and Realm
of England, and Dominion of Wales, that they, and every of them, shall put
their effectual endeavors, that the Curats and Parishioners shall obey and
accomplish this his Majesty's Proclamation and Commandment, as they tender the
advancement of the King's most gracious and godly purpose in that behalf, and
as they will answer to his Highness for the same.

God save the KING.
XXV. An Admonition and Advertisement given by the Bishop of London, to all
Readers of this Bible in the English Tongue.
TO the intent that a good and wholesome thing, Register, Bonner.
godly and virtuously, for honest intents and purposes, set forth for many, be
not hindered or maligned at, for the abuse, default, and evil behavior of a
few, who for lack of discretion, and good advisement, commonly without respect
of time, or other due circumstances, proceed rashly and unadvisedly therein;
and by reason thereof, rather hinder than set forward the thing that is good of
it self: It shall therefore be very expedient, that whosoever repaireth hither
to read this Book, or any suchlike, in any other place, he prepare himself
chiefly and principally, with all devotion, humility, and quietness, to be
edified and made the better thereby; adjoining thereto his perfect and most
bounden duty of obedience to the King's Majesty, our most gracious and dread
Sovereign Lord, and supreme Head, especially in accomplishing his Graces most
honorable Injunctions and Commandments given and made in that behalf. And right
expedient, yea necessary it shall be also, that leaving behind him vain Glory,
Hypocrisy, and all other carnal and corrupt Affections, he bring with him
discretion, honest intent, charity, reverence, and quiet behavior, to and for
the edification of his own Soul, without the hindrance, let, or disturbance of
any other his Christian Brother; evermore foreseeing that no* number of People
be specially congregate therefore to make a multitude; and that no exposition
be made thereupon otherwise than it is declared in the Book it self; and that
especially regard be had no reading thereof, be used, allowed, and with noise
in the time of any Divine Service, or Sermon; or that in the same be used any
Disputation, contention, or any other misdemeanour* or finally that any Man
justly may reckon himself to be offended thereby, or take occasion to grudg or
malign thereat.

God save the KING.
XXVI. Injunctions given by Bonner, Bishop of London, to his Clergy.
Regist. Bonner. Fol. 38.
INjunctions made by the consent and authority of me Edmond Bonner Bishop of
London, in the Year of our Lord God 1542, and in the 34 Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and supreme Head here in Earth,
next under God, of the Church of England and Ireland. All which and singular
Injunctions, by the Authority given to me of God, and by our said Sovereign
Lord the King's Majesty, I exhort, require, and also command, all and singular
Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and Chantry Priests, with other of the Clergy,
whatsoever they be, of my Diocese and Jurisdiction of London, to observe, keep,
and perform accordingly, as it concerns every of them, in virtue of their
Obedience, and also upon pains expressed in all such Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances of this Realm, as they may incur, and be objected against them, now,
or at any time hereafter, for breaking and violating of the same, or any of
them.

First; That you, and every of you, shall, with all diligence, and faithful
obedience, observe and keep, and cause to be observed and kept, to the
outermost of your Powers, all and singular the Contents of the King's Highness
most gracious and godly Ordinances and Injunctions given and set forth by his
Graces Authority; and that ye, and every of you, for the better performance
thereof, shall provide to have a Copy of the same in writing, or imprinted, and
so to declare them accordingly.

Item; That every Parson, Vicar, and Curat, shall read over and diligently
study every day one Chapter of the Bible, and that with the gloss ordinary, or
some other Doctor or Expositor, approved and allowed in this Church of England,
proceeding from Chapter to Chapter, from the beginning of the Gospel of Matthew
to the end of the New Testament, and the same so diligently studied to keep
still and retain in memory, and to come to the rehearsal and re^ital thereof,
at all such time and times as they, or any of them, shall be commanded
thereunto by me, or any of my Officers or Deputies.

Item; That every of you do procure and provide of your own, a Book called, The
Institution of a Christian Man, otherwise called the Bishops Book; and that ye,
and every of you, do exercise your selves in the same, according to such
Precepts as has been given heretofore or hereafte^ to be given.

Item; That ye being absent from your Benefices, in cases lawfully permitted by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, do suffer no Priest to keep your Cure*
unless he being first by you presented, and by me or my Officers thereunto
abled and admitted. And for the more and better assurance and performance
thereof to be had, by these presents I warn and monish peremptorily, all and
singular Beneficed Parsons having Benefices with Cure, within my Diocese and
Jurisdiction, that they and every of them, shall either be personally resident
upon their Benefices and Cures, before the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel
now next ensuing; or else present, before the said Feast, to me the said
Bishop, my Vicar General, or other my Officers deputed in that behalf, such
Curats as upon examination made by me, or my said Officers, may be found able
and sufficient to serve and discharge their Cures in their absence; and also at
the said Feast, or before, shall bring in and exhibit before my said Officers
their sufficient Dispensations authorized by the King's Majesty, as well for
non-residence, as for keeping of more Benefices with Cure than one.

Item; That every Parson, Vicar, and other Curats, once in every quarter, shall
openly in the Pulpit exhort and charge his Parishioners, that they in no wise
do make any privy or secret contract of Matrimony between themselves, but that
they utterly defer it until such time as they may conveniently have the Father
and Mother, or some other Kinsfolks or Friends of the Person that shall make
such Contract of Matrimony; or else two or three honest Persons to be present,
and to hear and record the words and manner of their Contract, as they will
avoid the extreme pains of the Law provided in that behalf, if they
presumptuously do or attempt the contrary.

Item; That in the avoiding of diverse and grievous Offenses and Enormities, and
specially the most detestable sin of Adultery, which ofttimes has happened by
the negligence of Curats in marrying Persons together which had been married
before, and making no due proof of the death of their other Husbands and Wives
at the time of such Marriages, I require and command you, and monish
peremptorily by these presents, all manner of Parsons, Vicars, and Curats, with
other Priests, being of my Diocese and Jurisdiction, that they, nor any of them
from henceforth, do presume to solemnizate Matrimony in their Churches,
Chapels, or elsewhere, between any Persons that have been married before,
unless the said Parson, Vicar, Curat, or Priest, be first plainly, fully, and
sufficiently informed and certified of the Decease of the Wife or Husband of
him or her, or of both, that he shall marry, and that in writing, under the
Ordinaries Seal of the Diocese, or place where he or she inhabited or dwelt
before, under pain of Excommunication, and otherwise to be punished for doing
the contrary, according to the Laws provided and made in that behalf.

Item; That ye, and every of you that be Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and also
Chauntry-Priests and Stipendiaries, do instruct, teach, and bring up in
Learning the best ye can, all such Children of your Parishioners as shall come
to you for the same; or at the least, to teach them to read English, taking
moderately therefore of their Friends that be able to pay, so that they may
thereby the better learn and know how to Believe, how to Pray, how to live to
God's pleasure.

Item; That every Curat do at all times his best diligence to stir, move, and
reduce such as be at discord, to Peace, Concord, Love, Charity, and one to
remit and forgive one another, as often and howsoever they shall be grieved or
offended: And that the Curat show and give example thereof, when and as often
as any variance or discord shall happen to be between him and any of his Cure.

Item; Where some froward Persons, partly for malice, hatred, displeasure, and
disdain, neglect contemn and despise their Curats, and such as have the Cure
and Charge of their Souls, and partly to hide and cloak their lewd and naughty
living, as they have used all the Year before, use at length to be confessed of
other Priests which have not the Cure of their Souls: Wherefore I will and
require you to declare, and show to your Parishioners, That no Testimonials
brought from any of them, shall stand in any effect, nor that any such Persons
shall be admitted to God's Board, or receive their Communion, until they have
submitted themselves to be confessed of their own Curats, (Strangers only
except) or else upon arduous and urgent Causes and Considerations, they be
otherwise dispensed with in that behalf, either by me or by my Officers
aforesaid.

Item; That whereupon a detestable and abominable practice universally reigning
in your Parishes, the young People, and other ill-disposed Persons does use
upon the Sundays and Holy Days, in time of Divine Service, and preaching the
Word of God, to resort unto Alehouses, and there exercises unlawful Games,
with great Swearing, Blasphemy, Drunkenness, and other Enormities, so that good
and devout Persons be much offended therewith: Wherefore I require and command
you, to declare to such as keeps Alehouses, or Taverns within your Parishes,
that at such times from henceforth, they shall not suffer in their Houses any
such unlawful and ungodly Assemblies; neither receive such Persons to Bowling
and Drinking at such Seasons, into their Houses, under pain of Excommunication,
and otherwise to be punished for their so doing, according to the Laws in that
behalf.

Item; That all Curats shall declare openly in the Pulpit, twice every Quarter
to their Parishioners, the seven deadly Sins, and the Ten Commandments, so that
the People thereby may not only learn how to obey, honor, and serve God, their
Prince, Superiors, and Parents, but also to avoid and eschew Sin and Vice, and
to live virtuously, following God's Commandments and his Laws.

Item; That where I am credily informed, that certain Priests of my Diocese and
Jurisdiction, does use to go in an unseemly and unpriestly habit and apparel,
with unlawful tonsures, carrying and having upon them also Armor and Weapons,
contrary to all wholesome and godly Laws and Ordinances, more like Persons of
the Lay, than of the Clergy; which may and does minister occasion to light
Persons, and to Persons unknown, where such Persons come in place, to be more
licentious both of their Communication, and also of their Acts, to the great
slander of the Clergy: Wherefore in the avoiding of such slander and obloquy
hereafter, I admonish and command all and singular Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and
all other Priests whatsoever they be, dwelling, or inhabiting, or hereafter
shall dwell and inhabit within my Diocese and Jurisdiction, That from
henceforth they, and every of them, do use and wear meet, convenient, and
decent Apparel, with their Trussures accordingly, whereby they may be known at
all times from Lay People, and to be of the Clergy, as they intend to avoid and
eschew the penalty of the Laws ordained in that behalf.

Item; That no Parson, Vicar, or other Beneficed Man, having Cure within my
Diocese and Jurisdiction, do suffer any Priest to say Mass, or to have any
Service within their Cure, unless they first give knowledge, and present them
with the Letters of their Orders to me as Ordinary, or to my Officers deputed
in that behalf; and the said Priest so presented, shall be by me, or my said
Officers, found able and sufficient thereunto.

Item; That every Curat, not only in his Preachings, open Sermons, and
Collations made to the People, but also at all other times necessary, do
persuade, exhort, and monish the People, being of his Cure, whatsoever they be,
to beware and abstain from Swearing and blaspheming of the Holy Name of God, or
any part of Christ's most precious Body or Blood. And likewise to beware, and
abstain from Cursing, Banning, Chiding, Scolding, Backbiting, Slandering, and
Lying. And also from talking and jangling in the Church, specially in time of
Divine-Service, or Sermon-time. And semblably to abstain from Adultery,
Fornication, Gluttony and Drunkenness: And if they, or any of them, be found
notoriously faulty or infamed upon any of the said Crimes and Offenses, then to
detect them at every Visitation, or sooner, as the case shall require, so that
the said Offenders may be corrected and reformed to the example of other.

Item; That no Priest from henceforth do use any unlawful Games, or frequently
use any Alehouses, Taverns, or any suspect place at any unlawful times, or any
light Company, but only for their Necessaries, as they, and any of them, will
avoid the danger that may ensue thereupon.

Item; That in the Plague-time, no dead Bodies or Corpses be brought into the
Church, except it be brought straight to the Grave, and immediately buried,
whereby the People may the rather avoid infection.

Item; That no Parsons, Vicars, nor Curats, permit or suffer any manner of
common Plays, Games, or Interludes, to be played, setforth, or declared, within
their Churches or Chapels, contrary to this our forbidding and Commandment;
that then you, or either of you, in whose Churches or Chapels any such Games,
Plays, or Interludes shall be so used, shall immediately thereupon make
relation of the names of the Person or Persons so obstinately and disobediently
using themselves, unto me, my Chancellor, or other my Officers, to the intent
that they may be therefore reformed and punished according to the Laws.

Item; That all Priests shall take this order when they Preach; first, They
shall not rehearse no Sermons made by other Men within this 200 or 300 Years;
but when they shall preach, they shall take the Gospel or Epistle of the day,
which they shall recite and declare to the people, plainly, distinctly, and
sincerely, from the beginning to the end thereof, and then to desire the people
to pray with them for Grace, after the usage of the Church of England now used:
And that done, we will that every Preacher shall declare the same Gospel or
Epistle, or both, from the beginning, not after his own Mind, but after the
Mind of some Catholic Doctor allowed in this Church of England, and in no wise
to affirm any thing, but that which he shall be ready always to show in some
Ancient Writer; and in no wise to make rehearsal of any Opinion not allowed,
for the intent to reprove the same, but to leave that for those that are and
shall be admitted to preach by the King's Majesty, or by me the Bishop of
London, your Ordinary, or by mine authority. In the which Epistle and Gospel,
ye shall note and consider diligently certain godly and devout places, which
may incense and stir the Hearers to obedience of good Works and Prayers: And in
case any notable Ceremony used to be observed in the Church, shall happen that
day when any preaching shall be appointed, it shall be meet and convenient that
the Preacher declare and set forth to the people the true meaning of the same,
in such sort that the people may perceive thereby, what is meant and signified
by such Ceremony, and also know how to use and accept it to their own edifying.
Furthermore, That no Preacher shall rage or rail in his Sermon, but coldly,
discreetly, and charitably, open, declare, and set forth the excellency of
Virtue, and to suppress the abomination of Sin and Vice; every Preacher shall,
if time and occasion will serve, instruct and teach his Audience, what Prayer
is used in the Church that day, and for what thing the Church prays,
specially that day, to the intent that all the people may pray together with
one heart for the same; and as occasion will serve, to show and declare to the
people what the Sacraments signifies, what strength and efficacy they be of,
how every Man should use them reverently and devoutly at the receiving of them.
And to declare wherefore the Mass is so highly to be esteemed and honored,
with all the Circumstances appertaining to the same. Let every Preacher beware
that he do not feed his Audience with any Fable, or other Histories, other than
he can avouch and justify to be written by some allowed Writer. And when he
has done all that he will say and utter for that time, he shall then in few
words recite again the pith and effect of his whole Sermon, and add thereunto
as he shall think good.

Item; That no Parson, Vicar, Curat, or other Priest, having Cure of Souls
within my Diocese and Jurisdiction, shall from henceforth permit, suffer, or
admit any manner of person, of whatsoever estate or condition he be, under the
degree of a Bishop, to preach, or make any Sermon or Collation openly to the
people within their Churches, Chapels, or elsewhere within their Cures,
unless he that shall so preach, have obtained before special License in that
behalf, of our Sovereign Lord the King, or of me Edmund Bishop of London, your
Ordinary; And the same License so obtained, shall then and there really bring
forth in writing under Seal, and show the same to the said Parson, Vicar,
Curat, or Priest, before the beginning of his Sermon, as they will avoid the
extreme Penalties of the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, provided and
established in that behalf, if they presumptuously do or attempt any thing to
the contrary.

Item; I desire, require, exhort, and command you, and every of you, in the
Name of God, Th^^ ye firmly, faithfully, and diligently, to the uttermost of
your powe^^, do observe, fulfill, and keep all and singular these mine
Injunctions. And that ye, and every of you, being Priests, and having Cure, or
not Cure, as well Benefice as not Beneficed, within my Diocese and
Jurisdiction, do procure to have a Copy of the same Injunctions, to the intent
ye may the better observe, and cause to be observed the Contents thereof.

The names of Books prohibited, delivered to the Curats, Anno 1542. to the
intent that they shall present them with the Names of the Owners, to their
Ordinary, if they find any such within their Parishes.
THe Disputation between the Father and the Son. The Supplication of Beggars;
the Author Fish. The Revelation of Antichrist. The Practice of Prelates. The
Burying of the Mass, in English Rithme. The Book of Friar Barnes, twice
printed. The Matrimony of Tindall. The Exposition of Tindall, upon the 4 th
Chap. to the Corinth. The Exposition of Tindall upon the Epistles Canonick of
St. John. The New Testament of Tindalls Translation, with his Preface before
the whole Book, and before the Epistles of St. Paul and Romans The Preface made
in the English Prymmers, by Marshall. The Church of John Rastall. The Table,
Glosses, Marginal, and Preface before the Epistle of St. Paul and Romans, of
Thomas Mathews doing, and printed beyond the Sea without privilege, set in his
Bible in English.
XXVII. A Collection of Passages out of the Canon Law, made by Cranmer, to show
the necessity of reforming it. An Original.
Did. 22. Omnes de Major. and obedien. solit. Extra. De Majorit and obedient.
Unam Sanctam.
HE that knowledgeth not himself to be under the Bishop of Rome, Ex MSS. D.
Stillingfleet.
and that the Bishop of Rome is ordained by God to have Primacy over all the
World, is an Heretic, and cannot be saved, nor is not of the flock of Christ.

Did. 10. de Summa Excommunicationis, Nominat. 25. q. 11. omne.
Princes Laws, if they be against the Canons and Decrees of the Bishop of Rome,
be of no force nor strength.

Did. 19, 20, 24. q. 1. A recta memoria. Quotiens haec est 25. q. 1. General.
violatores.
All the Decrees of the Bishop of Rome ought to be kept perpetually of every
Man, without any repugnancy, as God's Word spoken by the Mouth of Peter; and
whosoever does not receive them, neither avails them the Catholic Faith, nor
the four Evangelists, but they blaspheme the Holy Ghost, and shall have no
forgiveness.

35. q. 1. Generali.
All Kings, Bishops, and Noblemen, that believe or suffer the Bishop of Rome's
Decrees in any thing to be violate, be accursed, and for ever culpable before
God, as transgressors of the Catholic Faith.

Did. 21. Quamvis, and 24. q. 1. A recta memoria.
The Sea of Rome has neither spot nor wrinkle in it, nor cannot err.

35. q. 1. Ideo de Senten. and re judicata, de jurejurando licet ad Apostolicae
li. 6. de jurejurando.
The Bishop of Rome is not bound to any Decrees, but he may compel, as well the
Clergy as Laymen, to receive his Decrees and Canon Law.

9. q. z. Ipsi cuncta. Nemo z. q. 6. dudum aliorum. 17. q. 4. Si quis de
Baptis. and ejus effectu majores.
The Bishop of Rome has authority to judge all Men, and specially to discern
the Articles of the Faith, and that without any Counsel, and may assoil them
that the Counsel has damned; but no Man has authority to judge him, nor to
meddle with any thing that he has judged, neither Emperor, King, People, nor
the Clergy: And it is not lawful for any Man to dispute of his Power.

gr. Duo sunt 25. q. 6. Alius Nos Sanctorum juratos in Clemen. de Haereticis
aut efficiund.
The Bishop of Rome may excommunicate Emperors and Princes, depose them from
their States, and Assoil their Subjects from their Oath and Obedience to them,
and so constrain them to rebellion.

De Major. and obedien. solit. Clement. de summa and re judicata. Pastoral.
The Emperor is the Bishop of Rome's Subject, and the Bishop of Rome may revoke
the Emperor's Sentence in temporal Causes.

De Elect. and Electi proprietate. Venerabilem.
It belongs to the Bishop of Rome to allow or disallow the Emperor after he
is elected; and he may translate the Empire from one Region to another.

De supplenda Negligen. praelat. Grand. li. 6.
The Bishop of Rome may appoint Coadjutors unto Princes.

Did. 17. Si modo. Regula. Nec licuit multum. Concilia. 96. ubinam.
There can be no Council of Bishops without the Authority of the Sea of Rome;
and the Emperor ought not to be present at the Council, except when Matters of
the Faith be entreating, which belong universally to every Man.

2. q. 6.
Nothing may be done against him that appealeth unto Rome.

1. q. 3. Aliorum Did. 40. Si Papa. Did. 96. Satis.
The Bishop of Rome may be judged of none but of God only; for although he neither
regard his own Salvation, nor no Man's else, but draw down with himself
innumerable People by heaps unto Hell; yet may no mortal Man in this World
presume to reprehend him: for so much as he is called God, he may not be judged
of Man, for God may be judged of no Man.

^. z. q. 5.
The Bishop of Rome may open and shut Heaven unto Men.

Did. 40. Non vos.
The Sea of Rome receives holy Men, or else makes them holy.

De Pecunia. Did. 1. Serpens.
He that makes a Lie to the Bishop of Rome commits Sacriledg.

De Consecra. Did. 1. De locorum praecepta. Ecclesia de Elect. and Electi
proprietate. Fundamenta.
To be Senator, Capitane, Patrician, Governor, or Officer of Rome, none shall
be elected or pointed, without the express license and special consent of the Sea of Rome.

De Electione and Electi proprietate. Venerabilem.
It appertains to the Bishop of Rome to judge which Oaths ought to be kept,
and which not.

De jurejurand. Si vero. 15. q. 6. Authoritatem.
And he may absolve Subjects from their Oath of Fidelity, and absolve from
other Oaths that ought to be kept.

De foro competent. Ex tenore. De donat. inter virum and Vxorem dependentia.
Qui Filii sunt legittime per venerabilem. De Elect. and Electi proprietate
Fundamenta. Extravag. de Majorit. and Obedient. unam Sanctam. De judiciis Novit.
The Bishop of Rome is judge in temporal things, and has two Swords, Spiritual
and Temporal.

De Haereticis multorum.
The Bishop of Rome may give Authority to arrest Men, and imprison them in
Mannacles and Fetters.

Extrav. de Consuetudine super gentes.
The Bishop of Rome may compel Princes to receive his Legates.

De Truga and pace. Trugas.
It belongs also to him to appoint and command Peace, and Truce to be
observed and kept, or not.

De Praebend. and dig. dilectus and li. 6. licet.
The Collation of all Spiritual Promotions appertain to the Bishop of Rome.

De Excessibus praelatorum. Si^ut unire.
The Bishop of Rome may unite Bishoprics together, and put one under another
at his pleasure.

Li. 6. de paenis Felicum.
In the Chapter Felicis li. 6. de poenis, is the most partial and unreasonable
Decree made by Bonifacius 8. that ever was read or heard, against them that be
Adversaries to any Cardinal of Rome, or to any Clerk, or Religious Man of the
Bishop of Rome's Family.

Did. 28. Consulendum. Did. 96. Si. Imperator. 11. q. 1. Ex -- Clericus. Nemo
nullus. Clericum, etc. and q. 2. Si vero de sentent. Excommunication. Si judex
q. 2. q. 5. Si quis foro competent. Nullus. Si quibus. Ex transmissa. de foro
compet. in 6 Seculares.
Laymen may not be Judges to any of the Clergy, nor compel them to pay their
undoubted Debts, but the Bishops only must be their Judges.

De foro Competent. Cum sit licet.
Rectors of Churches may convent such as do them wrong, whither they will,
before a Spiritual Judge, or a Temporal.

Idem ex part Dilecti.
A Layman being spoiled, may convent his Adversaries before a Spiritual Judge,
whether the Lords of the Feod consent thereto or not.

Ibidem Significasti, and 11. q. 1. placuit.
A Layman may commit his Cause to a Spiritual Judge; but one of the Clergy may
not commit his Cause to a Temporal Judge, without the consent of the Bishop.

Ne Clerici vel Monachi. Secundum.
Laymen may have no Benefices to farm.

De Summa Excommunicationis. Nom. extra. de pecuniis and Remiss. etc. si.
All they that make, or write any Statutes contrary to the Liberties of the
Church; and all Princes, Rulers, and Counselors, where such Statutes be made,
or such Customs observed, and all the Judges and others that put the same in
execution; and where such Statutes and Customs have been made and observed of
old time, all they that put them not out of their Books be excommunicate, and
that so grievously, that they cannot be assoiled but only by the Bishop of Rome.

De Immunitate Ecclesiae. Non minus ad usus. Quia Quum and in 6. Clericis.
The Clergy to the relief of any common necessity, can nothing confer without
the consent of the Bishop of Rome; nor it is not lawful for any Layman to lay
any Imposition of Taxes, Subsidies, or any charges upon the Clergy.

Did. 97. Hoc capitulo and 63. Nullus and quae sequitur. Non aliae Cum Laic.
Laymen may not meddle with Elections of the Clergy, nor with any other thing
that belongs unto them.

De jurejurando. Nimis.
The Clergy ought to give no Oath of Fidelity to their Temporal Governors,
except they have Temporalities of them.

Did. 96. Been Quidem. 12. q. 2. Apostolicos. Quisquis.
The Goods of the Church may in no wise be alienated, but whosoever receives
or buyeth them, is bound to restitution; and if the Church have any Ground,
which is little or nothing worth, yet it shall not be given to the Prince; and
if the Prince will needs buy it, the Sale shall be void and of no strength.

13. q. 2. Non liceat.
It is not lawful for the Bishop of Rome to alienate or mortgage any Lands of
the Church, for every manner of necessity, except it be Houses in Cities, which
be very chargeable to support and maintain.

Did. 96. Quis nunquam, 3. q. 6. Accusatio 11. q. 1. Continua nullus
Testimonium Relatum Experientiae. Si quisquis. Si quae. Sicut Statuimus, nullus
de persona. Si quis.
Princes ought to obey Bishops, and the Decrees of the Church, and to submit
their Heads unto the Bishops, and not to be judge over the Bishops; for the
Bishops ought to be forborne, and to be judged of no Layman.

De Major. and obedien. solite.
Kings and Princes ought not to set Bishops beneath them, but reverently to
rise against them, and to assign them an honorable Seat by them.

11. q. 1. Quicunque. Relatum. Si qui omnes volumus. Placuit.
All manner of Causes, whatsoever they be, Spiritual or Temporal, ought to be
determined and judged by the Clergy.

Ibidem Omnes.
No judge ought to refuse the Witness of one Bishop, although he be but alone.

De Haereticis ad abolendam, and in Clementini ut officium.
Whosoever teaches or thinks of the Sacraments otherwise than the Sea of
Rome does teach and observe, and all they that the same See does judge
Heretics, be Excommunicate.

And the Bishop of Rome may compel by an Oath, all Rulers and other People, to
observe, and cause to be observed, whatsoever the Sea of Rome shall ordain
concerning Heresy, and the Fautors thereof; and who will not obey, he may
deprive them of their Dignities.

Clement. de reliq. and venerat. Sanctorum. Si Dominus extravag. de reliq. and
venerat. Sanctorum. Cum per excelsa: de poenitent. and remiss. antiquorum, and
Clemen. unigenitus. Quemadmodum.
We obtain Remission of Sin by observing of certain Feasts, and certain
Pilgrimages in the Jubilee, and other prescribed times, by virtue of the Bishop
of Rome's Pardons.

De praemiis and remissionibus extravag. ca. 3. Et si Dominici.
Whosoever offends the Liberties of the Church, or does violate any
Interdiction that comes from Rome, or conspireth against the Person, or
Statute of the Bishop, or See of Rome; or by any ways offends, disobeyeth, or
rebelleth against the said Bishop, or See, or that kills a Priest, or
offends personally against a Bishop, or other Prelate; or invadeth, spoileth,
withholdeth, or wastes Lands belonging to the Church of Rome, or to any other
Church immediately subject to the same; or whosoever invadeth any Pilgrims that
go to Rome, or any Suitors to the Court of Rome, or that let the devolution of
Causes unto that Court, or that put any new Charges or Impositions, real or
personal upon any Church, or Ecclesiastical Person; and generally all other
that offend in the Cases contained in the Bull, which is usually published by
the Bishops of Rome upon Maundy Thursday; all these can be assoiled by no
Priest, Bishop, Archbishop, nor by none other but only by the Bishop of Rome,
or by his express license.

2. 4. q. z.
Robbing of the Clergy, and poor Men, appertains unto the judgment of the
Bishops.

23. 9. q.
He is no Manslayer that slays a Man which is Excommunicate.

Did. 63. Tibi Domino de summa Excommunicationis. Si judex.
Here may be added the most tyrannical and abominal Oaths which the Bishop of
Rome exact of the Emperors; in Clement. de jurejurando Romani did. 6.3, Tibi
Domino.

De Consecra. Did. 1. Sicut.
It is better not to Consecrate, than to Consecrate in a place not Hallowed.

De Consecrat. Did. 5. De his manus, ut reum.
Confirmation, if it be ministered by any other than a Bishop, is of no value,
nor is no Sacrament of the Church; also Confirmation is more to be had in
reverence than Baptism; and no Man by Baptism can be a christened Man without
Confirmation.

De poeniten. Did. 1. Multiplex.
A penitent Person can have no remission of his Sin, but by supplication of the
Priests.

XXVIII. A Mandate for publishing and using the Prayers in the English Tongue.
Mandatum Domino Episcopo London. direct. pro publicatione Regiarum
Injunctionum.
Regist. Bonner. Fol. 48.
MOst Reverend Father in God, right trusty and right well-beloved, we greet you
well, and let you wit, That calling to our remembrance the miserable state of
all Christendom, being at this present, besides all other troubles, so plagued
with most cruel Wars, Hatred, and Dissensions, as no place of the same almost
(being the whole reduced to a very narrow corner) remains in good Peace,
Agreement, and Concord; the help and remedy whereof far exceeding the power of
any Man, must be called for of him who only is able to grant our Petitions, and
never forsakes nor repelleth any that firmly believe and faithfully call on
him; unto whom also the example of Scripture encourages us, in all these and
other our troubles and necessities, to fly and to cry for aid and succor;
being therefore resolved to have continually from henceforth general
Processions, in all Cities, Towns, Churches, and Parishes of this our Realm,
said and sung, with such reverence and devotion as appertains. Forasmuch as
heretofore the People, partly for lack of good Instruction and Calling, and
partly for that they understood no part of such Prayers or Suffrages as were
used to be sung and said, have used to come very slackly to the Procession,
when the same have been commanded heretofore; We have set forth certain godly
Prayers and Suffrages in our Native English Tongue, which we send you herewith,
signifying unto you, That for the special trust and confidence we have of your
godly mind, and earnest desire, to the setting forward of the Glory of God, and
the true worshipping of his (...) Holy Name, within that Province committed by
us unto you, we have sent unto you these Suffrages, not to be for a month or
two observed, and after slenderly considered, as other our Injunctions have, to
our no little marvel, been used; but to the intent that as well the same, as
other our Injunctions, may be earnestly set forth by preaching good
Exhortations and otherwise to the People, in such sort as they feeling the
godly taste thereof, may godly and joyously, with thanks, receive, embrace, and
frequent the same, as appertains. Wherefore we will and command you, as you
will answer unto us for the contrary, not only to cause these Prayers and
Suffrages aforesaid to be published, frequented, and openly used in all Towns,
Churches, Villages, and Parishes of your own Diocese, but also to signify this
our pleasure unto all other Bishops of your Province, willing and commanding
them in our Name, and by virtue hereof, to do and execute the same accordingly.
Unto whose Proceedings, in the execution of this our Commandment, we will that
you have a special respect, and make report unto us, if any shall not with good
dexterity accomplish the same; Not failing, as our special trust is in you.

At St. James's, Iunii -- Regni 36. Directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury.
XXIX. The Articles acknowledged by Shaxton, late Bp of Sarum.
THe First; Almighty God, by the Power of his Word, Regist. Bonner. Fol. 100.
pronounced by the Priest at Mass in the Consecration, turns the Bread and
Wine into the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ; so that after
the Consecration, there remains no Substance of Bread and Wine, but only the
substance of Christ, God and Man.

The Second; The said Blessed Sacrament being once Consecrate, is and remains
still the very Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, although it be reserved,
and not presently distributed.

The Third; The same blessed Sacrament being consecrate, is and ought to be
worshipped and adored with godly honor wheresoever it is, forasmuch as it is
the Body of Christ inseparably united to the Deity.

The Fourth; The Church, by the Ministration of the Priest, offers daily at
the Mass for a Sacrifice to Almighty God, the self-same Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ, under the form of Bread and Wine, in the remembrance and
representation of Christ's Death and Passion.

The Fifth; The same Body and Blood which is offered in the Mass, is the very
propitiation and satisfaction for the sins of the World; forasmuch as it is the
self-same in Substance which was offered upon the Cross for our Redemption: And
the Oblation and Action of the Priest is also a Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving unto God for his Benefits, and not the satisfaction for the Sins
of the World, for that is only to be attributed to Christ's Passion.

The Sixth; The said Oblation, or Sacrifice, so by the Priest offered in the
Mass, is available and profitable, both for the Quick and the Dead, although it
lies not in the power of Man to limit how much, or in what measure the same
does avail.

The Seventh; It is not a thing of necessity, that the Sacrament of the Altar
should be ministered unto the People under both kinds, of Bread and Wine: and it
is none abuse that the same be ministered to the People under the one kind;
forasmuch as in every of both the kinds, whole Christ, both Body and Blood is
contained.

The Eighth; It is no derogation to the virtue of the Mass, although the Priest do
receive the Sacrament alone, and none other receive it with him.

The Ninth; The Mass used in this Realm of England, is agreeable to the
institution of Christ; and we have in this Church of England, the very true
Sacrament, which is the very Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, under the
form of Bread and Wine.

The Tenth; The Church of Christ has, does, and may lawfully order some
Priests to be Ministers of the Sacraments, although the same do not preach, nor be
not admitted thereunto.

The Eleventh; Priests being once dedicated unto God by the Order of
Priesthood, and all such Men and Women as have advisedly made Vows unto God of
Chastity or Widowhood, may not lawfully marry, after their said Orders
received, or Vows made.

The Twelfth; Secret auricular Confession is expedient and necessary to be
retained, continued, and frequented in the Church of Christ.

The Thirteenth; The Prescience and Predestination of Almighty God, although in it
self it be infallible, induces no necessity to the Action of Man, but that he
may freely use the power of his own will or choice, the said Prescience or
Predestination notwithstanding.

I Nicholas Shaxton, with my Heart, do believe, and with my Mouth do confess
all these Articles above-written to be true in every part.

Ne despicias hominem avertentem se a peccato, neque improperes ei: memento
quoniam omnes in corruptione sumus, Eccles. 8.
XXX. A Letter written by Lethington the Secretary of Scotland, to Sir William
Cecil, the Queen of England's Secretary, touching the Title of the Queen of
Scots to the Crown of England: By which it appears that K. Henry's Will was not
signed by him.
I Cannot be ignorant that some do object as to her Majesty's Foreign Birth,
Ex MS. D.G. P^tyr.
and hereby think to make her incapable of the Inheritance of England. To that
you know for answer what may be said by an English Patron of my Mistriss's
Cause, although I being a Scot will not affirm the same, that there arises
amongst you a Question; Whether the Realm of Scotland be forth of the Homage
and Leageance of England: And therefore you have in sundry Proclamations
preceding your Warsmaking, and in sundry Books at sundry times, labored much
to prove the Homage and Fealty of Scotland to England. Your Stories also be not
void of this intent. What the judgment of the Fathers of your Law is, and what
commonly is thought in this Matter, you know better than I, and may have better
intelligence than I, the Argument being fitter for your Assertion than mine.

Another Question there is also upon this Objection of Foreign Birth; that is
to say, Whether Princes inheritable to the Crown, be in case of the Crown
exempted or concluded as private Persons, being Strangers born forth of the
Allegiance of England. You know in this case, as diverse others, the State of
the Crown: the Persons inheritable to the Crown at the time of their Capacity,
have diverse differences and prerogatives from other Persons; many Laws made for
other Persons take no hold in case of the Prince, and they have such
Privileges as other Persons enjoy not: As in cases of Attainders, and other
Penal Laws: Examples, Hen. 7. who being a Subject, was attainted; and Ed. 4.
and his Father Richard Plantagenet were both attainted; all which
notwithstanding their Attainders had right to the Crown, and two of them
attained the same. Amongst many Reasons to be showed, both for the differences,
and that Foreign Birth does not take place in the case of the Crown, as in
common Persons, the many experiences before the Conquest, and since, of your
King's* do plainly testify. 2. Of purpose I will name unto you, Hen. 2d. Maud
the Empress Son, and Richard of Bourdeaux, the Black Princes Son, the rather
for that neither of the two was the King of England's Son, and so not Enfant du
Roy, if the word be taken in this strict signification. And for the better
proof, that it was always the common Law of your Realm, that in the case of the
Crown, Foreign Birth was no Bar; you do remember the words of the Stat. 25.
Ed. 3. where it is said, the Law was ever so: Whereupon if you can remember it,
you and I fell out at a reasoning in my Lord of Leicester's Chamber, by the
occasion of the Abridgment of Rastal, wherein I did show you somewhat to this
purpose; also these words, Infant and Ancestors be in Praedicamento ad aliquid,
and so Correlatives in such sort, as the meaning of the Law was not to restrain
the understanding of this word Infant, so strict as only to the Children of the
King's Body, but to others inheritable in remainder; and if some Sophisters
will needs cavil about the precise understanding of Infant, let them be
answered with the scope of this word Ancestors in all Provisions, for Filii,
Nepotes and Liberi, you may see there was no difference betwixt the first
degree, and these that come after by the Civil Law. Liberorum appellatione
comprehenduntur non solum Filii, verum etiam Nepotes, Pronepotes, Abnepotes,
etc. If you examine the Reason why Foreign Birth is excluded, you may see that
it was not so needful in Princes Cases, as in common Persons. Moreover, I know
that England has oftentimes married with Daughters, and married with the
greatest Foreign Princes of Europe. And so I do also understand, that they all
did repute the Children of them, and of the Daughters of England, inheritable
in succession to that Crown, notwithstanding the Foreign Birth of their Issue:
And in this case I do appeal to all Chronicles, to their Contracts of
Marriages, and to the opinion of all the Princes of Christendom. For tho
England be a noble and puissant Country, the respect of the Alliance only, and
the Dowry, has not moved the great Princes to match so often in marriage, but
the possibility of the Crown in succession. I cannot be ignorant altogether in
this Matter, considering that I serve my Sovereign in the room that you serve
yours. The Contract of Marriage is extant betwixt the King, my Mistris's
Grandfather, and Queen Margaret, Daughter to King Henry the 7 th, by whose
Person the Title is devolved on my Sovereign; what her Fathers meaning was in
bestowing of her, the World knows, by that which is contained in the
Chronicles written by Polidorus Virgilius, before (as I think) either you or I
was born; at least when it was little thought that this Matter should come in
question. There is another Exception also laid against my Sovereign, which
seems at the first to be of some weight, grounded upon some Statutes made in
King Hen. 8. time, (viz.) of the 28 th, and 35 th of his Reign, whereby full
power and authority was given him the said King Henry, to give, dispose,
appoint, assign, declare, and limit, by his Letters Patents under his Great
Seal, or else by his last Will made in writing, and signed with his hand at his
pleasure, from time to time thereafter the Imperial Crown of that Realm, etc.
Which Imperial Crown is by some alleged and constantly affirmed to have been
limited and disposed, by the last Will and Testament of the said King Hen. 8.
signed with his hand before his death, unto the Children of the Lady Francis;
and Elenor, Daughter to Mary the French Queen, younger Daughter of Hen. 7. and
of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk; so as it is thought the Queen, my
Sovereign, and all others, by course of Inheritance, be by these Circumstances
excluded and fore-closed: So as it does well become all Subjects, such as I am,
so my liking is, to speak of Princes, of their Reigns and Proceedings modestly,
and with respect; yet I cannot abstain to say, that the Chronicles and
Histories of that Age, and your own printed Statutes being extant, do
contaminate and disgrace greatly the Reign of that King in that time. But to
come to our purpose, what equity and justice was that to disinherit a Race of
Foreign Princes of their possibility, and maternal right, by a municipal Law
or Statute made in that, which some would term abrupt time, and say, that that
would rule the Roast, yea, and to exclude the right Heirs from their Title,
without calling them to answer, or any for them: well, it may be said, that ^he
injury of the time, and the indirect dealing is not to be allowed; ^ut since it
is done it cannot be avoided, unless some Circumstances material do annihilate
the said limitation and disposition of the Crown.

Now let us examine the manner and circumstances how King Hen. 8. was by
Statute enabled to dispose the Crown. There is a form in two sorts prescribed
him, which he may not transgress, that is to say, either by his Letters
Patents, sealed with his Great Seal, or by his last Will, signed with his hand:
for in this extraordinary case he was held to an ordinary and precise form;
which being not observed, the Letters Patents, or Will, cannot work the intent
or effect supposed. And to disprove, that the Will was signed with his own
hand; You know, that long before his death he never used his own signing with
his own hand; and in the time of his Sickness, being diverse times pressed to
put his hand to the Will written, he refused to do it. And it seemed God would
not suffer him to proceed in an Act so injurious and prejudicial to the right
Heir of the Crown, being his Niece. Then his death approaching, some as well
known to you as to me, caused William Clarke, sometimes Servant to Thomas
Henneage, to sign the supposed Will with a stamp, (for otherwise signed it was
never); and yet notwithstanding some respecting more the satisfaction of their
ambition, and others their private commodity, than just and upright dealing,
procured diverse honest Gentlemen, attending in diverse several Rooms about the
King's Person, to testify with their hand-writings the Contents of the said
pretended Will, surmised to be signed with the King's own hand. To prove this
dissembled and forged signed Testament, I do refer you to such Trials as be yet
left. First; The Attestation of the late Lord Paget, published in the
Parliament in Queen Mary's time, for the restitution of the Duke of Norfolk.
Next, I pray you, on my Sovereigns behalf, that the Depositions may be taken in
this Matter of the Marquess of Winchester, Lord Treasurer of England, the
Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Pembroke, Sir William Petre then one of
King Henry's Secretaries, Sir Henry Nevill, Sir Maurice Barkley, Doctor Buts,
Edmond Harman Baker, John Osborn Groom of the Chamber, Sir Anthony Dennis, if
he be living, Terris the Surgeon, and such as have heard David Vincent and
others speak in this case; and that their Attestations may be enrolled in the
Chancery, and in the Arches, In perpetuam rei memoriam.

Thirdly; I do refer you to the Original Will surmised to be signed with the
King's own hand, that thereby it may most clearly and evidently appear by some
differences, how the same was not signed with the King's hand, but stamped as
aforesaid. And albeit it is used both as an Argument and Calumniation against
my Sovereign to some, that the said Original has been embezelled in Queen
Mary's time, I trust God will and has reserved the same to be an Instrument to
relieve the Truth, and to confound false Surmises, that thereby the Right may
take place, notwithstanding the many Exemplifications and Transcripts, which
being sealed with the great Seal, do run abroad in England, and do carry away
many Men's minds, as great presumptions of great variety and validity. But, Sir,
you know in cases of less importance, that the whole Realm of England,
Transcripts and Exemplifications be not of so great force in Law to serve for
the recovery of any thing, either real or personal: And in as much as my
Sovereign's Title in this case shall be little advanced, by taking exceptions
to others pretended and crased Titles, considering her precedence, I will leave
it to such as are to claim after the issue of Hen. the 7 th, to lay in Bar the
Poligamy of Charles Brandon the Duke of Suffolk; and also the vitiated and
clandestine Contract, (if it may be so called) having no witness nor
solemnization of Christian Matrimony, nor any lawful matching of the Earl of
Hertford and the Lady Katharine. Lastly; The semblably compelling of Mr. Key,
and the Lady Mary Sister to the Lady Katherine.

And now, Sir, I have to answer your desire said somewhat briefly to the
Matter, which indeed is very little, where so much may be said; for to speak
truly, the Cause speaks for it self. I have so long forborne to deal in this
matter, that I have almost forgotten many things which may be said for
Roboration of her Right, which I can shortly reduce to my Remembrance, being at
Edinburgh where my Notes are: So that if you be not by this satisfied, upon
knowledge from you of any other Objection, I hope to satisfy you unto all things
may be said against her. In the mean time I pray you so counsel the Queen, your
Sovereign, as some effectual reparation may follow without delay, of the many
and sundry traverses and dis-favorings committed against the Queen, my
Sovereign: as the publishing of so many exemplifications of King Henry's
supposed Will, the secret embracing of John Halles Books, the Books printed and
not avowed the last Summer, one of the which my Mistress has sent by Henry
Killigrew to the Queen your Sovereign; The Disputes and Proceedings of
Lincoln's Inn, where the Case was ruled against the Queen my Sovereign; The
Speeches of sundry in this last Session of Parliament, tending all to my
Sovereigns derision, and nothing said to the contrary by any Man, but the
Matter shut up with silence, most to her prejudice; and by so much the more as
every Man is gone home settled and confirmed in his Error. And, Lastly, The
Queen, your Sovereign's resolution to defend now by Proclamations, all Books
and Writings containing any discussion of Titles, when the whole Realm has
engendered by these fond proceedings, and other favored practis^s, a settled
opinion against my Sovereigns, to the advancement of my Lady Katherines Title.
I might also speak of an other Book lately printed and set abroad in this last
Session, containing many Untruths and weak Reasons, which Mr. Wailing desired
might be answered before the Defense were made by Proclamation. I trust you
will so hold hand to the Reformation of all these things, as the Queen, my
Sovereign, may have effectual occasion to esteem you her Friend; which doing,
you shall never offend the Queen your Mistress, your Country, nor Conscience,
but be a favourer of the Truth against Errors, and yet deserve well of a
Princess, who has a good heart to recognize any good turn, when it is done
her, and may hereafter have means to do you pleasure. For my particular, as I
have always honored you as my Father, so do I still remain of the same mind,
as one, whom in all things not touching the State, you may direct, as your Son
Thomas Cecil, and with my hearty commendations to you, and my Lady, both, I
take my leave.

From Striveling, the 14 th of January, 1566.
FINIS.
AN APPENDIX Concerning some of the Errors and Falsehoods IN SANDER's Book OF
THE English Schism.

AN APPENDIX.
THose who intend to write Romances or Plays, do commonly take their Plot from
some true piece of History; in which they fasten such Characters to Persons and
Things, and mix such Circumstances and secret Passages, with those public
Transactions and Changes, that are in other Histories; as may more artificially
raise these passions and affections in their Readers minds, which they intend
to move, than could possibly be done, if the whole story were a mere fiction
and contrivance: and tho all Men know those tender passages to flow only from
the invention and fancy of the Poet; yet by I know not what char^ the greatest
part that read or hear their Poems, are softened and sensibly touched.

Some such design Sanders seems to have had in his Book, which he very wisely
kept up as long as he lived: he intended to represent the Reformation in the
foulest shape that was possible, to defame Queen Elizabeth, to stain her Blood,
and thereby to bring her Title to the Crown in question; and to magnify the
Authority of the Sea of Rome, and celebrate Monastic Orders, with all the
praises and high characters he could devise: And therefore after he had writ
several Books on these Subjects, without any considerable success, they being
all rather filled with foul calumnies and detracting malice, than good
Arguments, or strong sense, he resolved to try his skill another way; so he
intended to tell a doleful Tale, which should raise a detestation of Heresy,
an ill Opinion of the Queen, cast a stain on her Blood, and disparage her
Title, and advance the honor of the Papacy. A Tragedy was fitter for these
ends, since it left the deepest impressions on the graver and better affections
of the mind; the Scene must be laid in England, and King Henry the Eighth and
his three Children, with the changes that were in their times, seemed to afford
very plentiful Matter for a Man of wit and fancy, who knew where he could
dexterously show his Art, and had boldness enough to do it without shame, or the
reverence due, either to crowned Heads, or to Persons that were dead. Yet
because he knew not how he could hold up his Face to the World, after these
discoveries were made, which he had reason to expect, this was concealed as
long as he lived: and after he had died for his Faith (that is, in Rebellion,
which I shall show is the Faith in his style) this Work of his was published.
The style is generally clean, and things are told in an easy and pleasant way;
only he could not use his Art so decently, as to restrain that malice which
boiled in his Breast, and often fermented out too palpably in his Pen.

The Book served many ends well, and so was generally much cried up, by Men who
had been long accustomed to commend any thing that was useful to them, without
troubling themselves with those impertinent Questions, whether they were true
or false; yet Rishton and others since that time took the Pencil again in their
hands, and finding there were many touches wanting, which would give much life
to the whole Piece, have so changed it, that it was afterward reprinted, not
only with a large continuation, that was writ by a much more unskilful Poet,
but with so many and great additions, scattered thorough the whole Work,
whereby it seemed so changed in the vamping, that it looked new.

If any will give themselves the trouble, to compare his Fable with the History
that I have written, and the certain undoubted Authorities I bring in
confirmation of what I assert, with the slender and (for the most part) no
Authorities, he brings, they will soon be able to discern where the Truth lies:
but because all People have not the leisure or opportunities for laying things
so critically together, I was advised, by those whose Counsels directed me in
this whole Work, to sum up, in an Appendix, the most considerable Falsehoods and
Mistakes of that Book, with the Evidences upon which I rejected them. Therefore
I have drawn out the following Extraction, which consists of Errors of two
sorts. The one is, of the^e in which there is indeed no malice, yet they show
the Writer had no ^^ue information of our Affairs, but commits many Faults,
which tho they leave not such foul imputations on the Author, yet tend very
much to disparage and discredit his Work. But the others are of an higher
guilt, being designed Forgeries, to serve partial ends; not only without any
Authority, but manifestly contrary to Truth, and to such Records as (in spite
of all the care they took in Q. Mary's time by destroying them, to condemn
Posterity to Ignorance in these Matters) are yet reserved, and serve to
discover the falsehood of those Calumnies in which they have traded so long. I
shall pursue these Errors in the series in which they are delivered in Sanders
his Book, according to the Impression at Colen 1628, which is that I have. I
first set down his Errors, and then a short confutation of them, referring the
Reader for fuller information to the foregoing History.

Page 2.
1. Sanders says; That when Prince Arthur and his Princess were bedded, King
Henry the 7 th ordered a grave Matron to lie in the Bed, that so they might not
consummate their Marriage.

This is the groundwork of the whole Fable; and should have been some-way or
other proved. But if we do not take so small a circumstance upon his word, we
treat him rudely; and who will write Histories, if they be bound to say nothing
but Truth! But little thought our Author that there were three Depositions upon
Record, point blank against this, for the Duchess of Norfolk, the Viscount of
Fitswater and his Lady, deposed they saw them bedded together, and the Bed
blessed after they two were put in it; besides that such an extravagant thing
was never known done in any place.

Ibid.
2. Sanders says; Prince Arthur was not then fifteen years of Age, and was sick
of a lingering Disease.

The Plot goes on but scurvily, when the next thing that is brought to confirm
it, is contradicted by Records. Prince Arthur was born the 20 th of September,
in the year 1486, and so was 15 years old and two months passed at the 14 th of
November 1501, in which he was married to the Princess, and was then of a
lively and good Complexion, and did not begin to decay till the Shrovetide
following, which was imputed to his excesses in the Bed, at the Witnesses
deposed.

3. He says; Ibid.
Upon the motion for the marrying of his Brother Henry to the Princess, it was
agreed to by all, that the thing was lawful.

It was perhaps agreed on at Rome, where Money and other political Arts sway
their Counsels; but it was not agreed to in England: for which we have no
meaner Author, than Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, who, when examined upon
Oath, deposed that himself then thought the Marriage was not honorable nor
well-pleasing to God, and that he had thereupon opposed it much, and that the
People murmured at it.

4. He says; There was not one Man in any Nation under Heaven, Page 3.
or in the whole Church, that spoke against it.

The common Style of the Roman Church, calling the Sea of Rome the Catholic
Church, must be applied to this, to bring off our Author; otherwise I know not
how to save his Reputation. Therefore by all the Nations under Heaven must be
understood only the Divines at Rome, tho when it came to be examined, they
could scarce find any who would justify it: all the most famous Universities,
Divines, and Canonists, condemned it, and Warham's Testimony contradicts this
plainly, besides the other great Authorities that were brought against it, for
which see lib. 2. from page 91. to page 103.

5. He says, "The King once said, He would not marry the Queen. Page 4.


Here is a pretty Essay of our Authors Art, who would make us think it was only
in a transient discourse, that the King said he would not marry Queen
Katherine; but this was more maturely done, by a solemn Protestation, which he
read himself before the Bishop of Winchester, that he would never marry her,
and that he revoked his consent given under Age. This was done when he came to
be of Age, see page 36. it is also confessed by Sanders himself.

6. He says; "The Queen bore him three Sons and two Daughters. Ibid.


All the Books of that time speak only of two Sons, and one Daughter; but this
is a flourish of his Pen, to represent her a fruitful Mother.

7. He says; The King had sometimes two, Page 5.
sometimes three Concubines at once.

It does not appear he had ever any but Elizabeth Blunt; and if we judge of his
Life, by the Letters the Popes wrote to him, and many printed Elogies that were
published then, he was a Prince of great Piety and Religion all that while.

8. He says; Page 6.
The Lady Mary was first desired in marriage by James the 5 th of Scotland,
then by Charles the 5 th the Emperor; and then Francis asked her, first for the
Dolphin, then for the Duke of Orleance, and last of all for himself.

But all this is wrong placed, for she was first contracted to the Dolphin,
then to the Emperor, and then treated about to the King of Scotland; after that
it was left to Francis his choice, whether she should be married to himself, or
his second Son the Duke of Orleance: So little did our Poet know the public
Transactions of that time.

Ibid.
9. He says; She was in the end contracted to the Dolphin: from whence he
concludes that all Foreign Princes were satisfied with the lawfulness of the
Marriage.

She was first of all contracted to the Dolphin. Foreign Princes were so
little satisfied of the lawfulness of the Marriage, that tho she being Heir to
the Crown of England, was a Match of great advantage; yet their Counselors
excepted to it, on that very account, that the Marriage was not good. This was
done in Spain, and she was rejected, as a Writer who lived in that time informs
us; and Sanders confesses it was done by the French Ambassador.

Page 7.
10. He says; Wolsey was first Bishop of Lincoln, then of Duresme, after that of
Winchester, and last of all Archbishop of York; after that he was made
Chancellor, then Cardinal and Legate.

The order of these Preferments is quite reversed; for Wolsey soon after he was
made Bishop of Lincoln, upon Cardinal Bembridge his death, was not only
promoted to the Sea of York, but advanced to be a Cardinal in the 7 th year of
the King's Reign: And some months after that, he was made Lord Chancellor; and
seven years after that, he got the Bishopric of Duresme, which six years after
he exchanged for Winchester. He had heard perhaps that he enjoyed all these
Preferments; but knowing nothing of our Affairs beyond hearsay, he resolved to
make him rise as Poets order their Heroes by degrees, and therefore ranks his
Advancement not according to Truth, but in the method he liked best himself.

Page 8.
11. He says; Wolsey first designed the Divorce, and made Longland, that was the
King's Confessor, second his motion for it.

The King not only denied this in public, saying, That he himself had first
moved it to Longland in Confession; and that Wolsey had opposed it all he
could: but in private discourse with Grinaeus told him, he had labored under
these scruples for seven years; septem perpetuis annis trepidatio. Which
reckoning from the year 1531, in which Grinaeus wrote this to one of his
Friends, will fall back to the year 1524. long before Wolsey had any
provocation to tempt him to it.

Page 9.
12. He says; In the year 1526, in which the King was first made to doubt of his
Marriage, he was resolved then whom to marry when he was once divorced.

But by his other Story, Ann Boleyn was then but fifteen years old, and went to
France at that Age, where she stayed a considerable time before she came to the
Court of England.

Ibid.
13. He says; The King spent a year in a private search, to see what could be
found, either in the Scriptures, or the Pope's Bull, to be made use of against
his Marriage; but they could find nothing.

In that time all the Bishops of England, except Fisher, declared under their
Hands and Seals, that they thought the Marriage unlawful; for which see page
38. and upon what Reasons this was grounded, has been clearly opened, page 97.

14. He says; Ibid.
If there were any ambiguities in the Pope's first Letters (meaning the Bull,
for dispensing with the marriage) they were cleared by other Letters, which
Ferdinand of Spain had afterward procured.

These other Letters (by which he means the Breve) bear date the same day with
the Bull; and so were not procured afterward. There were indeed violent
presumptions of their being forged long after, even after the Process had been
almost an year in agitation. But tho they helped the matter in some lesser
Particulars; yet in the main Business, Whether Prince Arthur did know his
Princess, they did it a great prejudice; for whereas the Bull bore, that by the
Queens Petition her former Marriage was perhaps consummated, the Breve bears
that in her Petition, the Marriage was said to be consummated, without any
perhaps.

15. He says; The King having seen these second Letters, Ibid.
both he and his Council resolved to move no more in it.

The Process was carried on, almost a year, before the Breve was heard of: and
the forgery of it soon appeared, so they went on notwithstanding it.

16. He says; The Bishop of Tarby being come from France, Page 10.
to conclude the Match for the Lady Mary, was set on by the King and the
Cardinal, to move the exception to the lawfulness of the marriage.

There is no reason to believe this; for that Bishop, tho afterward made a
Cardinal, never published this: which both he ought to have done as a good
Catholic, and certainly would have done as a true Cardinal, when he saw what
followed upon it, and perceived that he was trepanned to be the first mover of
a thing, which ended so fatally forth Interests of Rome.

17. He says; The Bishop of Tarby, Page 11.
in a Speech before the King in Council, said, That not he alone, but almost
all Learned Men, thought the King's Marriage unlawful and null: so that he was
freed from the Bond of it, and that it was against the Rules of the Gospel; and
that all Foreign Nations had ever spoken very freely of it, lamenting that the
King was drawn into it in his Youth.

It is not ordinary for Ambassadors to make Speeches in King's Coun^cils: But
if this be true, it agrees ill with what this Author delivers in his third
Page, That there was not a Man in the whole Church, nor under Heaven, that
spoke against it, otherwise the Bishop of Tarby was both an impudent and a
foolish Man.

18. He says; Upon the Pope's Captivity, Page 13.
Wolsey was sent over to France with 300000 Crowns to procure the Pope's
liberty.

Hall, Hollingshead, and Stow, say, He carried over 240000 pounds Sterlin,
which is more than thrice that sum.

Ibid.
19. He says; Two Colleagues were sent in this Ambassy with the Cardinal.

His greatness was above that, and none are mentioned in the Records.

Ibid.
20. He says; Orders followed him to Callais, not to move any thing about the
King's Marriage with the French King's Sister, the King having then resolved to
marry Ann Boleyn.

This agrees ill with what he said page 9. that a year before the King was
resolved whom to marry.

Ibid.
21. He says; King Henry, that he might have freer access to Sir Thomas Boleyn's
Lady, sent him to France; where after he had stayed two years, his Lady was
with Child of Ann Boleyn by the King.

This Story was already confuted, see page 41, 42. And in it there are more
than one or two lies.

1. Sir Thomas Boleyn went not Ambassador to France till the 7 th year of the
King's Reign: And if two years after that, Ann was born, which was the 9 th of
his Reign, she must then have been but ten years old at this time.

2. Tho he had sent him upon his first coming to the Crown, this could not be
true; for two years after, admit her to be born, that is Anno 1511, then a year
before this, which was Anno 1526, she was fifteen years old; in which Age,
Sanders says, she was corrupted in her Father's House, and sent over to France,
where she staid long. But all this is false: For,

3. She was born two years before the King came to the Crown, in the year 1507.
and if her Father was sent to France two years before, it was in the year 1505.

4. The King being then Prince, was but fourteen years old, for he was born the
28 th of June, in the year 1491: in which Age there is no reason to think he
was so forward as to be corrupting other Men's Wives, for they will not allow
his Brother, when almost two years elder, to have known his own Wife.

As for the other pieces of this Story, that Sir Thomas Boleyn did sue his Lady
in the Spiritual Court; that upon the King's sending him word that she was with
Child by him, he passed it over; that the King had also known her Sister, and
that she had owned it to the Queen, that at the fifteenth year of Ann's Age,
she had prostituted her self both to her Fathers Butler, and Chaplain; that
then she was sent to France, where she was at first for some time concealed,
then brought to Court, where she was so notoriously lewd, that she was called
an Hackney; that she afterward was kept by the French King; that when she came
over into England, Sir Thomas Wiat was admitted to base privacies with her, and
offered to the King and his Council, that he himself should with his own Eyes
see it: And in fine, that she was ugly, mishaped, and monstrous, are such an
heap of impudent Lies, that none but a Fool, as well as a Knave, would venture
on such a recital. And for all this, he cites no other Authority but Rastal's
Life of Sir Thomas More, a Book that was seen by none but himself; and he gives
no other evidence that there was any such Book but his own Authority. Nor is it
likely that Rastal ever writ More's Life, since he did not set it out with his
Works, which he published in one Volume, Anno 1556. It is true, More's Son in
Law, Roper, writ his Life, which is since printed, but there is no such Story
in it. The whole is such a piece of lying, as if he who forged it, had resolved
to outdo all who had ever gone before him: for can it be so much as imagined,
that a King could pursue a design for seven years together, of marrying a Woman
of so scandalous a Life, and so disagreeable a Person; and that he who was
always in the other extreme of Jealousy, did never try out these Reports, and
would not so much as see what Wiat informed? Nor were these things published in
the Libels that were printed at that time, either in the Emperor's Court, or at
Rome. All which show that this was a desperate contrivance of Malicious
Traitors, against their Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, to defame and disgrace her.
And this I take to be the true reason, why none made any full answer to this
Book all her time. It was not thought for the Queen's honor to let such Stuff
be so much considered as to merit an answer. So that the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
and 18, pages are one continued Lie.

22. He says; Page 16.
Sir Thomas Boleyn hearing the King intended to marry his supposed Daughter,
came over in all haste from France, to put him in mind that she was his own
Child; and that the King bade him hold his peace for a Fool, for an hundred had
lien with his Wife as well as he, but whosesoever Daughter she was, she should
be his Wife: and upon that Sir Thomas instructed his Daughter how she should
hold the King in her toils.

Sir Thomas must have thought the King had an ill memory, if he had forgot such
a Story: but the one part of this makes him afraid that the King should marry
his Daughter, and the other part makes him afraid they should miss their hopes
in it: Not to mention how little likely it is, that a King of such high vanity,
would have done that which the privatest Person has an aversion to, I mean, the
marrying the Daughter of one whom they know to be a common Prostitute.

23. He says; Wolsey before his return from France, Page 19.
sent Gambara to the Pope, desiring him to name himself Vicar of the Papacy,
during his captivity.

This was not done till almost a year after this: and the motion was sent by
Staphileus Dean of the Rota, for which see page 50.

24. He says; Page 20.
None but ill Men and ignorant Persons wrote against the Marriage, but all
learned and good Men wrote for it.

The whole Doctors of the Church, in all Ages, were against it; and no Doctor,
ancienter than Cajetan, could ever be found to have writ for it.

25. He says; Ibid.
That tho great endeavors were used to persuade Sir Tho. More of the
unlawfulness of the marriage, all was in vain.

Is it probable that the King would have made him Lord Chancellor, when he was
so earnest in this business, if he had not known that he would have gone along
with him in it. By one of his Letters to Cromwell out of the Tower it appears,
that he approved the Divorce, and had great hopes of success in it, as long as
it was prosecuted at Rome, and founded on the defects in the Bull. And in the
22 d year of the King's Reign, when the Opinions of the Universities, and the
Books of Learned Men were brought to England against the Marriage, he carried
them down to the House of Commons, and made read them there; after which he
desired they would report in their Country what they had heard and seen; and
then all Men would openly perceive that the King had not attempted this matter
of his Will and Pleasure, but only for the discharge of his Conscience. More
was a Man of greater integrity than to have said this, if he had thought the
Marriage good; so that he has either afterward changed his mind, or did at
this time dissemble too artificially with the King.

Page 22.
26. After a long flourish about the King's secret fears and apprehensions, and
the perplexities the Cardinal was in, which must pass for a piece of his Wit,
that is to say, Lying, for he knew none of their thoughts; He says, That
Gardener and Sir Francis Brian were sent to the Pope together, Gardener being
then Secretary of State.

In this there are only three gross mistakes. First, Gardener was not sent with
the first Message to the Pope, Secretary Knight carried it.

2. Sir Francis Brian went never to Rome with Gardener: It is true, a year
after the commencing the Suit, Sir Francis Brian was sent to Rome, and about a
month after him Gardener was also sent; so tho they were both together at Rome,
yet they were not sent thither together.

3. Gardener was not Secretary of State, but was Wolsey's Secretary, when he
went first to Rome, and was made a Privy Counselor when he was sent thither
the second time; and was not Secretary of State till some months after his
return from his Journey the last time.

Page 23.
27. He says; They made the Pope believe that the Queen would willingly retire
into a Monastery.

This was on the contrary a contrivance of the Popes, who thought it the
easiest way to bring the Matter to a good issue; but in England they had no
hopes of it, and so always diverted the motion when it was proposed by the Pope.

Ibid.
28. He says; 'The Pope said he would consult with some Cardinals and Divines,
and do all that he could lawfully do to give the King satisfaction.

Upon the first motion of it, the Pope frankly granted the King's desire; and
gave a Bull with a Commission upon it: And only consulted some Cardinals about
the methods of doing it. And did assure the King, that he would not only do
every thing that could be granted in Law or Justice, but whatsoever he could
grant out of the fullness of his Power. It is true, afterward when the Pope
changed his measures, and resolved to agree with the Emperor, he pretended he
understood not these things himself, but would needs turn it over upon the
Cardinals and Divines.

29. He says; Page 24.
All the Cardinals were of a mind that the Marriage was good.

Cardinal Sanctorum Quatuor, by the force of that mighty Argument of 4000
Crowns, changed his mind. All the other Cardinals were forward in granting the
King's desires, for which he wrote them a Letter of Thanks.

30. He says; The Pope granted the Commission to the two Legates, Page 26.
not doubting but it was true, that had been told him of the Queens readiness
to go into a Monastery.

The Pope knew she would not yield to any such thing; but when he granted that
Commission, he sent with Campegio a Decretal Bull, annulling the Marriage: and
sent afterward a promise never to avocate the Process, but to confirm what
Sentence the Legates should give; tho soon after he broke his promise most
signally. And since he had often dispensed with others for breaking their
Faith, he might think that it was hard to deny him the same privilege for
himself.

31. He says; Ibid.
The Pope understanding that the Queen did not consent to the Propositions that
were made, and that he had been abused, sent after Campegio, when he was on his
Journey, that he should not proceed to a Sentence without a new order.

The Pope sent Campana to England after Campegio, to assure the King he would
do every thing for him that he could do out of the fullness of his Power: And
ordered the same Person to charge Cardinal Campegio to burn the Decretal Bull,
which he had sent by him: In all which the Pope, as appears by the Original
Letters, was only governed by politic Maxims, and considered nothing but the
dangers himself was like to fall in; tho Sanders would persuade us, he was
ready to run the hazard of all these.

32. He says; The King by his Letters to the Pope, did, Page 30.
at the same time that he was moving scruples about his own Marriage, transact
about a Dispensation for a marriage betwixt his own natural Son the Duke of
Richmond, and his Daughter the Lady Mary.

Tho the whole Dispatches at that time, both to and from Rome, be most happily
preserved, there is not the least mention of any such design: and can any body
think that if any such motion had been made, the Pope would not have taken
great advantages from it, and that these Letters would not have been afterward
published? But this Sanders thought was a pretty embellishment of his Fable;
and of a piece with this is his next.

33. He says; The King did under his own hand confess, Ibid.
he had known Ann Boleyn's Sister Mary, and desired the Pope would dispense
with his marrying Ann notwithstanding that.

The falsehood of this appears from the recital of it: And how came it that
these Letters were not published? Nor is there any mention of this in all the
Dispatches I have seen. And it is not possible that in so many conferences
which the English Ambassadors had with the Pope, these two things should never
have been discoursed of. And can it be thought credible that at the same time
when the King pretended such scruples and troubles of Consciences, he could be
guilty of so much folly and impudence, as to put himself thus in the Pope's
Mercy, by two such demands. This was a forgery of Cardinal Pole's, which
Sanders greedily catched to dress up the Scene.

Page 34.
34. From page 34, to 42, there is a trifling account given of the Reasons
brought against the Marriage, which Sanders answers manfully, and fights
courageously against the Man of Straw he had set up. But if that be compared
with what has been opened in the History, it will appear how lame and defective
his account is.

Page 42.
35. He says; Clarke Bishop of Bath and Wells, Tonstal Bishop of London, and
West Bishop of Ely, writ for the lawfulness of the King's marriage.

All the Bishops, except Fisher, had a year before this given it under their
Hands and Seals, that the King's marriage was unlawful: and in all the
Memorials of that time, Fisher is the only Bishop I find mentioned to have writ
for it. Tonstall was also soon after translated to Duresme, which none that
have considered that King's temper, will think could have been done, if he had
interposed in so tender a Point, against what the King so vehemently desired.

Ibid.
36. He says; That Abel, Powel, Fetherston, and Ridley, also writ for the
marriage.

This is not likely of the second and third, for they being afterward
attainted of Treason, no such Books were objected to them; but the Crime
charged on them, was only that they said, the King's marriage with Q. Katharine
was good.

Page 43.
37. He says; All things appeared clear in the Trial before the Legates, in
behalf of the Marriage, so that they could give no Sentence against such full
evidence as was brought for it.

This is said without any regard to Truth; for all the Matter of Fact that had
been alleged, was clearly proved for the contrary side. It was proved that
Prince Arthur married the Queen: violent presumptions appeared of his
consummating the Marriage: It was also proved that the King was under age when
the Bull was obtained, and that the Petitions given in his Name, upon which the
Bull was granted, were false: That the King had not desired it, but when he
came of Age he had protested against it: And that there was no hazard of a War
between Spain and England, the preventing which was the chief reason set down
in the Bull that permitted it. So that all that had been informed at Rome, as
to matter of Fact, was fully proved before the Legates, by clear Instruments,
and many and noble Witnesses.

Ibid.
38. He puts a long bold speech in Campegio's Mouth, who was far from assuming
such freedom; but lived licentiously in England, in all manner of disorders, of
which both he and his Bastard Son were guilty. And by dissembling, and other
Arts, persuaded the King to delay the Process, from day to day, giving him full
assurances, that in conclusion he should obtain what he desired: and by such
means he gained time, and drew out the Trial, till the Pope had ended his
Treaty with the Emperor; and then he served him an Italian trick, by adjourning
the Court.

39. He says; Some Doctors being corrupted with the King's Money, Page 48.
declared for him; but those were none of the most learned.

The King ordered those he sent, not to give or promise any thing to any
Person, till they had delivered their Opinion freely: upon which some of them
wrote to him, that they would answer upon their heads, that they had followed
his Orders in that particular.

40. He says; Ibid.
These Determinations were published in the names of the Universities, to
deceive the World by a false representation of so great Authorities.

Were the public Seals of the Universities put to their determinations, after
a long debate, all being required to deliver their Consciences upon Oath, and
done with the unanimous consent of the whole faculty in some places, false
representations? This was done in Italy, in Padua, Bononia, Ferrara, and
Millan, under the Pope and the Emperors Eye, and within their Dominions.

41. He says; Page 50.
Endeavors were used to corrupt the University of Colen, and some others in
Germany, for which great sums were offered, and that the King was at a vast
expense in it.

Crooks accounts show that his expense in Italy was very inconsiderable. And
who can imagine that when Paris, Padua, and Bononia, had declared for the King,
he would be much concerned for Colen, or any other University in Germany? Those
who will believe Sanders, and such Authors as he quotes, Cochleus, and an
unknown Bishop of Brasile, may if they will.

42. He says; Page 51.
In Oxford the King not being able to obtain a satisfactory answer in that
Matter, eight Students of the University broke into the place where the Seal
was laid, and put it to an Answer, which passed for the determination of the
University.

The Lord Herbert says, there was an Original Instrument passed, which he saw;
by which the University did appoint a Committee of 33 Doctors and Batchelors of
Divinity to examine the Questions proposed by the King, and to set the Seal of
the University to any Answer that they should agree on: and these did
afterward give a Resolution against the lawfulness of the Marriage.

43. He tells a long Story of the King's endeavors to gain Reginald Pole, and
that he came over to England; Page 52.
and being much pressed by his Kindred to comply with the King, he went to him,
fully purposed to have done it: but could not speak a word to him, till he
resolved to talk to him in another style; and then he found his tongue, and
spoke very freely to the King, who put his hands sometimes to his Poynard,
intending to have killed him; but was overcome with the simplicity and humility
of his Discourse: and so the King continued his Pension to him, and gave him
leave to go back to Padua.

This is another pretty adventure of one of the Hero's of the Romance, but has
this misfortune in it, that it is all without any proof: for as none of the
Books of that time ever mention it, so neither did Pole himself pretend to have
carried so, in his Book, tho written with the most provoking insolence that was
possible. In it he mentions his going over to England, but not one word of any
such discourse with the King. And King Henry was not a Man of such a temper, as
to permit one of Pole's quality to go out of England, and live among his
Enemies, and continue his Pensions to him, if he had to his face opposed him in
a Matter he laid so much to heart.

Page 53.
44. He says; Fisher of Rochester, and Holman Bishop of Bristol, wrote for the
Marriage.

There was no Bishopric, nor Bishop of Bristol at that time, nor thirteen
years after.

Ibid.
45. Many are reckoned up who wrote for the Marriage in all Nations.

These are neither to be compared in number, nor authority, to those who wrote
against it; an hundred Books were showed in Parliament, written by Divines, and
Lawyers beyond Sea, besides the determinations of twelve of the most celebrated
Universities in Europe. The Emperor did indeed give so great Rewards, and such
good Benefices, to those who wrote against the King, that it is a wonder there
were not more Writers of his side.

Page 56.
46. He says; That upon Warham Archbishop of Canterbury's death, the Earl of
Wiltshire told the King that he had a Chaplain, who was at his House, that
would certainly serve the King in the matter of his Divorce; upon which Cranmer
was promoted.

Cranmer was no stranger to the King at this time: he was first recommended by
the King to the Earl of Wiltshire, to be kept in his House; but was in Germany,
when Warham died, and made no haste over, but delayed his Journey some months.
It is true, he was of the mind that the King ought to be divorced; but this was
not out of servile compliance, for when the King pressed him in other things
that were against his Conscience, he expressed all the courage and constancy of
mind which became so great a Prelate.

Ibid.
47. He says; That Cranmer being to swear the Oath of Obedience to the Pope,
before he was consecrated, did protest to a Public Notary, that he took it
against his will; and that he had no mind to keep his Faith to the Pope, in
prejudice to the King's Authority.

He did not protest that he did it unwillingly, nor was it only to a Notary,
but twice at the high Altar he repeated the Protestation that he made; which
was to this effect, That he intended not thereby to oblige himself to any
thing, contrary to the Law of God, the King's Prerogative, or the Laws of the
Land; nor to be restrained from speaking, advising, or consenting to any thing
that should concern the Reformation of the Christian Faith, the Government of
the Church of England, and the Prerogative of the Crown and Kingdom.

48. He says; Page 57.
Cranmer did in all things so comply with the King's Lusts, that the King was
wont to say he was the only Man that had never contradicted him in any thing he
had a mind to.

Cranmer was both a good Subject, and a modest and discreet Man, and so would
obey and submit as far as he might, without sin: yet when his Conscience
charged him to appear against any thing that the King pressed him to, as in the
matter of the six Articles, he did it with much resolution and boldness.

49. He says; The King going over to Calais, Page 58.
carried Ann Boleyn secretly with him.

He carried her over in great state, having made her Marchioness of Pembroke;
and in the public Interview between him and Francis, she appeared with all
possible splendour.

50. He says; After the King's return from France, Page 59.
he brought the Action of Praemunire against all the Clergy.

This is an Error of two years, for so long before this Voyage to France was
that action begun: and the Clergy about 28 months before had made their
submission, and obtained their pardon in March 1531, which appears by the
printed Statutes, and the King went over to France in September 1532; so that
it is clear Sanders never looked for any verification of what he wrote.

51. He says; The King by an unheard of Tyranny, Ibid.
and a new Calumny, brought this Charge against the Clergy.

These Laws upon which the Charge was founded, had been often renewed: they were
first made under Edward the First, by reason of the Papal Encroachments that
gave the rise to them; they were often confirmed by Edward the Third, Richard the
Second, Henry the Fourth, and Henry the Fifth, with the concurrence of their
Parliaments; so the Charge was neither new nor tyrannical.

52. He says; The Clergy submitted to the King, Ibid.
being betrayed by their Metropolitanes Cranmer and Lee.

The submission was made two years before Cranmer was Archbishop, in March
1531, and Cranmer was Consecrated in March 1533. but at that time Warham sat
in Canterbury; as for Lee, he opposed it for some time.

53. He says; The whole Clerg^ petitioned the King, Ibid.
to forgive their Crime, according to that Supreme Power which he had over all
the Clergy and Laity, within his Kingdom; from whence the King's Counselors
took occasion afterward to call him Supreme Head.

The Clergy did in the Title of their Submission call the King in formal terms,
Supreme Head of the Church and Clergy of England, as far as by the Law of
Christ is lawful: to which Fisher, with the rest of the Convocation subscribed.
And all this was done when More was Chancellor.

Page 62.
54. He says; When the King went to marry Ann Boleyn, he persuaded Rowland Lee,
made soon after Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, to officiate in it, assuring
him he had obtained a Bull for it from Rome, which was then lying in his
Cabinet. Upon which Lee giving credit to what he said, did marry them.

This is another trial of Sander's wit, to excuse Lee, who tho at this time he
complied absolutely with the King, yet did afterward turn over to the Popish
Party; therefore to make him look a little clean, this Story must be forged.
But at that time all the World saw that the Pope and the Emperor were so linked
together, that Lee could not but know that no such thing was possible. And he
was so obsequious to the King, that such Arts were needless to persuade him to
any thing the King had a mind to.

Page 67.
55. For five pages he runs out in repetition of all those foul Lies concerning
Ann Boleyn, by which he designed both to disgrace the Reformers, who were
supported by her, and to defame her Daughter Queen Elizabeth, which have been
before confuted: after that he says, Queen Katharine, with three Maids and a
small Family, retired into the Country.

She had both the respect of a Princess Dowager, and all the Jointure
contracted to her by Prince Arthur; so she could not be driven to that
straitness, but this must go for an Ornament in the Fable.

Page 71.
56. He says; It was concluded, that Cranmer might be more free to pass
Sentence, that there should be an Oath imposed on the Clergy, for paying the
same Obedience to the King that they had paid the Pope: upon which he tells a
long formal Story, for two pages, That it was resolved to draw Fisher into it,
to swear Obedience to the King in all Ecclesiastical Causes, with that
exception, as far as is lawful, according to the Word of God; which he did, and
persuaded others to do it; and upon this Cranmer taking the New Oath, went and
pronounced judgment for Divorce.

There is not one tittle of this true, for there was no Oath sworn about the
King's Supremacy at this time. The Story of Fisher, is that which was done by
the Convocation two years before Cranmers preferment, nor was there any Oath
taken then, or at this time. It is true, two years after this, Gardener,
Stokesley, and many other Bishops, did of their own accord take such an Oath;
but there was no Law for it till the 28 th year of the King's Reign.

Page 72.
57. He says; One Richard Risey (or Rouse, according to the Records) was hired
by Ann Boleyn to poison Fisher.

Rouse was boiled alive for poisoning the Bishop's Family, but did not discover
any that set him on it: Which none can think but he would have done, if the
Queen had hired him to it, and had then deserted him, to perish in so horrid a
manner.

Page 73.
58. He says; Cranmer being by Authority of Parliament freed from his Oath to
the Pope, and bound by a new one to the King, went now confidently to pronounce
Sentence.

The Parliament did not put down the Pope's Authority for eight months after
this, and appointed no new Oath till three years after; For Cranmer sat in
Judgment as Primate of England, and Legate of the Apostolic See.

59. He says; Cranmer carried some Bishops with him, Ibid.
and having cited the Queen, without hearing her, he gave sentence against the
Marriage.

Gardener, Stokesly, Clark, and Longland, the Bishops of Winchester, London,
Bath, and Lincoln, went with him. He could not hear the Queen, when she would
not appear: but he examined all the Instruments and Evidences that had been
brought in the whole Process.

60. He says; The Pope would not proceed against the King, Page 75.
till he met with the French King at Marseilles: but that the English
Ambassadors did there carry so insolently, that Francis was ashamed of their
behavior; and desired the Pope to proceed against the King as he thought fit,
and that he should never defend him more, but should be against him.

Here the Romance goes on too grossly, for the Pope and the French King agreed
at Marseilles to bring this matter to an issue: the Pope declared he thought
the King's Cause was just and right; and promised, if the King would send a
full submission to Rome, he would give sentence in his favors: Upon which the
French King sent over the Bishop of Paris, who prevailed with the King to do
it; tho this afterward came to nothing. It is true, Bonner who was always
officious and forward when there was any thing to be got by it, being sent to
Marseilles by the King, to deliver an Appeal in the King's Name to the Pope, to
the next General Council; and perhaps knowing nothing of the private
Transactions between the Pope and the French King, it being a Secret of too
great importance to be communicated to such a hot-brained Man, did deliver his
Message to the Pope in such provoking language, that the Pope talked of
throwing him into a boiling Cauldron; and he was fain to fly for it.

61. He says; The Pope returning to Italy, Page 76.
after he had again most "carefully reviewed the whole Cause, gave sentence.

This was so precipitated, that they would not stay six days beyond the time
which they prefixed, for the return of the Messenger that was sent to England:
but dispatched that, which by the forms of their Court should have been done in
three Consistories, all in one day.

62. He says; Upon this Sentence, the King being enraged, Page 78.
did command Queen Katharine to be only called Princess, and declared her
Daughter the Lady Mary a Bastard.

Both these were done five months before the Pope's Sentence, and soon after,
the Sentence was pronounced by Cranmer. And these were the natural consequences
of it; for the Marriage being annulled, neither could she be longer a Queen,
nor her Daughter Princess any more.

63. He says; Ibid.
The King imprisoned F. Forest a Franciscan Observant, a most holy and learned
Man, for contradicting Latimer, when he was enveighing against the Pope's
Authority.

Concerning this Forest, I have seen an Original Letter of one List a Friar of
the same House, a year after this, that says Forest was a great scandal to
their House, and was very ignorant: and that tho he had been much against the
King in his Marriage, yet he had then insinuated himself into his favor, of
which many of the House, who were for the King's Cause, had great
apprehensions. In the same Letter he writes how cruel they were against any of
their Brethren, who they thought discovered any thing that was done among them;
and that one Rainscroft, a Brother, whom they suspected to have informed what
passed among them, was cruelly used, and kept in Prison till he died; which he
chiefly imputes to Forest. This Friar swore the King's Supremacy, and yet at
the same time was persuading others not to do it; and being questioned upon it,
said, He took the Oath only with his Outward, but not with his Inward Man; and
for that, and his denying the Gospel, he was burnt as an obstinate Heretic.

Page 79.
64. He says; Abell, Powel, and Fetherston, were put in Prison because they
consulted with the Maid of Kent.

This is only charged upon the former of these, but the two latter are not
accused of any such thing.

Ibid.
65. He says; Elizabeth being born the 8 th of September, but five months after
the King had publicly married her Mother, could not be the lawful issue of
that Marriage.

This is a malacious Lie, for himself confessed that the King was married to
her Mother, the 14 th of November the former year; between which, and the 8 th
of September, there were ten months; nor was the King ever after that married
publicly to the Queen. For what he calls a public Marriage, was only the
showing her openly as Queen. But the design of this Lie is so visible that it
needs not be opened.

Ibid.
66. He says; The King's Daughter Mary, who was then present, could never be
induced to think she was the King's Child.

In the former page he said Mary was sent to her Mother, and now forgetting
himself too soon, he says, she was present when Elizabeth was born. What Mary's
thoughts were, none can tell, but she publicly acknowledged Her to be her
Sister, tho she did not use her as one.

Page 80.
67. He says; Elizabeth Barton, who was famed for her sanctity, and six with
her, who thought she was inspired by the Holy Ghost, were accused in Parliament.

Those six knew that she was not inspired; and that all that was given out
about her, was a contrivance of theirs, who had instructed her to play such
tricks; as was proved by their own Confessions and other Evidences.

Ibid.
68. He says; They all died very constantly: and on the Margent calls them seven
Martyrs.

The Nun her self acknowledged the Imposture at her death, and laid the
heaviest weight of it, on the Priests that suffered with her, who had taught
her the Cheat: so that they died both for Treason and Imposture. And this being
Sander's Faith, as appeared by his Works, they were indeed Martyrs for it.

69. He says; More and Fisher having examined her, Ibid.
could see no ground to think she was acted by a Fanatical Spirit, as it was
given out.

It was not given out that she was acted by a Fanatical Spirit, for that had
been more honest; but her Spirit was cheating and knavery. More cleared
himself, and looked on her as a weak Woman, and commonly called her the Silly
Maid: But Fisher did disown her when the Cheat was discovered, though he had
given her too much encouragement before.

70. He says; The thing she prophesied came to pass; which was, Page 81.
that Mary should be Queen of England.

The thing for which She and her Accomplices were attainted of Treason, was, that
she said, If the King married Ann Boleyn, he should not be a King a month
longer, and not an hour longer in the sight of God, and should die a Villains
death. But it did not serve Sander's ends to tell this.

71. He says; The day she suffered, Ibid.
many of the Nobility came and swore to the Succession of the Issue of the
King's marriage with Queen Ann, before the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord
Chancellor, and Cromwell.

Both Houses of Parliament, did in the House of Lords take that Oath, on the
day of their Prorogation, which was the 30 th of March, as appears by the
second Act of the next Session: and the Nun, with her Accomplices, did not suffer
till the 21 of April after.

72. He says; The Franciscans of the Observance, Ibid.
chiefly two Fathers in London, Elston and Payton, did, both in their Sermons
and public Disputes, justify the King's marriage with Q. Katharine.

Elston and Payton, were not of London but of Greenwich. They compared the King
to Achab, and said, in the Pulpit to his face, The Dogs should lick his Blood;
with many other such virulent Expressions. But to rail at a Prince with the
most spiteful reproaches that could be, was a part of Sanders's Faith: and so
no wonder those pass for Confessors, when Elizabeth Barton and her Accomplices
are reckoned Martyrs.

73. He says; Tonstal Bishop of Duresme, Page 82.
was ordered by the King's Messengers, not to come to the Session of Parliament
26 Regni, in which the King's Supremacy was established.

In this he is safer than in some other Stories, for the Journals of that
Session are lost, so the falsehood of this cannot be demonstrated: yet it is not
at all likely, that he who justified all that was done in the former Session,
in which the Pope's Power was put down, the nomination of Bishops annexed to
the Crown, a Reformation of Ecclesiastical Laws appointed to be made, in
defense of all which he wrote afterward, was now so scrupulous as to be
ordered to stay at home. But Tonstal suffering imprisonment in Edward the
Sixth's time, it was fit to use some art to show that he was unwillingly
brought to comply with the King.

Ibid.
74. He, to show God's Judgments on the chief Instruments that served the King,
says, That the Duke of Norfolk was by the King condemned to perpetual
imprisonment.

This bewrays palpable ignorance, since he was attainted of High Treason, the
very day before the King's death, and should have suffered the next day, if the
King's death had not prevented it. But since he will descant on the Providence
of God, he should rather have concluded that his escaping so narrowly, was a
sign of God's great care of him.

Ibid.
75. In the Session of Parliament that met the third of November (as he
describes it, which was the 26 th year of the King's Reign) he says, Mary the
King's Daughter was illegitimated, and all her honors were transferred on
Elizabeth, and the Pope's Power put down.

This shows he never looked on our public Statutes; otherwise he had seen that
these Acts passed in the former Session.

Page 84.
76. He says; When the King sent his Ambassadors to the French Court, Francis
would not so much as hear them give a justification of the King's proceedings.

How true this can be, the World may judge, since these two Kings continued in a
firm Alliance eight years after this. And Francis did often treat, both with
him and the Princes of Germany, about these things, and was inclined to do
almost all that he did.

Ibid.
77. He says; The Lutherans did so abominate the grounds of his separation from
Rome, that they could never be induced to approve it; for which he cites
Cochleus, an Author of his own kidney.

They did condemn the King's first marriage as unlawful, and thought the Pope's
Dispensation had no force: and so far they approved it. But they had this
singular Opinion, that he should have continued unmarried as long as Q.
Katharine lived. Yet in that they were so modest that they only desired to be
excused, as to the second Marriage: which considering that Queen Ann favored
their Doctrine, and that by an absolute compliance with what the King had done,
they might have secured his Protection to themselves, whom otherwise they
provoked highly, is an evidence of a strict adhering to what their Consciences
dictated, that cannot be sufficiently commended.

Page 85.
78. He says; The King made many write Apologies for what he did; which some did
willingly, being tainted with Heresy, others unwillingly, and for fear, as
Gardener and Tonstall.

In this he shows how little judgment he had of the nature of things, when he
thinks to excuse their writing for the King, as extorted by force: To have done
it thorough Error and Mistake, was much the softer excuse; but to make them Men
of such prostituted Consciences, as not only to subscribe and swear, but to
write with Learning and Zeal, and yet against their Consciences, represents
them guilty of unexpressible baseness. Indeed Gardener was a Man like enough to
write any thing that might please the King; but Tonstall was a Man of greater
probity, than to have done so unworthy a thing upon any account whatsoever. But
since he mentioned Writers, he should have named Longland Bishop of Lincoln,
Stokeley Bishop of London, and above all Bonner, who did officiously thrust
himself into the debate, by writing a Preface to Gardiner's Book, with the
greatest vehemence that could be. But the Blood he shed afterward did so
endear him to this Author, that all past Faults were forgiven and to be clean
forgotten.

79. He says; Page 86
Five Martyrs suffered because they would not swear the King's Supremacy
according to the Law that was then passed.

There was no such Law made at that time, nor could any such Oath be then put
to them. The only Oath which the Parliament had enacted, was the Oath of the
Succession, and the refusing it was only misprision of Treason, and was not
punishable by death. But it was for denying the King's Supremacy, and for
writing and speaking both against it, and his marriage, that they suffered
according to Law.

80. He says; Cromwell threatened the Jury, in the King's name, Page 87.
with certain death, if they did not bring them in guilty.

Every Body that knows the Law of England, will soon conclude this to be a Lie:
for no such threatenings were ever made in Trials in this Nation. Nor was there
any need at this time, for the Law was so plain, and their Facts so clearly
proved, that the Jury could not refuse to bring them in guilty.

81. He says; The three Carthusians that suffered, Page 88, 89
were made stand upright and in one place fourteen days together, with Irons
about their Necks, Arms, and Legs, before they died: and then with great pomp
he describes their Death in all its parts, as if it had been a new-devised
cruelty, it being the Death which the Law appoints for Traitors. He tells, that
Cromwell lamented that others of them had died in their Cells, and so prevented
his cruelty. He also adds a long story of the severities against the
Franciscans.

All this he drew from his learning in the Legend. The English Nation knows
none of these Cruelties, in which the Spanish Inquisitors are very expert. I
find, by some Original Letters, that the Carthusians who were shut up in their
Cells, lived about a year after this; so if Cromwell had designed to take away
their lives, he wanted not opportunities: but it appears from what More writ in
his Imprisonment, that Cromwell was not a cruel Man, but on the contrary,
merciful and gentle. And for the Franciscans, tho they had offended the King
highly, two of them railing spitefully at him to his Face, in his Chapel at
Greenwich: Yet that was passed over with a Reproof, from which it appears that
he was not easily provoked against them. So all that Relation which he gives,
being without any Authority, must pass for a part of the Poem.

82. He says; The Bishop of Rochester was condemned, Page 91.
because he would not acknowledge the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters.

He was never pressed to acknowledge it, but was condemned for denying it, and
speaking against it: for had he kept his Opinion to himself, he could not have
been questioned. But the denying the King's Titles, of which his being Supreme
Head was one, was by the Law Treason; so he was tried for speaking against it,
and not for his not acknowledging it.

Page 93.
83. He runs out in an high commendation of Fisher, and among other things
mentions his Episcopal and Apostolical Charity.

His Charity was burning indeed. He was a merciless Prosecutor of Heretics, so
that the rigor of the Law, under which he fell, was the same measure that he
had measured out to others.

Page 100.
84. Sanders will let the World see how carefully he had read the Legend, and
how skilfully he could write after that Copy, in a pretty Fabulous Story
concerning More's death; to whom I will deny none of the Praises due to his
memory, for his great learning, and singular probity: nor had he any blemish,
but what flowed from the Leaven of that cruel Religion, which carried him to
great severities against those that preached for a Reformation. His Daughter
Roper was a Woman of great Virtue, and worthy of such a Father, who needed none
of Sanders's Art to represent her well to the World. His Story is; That the
morning her Father died, she went about distributing all the Money she had in
Alms to the Poor: and at last was at her Prayers in a Church, when of a sudden
she remembered that she had forgot to provide a Winding Sheet for his Body; but
having no more Money left, and not being well known in that place, she
apprehended they would not give her credit: Yet she went to a Linnen-Drapers
Shop, and calling for so much Cloth, she put her hand in her Pocket, knowing
she had nothing in it, but intending to make an excuse, and try if they would
trust her. But by a Miracle she found the price of the Sheet, and neither more
nor less was conveyed into her Pocket. This is such a lively essay of the
Man's Spirit that invented it, that I leave it without any further Commentary.

Page 105.
58. He says; Lee that was not in Orders, was sent to visit the Monasteries, who
solicited the chastity of the Nunns.

He does not mention Leighton and London the two chief Visitors, for Leighton
brought in Lee: but they were of the Popish Party, and Lee was Cranmer's
Friend, therefore all must be laid on him. He was in Orders, and soon after was
made Dean of York. I have seen complaints of Dr. London's soliciting the Nuns,
yet I do not find Lee complained of. But since London was a Persecutor of
Heretics, such a small kindness as the concealing his Name, and the turning
the blame over on Lee, was not to be stood on among Friends, especially by a
Man of Sander's ingenuity.

Page 107.
86. For the correspondence between Q. Katharine and Father Forest, and the
Letters that past; since Sanders tells us not a word how he came by them, we
are to look on them as a piece of the Romance.

87. He says; Page 114.
Ann Boleyn bore a monstrous and a mishaped lump of Flesh, when the time of her
bearing another Child came.

She bore a dead Child before the time, says Hall; but there was no great
reproach in that, unless made up by Sanders's wit.

88. He lays out the business of Ann Boleyn with so much spite and malice, Page
115.
that we may easily see against whom he chiefly designed this part of his Work.
He says; She was found guilty of Adultery and Incest.

There was no Evidence against her, but only a hearsay from the Lady
Wingfield: we neither know the credit of that Lady, nor of the Person who
related it in her name. It is true, Mark Smeton did confess his Adultery with
the Queen, but it was generally thought he was drawn into it by some promises
that were made to him, and so cheated out of his Life; but for the Queen, and
the other four, they attested their innocence to the last: nor would any of
those unfortunate Persons redeem their lives at so ignominious a rate, as to
charge the Queen, whom they declared they knew to be innocent; so that all the
Evidence against her, was an hearsay of a Woman that was dead, the Confession
of a poor Musician, and some idle words her self spoke of the Discourses that
had passed between her, and some of those Gentlemen.

89. He says; Foreigners did generally rejoice at her fall; Page 116.
and to prove this, he cites Cochleus's words, that only show that Author's ill
opinion of her.

The Germans had so great a value of her, that all their correspondence with
the King fell to the ground with her: but he may well cite Cochleus, an Author
of the same honesty with himself, from whose writings we may with the like
security make a judgment of Foreign Matters, as we may upon Sanders's
testimony believe the account he gives of English Affairs.

90. He tells us, among other things done by the King, Page 117.
and picks it out as the only instance he mentions of the King's Injunctions,
that the People should be taught in Churches the Lord's Prayer, the Ave, the
Creed, and the Ten Commandments, in English.

It seems this Author thought the giving these Elements of Religion to the
People in the vulgar Tongue, a very heinous Crime, when this is singled out
from all the rest.

91. That being done, he says, there was next a Book published, Ibid.
called Articles, appointed by the King's Majesty, which were the six Articles.

This shows that he either had no information of English Affairs, or was
sleeping when he wrote this: for the Six Articles were not published soon after
the Injunctions, as he makes it, by the same Parliament and Convocation, but
three years after, by another Parliament: They were never put in a Book, nor
published in the King's Name; they were Enacted in Parliament, and are neither
more nor less than 25 lines in the first Impression of that; Act so far short
come they of a Book.

Page 119.
92. He reckons up very defectively the differences between the Church of Rome,
and the Doctrine set forth by the King's Authority: but in one point he shows
his ordinary wit; for in the sixth particular, he says, He retained the
Sacrament of Order, but appointed a new Form of Consecrating of Bishops.

This he put in out of malice, that he might annul the Ordinations of that
time: but the thing is false, for except that the Bishops, instead of their
Oaths of Obedience to the Pope, which they formerly swore, did not swear to the
King, there was no other change made; and that to be sure, is no part of the
Form of Consecration.

Page 120.
93. He resolved once to speak what he thought was Truth, tho it be treasonable
and impious: and says, Upon these changes many in Lincolnshire, and the
Northern parts, did rise for Religion, and the Faith of Christ.

This was indeed the motive by which their Seditious Priests misled them; yet
he is mistaken in the time, for it was not after the six Articles were
published, but almost three years before it. Nor was it for the Faith of
Christ, which teaches us to be humble, subject, and obedient; but because the
King was removing some of the corruptions of that Faith, which their false
Teachers did impiously call the Faith of Christ.

Ibid.
94. He says; The King did promise most faithfully that all these things of
which they complained, should be amended.

This is so evidently false, that it is plain Sanders resolved dexterously to
avoid the speaking of any sort of Truth: for the King did fully and formally
tell them, he would not be directed nor counseled by them in these Points they
complained of, and did only offer them an Amnesty for what was past.

Page 121.
95. Then he reckons up 32 that died for the defense of the Faith.

They were attainted of Treason, for being in actual Rebellion against the
King: and thus it appears that Rebellion was the Faith in his sense; and
himself died for it, or rather in it, having been starved to death in a Wood,
to which he fled after one of his rebellious Attempts on his Sovereign, in
which he was the Pope's Nuncio.

Page 122.
96. He says; The King killed the Earl of Kildare, and five of his Uncles.

By this strange way of expressing a legal Attainder, and the execution of a
Sentence for manifest Treason and Rebellion, he would insinuate on the Reader,
a fancy, that one of Bonner's cruel fits had taken the King, and that he had
killed those with his own hand. The Lord Herbert has fully opened that part of
the History, from the Records that he saw; and shows that a more resolved
Rebellion could not be, than that was, of which the Earl of Kildare and his
Uncles were guilty. But because they sent to the Pope and Emperor for
assistance, the Earl desiring to hold the Kingdom of Ireland of the Pope, since
the King by his Heresy had fallen from his Right to it, Sanders must needs
have a great kindness for their memory, who thus suffered for his Faith.

97. He says; Ibid.
Queen Jane Seimour being in hard labor of Prince Edward, the King ordered her
Body to be so opened by Surgeons, that she died soon after.

All this is false, for she had a good Delivery, as many Original Letters
written by her Council (that have been since printed) do show, but she died two
days after of a distemper incident to her Sex.

98. He sets down some Passages of Cardinal Pole's Heroical Constancy; Page 124.
which being proved by no Evidence, and not being told by any other Writer
(whom I ever saw) are to be looked on as the flourishes of the Poet to set off
his Hero.

99. He would persuade the World, that the Marquess of Exceter, Page 125.
the Lord Montacute, and the rest that suffered at that time, died, because
they were believed to dislike the King's wicked Proceedings; and that the
Countess of Sarum was beheaded on this single account, that she was the Mother
of such a Son, and was sincerely addicted to the Catholic Faith; and that she
was condemned because she wrote to her Son, and for wearing in her Breast, the
Picture of the five Wounds of Christ.

The Marquess of Exceter pretended he was well satisfied with the King's
Proceedings, and was Lord Stewart when the Lords Darcy and Hussie were tried,
and he gave judgment against them. But it being discovered that he and other
Persons approved of Cardinal Pole's proceedings, who endeavored to engage all
Christian Princes in a League against the King, pursuant to which they had
expressed themselves, on several occasions, resolved, when a fit opportunity
offered it self, to rebel; it was no wonder if the King proceeded against them
according to Law. And for the Countess of Sarum, tho the legality of that
Sentence passed against her cannot be defended, yet she had given great
offense; not only by her correspondence with her Son, but by the Bulls she had
received from Rome, and by her opposing the King's Injunctions, hindering all
her Tenants to read the New Testament, or any other Books set out by the King's
order. And for the Picture, which was found among her Clothes, it having been
the Standard of the Rebellion, and the Arms of England being found on the other
side of it, there was just ground to suspect an ill design in it.

100. He says; The Images which the King destroyed, Page 129.
were by many wonderful Works of God, recommended to the Devotion of the Nation.

All the wonder in these Works, was the knavery of some juggling Impostors, and
the simplicity of a credulous multitude, of which see page 224. which being so
openly discovered, nothing that had shame in it, could speak of them as our
Author does.

Page 131.
101. He says; Six and twenty Carts drawn with Oxen, were loaded with the Riches
taken from Thomas Becket's Shrine; whom he makes a most glorious Martyr, that
died for the defense of the Faith, and was honored by many Miracles after his
death.

Other Writers have sufficiently showed what a perfidious, ungrateful, and
turbulent Priest he was. All these were Virtues in our Author's Opinion, and
Ingredients in his Faith. But he has in this account of the Riches of that
Shrine gone beyond himself, having by a figure of speech very familiar to him,
(called Lying) increased two Chests (see page 224.) to 26 Cart Loads.

Page 1^2.
102. He says; The Sentence which P. Paul gave out against the King, was affixed
in some Towns, both in France, Flanders, and Scotland: from which he infers,
that both the Emperor, the French, and the Scotch King, did consent to that
Sentence.

In this he designed an eminent piece of service to the Apostolic See, to
leave on Record an Evidence that three Sovereign Princes had acknowledged the
Pope's Power of deposing Kings. But he did ill to name the proofs of his
Assertion, and had done better to have said simply that it was so, than to have
founded it on so ill grounds: as if the affixing Papal Bulls in a place, were
an evidence that the Princes, in whose Dominions it was done, consented to it.
He might with the same reason have concluded, that Q. Elizabeth consented to
the Sentence against her self; which it is very like will not be easily
believed, tho the Bull was affixed in London. But all those very Princes whom
he names, continuing to keep up their correspondence with the King, as well
after as before this Sentence, is a much clearer demonstration that they
despised the Pope's Sentence.

Page 134.
103. He says; The King by his own Authority, threw all the ^egging Orders out
of their Houses.

The falsehood of this has appeared already, for they resigned their Houses to
the King: and of these Resignations, tho many were destroyed, yet near an
hundred are still extant.

Ibid.
104. He says; The Parliament, in the year 1539, gave the King all the great
Monasteries.

The Parliament passed no such Act; all that they did, was only to confirm the
Grants made, or to be made by these Houses to the King. It was their Surrenders
that clothed the King with the Right to them. All the Tragical Stories he
tells us that followed upon this, are founded on a false Foundation.

Page 135.
105. He sets down a Form of a Resignation, which he says, All the Abbots, and
many Religious Persons, were made to Sign and set their Seals to it.

Among all the Resignations which are yet extant, there is not one in this
Form, for which see page 238.

106. He says; The King's Commissioners, Page 136.
who went about getting Hands to that Form, made them believe, in every House,
that all the rest had signed it; and so by that, and other persuasions,
prevailed with many to set their Hands to it.

If all the Subscriptions had been procured about the same time, such Arts
might be suspected: but in a thing that was three years a-doing, these tricks
could not have served their turn.

107. He says; They told the Monks, that tho the King might, Ibid.
by virtue of the Act of Parliament, seize on their Houses and Rents, yet he
desired rather to do it with their good will.

In this there are two Errors; First, Most of these Houses were resigned to the
King before the Act of Parliament, see page 235. and next, the Act of
Parliament only confirmed their Deeds, but did not give their Houses to the
King.

108. He says; The Abbots of Glassenbury, Colchester, and Reading, Page 137.
suffered Martyrdom, because they refused to set their hands to that Writing.

There was no such Writing ever offered to them; nor was there any Law to force
them to resign: so they could not suffer on that account, but they were Martyrs
for Sander's Faith, for they were attainted by a legal Trial of High Treason.

109. He tells a long Story of Whitting Abbot of Glassenbury's being brought up
to London, Page 138.
to be prevailed with to set his hand to the Surrender. Which he still refusing
to do was sent back; and tho a Book against the King's Divorce was found among
his Papers, which was laid there by those who searched for it; yet that was
past over in a chiding: but as he went home, hearing there was a meeting of the
County at Wells, he went thither; and as he was going up to his place on the
Bench, he was called to the Bar to answer some things that were to be objected
to him: He was amazed at it, and asked what the matter was? but one told him,
he needed fear nothing, for somewhat was only to be done for form, to terrify
others: Upon which he was condemned and sent away to his Abbey, little thinking
he was so near his end; but when he came near it, a Priest was sent to him to
take his Confession, for they told him he must die immediately; he begged a day
or two's respite, but in vain: so they hanged him up in his Habit, on the top
of the Hill near his Abbey, and quartered him; and all this was done in one day.

This Book came out in Foreign Parts, and was printed at Rome, in the Reign of
Sixtus the Fifth, who took great pleasure in such Executions, as he describes
this to have been, which may fall often out, where the lives of the Subjects are
wholly at the Prince's Mercy: But to tell such tales of England, which is so
famed over the World for the safety and security the Subjects enjoy, and for
the regular and legal proceedings in all Trials, especially of Life and Death,
was a great Error in the Poet; for the decorum of the Laws and Customs of a
place must be observed, when any Nation is made the Scene of a Fable. But as
nothing like this can be done by the Law of England, so there was nothing of it
in this Case: The Jury that sat on him, were Men of great credit in the
Country, when he died: he acknowledged his Offenses; and with appearance of
repentance, begged God's Pardon, and the King's: see page 239.

Page 145.
110. After many bitter Invectives against Cromwell, for which I could never see
good evidence, tho I cannot disprove them by any convincing Arguments; he says,
That he advised the King to make a Law, that Persons might be Convented and
Condemned in absence, and without being heard: and that this Law first of all
fell upon himself.

There was no such Law ever made, only the Parliament by their Supreme
Authority, did Attaint some in that manner, but no other Court might do it. Nor
was this first applied to Cromwell, for an year before his Attainder, the
Countess of Sarum, with a great many more, were so attainted, tho she did not
Suffer till a year after him.

Ibid.
111. He tells many Reasons why the King had a mind to put away Ann of Cleve:
But in this, as in other things, he betrays a profound ignorance of that time;
for every Body knew, that the King, from the first time he saw her, disliked
her, and that he never consummated the Marriage.

This is a Subject not fit to be long dwelt on: but if any will compare the
account I give of this Matter from the Records, with Sander's Tale, they will
see that he wrote at random, and did not so much as know public Transactions.

Page 146.
112. He says; The King had promised to the Emperor, That he would no longer
continue in the Smalcaldick League; but Cromwell counterfeited the King's Hand,
to a new confirmation of it; which coming to the Emperor's knowledge, he
challenged the King of it: and sent him over a Copy of it; upon which the King
disowned it, and cast it on Cromwell; and that this was the cause of his fall.

This I believe is one of Sander's dreams: there is not one word of it in
Cromwell's Attainder; nor do I find the least shadow of this in some Original
Letters which he wrote to the King for his Pardon, in which he answers many of
the things laid to his Charge. Nor is it likely he would adventure on so bold a
thing, with such a King, nor could the Emperor have that Writing in his power,
as long as the King lived: for it is not to be imagined how he could come by
it, till he had taken the Duke of Saxony Prisoner, which was after this King's
death.

Page 148.
113. He says; When Cromwell was put to death, the King proceeded to the Divorce
of Ann of Cleve.

The Divorce was judged by the Convocation eight days before Cromwell's death,
and confirmed in Parliament, which was dissolved before he suffered.

Ibid.
114. He says; The King sent to her, to tell her, he had a mind to be separated
from her; and tho he could proceed more severely against her, since he knew she
was an Heretic; yet for her Families sake, he left it to her self to devise
any reason for their Divorce: upon which she came next day to the Senate,
(which may be either the King's Council, or the Parliament) and confessed she
had been married to another before she was married to the King; and thereupon
by the Authority of Parliament, he was divorced, and within eight days married
Katharine Howard.

There are but six gross Errors in this Period. 1. The King sent not any
message to her, nor came there any answer from her till the Sentence of Divorce
was quite passed. 2. In the Original Letter which those he sent to her, wrote
to him from Richmond, it appears that they used no threatenings to her, but
barely told her what was done; to which she acquiesced. 3. She never came from
Richmond in all that Process, and so made no such declaration in the Senate. 4.
She did not say that she was married to another, but only that she had been
contracted to the Prince of Lorrain when she was under Age. 5. The Parliament
did not dissolve the Marriage, but only confirmed the Sentence of the
Convocation. 6. The King did not marry Katharine Howard before the 8 th of
August, and the Divorce was judged the 10 th of July, a month wanting two days.

115. He says; Page 149.
The King had consummated the Marriage for seven months together.

There were but six months between his Marriage and the Divorce; and in all
that while, as they bedded but seldom, so there were very clear Evidences
brought, that it was not consummated.

116. He says; The King sent the Bishop of Winchester, Page ^^^
and Sir Henry Knevet to the Diet of the Empire; who were ordered to propose to
the Emperor, That the King might be again reconciled to the Sea of Rome; to
which, he adds, his Conscience did drive him: but since the King would not
confess his past Crimes, nor do penance for them, nor restore the Goods of the
Church, it came to nothing.

This is another Ornament of the Fable, to show the Poet's wit; but is as void
of Truth as any passage in Plantus or Terence is. For the King was all his life
so intractable in that Point, that the Popish Party had no other way to
maintain their Interest with him, but to comply, not without affectation in
that Matter: and when an Information was given against Gardener, for his
holding some correspondence with the Pope's Legate at the Diet, he got the Man
who had innocently discovered it, to be put in Prison; and said, it was a Plot
against him to ruin him, which he needed not be so sollicitous about, if his
Instructions from the King had allowed him to enter on such a Treaty.

117. He runs out in a long digression, Page 153.
upon the King's assuming the Title of King of Ireland; to show that the Kings
of England only hold Ireland by the Pope's Donation.

In this Sanders shows his Art, he being to carry the Standard of Rebellion in
that Kingdom, to blast the King's Right to it. He acknowledges the Crown of
England had the Dominion of Ireland, with the Title of Lord of Ireland, about
400 years: And certainly if so long a possession does not give a good Title,
and a prescription against all other Pretenders, most of the Royal Families in
Christendom will be to seek for their Rights. But he says, It was given by the
Pope to King Henry the Second; and yet he confesses that he had conquered some
parts of it before that Grant was sent him by Hadrian the Fourth. Certainly
King Henry the Second had as good a right to take it, as Pope Hadrian had to
give it: nor was the King's accepting the Pope's Donation, any prejudice to his
Title, for things extorted or allowed upon a public Error, can have no force,
when that is openly discovered. If then the Superstition of those Ages, made,
that the Pope's Donation was a great help to any Pretender, it was no wonder
that Kings made use of it; but it were a wonder indeed if they should
acknowledge it, after the Trick is known and seen by all.

Page 162.
118. After this, and a Satyr against Queen Elizabeth for assuming the Title,
Defender of the Faith, and a long enumeration of the exactions in the last
years of this Reign; in which, tho there is Matter enough for severe
complaints, yet many of the Particulars he mentions are without any proof, and
must rest on the Author's credit; which by this time, the Reader will
acknowledge is not very great. Another long discourse of some length follows, of
the misfortunes of the Duke of Norfolk, and of all that served the King in his
Divorce, and in the following Actions of his Life: from which he infers, that
these were effects of a Cur^e from Heaven upon all that he did, and on all
those that assisted him: But as the Inference is bad, so he forgot to mention
those Noble Families that were raised in his time, and have continued since in
great honor; as the Seimours, from whom the Dukes of Somerset are descended;
the Paulets, from whom the Marquess of Winchester derives; the Russels,
Wriothslies, Herberts, Riches, and Cromwells, from whom the Earls of Bedford,
Southampton, Pembroke, Essex, and Ardglass have descended; and the Browns, the
Petres, the Pagets, the Norths, and the Mountagues, from whom the Vice-Count
Mountague, the Barons Petre, Paget, North, and Mountague, are descended. These
Families have now flourished in great Wealth and Honor an Age and a half; and
only one of them has, and that but very lately, determined in the Male Line:
but the Illustrious Female Branches of it are intermixed with other Noble
Families. So that the Observation is false, and the Inference is weak.

Page 164.
119. He says; When the King found his strength declining, he had again some
thoughts of reconciling himself to the Church of Rome; which when it was
proposed to one of the Bishops, he made a flattering answer. But Gardener moved
that a Parliament might be called for doing it: and that the King, for the
quiet of his own Conscience, would vow to do it; of which God would accept in
that extremity, when more was not possible to be done. But some of his
Courtiers coming about him, who were very apprehensive of such a
Reconciliation, lest they should have been made restore the Goods of the
Church, diverted the King from it: And from this our Author infers, that what
the King had done was against his Conscience, and that so he sinned the Sin
against the Holy Ghost.

I shall not examine this Theological definition of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, for my quarrel is not at present with his Divinity, but with his
History; tho it were easy to show that he is alike at both. But for this story,
it is a pure dream; for not only there is no evidence for it, nor did Gardener
in the Reign of Queen Mary ever own any such thing, tho it had been then much
for the credit of their Cause, especially he being often upbraided with his
compliances to this King, for which the mention of his repentance had furnished
him with a good answer: But as the Tale is told, the Fiction appears too
plainly, for a Parliament was actually sitting during the King's sickness,
which was dissolved by his Death, and no such Proposition was made in it. The
King on the contrary destroyed the chief hopes of the Popish Party, which were
founded on the Duke of Norfolk's greatness, by the Attainder which was passed a
day before he died. And yet Sanders makes this discourse to have been between
the King and Gardener after his fall, and his Sons death; between which, and
the King's Death, there were only nine days: but besides all this, Gardener had
lost the King's favor a considerable time before his death.

120. He says; The King, Page 166.
that he might not seem never to have done any good Work in his whole life, as
he was dying, founded Christ's Church Hospital in London; which was all the
restitution he ever made for the Monasteries and Churches he had robbed and
spoiled.

If it had not already appeared, in many Instances, that our Author had as
little shame as honesty, here is a sufficient proof of it. I will not undertake
to justify the King, as if he had done what he ought to have done, in his new
Foundations: But it is the height of impudence to deny things that all England
knows. He founded six Bishoprics; he endowed Deans and Prebendaries, with all
the other Offices belonging to a Cathedral, in fourteen several Sees,
Canterbury, Winchester, Duresme, Ely, Norwich, Rochester, Worcester, and
Carlisle; together with Westminster, Chester, Oxford, Gloucester, Peterborough,
and Bristol, where he endowed Bishoprics likewise. He founded many
Grammar-Schools, as Burton, Canterbury, Coventry, Worcester, etc. He founded
and endowed Trinity College in Cambridg, which is one of the noblest
Foundations in Christendom. He also founded Professors in both Universities,
for Greek, Hebrew, Law, Physic, and Divinity. What censure then deserves our
Author, for saying, that the Hospital of Christ's-Church, was all the
restitution he ever made of the Church Lands.

121. He gives a Character of the King, Ibid.
which suits very well with his History, his malice in it being extravagantly
ridiculous. Among other things, he says, The King promoted always learned
Bishops, Cranmer only being excepted, whom he advanced to serve his Lusts.

Cranmer was a Man of greater Learning, than any that ever sat in that See
before him, as appears in every thing that he writ: Tonstal was a learned Man,
and Gardener was much esteemed for Learning; yet if any will compare Cranmer's
Books of the Sacrament, with those the other two writ on the same Subject;
there is so great a difference between the learning and solidity of the one and
the other, that no Man of common ingenuity can read them but he must confess it.

Page 170.
122. He says; When the King found himself expiring, he called for a Boul of
White Wine, and said to one that was near him, We have lost all: and was often
heard repeating Monks, Monks, and so he died.

This was to make the Fable end as it had gone on, and it is forged without any
authority or appearance of truth. The manner of his death was already told, so
it needs not be repeated.

Page 172.
123. He says; The King by his Will appointed the Crown to go to his righteous
Heirs after his three Children, and commanded his Son to be bred a true
Catholic: but his Will was changed, and another was forged, by which the Line
of Scotland was excluded, and they bred his Son an Heretic.

There was no such Will ever heard of; and in all the Debates that were managed
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign about the Succession, those that pleaded for the
Scottish Line, never alleged this; which had it been true, did put an end to
the whole Controversy. It was indeed said, that the Will which was given out
as the King's Will, was not signed by his Hand, nor sealed by his Order, but it
was never pretended that there was any other Will: so this is one of our
Author's Forgeries.

The Conclusion.
THus I have traced him in this History, and hope I have said much more than
was necessary to prove him a Writer of no credit, and that his Book ought to
have no Authority; since he was not only a stranger to the Public
Transactions, Printed Statutes, and the other Authentic Registers of that
time, but was a bold and impudent Asserter of the grossest and most malicious
Lies, that ever were contrived. I have not examined all the Errors of his
Chronology, for there is scarce any thing told in its right order, and due
place; nor have I insisted on all the passages he tells, without any proof, or
appearance of truth; for as I could only deny these without any other evidence
but what was negative, so there are so many of them, that I must have
transcribed the greatest part of his Book, if I had considered them all. I have
therefore only singled out these Passages, which I had in the former History
demonstrated to be false: and these are both so many and so important, that I
am sure, enough is said to destroy the credit of that Author, and of his Book,
which has too long deceived the the World. And what is performed in this first
part, will I hope dispossess the Reader of any ill Impressions the following
parts of that Work have made on him, concerning the succeeding Reigns, of which
an account shall be given, as soon as it possibly can be made ready.

I shall esteem my time to have been well employed, and my pains rightly
placed, if my endeavors have so good an effect, as to take off the unjust
Prejudices which some may have conceived at the changes that were then made in
Religion; or at the beginnings of them, which being represented by this Author,
and upon his testimony by many other Writers, in such odious Characters to the
World, are generally so ill looked on.

The Work it self was so good, done upon so much reason, managed with such
care, directed by such wisdom, and tempered with so great moderation, that
those who intended to blast it, did very wisely to load it with some such
Prejudices: for if without these, the thing it self be examined by Men of a
candid temper and solid judgment, the Opposers of it know well where the Truth
lies; and on whose side, both the Scriptures, and the best Ages of the
Primitive Church have declar^d. But it was not fit to put a Question of such
importance, on so doubtful and so dangerous an issue: therefore it was well
considered by them, that some popular and easily understood Calumnies, to
disgrace the beginnings of it, and the Persons that were most employed in it,
were to be fastened on them: and if these could be once generally received, then
Men might be alienated from it by a shorter way, than could be done by the dull
and unsuccessful methods of Reason. Therefore as the Cause of our Church has
been often vindicated, by the learned Books that have been published in it; and
never with more success, and a clearer victory, than of late, in the elaborate
Writings (which are never to be mentioned but with honor) of the renowned Dr.
Stillingfleet; so I judged it might not be an unuseful and unacceptable Work
(which tho it be of a lower form, and so most suitable to my genius, yet will
be of general use) to employ the leisure I enjoy, and the small Talent
committed to me, in examining and opening the Transactions of those Times: And
if these who read it, are dispossessed of their prejudices, and inclined to
consider things as they are now set before them, in a truer light, I have
gained my end in it.

The Truths of Religion need no support from the Father of Lies. A Religion
made up of Falsehoods and Impostures, must be maintained by means suitable to it
self: So Sanders's Book might well serve the ends of that Church, which has all
along raised its greatness by public Cheats and Forgeries; such as the
Donation of Constantine, and the Book of the Decretals; Besides the vast number
of Miracles and Visions that were for many Ages made use of by them; of which
even the most disingenuous of their own Writers begin to be now ashamed. But
the Reformation of Religion was a Work of Light, and needs none of the Arts of
Darkness to justify it by. A full and distinct Narrative of what was then done,
will be its Apology, as well as its History. There is no need of Artifice, but
only of Industry, and sincerity to gather together all the remains of that
Time, and put them in good order.

I am now beginning to look toward the next, and indeed the best part of this
Work: Where in the first Reign, we shall observe the active endeavors of those
Restorers of Religion. The next Reign affords a sadder prospect of that Work
laid in Ruins, and the Authors of it in Ashes; but the Fires that consumed
them, did rather spread than extinguish that Light which they had kindled. And
what is fabled of the Phoenix, will be found true of our Church, That she rose
new out of these Ashes, into which she seemed consumed.

Toward the perfecting this History, I hope all that love the Subject of it,
will contribute their Endeavors, and furnish every thing that is in their
power, which may make it fuller or clearer: So I end with that desire which I
made in the Preface, that any who have in their hands any Papers relating to
these times, will be pleased to communicate them; and whatever assistance they
give to it, shall be most thankfully owned and acknowledged.

The end of the Appendix.
ADDENDA.
Numb. I. ARTICLES about Religion, set out by the Convocation, and published by
the Kings Authority.
AN ORIGINAL.
HENRY the Eight, by the Grace of God, King of England, Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 5.
and of France, Defender of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, and in Earth
Supreme Head of the Church of England, to all and singular our most loving,
faithful and obedient Subjects, greeting. Amongst other cures committed unto
this our Princely Office, whereunto it has pleased God of his infinite mercy
and goodness to call us, we have always esteemed and thought (as we also yet
esteem and think) this to be most chief, most ponderous, and of most weight,
that his Holy Word and Commandments may sincerely without let or hinderance, be
of our Subjects truly believed and reverently kept and observed; and that unity
and concord in opinions, namely in such things as does concern our Religion,
may increase and go furthward, and all occasion of dissent and discord touching
the same be repressed, and utterly extinguished; for the which cause we being
of late to our great regret credibly advertised of such diversity in opinions,
as have grown and sprongen in this our Realm, as well concerning certain
Articles necessary to our Salvation, as also touching certain honest and
commendable Ceremonies, rites, and usages in our said Church, for an honest
policy, and decent order heretofore of long time used and accustomed; minding
to have that unity and agreement established through our said Church concerning
the premises; and being very desirous to eschew not only the dangers of Souls,
but also the outward inquietness which by occasion of the said diversity in
opinions (if remedy had not been provided) might perchance have ensued; have
not only in our own person in any times taken great pain, study, labor and
travails, but also have caused our Bishops and other the most discreet and best
learned men of our Clergy of this our whole Realm to be assembled in our
Convocation, for the full debatement and quiet determination of the same: where
after long and mature deliberation and disputations, had of and upon the
premises, finally they have concluded and agreed upon the said matters, as
well those which be commanded of God, and are necessary to our Salvation, as
also the other touching the honest ceremonies, and good and politic order, as
is aforesaid; which their determination, debatement, and agreement, forasmuch
as we think to have proceeded of a good, right and true judgment, and to be
agreeable to the Laws and Ordinances of God, and much profitable for the
establishment of that charitable concord and unity in our Church of England,
which we most desire, we have caused the same to be published, willing,
requiring and commanding you to accept, repute, and take them accordingly; most
heartily desiring and praying Almighty God, that it may please him so to
illumin your hearts that you, and every of you, may have no less desire, zeal,
and love to the said unity and concord, in reading, divulging, and following
the same, than we have had and have, causing them to be thus devised, set forth
and published. And for because we would the said Articles, and every of them,
to be taken and understanden of you after such sort, order, and degree as
appertains accordingly; We have caused by the like assent and agreement of
our said Bishops and other Learned men, the said Articles to be divided into
two sorts, that is to say, such as are commanded expressly by God, and are
necessary to our Salvation, and such other, as although they be not expressly
commanded of God, nor necessary to our Salvation; yet being of a long
continuance for a decent order and honest policy, prudently instituted, are for
that same purpose and end to be observed in like manner; which ye following,
after such sort as we have prescribed unto you, shall not only attain that most
charitable unity and loving concord, whereof shall ensue your incomparable
commodity, profit and lucre, as well spiritual as other; but also ye conforming
your selves, and using these our said Articles as is aforesaid, shall not a
little encourage us to take further travel, pains, and labors for your
commodities in all such other matters, as in time to come may happen to occur,
and as it shall be most to the honor of God and ours, the profit,
tranquillity, and quietness of all you our most loving Subjects.

The Articles of our Faith.
FIrst, as touching the chief and principal Articles of our Faith, since it is
thus agreed as hereafter follows by the whole Clergy of this our Realm, we
will that all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach our people by us
committed to their spiritual Charge, that they ought and must most constantly
believe and defend all those things to be true, which be comprehended in the
whole body and Canon of the Bible, and also in the three Creeds or Symbols,
whereof one was made by the Apostles, and is the common Creed which every man
uses, the second was made in the Holy Council of Nice, and is said daily in
the Mass, and the third was made by Athanasius, and is comprehended in the
Psalm Quicunque vult; and that they ought and must take and interpret all the
same things according to the selfsame sentence and interpretation, which the
words of the selfsame Creeds or Symboles do purport, and the Holy approved
Doctors of the Church do entreat and defend the same.

Item, that they ought and must repute, hold and take all the same things for
the most Holy, most sure and most certain and infallible words of God, and such
as neither ought ne can be altered or convelled by any contrary opinion or
Authority.

Item, that they ought and must believe, repute and take all the Articles of
our Faith contained in the said Creeds to be so necessary to be believed for
man's Salvation, that whosoever being taught will not believe them as is
aforesaid, or will obstinately affirm the contrary of them, he or they cannot
be the very members of Christ and his Spouse the Church, but be very Infidels
or Heretics, and members of the Devil, with whom they shall perpetually be
Damned.

Item, that they ought and must most reverently and religiously observe and
keep the selfsame words, according to the very same form and manner of
speaking, as the Articles of our Faith be already conceived and expressed in
the said Creeds, without altering in any wise or varying from the same.

Item, that they ought and must utterly refuse and condemn all these opinions
contrary to the said Articles, which were of long time past condemned in the
four Holy Councils, that is to say, in the Council of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, and Chalcidonense, and all other since that time in any point consonant
to the same.

The Sacrament of Baptism.
SEcondly, as touching the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, we will that all Bishops
and Preachers shall instruct and teach our people committed by us unto their
Spiritual Charge, that they ought and must of necessity believe certainly all
those things, which has been always by the whole consent of the Church
approved, received and used in the Sacrament of Baptism; that is to say, that
the Sacrament of Baptism was instituted and ordained in the New Testament by
our Savior Jesus Christ, as a thing necessary for the attaining of everlasting
life, according to the saying of Christ, Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and
Spiritu Sancto, non potest intrare in Regnum coelorum.

Item, that it is offered unto all men, as well Infants as such as have the use
of Reason, that by Baptism they shall have remission of sins and the grace and
favor of God, according to the saying of St. John, Qui crediderit and
Baptizatus fuerit Salvus erit.

Item, that the promise of Grace and everlasting life, which promise is
adjoined unto the Sacrament of Baptism, pertains not only unto such as have
the use of reason, but also to Infants, innocents and children; and they ought
therefore and must needs be Baptized: and that by the Sacrament of Baptism they
do also obtain remission of their sins, the grace and favor of God, and be
made thereby the very sons and children of God, insomuch as Infants and
Children dying in their Infancy shall undoubtedly be saved thereby, or else not.

Item, that Infants must needs be Christened because they be born in Original
sin, which sin must needs be remitted; which cannot be done but by the
Sacrament of Baptism, whereby they receive the Holy Ghost which exercises his
Grace and efficacy in them, and cleanses and purifieth them from sin by his
most secret virtue and operation.

Item, that Children or men once Baptized, can, ne ought ever to be Baptized
again.

Item, that they ought to repute, and take all the Anabaptists and the
Pelagians opinions contrary to the premises, and every other man's opinion
agreeable unto the said Anabaptists or the Pelagians opinions in this behalf,
for detestable Heresies, and utterly to be condemned.

Item, that men or children having the use of reason, and willing and desiring
to be Baptized, shall by the virtue of that holy Sacrament obtain the grace and
remission of all their sins, if they shall come thereunto perfectly and truly
repentant and contrite of all their sins before committed, and also perfectly
and constantly confessing and believing all the Articles of our faith,
according as it was mentioned in the Article before, or else not.

And Finally, if they shall also have firm credence and trust in the promise of
God adjoined to the said Sacrament, that is to say, that in and by this said
Sacrament which they shall receive, God the Father gives unto them for his Son
Jesus Christ's sake, remission of all their sins, and the Grace of the Holy
Ghost, whereby they be newly regenerated and made the very Children of God,
according to the saying of Christ and his Apostle St. Peter, Paenitentiam agite
and Baptizetur vnusquisque vestrum in nomine Jesus Christi in remissionem
peccatorum, and accipietis donum Spiritus Sancti, and according also to the
saying of St. Paul ad Titum 3. non ex operibus justitiae quae fecimus nos, sed
secundum suam misericordiam, salvos nos fecit per lavacrum regenerationis and
renovationis Spiritus Sancti, quem effudit in nos opulenter per Iesum Christum
servatorem nostrum, ut justificati illius gratia haeredes efficiamur juxta spem
vitae aeternae.

The Sacrament of Penance.
THirdly, Concerning the Sacrament of Penance, We will that all Bishops and
Preachers shall instruct and teach our people committed by us unto their
Spiritual charge, that they ought and must most constantly believe, that that
Sacrament was instituted of Christ in the New Testament as a thing so necessary
for man's Salvation, that no man which after his Baptism is fallen again and
has committed deadly sin, can without the same be saved or attain everlasting
Life.

Item, That like-as such men which after Baptism do fall again into sin, if
they do not Penance in this Life, shall undoubtedly be damned; even so
whenever the same men shall convert themselves from the said naughty Life,
and do such Penance for the same as Christ requires of them, they shall
without doubt attain remission of their sins and shall be saved.

Item, That this Sacrament of perfect Penance which Christ requires of such
manner of persons, consists of three parts, that is to say, Contrition,
Confession, with the amendment of the former Life, and a new obedient
reconciliation unto the Laws and will of God, that is to say, exterior Acts in
works of Charity according as they be commanded of God, which be called in
Scripture, fructus digni Paenitentia.

Furthermore, as touching Contrition which is the first part, We will that all
Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach our people committed by us unto
their Spiritual charge, that the said Contr^tion consists in two special
parts, which must always be conjoined together and cannot be dissevered; that
is to say, the penitent and contrite man must first knowledge the filthiness and
abomination of his own sin, whereunto he is brought by hearing and considering
of the will of God declared in his Laws, and feeling and perceiving in his own
conscience that God is angry and displeased with him for the same; he must also
conceive not only great sorrow and inward shame that he has so grievously
offended God, but also great fear of Gods displeasure toward him, considering
he has no works or merits of his own which he may worthily lay before God as
sufficient satisfaction for his sins; which done then afterward with this
fear, shame and sorrow must needs succeed and be conjoined, The second part,
viz. a certain faith, trust and confidence of the mercy and goodness of God,
whereby the penitent must conceive certain hope and faith that God will forgive
him his sins, and repute him justified and of the number of his Elect children,
not for the worthiness of any merit or work done by the penitent, but for the
only merits of the blood and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Item, That this certain faith and hope is gotten and also confirmed, and made
more strong by the applying of Christ's words and promises of his grace and
favor contained in his Gospel, and the Sacraments instituted by him in the new
Testament; and therefore to attain this certain faith, the second part of
Penance is necessary, that is to say, Confession to a Priest if it may be had;
for the Absolution given by the Priest was institute of Christ to apply the
promises of Gods grace and favor to the Penitent.

Wherefore as touching Confession, We will that all Bishops and Preachers shall
instruct and teach our people committed by us to their spiritual charge, that
they ought and must certainly believe that the words of Absolution pronounced
by the Priest, be spoken by the Authority given to him by Christ in the Gospel.

Item, That they ought and must give no less faith and credence to the same
words of Absolution so pronounced by the Ministers of the Church, than they
would give unto the very words and voice of God himself if he should speak unto
us out of Heaven, according to the saying of Christ, Quorum remiseritis
peccata, etc. and qui vos audit me audit.

Item, That in no ways they do contemn this Auricular Confession which is made
unto the Ministers of the Church, but that they ought to repute the same a
verry expedient and necessary mean, whereby they may require and ask this
Absolution at the Priests hands, at such time as they shall find their
consciences grieved with mortal sin, and have occasion so to do, to the intent
they may thereby attain certain comfort and consolation of their consciences.

As touching the third part of Penance, We will that all Bishops and Preachers
shall instruct and teach our people committed by us to their spiritual charge,
that although Christ and his death be the sufficient oblation, sacrifice,
satisfaction, and recompense, for the which God the Father forgiveth and
remitteth to all sinners not only their sin, but also Eternal pain due for the
same; yet all men truly penitent contrite and confessed, must needs also bring
forth the fruits of Penance, that is to say, Prayer, Fasting, Almsdeeds, and
must make Restitution or Satisfaction in will and deed to their neighbor, in
such things as they have done them wrong and injury in, and also must do all
other good works of mercy and charity, and express their obedient will in the
executing and fulfilling of Gods Commandments outwardly, when time, power and
occasion shall be Ministered unto them, or else they shall never be saved; for
this is the express precept and commandment of God, Agite fructus dignos
paenitentia; and St. Paul says, Debitores sumus, and in another place he
says, Castigo corpus meum and in servitutem redigo.

Item, That these precepts and works of Charity be necessary works to our
Salvation, and God necessarily requires that every penitent man shall perform
the same, whenever time, power, and occasion shall be ministered unto him so
to do.

Item, That by Penance and such good works of the same, we shall not only
obtain everlasting life, but also we shall deserve remission or mitigation of
these present pains and afflictions in this World, according to the saying of
St. Paul, Si nos ipsi judicaremus, non judicaremur a Domino; and Zacharias,
Convertimini ad me and ego convertar ad vos; and Esajas ^8. frange esurienti
panem tuum, etc. tunc eris velut hortus irriguus. Haec sunt inculcanda
ecclesiis and ut exercitentur ad been operandum, and in his ipsis operibus
exerceant and confirment fidem, petentes and expectantes a Deo mitigationem
praesentium calamitatum.

The Sacrament of the Altar.
FOurthly, as touching the Sacrament of the Altar, We will that all Bishops and
Preachers shall instruct and teach our people committed by us unto their
spiritual charge, that they ought and must constantly believe that under the
form and figure of bread and wine, which we there presently do see and perceive
by our outward senses, is verily, substantially, and really contained and
comprehended, the very selfsame body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ
which was born of the Virgin Mary and suffered upon the cross for our
Redemption, and that under the same form and figure of bread and wine, the very
selfsame body and blood of Christ is corporally, really, and in the very
substance exhibited, distributed and received of all them which receive the
said Sacrament; and that therefore the said Sacrament is to be used with all
due reverence and honor, and that every man ought first to prove and examine
himself, and religiously to try and search his own Conscience, before he shall
receive the same according to the saying of St. Paul, Quisquis ederit panem
hunc aut biberit de poculo domini indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis
domini; probet autem seipsum homo, and sic de pane illo edat and de poculo illo
bibat: nam qui edit aut bibit ind^gne, judicium sibiipsi manducat and b^bit,
non dijudicans corpus domini.

Justification.
FIfthly, As touching the order and cause of our Justification, we will that
all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach our people committed by us
unto their spiritual charge, that this word Justification signifies remission
of our sins, and our acceptance or reconciliation into the grace and favor of
God, that is to say, our perfect renovation in Christ.

Item, That sinners attain this Justification by Contrition and Faith joined
with Charity, after such sort and manner as we before mentioned and declared;
not as though our Contrition, or Faith, or any works proceeding thereof can
worthily merit or deserve to attain the said Justification; for the only mercy
and grace of the Father, promised freely unto us for his Sons sake Jesus
Christ, and the merits of his blood and his passion be the only sufficient and
worthy causes thereof; and yet that notwithstanding to the attaining of the
said Justification, God requires to be in us not only inward Contrition,
perfect Faith, and Charity, certain hope and confidence, with all other
spiritual graces and motions, which as we said before must necessarily concur
in remission of our sins, that is to say, our Justification: but also he
requires and commands us, that after we be justified we must also have good
works of charity and obedience toward God, in the observing and fulfilling
outwardly of his Laws and Commandments; for although acceptance to everlasting
life be conjoined with Justification, yet our good works be necessarily
required to the attaining of everlasting Life, and we being justified be
necessarily bound, and it is our necessary duty to do good works, according to
the saying of St. Paul, debitores sumus non carni ut secundum carnem vivamus,
nam si secundum carnem vixerimus moriemur, sin autem spiritu facta corporis
mortificaverimus, vivemus; etenim quicunque spiritu dei ducuntur hi sunt filii
dei: and Christ says, si vis ad vitam ingredi serva mandata: and St. Paul
says, de malis operibus, qui talia agunt Regnum dei non possidebunt, Wherefore
we will that all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach our people
committed by us unto their spiritual charge, and God necessarily requires of
us to do good works commanded by him, and that not only outward and civil
works, but also the inward spiritual motions and graces of the Holy Ghost, that
is to say, to dread and fear God, to love God, to have firm confidence and
trust in God, to invocate and call upon God, to have patience in all
adversities, to hate sin, and to have certain purpose and will not to sin
again, and such other like motions and virtues; for Christ says, Nisi
abundaverit justitia vestra plusquam scribarum and Pharisaeorum, non intrabitis
in regnum caelorum, that is to say, we must not only do outward civil good
works, but also we must have these foresaid inward spiritual motions consenting
and agreeable to the Law of God.

Of Images.
AS touching Images, truth it is that the same have been used in the old
Testament, and also for the greater abuses of them sometime destroyed and put
down, and in the new Testament they have been also allowed, as good Authors do
declare; wherefore we will that all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and
teach our people committed by us to their spiritual charge, how they ought and
may use them. And First, that this may be attributed unto them that they be
representers of virtue and good example, and that they also be by occasion the
kindlers and firers of men's minds, and make men often remember and lament their
sins and offenses, especially the Images of Christ and our Lady; and that
therefore it is meet that they should stand in the Churches, and none otherwise
to be esteemed: And to the intent the rude people should not from henceforth
take such superstition, as in time past it is thought that the same has used
to do, we will that our Bishops and Preachers diligently shall teach them, and
according to this Doctrine reform their abuses; for else there might fortune
Idolatry to ensue, which God forbid. And as for Censing of them, and kneeling
and offering unto them, with other like worshippings, although the same has
entered by devotion and fallen to custom; yet the people ought to be diligently
taught, that they in no ways do it, nor think it meet to be done to the same
Images, but only to be done to God and in his honor, although it be done
before the Images, whether it be of Christ, of the Cross, or of our Lady, or of
any other Saint besides.

Of Honoring of Saints.
AS touching the honoring of Saints, we will that all Bishops and Preachers
shall instruct and teach our people, committed by us unto their spiritual
charge, that Saints now being with Christ in Heaven be to be honored of
Christian people in Earth; but not with that confidence and honor which are
only due unto God, trusting to attain at their hands that which must be had
only of God, but that they be thus to be honored, because they be known the
Elect persons of Christ, because they be passed in Godly Life out of this
transitory World, because they already do Reign in Glory with Christ; and most
specially to laud and praise Christ in them for their excellent virtues which
he planted in them, for example, of and by them to such as are yet in this
World to live in virtue and goodness, and also not to fear to dye for Christ
and his cause as some of them did; and finally to take them, in that they may,
to be the advancers of our prayers and demands unto Christ. By these ways and
such like be Saints to be honored and had in reverence, and by none other.

Of Praying to Saints.
AS touching Praying to Saints, We will that all Bishops and Preachers shall
instruct and teach our people committed by us unto their spiritual charge, that
albeit grace, remission of sin and Salvation, cannot be obtained but of God
only by the mediation of our Savior Christ, which is only sufficient mediator
for our sins; yet it is very laudable to pray to Saints in Heaven everlastingly
living, whose charity is ever permanent, to be intercessors and to pray for us
and with us unto Almighty God after this manner: All holy Angels and Saints in
Heaven pray for us and with us unto the Father, that for his dear Son Jesus
Christ's sake, we may have grace of him and remission of our sins, with an
earnest purpose, not wanting Ghostly strength, to observe and keep his holy
Commandments, and never to decline from the same again unto our lives end: And
in this manner we may pray to our Blessed Lady, to St. John Baptist, to all and
every of the Apostles or any other Saint particularly, as our devotion does
serve us; so that it be done without any vain superstition, as to think that
any Saint is more merciful, or will hear us sooner than Christ, or that any
Saint does serve for one thing more than another, or is Patron of the same. And
likewise we must keep Holy Days unto God in memory of him and his Saints, upon
such days as the Church has Ordained their memories to be celebrated; except
they be mitigated and moderated by the assent or commandment of the Supreme
head, to the Ordinaries, and then the Subjects ought to obey it.

Of Rites and Ceremonies.
AS concerning the Rites and Ceremonies of Christ's Church, as to have such
vestments in doing God service as be and have been most part used, as
Sprinkling of Holy Water to put us in remembrance of our Baptism and the blood
of Christ sprinkled for our redemption upon the Cross; Giving of holy bread to
put us in remembrance of the Sacrament of the Altar, that all Christen men be
one body mystical of Christ, as the bread is made of many grains and yet but
one Loaf, and to put us in remembrance of the receiving the holy Sacrament and
body of Christ, the which we ought to receive in right Charity; which in the
beginning of Christ's Church, men did more often receive than they use now adays
to do; Bearing of Candles on Candlemasday in memory of Christ the spiritual
light, of whom Simeon did prophecy as is read in the Church that day; Giving
of ashes on Ash-Wedensday, to put in remembrance every Christen man in the
beginning of Lent and Penance, that he is but ashes and earth and thereto shall
return; which is right necessary to be uttered from henceforth in our
mother tongue always on the same day: Bearing of Palms on Palm Sunday in memory
of receiving of Christ into Jerusalem a little before his death, that we may
have the same desire to receive him into our hearts; Creeping to the Cross and
humbling our selves to Christ on Good Friday before the Cross, and offering
there unto Christ before the same, and kissing of it in memory of our
Redemption by Christ made upon the Cross; Setting up the Sepulture of Christ,
whose body after his death was buried; the Hallowing of the Font, and other
like Exorcisms and Benedictions by the Ministers of Christ's Church: and all
other like laudable Customs, Rites, and Ceremonies be not to be contemned and
cast away, but to be used and continued as things good and laudable, to put us
in remembrance of those spiritual things that they do signify, not suffering
them to be forgotten, or to be put in oblivion, but renewing them in our
memories from time to time; but none of these Ceremonies have Power to remit
sin, but only to stir and lift up our minds unto God, by whom only our sins be
forgiven.

Of Purgatory.
FOrasmuch as due order of Charity requires, and the book of Maccabees and
diverse ancient Doctors plainly showing, that it is a very good and charitable
deed to pray for Souls departed, and forasmuch also as such usage has
continued in the Church so many years even from the beginning, We will that all
Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach our people committed by us unto
their spiritual charge, that no man ought to be grieved with the continuance of
the same, and that it stands with the very due Order of Charity, for a
Christen man to pray for Souls departed, and to commit them in our prayers to
Gods mercy, and also to cause others to pray for them in Masses, and Exequies,
and to give Alms to others to pray for them, whereby they may be relieved and
helped, of some part of their pain: But forasmuch as the place where they be,
the name thereof and kind of pains there, also be to us uncertain by Scripture;
therefore this with all other things we remit to God Almighty, unto whose mercy
it is meet and convenient for us to commend them, trusting that God accepts
our prayers for them, referring the rest wholly to God, to whom is known their
estate and condition; wherefore it is much necessary that such Abuses be
clearly put away, which under the name of Purgatory has been advanced, as to
make men believe that through the Bishop of Romes Pardon Souls might clearly be
delivered out of Purgatory, and all the pains of it, or that Masses said at
Scala caeli, or otherwhere, in any place, or before any Image, might likewise
deliver them from all their pain, and send them straight to Heaven, and other
like Abuses.

Signed Thomas Cromwell. T. Cantuarien. Edwardus Ebor. Ioannes London.
Cuthbertus Dunelmen. Ioannes Lincoln. Ioannes Lincoln Nomine procuratorio pro
Dom. Joan. Exon. Hugo Wygornen. Ioannes Roffen. Richardus Cicestren. Ioannes
Bathonien. Thomas Elien. Ioannes Lincoln. nomine procuratorio pro Dom. Rowlando
Coven. and Lichfielden. Ioannes Bangoren. Nicholaus Sarisburien. Edwardus
Hereforden. Willielmus Norwicen. Willielmus Meneven. Robertus Assaven. Robertus
Abbas Sancti Albani. Willielmus Ab. Westmonaster. Ioannes Ab. Burien. A
Richardus Ab. Glasconiae. A Hugo Ab. Redying. Robertus Ab. Malmesbur. Clemens
Ab. Eveshamen. Johannes Ab. de Bello. Willielmus Ab. S. Petri Glocest.
Richardus Ab. Winchelcombens. Ioannes Ab. de Croyland. Robertus Ab. de Thorney.
Robertus Ab. de Waltham. Ioannes Ab. Cirencest. Ioannes Ab. Teuxburen. Thomas
Prior Coventr. Ioannes Ab. de Osney. B Henricus Ab. de Anthonius Ab. de
Eyntham. Robertus Prior Elien. Robertus Magister ordinis de Semper-ingham.
Richardus Ab. de Notley. Hugo Prior de Huntingtoun* Willielmus Ab. de
Stratford. Gabriel Ab. de Buckfestia. Henricus Ab. de Wardenor. Ioannes Prior
de Merton. Richardus Pr. de Walsingham. B Thomas Ab. de Thomas Ab. de Stanley.
Richardus Ab. de Bytlesden. Richardus Pr. de Lanthony. Robertus Ab. de Them. B
Ioannes Prior de Radulphus Prior de Kymme. B Richardus Ab. de Robertus Ab. de
Welhows. Bartholamaus Pr. de Overhey. Willielmus Pr. de Burgaveny. Thomas Ab.
de Abendon.
Inferior Domus.
C R. Gwent Archidiaconus London, and Breck. Robertus Alridge Archid.
Colecestr. Thomas Bedyl Archid. Cornub. Richardus Street Archid. Derbiae. David
Pole Ar. Salop. Procurator. Archid. and Cleri Covent and Lichfield. Richardus
Doke Archid. Sarum. Edmundus Bonner Archid. Leycestriae. Thomas Baghe Archid.
Surr. Richardus Rawson Archid. Essex. Edmundus Cranmer Archid. Cant. Polidorus
Virgilius Archid. Wellen. Richardus Coren Archid. Oxon. Henricus Morgan
Procurator cleri Lincoln. Petrus Vannes Archid. Wygornen. Georgius Hennage
Decanus Lincoln. Nilo Spencer Procurator Cleri Norwicen. Guilielmus Knight
Archid. Cestriae. GamalielClyfton Decanus Hereford. and Proc. Capit. Ioannes
London Decanus Wallingford. Richardus Layton Archid. Bucks. Hugo Coren Pro^.
Cleri Hereford. Richardus Sparaheford Proc. Cleri Hereford. Mauritius Griffith
Proc. Cleri Roffen. Gulielmus Buckmastr. Procurator Cleri London. Richardus
Shelton Mag. Colleg. de Melyngham. Per me Willielmum Glyn. Archi. An-glessen.
Robertus Evans Decan. Bangoren. Walterus Cretying Ar. Bathonien. Thomas Bagard
Procurator Cleri Wygornen. Ioannes Nase Proc. Cleri Bathon and Wellen. Georgius
Wyndham Archid Norwicen. Nicolaus Metcalfe Archid. Roffen. Gulielmus Hedge
Procurator Cleri Norwicen. Adam Traves Archid. Exon. Ricardus Woleman Dec.
Wellen. Tho. Brerewood Archidiacan. Har. Procur. Capituli and Cleri Exon.
Georgius Carew Archid. Totten Proc. Capituli and Cleri Exon. Thomas Bennet
Psoc. Cleri and Capit Sarum. Richardus Arch Proc. Cleri and Capit Sarum. Petrus
Lighman Proc. Cleri Cant. Edmundus Stewart Proc. Cleri Winton. Ioannes Rain
Proc. Cleri Lincoln. Leonardus Samill Proc. Cleri Archid. Lewen. Simon Matthew
Proc. Cleri London. Linfrid Ogle Archid Salop. Gulielmus May Proc. Cleri
Elien. Roll. Philips Proc. Eccles. St. Pauli London. Ioannes Bell Ar. Glocest.
Ioannes Chambers Dec. St. Stephani Archid Bedford. Nicolaus Wilson

Some Observations on the former Subscriptions.
A The Abbots of Glossenbury and Reading Subscribe with the rest: by which it
appears that they complied in the changes that were made as readily as others
did.

B The Abbots writ generally so ill that it is very hard to read their
Subscriptions: Some of them I could by no means know what to make of.

C There are of 50 of the lower house of Convocation: of those there are 25
Archdeacons 4 Deans of Cathedrals 3 Deans of Collegial* Churches 17 Procurators
for the Clergy and one Master of a College.



II. Some Queries put by Cranmer in Order to the Correcting of several Abuses.
Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 5.
FIrst, What causes, reasons, or considerations has or might move any man to
desire to have the Bishop of Rome restored in any point to his pretended
Monarchy, or to repugn against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm made for the
setting forth of the Kings Title of Supreme Head?

Item, Whether a man offending-deadly after he is Baptized, may obtain
remission of his Sins, by any other way than by Contrition, through grace?

Item, If the Clergy know that the common sort of men have them in a higher
estimation, because they are persuaded, that it lies in the will and Power of
Priests to remit, or not remit sins at their pleasure whether in such case the
said Clergy offend if they wink at this, and voluntarily suffer the people to
continue in this Opinion?

Item, Whether a sinner being sorry and contrite for his sins and forthwith
dying, shall have as high a place in Heaven, as if he had never offended?

Item, Whether any, and what difference may be Assigned betwixt two men,
whereof the one being very sorry and contrite for his sins dies without
Absolution of the Priest, and the other which being contrite is also absolved
by the Priest and so dies?

Item, If it may appear that the common people have a greater affiance

Item, Whether now in time of the new Law the Tithes or tenth be

Item, Whether the Clergy only, and none but they ought to have

Item, Whether the 19th Canon in the Council of Calcedon, wherein

Item, Of the 24th Canon of the said Council, wherein is contained

Item, If it may appear that the Bishops have not, ne yet do maturely

Item, If such as have Deanries, Arch-Deaconries, Chanterships,

Item, For what causes and to what ends and purposes such Offices and
promotions of the Clergy were first instituted?

Item, If Curates having Benefices with cure, for their more bodily

Item, Of the Sacraments of Confirmation, Order, Matrimony, and extreme
Unction, what the external signs and inward graces be in every of the said
Sacraments, what promises be made to the receivors of them by God, and of what
efficacy they be of and energy of themselves?

III. Some Queries concerning Confirmation, with the answers which were given
to them by Cranmer, and Stokesley Bishop of London.
AN ORIGINAL.
WHether Confirmation be Instituted by Christ?

Written with Cranmers hand.

Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 5.


Respon. There is no place in Scripture that declares this Sacrament to be
instituted of Christ.

First, For the places alleged for the same be no Institutions but Acts and
deeds of the Apostles.

Secondly, These Acts were done by a special gift given to the Apostles for the
confirmation of Gods Word at that time.

Thirdly, The said special gift does not now remain with the Successors of the
Apostles.

What is the External Sign.

The Church uses Chrisma for the exterior sign, but the Scriptur makes no
mention thereof.

What is the Efficacy of this Sacramint?

The Bishop in the name of the Church does invocate the Holy Ghost to give
strength and constancy, with other spiritual gifts, unto the person confirmed:
so that the efficacy of this Sacrament is of such value, as is the Prayer of
the Bishop made in the name of the Church.

Haec respondeo, salvo semper eruditiorum and Ecclesiae ortho doxae judicio.

Stokesley's Paper. The first Question, Whether the Sacrament of Confirmation
be a Sacrament of the New Testament institute by Christ?

To this I answer, That it is.

The second Question, What is the outward sign, and the invisible graces which
be conferaed in the same?

To this I Answer, That the Words Signo te Signo Sanctae crucis and confirmo
te, etc. With the consignation, with the Cream, imposition of hands of the
Prelates, be the Signs: and the increase of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
especially of fortitude, to speak, show, and defend the Faith, and to suffer
for the same in case need be.

The third Question, What promises be made of the said graces?

I Answer, That the facts and deeds that be expressed in the Books of the
Apostles, with the effects ensuing, by the imposition of their hands, upon them
that before had received Remission of their sins, joined with the promises of
Christ, made to his Church, and the continual belief of the university of the
same Catholic Church from the time of the Apostles hitherto, without
contradiction of any man (ignorants and suspects of Heresy only excepted)
makes us, and in my opinion, without prejudice of other men's opinions, ought
to suffice to make all men that has promised to believe the Catholic Church,
assuredly to think that God has made the promises of the said grace.

Ego Joannes London. sic respondeo, fretus autoritate and Testimonio
antiquissimorum, eorumque Doctissimorum pariter ac Sanctissimorum virorum, and
praecipue Sanctae matris nostrae Ecclesiae Catholicae, cui etiam in non
expressis in sacra Scriptura, non multo minus quam scriptis, fides adhibenda
est; nisi tam de baptismo parvulorum, quam de perpetua Deiparae virginis
integritate, and id genus compluribus, quibus sine salutis periculo nemo
discrepat, licebit salva fide contradicere. IV. Some Considerations offered to
the King by Cranmer, to Induce him to proceed to a further Reformation.
Pleases it your Highness graciously to consider, Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 4.
deeply to ponder and weigh by your high wisdom these Considerations following.

First, How no great thing is to be determined, principally matters of Christ's
Religion, without long, great, and mature deliberation.

Secondly, How evil it has succeeded when in Provincial, yea or yet in General
Councils, men have gone about to set forth any thing as in the force of Gods
Law, without the manifest Word of God, or else without apparent reasons,
infallibly deduced out of the Word of God.

Thirdly, How all Christened Regions are now full of Learned men in the
Scripture, which can well epsy out and judge how things that be, or shall be
set forth are agreeable with Scripture or not.

Fourthly, Of what Audacity men be of now adays, which will not spare to write
against high Princes, as well as against private persons, without any respect
to their high Estates, only weighing the equity or the iniquity of the cause.

Fifthly, How not only men of the New Learning (as they be called) but also the
very Papistical Authors, do allow that by the Word of God, Priests be not
forbidden to Marry, although they were not ignorant that many expounders of
Scripture were of the contrary judgment.

Sixthly, How that it is not possible that all Learned men should be of one
mind, sentence, and opinion, as long as the cockle is mingled with the wheat,
the Godly with the ungodly, which certainly shall be as long as the World
endures.

Seventhly, How variety of Opinions have been occasion of the opening of many
verities heretofore taken for Heresy, yea and yet so esteemed and taken of
many, in other Regions; as namely the usurped Authority of the Bishop of Rome
has by that occasion come into Light, with the effusion of the blood not of a
few, such as were the first stirrers up thereof.

Lastly, There be also other opinions not spoken of, which have made, and yet
will make as much variance in your Graces Realm as any of them treated of,
namely, Whether the Holy Scripture teaches any Purgatory to us after this Life
or not? whether the same Scripture teaches the Invocation of dead Saints?
Whether there be any unwritten verities necessary to be believed not written in
Scripture, nor deducted by infallible Arguments out of the open places of
Scripture? Whether there be any satisfactions beside the satisfaction of
Christ? Whether free will by its own strength may dispose it self to grace of a
convenience (as it is said) de congruo? Whether it be against Scripture to kiss
the Image of Christ in the Honor of him? And generally whether Images may be
used any other way than your Grace sets forth in your Injunctions?

Wherefore in consideration of the premises it may please your Highness to
suspend your judgment for a time, and not to determine the Marriage of Priests
to be against Scripture, but rather to put both parts to silence, commanding
them neither to preach, dispute, nor openly to talk thereof under pain of, etc.
And in case these premises do not move your Highness to stay, that then it may
please the same to grant that the Article of Priests Marriage may be openly
disputed in both Universities, under indifferent Judges, before it be
determined. All the Arguments of the contrary party first to be delivered in
writing to the defenders twelve days before the disputation; to the intent they
may the more maturely and deliberately make answer to the same; and they that
shall enter as defenders into this disputation, to do it under this condition,
that if their Judges decern them to be overcome, they be right well contented
to suffer death, therefore: And if their adversaries cannot prove their
purpose, their desire is no more but that it may please your Highness to leave
your most humble Subjects to the liberty that Gods Word permits them in that
behalf; and your said humble Subjects shall pray unto Almighty God for the
preservation of your most Royal Estate long to continue to Gods Glory and
Honor.

V. A Declaration made of the Functions and Divine Institution of Bishops and
Priests.
AN ORIGINAL.
AS touching the Sacrament of Holy Orders, we will that all Bishops and
Preachers shall instruct and teach our people committed by us unto their
spiritual charge,

First, Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. ^.
How that Christ and his Apostles did institute and Ordain in the New
Testament, that beside the Civil Powers and governance of Kings and Princes,
which is called in Scripture, potestas gladij, the Power of the Sword, there
should be also continually in the Church Militant, certain other Ministers or
Officers, which should have Spiritual Power, Authority and commission under
Christ, to Preach and teach the Word of God, unto his people, and to dispense
and administer the Sacraments of God unto them; and by the same to confer and
give the grace of the Holy Ghost, to consecrate the blessed body of Christ in
the Sacrament of the Altar, to loose and absoil from sin, all persons which be
duly penitent and sorry for the same; to bind and excommunicate such as be
guilty in manifest crimes and sins, and will not amend their defaults; to order
and consecrate others in the same room, Order and Office, whereunto they be
called and admitted themselves; and finally to feed Christ's people like good
Pastors, and Rectors, as the Apostles calls them, with their wholesome
doctrine, and by their continual exhortations and monitions to reduce them from
sin and iniquity, so much as in them lies, and to bring them unto the perfect
knowledge, the perfect love and dread of God, and unto the perfect charity of
their neighbors.

Item, that this Office, this Ministration, this Power and Authority is no
tyrannical Power, having no certain Laws or Limits, within the which it ought
to be contained, nor yet none absolute Power, but it is a moderate Power,
subject, determined, and restrained unto those certain Limits and ends for the
which the same was appointed by Gods Ordinance; which, as was said before, is
only to administer and distribute unto the members of Christ's Mystical body,
spiritual and everlasting things; that is to say, the pure and heavenly
doctrine of Christ's Gospel, and the graces conferred in his Sacraments: And
therefore this said Power and administration is called in some places of
Scripture, donum and Gratia, a gift and a grace; in some places it is called
Claves sive potestas clavium, that is to say, the keys or the Power of the
keys, whereby is signified a certain limited Office restrained unto the
execution of a special Function or Ministration, according to the saying of St.
Paul in his first Chap. of his Epistle to the Romans, and in the fourth Chap.
of his first Epistle to Timothy, and also in the fourth Chap. of his Epistle to
the Ephesians. Where he writes in this Sentence; Quum ascendisset Christus in
altum, captivam duxit captivitatem, and dedit dona hominibus, dedit autem,
alios q^idem Apostolos, alios vero Prophetas, alios vero Evangelistas, alios
autem pastores ac doctores, ad instaurationem sanctorum, in opus
administrationis, in aedificationem corporis Christi, donec perveniamus omnes
in unitat^m fidei and agnitionis filii Dei, in virum perfectum, in mensuram
aetatis plene adultae Christi. That is to say, when Christ ascended into
Heaven, he subdued and vanquished very captivity her self, and led or made her
thrall and captive, and distributed and gave diverse heavenly gifts and graces
unto men here on earth; and among all he made some the Apostles, some Priests,
some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors, to the intent they should execute
the work and office of their administration, to the instauration, instruction,
and edifying of the members of Christ's Mystical body: And that they should also
not cease from the Execution of their said Office, until all the said members
were not only reduced and brought unto unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of
the Son of God, but also that they were come unto a perfect state, and full age
therein; that is to say, until they were so established and confirmed in the
same that they could no more afterward be wavering therein, and be led or
carried like children, into any contrary doctrine, or opinion, by the craft or
subtle persuasion of the false Pastors and Teachers, which go about by craft
to bring them into erroneous opinions, but that they should constantly follow
the true Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, growing and increasing continually by
charity unto a perfect member of that body, whereof Christ is the very head, in
whom if the whole body, that is to say, if every part and member be grown and
come unto his perfect estate, not all in like, but only one according to the
gift and quality which is deputed unto it, and so to be compacted, united, and
corporated together in the said body, no doubt bu^ that whole body and every
part thereof shall thereby be made ^he more perfect and the more strong, by
reason of that natural love and charity, which one member so united in the body
has unto the other: by which words it appears evidently not only that St
Paul accounted and numbered this said Power and Office of the Pastors and
Doctors among the proper and special gifts of the Holy Ghost, but also it
appears that the same was a limited power and Office, ordained specially and
only for the causes and purposes before rehearsed.

Item, That this Power, Office, and Administration is necessary to be preserved
here in Earth for three special and principal causes. First, for that it is the
Commandment of God it should be so, as it appears in sundry places of
Scripture. Secondly, for that God has instituted and ordained none other
ordinary mean or instrument, whereby he will make us partakers of the
reconciliation which is by Christ, and confer and give the graces of his holy
Spirit unto us, and make us the right inheritors of everlasting Life, there to
Reign with him for ever in glory, but only his words and Sacraments; and
therefore the Office and Power to Minister the said Word and Sacraments, may in
no wise be suffered to perish, or to be abolished, according to the saying of
St. Paul, Quomodo credent in eum de quo non audi^runt? quomodo autem audient
sine praedicante? quomodo autem praedicabunt nisi missi fuerunt? sicut scriptum
est, quam specios^ super montes pedes Evangelizantium pacem, annunciantium
bona! Thirdly, because the said Power and Office or Function has annexed unto
it assured promises of excellent and inestimable things; for thereby is
conferred and given the Holy Ghost with all his graces, and finally our
justification and everlasting life, according to the saying of St. Paul, Non me
p^det Evangelii Jesus Christi, potentia siquidem est Dei ad salutem omni
credenti; that is to say, I am not ashamed of the room and Office which I have
given unto me by Christ, to preach his Gospel, for it is the Power of God, that
is to say, the elect Organ or instrument ordained by God and endued with such
virtue and efficacy, that it is able to give and Minister effectually
everlasting Life unto all those that will believe and obey unto the same.

Item, That this Office, this Power and Authority was committed and given by
Christ and his Apostles unto certain persons only, that is to say, unto Priests
or Bishops, whom they did elect, call, and admit thereunto by their Prayer and
Imposition of their hands.

Secondly, We will that all Bishops and Preachers shall instruct and teach our
people committed unto their Spiritual charge, that the Sacrament of Order may
worthily be called a Sacrament, because it is a holy Rite or ceremony
instituted by Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament, and does consist of
two parts, like as the other Sacraments of the Church do; that is to say, of a
spiritual and an invisible grace, and also of an outward and a visible Sign.
The invisible gift or grace conferred in this Sacrament, is nothing else but
the Power, the Office and the Authority before mentioned: the visible and
outward Sign, is, the Prayer and Imposition of the Bishops hands, upon the
person which receives the said gift or grace. And to the intent the Church of
Christ should never be destituted of such Ministers, as should have and execute
the said power of the keys, it was also Ordained and commanded by the Apostles,
that the same Sacrament should be applied and ministered by the Bishop from time
to time, unto such other persons as had the qualities, which the Apostles very
diligently descryve; as it appears evidently in the third Chap. of the first
Epistle of St. Paul to Tim. and his Epistle unto Titus. And surely this is the
whole virtue and efficacy, and the cause also of the institution of this
Sacrament, as it is found in the New Testament; for albeit the Holy Fathers of
the Church which succeeded the Apostles, minding to beautify and ornate the
Church of Christ with all those things, which were commendable in the Temple of
the Jews, did devise not only certain other ceremonies than be before
rehearsed, as Tonsures, Rasures, Unctions, and such other observances to be
used in the administration of the said Sacraments, but did also institute
certain inferior orders or degre^s, as Ianitors, Lectors, Exorcists, Acolits,
and Subdeacons, and deputed to every one of those certain Offices to Execute in
the Church, wherein they followed undoubtedly the example and rites used in the
Old Testament; yet the truth is, that in the New Testament there is no mention
made of any degrees or distinctions in Orders, but only of Deacons or
Ministers, and of Priests or Bishops: nor there is any word spoken of any other
ceremony used in the conferring of this Sacrament, but only of Prayer, and the
Imposition of the Bishops hands.

Thomas Cromwell. T. Cantuarien. Edwardus Ebor. Ioannes London. Cuthbertus
Dunelmensis. Ioannes Lincoln. Ioannes Bathoniens. Thomas Elien. Ioannes Bangor.
Nicolaus Sarum. Edwardus Hereforden. Hugo Wygorn. Ioannes Roffen. Rich.
Cicestr. Richardus Wolman. Ioannes Bell. Willielmus Clyffe. Robertus Aldridge.
Gilfridus Downs. Ioannes Skip. Cuthbertus Marshall. Marmaduke Waldeby.
Robertus Oking. Nicolaus Heyth. Rodolphus Bradford. Richardus Smith. Simon
Matthew. Ioannes Prynn. Gulielmus Buckmastre. Willielmus May. Nicolaus Wotton.
Ricardus Cox. Ioannes Redman. Thomas Robertson. Thomas Baret. Ioannes Nase.
Ioannes Barbar.

(Some other hands there are that cannot be Read.)

Sacrae Theologiae, Iuris Ecclesiastici, and Civilis Professores.



VI. A Letter of Melanthons, to persuade the King to a further Reformation. An
Original.
S. D. Serenissime and Inclyte Rex, Cotton Libr. Cleop. E. 5.
Etsi audieramus Romanum Episcopum omnibus artificiis incendere Caesaris Caroli
and Regis Gallici animos adversus Britannos and Germanos, tamen quia spero Deum
haec pericula gubernaturum esse, and defensurum tranquillitatem tuam, scripsi
in alteris literis de Ecclesiarum emendatione, quam si tempora sinent, rogo ut
Regia Majestas tua suscipiat. Postea adjeci hanc Epistolam, non impudentia, sed
optimo studio, and amore cum Ecclesiarum, cum Regiae Majestatis tuae incitatus:
quare per Christum obtestor Regiam Majestatem tuam ut meam libertatem boni
consulat. Saepe cogito Britannicae Ecclesiae primordia, and caeteras lauds:
hinc enim propagata est doctrina Christiana in magnam Germaniae and Galliae
partem; imo Britannicae Ecclesiae beneficium fuit, quod primum Romanae
Provinciae liberatae sunt persecutione. Haec primum nobis Imperatorem pium
Constantinum dedit: magna haec gloria est vestri nominis. Nunc quoque Regia
Majestas tua, primum heroica magnitudine animi ostendit se veritati
patrocinaturum esse, excussit Romani Episcopi tyrannidem, quare veterem
puritatem Ecclesiae vestrae maxim optarim restitui integram. Sed animadverto
istic esse quosdam qui veteres abusus ortos aut confirmatos a Romano Episcopo
adhuc mordicus tenent. Mirum est autem Autore abusuum ejecto ipsa tamen venena
retineri; qua in re illud etiam periculi est, quod illi ipsi aut eorum
imitatores aliquando revocaturi potestatem Romani Episcopi videntur, si populus
hunc putavit esse Magistrum Ecclesiarum, incurrunt enim ritus in oculos and
admonent de autore, ut Solonis memoria cum legibus Athenis and propagata and
jucunda fuit.

Gaudebam igitur in Edicto recens istic proposito de Religione, promitti
publicam deliberationem and emendationem de Ecclesiarum ritibus and legibus,
eaque sententia mitigavit Decreti acerbitatem: quanquam enim laudo pietatem,
quod errores prohibentur, qui pugnant cum doctrina Catholicae Ecclesiae quam
and nos profitemur; tamen doleo ad eas causas adjectum esse articulum, in quo
praecipitur omnium rituum usitatorum and caelibatus observatio. Primum enim
multi transferent Edicti Autoritatem ad stabiliendos abusus Missae. Deinde in
universum confirmatur pertinacia eorum qui Doctrinae nostrae sunt iniquiores,
and debilitantur studia piorum. Augustinus queritur sua aetate jam duriorem
fuisse servitutem Christianam quam Judaicam, quanto erit asperior servitus, si
superstitiosiores ineptiae, ut reptatio ad crucem aut res similes, munientur
corporum suppliciis? Gerson scribit prodesse piis, qui tamen superstitiosius
observant ritus, ut invitentur ad eos violandos, ut usu and exemplo dediscant
superstitionem.

Sed munio tranquillitatem, dices, and nolo dissimilitudine rituum excitari
discordias. Ego de piis and modestis loquor qui humanas traditiones sine
tumultibus violant, non de his qui in caetu publico seditiose tranquillum
populum aut concitant aut perturbant. Extant autem antea leges de seditiosis,
nec statim violatio inepti and non necessarii ritus judicanda est seditiosa,
attamen hac in re non solum tranquillitatis, sed etiam piarum conscientiarum
ratio habenda est: est enim tenera res conscientia, facile languescit perculsa
potentum judiciis.

Nec ignoro quosdam novo jam uti genere sapientiae, excusant abusus, and
leniunt eos astute affictis interpretationibus, ut habeant speciosam causam cur
eos retineant; sicut nefarios abusus excusat Author reformationis Coloniensis,
ut campanarum consecrationem and similes imposturas. Quam multa sunt in
fabulosis historiis sanctorum, ut Christophori, Georgii, quae ut poemata
continent venustissimas Allegorias; nec tamen propter has cogendae sunt
Ecclesiae ut illas poeticas personas colant,

Erat in Egypto sacrum cum fici maturuissent, populus enim in templo edens
recentes ficus, addebat canticum his verbis, Dulcis veritas. Huic ritui facile
est bellam significationem addere, eumque accommodare ad laudem Verbi Dei, nec
tamen propterea hic mos in Ecclesias revocandus est; atqui hanc novam
sophisticam exoriri passim videmus. Sic in Italia dicuntur abusibus
patrocinari, Contarenus, Sadoletus, and Polus Cardinalis; nam hi praecipue
susceperunt sibi jam has parts defendendae Romanae impietatis, and hanc ducunt
esse magnam ingenii laudem fucos illinire vitiosis ritibus, putantque se his
ineptiis Dionysii Theologiam Mysticam renovare. Haec Sophistica, nisi prudentes
gubernatores Ecclesiarum obsistent, pariet horribilem confusionem religionum,
and rursus obruet veritatem. Donec flagitantur humani ritus tanquam necessarii,
confirmatur prava opinio de cultu; ideo Paulus tam vehementer non modo
opinionem, sed ritus ipsos Leviticos insectatus est, praevidebat enim non
excuti posse superstitionem, si ritus manerent, quare gravissime inquit, si
circumcidimini, Christus vobis nihil proderit.

Retineatur ergo simplex and perspicua sententia de liberate in adiaphoris,
and doceant concionatores quae scandala vitanda sint; retineantur ritus
divinitus instituti, and aliquae humanae traditiones utiles ad bonum ordinem,
ut Paulus loquitur, and sit modus caeremoniarum quae habeant conjunctam
gravitatem and elegantiam; decet autem abesse ab Ecclesiis barbariem: Caeteri
inutiles and inepti ritus non duriter flagitentur.

Deinde quantum periculi adfert conscientiis prohibitio conjugii, nec ignorant
Regia Majestas tua, legem de caelibatu perpetuo tantum Romae natam esse: extant
Epistolae Episcopi Tarraconensis defendentes conjugia Presbyterorum in Hispania
contra Romanum Episcopum. In Germania ante annos quingentos adhuc Sacerdotes
fuerunt mariti, adeoque aegre tulerunt sibi eripi hanc libertatem, ut in
Episcopum Moguntinum recitantem edictum Romanum tumultuantes impetum fecerint,
quare Episcopus fugere coactus recitationem omisit. Erat Author Edicti Gregorius
septimus qui cuilibet tyrannorum veterum audacia and impietate par fuit. Hic
cum longo and funesto bello civili nostros Germanicos imperatores implicuisset,
simul etiam Ecclesias Tyrannide oppressit. Audio and in Anglia Sacerdotes
fuisse maritos: denique notae sunt Historiae, quae exempla satis multa
continent, quare miror in Edicto citari Epistolam ad Corinthios, cum haec long
aliud tradat de conjugio, ac praecipiat conjugium iis qui non sunt idonei ad
caelibatum.

Nec objicienda sunt vota quae and express pugnant cum divinis mandatis, and
trahunt secum multiplicem superstitionem and morum corruptionem; videmus enim
qualis sit vita multorum Sacerdotum caelibum: itaque non sine dolor aliquo
legi in Edicto, quod hi qui Uxores duxerunt accusantur Levitatis, nam hoc
convicio causa nostra praegravari videtur, quae tamen Ecclesiae necessaria est,
ut conjugii dignitas clarius conspiciatur, ut superstitiosi cultus votorum
reprehendantur, ut arceantur libidines. Non enim impurus caelibatus, sed
honesta and pia conjugum consuetudo, est castitas Deo grata, sicut Christus sua
voce divinam conjunctionem appellat connubium, inquiens, Quos Deus conjunxit,
etc. Discamus Dei Ordinationem in natura magnifacere, eaque reverenter uti, non
fingamus ipsi novos cultus sine Verbo Dei; de quo genere Paulus nominatim
concionatur, cum ad Timotheum scribens duriter reprehendit eos qui prohibent
nuptias.

Propheta Daniel insignes notas addidit Antichristo duas, cum ait colet Deum
Maosim argento and auro, and Deum patrum suorum non intelliget, and mulieres
non curabit. Haec quadrant maxim ad Romanos mores: Missarum abusus and
Sanctorum cultus pepererunt immensas opes and Regiam potentiam. Nova numina
confecta sunt, adorantur aureae and argenteae statuae, and auro atque argento
ornantur. Deinde accedit Lex de caelibatu, unde magna corruption morum orta est.
Hae notae cui genti, cui Regno usquam competunt nisi factioni Episcopi Romani?
qui cum sit Antichristus, pio and forti animo ipsius autoritati and legibus
adversandum est.

Porro faeliciter coepit Regia Majestas tua quaedam emendare, sustulit aliqua
idola quae impie colebantur: Obtestor ergo Regiam Majestatem tuam, ut reliquam
impietatem Romanam etiam ex Ecclesiis tollat. Exempla testantur ingentibus
victoriis ornatos esse Reges qui sustulerunt Idololatriam, ac saepe testatur
Deus quantopere requirat hunc cultum, ut removeantur superstitiones, and pro
hoc officio ingentia praemia pollicetur: quare Deus etiam defendet Regiam
Majestatem tuam, si ut Ezechias and caeteri pii Reges impios ritus sustuleris.
Audit Regia Majestas tua in Belgico and alibi immanem saevitiam exerceri
adversus pios; and haec Tyrannis gignit alia multa vitia, stabilit
idololatriam, delet veram invocationem, extinguit penitus veram Religionem;
cumque desint boni Doctores, multi in populo fiunt palam (...) Constat enim
pene Ethnicam licentiam esse in Belgico, alii superstitiosi natura, alii
fanaticas opiniones Anabaptistarum amplectuntur. Talis est in Belgico status,
quod quidem floret pace, otio, opibus; adfluunt luxu ditiores, ita se beatos
esse putant, nec interea prospiciunt quot paenae ipsis impendeant: Deus autem
haud dubie tantam impietatem and crudelitatem atrociter puniet. Nollem igitur
in Regno tuo renovari asperitatem adversus pios, quam ita prohibebit Regia
Majestas tua si Edictum leniet and Ecclesias constituere perget. Deinde ut
etiam ad posteritatem, animi abhorreant a Tyrrannide Romani Episcopi, plurimum
refert illas leges tolli, quae sunt nervi autoritatis ipsius; magna vero
adminicula potentiae Romanorum Episcoporum fuerunt, Missarum abusus, and
Coelibatus, quae si durabunt aliquando poterunt praebere occasionem iis qui
depravatae sunt opinionis Romanae Aulae, ut ad eam rursus inclinationem
faciant. Id caveri quantum referat, si doctrinae puritas conservanda est, satis
intelligit Regia Majestas tua. Verum adhuc est quod Iuvenalis de Romana aula
scripsit, hic fiunt homines, etc. imbuti eo loci malis artibus, contumaciam
singularem adversus Reges inde referunt, ut multa exempla testantur. Hanc
Epistolam loquaciorem ac liberiorem ut Regia Majestas tua boni consulat oro.
Precor autem Deum and Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, ut Regiam Majestatem tuam
servet and defendat, ac gubernet ad salutem Ecclesiae. Been and feliciter
valeat Regia Majestas tua. Ex Francofordia,

Call. Aprilis 1539. Regiae Majestatis tuae Addictissimus Philippus Melanthon.
Directed thus on the back; Serenissimo and Inclyto Angliae and Franciae Regi
D. Henrico Octavo Walliae and Cornubiae Principi, Capiti Anglicae Ecclesiae
post Christum Supremo, Principi Clementissimo.
VII. A Letter written by the German Ambassadors to the King, against the
taking away of the Chalice, and against private Masses, and the Celibat of the
Clergy, etc. An Original.
Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 5.
SErenissime and Potentissime Rex, Domine Clementissime, Etsi Serenissimam
Regiam Majestatem vestram maximorum negotiorum mole, tum ad Regnum ac
Provincias proprias Majestatis Vestrae pertinentium, tum etiam exterorum Regum,
Principum, and Potentatuum gravissimis causis, quae ad Regiam Majestatem
Vestram pene quotidie devolvuntur, obrui non ignoremus; nosque pro nostra erga
Regiam Majestatem Vestram debita observantia ut par est, nihil minus velimus
aut cogitemus, quam Serenissimam Regiam Majestatem Vestram vel mittendis
literis crebrioribus, vel ulla alia re interturbare and a Reipublicae curis
impedire, tamen certis quibusdam de causis, quas Serenissimae Regiae Majestati
Vestrae probaturos nos speramus, duximus iterum ad Serenissimam Regiam
Majestatem Vestram literas dandas esse, nihil dubitantes quin Vestra
Serenissima Regia Majestas eas pro sua insigni bonitate, sapientia, doctrina,
atque favore sincerioris Religionis, benign acceptura sit. Cum enim ab
Illustrissimis Principibus nostris nobis injuncta mandata Vestrae Serenissimae
Majestati jampridem exposuerimus, and praeterea postulante Majestate Vestra cum
quibusdam ejusdem Reverendissimis and eruditissimis Episcopis and Theologiae
Doctoribus, de articulis Religionis Christianae per duos pene menses sermones
contulerimus, ac Dei beneficio res eo perducta fuerit, ut nihil ambigamus, quin
inter Serenissimam Regiam Majestatem Ve^^ram and Principes nostros, ac eorum in
causa religionis confaederatos, utrorumque Episcopos, Theologos and Subditos
firma atque perpetua concordia in sinceriore Evangelii Doctrina, in laudem Dei
Optimi Maximi, salutem Ecclesiae Christianae, ac perniciem Romani Antichristi,
secutura sit, nosque reliquam disputationem de abusibus non expectare queamus,
existimavimus non esse alienum ab officio nostro, ut ante discessum nostrum
Serenissimae Regiae Majestati Vestrae, quae per Dei Gratiam indefessa cura and
diligentia sinceram Evangelii Doctrinam promotam cupit, debitam observantiam,
atque perpetuum studium nostrum literis nostris testatum relinqueremus, and
Majestati Vestrae nostrorum etiam sententiam de quibusdam Articulis abusuum, de
quibus Majestas Vestra post abitum nostrum haud dubie curabit eosdem Episcopos
and Theologos pro inquirenda veritate, sermones confer and disputare,
declararemus: nihil ambigentes, quin ea etiam in re Serenissima Regia Majestas
Vestra pro Christi gloria id praestitura sit, ut non tantum doctrinam puram
habeat, verum etiam abolitis aliquando impiis cultibus and abusibus per Romanum
Episcopum in Ecclesiam introductis, cultus ac caeremonias consentaneas Verbo
Dei constituat: facile enim Serenissima Regia Majestas Vestra pro sua summa
sapientia perspicit, non posse unquam Doctrinae puritatem, vel constitui, vel
conservari, nisi tollantur e medio etiam hi abusus, qui prorsus and ex
diametro, ut dici solet, cum Verbo Dei pugnant, and Romani Antichristi
tyrrannidem ac idololatriam, tum pepererunt, tum etiam hactenus conservarunt;
nam ut radicibus demum resectis, necesse est arbores and herbas penitus
exarescere and perire, ita dubium non est, quin impiis Romani Episcopi abusibus
and idololatria, ut fundamento stabilitatis ipsius, labefactis and eversis,
etiam Tyrannis ejusdem prorsus ruitura and interitura sit; quod nisi fiat
perpetuo metuendum est, ne levi aliqua occasion iterum repullulescat and
tanquam a radice reviviscat.

Sunt vero haec tria pene capita and fundamentum Tyrannidis and Idololatriae
Pontificiae, quibus stantibus, neque Doctrina Religionis integra permanere,
neque unquam Romani Episcopi improbissimus dominatus, penitus extirpari
poterit: nempe, Prohibitio utriusque speciei Sacramenti in caena Domini, Missa
Privata, and Interdictio conjugii Sacerdotum, quae quidem usque adeo Dei Verbo
adversantur, adeoque etiam honestati publicae repugnant, ut vel ex his solis
apertissime intelligi possit Romanum Pontificem verum Antichristum, and omnis
idololatriae, impietatis, erroris, and turpitudinis, in Christi Ecclesiam
introductae auctorem esse; de quibus sane articulis nos pauca quaedam
Serenissimae Regiae Majestati Vestrae optimo studio scribemus, and ejusdem ut
Regis summa sapientia, acerrimo judicio, and excellenti doctrina praediti,
censurae committemus, persuasissimum nobis habentes Vestram Majestatem
Illustrissimam Principum nostrorum, and Statuum confaederatorum consilium and
institutum, in hisce articulis non improbaturam esse.

Primum enim, Serenissime ac Potentissime Rex, De utraque specie.
non existimamus quenquam inficias iturum, quin Christi Doctrina, mandata, and
ordinationes omnibus aliis praeceptis, traditionibus aut caeremoniis humanis
praeferri debeant; hic enim cum ipse sit vita and veritas, errare non potest,
humana vero omnia, praecipue in rebus divinis, incerta and dubia sunt. Porro
constat Christum ipsum utramque speciem instituisse, cum ait, Bibite ex hoc
omnes; and Paulum idem docuisse, cum inquit, 2 Cor. 11. probet seipsum homo,
and sic de pane comedat and poculo bibat. Quibus sane locis, non de una part
Ecclesiae, id est, de Sacerdotibus tantum, sed de tota Ecclesia mentio fit: Nam
quod quidam ita Argumentantur solis Apostolis Christum id dixisse, eaque de
causa utramque speciem ad solos Sacerdotes pertinere, infirmum admodum est
Argumentum; quia eadem ratione sequeretur, quod Laicis ne altera quidem species
danda esset; neque enim alio loco Christus mandavit solum corpus laicis dari,
and utramque speciem pro Sacerdotibus instituit: sed hoc fatendum est, quod
illud mandatum Christi de Sacramento, aut ad omnes, hoc est, Laicos and
Sacerdotes pertineat, aut Laici prorsus a Sacramento Corporis etiam arcendi
fuerint, cum nusquam alibi in Evangelio, nisi tunc ^um dedit Apostolis simul
corpus and sanguinem, Sacramentum pro Laicis institutum reperiatur; idque ad
omnes pertinere Paulus declarat, cum addit, and de poculo bibat, etc. Quod enim
dicunt Sacramenti divisionem, urgentibus quibusdam causis, ab Ecclesia
institutam esse, and sub una specie, non minus quam sub utraque contineri, non
multum ad rem facit: Quis enim non intelligit hic de Christi instituto and
mandato agi, idque humanae auctoritati and opinionibus long praeferendum esse;
neque enim Ecclesia sumit sibi hanc libertatem, ex Christi Ordinationibus res
indifferentes constituendi; and rations illae vel de discrimine ordinum, seu
dignitate Sacerdotali, vel periculo effusionis and similes, nullo modo tantam
queunt vim habere, ut propterea Divinae Ordinationes mutandae sint; neque ulla
etiam consuetudo contra mandata Dei introducta, ipsis canonibus Pontificiis
attestantibus, probanda est. Constat vero usum utriusque speciei, and clarum
habere mandatum Christi, and adprobationem Sanctorum Patrum, ac consuetudinem
veteris Ecclesiae; sic enim, inquit Divus Hieronymus, Sacerdotes qui
Eucharistiae serviunt, and sanguinem Christi populis distribuunt: and Gelasius
Pontifex, Sacramenti Corporis and Sanguinis Domini divisionem prohibet, eamque
grande Sacrilegium adpellat.

Adhaec, durat hodie hic mos Communionis utriusque speciei in Graecis
Ecclesiis, quae hac in re Romani Pontificis tyrannidi semper restiterunt, neque
ejus jugum recipere voluerunt, and testantur Historiae tum in Germania, tum in
multis aliis regionibus ac provinciis, verum Communionis usum diu conservatum
fuisse, sed tandem fulminibus Romani Antichristi, quibus totum paene orbem
terrarum conterruit and subjugavit, homines, ut verisimile est, victi, veru^
Eucharistiae usum mutarunt, ad quem tamen, per singularem Dei Gratiam, agnita
iterum veritate Evangelica, cum Principes nostri, tum alii Evangelii Doctrinam
profitentes, jam redierunt, and sese ac suos in re Universae Ecclesiae maxim
salutifera, tanquam in libertatem, excusso jugo Pontificio, vendicarunt and
adseruerunt. Nam quae causae Pontificem permoverint, ut contra Christi mandatum
and institutum, contra sententiam Sanctorum Patrum, contra consuetudinem
Universae Ecclesiae Christianae, Sacramentum divideret, and Laicos Sanguine
Domini nefarie spoliaret, facile Serenissima Regia Majestas Vestra perspicit.
Verisimile quidem videtur, eum voluisse suam, suique ordinis auctoritatem ac
dignitatem, ea ratione augere, and hoc discrimen inter Laicos and Sacerdotes
constituere; nam etiam nunc clamitant adversarii, laicos debere esse altera
specie contentos; quasi regnum aliquod possideant, and ita imperare ipsis
liberum sit, ut etiam Christi beneficium hominibus eripere queant, ad quod
potius, si suo officio fungi vellent, omnes invitare and pellicere deberent.
Sed quid Christo cum Belial? quid Pontifici cum Christi instituto, cujus ipse
se summum adversarium esse satis declarat, ideoque tum in hoc, tum aliis
salutaribus Religionis Christianae Articulis oportuit ipsum a scriptura
discedere, imo Doctrinam Evangelio consentaneam damnare, ut manifestum fieret,
eum esse Antichristum, de quo passim Scriptura talia praedixit.

Porro in altero Articulo, De Missa Privata, De Missa privatae.
adhuc magis adparet a Romano Pontifice Religionem Christianam adeo oppressam
and obscuratam, ut Christi Beneficium qui sua morte nos redemit, solusque est
hostia and satisfactio pro peccatis nostris, penitus sustulerit, and in ejus
locum idololatricum cultum pro abolendis peccatis in Ecclesiam invexerit,
eamque suis erroribus and prophanationibus miserabiliter implicaverit,
turbaverit and deformaverit. Cum enim Missa nihil aliud sit, nec esse debeat,
quam communio sive Synaxis, ut Paulus adpellat, neque etiam alius ejus usus
fuerit tempore Apostolorum and veteris Ecclesiae, quemadmodum hoc clare ex S.
Patribus probari potest, plane diversum quoddam opus, prorsus pugnans cum
communione and vero Missae usu inde factum est, quod docent ex opere operato,
ut loquuntur, mereri gratiam, and tollere peccata vivorum and mortuorum.

Haec opinio quantopere distet a Scripturis, ac gloriam Passionis Christi
laedat, Sereniss. Regia Majestas Vestra facillime judicabit. Si enim hoc verum
est, quod Missa pro aliis applicari potest, quod peccata tollit, and prodest
tam vivis quam mortuis, sequitur Justificationem ex opere Missarum contingere
non ex fide; verum hoc omnino Scripturae repugnat, quae tradit nos gratis
propter Christum per fidem justificari, ac peccata nobis condonari, and in
gratiam nos recipi, atque ita non alieno opere, sed propria fide propter
Christum, singulos justos ^ieri: At illi docent alienum opus pro remittendis
peccatis alteri, quod quidem merum est somnium and figmentum humanum, repugnans
Evangelicae Doctrinae; nam tunc demum adplicatur gratia per Verbum and
Sacramentorum usum, cum ipsi utimur Sacramentis, sed isti pro aliis utuntur,
quod perinde est ac si pro aliis Baptizarentur. Neque vero potest dici
quantopere deformet Christi Gloriam opinio illa de Missa, quae ex opere operato
conferat gratiam, aut applicata pro aliis mereatur eis remissionem venialium
and mortalium peccatorum culpae and poenae; idque aperte adversari Scripturae,
and a vero usu Missae sive communionis long discedere, vel inde liquet, quia
Missa sive Synaxis ideo est instituta, ut fides Lis qui utitur Sacramento
recordetur quae beneficia accipiat per Christum, and erigat ac soletur pavidam
conscientiam; ideoque ibi porrigi debet Sacramentum, his quibus opus est
consolatione, sicut Ambrosius ait, quia semper pecco, semper debeo accipere
Medicinam. Atque hic usque ad tempora Gregorii in Ecclesia Missae usus fuit,
neque antea privatae Missae cognitae fuerunt; quod quidem cum multis aliis
Patrum Sententiis patet, tum Chrysostomi, qui inquit, Sacerdotem stare ad
altar and alios ad Communionem accersere, alios arcere: Et ex veteribus
Canonibus constat, unum aliquem celebrasse Missam, a quo reliqui Presbyteri and
Diaconi sumpserunt corpus Domini, sic enim inquit Canon Nicenus, Accipiant
Diaconi secundum Ordinem post Presbyteros ab Episcopo vel Presbytero, Sacram
Communionem. Et scribit Epiphanius, in Asia Synaxim ter celebratam singulis
septimanis, nec quotidianas fuisse Missas, eumque morem ab Apostolis traditum
esse; qui quidem Missae usus etiam hodie in Graecis Parochiis durare dicitur,
nam tantum singulis dominicis diebus and festis, fit ibi una publica Missa,
privatas vero non habent: fuitque Graeca Ecclesia hoc nomine long foelicior
quam Latina, quae meliorem usum coenae Domini, Synaxis, sive Missae retinuerit,
neque vel Sacramentum Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, contra claram Evangelii
Doctrinam diviserit, ut paulo ante diximus, neque etiam privatas Missas Sacrae
Scripturae acerrime repugnantes, receperit; cujus quidem rei hanc potentissimam
causam fuisse arbitramur, quod Graeca Ecclesia Romanum Episcopum auctorem
perversae and Idololatricae Doctrinae, and omnium poene abusuum qui in
Ecclesiam introducti sunt, pro summo Ecclesiae Universalis sive Catholicae
capite, nunquam agnoverit.

Sed concedunt quidam adplicationes quae f^unt in Missa pro vivis and mortuis,
and item opiniones, quod ex opere operato gratiam mereri traduntur, non esse
probandas, and disputant abolitis illis opinionibus impiis, alia ratione Missas
privatas retinendas, nempe quia sunt gratiarum actiones, quae possint ab uno
vel a pluribus fieri. Haec sane ratio videtur aliquam habere speciem, estque
(...), ut inquit Sophocles, quo in causis invalidis, and ut ipse ait, morbidis
utendum sit. Si Missa tantum esset gratiarum actio, possit fortassis tali
aliquo praetextu colorari; verum constat eam principaliter institutam esse, ut
sit Sacramentum quod per ministrum alteri exhibeatur, ut accipiens and credens
consequatur gratiam. Et hoc quidem principali fine posito, accedit alter de
gratiarum action; quare nullo modo ab institutione Christi recedere, sed modum
and formam illius Institutionis, and exemplum veteris Ecclesiae sequi and
retinere debemus: Nulla enim novitas, praesertim in Sacramentis, recipienda
est, contra formam a Christo traditam, and contra exempla veteris Ecclesiae.

Porro constat privatas Missas esse recentes, and a Romany Pontificibus
introductas, and ne hodie quidem, ut paulo ante dictum est, in Graecis
Ecclesiis esse, nisi Parochiales diebus festis, cum quibus adhuc manet
vestigium Communionis: Cum igitur contra Dei Verbum Missa privata introducta
sit, eamque humanum tantum and commentitium cultum esse adpareat, quis dubitat
quin talis Missa, sine ullo periculo omitti possit, imo debeat, cum repugnet
Evangelio? Estque pium and sanctum opus, verum Missae sive Synaxis usum
Ecclesiae restituere ac reddere, quo per Romanum Pontificem, hoc est
Antichristum, multis jam annis miserabiliter privata fuit, qui quidem adhuc
mordicusprivatas Missas tenet, adserit, and defendit. Neque id immerito, facile
enim sentit quod labefactata Missa privata, labefactetur imo ruat Universum
ejus Regnum and Tyrannis, quae Missis illis nititur; ut enim in seminibus causa
est Arborum and stirpium, ita hujus luctuosissimi dominatus, imperii,
tyrannidis, nundinationis and idololatriae Pontificiae semen fuit superstitio
Missarum privatarum: Nam hae pepererunt and sustinuerunt, veluti Atlas quidam,
totum Papatum; ad harum normam omnia redacta sunt, siquidem nihil fuit, quod
non Missa aliqua expiari posse creditum est. His aucupatus Pontifex Romanus
indulgentias, quibus immensam pecuniam ex toto orb terrarum praedatus est; hae
Monachorum turbas infinitas coacervarunt, cum eorum nullus alius esset usus,
quam demurmurandi Missas privatas, and alioquin inutile terrae pondus forent.
Hae sunt and fuerunt universa pietas, quam Pontifex Romanus profitetur, hanc
solam novit ille Religionem, quae in Missis privatis consistit; Doctrinam enim
Evangelii non modo non habet, verum acerrime odit and prosequitur, and in summa
his Missis ipsam praedicationem Verbi Divini Pontifex exterminavit, ut per
omnia Antichristi munere fungeretur: Nam in loco unius concionis Verbi, amplius
mill Missae privatae, hoc est, humani and commentitii cultus, contra Divinum
Verbum successerunt; cum non Missas fieri sed Evangelium praedicare, and
Sacramenta rite distribuere and administrare, Christus Apostolis, quorum illi
volunt esse successores, mandaverit.

Curarunt igitur Illustrissimi Principes nostri, and alii Evangelii Doctrinam
profitentes Principes and Status, privatas Missas penitus aboleri, and verum
Missae usum sive Synaxim Christi institutioni, exemplo Apostolorum, veteris
Ecclesiae ac Patrum sententiis conformem, in Ecclesiam revocarunt and
restituerunt. Quae quidem Missa sive Synaxis summa cum reverentia celebratur,
servatis pene omnibus usitatis Caeremoniis, quae non repugnant pietati; and
admiscentur Germanicae sive vernaculae cautiones ad docendum populum, praecepit
enim Paulus, in Ecclesia uti lingua intellecta a populo. Porro, quia propter
communionem sive usum Sacramenti Missa instituta est, hi qui sunt idonei and
antea explorati, sacramento utuntur; ac dignitas and usus Sacramenti, summa
diligentia ac cura ex Verbo Dei populo commendatur, ut sciant and intelligant
homines, quantam consolationem pavidis conscientiis adferat, ac discant Deo
credere, and optima quaeque ab eo expectare and petere.

Et hunc quidem Sacramenti and Missae usum, Scripturae consentaneum, Deo
gratum, and pietati conducibilem esse, Serenissima Regia Majestas Vestra facile
agnoscit; neque enim hic aliquid contra Dei Verbum admittitur, imo secundum
Christi mandatum and ordinationem, qui hanc Sacram Communionem ad hunc finem
instituit, omnia geruntur: Nulla est hic admixta, prava, aut impia opinio, ut
in Missa privata Papistica, cujus finis and institutio cum Evangelio pugnat.
Nihil hic etiam absque summa reverentia, ordine, and decoro, digno Ecclesiae,
fieri cernitur. Audemusque adfirmare, majore Religione hunc verum Missae usum
exhiberi apud nos, quam hactenus unquam sub Papatu privatae Missae celebratae
fuerint, provocamusque ad testimonia doctissimorum virorum, qui a Majestate
Vestra missi in illis locis fuerunt, and haec omnia coram fieri viderunt and
audierunt.

Quod enim Adversarii clamitant, Nostros omnes cultus Divinos, omnes
Caeremonias, omnem denique Religionem abolere and labefactare, ea in re
Principibus nostris, and aliis Evangelii Doctrinam profitentibus, injuriam
faciunt; and haec eos insigni quadam malevolentia and odio plusquam Vatiniano,
ut dici solet, confingere and comminisci clare adparet, cum ex Doctrina
nostrorum, quam consentientem Sacris Literis in lucem ediderunt, and Scriptis
suis universo orbi Christiano promulgarunt, tum etiam exemplis nostrarum
Ecclesiarum, in quibus nolint velint coguntur fateri, omnia religiosius and
sanctius fieri, quam apud ipsos; immo Dei beneficio universus populus, non
tantum in templis est religiosior, sed in tota disciplina publica modestius se
gerit, majoremque erga Magistratum civilem, and eos qui Ecclesiis praesunt,
reverentiam and honorem exhibet, quam unquam antea factum fuerit: and hoc
sincerae Evangelii Doctrinae acceptum refer debemus, quae singulos, rectius
omnibus Pontificiis constitutionibus, sui officii admonet, and sola in quibus
re vera pietas ac cultus divinus consistat, tradit ac docet.

Porro, quod Missae collocatae ad quaestum, ut sub Papatu accidit, turpiter
prophanentur, quodque hic abusus in omnibus pene templis latissime pateat, non
est obscurum: Nam Christi beneficium qui nos precioso suo sanguine redemit,
idque gratuito pro vili stipe and mercede vendere, and tale etiam opus inde
constituere velle, quod ex sui natura, hoc est ex opere operato, mereatur
gratiam, and possit adplicari pro peccatis aliorum, mortuorum and vivorum, quis
non videt summam esse impietatem? Quid enim est corpus Domini indigne tractare
and sumere, si hoc non esset? An potest etiam magis impium quidquam dici, quam
illi de Missis istis docuerunt? Nempe quod Christus sua passione satisfecerit
pro peccatis Originis, and instituerit Missam, in qua fieret Oblatio pro
quotidianis delictis mortalibus and venialibus: cum Christus poenitentiam and
remissionem peccatorum praedicari mandaverit; Missam vero, hoc est Synaxim, ad
alium plane finem instituerit, viz. ut porrigatur Sacramentum his quibus opus
est consolatione, and ut per Verbum and Sacramentum credentes gratiam
recipiant, and remissionem peccatorum consequantur, non ut ipsi suum opus, quod
quale quale sit, humanum figmentum, humanus cultus est, contra Scripturam Deo
offerant ac sacrificent. Hoc enim non placat Deum, ut Christus ipse inquit, se
frustra coli mandatis hominum: Nam Missam non esse tale opus sive Sacrificium,
quod mereatur gratiam and prosit etiam aliis, inde adparet, quia Missa sive
Synaxis ad hoc est instituta, non ut Deo aliquid offeratur, sed ut
communicantes consolationem hauriant, and veluti pignus seu certum signum
gratiae ac bonae voluntatis Dei erga se recipiant, atque ita recordentur mortis
Christi, hoc est, beneficiorum quae per Christum accipiunt, qui quidem pro
nobis mortuus est, solusque pro peccatis nostris satisfecit, idque probant
Verba ipsa quibus and Christus and Paulus de Missa sive Synaxi usi sunt.

Primum enim inquit Christus, hoc est Corpus Meum, quod pro vobis traditur.
Haec sunt Verba promissionis Divinae quae solam fidem exigunt, quibusque
offertur nobis gratia and remissio peccatorum, ergo non est Sacrificium, hoc
est, opus quod Deo offeratur and quidem pro abolendis peccatis. Item Paulus
ait, Annunciantes mortem Domini: Annunciare autem non est Sacrificare, hoc est
tale opus Deo reddere, quo peccata deleantur. Praeterea Evangelii textus ita
sonat, Fregit and dedit Discipulis, inquiens, accipite and comedite, etc. item,
bibite ex hoc omnes, etc. accipere autem, comedere, and bibere, non est
sacrificare, quia haec opera ex opere operato non delent peccata.

Neque mandatur hisce verbis, ut nos Deo aliquid offeramus, sed potius ut ab eo
accipiamus, quia addit, pro vobis traditum, and sanguis qui pro vobis
effunditur; quae Verba ostendunt, non exhiberi a sumentibus Eucharistiam Deo
Sacrificium, sed donum hominibus datum. Praeterea vero nemo dicit Laicos cum
sumunt Sacramentum, Sacrificare: at quantum ad hanc Sacram Communionem, Missam,
sive Synaxim pertinet, nulla est ratio diversitatis, cum idem Christus uno
eodemque tempore ac momento, propter eundem finem and usum, hoc Sacramentum
absque differentia utentium Sacerdotum vel Laicorum instituerit. Et quemadmodum
prohibitio utriusque speciei, humanum tantum commentum and mandatum est; ita
quod de Sacrificio Missae ex opere operato gratiam promerente traditur, humana
tantum opinio est, contra Verbum Dei, a quo in rebus maximis, nempe ad
remissionem peccatorum, salutem animarum, and vitam aeternam pertinentibus,
nullo modo est discedendum: Non enim frustra Paulus inquit and bis repetit, Si
nos aut Angelus de Coelo Evangelizet vobis praeter id quod Evangelizavimus and
accepistis, Anathema sit.

Praeterea nec potest ratio diversitatis adsignari ex Sacris Literis, cur magis
dicant eos qui Sacramento Eucharistiae fruuntur Sacrificare, quam illos qui
alio Sacramento, ut Baptismo, utuntur, cum utrumque nihil aliud sit, quam
Sacramenta, quae Christus horum institutor and auctor prorsus ad alium finem,
quam ut sint talia Sacrificia, qualia illi comminiscuntur, ordinavit. Sed
oportuit Romanum Pontificem Missas privatas, ad opprimendam Christi, cum ipse
hostis est, gloriam attollere, ut populum Christianum a veritate Evangelica and
agnitione Christi, and Sacramentorum legitimo usu, prorsus abduceret,
Christique bonitatem and misericordiam obliteraret. Qui enim Missam ^ale
Sacrificium esse cogitant, quo Deus placetur, hi non queunt Christi beneficium
expendere pro dignitate, and in terroribus ac doloribus irae and judicii Dei
non habebunt refugium, neque bo^a conscientia poterunt do^a and signa amoris
divina agnoscere, si alieno opere Deum placari and peccata remitti sibi
persuasum habeant: Nam illi ipsi qui nituntur impias opiniones de Missa privata
excusare, hoc praetextu, quasi Missa ideo vocetur Sacrificium, quia sit
gratiarum actio and sacrificium laudis, hi convincuntur propriis ipsorum
testimoniis and Scriptis quae de Missis extant, haeque persuasiones hominum
animis etiam hodie de Missis privatis inhaerent: sic enim Thomas inquit in
Opusculo de Sacramento Altaris, cur Missa instituta sit? Corpus Domini semel
oblatum est in cruce, pro debito originali, sic offeratur jugiter pro
quotidianis delictis in Altari, ut habeat in hoc Ecclesia munus ad placandum
sibi Deum, super omnia legis Sacrificia preciosum and acceptum.

Alexander Papa, nihil in Sacrificiis Ecclesiae majus esse potest, quam Corpus
and Sanguis Christi, nec ulla oblatio hac potior est, sed omnes praecellit:
item ipsa veritas nos instruit, Calicem ac Panem in Sacramento offerre, quando
ait, accipite and comedite, nam crimina atque peccata, oblatis his Domino
Sacrificiis, delentur. Et rursus inquit, talibus hostiis delectabitur and
placabitur Deus, and peccata dimittet ingentia. Gabriel de Canon. Missae,
Sacramentum Eucharistiae veluti Sacrificium summo patri oblatum, nedum veniale
sed etiam mortale, non dico sumentium sed omnium eorum pro quibus offertur, and
quantum ad reatum culpae and poenae, plus vel minus secundum dispositionem
eorum pro quibus offertur, tollit: unde Thomas in Quarto Did. 1, 2. q. 2.
Eucharistia in quantum est Sacrificium, habet effectum etiam in aliis pro
quibus offertur, in quibus non prae-exigit vitam spiritualem in actu, sed in
potentia, and ideo si eos dispositos inveniat, eis gratiam obtinet, virtute
illius very Sacrificii a quo omnis gratia in nos fluxit, and per consequens
peccata mortalia in eis delet, non sicut causa proxima, sed in quantum gratiam
contritionis eis impetrat.

His and similibus omnes libri Scolasticorum pleni sunt, quibus uno ore docent,
Missam tale esse Sacrificium, quo gratiam homines mereantur ex opere operato,
quod ad delenda aliorum peccata adplicari possit. Quae Doctrina aut potius
perversum and impium figmentum, an pugnet cum Sacris Literis necne? An verum
Missae seu communionis usum tradat necne? An Christi beneficium non magis
obscuret quam illustret, imo etiam prorsus tollat? Vestrae Serenissimae Regiae
Majestati dijudicandum relinquimus, quae pro sua sapientia, and non tantum in
rebus politicis, sed etiam Sacris and in omni genere doctrinarum acerrimo
judicio, facile censebit, justissimam causam habuisse Principes nostros and
alios Evangelii Doctrinam profitentes, Missas privatas abrogandi, and verum
Missae sive Communionis usum, pro Christi gloria and consolatione totius
Ecclesiae Christianae, restituendi and revocandi, postquam ex Dei Verbo
cognoverunt, quantum privatae Missae a veritate Evangelica distent, quantumque
in iis insit impietatis and idololatriae: fuit enim unicum Sacrificium
propitiatorium in mundo, viz. Mors Christi, qui, ut Paulus inquit, semel est
pro nobis oblatus, and factus hostia pro peccatis nostris, quod caetera legis
Sacrificia propitiatoria significarunt, quae similitudine quadam, erant
satisfactiones redimentes justitiam legis, ne ex politia excluderentur illi qui
peccaverant, eaque cessaverunt post Revelatum Evangelium: in Novo Testamento,
necesse est cultum tantum esse Spiritualem, hoc est, justitiam fidei and
fructus fidei, quia adfert justitiam and vitam spiritualem and aeternam, juxta,
Dabo legem meam in cordibus eorum; and Christus ait, very adoratores adorabunt
Patrem in spiritu and veritate, id est, vero cordis adfectu, qua de causa
abrogati sunt Levitici cultus, quod debeant succedere cultus Spirituales
mentis, and horum fructus ac signa, ut in Epistola ad Hebraeos manifest
docetur.

Ex quibus omnibus sequitur Missam non esse Sacrificium, quod ex opere operato
mereatur, faciente vel aliis remissionem peccatorum, ut illi docuerunt. Et
quocunque quidam fuco nitantur excusare Missas privatas, semper eis refragatur
and reclamat Doctrina ipsoru^ de Missa, qua eam aliis posse adplicari
tradiderunt, and peccata delere hominibus persuaserunt. Haec opinio nisi
restituto vero Missae usu, nunquam ex animis hominum delebitur, sed perpetuo
manet and redit is error, quod oporteat talem esse cultum in Ecclesia, quo Deus
placetur.

Et ut videatur fictione juris; ut Jureconsulti loquuntur, Missam posse vocari
sacrificium memoriale sive laudis: at cum id non sit satisfactorium pro
facientibus, vel adplicabile pro aliis, quo quis mereatur remissionem
peccatorum, quorsum attinebit, relicto vero ejus usu and institutione, id in
Ecclesiam introducere, ubi propter nullam humanam rationem, commentum, aut
opinionem, a Christi mandato and ordinatione est discedendum? Eadem enim
ratione; Natalis Domini and similia festa, quae in Christi memoriam
celebrantur, sacrificia memorialia sive Eucharistica dici possent; imo talia
Sacrificia verius sunt, Evangelii praedicatio, fides, invocatio, gratiarum
actio, adflictiones, aut adplicationes pro aliis; and Missae principalis finis,
ut supra disseruimus, is est, ut sit Sacramentum, quod per ministrum alteri
exhibeatur, quare non potest dici Sacrificium; cum nemo ignoret magnum inter
Sacrificia and Sacramenta discrimen esse, his enim nos dona a Deo oblata
accipimus, illis vero nostrum Deo reddimus and offerimus.

Neque vero habent privatae Missae alios auctores quam Pontifices, qui a
tempore Gregorii, nunc hanc, nunc illam caeremoniam, cantionem, aut orationem,
singuli pro sua sanctitate and opinione adjecerunt, ut historiae uno consensu
testantur, donec eandem, egregium illud opus, dignum istis auctoribus
exaedificarunt, and relicto vero Missae sive Communionis usu, ac obliterata
doctrina de Christo, Universa Ecclesia Missis privatis in qua sola omnem poene
sanctitatem posuerunt, repleta and obruta fuit.

Haec Serenissime ac Potentissime Rex, nostrorum Principum and aliorum Imperii
ordinum, Evangelicam Doctrinam profitentium, Theologi and Doctores, justis
voluminibus explicarunt, quae quidem hac Epistola nos breviter adtingenda
duximus; non quod Serenissimam Regiam Majestatem Vestram haec latere penitus
putemus, neque enim ignoramus Serenissimae Regiae Majestati Vestrae and veteru^
and recentiu^ scripta, de his and aliis Controversiis Ecclesiasticis
diligentissime cognita esse, de quibus etiam Majestas Vestra sapientissime
eruditissime saepe cum doctis viris confer and disputare solet: Sed haec ideo
fecimus ut Majestati Vestrae quam posset fieri brevissime, occasionem and
causas quasdam abolitaru^ privatarum Missarum apud nos, summa cum observantia
ut decet exponeremus; and adversariorum calumnias, quibus cum apud Regiam
Majestatem Vestram tum alias, undecunque quaesita and arrepta occasion, variis
technis and figmentis, doctrinam sinceriorem gravare and in odium omnium
perducere conantur, declinaremus.

Neque vero ambigimus quin Majestas Vestra, ut Rex eruditissimus and veritatis
Evangelicae amantissimus, facillime judicabit, quod non temere privatae Missae
apud nos abrogatae sint, sed justissimis and firmissimis rationibus, ex Dei
Verbo quod solum errare non potest, sincere and absque sophistica deductis, pro
conservanda and illustranda Christi Gloria, and hominum salute id factum esse:
Et opponantur qualescunque excogitari possint cavillationes and sophismata,
tamen adparebit nostros hoc agere quod sit tutius, dum retinent modum and
formam institutionis Christi. Ac maxima pars Sacerdotum sua sponte apud nos
desiit Missas privatas celebrare, posteaquam intellexerunt ex Evangelica
Doctrina, quantum in iis erroris and impietatis esset; and plurimi ac
doctissimi quique, qui Sacerdotia aut Parochias sub Magistratibus alienis a
sincera Evangelii Doctrina tenebant, eas deseruerunt, ne cogerentur facere
contra suas conscientias, seque ad ea loca in quibus Evangelii Doctrina libere
praedicatur contulerunt; gravissimum enim est quenquam in re praesertim tali,
quae Dei gloriam laedit, ac Divino Verbo repugnat, tanquam ad cultum divinum
adigi, and compelli.

Sed ne Serenissimae Regiae Majestati Vestrae prolixitate literarum simus
molesti, desinemus plura de hoc articulo inpraesentiarum disserere.

Restat tertius locus instituti Argumenti, De Conjugio Sacerdotum.
viz. de Conjugio Sacerdotum, quod itidem Romanus Episcopus contra Scripturam,
contra leges naturae, and contra omnem honestatem prohibuit, ac multorum
peccatorum, scelerum and turpitudinis occasionem praebuit: sed fortassis ne
possit dubitari eum esse Christi adversarium, de quo cum illam ipsam
prohibitionem, tum alia quaedam quae in illum solum adperte quadrant, Scriptura
clare praedixit, oportuit eum talem legem Caelibatus Sacerdotalis sancire, ut
sicut leo ex unguibus, ita Papa, hoc est Antichristus, ab hac prohibitione
Sanctissimi and in omnibus honorabilis conjugii, agnosceretur; sic enim Paulus
inquit, Spiritus autem manifest dicit, quod in novissimis temporibus discedent
quidam a fide, attendentes Spiritibus Erroris and Doctrinis Daemoniorum, in
hypocrisi loquentium mendacium, cauteriatam habentium conscientiam suam,
prohibentium nubere: haec si non in Romanum Episcopum congruunt, in quem alium
convenient? nemo enim alius quam ipse conjugium Sacerdotibus injustissime
eripuit, and caelibatum impurissimum sub specie Sanctitatis, and ut Paulus ait
in Hypocrisi and per mendacium introduxit.

Scriptura non minus Sacerdotibus, quam alterius sortis hominibus matrimonium
liberum permittit, sunt enim de eadem carne, quae totum genus humanum vestit
and continet, nati: non possunt igitur naturam suam mutare, non possunt carnem
abjicere, nec absque singulari Dei dono caelibes vivere, nam non quilibet, ut
Christus inquit, capit Verbum hoc: and Paulus, propter Fornicationem
unusquisque suam Uxorem habeat; and peculiariter de Sacerdotibus ait,
constituas per civitates Presbyteros sicut disposui tibi, si quis sine crimine
est, unius Uxoris vir, Filios habens fideles, non in accusatione luxuriae;
item, oportet Episcopum esse irreprehensibilem, unius Uxoris virum: patet
igitur hanc prohibitionem non ex jure Divino, sed potius contra Sacram
Scripturam decretum esse.

At solet a quibusdam Pontificiis defensoribus opponi, quod licet conjugium
Sacerdotum non videatur vetitum Divinis Literis, tamen Sacerdotes a veteribus
temporibus in hunc usque diem in caelibatu vixisse, eaque de causa addunt non
esse discedendum hac in re a tali exemplo, neque permittendum conjugium
Sacerdotibus. His, Serenissime ac potentissime Rex, adperte refragantur
historiae, tum Ecclesiasticae tum aliae, ex quibus clare patet, Episcopos and
Sacerdotes veteribus temporibus conjugatos fuisse.

Primum enim Spiridion Cyprius Episcopus, vir unus ex ordine prophetarum, ut
Historia Ecclesiastica ait, Uxorem habuit ex qua filiam nomine Irenen suscepit;
deinde ordine pene omnes Episcopi Uxorati fuerunt, quorum plurimi Filii postea,
tum Romani, tum alii Episcopi creati sunt: fuit enim Sylverius Papa Hormisdae
Episcopi Filius, Papa Theodorus Theodori Episcopi Hierosolymitani, Papa
Adrianus secundus Talari Episcopi, Joannes decimus Papa Sergii Papae, Gelasius
Valerii Episcopi, Papa Joannes decimus quintus Leonis Presbyteri Filius; and ne
omnes enumeremus, patet vel unica historia Polycratis, ex cujus parentibus
septem fuerunt per ordinem Episcopi, ipse vero fuit octavus: at non est
credibile omnes illos ex illegitimis nuptiis prognatos esse, cum ipsi canones
and decreta Synodorum doceant, conjugia Sacerdotum esse licita; sic enim inquit
Canon Apostolorum, si quis docuerit Sacerdotem sub obtentu Religionis propriam
Uxorem contemnere, Anathema sit.

Item extat praeclarum exemplum de Paphnutio confessore, qui universae Synodo
Nicenae prohibitionem conjugii dissuasit, and obtinuit ne hac ex part
^ancitum, sed hoc in uniuscujusque voluntate non necessitate permissum fuerit.
Quae Historia etiam in jure Pontificio recensetur, extatque decretum quoddam
sextae Synodi, in quo palam damnatur prohibitio conjugii Sacerdotalis.

Sed objicitur iterum, propter votum castitatis, quod Sacerdotes praestiterunt,
non posse eis permitti nuptias. Hoc quale votum sit, quamque obligatorium, quod
sine peccato servari non potest, Serenissima Regia Majestas Vestra pro summa
sapientia and Doctrina, facile aestimabit: neque enim donum castitatis omnibus
datum est, idque caelibatus ipse Sacerdotum, and quotidiana experientia etiam
nunc testatur; and quid de tali voto sentiendum sit, Sanctorum Patrum sententia
declaravit, sic enim Augustinus ait, quidam nubentes post votum adserunt
adulteros esse, ego autem dico vobis quod graviter peccant qui tales dividunt.
Et Cyprianus de virginibus qui continentiam voverunt, sic inquit, si
perseverare nolunt, vel non possunt, melius est ut nubant, quam ut in ignem
delitiis suis cadant.

Censent itaque praedicti Sancti Patres, tale votum non debere impedire
Matrimonium, sicut revera etiam non potest obstare quo minus hi quibus donum
continentiae non contigit, matrimonium contrahant: nam melius est nubere quam
uri, ut inquit Paulus; Quid autem est impurius coelibatu illo Sacerdotali? quam
pauci vero continent? quam plurimi in fornicationibus, adulteriis, and id genus
similibus ac gravioribus peccatis and flagitiis pene quotidie deprehenduntur,
contra quod sileges severe animadverterent, non habituri essent, quo de illo
ficto and hypocritico coelibatu adeo gloriarentur?

Ac tradunt Historiae in Germania triennium aut amplius, Sacerdotes acerrime
restitisse Sanctioni Pontificis Hildebrandi de caelibatu, qui summa vi eis
Uxores adimere conatus est, hique justissimas causas contra illam
constitutionem ac tyrannidem Pontificiam, pro Matrimonio defendendo allegarunt,
in qua re cum nihil aequi obtinere potuerint, tandem ingens orta est seditio
contra Archiepiscopum Moguntinum, qui decretum pontificium detulat, adeo ut is
ab incaepto destiterit; and vix tandem Papa post multas diras execrationes and
bullas, quibus etiam coelum ipsum expugnare conatus est, miseris Sacerdotibus
facultatem liberam conjugii, contra divina and humana jura abstulerit, and
omnis generis libidinis and impuritatis exercendae occasionem praebuerit: Extat
quoque Epistola ad Nicolaum Episcopum Romanum I. Divi Udalrici Episcopi
Augustensis, qua is gravissimis and optimis argumentis dissuadet and damnat
prohibitionem conjugii Sacerdotum.

Cum igitur Principes nostri, and alii porfitentes Evangelii Doctrinam,
patefacta per Dei Gratiam iterum veritate, intellexerint quid de prohibitione
illa pontificia conjugii Sacerdotalis sentiendum esset, and palam viderent and
experirentur, quod non posset coelibatus ille sine peccatis and scandalis
consistere, reperunt in ea etiam vincula pontificia, ac Matrimonium
Sacerdotibus, sicut hoc Scriptura Sacra and exempla Sanctorum Patrum ac veteris
Ecclesiae exigunt and testantur, liberum permiserunt. Existimarunt enim hoc
quoque ad suum officium pertinere, ut infinitorum scandalorum and scelerum,
quae necessario secum trahit caelibatus Sacerdotalis, occasionem and materiam
praescinderent and auferrent, publicaeque honestati hac quoque in re
consulerent; maxim cum animadverterent quantae etiam abominationes, and in
ordine Sacerdotali, and in Monasteriis Vestalium ac Monachorum evenerint, in
quibus compertum est saepe infantes crudeliter necatos, pharmacis foetus
depulsos, and similia nefaria crimina commissa, quos solos fructus caelibatus
ille protulit: ideoque plurimi nunc sunt conjugati Sacerdotes apud nos, multi
etiam caelibes, idque cujusque conscientiae ut vel ducat uxorem, vel a conjugio
abstineat, permittitur; modo ita vivat ne sit aliis offendiculo, alioqui enim
non minus in Sacerdotes quam reliquum vulgus, hac quoque part, secundum leges
politicas animadvertitur. Ac per Dei Gratiam, hoc inde secutum est, quod eorum
conscientiis, quibus continentiae donum non contigit, consultum fuerit,
plurimorum flagitiorum and scelerum occasio cessaverit, matronis ac puellis
quibus plerique istorum sub specie pietatis saepissime inhiabant, and laqueos
nectebant, nihil ejusmodi periculi sit; and in summa, quod quum tum Officia
Ecclesiastica tum politica majore reverentia and honestate tractentur, quodque
ab universis in majore honor and favore habeantur Sacerdotes, quam antea in
illo pleno scandulis caelibatu acciderit, id quoque magna ex part honestum
conjugium Sacerdotum praestat.

Adhaec, nulli acrius and constantius oppugnant Romanum Pontificem, and tum
Matrimonii libertatem, tum sanam Doctrinam ab illo obscuratam and oppressam
defendunt, quam hi qui ab ejus jugo impuri illius caelibatus liberati sunt: and
honest etiam ^^os liberos, quos ex conjugio suscipiunt educare solent, quibus
haud dubie Deus etiam post mortem parentum, ubi in timore Domini aliti and
edocti fuerint, prospiciet; gravissimum enim esset, Sacerdotes ideo a conjugio
arcere, quia sua munia sive officia tantum ad vitam suam, non autem jure
haereditario tenent; eadem ratione multis aliis qui sunt aut in publicis
muneribus, aut in privatis Ministeriis, Matrimonium interdicendum foret. Quod
quidem si fieret, Reip. plus incommodi quam boni allaturum esset; cum and
Sacrarum Literarum Auctoritate, Sanctissimorum Patrum Sententiis, legum naturae
and gentium testimonio, and omnium sapientissimorum virorum judicio ac
suffragiis constet, Matrimonium semper iis qui caelibes vivere non queant, ad
vitanda graviora pericula, concessum and liberum esse debere.

Haec, Serenissime ac invictissime Rex, coram Serenissima Regia Majestate
Vestra, breviter disserenda duximus, ut Majestati Vestrae rations quasdam
commemoraremus, cur Illustrissimi Principes nostri, and alii Evangelii
Doctrinam profitentes Principes and Status Imperii, in his tribus Articulis
adeo dissentiant a Romano Pontifice, ut sicut in reliquis Doctrinae Christianae
partibus, a veritate vel latum digitum non discedendum esse existiment, ita in
his etiam decreverint, abjecta ejus tyrannide, pro Gloria Evangelii, and ad
vitanda infinita scelera, perdurare: neque vero hic dicemus de aliis abusibus a
Romano Pontifice introductis, in quos imprimis Confessio Auricularis recenseri
meretur, qua ille, and Potestatem clavium tantum ad turpissimum quaestum and
tyrannidem redegit, and Confessionem ipsam, quae informandarum and
consolandarum conscientiarum gratia salubriter instituta fuit, carnificinam
tantum Conscientiarum reddidit, perque eam tum omnes Reges, Principes, and
Potentatus sub suo jugo tenuit, tum multorum malorum auctor extitit; de qua
quid nostri sentiant, ac qua reverentia in Ecclesiis retineant, edita ipsorum
scripta testantur.

Ac gratulamur nobis datam occasionem haec Serenissimae Regiae Majestati
Vestrae exponendi, ejusque censurae committendi: Cum enim Majestas Vestra and
summa Doctrina, sapientia ac studio veritatis praedita sit, and Romani Episcopi
tyrannidem (haud sine mente deum, sive numine divum, ut Poeta inquit) itidem ex
suis amplissimis Regnis exterminari curaverit, neque amplius per Dei Gratiam
illius impiis opinionibus captiva teneatur; persuasissimum nobis habemus
Vestrae Serenissimae Regiae Majestatis hisce de rebus maximis, quae ad Dei
Gloriam, salutem Ecclesiae, and perpetuam profligationem Romani Antichristi
pertinent, aequissimum ac liberrimum fore judicium, quod sane ii, quibus vel
Doctrina aut veritatis studium deest, vel animum habent addictum Pontificiis
Opinionibus, vel metu interdum prohibentur, aut etiam ab affectibus diverse
trahuntur, non adeo facile praestare possunt; and plurimi interdum inservientes
tempori, fingunt se odiisse pontificem, simulantque studium veritatis, quibus
tamen revera aliud est cordi, hi vero quum non possint nec debeant de hisce
controversiis far sententiam, Serenissima Regia Majestas Vestra nequaquam
ignorant.

Non autem dubitamus, quin ut quisque est eruditissimus, and veritatis
Evangelicae amantissimus, ita facillime eum causam nostram immo Christi and
Ecclesiae adprobaturum esse, neque enim ea ullum commodum aut emolumentum
privatum quaeritur, sed solum agitur de abolendis impiis abusibus in Christi
Ecclesiam per Antichristum invectis, and Christi Gloria illustranda, ac veris
cultibus restituendis, and ut hominum Conscientiae jugo ac tyrannide pontificia
liberentur, ac scandala publica, quantum sieri possit e medio tollantur. Quarum
quidem rerum studium quo jure reprehendi queat, ut etiam magis favore and
imitatione dignum censendum sit: Cum enim omnium been constitutarum Rerumpub.
hic praecipue finis and scopus esse debeat, ut and Dei Gloria ornetur, and
publica salus, honestas, pax, and tranquillitas conservetur, quis dubitat eos
qui sedent ad gubernacula Rerumpub. and ad haec tanquam ad Cynosuram ut dici
solet, cursum suum and omnem rationem regendi Rempublicam instituunt, maximis
laudibus dignos esse? Et quoniam Serenissima Regia Vestra Majestas, ut Rex
sapentissimus and eruditissimus, hunc quoque scopum in gubernandis amplissimis
and laudatissimis Regnis and Provinciis suis, ob oculos habere luce meridiana
clarius adparet, non possumus non nobisipsis, quum in hac honestissima causa
promovendae Christi gloriae and publicae utilitatis ad Serenissimam Regiam
Majestatem Vestram Oratores missi sumus, non gratulari; non possumus etiam non
faelices judicare universos subditos Majestatis Vestrae, quibus divina bonitate
talis Rex and Princeps contigerit, qui cum aliis regiis virtutibus excellit,
tum studio verae pietatis and veritatis Evangelicae omnibus modis admirandus
conspicitur.

Sunt quidem illa maxima Remp. certis and justis legibus civilibus constituere,
bonos tueri and juvare, improbos poenis adficere, arcere injurias, pacem and
concordiam subditorum conservare; quis enim non tanquam Deum aliquem talem
Principem amplectendum and honorandum putet, a quo ista praestentur: sed adhuc
sunt majora, si vera pietas accesserit, si Christi Gloria ornetur, si Dei
Verbum in pretio habeatur, si cultus Divinae voluntati consentanei
instituantur, si hominum conscientiis consulatur, and publica scandala e medio
tollantur; illa enim tantum hanc civilem vitam attingunt, quam unumquemque quum
tempus praefinitum advenerit, deserere oportet; haec vero ad aeternam salutem
pertinent quae bonos and pios, cessante hac misera condition humanae vitae,
expectat, quibusque and in hoc, and in futuro saeculo, maxima praemia proposita
sunt. Hoc est cur Deus Reges honor sui nominis ornat, cum ait, ego dixi Dii
estis, maxim ut res divinas intelligant, and veram Religionem in mundo
conservent; huc praecipue Scriptura hortatur, cum inquit, nunc Reges
intelligite, and erudimini qui judicatis terram, servite Domino, etc. huc
invitant exempla praestantissimorum regum in Sacris Literis, qui summa cura,
opera, ac studio veram Religionem promoverunt, and impios cultus abrogarunt:
hoc David, hoc Josias, hoc Josophat, hoc Ezechias, and deinceps omnes
Sanctissimi Reges praestiterunt. Eadem cum Sereniss. R. M. Vestra haud dubie
etiam cogitet, imo jam nunc in hoc totis viribus incumbat, ut sincera Evangelii
Doctrina Papae Tyrannide oppressa restituatur, Gloria Christi itidem a
Ponti^ice obscurata iterum illustretur, and impii abusus ab illo ipso
Antichristo in Ecclesiam tanquam venenum quoddam pestilentissimum sparsi and
introducti aboleantur, ac very and Divinis Literis consentanei cultus and
caeremoniae constituantur, non dubitabimus quin Deus Opt. Max. Sereniss. R.
Majestatis Vestrae conatus and consilia, in hisce rebus Sanctissimis and
Honestissimis fortunaturus sit, and pro sua bonitate clementer effecturus, ut
inter Sereniss. R. M. Vestram and Principes nostros, ac eorum in causa
Religionis confaederatos, talis concordia constituatur, quam and in laudem
Evangelii, and publicam totius Christiani Orbis utilitatem cessuram, and majori
exitio Romano Antichristo futuram esse, minime ambigimus; estque optima spes,
ut volente Deo, plures Reges, Principes, and potentatus, ad hanc Sanctissimam
causam accedant, ac Evangelicae veritatis Doctrinam agnoscant and recipiant,
sicut etiam hactenus per Dei Gratiam, maximi progressus facti sunt, and non
tantum in Germania, verum etiam extra Germaniam, Potentissimi Reges, Principes
and civitates, Divini Verbi Doctrinam receperunt.

Adparetque homines passim agnita veritate, ex Scriptis eorum qui Evangelii
Doctrinam profitentur and docent, per totum pene orbem terrarum sparsis,
sanioris Doctrinae admodum cupidos esse, quorum preces aliquando Deus pro sua
benignitate exaudiet, ac suum Verbum illuminatis mentibus Regum and Principum
latissime propagabit, ut sit unus pastor, hoc est Dominus noster Jesus
Christus, and unum ovile quod est Ecclesia Catholica, quae profitetur sincerum
Christi Evangelium, and illi consentaneum usum Sacramentorum retinet, non
Papistica aut Romana, quae utrumque reprobat, odit, and oppugnat.

Quod reliquum est, Serenissime ac Potentissime Rex, Domine Clementissime,
precamur and optamus ut Sereniss. Regia Majestas Vestra in caepto negotio
veritatis Evangelicae pro illustranda Christi Gloria and salute publica, per
Dei Gratiam fortiter pergat, quod quidem Majestatem Vestram, ut Regem verae
pietatis and omnis virtutis ac Doctrinae amantissimum, facturam nihil
dubitamus: Oramusque ut Serenissima Regia Majestas Vestra dato benigno
responso, ad Illustrissimos Principes nostros, quam primum fieri queat, ne
commodam praesentis Navigationis occasionem negligamus, clementer nos dimittat;
and ut Serenissima Regia Majestas Vestra, erga quam nostra debita officia atque
servitia summa cum observantia perpetuo constabunt, has nostras literas pro sua
insigni humanitate, bonitate ac clementia, in optimam partem accipiat, nosque
etiam clementer commendatos habeat. Been valeat Serenissima Regia Majestas
Vestra, quam Deus Opt. Max. pro illustranda and propaganda nominis sui Gloria
and publica salute, diu servet incolumem. Datae Londini quinto die Augusti Anno
Dom. 1538.

Vestrae Serenissimae Regiae Majestatis Addictissimi and obsequentissimi,
Franciscus Burgratus Vicecancellarius. Georgius a Boyneburgh D. Oratores.
Friderichus Myconius Ecclesiastes Gothanus.

VIII. The Ki^g's Answer to the former Letter.
LIteras Vestras, Egregii ac praestantissimi Oratores, Cotton Lib^. Cleop. E. 5.
per ministrum vestrum nuper ad nos mis^as summa humanitate plenas, atque
ingentem erga nos benevolentiam spirantes, tum libenter accepimus, tum magna
cum voluptate legimus; quibus significatis vos, post exposita nobis mandata,
cum quibusdam Episcopis and Theologiae Doctoribus a nobis designatis de
Christianae Religionis nonnullis articulis per duos menses contulisse; non
dubitare quoque quin inter Principes vestros and nos, atque utrorumque
Episcopos Theologos and subditos, firma perpetuaque concordia in Evangelii
Doctrina ad laudem Dei, and Romani Antichristi perniciem sit sequutura: Verum
quia reliquam disputationem de abusibus expectare non potestis, cum jam naves
appulerint vos in patriam deportaturae, ante discessum vestrum existimatis
vestri officii esse ut sententiam vestram de quibusdam abusuum articulis nobis
declaretis, de quibus nos post discessum vestrum cum Episcopis and Theologis
nostris confer possemus. Et quia tria capita praecipua putatis quae
fundamentum Pontificiae Tyrannidis sustentare videntur, nempe Prohibitionem
utriusque speciei in caena Domini, Missas privatas, and Prohibitionem Conjugii
Sacerdotum; de his articulis sententiam vestram ingenue aperitis, atque eam
judicio nostro quantumcunque id sit, and censurae committitis: Quis non hanc
vestram benevolentiam, Egregii Oratores, summopere amplectatur, Quis non hanc
Vestram gratitudinem modis omnibus admiretur? Qui nobiscum ea communicare
studetis, quae non modo ad praesentem vitam transigendam sed ad futuram quoque
assequendam conferunt? Enimvero si illos non abs re existimamus amicos, qui in
Regionum commerciis ea quae sunt grata atque commoda important, ne quid usquam
desit quod ad praesentem vitam degendam pertinet, quanto magis illi sunt amici
judicandi, qui quae ad aeternam vitam conferunt impertiri non gravantur! nam
quae praesentis vitae subsidia parantur durabilia diu non sunt, quae vero ad
aeternam promovent nunquam intermoriuntur; quinimo amicitia ipsa terrena,
quantumvis ingens, quantumvis firma, finem habet e vita excessum, charitas vero
quae nunquam excidit post hanc vitam splendescit magis. Et quia nostrum
judicium non aspernari videmini, quod nos ipsi indignum existimamus, ut de
rebus tam arduis judicemus, atque ea proponitis quae putatis inprimis
amplectenda, qua in re non vulgarem sed ingentem vim erga nos amoris
ostenditis, ne nos non respondere huic vestrae tantae gratitudini videremur, si
quae nobis ad praesens videntur vobiscum non communicaremus, decrevimus itidem
de his tribus Articulis nonnihil attingere, and pectus nostrum ingenue vobis
aperire: Quo fiet ut mutuus inter nos and Principes vestros amor eo magis
augescat, eo diutius foveatur, si nihil occultum inter amicos retentetur, sed
summa sinceritate gerantur omnia, id quod nos cum omnibus amicis semper facere
consuevimus; quod nostrum perpetuum institutum in praesentia apud Amicissimos,
eosque quos habemus charissimos, mutare nequaquam libuit. Verum de Articulis
ipsis tandem agamus.

De utraque Specie.
Quod inprimis sub utraque Specie semper Eucharistiam populis secundum
primariam Christi institutionem dandam esse existimetis, and nullo pacto sub
altera tantum, non possumus quovis pacto adduci, egregii and praestantissimi
Oratores, ut putemus vos id serio affirmasse, sed forsan probandi causa nobis
id protulisse, ut quid sentiamus intelligeretis; nam ipsa opinio tam aliena est
a recta Scripturae intelligentia, ut vix quivis id serio affirmare praesumeret,
quod latius in hac Epistola declarabimus. Nec nobis persuadere possumus, etsi
occasio sit, vos non nobiscum credere, quod sub specie Panis sit realiter and
substantialiter verum and vivum Corpus Christi, and una cum Corpore Sanguis
verus, alioqui fatendum e^set Corpus ibi exsangue esse, quod nefas esset
dicere, cum Caro illa Christi non modo viva, sed and vivificatrix sit; and quod
sub specie vini non modo vivus and verus Christi Sanguis sit, sed etiam una cum
vero Sanguine viva and vera etiam Corporis sit Caro. Quod cum ita sit,
necessario consequetur etiam eos qui sub altera specie communicant, and solum
sub specie Panis Corpus Christi sumunt, non fraudari Communione Sanguinis
Christi, atque eos etiam qui sub specie vini Communicant non fraudari
communione Corporis Domini; Quocirca cum sub alterutra specie utrumque
contineatur, viz. and Corpus and Sanguis Christi, utravis solum species
porrigatur populis, utrumque, id est tam Sanguis quam Corpus Christi, per hoc
eisdem exhibeatur. Nam Christus ipse sub altera specie dedisse legitur in
Evangelio Lucae Discipulis duobus in Emaus euntibus, quando agnitus est in
fractione Panis; scribitur enim, quod cum recumberet cum eis, accepit panem and
benedixit, ac fregit and porrigebat illis, and aperti sunt oculi eorum, and
cognoverunt eum fractione panis. Ubi de Eucharistia eum locum vetustissimi
Authors Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, and Augustinus intelligunt, and tamen de
vini poculo nulla ibi sit mentio: Unde Christus qui in altera specie
miuistravit Eucharistiam, libertatem Ecclesiae sponsae suae reliquisse videtur,
ut imitetur sponsi sui vestigia, ac similiter sub altera specie, sicut sub
utraque, communicare libere possit. Nam Christus qui sub utraque specie
Communionem docuit, etiam de Communione sub altera ipse exemplum reliquit, qui
secum tamen nusquam vel in praeceptis, vel in exemplis dissidet.

Simile idem Lucas in Actis Apostolorum citat, quando post adventum Spiritus
Sancti, praedicante Petro, appositae sunt animae circiter tria millia,
inquiens, Erant autem perseverantes in Doctrina Apostolorum and Communicatione
and fractione panis and orationibus; Ubi similiter de Eucharistia eum locum
intelligunt veteres, and de poculo nulla fit ibi mentio. Jam si Christum ipsum
Autorem, si Apostolos ab eo ad docendum orbem missos patronos habet, Communio
sub una specie nempe Panis, usitata in Ecclesia non est tanquam Evangelicis
praeceptis contraria, statim repudianda; nam Apostoli, qui per adventum
Spiritus edocti sunt omnem veritatem, nunquam in fractione Panis Communionem
dedissent populo, si utraque species de praecepto Christi semper necessario
fuisset porrigenda, ne Christi jubentis parum memores institutum ejus mutasse
viderentur.

Porro ipsa Christi Verba, quae post Evangelistas Paulus totam coenam dominicam
Corrinthiis enarrans citat, nos admonent Christum separatim de alterutra specie
locutum esse; ait enim, Dominus Jesus in qua nocte tradebatur, accepit panem
and gratias agens fregit, and dixit, accipite and manducate, Hoc est Corpus
meum quod pro vobis traditur, hoc facite in mei commemorationem. Ecce Christus
de Corpore suo sub specie panis sumendo separatim locutus est, inquiens, Hoc
facite, priusquam ullam de poculo faceret mentionem. Postea autem de Calice ait
Paulus, Similiter and Calicem postquam caenavit accepit dicens, Hic calix Novum
Testamentum est in meo sanguine, hoc facite quotiescunque bibetis in mei
commemorationem: Nec dixit sicut de corpore dixerat simpliciter, Hoc facite in
mei commemorationem, sed dixit, Hoc facite, cum hac adjectione, nempe
quotiescunque bibetis, in mei commemorationem, per hoc nobis indicans non
semper sub specie vini sumendum esse sanguinem una cum corpore sub specie
Panis, sed quotiescunque sumeretur Sanguis sub specie Vini in Commemorationem
Christi id faciendum.

Ecce rursum Christus post distributionem corporis sui, peracta coena in qua
corpus suum sub specie Panis separatim prius dederat, iterum separatim sub
specie Vini Sanguinem suum offert, inquiens, Hoc facite quotiescunque bibetis
in mei commemorationem, significans nobis and seorsum nonnunquam alterum
porrigi posse, and tamen cum ita sit, utriusque vim integram populis dari,
alioqui suffecisset semel duntaxat de utroque fuisse dictum, Hoc facite, nec de
Calice adjecisset Hoc facite quotiescunque bibetis, cum prius de specie Panis
simpliciter dixisset Hoc facite, nisi separatim ea sumi posse judicaret.

Neque quisquam negare potest Discipulos in coena sub specie panis sumpsisse
Corpus Christi, nam coenantibus illis, accepit panem and benedixit, ac fregit
deditque illis, dicens Hoc est Corpus meum; Calicem autem non nisi post
intervallum ac peracta coena porrexit, nisi quis adeo stupidus esset, ut
crederet post sumptionem speciei panis non prius eos sumpsisse Corpus Christi,
quum postquam caenavit porrexisset Calicem; quasi vero priora Verba Christi
irrita fuissent, cum de specie panis diceret Hoc est Corpus meum, aut ipsa
distribut^o facta Discipulis nullam vim haberet, priusquam de Calice peracta
Caena bibissent; Quod cum impium sit sentire, tum ipsum Verbum and factum
Christi, proh nefas! evacuat. Denique ipse Paulus, postquam etiam de utraque
specie conjunctim locutus est, rursum de ipsis speciebus disjunctim infert,
inquiens (...).

Quae verba latin sic transtulit Erasmus, Itaque quisquis ederit panem hunc
aut de Calice biberit indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini; ubi ex
Pauli verbis aperte liquet, Quisquis indigne panem hunc sumpserit, reum esse
Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, aut si quis de Calice biberit indigne, similiter
reum esse Sanguinis and Corporis Domini, quod tamen nullo modo crimini daretur,
nisi seorsum sub specie panis esset and Corpus and Sanguis Christi, atque
itidem sub specie vini seorsum esset and Corpus and Sanguis Christi; nec
disjunctim despecie panis locutus fuisset Paulus, si nunquam nisi conjunctim
cum Calice sumeretur: Neque rursum disjunctim de Calice dixisset, si nunquam
nisi conjunctim cum specie panis esset sumendus. Quorsum enim ea disjunxisset
si nunquam nisi conjuncta esse possent? At Verba ipsa Scripturae singula sunt
attendenda, nam Propheta inquit, Inclinate au^em vestram in Verba oris mei; and
Moises in Deuteronimo ait, Ponite corda vestra in omnia verba quae ego
testificor vobis hodie, quia non incassum praecepta sunt vobis. Et iterum, non
addetis ad verbum quod vobis loquor, nec auferetis ab eo. Verba igitur Domini
atque ipsius Pauli, and separatim de alterutra specie primum posita; and post
utriusque conjunctionem etiam iterum disjuncta, significare nobis videntur, and
posse alterutram speciem seorsum porrigi secundum Verbum Christi.

Nec per hoc quod Christus dixit, Bibite ex hoc omnes, statim consequetur
Christum jussisse Communionem cuilibet de populo semper sub utraque specie and
nunquam sub altera dandam esse: Nam illorum Verborum sensum non alium esse
apparet, quam quem ipse Dominus Apostolum suum Paulum, qui a Domino de hoc
Sacramento omnia se accepisse testatur, edocuit, nempe quod quotiescunque de
Calice hoc quisquam biberet, id in Christi memoriam faceret, sicuti fecerunt
Discipuli, qui tunc aderant praesentes and de eo biberunt omnes: Itaque
quotiescunque Sanguis Christi bibendus a quoquam esset, in memoria Passio
Christi recordanda est; sicut similiter quisquis Corpus Christi sumpserit ad
memoriam passionem ejus revocare debet: Neque ex praecepto Christi toties
bibendum es^e de hoc Calice, quotiescunque Corpus Christi sumendum est, apparet
per ea quae de verbis and de exemplo Christi supradicta sunt. Certe quicquid
Christus omnino observari praecepit, non posse ulla humana sanctione prohiberi
putamus, cum humana lex divinam abolere non possit. Similiter etiam
existimamus, nec morem ullum, nec ullam consuetudinem tantopere apud homines
valere debere, ut Dei Verbum expugnet and Christi praeceptum subvertat.

Verumtamen cum Christus nobis libere reliquerit ut eum tribus modis
corporaliter sumere possimus, and quarto spiritualiter, nempe primo sub utraque
specie, secundo, sub Panis specie tantum; tertio, sub Vini; quarto, voluntate
and desiderio solo cum aliter necessitate coacti eum sumere nequimus;
existimamus pro primo, ut si quis fidelis ardenti in Deum amore flagrans,
pietateque ingenti aestuans, magnopere desideraret Sacramentum sub utraque
specie sumere, si nullum vel valetudinis vel imbecillitatis obstaret
impedimentum, ei sub utraque specie Communio praeberi possit, dummodo neque
postulans neque ministrans Sacramentum in scandalum populi, aut in contemptum
Ecclesiae id faciat, neque suo jure leges regionis in qua degit sive
Ecclesiasticas sive laicas infringere praesumat.

Pro secundo and tertio sic, Quod si impedimentum aliquod hujusmodi intervenit,
ut in utraque specie absque periculo sumi non possit, ut si quis Paralysi
correptus, aut ab alio quovis naturae aut morborum impedimento utramque speciem
recipere commode non possit, hic si desideret Sacram Communionem sumere, ei sub
altera tantum specie porrigatur. Pro quarto autem, Quod si quis nausea, vel
alia corporis molestia adeo sit infestatus, ut nihil in stomachus receptum non
rejectet, huic si id petat Sacramentum saltem ostendi posset, ut viso eo mortem
Christi redemptoris sui citius revocans in memoriam compunctus cord
spiritualiter communicet.

Plurimum igitur demiror, quod hi qui Christianae Libertatis assertores and
acerrimi propugnatores videri volunt, libertatem hanc nostram in hoc uno
Corporis and Sanguinis Domini Sacramento, quo nihil superexcellentius, nihil
celebrius, nihil incomparabilius, nihil denique ad consolandos ^idelium animos
solidius, Christus hinc abiturus Ecclesiae suae reliquit, nobis tollere velint;
Quid enim majus donare potuit Christus in hoc Sacramento sumendum quam seipsum?
Deinde cum ipse omnino liberum nobis reliquerit, and posse aliquos sub utraque
specie Communionem accipere, and posse alios sub altera, nonnullos quoque
morborum necessitate impeditos, saltem in conspectum prolato Corpore Domini
compuncto cord posse Spiritualiter communicare, quanta immodestia, quanta
inclementia esset, liberate hac fraudare Christianos? Ut quibus sub utraque
specie, ob impedimenta quae sunt innumera, Communio praeberi non posset, his
summi boni fruitione privatis sub neutra daretur! Nec adhuc fatentur etsi non
corporaliter sumatur saltem Spiritualiter capi posse. Qua non servitute durior
esset haec conditio, ut Christi redemptoris nostri corpus, quod ille a
fidelibus sumi voluit, nobis id summopere desiderantibus violenter eripiatur?
quis ingenue Christianus libertatem fruitionis hujus sibi extortam non omni
morte intolerabiliorem putaret? Itaque libertas haec a Christo nobis relicta
omni conatu retinenda est, omnibus viribus amplectenda, nec ipsis mea opinione
fidendum es^, qui eam nobis tollere velint.

Praeterea quid fiat apud septentrionales populos? quid apud populos Aphricae
and qui intra Tropicos habitant? apud quos non ea vini copia est ut populis
omnino sub specie vini praeberi possit, (nam his populis cervisia ex frugibus
est potui) an ideo quia sub utraque specie his ministrari Sacramentum non
potest, ab utraque arcendi essent? aut sub una non integrum Christum capere
possent? id quod absit.

Quando autem primum populus priscum morem deserere, and sub altera tantum
panis specie Communionem sacram sumere coepit, nobis est incompertum; credibile
est majores nostros auctoritate Scripturae motos, quae alteram nonnunquam
speciem per Christum and Apostolos datam memorat, propter periculum effusionis
in terram Sanguinis Christi, cum liquida omnia levi membrorum trepidante motu
facile effundantur, religiosa quadam and pia reverentia, non mediocrique Dei
timore abstinuisse in Sacramento a vini specie, nec Christum qui se cum
Ecclesia usque in finem omnibus diebus mansurum promisit, tot saeculis eam
deseruisse, ut si necessarium praeceptum de utraque specie semper ab omnibus
sumenda dedisset, in re tanti momenti eam permisisset turpiter labi; sed magis
Ecclesiae suae liberum reliquisse videtur, ut cum in alterutra specie totus and
integer Christus contineatur, sub altera etiam sumi possit.

Qui vero sit mos hodie de utraque specie in Ecclesiis Graecis, quae Romanae
Ecclesiae Tyrannidem nunquam admiserunt, non satis nobis est compertum, cum
Graecia tota Turcarum subsit imperio, nec liberam habeant facultatem Christum
ut libet profitendi, quando nec Verbum Dei public praedicare, nec ad
Campanarum sonitum populum convocare, nec publicas Litanias crucis vexillo
praeeunte facere, his ullo pacto est concessum.

Illud quoque inprimis est observandum, nempe quod in Universis Ecclesiis in
die Parasceves Sacerdos and omnis populus sub una tantum specie panis
communicant, non sub specie Vini, ut cum is dies repraesentat mortem Christi in
qua sanguis ejus pretiosus pro nostra salute effusus est and separatus a
corpore, separatim illo die sub altera solum specie communicarent omnes sive
Sacerdos sive populus; qui mos per universam Ecclesiam nunquam fuisset
admissus, nisi sub altera tantum specie integer Christus contineretur, atque
nisi sub altera Sacramentum populis ministrari posset.

De Missa Privata.
Per Missas autem privatas multos abusus intoductos esse dicitis, quas velut
Atlantem quendam Papatum sustinuisse, indulgentias invexisse, orbem expilasse,
utpote quae ad quaestum pateant, monachorum turbas coacervasse, Verbum Dei
exterminasse asseritis, atque ideo Germanos Principes Synaxim veteri more
reduxisse, quam lingua vernacula facere, ritu satis decoro atque decenti
commemoratis; privatas vero Missas apud vos in totum abolitas esse, quae tot
pepererunt abusus and foetus malignos. Qua de re nobiscum diu multumque
cogitantes, consideramus inprimis nihil unquam in Ecclesia sua Christum
ordinasse quo malignus serpens aliquando non sit abusus, neque tamen propterea
rejiciendum est quicquid sancte est ordinatum, alioqui Sacramenta omnia
antiquanda essent; quin magis reputavimus long satius esse abusus omnes in
totum removere, quae vero Sancte and pie introducta sunt in Ecclesiam, illa
ipsa stabilia manner.

Nam si ideo Missae privatae abolendae sunt in totum, quia de illis Thomas
Aquinas, Gabriel, atque alii Doctrinas ut dicitis impias induxerunt, viz.
Missas ex opere operato gratiam mereri, and tollere peccata vivorum and
mortuorum, and applicari posse alienum opus ad alterum, Quicquid sit, quod illi
asserunt, hoc de omni Missa asserunt, non de privata duntaxat; Qua propter si
ad tollendas illas opiniones qualescunque Missa privata esset abroganda, eadem
ratione abroganda esset Synaxis and Missa publica, quam vos ipsi retinetis nec
censetis abolendam, quicquid de ea alii opinentur. Missa vero privata, velut
privata quaedam est Communio and Synaxis, quae si recte atque ut decet fiat,
quicunque fideles illi interesse decreverint, si paenitentes convenerint
contriti de peccatis, Deique implorent misericordiam cum filio prodigo
dicentes, Pater peccavi in Coelum and coram te, haud dubie quin ipsi
Spiritualiter cum Sacerdote communicant, offerentes se and animas suas, hostias
vivas and acceptabiles Deo, tametsi pauci fuerint, atque a corporali Sacramenti
sumptione abstinuerint: ac per hoc Missa privata Ecclesiae adeo non obest, ut
non parum and ad vitam corrigendam, and ad fidem in Christum corroborandam
prodesse videatur; quippe Christiani per hoe peccatores se agnoscunt quotidie
delinquentes, quotidie veniam postulant, quotidie per peccatum in salebroso
vitae hujus cursu cadentes, quotidie paenitentes resurgunt, and velut
alacriores redditi, devicto saepius host, fiunt ad pugnam audentiores.

Porro statim in exordio omnis Missae privatae publica est peccatorum omnium
generalis Confessio, venia postulatur a Deo, absolutio impartitur a Sacerdote
secundum Dei Verbum, quemadmodum in Missa publica.

Et si in Missa publica and quantumcunque solenninemo adsit alius praeter
Sacerdotem qui Communicare velit in esu Sacramenti, quid quaeso differet Missa
publica a privata? An Sacerdos in solenni die populo ad Sacra conveniente, si
nemo alius communicare velit, abstinet a Missa publica? atque inter Graecos
ipsos, ubi singulis dominicis diebus fit una Missa publica uti asseritis, raro
admodum communicate in esu Sacramenti quisquam e populo, uti a fide dignis
accepimus, qui ipsi Graecorum Sacris interfuerunt.

Quod vero Epiphanium citatis qui singulis septimanis ter celebratam Synaxim in
Asia asserit, eumque morem ab Apostolis inductum, cum jam tantum in Graecia
singulis Dominicis fiat populi conventus ad Sacra, si mutari mos potuit ab
Apostolis inductus, ut rarius quam statuerunt Apos^oli populus congregaretur,
cur non etiam mutari potuit ut saepius conveniret, quando per hoc celebrior fit
mortis Christi memoria, id quod in Missa sit etiam privata.

Jam vero si Sacramentum hoc a fidelibus exerceri Christus in mortis suae
memoriam praecepit, inquiens, Hoc facite in meam commemorationem, ne mors ejus
raro admodum commemorata in oblivionem transiret, quo crebrius, quo
frequentius, memoria ejus in Sacramento repetitur, eo mandatum ejus servatur
magis: Etenim sicut raro admodum memorata oblivioni sunt obnoxia, ita crebro
frequentata radices in mente agunt altius, ne obliterari unquam possint; itaque
ut mors Christi creb^a memoria illustretur, Missa etiam privata non parum
confert.

Certe Paulus Apostolus singulas domos privatas, ubi credentium numerus aliquis
erat, Ecclesias vocat, membra Majoris Ecclesiae, civitatis illius in qua
essent, sicut majores ipsas civitatum Ecclesias, membra Catholicae and
universalis Ecclesiae appellat, scribens ad Corinthios; at quae Ecclesia
arcenda est a Communione Corporis Domini? Christus etiam ipse instituendo
Sacramentum hoc Corporis and Sanguinis sui, inquit, Hoc quotiescunque facitis,
facite in meam commemorationem; nec tempus nec locum ullum cohibuit, quo fieri
id non posset, quonam modo igitur arcebimus quenquam a Missis privatis? Et ad
dies festos publicamque Synaxim eum relegabimus? Cujus arbitrio Christus
liberum reliquit, quando and ubi id vellet decenter exequi, dum inquit
quotiescunque? nam si certa tempora servanda essent, non indefinite locutus
fuisset Christus, ipsum Dei Verbum, ipsa sapientia Patris.

Jam vero ab initio nascentis Ecclesiae per singulas domos ubi erant fideles
fiebat communio, atque id quotidie, test Luca in Apostolorum Actis, ubi ait,
Quotidie quoque perdurantes unanimiter in templo, and frangentes circa domos
panem; quem locum etiam de Communione veteres interpretes intelligunt, and
tamen singulis diebus non agebant public dies festos, sed privatim per domos
communicabant: Etsi terrenorum regum atque principum ministri plerique omnes
nullum diem transigere cupiunt, quo non fruantur vel solo aspectu sui Domini,
tametsi propior congressus non contingat, quis fidelis Christianus non omnibus
optabit votis, ut quando in hac vita Christum Regem Regum, and Dominum
Dominantium, in Majestate gloriae regnantem cernere mortales oculi non possunt,
saltem per fidem in Sacramento Corporis Domini, quod ille fidelibus in memoriam
sui frequentandam reliquit, interim quotidie Regem gloriae videat?

Quod vero Chrysostomus Sacerdotem ad altar stare, and aliosad Communionem
accersere, alios arcere scribit, enarrat morem publicae Communionis, qui in
initio nascentis Ecclesiae crebrius quam nunc fit frequentabatur; qui mos nunc
in Paschate, quando ubique communicate populus, apud omnes servatur Ecclesias:
Caeterum ille ipse expostulat cum fidelibus sui temporis, quod rarius
communicent, quam vel oporteret, vel vetus mos erat; caeterum nusquam is
privatas Missas vetuit.

At Canon Nicenus Diaconis in Communione publica suum locum designat post
Presbyteros; caeterum nec is Canon, nec ullus alius Missas privatas abrogat.

Sacramentum autem Eucharistiae Sacrificium non esse arbitramini, quod unum
Sacrificium sit propitiatorium mors Christi, and cum is ultra non moritur, qui
semel tantum pro nobis oblatus est, nullum restat ultra Sacrificium, nisi
cultus Spiritualis, hoc est, justitia fidei and fructus fidei. Quid sibi velit
justitia quae ex fide est scimus, quippe quam Paulus opponit Justitiae quae est
ex lege: Caeterum qui sunt fructus fidei, nobis ex Scripturis non satis liquet,
ipsam fidem sicut charitatem, and multas alias virtutes scimus esse fructus
Spiritus. Verum enimvero non satis miramur, cur quispiam aegre ferat Missam
Sacrificium vocari, quando omnis vetustas and Graecorum and Latinorum sic eam
appellare consuevit, quum ibi fiat consecratio Corporis and Sanguinis Domini in
memoriam mortis ejus, qui, ut inquit Paulus, pro peccatis offerens hostiam, in
sempiternum sedet ad dextram Dei, una enim oblatione consummavit in sempiternum
sanctificatos; itaque si Christus and Sacerdos esset, and Sacrificium, and
hostia, ubicunque est Christus, ibi est hostia nostra, ibi est sacrificium
nostrum; at si in Sacramento altaris est verum Corpus Christi, and verus
Sanguis Christi, quo pacto manente veritate Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, non
est ibi Sacrificium nostrum?

Porro quia in Missa est Christus Sacrificium nostrum, qui ipse ultra non
moritur, ibique cum ipso capite nostro, nos illius Corpus and membra nosmet
ipsos Deo hostias vivas offerimus* Graeci id totum (...), id est, Sacrificium
incruentum vocant: ita veteres omnes intrepide Missam Sacrificium vocarunt,
quod ibi sit Christus Sacrificium nostrum in Sacramento.

Sic Basilius, sic Chrysostomus, sic Hieronymus, sic Augustinus eam appellare
non dubitavit; Quocirca quid vetat Missam, in qua consecratur Panis in Corpus
Christi, and Vinum in Sanguinem ejus, qui vere est Sacrificium nostrum, and hoc
fieri in memoriam sui jussit, vocari Sacrificium: alioqui si id negabimus, non
parum verendum est, ne cum Sacramentariis quos nunc vocant, qui veritatem
Corporis and Sanguinis in Sacramento negant, and cum Anabaptistis consentire
videamur, a qua suspicione sicut in animo nostro nos profitemur long abesse,
ita quoque cupimus calumniantibus adversariis omnem obtrectandi ansam auferri:
Atqui cum in Missa tum Sacerdos, tum populus contritus de peccatis se, ut
hortatur Paulus, hostiam vivam, sanctam atque Deo placentem exhibeat, lauds
quas Deo canat and in gratiarum action versetur, quis dubitare potest, ea
quoque ratione, Missam jure Sacrificium nominari, cum Propheta appellat
Sacrificium laudis, and Paulus omnes hortetur, ut se hostias vivas exhibeant,
id quod fit in Missa. Malachias etiam Propheta inquit, Ab ortu solis usque ad
occasum, magnum est nomen meum in gentibus, and in omni loco Sacrificatur, and
offertur nomini meo oblatio munda, quia magnum est nomen meum in gentibus,
dicit Dominus exercituum. At quae alia oblatio munda in omni loco intergentes,
nisi solus Christus, aut quod aliud Sacrificium Christianorum, nisi Missa, ubi
Commemoratio mortis Christi agitur? Nam aut aliquod inter gentes Christianorum
oportet esse Sacrificium, aut mentitus est Propheta: quaenam quaeso est oblatio
munda, nisi solus Christus hostia nostra, qui in Sacramento altaris est sub
Panis and Vini speciebus? quippe quantumcunque nos ipsi nos Deo offeramus,
hostiae mundae non meremur nomen, quorum omnis justitia velut pannus est
menstruatae: Itaque constat Missam Sacrificium vocari ex Verbo Dei per
Malachiam enunciato, quod cum ita sit, cur Missae invidemus nomen Sacrificii,
quod Propheta praedixit, and in qua Christus in Sacramento praesens est ipse
mundi Sacrificium?

De Conjugio Sacerdotum.
Caelibatum Sacerdotum contra Scripturam, contra leges naturae, contra
honestatem, per Pontificem Romanum asseritis introductum, cum Scriptura
Sacerdotibus, sicut caeteris hominibus, conjugium permittat, nec possint
naturam suam mutare, nec absque singulari dono caelibes vivere: nam non omnes
capiunt verbum hoc, and Paulus inquit, propter fornicationem unusquisque Uxorem
suam habeat.

Hic primum ordiri juvat, ut locum illum Evangelii de tribus Eunuchorum
generibus consideremus, quandoquidem Christus alios a natura Eunuchos esse
asserit, alios per vim factos, quorum neutrum genus continentiae virtute
splendet; quoniam alteros ad generandum natura, alteros violentia reddidit
inutiles. Tertium vero genus eorum est, qui quanquam terrena generatione uti
possunt, malunt continere, and se castrare propter Regnum Coelorum; de quo
genere Christus statim infert, qui potest capere, capiat, id quod nec de primo,
nec de secundo Eunuchorum genere intelligi potest, quibus continentiae palma
negata est, cum descendere in certamen nequeunt: tertium vero genus eorum est,
qui continentiae student, and a licitis nuptiis abstinere malunt propter Regnum
Coelorum, quo Christum liberius atque expeditius sequantur, ne terrenis nuptiis
implicati, cogitare cogantur, ut inquit Paulus, quae sunt mundi; ad quod genus
Christus virginitatis author homines sapientissime invitat, inquiens, Qui potest
capere, capiat: per hoc quod inquit, capiat, homines adhortans ad capescendum
certamen ut palmam arripiant, nempe Regnum Coelorum, ad quod neminem
hortaretur, si nemo carnem posset vincere; per hoc vero quod ait, qui potest
capere, posse capi palmam indicans; alioqui si impossible esset carnem
superare, quorsum attineret dicere, Qui potest, si nemo id posset.

Praeterea per ea verba Qui potest capere, quosdam etiam esse declarat, qui non
facile possunt, nam nisi aliqui non facile possent capere, cur secerneret eos
qui possunt; itaque considerandas animi vires admonet, priusquam certamen
aggrediare, ne temere arrepto certamine turpiter succumbas: Nec dixisset
quosdam esse, qui se castraverunt propter Regnum Coelorum, si caro esset
insuperabilis, and nemo se castrare posset. Nec dubitandum est quin is qui
hortatur ad subeundum certamen, gratiam suam sine qua nihil possent, his non
defuturam demonstrat, qui nomina sua in militiam ei dederunt, quorum ille ipse
dux futurus est, qui non modo in periculis suos milites invocatus nunquam
deserit, sed stat ante januam and pulsat, paratus semper ad succurrendum, si
quis ei aper^at: Nam Paulus tentationes superari posse nos admonet, modo Dei
auxilium imploremus, inquiens, Tentatio vos non apprehendit nisi humana,
fidelis autem Deus qui non patietur vos tentari supra id quod potestis, sed
faciet etiam cum tentatione proventum ut possitis sustinere. Quamobrem his qui
continentiam semel profitentur, and eam postea turpiter deserunt, ^tiam atque
etiam considerandum est, ne nomen Dei blasphemare videantur, Christum
accusantes deserti auxilii, cum sint ipsi desertores militiae, and primo statim
congressu terga dantes hosti: itaque quod Paulus liberum cuique ^acit, ut
propter fornicationem Uxorem suam habeat, id de his intelligi, qui continentiam
non sunt professi, Paulus ipse nos docet, inquiens, de viduis
adolescentioribus, quae cum luxuriatae fuerunt in Christo nubere volunt,
habentes damnationem quia primam fidem irritam feceru^t. Augustinus Pauli
Doctrinam secutus, Psalm. 83. inquit, alius ex Dei muner^ majus aliquid vovit,
statuit, nec nuptias pati, qui non damnaretur si duxisset Uxorem; post votum
quod Deo promisit si duxerit damnabitur: sic virgo quae si nuberet non
peccaret, Sanctimonialis si nupserit Christi adultera reputabitur, respexit
enim retro de loco quo accesserat, exemplo Uxoris Loath, and sicut canis
reversus ad vomitum reputatur.

Itidem Augustinus, Psalm. 75. ample asserit votum semel emissum servandum esse.
Hieronymus etiam adversus Jovinianum inquit, virgo quae se Deo dicavit, si
nubat, damnationem habet; atque alio loco adversus eundem, Virgins tuae quas
prudentissimo consilio (quod nemo unquam legerat, nec audierat de Apostolo)
docuisti, melius esse nubere quam uri, occultos adulteros in apertos verterunt
maritos; non suasit hoc Apostolus, non Electionis vas Virgilianum consilium
est, conjugium vocat, hoc praetexit nomine culpam. Verbum ipsum Dei palam
adversatur ubique ne rumpantur vota. Propheta inquit, vovete and reddite Domino
Deo Vestro; in Deuteronomio quoque scribitur, cum votum voveris Domino Deo tuo,
non tardabis reddere, quia requiret illud Dominus Deus tuus, and si moratus
fueris, reputabitur tibi in peccatum; si nolueris polliceri absque peccato
eris, quod autem egressum est de labiis tuis, observabis and facies, sicut
promisisti Domino Deo tuo and propria voluntate and ore locutus es.
Ecclesiastes etiam inquit, si quid vovisti ne moreris reddere, sed quodcunque
voveris read: Et in Numerorum libro scribitur, si quis virorum votum Domino
voverit, aut se constrinxerit juramento, non faciat irritum Verbum suum, sed
omne quod promisit implebit. Quocirca Ecclesia a principio sicut conjugatos
Sacerdotes and Episcopos, qui sine crimine essent unius Uxoris viri, propter
necessitatem admisit, cum tot alii quot possent ad edocendum orbem sufficere
tunc non reperirentur idonei, and tamen Paulus ipse Timotheum caelibem elegit;
ita quoque si quis ad Sacerdotium caelebs accersitus, postea Uxorem duxerit,
semper a Sacerdotio deponebatur, secundum Canonem Neocaesariensis Concilii,
quod fuit ante Nicenum. Similiter in Calcedonensi Concilio, in cujus primo
capite priora Concilia confirmantur, statuitur ut Diaconissa, si se nuptiis
tradat, maneat sub Anathemate, and Virgo Deo dicata and Monachus jungentes se
nuptiis, maneant excommunicati.

Hoc quoque observandum est, quod in Canonibus Apostolorum habetur, tantummodo
Lectores cantoresque non conjugatos posse Uxores ducere, caeteris vero in
clerum admissis postea Uxorem ducere nunquam licuit.

Qui vero conjugati ad Sacerdotium admissi erant, Uxores suas praetextu
Religionis abjicere nequaquam poterant, ut docet Canon Apostolicus; cumque in
Niceno Concilio proponeretur de Presbyterorum jam ductis Uxoribus abjiciendis,
restitit Paphnutius ne legitimae Uxores pellerentur, cujus sententiam, cum
Canone Apostolorum de non abjiciendis Uxoribus concordantem, omnes sunt secuti.

Caeterum in Niceno Concilio nihil unquam propositum fuit, ut Sacerdotes post
Sacerdotium Uxores ducerent, quod jam ante sic erit prohibitum, ut si quis
contrarium auderet, ducens postea Uxorem, deponeretur a Sacerdotio, ut supra
dictum est; itaque Paphnutius de non abjiciendis jam ductis ante Sacerdotium
Uxoribus, non autem de ducendis post Sacerdotium aperte locutus est.

Itaque neque Canon aliquis Apostolicus, neque Concilium Nicenum quicquam habet
ejusmodi ut in Sacerdotium admissi, postea Uxores ducant, sicuti vos allegatis.

His concordat sexta Synodus in qua sancitum est, quod si quis e clero vellet
Uxorem ducere, ante subdiaconatum id faceret, postea nequaquam liceret, nec
ulla usquam libertas Sacerdotibus in sexta Synodo datur post Sacerdotium Uxores
ducendi, sicut vos asseritis.

Itaque a principio nascentis Ecclesiae, plane compertum est nullo unquam
tempore licuisse Sacerdoti post Sacerdotium Uxorem ducere; atque ubicunque id
fuit attentatum, id non fuit impune, nam tantum nefas ausus deponebatur a
Sacerdotio. Paulus Apostolus inquit, de conjugibus loquens, nolite fraudare
invicem nisi forte ex consensu ad tempus, ut vacetis orationi. Hieronymus in
Apologia ad Pammachium ait, Paulus Apostolus dicit, Quando coimus cum Uxoribus
nos orare non posse, si per coitum quod minus est impeditur, id est orare,
quanto plus quod majus est, id est Corpus Christi, prohibetur accipere: idque
late prosequitur exemplo panum propositionis, qui non dabantur nisi
continen^^bus Davidi and ministris, ut scribitur in libro Regum; Panes enim
Propositionis, quasi Corpus Christi, de Uxorum cubilibus consurgentes edere non
poterant, ut inquit Hieronymus, atque exemplo dationis legis veteris, ante
cujus dationem filii Israel in Exodo triduo abstinere sunt jussi ab Uxoribus.

Hieronimus etiam adversus Jovinianum inquit, si Laicus and quicunque fidelis
orare non potest, nisi careat officio conjugali, Sacerdoti cui semper pro
populo offerenda sunt Sacrificia, semper orandum est: si semper orandum est,
semper ergo carenduum Matrimonio. Idem asserit Ambrosius ample in Epistola ad
Timotheum prima, cum quo consentit Augustinus.

Paulus Timotheum Discipulum in Sacerdotali Officio erudiens, admonet secularia
negotia fugienda esse, inquiens, Labora ut bonus miles Christi Jesus, nemo
militans implicat se negotiis secularibus, ut ei placeat cui se probavit; and
si Sacerdotes Uxores acciperent, curis secularibus necesse est involvantur, nam
test Paulo, qui cum Uxore est, solicitus est quae sunt mundi, quomodo placeat
Uxori; qui vero sine Uxore est, solicitus est quae Domini sunt, quomodo placeat
Deo: Ideoque eundem ad caelibatum hortatur, quando ait, Teipsum castum custodi,
nam castitas, ubi de conjugatis non fit sermo, caelibatus intelligitur, suum
enim Discipulum sui similem reddere cupiebat; atque quodam in loco Corinthiis
scribens, omnes homines hortatur ad continentiam, ait enim, volo omnes homines
esse sicut meipsum, and rursus dico non-nuptis and viduis bonum est, si sic
permanserint sicut and ego. Alio in loco scribens eisdem, ministros Ecclesiae
sui officii admonet, adhortans ne in vacuum Gratiam Dei recipiant, and subdit,
Nemini dantes ullam offensionem, ut non vituperetur ministerium, sed in omnibus
exhibeamus nosmetipsos sicut Dei Ministros, etc. in vigiliis, in jejuniis, in
castitate, in scientia, in verbo veritatis. Quae omnia ad ministros Ecclesiae
pertinent quos castitatem maxim sectari convenit, ut impuri non appropinquent
altaribus, a quibus ^alaces omnino arceri decet: Nam non nisi de Sacerdotibus
ea intelligi possunt, quando scientia divinae legis and populi institutio ad
eos spectat, ut inquit Malachias, Labia Sacerdotis custodiunt scientiam and
legem requirunt ex ore ejus. Et Paulus Timotheum vult se exhibere operarium
inconfusibilem, recte tractantem verbum veritatis, viz. in Doctrina populi;
igitur Sacerdotes Domini, qui se Deo jampridem dedicaverunt, qui se
castraverunt propter Regnum Coelorum, qui pro suis and populi peccatis orare
assidue debent, quonam pacto, deserto caelibatus vexillifero Christo, novis
nuptiis operam dare secularibusque molestiis quibus scaturiunt se implicare
decet? quid enim est ad aratrum manum mittere, retroque recipere exemplo Uxoris
Loath, si hoc non est? cujusmodi homines non aptos esse Regno Dei, Christus ipse
pronunciat, etenim si nemo potest Uxori pariter and Philosophiae operam dare,
ut mundana prudentia docet, quanto magis is qui se Deo dicavit, duobus Dominis
servir^ non poterit, nempe Deo pariter and mundo, quorum uterque totum hominem,
non dimidiatum, ad se raptat?

Quanquam autem and conjugati and caelibes in initio Ecclesiae admittebantur ad
Sacerdotium, id tamen non ubique ita servabatur test Hieronymo adversus
Vigilantium, ubi inquit, quid facient Orientis Ecclesiae, quid Egypti, and
Sedis Apostolicae, quae aut Virgins clericos accipiunt, aut continentes, aut
si Uxores habuerint mariti esse desistunt? Atque ad Pammachium Hieronymus
inquit, Christus Virgo, Virgo Maria, utriusque sexus virginitatem dedicaverunt,
Apostoli vel Virgins, vel post nuptias continentes, Episcopi, Presbyteri,
Diaconi, aut Virgins eliguntur, aut vidui, aut certe post Sacerdotium in
aeternum pudici, in morem Ecclesiae veterem, cujus author est haud dubie Paulus
and Scriptura ipsa. Jam vero uti Augustinum citatis, qui ait, quidam nubentes
post votum asserunt adulteros esse, ego dico vobis quod graviter peccant qui
tales dividunt: at ille ipse Augustinus asserit, lapsus and ruinas a castitate
Sanctiori quae vovetur Deo adulteriis esse pejores, neque statim legitimum est
quicquid tolerat Ecclesia.

Cyprianus quoque ipse quem citatis, in illa ipsa Epistola de Virginibus quae
continentiam voverunt, ubi inquit, si perseverare nolunt, vel non possint,
melius est ut nubant, quam ut in ignem delitiis suis ruant; ex quo infertis
tale votum non impedire Matrimonium, long aliud sentit: nam consultus a
Pomponio Sacerdote, quid sibi videretur de Virginibus his, quae cum semel
statum suum continenter and firmiter tenere decreverint, detectae sunt postea
in eodem lecto pariter mansisse cum Masculis; ea de re altius repetens
Sermonem, periculosamque esse Virginum and Masculorum cohabitationem,
confirmans per Scripturas ac graves multorum ruinas ex hoc enatas, asserens
generaliter de omnibus Virginibus inquit, quod si ex fide Christo se dicaverint
cast and pudice sine ulla fabula perseverent, ita fortes and stabiles praemium
Virginitatis expectent; si autem perseverare nolunt, vel non possunt, melius
est ut nubant, quam ut in ignem delitiis suis cadant, certe nullum fratribus
aut sororibus scandalum faciant, cum scriptum sit, etc. Et paulo post infert,
Christus Dominus and judex noster, cum virginem suam sibi dicatam and
sanctitati suae destinatam jacere cum altero cernat, quam indignatur and
iras^itur, and quas paenas incestis hujusmodi conjunctionibus comminatur!
Deinde ad quaesitum respondens, jubet obstetrices adhiberi ut videatur an
Virgins illae sint corruptae, ubi inquit, si autem aliquae ex ei^ corruptae
fuerunt deprehensae, agant poenitentiam plenam, quia quae hoc crimen admisit*
non mariti sed Christi adultera est, and ideo aestimato justo tempore and ex
homologesi facta ad Ecclesiam redeant; quod si obstinatae perseverent, nec se
ab invicem separent, sciant se ^um hac sua impudica obstinatione nunquam a
nobis admitti in Ecclesiam posse, ne exemplum caeteris ad ruinam delictis suis
facere incipiant. Ecce quid sentit Cyprianus de votis ruptis, incestuosos and
Christi Adulteros hujusmodi flagitiosos appellat, and nisi separentur, nunquam
admittit in Ecclesiam; quomodo ergo talia vota non impediant Matrimonium, aut
quis ad tale Matrimonium quenquam hortari audebit, quod sine violatione voti
and transgressione divini mandati, ideoque sine gravissimo s^elere contrahi non
possit? Atqui quod Principes Germaniae, scribitis, cum viderent mul^^ flagitia
de coelibatu Sacerdotum provenire, Matrimonia Sacerdotibus libera permisisse,
si meum, Egregii Oratores, consilium requisissent vestri (...) priusquam tot
Sacerdotes apud vos (...) ^inculis ad nuptias (...), an id consilii dedissem
quod vestri (...) arripuerunt (...); nam si Sacerdotes qui continere nollent,
erump^^^ ad nuptias omnino voluissent, quanto satius forte fuisset, exemplo
veterum deposuisse tales a Sacerdotio, suaeque de c^^^ero Conscientiae qu^nquam
reliquisse, ac deinde puriores altaribus admovisse, quam libere omnia
permittendo peccatis alienis auctores videri, atque ea ratione alie^^ peccata
nostra facere: Veruntamen nos, qui in aliena Repub. cu^^o^^ nunquam fuimus nec
esse voluimus, omnia Principum vestrorum acta atque gesta in optimam partem
interpretamur, non dubitantes, q^^^ ad tollendos abusus omnes sincerus his
animus, atque ad repurgandam Dei Ecclesiam appositus non desit.

Porro nos qui in Regno nostro Romani Episcopi Tyrannidem pro^ligare magna
industria studuimus, and Christi Gloriam sinceriter promovere curabimus Deo
propitio, qu^ntum humano consilio fieri potest, ne quis abusus sive a Romano
Episcopo sive a quovis alio inductus non aboleatur, and si quos comperiemus
tempori inservientes, fingentesque se odisse Romanum Episcopum, atque in
Sermon simulare veritatem, quam cord non amplectuntur, ejusmodi viris
consilia nostra de rebus Sacris non communicabimus, nec eorum vel de Sacris vel
de Prophanis expectabimus sententiam.

Quae vero Christi puram atque sinceram Doctrinam promovere, quae Christi
Evangelium dilatare, quae ad repurganda Ecclesiae Anglicanae vitia tendere,
quae ad extirpandos abusus atque errores omnes spectare, quae denique Ecclesiae
candorem exornare posse videbuntur, ea totis viribus sectabimur, his
studebimus, his Deo volente in perpetuum incumbemus.

De Articulis vero quos jam disseruimus maturius cum Theologis nostris
quamprimum vacabit agemus, atque ea demum statuemus quae ad Christi Gloriam
Ecclesiaeque sponsae ejus decorem conducere existimabimus.

Vobis autem, Praestantissimi Oratores, qui tot labores terra marique perpessi
estis, ut nos inviseretis, qui cum Theologis nost^is tamdiu contulistis, qui ob
Evangelii negotium a Patria abfuistis multis mensibus, immensas atque innumeras
habemus gratias; nec miramur si dulcis amor Patriae, post diuturnam absentiam
vestr^^, ad reditum vos invitat. Itaque post expleta Principum vestrorum
mandata, post absoluta in totum negotia vestra, si non gravabimini nos
invisere, vester ad nos accessus admodum gratus erit, vosque in Patriam non
modo libenter dimittemus cum bona venia, sed ad Principes etiam vestros,
literas dabimus summae diligentiae vestrae in exequenda legatione testimonium
perhibentes. Valete.

IX. A Letter written by the King to his Bishops, directing them how to
instruct the People. An Original. By the KING.
HENRY R.

Cotton Lib^. Cleop. E. 5.
RIght Reverend Father in God, right trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well:
And whereas for the Virtue, Learning, and good Qualities which we saw and
perceived heretofore in you, judging you thereby a Personage that would
sincerely, devoutly, purely, and plainly set forth the Word of God, and
instruct our People in the truth of the same, after a simple and plain sort,
for their better instruction, unity, quiet, and agreement in the points
thereof, we advanced you to the room and office of a Bishop within this our
Realm; and so endowed you with great Revenues and Possessions; perceiving
after, by the contrariety of preaching within this our Realm, our said People
were brought into a diversity of Opinion, whereby there ensued contention
amongst them; which was only engendered by a certain contemptuous manner of
speaking, against honest, laudable, and tolerable Ceremonies, Usages, and
Customs of the Church; we were enforced, by our sundry Letters, to admonish and
command you, amongst others, to preach God's Word sincerely, to declare abuses
plainly, and in no wise contentiously to treat of matters indifferent, which be
neither necessary to our Salvation, as the good and virtuous Ceremonies of Holy
Church, ne yet to be in any wise contemned and abrogated, for that they be
incitements and motions to Virtue, and allurements to Devotion: all which our
travail notwithstanding, so little regard was by some taken and adhibited to
our advertisements therein, that we were constrained to put our own Pen to the
Book, and to conceive certain Articles, which were by all you the Bishops and
whole Clergy of this our Realm in Convocation agreed on, as Catholic, meet,
and necessary to be by our Authority for avoiding of all contention set forth,
read and taught to our Subjects, to bring the same in unity, quietness, and
good concord: supposing then that no Person having Authority under us, would
either have presumed to have spoken any word, that might have offended the
sentence and meaning of the same, or have been any thing remiss, slack, or
negligent in the plain setting forth of them as they be conceived, so as by
that mean of abstinence such quiet and unity should not grow thereupon as we
desired and looked for of the same; and perceiving eft-soons, by credible
report, that our labors, travail, and desire therein, is nevertheless
defeated, and in manner by general and contemptuous words spoken, by sundry
light and seditious Persons, contemned and despised, so that by the abstinence
of direct and plain setting-forth of the said Articles, and by the fond and
contentious manner of speaking, that the said light Personages do still use
against the honest Rites, Customs, Usages, and ceremonial Things of the Church,
our People be much more offended than they were before; and in a manner exclaim
that we will suffer that injury at any Man's hand, whereby they think both God,
us, and our whole Realm highly offended, insomuch that principally upon that
ground, and for the Reformation of those Follies and Abuses, they have made
this commotion and insurrection, and have thereby grievously offended us,
dammaged themselves, and troubled many of our good Subjects: We be now
enforced, for our discharge toward God, and for the tender love and zeal we
bear unto the tranquillity and loving unity of our said People and Subjects,
again to readdress these our Letters to all the Bishops of our Realm, and
amongst other unto you, as a peremptory warning to admonish you, to demean and
use your self for the redobbying of these things as shall be hereafter
declared, upon pain of deprivation from the Bishopric, and further to be
punished for your contempt, if you shall offend in the contrary, as Justice
shall require for your own Trespass.

And first, we straightly charge and command you, that plainly and distinctly,
without any additions, ye shall every Holy day, wheresoever ye shall be within
your Diocese, when ye may so do with your health and convenient commodity,
openly, in your Cathedral Church, or the Parish Church of the place where ye
shall for time be, read and declare our Articles; and in no wise, in the rest
of your words which ye shall then speak of your self, if you speak any thing,
utter any word that shall make the same, or any word in the same, doubtful to
the People.

Secondly; We will and command you, That you shall in your Person travel from
place to place in all your Diocese, as you may with your commodity, and
endeavor your selves every Holy Day to make a Collation to the People, and in
the same to set forth plainly the Texts of Scripture that you shall treat of;
and with that also as well to declare the obedience due by God's Laws to their
Prince and Sovereign Lord, against whose commandment they ought in no wise,
though the same were unjust, to use any violence, as to commend and praise
honest Ceremonies of the Church as they be to be praised, in such plain and
reverent sort, that the People may perceive they be not contemned, and yet
learn how they were instituted, and how they ought to be observed and esteemed;
using such a temperance therein, as our said People be not corrupted, by
putting overmuch affiance in them, which a part should more offend, than the
clear silencing of the same, and that our People may thereto the better know
their duties to us, being their King and Sovereign Lord.

Thirdly; We straightly charge and command you, That neither in your private
communications you shall use any words that may sound to the contrary of this
our Commandment, ne you shall keep or retain any Man of any degree, that shall
in his words privately or openly, directly or indirectly, speak in these matters
of the Ceremonies, contentiously or contemptously; but we will that in case ye
have, or shall have toward you any such Person that will not better temper his
Tongue, you shall, as an Offender and a Seductor of our People, send the same
in sure custody to us and our Council, to be punished as shall appertain; and
semblably to do with other Strangers whom ye shall hear to be notable offenders
in that part.

Fourthly; Our pleasure and commandment is, That you shall on your behalf, give
strait commandment upon like pain of deprivation and further punishment, to all
Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and Governors of Religious Houses, Colleges, and
other places Ecclesiastical within your Diocese, that they and every of them
shall, touching the indifferent praise of Ceremonies, the avoiding of
contentious and contemptous Communication, concerning any of the same, and the
distinct and plain reading of our said Articles, observe and perform, in their
Churches, Monasteries, and other Houses Ecclesiastical aforesaid, the very same
order that is before to you prescribed. And further, that you permit nor suffer
any Man, of what degree soever in learning, Strangers or other, to preach in
any place within your said Diocese out of his own Church, by virtue of any
License by us, or any other of our Ministers, granted before the fifteenth day
of this month, neither in your presence nor elsewhere, unless he be a Man of
such hon^sty, virtue, learning, and judgment, as you shall think able for that
purpose, and one whom in manner you dare answer for.

Finally; Whereas we be advertised that diverse Priests have presumed to marry
themselves, contrary to the custom of our Church of England, our pleasure is,
Ye shall make secret enquiry within your Diocese, whether there be any such
resiant within the same or not: And in case ye shall find that there be any
Priests that have so presumed to marry themselves, and have sithence
nevertheless used and exercised in any thing the Office of Priesthood, we
charge you, as ye will answer upon the pains aforesaid, not to conceal their
doings therein, but rather to signify their demeanor to our Council, or to
cause them to be apprehended, and so sent up unto us accordingly. Given under
our Signet at our Castle of Windsor, the 19 th day of November, in the 28 th
Year of Our Reign.

X. Tonstall's Arguments for the Divine Institution of Auricular Confession;
with some Notes written on the Margent by King Henry's own Hand. An Original.
Quod Confessio Auricularis sit de Iure Divi^o.
PRobari videtur ex illo loco Matthaei 3. ubi Joanne Baptista in deserto
praedicante poenitentiam, Cotton Libr. Cleop. E. 5.
exibat ad eum Hierosolym^ and omnis Judaea, and baptizabantur ab eo in Jordane
confitentes peccata sua; quem locum Chrysostomus ita exponit, inquiens,
Confessio peccatorum est testimonium Conscientiae confitentis Deum, qui enim
timet Judicium Dei peccata sua non erubescat confiteri; qui autem erubescit non
timet, perfectus enim timor solvit omnem pudorem; illic enim turpitudo
confessionis aspicitur, ubi futuri judicii poena non creditur. Nunquid nescimus
quia Confessio peccatorum habet pudorem, and quia hoc ipsum erubescere poena
est gravis, sed ideo magis nos jubet Deus confiteri peccata nostra, ut
verecundiam patiamur pro poena? nam and hoc ipsum pars est Judicii, O
misericordia Dei! quem totiens ad iracundiam excitavimus, sufficit ei Nota been
de s^lo pud^re.
solus pudor pro poena.

Si verecundia pro poena est apud Deum, ea autem non continget ex confessione
facta soli Deo, Fall^x.
nam nemo rationis compos ignorant etiam absque Confessione Deum peccata nostra
scire, de Confessione facta homini necesse est intelligatur. Praeterea ipsa
Verba demonstrant quod Joanni Baptistae confessi sunt peccata sua, nam dixit
eis, facite ergo fructum dignum poenitentia, quod apt dicere non poterat, nisi
poenitentes eos ex confessione sibi facta rescivisset.

Beda Marci I.
Et Baptizabantur ab illo in Jordane flumine, confitentes peccata sua. Exemplum
dicit non praeceptum.
Exemplum confitendi peccata ac meliorem vitam promittendi datur eis, qui
Baptisma accipere desiderant, sicut etiam praedicante Non praecepto.
Paulo in Epheso multi credentium veniebant, confitentes and annunciantes actus
suos, quatenus abdicata vita veteri, renovari mererentur in Christo.

Scribitur quoque in Evangelio Joannis 21. Quorum remiseritis peccata, Huic
respondendum est. Absolutio datur in remedium peccatorum petentibus tantum, nam
si non petiero.
remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt: and Matthew. 18.
Quaecunque ligaveritis super terram erunt ligata in Coelo, and quaecunque
solveritis super terram, erunt soluta in Coelo. Remittere autem and solvere
nemo potest id quod ignorant, occulta autem peccata praeter peccantem novit nisi
solus Deus, quare nisi peccata aperiantur Sacerdoti, nec ea ligare nec solvere
posset. Et Exemplum been declarat rem, sed non perite positum.
quemadmodum Sacratissima tua Majestas, si commissionem aliquibus dedisset
audiendi and terminandi negotium aliquod, non possent judices rem ignorantes
nisi negotio coram eis patefacto causam finire, viz. propter culpam litigatorum
non comparentium coram eis; sic nec Sacerdotes ligare and solvere possunt
peccata quae ignorant. Itaque cum Deus Sacerdotem velut medicum Spiritualem
Ecclesiae dederit, si quis enim sua vulnera celat ipse sua culpa perit, cum
tamen de salute sua deberet esse sollicitus, sicut Paulus ad Phil. 2. admonet,
inquiens, cum metu and tremore Salutem vestram operamini.

Origenes in Levit. Homilia 2. loquens de Remissionibus Peccatorum.
D^ su^ ^pin^ne l^quens.
Est adhuc and septima, licet dura and laboriosa, per poenitentiam remissio
peccatorum, cum lavat peccator lachrimis stratum suum, and fiunt ei lachrimae
suae panis die and nocte, and cum non erubescit Sacerdoti Domini indicare
peccatum suum, and quaerere medicinam secundum eum qui ait, Male s^nt^t q^^
abu^^^rur Scriptura.
Dixi pronunciabo adversum me injustitiam meam Domino, and tu remisisti
impietatem cordis mei, in quo impletur and illud quod Jacobus Apostolus dicit,
Si quis autem infirmatur, vocet Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and imponant ei manus,
Nunq^a^^ is modi^ uncti^nis (...) Confessione (...).
ungentes eum oleo in nomine Domini, and oration fidei salvabit infirmum, and si
in peccatis fuerit remittentur ei.

Origenes Homilia 2. in Psalm. 37.
Intellige mihi fidelem quidem hominem sed tamen infirmum, qui etiam vinci ab
aliquo peccato potuit, and propter hoc mugientem pro delictis suis and omnimodo
curam vulneris sui sanitatemque requirentem, licet praeventus sit and lapsus,
volentem tamen medelam ac salutem reparare; si ergo hujusmodi homo memor
delicti sui, confiteatur quae commisit, and humana confusione parvi pendat eos,
Non a^t necesse est ut con^iteantur, ^am de contemp^^ loquitur.
qui exprobrant eum confitentem, and notant vel irrident, ille autem
intelligens per hoc veniam sibi dari, and in die Resurrectionis pro his quibus
nunc confunditur coram hominibus, tunc ante Angelos Dei confusionem atque
opprobria evasurum, ut nolit tegere and occultare maculam suam, sed pronunciet
delictum suum, nec velit esse Sepulchrum dealbatum, quod deforis quidem
appareat hominibus speciosum, id est ut videntibus se quasi justus appareat,
intus autem sit repletus omni immunditie and ossibus mortuorum.

Et paulo post, Quoniam iniquitatem meam pronuncio. Pronunciationem
iniquitatis, id est confessionem peccati, frequentius diximus, vide ergo quid
edocet nos scriptura divina, quia opportet peccatum non celare intrinsecus;
fortassis enim sicut ii qui habent intus inclusam escam indigestam, aut
humoris, vel flegmatis stomacho graviter and moleste imminentem, si vomuerunt
relevantur; ita etiam hi qui peccarunt, si quidem occultant and retinent intra
se peccatum intrinsecus urgentur, and propemodum suffocantur a phlegmate vel
humore peccati: Si autem ipse sui accusator fiat, dum accusat semetipsum, simul
evomit and delictum, atque omnem morbi digerit causam. Tantummodo circumspice
diligentius cui debeas confiteri peccatum tuum, proba prius medicum cui debeas
causam languoris exponere, qui sciat infirmari cum infirmante, flere cum
flente, qui condolendi and compatiendi noverit disciplinam, ut ita demum si
quid ille dixerit, qui se prius and eruditum medicum ostenderit and
misericordem, si quid consilii dederit, facias and sequaris, si intellexerit
and praeviderit talem es^e languorem tuum, qui in conventu totius Ecclesiae
exponi debeat and curari, ex quo fortassis and caeteri aedificari poterunt, and
tu ipse facile sanari, multa hac deliberatione and satis perito medici illius
consilio procurandum est.

Cyprianus in Sermon de Lapsis.
Denique, quando and fide majore and timore meliores sunt, Ha^^tur ^^prianus
Conf^ssionem auricularem nobis non plus praecipi quam virginitatem.
qui quamvis nullo Sacrificii aut libelli facinore constricti, quoniam tamen de
hoc vel cogitaverunt, hoc ipsum apud Sacerdotes Dei dolenter and simpliciter
confitentur, exomologesin conscientiae faciunt, animi sui pondus exponunt,
salutarem medelam parvis licet and modicis vulneribus exquirunt, scientes
scriptum esse, Deus non deridetur; derideri and circumveniri Deus non potest,
nec astutia aliqua fallente deludi: plus imo delinquit qui secundum hominem
Deum cogitans evadere se poenam criminis credit, si non palam crimen admisit.
Christus in praeceptis suis dicit, qui confusus me fuerit, confundet eum filius
hominis, and Christianum se putat qui Christianus esse aut confunditur aut
veretur: Quomodo potest esse cum Christo, qui ad Christum pertinere aut
erubescit aut metuit? minus plane peccaverit non videndo idola, nec sub oculis
circumstantis atque insultantis populi sanctitatem fidei profanando, non
polluendo manus suas funestis Sacrificiis, nec sceleratis cibis ora maculando;
hoc eo proficit ut sit minor culpa, non ut innocens conscientia; facilius
potest ad veniam criminis pervenire, non est tamen immunis a crimine, nec
cesset in agenda poenitentia, atque in Domini misericordia deprecanda, ne quod
minus esse in qualitate delicti videtur, in neglecta satisfactione cumuletur.
Si pr^c^ptum hab^ret non persuade^er.
Con^iteantur singuli, quaeso vos fratres, delictum suum, dum adhuc qui
deliquit in soeculo est, dum admitti confessio ejus potest, dum satisfactio and
remissio facta per Sacerdotes apud Dominum grata est; convertamur ad Dominum
mente tota, and poenitentiam criminis veris doloribus exprimentes Dei
misericordiam deprecemur; illi se anima prosternat, illi maestitia satisfaciat,
illi spes omnis incumbat; rogare qualiter debeamus dicit ipse, Revertimini
inquit, ad me ex toto cord vestro, simulque and jejunio, and fletu, and
planctu, and scindite corda vestra and non vestimenta.

Praeterea Esaias peccatorem admonet Cap. 42. secundum 70. inquiens, Hi omnes
su^dent, sed non praeciptunt.
Dic tu prior iniquitates tuas ut justificeris; and Solomon Prove. 18. ait,
Justus prior est accusator sui, atque ideo ne Satan nos in judicio coram
omnibus accuset, nos illum in hac vita, per priorem confessionem delicti nostri
factam aliis praevenire debemus, nam Deum praevenire in nostri accusatione
nequimus, qui omnia facta nostra jam novit, immo vero antequam fierent ea
praescivit; quare Confessio illa necesse est, intelligatur, de extranea
confessione facta Dei ministro qui id ignoravit, nam Deum nihil unquam latuit
non modo jam factum, sed ne futurum quidem quicquam.

Circa personas vero ministrorum quibus fieri deberet Confessio, C^m nec cui
nec tempus designatur non firmum ^raeceptum datu^.
atque circa tempora Ecclesiae nonnunquam aliquid immutarunt, and vary pro
regionibus statuerunt.

Et ne tuam solicitudinem, Sacratissima Majestas, circa publicam Regni tui
tranquillitatem stabiliendam sanctissime occupatam, longa multorum lectione,
quae praeter ista afferre possem, remorari videar, plura adjungere supersedebo,
illud tantummodo precatus, ut meam hanc scribendi temeritatem boni consulat,
quam ego totam perspicacissimo atque eruditissimo Majestatis tuae judicio
considerandam pensitandamque committo. Atque ita foelicissime valeat
Sacratissima tua Majestas, cujus Regnum and prosperrimum and in soeculum
diuturnum nobis fore precamur.

XI. A Letter of King Henry's to Tonstall, Bishop of Duresme, against Articular
Confession being of Divine Institution. An Original.
Cott. Libr. Cleop. E. 5.
SInce me thought (my Lord of Durham) that both the Bishops of York, Winchester,
and your Reasons and Texts were so fully answered this other day, in the House,
as to my seeming and supposal, the most of the House was satisfied; I marvelled
not a little why eft-soons you have sent to me this now your writing, being in
a manner few other Texts or Reasons than there were declared both by the Bishop
of Canterbury and me, to make smally or nothing to your intended purpose: but
either I esteem that you do it to prove my simple judgment alone, which indeed
does not much use (tho not the wisest) to call in aid, the judgments of other
learned Men, and so by mine ignorant answer, seem to win the Field; or else
that you be too much blinded in your own fansy and judgment, to think that a
Truth, which by learning you have not yet proved, nor I fear me cannot by
Scriptures, nor any other Directors probable grounds, though I know mine
unsufficiency in learning, if the matter were indifferent, and that the
balance stood equal, since I take the verity of the Cause rather to favorize
the part I take than yours; it gives me therefore great boldness, not
presuming in Learning, but in justness of the Cause, seeing by writing you have
provoked me to it, to make answer to your Arguments: Therefore I beginning now
to reply to your first Allegation, shall essay to prove, if I can, that your
own Author in place by you alleged, makes plain against your Opinion; for as
you alledg him, St. Chrysostom says, Quod sufficit solus pudor pro poena, then
Articular Confession is not by commandment necessary; for if it were, this word
( Solus) is by your Author ill set; therefore your Author in this place
furdereth you but little, To your Fallax Argument, I deny your consequent,
founded only upon small Reason, which is the ground of your Fallax Argument:
which Reason I need not take away, for your alleged Author does show too
plainly, in his 5. Homily, Tom. 5. that you gather wrong sense upon his words;
for he says, with much more touching this matter, these few words, Non
hominibus peccata detegere cogo; then this other Text before rehearsed, is not
to be understood as you will by writing it. Further, me thinks, I need not
(God thank you) too greatly study for Authors to conclude your wrong taking of
Texts, for those your self alledg serves me well to purpose: for all your
labor is to prove that Auricular Confession were by God commanded, and both
your Authorities of Bid and Paul, shows nothing but that they did confess
their sins, and yet do not they affirm that it was by commandment; wherefore
they make for mine Argument and not for yours. Your other Texts of John 21. and
Matthew 10. were so thoroughly answered this other day, and so manifestly
declared not to appertain to our grounded Argument, that I marvel you be not
ashamed eft-soons to put them in writing, and to found your Argument now so
fondly on them; for what fonder Argument can be made to prove thereby a
necessity of Confession, than to say, If you confess not, I cannot forgive?
Would a Thief which commits Felony, think himself obliged by the Law to
disclose his Felony, if the Law say no more, but if thou confess not I cannot
forgive thee? or would the^t the sooner therefore to be forgiven? This is
matter so apparent, that none can but perceive except he would not see. As
touching Origens places by you alleged; as the first, in Leviticum, shows
that we be as much bound lavare stratum lacrimis, as dicere Sacerdoti, which no
Man, I think, will affirm that we be bound to do; and yet he affirms not that
any of them is commanded: the Text also whereby ye would approve his so saying,
does not yet speak quod pronunciabo justitiam meam Sacerdoti, but Domino: The
other of James seems better to make for extreme Unction, than for Confession;
for when was ever the use, that Folk coming only to Confession, were wont to be
anointed with Oil, therefore this makes nothing to your Argument. As touching
Origin in Psalm. 37. he says not, quod obligamur dicere Sacerdoti, but si
confiteantur; and seems rather to persuade Men that they should not
parvipendere Confessionem, (as all good Folk would) than that they were obliged
to Confess them to a Priest. Though Cyprian de Lapsis, does praise them which
do Confess their Faults to Priests, yet does he confess that we be not bound to
do so; for he says in the highest of his praise these words, How much be they
then higher in Faith, and better in fear of God, which though they be not bound
by any deed of Sacrifice, or Book, yet be they content sorrowfully to confess
to the Priest sins! He knowledgeth no bond in us by neither fact of Sacrifice
or Libel, why alledg you (tho he praise Auricular Confession) that we should be
bound by God and Law thereto? This is no proof thereof, neither by Reason nor
by Scripture, nor any good Authority. And whereas he says further,
Confiteantur singuli, quaeso vos fratres, delictum suum; this does not argue a
precept: nor yet the saying of Esaias, cap. 43. s^cundum Septuaginta; nor Solomon
in the Proverbs 10. for these speak rather of knowledging our Offense to God in
our Heart, than of Auricular Confession; after David the Prophets saying and
teaching, when he said, Tibi soli peccavi, that was not to a Priest. By the
text also which you alledg, beginning, circa personas vero ministrorum, etc.
you do openly confess that the Church has not accepted Auricular Confession to
be by God's Commandment; or else by your saying and Allegation, they have long
erred: for you confess that the Church has diverse times changed both to whom
Confession should be made, and times when; and that also they have changed
diverse ways for diverse Regions; if it were by God's Commandment they might not
do thus: Wherefore, my Lord, since I hear no other Allegations, I pray you
blame not me tho I be not of your Opinion; and of the both, I think that I have
more cause to think you obstinate, than you me, seeing your Authors and
Allegations make so little to your purpose. And thus fare you well.

XII. A Definition of the Church, corrected in the Margent by King Henry's own
hand. An Original.
De Ecclesia.
Cotton Libr. Cleop. E. 5.
ECclesia praeter alias acceptiones in Scripturis duas habet praecipuas: Unam,
qua Ecclesia accipitur pro Congregatione Sanctorum and vere fidelium qui
Christo capiti vere credunt, and sanctificantur Spiritu ejus; haec autem una
est, and vere Sanctum Corpus Christi sed Soli Deo Sponsa Christi cognita.
cognitum, qui hominum corda solus intuetur. Altera acceptio est, qua Ecclesia
accipitur pro Congregatione omnium Hominum qui baptizati sunt in Christo, and
non palam abnegarint Christum, nec sunt Just.
excommunicati A^t obstinati.
quae Ecclesiae acceptio congruit ejus Statui in hac vita duntaxat, ubi habet
malos bonis simul admixtos Et cognitio hu^us Ecclesiae perve^^^ per usum Verbi
and Sacramentorum, acceptione perfecta, (...).
, and debet esse cognita per Verbum and legitimum usum Sacramentorum ut possit
audiri; sicut docet Christus, Qui Ecclesiam non audierit. Porro ad veram
unitatem Ecclesiae, requiritur ut sit consensus in recta Doctrina Fidei and
administratione Sacramentorum.

Traditiones vero and ritus atque Caeremoniae quae vel ad decorem, vel ordinem,
vel Disciplinam Ecclesiae ab hominibus sunt institutae, non omnino necesse est,
ut eaedem sint ubique aut prorsus similes: hae enim and variae fuere and
variari possunt Modo rec^torib^^ place ant quibus semper obtemperandum est,
tamen ut eorum institutio atque lex Verbo D^^ non a^versetur.
pro regionum atque morum diversitate and and commodo Ista est Eccl^sia (...)
Catholica and Aposto^ica, cum qua nec Pontifex R^man^s, (...) quivis alius
Praelatus aut Pontifex, habet quicquid agere praterquam in suas Dioceses.
, sic tamen ut sint consentientes Verbo Dei: and quamvis in Ecclesia secundum
posteriorem acceptionem mali sint bonis admixti, atque etiam Ministeriis Verbi
and Sacramentorum nonnunquam praesint, tamen cum ministrent non suo sed Christi
nomine, mandato and authoritate, licet eorum ministerio uti tam in verbo
audiendo quam recipiendis Sacramentis, juxta illud, Qui vos audit me audit; nec
per eorum malitiam imminuitur effectus aut gratia donorum Christi rite
accipientibus, sunt enim efficacia propter promissionem and ordinationem
Christi etiamsi per malos exhibeantur.

The End of the Addenda.
A Table of the Records and Papers that are in the Collection, with which the
places in the History to which they relate, are marked; the first number, with
the Letter C. is the Page of the Collection; the second, with the Letter H. is
the Page of the History.
C. H. 1. THe Record of Card. Adrian's Oath of Fidelity to K. Henry the 7th for
the Bishopric of Bath and Wells 3 12 2. P. Julius's Letter to Archbishop
Warham, for giving K. Henry the 8th the Golden Rose 5 19 3. A Writ for
summoning Convocations ibid 20 4. A Writ for a Convocation summoned by Warham
on an Ecclesiastical account 6 ibid 5. The Preamble of an Act of Subsidy
granted by the Clergy 7 21 6. Bishop Tonstal's License to Sir Tho. More for
his reading Heretical Books 8 32 The Second Book.
1. The Bull for the King's Marriage with Queen Katherine 9 35 2. The King's
Protestation against the Marriage 10 36 3. Cardinal Wolsey's first Letter to
Gregory Cassali about the Divorce 12 45 4. Two Letters of Secretary Knight's to
the Cardinal and the King, giving an account of his Conferences with the Pope
concerning the Divorce 21 47 5. A part of a Letter from Knight to Card. Wolsey,
that shows the Dispensation was then granted and sent over 26 49 6. Gregory
Cassali's Letter concerning the Method in which the Pope desired the Divorce
should be managed ibid ibid 7. The King's Letter to the College of Cardinals,
from which it appears how much they favored his Cause 28 52 8. The Cardinal's
Letter to the Pope concerning the Divorce 29 ibid 9. Card. Wolsey's Letter to
Cassali, directing him to make Presents at Rome 30 ibid 10. The Decretal Bull
that was desired in the King's Cause 31 ibid 11. The Cardinal's Letter to John
Cassali concerning it 34 53 12. Staphileus's Letter to the Cardinal 57 54 13.
The Cardinal's Letter to Campegio 38 ibid 14. The Cardinal's Letter to Cassali,
desiring a Decretal Bull might be sent over ibid 56 15. The Breve of P. Julius
for the King's marriage, suspected to be forged 39 37 16. A part of the
Cardinal's Letter to G. Cassali, desiring leave to show the Decretal Bull to
some of the King's Council 40 58 17. John Cassali's Letter concerning a
Conference he had with the Pope 41 ibid 18. The Pope's Letter to the Cardinal,
giving credence to Campana 47 60 19. A part of Peter Vaunes's Instructions,
directing him to threaten the Pope ibid ibid 20. The Cardinal 's Letter to the
Ambassadors, concerning his promotion to the Popedom 48 63 21. An Information
given to the Pope concerning the Divorce 49 65 22. The 2d part of a long
Dispatch of the Cardinal's concerning the Divorce 51 ibid 23. Another Dispatch
to the same purpose 60 67 24. A Letter from the two Legates to the Pope*
advising a Decretal Bull 67 68 25. Another Dispatch to Rome concerning it 71 70
26. A Letter from the Pope to the Cardinal 75 ibid 27. The King's Letter to his
Ambassadors to hinder an avocation of the Suit 75 ibid 28. The King's Letter
concerning his appearance before the Legates 77 73 29. Dr. Benn^t's Letter to
the Cardinal, showing how little they might expect from the Pope 80 75 30. A
Letter from the Pope to the Cardinal concerning the Avocation 81 76 31. An Act
Releasing to the King Sums of Money that were raised by a Loan 82 83 32. A
Letter from Gardner and Fox, concerning their Proceedings at Cambridg 85 86 33.
A Letter from Crook out of Venice, concerning the Opinions of Divines about the
Divorce 88 91 34. The Judgments of the Universities concerning the King's
Marriage 89 92 35. The Judgment of the Lutheran Divines about it 94 94 36. An
Abstract of the Grounds of the Divorce 95 97 37. A Bull sent to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, against the Statutes of Provisors ibid 110 38. A Letter to King
Henry the Sixth, for Repealing that Statute 98 111 39. A Letter to the
Par^lament upon the same occasion 99 ibid 40. An Instrument of the Speech the
Archbishop of Canterbury made to the House of Commons concerning it 100 ibid
41. An Act restraining the payment of Annals to the Sea of Rome 102 117 42.
The King's last Letter to the Pope 107 118 43. A Promise made to the Cardinal
of Ravenna, for engaging him to procure the Divorce 110 120 44. Bonn^r's Letter
concerning the Proceedings at Rome 111 ibid 45. Anot^er Letter about the same
Process 116 121 46. Another Letter concerning the progress of the Process at
Rome 118 122 47. The Sentence of Divorce given by Cranmer 120 131 48. An Act
for the Deprivation of the Bishops of Salisbury and Worcester 121 148 49. A
Letter from Cromwell to Fisher concerning the Maid of Kent 123 154 50. A
Renounciation of the Pope's Supremacy, signed by the Heads of six Religious
Houses 128 155 51. A Mandate for the Consecration of Suffragan Bishops 130 157
The Third Book.
1. Instructions for the General Vlsitation of the Monasteries 131 184 2.
General Injunctions sent by the King to all the Monasteries 137 185 3. Some
Paarticulars relating to the Dissolution of Monasteries Sect. 1. Of the
Preambles of some Surrenders 141 191 Sect. 2. A List of Religious Houses that
were of new founded by the King, after the Act for their Dissolution 142 224
Sect. 3. A List of all the Surrenders of Monasteries which are extant 143 238
Sect. 4. The Confessions made by some Abbots 149 237 Sect. 5. Of the manner of
suppressing the Monasteries, after they were surrendered 151 268 4. Queen Ann
Boleyn's last Letter to King Henry 154 206 5. The Judgment of the Convocat^on
concerning General Councils 155 219 6. Instructions for a Visitation of
Monasteries, in order to their Dissolution 157 222 7. Instruct^ons given by the
King to the Clergy 160 225 8. A Letter from Cromwell to Shaxton Bishop of
Sarum 163 240 9. The Sentence given out by Pope Paul the Third against King
Henry 166 245 10. The Opinion of some Bishops concerning the King's Supremacy
177 248 11. Injunctions to the Clergy made by Cromwell 178 249 12. Injunctions
made by Archbishop Cranmer 182 255 13. A Letter of Cromwell's to the Bishop of
Landaff, directing how to proceed in the Reformation 183 256 14. The Commission
by which Bonner held his Bishopric of the King 184 267 15. The King's Letters
Patents for printing the Bible in English 186 270 16. The Attainder of Thomas
Cromwell 187 278 17. Cromwell's Letter to the King concerning his marriage with
Ann of Cleve 193 280 18. The King's own Declaration about it 197 ibid 19. The
Judgment of the Convocation annulling it ibid 281 20. Ann of Cleves Letter to
her Brother 200 222 21. The Resolutions of several Bishops and Divines
concerning the Sacraments 201 289 22. Dr. Barnes's Renounciation of some
Articles informed against him 244 296 23. The Foundation of the Bishopric of
Westminster 246 300 24. A Proclamation for the English Bible to be set up in
all Churches 250 302 25. An Admonition set up by Bonner for all that came to
read the Bible 251 303 26. Injunctions given by Bonner to his Clergy 252 315
27. A Collection of Passages out of the Canon Law made by Cranmer, to show the
necessity of Reforming it 257 330 28. A Mandate for publishing and using the
Prayers in the English Tongue 264 331 29. Articles subscribed by Shaxton the
late Bishop of Sarum 265 341 30. A Letter from Lethington the Scottish
Secretary, to Cecill Secretary to Queen Elizabeth, by which it appears that
King Henry's Will was forged 267 349 An Appendix, corncerning some Errors and
Falsehoods in Sanders's Book of the English Schism 273 Addenda.
1. Articles about Religion, set out by the Convocation, and published by the
King's Authority 305 364 2. Some Queries put by Cranmer, in order to the
correcting of several Abuses 317 ibid 3. Some Queries concerning Confirmation,
with the Answers that were given to them by Cranmer and Stokesley Bishop of
London 319 ibid 4. Some Considerations offered to the King by Cranmer, to
induce him to proceed to a further Reformation 320 ibid 5. A Declaration made
by some Bishops and Divines, concerning the Functions and Divine Institution of
Bishops and Priests 321 365 6. A Letter of Melanthons, to persuade the King to
a further Reformation 329 367 7. A Letter written by the German Ambassadors to
the King, against the taking away of the Chalice, and against private Masses,
and the Celibate of the Clergy 332 ibid 8. The King's Answer to the former
Letter 396 ibid 9. A Letter written by the King to his Bishops; directing them
how to instruct the People 360 368 10. Arguments given by Tonstal to the King,
to prove Auricular Confession to be of a Divine Institution; with some Notes on
the Margent written with the King's own hand 363 369 11. A Letter of the King's
to Tonstall, in Answer to the former Paper 366 ibid 12. A Definition of the
Catholic Church, corrected with the King's own hand 367 370

FINIS.
Errata in the Collection of Records.
PAge 21. Line 4. compendio, read Compendio. P. 19. l. 32. huic, r. hic. P. 21.
l. 23. datum, r. datam. P. 65. l. 30. before to, r. than. P. 38. l. 5. and
take, r. to take; l. 22. gentily, r. generally. P. 111. the Marginal Note
should stand 6 lines higher. P. 1 4. l. 14. for, r. her; l. 15. Word, r. were.
P. 128. l. 12, 13, 14, 15, the Comma's are all wrong placed. P. 137. l. 42.
other, r. Oath. P. 154. l. 19. as if, dele as. P. 157. l. 12. here, r. have. P.
190. l. 18. our, r. your. P. 220. l. 5. Quest. 3. r. Quest. 9. P. 269. l. 47.
Variety, r. Verity. P. 285. l. 19, 28, r. 18. P. 305. l. 30. in any, r. many.
P. 311. l. 41. and, r. that. P. 317. l. 26. say-men, r. Laymen; l. 45. refuge,
r. refuse. P. 322. l. 30. only, r. every. P. 335. l. 35, 36. fides lis, r.
fidelis.

Literal Faults, or escapes in the Punctuation, are left to the Reader's
Correction.


