An ANSWER To Mr. Henry Payne's LETTER, Concerning His Majesty's DECLARATION of
INDULGENCE, Writ to the Author of the Letter to A Dissenter.
Mr. PAIN,
I Cannot hold asking you, how much Money you had, from the Writer of the
Paper, which you pretend to Answer: for as you have the character of a man that
deals with both hands, so this is writ in such a manner as to make one think
you were hired to it, by the Adverse Party: but it has been indeed so ordinary
to your Friends, to write in this manner of late, that the Censures upon it are
divided, both fall heavy: some suspect their Sincerity others accuse them for
want of a right Understanding: for tho all are not of the pitch of the Irish
Priests Reflections, on the Bp of Bath and Wells's Sermon, which was indeed
Irish double refined; yet both in your Books of Controversy, and Policy, and
even in your Poems, you seem to have entered into such an intermixture with the
Irish, that the thread all over is Linsey-woollsey. You acknowledge that the
Gentleman whom you answer has a Polite Pen, and that his Letter is an Ingenious
paper, and made up of well-Composed Sentences and Periods. Yet I believe he
will hardly return you your Complement. If it was well writ, your Party wants
either Men or Judgment extremely, in allowing you this province of answering
it. If the Paper did you some hurt, you had better have let the Town be a little
pleased with it for a while; and have hoped that a little time or some new paper
(tho one of its force is scarce to be expected) should have worn it out, then
to give it a new luster by such an Answer.

The Time of the Dissenters Sufferings, which you lengthen out to 27 years,
will hardly amount to seven. For the long Intervals it had, in the last Reign,
are not forgot: and those who animated the latest and severest of their
sufferings are such, that in good manners you ought not to reflect on their
Conduct. Opium is as certain a poison, tho not so violent, as Sublimate; and if
more corrosive Medicines did not work, the Design is the same, when
soporiferous ones are used: since the Patient is to be killed both ways: and it
seems that all that is in debate is, which is the safer: the accepting a
present ease when the ill intent with which it is offered, is Visible, is just
as wise an action, as to take Opium to lay a small Distemper when one may
conclude from the dose, that he will never come out of the Sleep. So that after
all, it is plain on which side the Madness lies. The Dissenters for a little
present ease, to be enjoyed at Mercy, must concur to break down all our hedges,
and to lay us open to that Devouring Power, before which nothing can stand that
will not worship it.

All that for which you reproach the Church of England amounts to this, that a
few good words, could not persuade her to destroy her self; and to Sacrifice
her Religion and the Laws to a party that never has done nor ever can do the
King half the service that she has rendered him. There are some sorts of
propositions that a man does not know how to answer: nor would he be thought
Ungrateful who after he had received some Civilities from a person to whom he
had done great service, could not be prevailed with by these so far as to spare
him his Wife or his Daughter. It must argue a peculiar degree of confidence to
ask things, that are above the being either asked or granted. Our Religion and
our Government are matters that are not to be parted with to show our good
breeding: and of all men living you ought not to pretend to Good Manners, who
talk as you do, of the Oppression of the last Reign. When the King's
Obligations to his Brother, and the share that he had in his Councils, are
considered; the reproaching his Government, has so ill a grace, that you are as
Indecent in your Flatteries as Injurious in your Reflections. And by this
gratitude of yours to the Memory of the late King, the Church of England may
easily Infer, how long all her Services would be remembered, even if she had
done all that was desired of her.

I would fain know which of the Brethren of the Dissenters in foreign
Countries sought their Relief from Rebellion. The Germans Reformed by the
Authority of their Princes, so did the Swedes, the Danes, and like wise the
Switsers. In France they maintained the Princes of the Blood against the
League: and in Holland the Quarrel was for Civil liberties; Protestant and
Papist concurring equally in it. You mention Holland as an Instance that
Liberty and Infallibility can dwell together: since Papists there show that
they can be friendly neighbors, to those whom they think in the wrong: It is
very like they would be still so in England, if they were under the lash of the
law, and so were upon their good behavior, the Government being still against
them: and this has so good an effect in Holland, that I hope we shall never
depart from the Dutch Pattern: some can be very Humble Servants that would
prove Imperious Masters. You say that Force is our only Supporter: but tho
there is no force of our side at present, it does not appear that we are in
such a tottering condition, as if we had no Supporter left us. God and Truth
are of our side: and the indiscreet use of Force, when set on by our Enemies,
has rather undermined than supported us. But you have taken pains to make us
grow wiser, and to let us see our Errors, which is perhaps the only obligation
that we owe you; and we are so sensible of it, that without examining what your
Intentions may have been in it, we heartily thank you for it.

I do not comprehend what your quarrel is at the squinting Term of the next
heir, as you call it; tho I do not wonder that squinting comes in your mind
whenever you think of HER; for all people look asquint at that which troubles
them: and her being the next heir is no less the delight of all good men, than
it is your affliction: all the pains that you take to represent her dreadful to
the Dissenters, must needs find that credit with them, that is due to the
Insinuations of an Enemy. It is very true, that as she was bred up in our
Church, she adheres to it so Eminently, as to make her to be now our chief
Ornament as we hope she will be once our main Defense. If by the strictest form
of our Church you mean an Exemplary Piety, and a shining Conversation, you have
given her true Character: But your design lies another way to make the
Dissenters form strange Ideas of her, as if she thought all Indulgence to them
Criminal: But as the Gentleness of her nature is such, that none but those who
are so guilty, that all mercy to them would be a Crime, can apprehend any thing
that is terrible, from her, so as for the Dissenters, her going so constantly
to the Dutch and French Churches shows, that she can very well endure their
Assemblies, at the same time that she prefers, ours. She has also too often
expressed her dislike at the heats that have been kept up among us concerning
such Inconsiderable Differences, to pass for a Bigot or a persecutor in such
matters: and She sees both the mischief that the Protestant Religion has
received from their subdivisions, and the happiness of granting a due Liberty
of Conscience, where she has so long lived, that there is no reason to make any
fancy that she will either keep up our Differences, or bear down the Dissenters
with Rigor. But because you hope for nothing from her own Inclinations, you
would have her terrified with the strong Argument of Numbers, which you fancy
will certainly secure them from her recalling the favor. But of what side
soever that Argument may be strong, sure it is not of theirs who make but one
to Two hundred: and I suppose you scarce expect that the Dissenters will rebel,
that you may have your Masses, and how their numbers will secure them, unless
it be by enabling them to Rebel, I cannot Imagine: this is indeed a squinting
at the Next Heir, with a witness, when you would already muster up the Troops
that must rise against her. But let me tell you, that you know both Her
Character and the Prince's very ill that fancy, they are only to be wrought on
by Fear. They are known to your great grief; to be above that: and it must be
to their own Merciful Inclinations, that you must owe all that you can expect
under them, but neither to their fear nor to your own Numbers. As for the
hatred and Contempt, even to the degree of being more Ridiculous then the Mass
under which you say Her way of Worship is in Holland, this is one of those
figures of speech that show how exactly you have Studied the Jesuits Moralls.
All that come from Holland, assure us, that she is so Universally beloved and
esteemed there, that every thing that she does, is the better thought of even
because she does it. Upon the whole matter, all that you say of the Next Heir,
proves too truly that you are that for which you reproach the Church of
England, a Disciple of the Crown only for the loaves; for if you had that
respect which you pretend for the King, you would have showed it more upon this
occasion.

Nor am I so much in love with your style, as to imitate it, therefore I will
not do you so great a pleasure, as to say the least thing that may reflect on
that Authority, which the Church of England has taught me to reverence even
after all the Disgraces that she has received from it: and if she were not
Insuperably restrained by her Principles, instead of the Thin Muster with which
you reproach her, she could soon make so thick a one as would make the Thinnes
of yours, very visible upon so unequal a division of the Nation: But she will
neither be threatened nor laughed out of her Religion and her loyalty: tho such
insultings as she meets with, that almost pass all humane Patience, would tempt
men that had a less fixed principle of submission, to make their Enemies feel
to their cost, that they owe all the Triumphs they make, more to our
Principles, than to their own Force. Their laughing at our Doctrine of non
resistance, lets us see, that it would be none of theirs under the Next Heir,
at whom you Squint, if the strong Argument of Numbers made you not apprehend
that Two Hundred to one would prove an Unequal Match.

As for your Memorandums, I shall answer them as short as you give them

1. It will be hard, to persuade people, that a Decision in favor of the
Dispencing Power, flowing from Judges that are both made, and paid, and that
may be removed at pleasure, will amount to the recognizing of that Right by law.

2. It will be hard to persuade the world, that the Kings adhering to his
Promises, and his Coronation Oath, and to the known Laws of the land, would
make him Felo de se. The following of different methods were the likelier way
to it, if it were not for the Loyalty of the Church of England.

3. It will be very easy to see the use of continuing the Test by Law; since
all those that break through it, as well as the Judges, who have authorized their
Crimes, are still liable for all they do: and after all your huffing, with the
Dispencing Power, we do not doubt but the apprehension of an after reckoning
sticks deep somewhere, you say, it may be supposed, that the aversion of a
Protestant King to the Popish party, will sufficiently exclude them, even
without the Test. But it must be confessed, that you take all possible care, to
confirm that Aversion so far, as to put it beyond a it may be supposed. And it
seems you understand Christ's Prerogative, as well as the Judges did the Kings,
that fancy the Test is against it: it is so suitable to the nature of all
Governments, to take Assurances of those who are admitted to Places of Trust,
that you do very ill to appeal to an Impartial consideration, for you are sure
to lose it there.

Few English men, will believe you in earnest when you seem zealous for public
liberty, or the Magna Charta: or that you are so very apprehensive of Slavery:
And your Friends must have very much changed both their Natures and their
Principles, if their conduct does not give cause to renew the like Statutes
against them, even tho they should be repealed in this Reign, notwithstanding
all your confidence to the contrary. I will still believe that the strong
Argument of Numbers will be always the powerfullest of all others with you:
which as long as it has its Force, and no longer, we may hope to be at quiet. I
concur heartily with you in your Prayers for the King, tho perhaps I differ
from you in my Notions, both of his Glory and of the Felicity of his People:
and as for your own particular, I wish you would either not at all Employ your
Pen, or learn to write to better purpose: but tho I cannot admire your Letter,
yet I am

YOUR HUMBLE SERVANT T. T.


