A COLLECTION OF Several Tracts AND DSICOURSES, Written in the Years 1678,
1679, 1680, 1681, 1682, 1683, 1684, 1685. By GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

To which are added, A Letter written to Dr. Burnet, giving an Account of
Cardinal Pool's Secret Powers. The History of the Powder Treason, with a
Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon. An Impartial Consideration of the
Five Jesuits dying Speeches, who were Executed for the Popish Plot, 1679.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXV

A TABLE of the TITLES.
MDCLXXVIII.
1. A LETTER written upon the Discovery of the LATE PLOT. 2. The
Unreasonablness and Impiety of POPERY in a Second Letter, written upon the
Discovery of the LATE PLOT. 3. A Relation of the Barbarous and Bloody MASSACRE
of about an Hundred thousand Protestants, begun at Paris, and carried on over
all FRANCE by the PAPISTS, in the year 1572, Collected out of Mezeray, Thuanus,
and Other approved Authors.
MDCLXXIX.
4. A Decree made at ROME, the 2d of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and Other Casuists.
MDCLXXX.
5. The Conversion and Persecutions of Eve Cohan, now called Elizabeth Verboon,
a Person of Quality of the Jewish Religion, who was baptized the 10th of
October, 1680. 6. A Sermon preached on the Fast day; December 22. 1680. at St.
Margarets Westminster, before the House of Commons, on Rev. 3. 2, 3. 7. A
Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, on September 2.
1680. being the Anniversary Fast, for the Burning of London, on Amos 4. 11, 12.
8. A Sermon preached before the Aldermen of London, January 30* 1680. being the
day of the Martyrdom of King Charles the first, on Zech. 8. 19.
MDCLXXXI.
9. A Sermon preached at the Election of the Lord Mayor of London, September
29. 1681. on Matthew. 12. 25.
MDCLXXXII.
10. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. James Houblon Merchant, June 28.
1682. Psalm. 37. 37. 11 News from France, in a Letter, giving a Relation of the
present State of the Difference between the French King, and the Court of Rome;
to which is added, the Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and the
Protestation made by Them. 12. An Answer to the Animadversions on Dr. Burnet's
History of the Rights of Princes.
MDCLXXXIV.
13. A Sermon preached at the Chapel of the Rolls, November 5. 1684. being
Gun-Powder-Treason day, on Psalm. 22. 21. 14. A Letter to Mr. Simon Lowth, Vicar
of Cosmus-Blene, in the Diocese of Canterbury, occasioned by his late Book, [Of
the Subject of Church Power.] 15. An Answer to a Letter to Dr. Burnet,
occasioned by His Letter to Mr. Lowth. 16. A Letter occasioned by the Second
Letter to Dr. Burnet.
MDCLXXXV.
17. A Letter written to Dr. Burnet, giving an Account of Cardinal Pool',
Secret Powers, From which it appears, That it was never intended to confirm the
Alienation that was made of the Abby-Lands. To which is added, Two Breves that
Cardinal Pool brought over, and Some other of his Letters that were never
before Printed.
18. The History of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings,
and Matters relating thereunto, from the Exoeptions made against it; and more
particularly of late years, by the Author of the Catholic Apology. To which is
added, A Parallel betwixt That and the present Popish Plot. 1681. 19. An
Impartial consideration of those Speeches, which pass under the Name of the
Five Jesuits lately Executed, viz. Mr. Whitebread, Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Gawen, Mr.
Turner, and Mr. Fenwick In Which it is proved, That according to their
Principles they not only might, but also ought to dye after that manner, with
solemn Protestations of their Innocence. 1679.
A LETTER, Written upon the DISCOVERY Of the Late PLOT.

Licensed W. Jane, October. 17. 1678.

LONDON: Printed for H. Brom, and R. Chiswell, both living in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

A LETTER, Written upon the DISCOVERY Of the Late PLOT.
SIR,
I Heartily thank you for the News your last brought me, of the discovery of
that horrid Plot, both against his Majesty's Person, and the whole Kingdom. I
doubt not but all good men are offering up their acknowledgments to God, for so
great a Blessing; which is a fresh demonstration of his care of this Church,
and State: and that all our Crying sins have not provoked him yet to abandon
us: of which I pray God make us all sensible, that we may not continue to pull
down such judgments, as the malice of wicked men would readily become
instrumental in, if the Providence of God did not so wonderfully and seasonably
interpose.

There is only one Passage in your Letter, that I wonder at. You tell me every
body is surprised with this Plot now discovered. I confess I am not of their
mind; for although I know there are persons of high Honor, and untainted
Loyalty of the Roman Religion, who abominate the thoughts of all secret
Assassinations, much more of Murdering his Majesty; yet such practices are so
necessarily consequent to the Principles of that Church, that no Member of it,
who thoroughly understands them, can, while they continue in that Communion,
avoid the being involved in Conspiracies, as often as a fit occasion presents it
self.

These several years past they have boasted much of their Loyalty, and their
Services and Sufferings for his Majesty, during the late Civil Wars. All this
was necessary to make the Government put confidence in them, that so they might
more secretly lay their designs: which were to take effect, when a Conjuncture
was offered that seemed favorable. But I must again and again repeat, what I
often told you in discourse; That no Member of that Church can thoroughly
understand and believe the Principles of it, and be a good Subject even to a
King of his own Persuasion: But he can be much less so, to a Prince whom he
looks on as an Heretic, who thereby lies under a general Excommunication, and
may be brought under a particular and Formal one, before he, or any body else,
but such as are fit to be entrusted with the Secret, shall know it: And then
the Prince is at the mercy of all his Popish Subjects, who if they consider
aright the Doctrine of their own Church, must depart from their Allegiance to
Him, and be ready to do any thing that is laid on them, by those who are either
directly their Superiors, if they have taken Religious Vows; or at least, have
some authority over their Consciences.

This I shall open to you in as short and plain terms as is possible; and the
rather, that you may communicate it to some persons of Honor of that Religion,
who I hope upon so fresh a Discovery of these practices, may be now not
unwilling to examine a Point, the consideration of which they before rejected,
as an Imputation cast on their Religion. This will now, I imagine, move them so
far to demur, as to consider impartially whether such practices flow only from
the ill Tempers of particular Persons, or from the received Principles of their
Church. This latter I undertake to make out, from the undeniable Maxims, to
which all of that Communion are bound to adhere.

There are Two Principles, which I may well call the Fundamental Principles of
the Roman Church: since all Opinions that are not inconsistent with them, can
be tolerated among them: But whatever strikes at these, must needs be
Abominated, as Destructive of that, they call The Catholic Faith. The one is,
The Authority of the Church, The other is, The Certainty of Tradition. If then
the Doctrine of Deposing Kings, and by consequence Killing them (for if they
are justly deposed, it is as just to kill them as to kill any Usurper) is such,
that without denying the Authority of the Church, and the Certainty of
Tradition, it cannot be denied; then all men must resolve either to acknowledge
it, or to renounce their Subjection to a Church that must needs believe it.

About the Authority of the Church, Two things are to be observed, that serve
for clearing what I design to make out.

The First is, That the Church in any one Age has as much Authority as ever it
had, or can have in any other Age: For if Christ's Promises, together with the
other Arguments they bring for the Authority of the Church, be good, they are
alike strong at all Times, and in all Ages: And therefore though in writing
Books of Controversies they muster up Authorities out of the former Ages,
because we profess we pay little esteem to the latter Ages: Yet among
themselves all Ages are alike, and the Decrees of them are of equal authority.

Secondly, The Authority of the Church is as little to be disputed in moral
matters, that fall under practice, as in Articles of Faith that only fall under
Speculation, and in a word, The Church must be the Infallible Expounder of the
Ten Commandments, as well as of the Creed. All the Arguments from Christ's
Promises, from the hazard of trusting to our private Reasonings, and the
Necessity of Submitting to a public Judge, are by so much the more concluding
in Practical matters, as it is of more Importance, That Men think aright in
Practical than in Speculative Opinions. If then there arises a Question about a
Moral matter, or the Exposition of any of the Commandments, The only certain
Decision must be expected from the Church. For instance, a Question arises
about Images, Whether it is lawful to use them in the Worship of God, upon the
seeming Opposition which the worship of them has to the 2d Commandment? Since
the Church has once Determined that it may be lawfully used, it is Heresy to
deny it, on this pretense, that we fancy it is contrary to one of the
Commandments. So if a Controversy arise upon the Fifth Commandment, How far a
King is to be acknowledged, if the Church has determined the Limits of that, it
is Heresy to carry it further. If also another Question arise how much the
Sixth Commandment obliges? It must be carried so far and no further than the
Determination of the Church allows. I confess by the Doctrine of that Church,
even a General Council may err in a point in which any matter of Fact is
included: Because they may be deceived by a false Information. But in a General
Rule about Morality, and the Extent of any of the Ten Commandments, The
Decision of the Church must either be certain, and for ever Obligatory, or the
whole Doctrine of the Infallibility of the Church falls to the ground.

Concerning the Certainty of Tradition, the general Opinion of that party, is,
That Tradition is an Infallible Conveyance of Divine Truth: and that whatever
any Age of the Church delivers to another as derived from Christ and his
Apostles, must be received with the same Veneration and Obedience that we pay
to the Holy Scriptures. And for the ways of distinguishing a Tradition of the
Church from any Imposture, or Novelty: There be four of them.

The first, That is the most doubtful, is, That the greatest and most esteemed
Doctors in any Age deliver as a Divine Truth. Nor is it necessary that they
formally say, This is a Tradition: but if many of them mention an Opinion, and
declare their own assent to it, this passes as a sufficient proof of the
Tradition of any Age of the Church* So in all points of Controversy between
them and us, the greatest part of their Writers, (some few later and suspected
ones only excepted) think they have sufficiently justified their Church, when
they bring Testimonies out of any of the Writings of the Fathers, that seem to
favor their Opinion: and will call it unreasonable for us to reject these,
because they only deliver their own opinion, and do not call it the Tradition
of the Church, but conclude, That many Writers in any age asserting an Opinion,
it may well be looked on as the Tradition of that Age.

But, because this is more liable to exception, there is another way, that is
more infallible to judge of Tradition: and that is, by the conveyance of the Sea
of Rome, which they judge the chief Depository of the Faith; and for which they
fancy they have so many proofs, from the high things some of the Fathers have
said about the dignity of that See. Now if these conclude any thing, it must
follow, That whatever has been delivered in any Age by a Pope, as conveyed down
from Christ, or his Apostles, must either be so indeed, or the Sea of Rome is
not a faithful Transmitter of Tradition.

But, there is yet a more certain way of judging of Tradition, by what the
chief Pastors of the Church have delivered, when assembled in a general
Council. This being the Supreme Tribunal in the Church, there can lie no appeal
from it: Nor can the Doctrines delivered or approved by it be questioned. For
instance, If it were under debate, How the Tradition about Transubstantiation
can be made out in the Thirteenth Century; it is needless to seek any other
evidence, than, That one Almerick is condemned for denying it, and in
Opposition to that, it was formally established in a general Council. This is
as much as can be had, and he were very unreasonable that were not satisfied
with it: So if it be asked, How can the Tradition of the Doctrine of Deposing
Kings, and giving away their Dominions in the same Century be proved? The
Answer is plain, That same very Council decreed it: Upon which a great Prince
was deposed, and his Dominions were given to another.

These are the Common Standards by which Traditions are Examined. But to these
a new one has been lately added: which is indeed a much shorter and nearer way:
And that is, whatever the Church holds in any one age, as a Material point of
Religion, she must have received it from the former age, and that age from the
former, and so it climbs upwards till the days of the Apostles. If this be a
certain Track of Tradition by which we may infallibly trace it; Then for
instance, If in any one age, it has been believed, That St. Peter had power
from Christ, which he left to the Sea of Rome, by which his Successor in it can
depose Kings, then this must be an Apostolical Tradition, and by consequence of
equal authority with any thing written in the Scriptures.

To these General Considerations about the Authority of the Church, and the
Certainty of Tradition; I shall add Two other, about the Nature of Supreme and
Sovereign Power: By which we may judge of what Extent the Popes Power must be,
if he have an authority to depose Kings, and transfer their Dominions to other
persons.

First, When the Sovereign Powers proceed in a Legal way against its Subjects;
If either they abscond, so that they cannot be found; Or have such a Power
about them, that the Sovereign cannot bring them to punishment; He may declare
them Rebels, and set Prices on their Heads; And in that case it is as lawful
for any Subject to kill them, as it is for an Executioner to put a condemned
Person to Death. These being the several ways the Law provides in those several
cases. So when a Pope deposes a Prince, He may as lawfully set on private
Assassinates to kill him, as oblige his Subjects to rise with open force
against him. For if the Pope has a Power over him to depose him; this clearly
follows from the Nature of Sovereign Power, and it is the Course that sometimes
must be followed, when the Rebel can be no other way brought to deserved
punishment; and if the Pope has the power of deposing, then a Prince who after
such a Sentence, carries himself as a King, is a Rebel against his Supreme
Lord: And is also an Usurper. For his Title being destroyed by the Sentence, He
has no authority over his Subjects: and therefore may be as lawfully killed as
any Rebel or Usurper.

Secondly, The Supreme power may in cases of great necessity, when the thing is
in it self materially just, pass over such Forms as ought in ordinary Cases to
be observed. I need not tell you, That in a great Fire, Subordinate Magistrates
may blow up Houses. But doubtless the Supreme Power of all, as a King in an
absolute Monarchy (and such is the Papal Power if these Opinions be true) may
dispense with some Forms, when the Matter is in it self just; and if the chief
design of a Law be pursued, the circumstantial parts of it may upon
extraordinary occasions be superseded: Therefore, if the Pope is Supreme over
all Kings, and has this deposing Power; Then though by the Canon, a King ought
to be first a Year Excommunicated for his Heresy or favoring Heretics; and at
the Years end he may be Deposed by the Pope, (There are also other Rules for
Excommunications, tho the Summary way in some cases may be used) yet all these
are but circumstantial and lesser Matters. The design of that Law, is, That no
Heretical Prince, or favourer of Heresy, be continued in his Power; The other,
are but Forms of Law, that cannot be indispensibly necessary in all cases.
Besides, the very Canon Law teaches, that when there is both a Notorietas juris
and Facti, Summary proceedings are Legal; when then it is Notorious, that the
Doctrines of the Church (of England for Instance) are Heretical, and that the
King is an Obstinate Favourer of these Heresies, and will not extirpate them,
Summary and Secret proceedings are justifiable. There is no hope that Bulls,
Breves, or Citations would do any good in this case: These would on the
contrary, alarm the State, and bring all the Party under great hazards:
Therefore from the Nature of Supreme Power, it is most justly Inferred, That
though there have been no public Sentence of Deposition (according to the
Forms of the Canon Law) yet all these may be dispensed with, and a Secret and
Summary one may do as well.

These Positions are such, that I cannot fancy any just Exceptions to which
they are liable; and from all these laid together, the Inference will
undeniably follow: That according to the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the
power of Deposing Kings is lodged with the Pope, by a Divine Authority; and
that, by consequence, private persons may conspire to take away the Life of a
King so deposed: Even though there be no public Sentence given about it. But
before I bring the Evidence for all this, I shall desire the Reader will a
little reflect on the Positions I have laid down: in which he will find an
Answer to all the Exceptions, that can be made against the following Evidence.

By the first, The Authority of the Church, being the same in all Ages; he will
see it is to no purpose to pretend these were dark Ages: So that what was done
in an ignorant time, cannot oblige the World when things are seen in a better
light. But if the Church has an Authority from Christ, that shall last till the
end of the World, it must be the same in all ages. The Ignorance of the age is
a very good answer when made by a Protestant, but can signify nothing in a
Papists Mouth.

By the second, Of the Churches authority in settling Moral Rules for practice,
it appears how fond that distinction is, which they make between a Canon and a
Decree. It is true, a Decree about a particular Case, in which there is some
matter of Fact, may be wrong according to their Principles, and yet the
authority of the Church remain entire. For instance, in the deposing a Prince,
or condemning a Man for Heresy, the Church may either by false Witnesses, or
mistaking a Man's words, be drawn to pass an unjust Sentence, by reason of a
mis-representation of the Fact. But that is nothing to the purpose here, where
a Decree is made as a perpetual Rule of Practice; this must be of the same
authority of a Canon about any article of Faith. Otherwise it will follow, that
the Church may mislead the People in matters indispensably necessary to
Salvation: For such is the Obedience to the Ten Commandments.

By the first way of judging of the Tradition of the Church, from what the most
received Writers in any age deliver, as the Doctrine of the Church, it will
appear; That the Schoolmen and Canonists are as competent Conveyers of
Tradition from the twelfth age downward, as the Fathers were from the sixth Age
upward; and laying this for a Principle, That the Church is the same in all
Ages, they are really more competent Witnesses than the Fathers were. First,
Because they write more closely to the subject they have in hand; they consider
what is said for, or against an Opinion in a more exact manner, than the
Fathers did, who being carried with the heat they are sometimes in, go off from
the purpose: and generally affect Eloquence, which is the most improper Style
for nice Matters: Whereas the Schoolmen write in a blunt way, only considering
the purpose they are about, coining the most barbarous words they can light on,
when they think them the fittest to express their Notions. Secondly, They were
divided into two famous Schools, among whom there were great heats, the
Scotists and Thomists: So that if either of these had asserted any thing that
was not the received Doctrine of the Age they lived in, the other Party had
such Emulation against them, that they would not have failed to have laid them
open: as they did in the matter of the Immaculate Conception of the B. Virgin.
Whereas the Fathers writing only against Heretics, or other Enemies to
Christianity, they might have mistaken somethings, without so public a
discovery as was likely to* happen among the Schoolmen. 3dly. The Schoolmen
wrote on purpose to deliver the Doctrine of the Age in which they lived, to
those who were to succeed them. Their Books being generally the Divinity
Lectures they read, either in Colleges or Religious Houses, to their Scholars,
whereas the Fathers wrote upon Emergent Occasions, either Letters or Treatises
to private Persons, regarding more the present, than the succeeding Age. In
which we cannot expect that exactness, that is to be looked for in a Public
Lecture. Upon all which I assume, That allowing the Church to have the same
Authority in all Ages, the Schoolmen are more competent Witnesses of the
Tradition of the Church in their Ages, than the Fathers were in theirs.

By the second Rule for judging of Traditions, from the Conveyance of the Sea
of Rome, it does undeniably follow, That the Popes from Gregory the Sevenths
time downward, were as sure Depositories of the Traditions of the Church, as
were the Popes from Gregory the First his time upward. They were both alike
Christ's Vicars, and St. Peter's Successors. So that all the high words that the
Fathers bestow on the Sea of Rome, were either Complements, in which they are
not wanting, or were said because of the worth of the Bishops, whom they had
known in that See. But if they be to be understood in that sense in which the
Writers of Controversy obtrude them on us, then it will follow manifestly, that
as to the Conveyance of Tradition, P. Gregory the 7th is as much to be
believed, when he says any thing in the Name of St. Peter, or of Christ, as any
of the Popes are. For in the Preamble of Bulls and Breeves, the Reasons are
given of what follows, which are most commonly vouched from Apostolical
Authority and Tradition. So let the Pope be ever so ignorant, or so corrupt in
his Manners, what he asserts to be Apostolical Tradition, must be either
received as such, or the authority of that See is overthrown: therefore they
must either cease to press us any more with tht Authority of the Sea of Rome,
or acknowledge that all the Popes Declarations, which they make about
Traditions, are to be received. It is an Answer to be made use of only to
ignorant Persons, to say, These Depositions were the Deeds of some Popes, who
might be ill Men, and the Church is not concerned to justify them. I confess,
whether this or that Deposition was justly or lawfully made, is a personal
thing, in which only the Pope who decreed it is concerned. But if he declares
in the Preamble, that the Power of deposing upon those reasons, is grounded on
an Apostolical Tradition, then the Sea is concerned in it: for either he
declares true or false; if the former, then that Power of deposing comes from
Apostolical Tradition; if they acknowledge he declares false, then we are not
any more to be urged with the Authority of that See, as the certain Depository
of the Traditions of the Church.

By the third Mark, to judge of the Tradition of any age from the Decision of a
General Council, it appears, that the Decisions of the fourth Council of
Lateran are as Obligatory as the Decrees of the first Council of Nice: the
Church having the same power in all Ages. If it be said, it was only a Council
of the Western Church, the like may be objected against the first General
Council, which were generally made up of Eastern Bishops, and very few of the
Western Bishops sat in them. And if we esteem a Council General, because it was
received by the Church, then the whole Church of Rome having received that
Council, it must be acknowledged to be General as much as any ever was. But to
this, others answer, That a Council is only Infallible, when a thing is decreed
by it according to the Tradition of the Church. If this be true, the whole
Controversy between the Roman Church and us, about the authority of Councils,
is decided on our Side. For if a Council has only authority to declare
Traditions, then it is free for every Person to examine, whether this
Declaration be according to truth or not? And if it be found that it is not so,
they may lawfully reject such Decisions. For instance in the second Council of
Nice, the worship of Images was established upon a mock-shew of Tradition: and
yet all the World knows, there were no Images allowed in the Church the first
four Ages after Christ; and even in the sixth Age P. Gregory declared, That
though they might be in the Church, yet they ought not to be worshipped. Nor
was there any contest about it, before the eighth Century. This being thus
examined, and found to be True, then according to the foregoing Answer, that
Decision was of no force, though made by the second Council of Nice. In a word,
if this Maxim be true, That Councils are only to be submitted to, when they
decree according to Apostolical Tradition, then they have no Authority in
themselves: and their decisions can have no more force than this, That it may
seem probable that they were not mistaken, and in an Ignorant Age, even this
probability will vanish to nothing

No Body will reject the Decision of a Council, when the Decrees are just and
right: But if i^ be upon that score alone, that they are to be submitted to,
then none are bound by them, before they have examined them: And if upon a
Search it appear they decreed against Tradition, then their Decrees are to be
rejected. So it is apparent this Answer does plainly, according to their
Principles, lay the foundation of all Heresy; since it gives every Man a right
to question the Decrees of a General Council.

Besides, How can those Persons be assured, that the fourth Council of Lateran
did not decree according to Tradition? The Acts of that Council are lost: so we
cannot know upon what reasons they made their Decrees. And it cannot be said,
that because there is no mention made of any Tradition in the Decree, that
therefore they considered none. It is seldom found that the reasons of any
Decree are put with it. But we may reasonably enough believe, that they
followed the Method in this Council, that had been used in some former ones
(particularly in the second Council of Nice) which was this, a Writing was
read, penned perhaps by the Pope, or a Patriarch, in which the Tradition of the
Church was confidently alleged; and some Quotations were brought; and very often
out of some later Writers. The Paper was no sooner read, than a loud and often
repeated Shout of applause followed, without any further search or canvasing
about these Authorities. And upon that the Decree was made. This was the
practice both of the second Nicene, and of some more ancient Councils; whose
Journals are hitherto preserved; and where the Journals are lost, we have
reason to believe they followed the same method: so that it is very probable
there might have been some such Writing read in the Council of Lateran. And if
they did not found their Decree upon Tradition, they were much to blame; for
they had as venerable a Tradition, as either the second Council of Nice, or
some other Councils had: a practice about 150 years standing from the days of
Pope Gregory the VII. so that it is not to be denied but they had as good
authority from Tradition, to make this Decree, as to make most of the other
Decrees, on which they insist much, in the Books of Controversies that are
written by them.

By the fourth Rule of judging about Tradition, the matter is yet much plainer:
for if the generally received Belief of any Age of the Church, is a good Thread
to lead us up to the Apostles times, then there needs no more be said. For it
is certain, that for near four Ages together, this was the universally received
Doctrine of the Church of Rome. And the opposition that some Princes made to it
was condemned as Heresy, Rebellion, and every thing that was evil. And it is
remarkable, that both O^kam that wrote much for the Emperors cause against the
Pope, and Gerson and Almain, no great favorers of Papal power, are cited by
Cardinal Perrow, as acknowledging the Ecclesiastical power of deposing, if a
Prince were guilty of spiritual crimes. So that the Controversies in this
matter that were managed between the Writers for the Popes and Emperors, were
not, whether the Pope in cases of Heresy might depose a Prince? but were
concerning two things very remote from this.

The one was, whether the Pope had a direct Temporal power over all Kings, by
which as being Lord of the Fe^, he could proceed upon any Cause whatsoever
against a King, and take his Dominions from him. To this indeed Gregory the 7th
pretended tho more covertly, and Boniface the 8th more avowedly. There was
great Opposition made to this by many Writers; but at the same time they all
agreed on it, as an undeniable Maxim, That the Pope had an indirect Power over
Princes, by which in the Cases of Heresy he might excommunicate and depose
them; nor was there so much as any Debate about it.

A second thing about which there was some Controversy was, whether the
Particulars that fell under debate came within the Head of Heresy, or not? So
in the Case of Princes giving the Investitures into Bishoprics, the Pope
brought it in within the Head of Heresy, and condemned those Persons as
Simoniacks. The Writers on the other side denied this, pretending it was a
Civil Matter, and a right of the Crown. The like Debates fell in, when Princes
were sentenced on any other account. The Authority of the Sentence in the Case
of Heresy was not controverted; all the Question was; Whether the Point under
debate was Heresy or not? And concerning these things, any who have read the
Writings in the great Collection made of them by Goldastus, will receive an
easy and full Satisfaction. By which it appears, that the Popes Power of
deposing Kings in the Case of Heresy was the received Doctrine of the Church
for several Ages, and by consequence it must be looked on as derived down from
the Apostles, If the Doctrine of any one Age of the Church can lead us backward
in a certain Track to discover what it was in the Apostles days.

By the first Position about the Nature of Supreme Power, it is apparent, that
in the Case of Heresy, a Prince deposed by the Pope, if he stands out against
the Sentence, may be as lawfully killed as any Tory or Moss-Trooper, or
Bantito, may be; for he is a Rebel against his Lord, and an Usurper over the
People, from that day forward. And therefore tho Mariana told a Secret too
publicly, yet it cannot be denied to be a certain Consequent of their
Principles. It had been indeed more discreetly done to have ordered this only
to be infused unto Peoples Consciences, by their Confessors in secret. And for
Mariana, tho the Book in gross is condemned, as they give out, yet the Opinions
set down in it are not censured. But In regiam Majest. B^. l. 6. c. 4. sect.
^0, a quocunque privato poteris interfici.
Suarez writing against K. James, tells him in plain Terms, That a King, who is
canonically deposed, may be killed by any man whatsoever. This was not only
published with an ordinary License, but the whole University of Alcala declared
every thing in it to be according to the Doctrine of the Church. Valentia, tho
he disguises In Thom. Tom. 3. D^sp. 151. q 12. p. 2.
it a little, yet says, That an Heretical Prince may by the Popes Sentence be
deprived of his Life. Romish Tree sons, l. 2. cap 4.
Foulis cites ten more Doctors for the same Opinion of killing Kings by private
persons.

I do not build upon the Assertions of these Jesuits, as binding Authorities in
that Church, but make use of them to show, that some of their own eminentest
Writers acknowledge the force of this Consequence; which is indeed so evident,
that nothing but good Manners, and some small Care not to provoke Princes too
much by such barefaced Positions, keeps others from asserting it. Few Princes
are so tame as Childeric was, to go into a Monastery after they are deposed.
Therefore this Doctrine is but a lame provision for the Churches Security from
Heresy, if the Lawfulness of killing does not follow that of deposing Kings.
And it was so generally received, that it is told of Gerson, that he was at
great The Life of Gerson before his Works, and Tom. 1. p. 375.
pains to get it declared that no private Cutthroat might kill a King, and
that by consequence it was only the Popes Prerogative to order them to be
destroyed.

By the second Position about the Nature of Supreme Power, that in
extraordinary Cases Forms of Law may be superseded; It is also clear, that tho
we know nothing of any Sentence of Deposition given out against the King, yet
he is not a whit the safer, for he lies under an yearly Curse every Maundy
Thursday. The Notoriousness of his Heresy will sufficiently justify a
particular Sentence, without any further Process or Citation, according to the
Maxims of the Canon Law. And there may be for ought we can know, as valid a
Deposition as Parchment and Lead can make it, already expeded. And if it be not
yet done, we are sure it may be done very suddenly, and will be done whenever
they see any probability of Success.

Bellarmine has very sincerely told us the Reason why Recog. in lib. 5. de
Romans Pont.
Heretical Princes are not deposed, because the Church has not strength enough
to make such a Sentence good, or does not think it expedient; that is to say,
They will do it whenever they find a Prince who will execute the Sentence,
and yet by that Conquest not grow so strong, as by that means to turn the
Balance. So the two Considerations to which we owe our Security are, the want
of Force, and the Fear of another Prince his becoming too powerful by the
Conquest. But I must add, that Bellarmine, while he was a Jesuit, had taught,
that Heretical Princes were not to be deposed, except they endeavored to turn
their people from the Faith: This was all his Bounty to them of which we could
not pretend to a Crumb, since there were such Laws made against Popery among
us. Yet when he became a Cardinal, he considered better of the Matter; so that
in his Recognitions he retracts that, and says therein be followed Durandus his
Opinion, who maintains it against Aquinas, but he thinks the latter was in the
right, and says, Even in that Case they may be deposed, only the Church does it
not always; either because she wants Strength, or does not judge it expedient.
But he concludes, If Princes endeavor to draw their Subjects from the Faith,
they may and ought to be deposed. So in our Case there is no Mercy to be
expected, unless we repeal all Laws against that Religion.

But after all this there is another Device in the Canon Law, called, Ipso
facto, by which a Sentence is incurred immediately upon the doing of a Fact.
This began in the Privileges granted to Monasteries or Churches, in most of
which this Clause is to be found, That if any King or Prince, etc. did any
thing contrary to these Privileges, he thereby fell from his Power and
Dignity. Now that Heresy is one of the things upon which a Prince is ipso facto
under Excommunication and Deposition, we have the Authority of Father
Philopater p. 106, 107.
Parsons, or Creswel, who tells us, That the whole School of Divines and
Canonists agree in it, and, That it is certain, and of Faith, That a Prince
falling from the Catholic Religion, and endeavoring to draw away others from
it, does immediately fall from all his Power and Dignity, even before the Pope
has pronounced any Sentence, and that his Subjects are free from their Oaths of
Obedience, and may eject such an one as Apostate and Heretic.

But there is a clearer Evidence for this; the great and famous College of the
Sorbon, (seventy Doctors being present) when consulted, whether the People of
France were not freed from their Obedience to Henry the third, upon his putting
the Duke and Cardinal of Guise to death; they, before ever the Pope had given
Sentence, declared, That they were absolved from their Obedience, and might
with a good Conscience make War upon him for the defense of the Catholic
Faith. Upon which the Parisians wrote to the Pope to desire the Confirmation of
that Decision. From all which it appears, that if the deposing Power be in the
Pope, the King is not a whit the safer, because we know nothing of any such
Sentence pronounced against him.

And thus having made good and illustrated the Positions I laid down, against
all the Exceptions which that small and condemned Party of Widdrirgton's
Followers make use of, to cover themselves from the Charge of Treason, that
lies against their Church* I go next to lay open the Evidence, after which I
shall leave it to every Man's Conscience to pass the Verdict.

There are in ( f) Pope Gregory the Great's Works, (l) Greg. M. l. 2 post. Ep.
38. lib. 11. Ep. 10, 11, 12. Siquis Regum, etc. contravenire tentaverit
potestatis honorisque sui dignitate careat. -- in alio honor suo privetur.
four Privileges granted; one to the Abbey of St. Medard, another to the
Hospital, a third to the Nunnery, a fourth to St. Martin's Church of Autim. In
which after the Privileges are granted, a Sanction is added in these words; If
any Kings, etc. shall endeavor to countervene this Writing, let him lose the
Dignity of his Power and Honor. Or shorter, in that of St. Medard, Let him be
deprived of his Dignity. These are to be found both in all the MSS, and Printed
Editions of that Popes Works. It is true, the first of these to Saint Medard's
Monastery, is looked on as a forged Piece, both by Cardinal Perron, Sirmond,
and Lannoy. But as it went for a true one till of late, and is still defended
by others, Baronius in particular, concluding from thence for the Popes Power
over Kings; so the other Privileges are not denied to be true by any, except
Lannoy of late, for ought I know. These have been for above 600 years looked on
as the Grants of that Pope. But this may seem a private Writing, and not of
such force.

About 130 years after that, Pope Baron. a^ An. 730. n. 5.
Gregory the 3d deposed Leo* the Emperor, from all his Dominions in Italy,
because he would not tolerate the Worship of I mages. And if that single
Heresy merited such a Sentence, what may we look, for, among whose many
imputed Errors this is but one, and none of the most considerable? Not many
years after that, did his Successor Zacharias upon a Message he received from
France, absolve that Nation from their Oaths to Childeric, and ordered Boniface
to Crown Pepin in his stead* And not long after that Pope Adrian gave the
Empire of Rome, and of the West to Charles the Great. As Bellar. de Trans.
Imperii Romani.
Bellarmine proves from above 30 of the Historians of that time, and the
Testimony of many Sovereign Princes. Yet these being dark Ages, in which there
was more of Action than Dispute, we do not find the Grounds laid down, on which
those Proceedings were founded. But the constant Maxim of the Papacy, was, once
to begin a Practice, and then to find Arguments to defend it, among which the
Practice it self was no inconsiderable one; for he was a mean spirited Pope,
that would in a Tittle fall short of what his Predecessors had assumed. About
250 years after Charles the Great had assumed the Empire of the West, there
arose a Pope ( Gregory the Seventh) that resolved to make the most of his See
that could be: and reckoning, That the Empire of the West was the Gift of his
Predecessors, and building on that known Maxim, That none can give that which
they have not, he looked on the supreme Dominion of it, as one of the
Perquisites of the Sea, which he would by no means part with. And therefore in
his Dictatus l. 2. post Ep. 55.
Dictatis, in which he asserts the several Branches of his Prerogative, these
be three of them: That the Pope only may use the Imperial Ensigns. That he may
depose Emperors. And, That he can absolve Subjects from their Fidelity to
wicked Princes. And to show he was in earnest in these Doctrines, he began soon
to lay about him. His first Threatenings were against King Philip of France, who
was a vicious Prince: In a Letter to the Bishops of France, he requires them to
admonish the King for his Faults, and if he did not mend them, to put the whole
Kingdom under an Interdict: And if after all that he continued still
Disobedient, he Swaggers out in these Words, Lib 2. Ep. 5. ad Ep. France.
We will have none to be ignorant, or doubtful, what we intend to do upon it;
for by the help of God we will endeavor by all Means, to wrest the Kingdom of
France out of his Possession. But upon the submission of that King, these
Threatenings came not to any effect: Yet he went on against the Emperor, Hen.
the 4th, at the rate he had threatened the King of France. I need not tell what
all the World knows: That he first Excommunicated and Deposed the Emperor, in
the Year 1076. Then upon his doing of Penance, he received him into his Favor.
But upon new provocations he deposed him a second, a third, and fourth time, in
the years 1080, 1081, and 1083. In all which he had the concurrence of so many
Roman Councils, and set up against him, first Rodolph, after that Herman: as
his Successors did; first Conrade, and then Henry, that Emperor's unnatural
Sons.

The prosecution of the History, is needless to my Design. But in his Letter to
Herman, Bishop of Mets, Live. 8. Ep* 21.
we meet with that which is more considerable. For there he largely justifies
his Proceedings, which he grounds on the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, being
given to St. Peter; and the power of Binding and Loosing joined to them. More
places of Scripture he sought not, but his Successor, Extra. de Major. and
Obed. cap. 1.
Boniface the 8th, made use of Ecce duo Gladii, and the power given to the
Prophet Jeremiah, Over Kingdoms, to Root out, Pull down, Destroy, Throw down,
to Build, and to plant: And they took it in great dudgeon, if any would compare
a single Prophet under the Law, to Christ's Vicar under the Gospel. But Gregory
goes on in his Proofs, to the Tradition of the Church: And says, The Fathers
had often both in General Councils, and in their particular Writings
acknowledged, That this Power was in the Sea of Rome; That it was the Mother
and Head of all other Churches: That all matters were to be judged by it, from
whose Sentence no Appeal could lie: Nor could there be a Review made of the
Judgments passed in that See. And to confirm what he had asserted, he cites
some Passages out of Gelasius, and Julius, and that Clause in the Privileges
granted by Gregory the Great, formerly mentioned. So here he very fully and
formally delivers the Tradition of the Church, and builds upon it. He also
cites the Precedent of Pope Zacharias, his Deposing Childeric, not for any
fault he found in him, but because he thought him not fit to Govern. From that
he goes on to some Reasons, (such as they are) for the justification of his
Proceedings. The Pope having thus declared the Tradition and Doctrine of the
Church, it is not to be wondered at, if both the Schoolmen mixed it with the
Instructions they gave their Scholars, and the Canonists made it a part of the
Law of the Church. Bellar. de Pont. Romans lib. 5. c. 151.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, Alexander Alensis, Bonaventure, Durand, Peter of
Aliac, John of Paris, Almain, Gabriel Biel, Henry of Ghant, John Driodo, John
de Terre*iremata, Albert Pighius, Thomas Waldensis, Petrus de Palude, Cajetan,
Franciscus Victoria, Dominicus a Soto, and many others, (in all 70 are reckoned
by Bellarmin, but Foulis enlarges the number to 177, whom he cites, who) did
formally assert it. Aquinas also taught it; though in some places he contradicted
himself. But Cuspiman in vita Albert.
Boniface the 8th, thought his Predecessors had proceeded in this matter too
cautiously, and therefore he went more roundly to work. In the Jubilee in the
year 1300, He showed himself the first day in the Pontifical Habit, but the
second day, he was clothed with the Imperial Habit, a naked Sword being carried
before him, and cried out with a loud voice, I am Pope and Emperor, and have
both the Earthly, and Heavenly Empire. This upon so public an occasion looks
very like the Teaching the Church Ex Cathedra* But because words vanished into
Air, he left it in writing, in these terms: Cap. de Major. ut Ob^d. Exter.
We say and define and pronounce, that it is absolutely necessary to Salvation
for every humane creature, to be subject to the Bishop of Rome. This being put
into the Text of the Canon Law, in which it is continued to this day; we cannot
think it Strange that Panorimitan, Ostiensis, Silvester, with all the other
Canonists assert the Popes direct Dominion over all the World. And what can
they say less, Believing him to be Christ's Vicar on Earth, to whom all Power in
heaven and earth was given of his Father, therefore the power in Heaven being
judged enough for Christ to manage himself, they thought all the power in Earth
was Committed to the Vicar. This passed down without Contradiction among them,
but was not received by the rest of the Church: yet the Indirect, or as they
termed it, the Ecclesiastical power in cases of Heresy was Universally agreed
to: not one person Opposing it, till Luther and his Followers came, sawcily to
look into the Popes Title to this, and many other pretended Rights of the Sea
of Rome.

But because the Plea for an Indirect Power, was not Sufficient, Since if a
Prince did not Favor Heresy, it was of no use: And the pretention to a direct
power was of an harsh sound: Therefore a Title of another kind was set up. It
was pretended, That all the Kingdoms in the Western and Northern parts of
Europe were by formal Surrenders offered up to St. Peter, and St. Paul; And
therefore whatever the Popes did, was said to be done in Defense of their
Rights; which made Gregory the 7th fly to them in that flanting Address, with
which he begins his Sentences against the Emperor.

First of all, the Donation of Constantine the Great was forged: By which the
Power of all the West, Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, Germany, France, Spain, and
England, were given to the Pope. This was put into the Text of the Canon Law:
and was stood to, by all the Canonists. It is true the Civilians wrote
generally against it. Among whom Bartholus may be reckoned, for in his Preface
to the Digests having mentioned the Opinions of some against it, when it comes
to his own, he delivers it thus; Take notice that we are now in the Territory
of the Church (for he taught at Bulloigne) and therefore I say that Donation is
valid. But till Valla discovered the Impostures of it so manifestly, that they
are now ashamed to maintain it any longer, their plea from it was never laid
down. But Augustinus Steuchus, who undertakes the Vindication of that Donation
against Valla, does likewise allege from some Instruments in the Vatican, that
both the Kingdoms of Spain, Arragon, France, England, Denmark, Muscovy, Sicily,
and Croatia and Dalmatia, did Subject their Crowns to the Sea of Rome. In
Vandal l. 8. c. 2.
Kranizius tells us, that Lakold King of Poland, made it Tributary to Rome. And
for the German Empire, tho Steuchus says nothing of it, perhaps that he might
not offend Charles the 5th, yet there is both in the Canon Law, and the Letters
of Popes, more to be said upon that Head, than for any of the rest. They
pretend the Popes set up first the Empire of the West: Then gave the Princes of
Germany the Right of choosing the Emperor, and does still give the Imperial
Crown, upon the Emperors Swearing an Oath of Homage to them, according to the
verse under that Insolent Picture set up by Pope Innocent the 2d. In the
Lateram Chron H^saug. in vita Abb. Hartiingi.
of the Emperor lying prostrate at his feet, and receiving the Crown from him.

Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dante Coronam. But all these Surrenders were
made use of only to strengthen the great pretention they had of being Christ's
Vicars, and St. Peter's Successors; which from the end of the 11th Century,
till the beginning of the 16th. for above 4 Ages together was as
Authoritatively asserted by Popes, as positively taught by Divines, and as
tamely received by the whole Church, Emperors and Kings not presuming to
contradict it, as any other Article of Faith. And for proofs of this we need
appeal to no other witnesses than those 3. great Cardinals Baronius, Bellarmin
and Perron, who may be presumed to have understood the Doctrine of their own
Church, better than any body else.

The First of those, through his whole work strains his Industry, to discover
as many Instances as he can of it: and never parts with any without expressing
the particular satisfaction he had in so pleasant a Discovery. I shall only set
down what he says on the two 1st. occasions that he met with. When he takes
notice of Gregory the Great's privileges formerly mentioned, he adds, Bar. ad
Ann. 593. Number. 86.
You see Reader, That the Popes can make Laws, to which if Kings themselves do
not yield Obedience, they shall lose their Kingdoms. Upon the first Deposition
made by Gregory the 3d. He adds, Bar. ad An. 730. Number. 5.
The Faithful in the West being awakened by this Thunder, do immediately fall
from the Obedience to Leo, adhering to this Apostolical Pope. So this Gregory
left a worthy Precedent to Posterity, that Heretical Princes, be not suffered
to reign in the Church of Christ, if having been often admonished, they
continue to persist obstinately in their Errors. Such strains as these do so
often occur afterward, that they can scarce be reckoned. It is well known what
advice he gave P. Paul the 5th in the quarrel with the Venetians, applying the
voice to St. Peter, Arise and Kill, to the case in hand; and that, with his
Insolent Paraenesis to that Republic, are clear Evidences of his sense in this
matter. What Bellarmin taught more shortly and obscur^ly in his Controversies,
was afterward made more plain both by his Writings, about the Translation of
the Roman Empire, upon the Interdict of Venice, and against King Iimes, and
William Barklay: And Cardinal Perrons Eloquent speech against the Bill put in
by the Third Estate of France, for Condemning those pretensions of a Deposing
Power, shows us not only his own sense, but the sense of the whole Clergy of
France; in whose name he delivered it. (...) his Di^ ^ Oevres and R^ueil
General des Affairs du Cierge de France.
He calls the Contrary Opinion, a Doctrine that breeds Schisms, a Gate that
leads unto all Heresy, and so detestable, that he and his Fellow Bishops will
choose to burn at a Stake rather than consent to it. He affirming That all the
parts of the Catholic Church, and of the Church of France in particular, and
all the Schools of Divinity, till the coming of Calvin, held the affi^mative,
and says, That no where in France since the Divinity Schools were set up, can
they find any one Doctor, Divine, or Lawyer, any Decree, Council, or Sentence
of Parliament, or any one Magistrate Ecclesiastic, or Politic, who had held
that in case of Heresy or Idolatry, Subjects might not be absolved from their
Oaths of Fidelity to their Princes. It is true, at first he spoke more
modestly, and pretended the thing was problematical, and so was not fit matter
for an Oath: but when that modester Strain (tho it tended all to depress the
Regal, and exalt the Papal Power) had so far prevailed with the King, that he
ordered the matter to be laid aside, and not to be further insisted on. They
were not satisfied with this, but made a new Address in the Name of the Clergy;
and the Cardinal spoke now in a higher tone, asserting formally the Popes
indirect Power in Temporal^; and that all who maintained the contrary were
Schismatics, and Heretics, even those of the Parliament it self; and did
plainly threaten the King, That if he did not raze all the Proceedings out of
the Register, the Clergy would leave the Assembly, and Excommunicate all who
denied the Popes Power of Deposing. And if the King would not suffer them to
execu^e these Censures, they would proceed upon their hazard tho they were to
suffer Martyrdom for it. For which zeal, they received a Brave from the Pope,
giving them his solemn Thanks for what they had done; desiring them to
persevere in the same mind. So we have in this ^stance, not only Cardinal
Perrons own mind, but the s^nse of the whole Clergy of France.

I do not think it necessary to enquire further into the opinion of later
Writers; tho it were easy to show, that to (...) day, both the Court of Rome,
the whole Order of the Jesuits, the Writers both of Controversies, and Cases
of Conscience, and the Expositors of Scripture, do as often as occasion offers,
assert the power of Deposing Kings to be still in the Sea of Rome. And tho some
few Writers of that Religion, since Barkelay and Widdrington's time, both of
the English and Irish Nation, have adventured to deny this power; they have
been censured for it, and branded with Heresy. This has been so notorious in
the matter of the Irish Remonstrance, that I need say no more of it.

But whether the Writers of this Age allow it or not, they are bound according
to their Doctrine about Tradition, to acknowledge it; since two of the
Characters of Tradition are found to agree to it. For it has been delivered in
several Ages of the Church, as true Catholic Doctrine by all the public
Doctors in these times: so that either This is a Tradition of the Church, or
That is not a true mark of Tradition: nor is it a certain conveyance of Truth,
if we may be thus deceived in a clear Tradition, for four Ages successively. It
does also appear, that if the Sea of Rome be a faithful Depositary and
Transmitter of Church Traditions, this must be one, since it is delivered to
the world by so many Popes in the names of St. Peter and St. Paul, and founded
on the Power of the Keys, and of Binding and Loosing granted to St. Peter.

But I shall next show how the third mark of Tradition, the Authority of
General Councils, agrees to this Doctrine. When this Doctrine had been so well
spread over Europe, then the Popes found it was safe, to trust it to the
judgment of such an Assembly as they esteemed a General Council. And they
proceeded in this matter, after the same manner that they had done in the
worship of Images: and as they did afterward in the points of
Transubstantiation, and denying the Chalice in the Communion. They took care
first to infuse it into all the Clergy, (which God wo^'s was no hard thing) and
then brought them together, and made up the Pageant of a Council, for giving it
more authority. So above an hundred years after Gregory the VII. had first
taught this Doctrine, a thing under the name of a General Council sat in the
Later an at Rome, where, upon the advantage the Popes had against the
Albigenses and others, who were according* to their Opinion most pestiferous
Heretics; they first precured a Decree for it. It is true, many Provincial
Councils had concurred with Gregory the VII. (one of these is called a General
one, 110 Bishops being present) and the other Popes who had formerly given out
these Thunders: But now the matter was to be more solemnly Transacted.

In this Council many Heretics are condemned and Conc. Late. 3. Chap. 27. anno
1287. Tom 28.
Excommunicated; and all that had sworn Oaths of Fidelity or Hemage to them,
are Absolved from those Oaths: and they are required in order to the obtaining
the Remission of their sins, to fight against them: and those who die doing
penance in that manner, may without doubt expect Indulgence for their sins,
with eternal rewards. And in conclusion, by the authority of St. Peter and St.
Paul they Remit to all who shall rise and fight against them, two years
Penance. Here the Council does industriously infuse this Doctrine into all
people; and calls Rebellion Penance (a very easy one to a poor or discontented
Subject) and assures them of a deliverance from Purgatory, and that they should
be admitted straight to Heaven for it. In an Age in which these things were
believed, more effectual means than those could not be found out, to engage the
people in it.

By this Decree, if we are guilty of the Heresies then condemned, (as no doubt
we are of most of them) without more ado, or any further Sentence* upon the
declaring us guilty of the Heresies of the Albigenses, the Subjects are
delivered from their obligations to the King. And when they conspire or rebel
against him, they are only doing penance for their sins; and he were
hardhearted that would punish men only for doing of penance.

About thirty years after that Council, the Pope had a mind to regulate the
former Law, That the Deposing of Kings might be declared a part of his
Prerogative; and that thereby he might with authority Dispose of their Kingdoms
to others. For hitherto the Popes had only pretended to the Power of Deposing,
and then the States of the Kingdom as in an Interregne, were to choose a new
Prince. But P. Innocent the III. thought it was half work, except he could
bestow, as well as take away Crowns. His Predecessor Celestine had in a most
extravagant humor set the Crown on Henry the Sixth his head, with his two
feet, and then kicked it off again; to show, according to Barronius his Comment,
That it was in his power to give, to maintain, and take away the Empire.

A very full Assembly therefore being called of about 1200 of one sort or other
to the Lateran again, It was Conc. Later. 4. Can. 3. Tom. 28. The same Council
that established Transubstantiation.
first Decreed, That the aid of Secular Princes should be required for the
Extirpating of Heretics; after that they proceed and enact thus. When the
Temporal Lord required or admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his
Territory from Heretical wickedness, let him be Excommunicated by the
Metropolitan and his Suffragans. And if he persist in neglecting to give
satisfaction for the space of a year, let him be signified to the Pope: That he
from thenceforth may pronounce his Subjects discharged from their Obedience;
and expose his Territory to be seized on by Catholics, who having exterminated
the Heretics, shall possess it without contradiction, and preserve it in the
purity of the Faieh; so as no injury be done to the Right of the Supreme Lord,
where there is such, provided he do not any way oppose himself: and the same
Law is to take place on them, who have no Superior Lord.

The Deposition of the Court of Toulouse, being the thing then in their eye,
made that the Decree runs chiefly against Feudatary Princes, yet as the last
Clause takes in Sovereign Princes, so by the Clause before, it was provided,
That if the Sovereign did any way Oppose what was done against his Vassal, he
was to forfeit his Right. I did in the former part of this Letter, meet with
all the Exceptions that are commonly made to this Canon. Only one pretty Answer
which a person of Honor makes, is yet to be considered. He tells us, that
there were so many Sovereign Princes, or Ambassadors from them, at this
Council, that we are to look on this Decree, as a thing to which those Princes
consented. From whence he Infers, It was rather their Act, than an Invasion of
their Rights made by that Council. But be it so, he knows they allow no
Prescription against the Church. If then those Princes consented to it, upon
which the power of Deposing had that Accession to fortify it by, it can never
be recalled nor prescribed against. It is true there were many Ambassadors from
Princes there: But they were all such as either held their Dominions by the
Popes Grant, or had been either Deposed by him, or Threatened with Depositions,
or were the Children of those whom he had Deposed. So no wonder they stood in
such fear of the Pope, that they durst not refuse to consent to every thing he
had a mind to. For indeed this Council did only give their Placet to a paper of
Decrees penned by the Pope.

Henry called the Greek Emperor, Brother to Baldwin, that had seized on
Constantinople, had no other Title to it besides the Popes Gift. Frederick the
2d. who had been the Popes Ward, was then the Elect Emperor of Germany, made so
at the Popes Instance, who had Deposed the two Immediately preceding Emperors,
Philip and Otho the 4th. the last being at that time alive; So that he durst
not contradict the Pope, lest he should have set up Otho against him. But no
Emperor, except Henry the 4th, ever suffered more from the Popes Tyranny, than
he did afterward. One sad Instance of it was, that the Pope having pressed his
March to the Holy Land much, did at last Excommunicate him for his delays: upon
which, he to avoid further censures, carried an Army thither: which was so
succesful, that the Pope who hoped he should have been destroyed in the
Expedition, (as the first Emperor of that name was) now being vexed at his
Success, complained that he should have presumed to go thither, while he lay
under Excommunication, and was in Rebellion against him; and went about not
only to Dethrone him, but to get him to be betrayed by the Knights
Hospitallers, and Templers, into the Sultans hands, who abominating that
Treachery, revealed it to him.

John of Brenne had the Kingdom of Jerusalem by that same Popes Gift, who took
it from Almeric King of Cyprus, and gave it him; But Almeric had no cause to
complain, since he held Cyprus only by the same Copy of the Popes Gift: So they
both were at the Popes Mercy. Our John of England was his Vassal, as he usually
called him; But his Successor went higher, calling the King of England not
only his Vassal, but his Slave; and Declared That at his beck he could procure
him to be Imprisoned, and Math. Paris. ad An. 1253.
Disgraced. James King of Arragon, who was also the Popes Ward, had no less
reason to be afraid of the Pope, who had Deposed his Father for Assisting the
Count of Toulouse. Philip Augustus King of France, had his Kingdom twice put
under an Interdict, worse things being also threatened. The like Threatenings had
been made to Andrew King of Hungary, but upon his Submission he was received
into favor.

And now is it any wonder, that those Princes gave way to such a Decree, when
they knew not how to help themselves by Opposing it, which would have raised a
Storm, that they could not hope to weather?

Anothet thing is remarkable concerning this time, by which the Belief of the
Deposing Doctrine in that Age will better appear. Other Princes whom Popes had
Deposed, procured some Civilians to write for them; and got Synods of Bishops
sometimes on their side against the Pope. Because it was evident the Pope
proceeded not upon the Account of Heresy, but of private spite and hatred. But
in the case of the Count of Toulouse, who was a manifest Favourer of that,
which was esteemed Heresy, (the Opinions of the Albigenses that were his
Subjects) not a Writer in all that Age durst undertake to defend his cause, nor
could he procure one Bishop to be of his side. So universally was it received,
that in the case of Heresy, a Prince might be Deposed by the Pope.

The 3d General Council that Confirmed this Power, Conc. Lugd. Tom. 28.
was the Council of Lions, held by Innocent the 4th against the forementioned
Frederick the 2d, where (as the Sentence bears) The Pope having Consulted with
his Brethren and the Holy Council, being Christ's Vicar on Earth, to whom it was
said in the person of St. Peter, whatsoever ye bind on Earth, etc. Declares the
Emperor bound in his sins, and thereupon Deprived by God of his Dominions.
Whereupon he by his Sentence does Depose him, and absolves all from their Oaths
of Fidellty to him. Straightly charging all persons, to acknowledge him no more
either Emperor or King. Declaring all that did otherwise, Excommunicated ipso
facto. There are in this Process several things very remarkable. It is grounded
on a pretense to a Divine Tradition; So here the whole Council concur with the
Pope, in asserting this power to flow from that Conveyance. And thus either
that Tradition is true, or the Councils are not to be believed when they
Declare a Tradition. 2ly. Tho this is but a Decree in one particular Instance,
yet it is founded on the General Rule; And so is a Confirmation of it, by which
it is put out of doubt that the 4th Council of Lateran included Sovereign
Princes within their Decree. 3ly, When the Emperors Advocate appeared to plead
for him; He did not at all except to their Jurisdiction over him, or Power of
Deposing in the case of Heresy, but denied that the Emperor was guilty of the
crimes Objected, namely Heresy, whereby he, at least, waved the denial of
their Power in that case. He also desired some time might be granted for the
Emperor to appear and plead for himself in person. Whereby he plainly
acknowledged their Jurisdiction. 4ly When the Ambassadors of France and
England, Interceded that the Emperors desire might be granted; the Council gave
him near two weeks time to appear in: which was so incompetent a time, and all
had declared themselves so prepossest, or rather so overawed by the Pope that
hated him Mortally; That the Emperor would not appear because they were his
professed Adversaries. And upon that, and other grounds (none of them touching
on the power of Deposing in cases of Heresy) He appealed from them, to the
next General Council; Upon which the Pope and Prelates sitting in Council, with
Candles burning in their hands, thundered out the Sentence against him.

Here were three very public Judgments, of three General Councils on this
Head, within the compass of sixty years. But it may be imagined, these were
Councils that wholly depended on the Pope; and so their Decrees are to be
looked on, only as a Ceremony used by the Pope to make his own Sentence look
more solemn. But when upon the long Schism in the Sea of Rome, the power of
that See was much shaken, and a Council met at Constance to heal that Breach;
in which the Bishops taking advantage from that Conjuncture, to recover their
former Dignity, began to Regulate many matters. It may be, upon such an
occasion, expected, that if any Party in the Church had disliked these
practices, they should have been now condemned; and that the rather, since by
so doing, the Bishops might have hoped to get the Princes to be of their side,
in their Contests with the Pope. But it fell out quite otherwise. For as the
Murderers of his late Sacred Majesty pretended, when the King was killed, that
all his power was devolved on them, and would have even the same precedence
allowed their Ambassadors in foreign parts, that his had: So the Council of
Constance reckoned, that whatever Rights the Popes had assumed, did now rest
with them, as the Supreme Power of the Church. For in one of their Sessions, a
Decree was framed, made up of all the severe Decrees that had ever been made
against those who violated the Rights of the Church: And this Clause often
returns, That all the Conc. Constable. Tom. 29. Sess. 19.
Breakers of these Privileges, whether they were Emperors, Kings, or
whatsoever other Degree, were thereby, ipso facto, subjected to the B^nns,
Punishments, and Censures set down in the Council of Lateran. And tho they do
not call it the Fourth Council, yet we are sure it could be no other; for they
relate to that in which Frederick the 2d. was consenting to which was the
fourth in the Lateran And in another Decree, by which they hoped to have set up
a Succession of General Councils, at evety ten years end; this Clause is added,
That if any person, whether of the Sess. 15.
Papal (for they had subjected the Pope to the Council, and had more reason to
fear his opposing this Decree, than any Bodies else) Imperial or Regal Dignity,
etc. should presume to hinder any to come to the next General Council, he is
declared to be first Excommunicated, then under an Interdict, and then to be
subject to further punishment both Temporal and Spiritual. And in the Pass they
gave the King of the Romans, to go to the King of Arragon, they add this
Sanction, That whatever person, whether King, Cardinal, Sess. 17.
etc. do hinder him in his Journey, he is ipso facto, deprived of all Honor,
Dignity, Office, or Benefice, whether Ecclesiastical or Secular. So here the
indirect power over Princes, by which they may be both deposed and punished, is
plainly assumed. It is true that same Council did Sess. 15.
indeed Decree, That no Subject should murder his King or Prince; upon which
some of our English and Irish Writers, who condemn these practices, think they
have great advantages. That Decree was procured by Gersons means, who observing
that by the many Rebellions that had been generally set on by Popes, the
Persons of Princes were brought under such contempt, that private
Assassinations came to be practiced: and in particular that of the Duke of
Orleance by the Duke of Burgundy. Therefore to prevent the fatal consequer ces
which were like to follow on that, and to hinder such practices for the future,
he with great earnestness followed that matter: And tho it had almost cost him
his life (it is like from some of the Duke of Orleance his Faction, who were
resolved on a Revenge) yet at last he procured it: But this was only a
Condemnation of private Cutthroats. And the Article condemned had a pretty
Reservation in it, for it strikes only against Subjects killing their Prince,
without waiting for the Sentence of any Judge whatsoever. So if a Sentence be
past by the Spiritual Judge, then this Condemnation notwithstanding, a Prince
may be Murdered. And the other Decree of that Council passed in the same
Session, show they had no mind to part with the Deposing Power. Besides the
Answer to this Decree is clear. It is acknowledged by the Defenders of the
contrary opinion, That it is not lawful in any case to kill a King; but when
one that was a King is no more such, but becomes a Rebel and an Usurper, then
it is lawful to kill him.

Pursuant to the Decree made at Constance, a Council Con. Sien. Tom. 29.
met at Siena ten years after, in which all the former Decrees made against
Heretics are confirmed, and the Favorers or Fautors of Heresy are delared
liable to all the pains and censures of Heretics, and by consequence to the
chief of them all, Deposition.

After that came the Council of Basil, which ratified the Con. Basil Tom. 29.
forementioned Decree made at Constance about General Councils. By which Popes,
Emperors, Kings, etc. that presumed to hinder any from coming to the Council,
are subjected to Excommunication, Interdicts and other Punishments Spiritual
and Temporal.

Last of all came the Council of Trent, and tho met Conc. Trid. Sess. 25 c. 19.
ters were at that pass, that the Council durst not tread on Princes, as others
had formerly done, lest they should have been thereby provoked to join with the
Protestants; yet they would not quite lay aside the pretense of a Deposing
power, but resolved to couch it so into some Decree, that it might continue
their claim to a Right, which they would not part with, tho they knew not at
that time what to make of it. So in the Decree against Duels, they declare,
That if any Emperors, Kings, etc. did assign a field for a Combat, that they
did thereby lose their Right to that place, and the City, Castle, or other
places about it. Now it is certain, if by their Decrees a Prince may forfeit
any part of his Dominion, he may be also dispossessed of all the rest; since
his Title to his whole Territory being one individual thing, what shakes it in
any part, subjects it entirely to him who has such authority over it.

Here we have found 7 General Councils, as they are esteemed by that Church,
all either expressly asserting the Deposing Power, or ratifying former Decrees
that had asserted it. And from such a succession of Councils, it is reasonable
to conclude, That this Third Character of a Tradition of the Church agrees to
it; and if General Councils are fit Conveyors of Traditions, we have as full
Evidence as can be desired, for proving this to be a Church-Tradition.

This last Character of a Tradition is what the whole Body of the Church has
held in any one Age. Upon which, they say, we may calculate that such opinions
must have come down from the Apostles, since it seems neither credible nor
possible, that the Belief of the Church could be changed. With this Arnold has
of late made great noise. And as the new Fashions that come from France do
please our young Gallants best, so some of the Writers of Controversies among
us have taken up the same plea here. That the whole Church received the
Deposing Doctrine in cases of Heresy, may be inferred from what had been said.
The Church is made up of Popes, Bishops, and Priests: Of Sovereign Princes, and
Subjects of all ranks. That the Popes believed it, none can doubt. So many
Definitions of Councils, shows us as plainly what the Bishops and other
Prelates believed: the Writing of the Schoolmen and Canonists show, what the
rest of the Clergy believed. Those Princes who suffered under the Sentences,
give at least a tacit consent to it, since they never question it, but study
only to clear themselves of the imputation of Heresy. The other Princes who
made use of the Donations of the Popes, show as plainly that they believed it.
The great Armies that were brought about their Standards, must have also
believed it: and the people who generally deserted the Deposed Prince,
notwithstanding the great virtues of some of them, and the love that Subjects
naturally carry to their Princes, show that they believed it. So that if St.
James his Question, Show me thy Faith by thy Works, be applied to this
particular, the Answer will be easy. What shall I mention the frequent
depositions of Charles the 1st, of Henry the 4th, of his Son Henry the 5th, of
Frederick the 1st, Philip, Otho the 4th, Frederick the 2d, and Lewis the 4th in
the Empire. The frequent Depositions in Sicily and Naples; the many attempts
upon France; that terrible Bull in particular of Julius the 2d, against that
good King Lewis the twelfth. By which, besides the Sentence against the King,
it appears he designed the total destruction of the Nation, promising Bud de
Ass lib. 5.
the Pardon of Sin to every one that killed one French Man; the frequent
Attempts upon England, both in Hen. the 2d, and K. John's time; not to mention
their later Bulls of Deposition against K. Henry the 8th, and Q. Elizabeth; the
many Attempts in Spain; particularly, the deposing the King of Navarre by P.
Julius; and the Sentences against Henry the 4th, then King of Navarre, and the
Prince of Conde. All these, and a great many more, with the strange Effects
that followed upon them, are so clear Proofs of the Worlds believing this
Doctrine, for many Ages together, that if Men had any Remainders of shame left
with them, they could not deny it. And to this day all their Writers maintain
it, tho perhaps now the greatest part of the Laity know little of it; but
whenever the Tradition of the Church is laid before them, they are obliged to
submit, or they fall from the Catholic Faith, the chief Branch of which is, To
believe all the Traditions of the Church. And since the Church is the same in
all Ages, according to their Doctrine, the Traditions of any one Age must be as
good as the Traditions of any other can be, all being grounded on the same
Authority.

And now let all the Reasons that Arnold brings to prove, from the Churches
believing Transubstantiation in any Age, that she must have always believed it,
be considered, and applied with a small variation of the Terms to this Purpose;
and we shall see if they conclude not as strongly in favor of this Doctrine,
as for that which he has pursued so much. How can it be imagined, says he* that
a Doctrine so contrary to common Sense and Reason, could have been so
universally received, if every Man had not been taught it by those who
instructed him in the Faith? Will Men easily change their Faith? Or, tho
particular Persons would prevaricate, would the whole Clergy conspire to do it?
Or would the People take it easily off their hands. These and many more Topics
of that sort may be so mustered up, and set off by a Man of Wit and Eloquence,
that an ordinary Person would stare, and not know what to say. The Premises
will show, that there is need but of very little Art to change the same Plea,
and fit it to this purpose, with two great advantages beyond what can be
fancied to be in the other. The one is, that the generality of Mankind is
naturally more concerned in the preservation of Temporal things, than about
nice points of Speculation; the one they see and handle every day, and are much
concerned about; the other they hear little of, and are not much touched with
them. So that it is less probable there could be a change made in opinions, on
which the Titles of Princes, and the Peace of Kingdoms depended, than about
subtle Discourses concerning Mysteries. So that the Plea is stronger for the
Tradition of deposing Kings, than for Transubstantiation. A second Difference
is, That there was a continual Opposition made to the belief of
Transubstantiation in all Ages, which they themselves do not deny, only they
shift it off the best they can, by calling the Opposers Heretics; but for the
deposing Doctrine, there was not one Person in the whole World, that presumed
to bring it in question, from the first time it was pretended to, till those
whom they call Heretics disputed against it; and tho some few others, who hold
Communion with them, have ventured on a canvasing of that Doctrine, it is well
enough known what thanks they got from Rome; nor can they show any one Book,
licensed according to the Rules of their Church, that denies it. And thus the
Plea for this Doctrine has a double Advantage beyond that for
Transubstantiation.

Upon the whole matter then, if Tradition be a sure Conveyance, and if we may
pronounce what is truly a Tradition, either from the Opinions of Doctors, the
Constitutions of Popes, the Decrees of General Councils, and the universal
Consent of the whole Church for some Ages; then the Doctrine of deposing Kings,
to which all these agree, must be reckoned among Church-Traditions. There is
but one other Mark that can be devised of a Tradition, which is, What the
Church has taught and believed in all Ages; but for a certain Reason, which
they know very well, they will not stand to that. They know we do not refuse
such Traditions, and if only such may be received, then the Worship of Images,
the Prayers to Saints, the Worship in an unknown Tongue, the Belief of
Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the denying the Chalice to the
Laity, the redeeming Souls out of Purgatory, with many other things of the like
nature, will be soon taken off of the File. And indeed in this sense, the
deposing Doctrine is so far from being a Tradition, that we have as undeniable
Evidences, that the Church for the first six Ages knew nothing of it, but on
the contrary abhorred the thoughts of it, as we have, that their Church these
last six Ages has set it up: From which, among many other Reasons, we conclude,
that these latter Ages have not been acted with the same Spirit, nor followed
the same Doctrine, that was the Rule of the former Ages.

There is more than enough said to show, that these Doctrines are a part of
their Faith; from which they can never extricate themselves, but by confessing,
either that their Church has erred, or that Tradition is no true Conveyance;
when they do either of these, they turn their Backs on Rome, and are in a fair
away to come over to our Church, with which purpose I pray God inspire them.

The mean while, it is no wonder, if those of that Communion, have been guilty
of such horrid Plots and Rebellions every where, especially in England, since
Henry the 8th's time. There was in his Reign, First a Rebellion in
Lincolnshire, another greater one in the North, and some lesser ones after
that* In Edward the 6th's time, there were Risings, both in the North, and in
the West. But these succeeded so ill, and turned only to the ruin of their own
Party, that they resolved to try secreter ways in Queen Elizabeth's time; in
whose long and blessed Reign, there scarce passed one year in which there was
not some Plot against her Life. There was not Matter enough to work upon, for
raising any considerable Rebellion in England: But in Ireland, there were more
frequent attempts that way. It is true, the Care and Providence of God was too
hard for all their Plots, how closely soever laid; and they were turned back on
themselves, not so much to the ruin of the chief Plotters (who were wise
enough to conveigh themselves out of the way) as of many Noble Families, that
were poisoned with their ill Principles. All the Blood which the State was
forced to shed, lies at their door, who were continually giving fresh
Provocations. And for King James (not to mention the Conspiracies against him
in Scotland, nor that Plot of Cobham and Watson, upon his first coming to this
Crown) the Gunpowder Treason was a thing that went beyond all the wicked
Designs that had been ever in any Age contrived. And when his late Majesty was
Embroiled in his Affairs in this Island, how did they take advantage from that
Conjuncture, to break out into a most horrid Rebellion in Ireland, joined with
a Massacre of Persons of whatsoever Age, or Sex, or Condition? Which was so far
set on by Rome, that a Nuncio came publicly to direct their Councils. I will
not dwell on Particulars that are suffciently known, but only name these
things, to show, That no Reign of any of our Princes, since the Reformation,
has been free from the dismal effects of these Doctrines. And for his Sacred
Majesty who now Reigns, (whom God long preserve from their Malice) they have
felt such signal marks of his Royal Clemency, that they can have no color to
complain, except it be, because they cannot bear any Office in the Nation. For
what Noise soever they make, of the severe Laws yet in force, both against the
Clergy and Laity of their Religion, they cannot pretend that since his
Majesty's happy Restoration, any Priest has died, or any Family has been
ruined for their Religion. But I confess, it is enough, according to the
Doctrine of their Church, to discharge them of their Allegiance, That the King
is a favourer of Heresy; and if upon this Reason they will still Plot and
Conspire against his Person and Government, we have no reason to wonder at it,
for they act according to their Principles.

Nor have these Islands been the only Scenes, in which those Principles have
produced such dismal Effects. If we look abroad and reflect on what was done in
France, we shall find, they have had the same Operation there. I need not
mention that perfidious and cruel Massacre, that as Thuanus tells us was so
much extolled in Rome and Spain: and of which the Pope has a Memorial kept in
the Hangings, at the entrance of his Chapel, to this day. The Barricadoes of
Paris, the design of Deposing Henry the 3d, only because he had made Pe^ce with
the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde; the whole progress of the holy
League; their taking Arms against that King, when the Duke and Cardinal of
Guise were killed by his Orders, and at last his being stabbed by Clement, a
Dominican Friar, are Instances beyond exception. The prosecution of the
Rebellion against Henry the 4th, the attempt made upon his Person by John
Chastel, which was more successful in Ravilliack's hands, show sufficiently,
That a Princes turning from that, which they call Heresy, over to their
Church, does not secure him, unless he will extirpate Heretics. For tho Henry
the 4th changed his Religion, yet the favor he showed the Protestants, in the
Edict of Nantes, was a thing never to be forgiven. These things were set on and
encouraged from Rome, and pleaded for by their Writers. That the holy League
was authorized from Rome, that Sixtus the 5th, by his Bulls, declared the King
of Navar incapable of the Succession; that he intended to have Deposed Henry
the 3d, and that he rejoiced at his death, and magnified the Fact; preferring
it to Eleazar's killing the Elephant, and Iudeth's killing Hollofernes, and
ascribed it to a singular Providence and Disposition of the Almighty; called it
a great Miracle, and appeared vain that a Friar had done it, having been one
himself, (tho no doubt he had liked it better, if Clement had been of his own
suit) and would have had himself thought a Prophet for foretelling it, (and so
he might well do perhaps): and in the end concluded, That unfortunate Kings
favoring Heretics, to be the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost: These
were all so publicly done, that it were a needless labor, to go about the
proving them. Francis Veronne wrote a Book, to justify both the Facts of
Clement the Dominican, and Chastel, (as well he might from the Principles of
their Church). After all these dismal Facts, was it not time for the States of
France, to think of some effectual Remedy, to prevent the like for the future?
And they judged aright, that without Condemning the Deposing Power, it could
not be done: To which, as was already hinted, the Clergy made such vigorous
Opposition, that it came to nothing. Diseuss. Decret. Con. Lateran. p. 46.


If these things had flowed only from the heat of some violent Spirits, the
danger were not so great; but it is the Doctrine of their Church, so Lessius
(under the name of Singletonus) says, That if the power of Deposing lies not in
the Pope, the Church must of necessity Err, which has taught it; and to assert
that, is Heretical, and a more intolerable Error, than any about the Sacrament
can be. And Becanus, Confessor to Ferdinand the 2d, says, No Bec. Controv.
Angl. p. 115.
Man doubts, but if Princes are Contumacious, the Pope may order their Lives to
be taken away. What security then can there be found out from Persons, who give
up their Consciences to the conduct of Men of such Principles; and profess an
Implicit Obedience and belief of all that their Church teaches and commands,
which possesses all its Votaries with such cursed rage against Heretics, that
not content to adjudg them to eternal Flames in another Life, they must needs
Persecute and Burn without Mercy where they have the Power in their Hands; and
Plot and Conspire, Kill and Massacre without relenting, where they have not
Power to do it with any color of Law?

Men of Honor will not be easily drawn in to such Practices. But in
Conclusion, when a fit Opportunity appears, they must either forsake their
Church, or concur in the most mischievous Designs, that the Masters of their
Consciences will draw them into; which I pray God make them see in good time,
before they are Involved in such Snares, that Repentance will come too late to
do them good, or to preserve the Nation from those Miseries that they will
bring upon it.

FINIS.
THE Unreasonableness AND IMPIETY OF POPERY: IN A SECOND LETTER Written upon
the Discovery of the Late PLOT.

Imprimatur C. Alston, Nov. 12. 1678.

LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

The Unreasonableness and Impiety OF POPERY, In a Second Letter written upon
the Discovery of the Late PLOT.
SIR,
YOu are pleased to tell me that my last Letter has had some good effect; and
that many who were before carried away with the false colors of the Romish
Religion, are now a little awakned, and seem not unwilling to examine things,
which they took formerly upon trust: and therefore you desire me, since you are
not Master of so much spare time your self, to set down the most material and
convincing reasons, and in as few words as may be, that are most likely to open
the eyes of honest and simple persons, that have been hitherto misled, and are
now willing to be instructed.

In all such cases I first consider the temper of the persons to be dealt with:
Such as take up their Religion out of interest or humor, and think it point of
honor to continue in it, and so will examine nothing are not to be spoken to.
Others that are naturally superstitious and credulous, are very hard to be
wrought on; for they believe every thing that is said on the one hand, and
distrust all that is told them by any body else. Some of those have a vanity in
coming to talk with Divines, but it is an endless labor to deal with them; for
at every time one must begin of new. But the only persons to be dealt with, are
those that are sincere and inquisitive, that having been bred in that Religion,
or brought over to it by some specious pretenses, are now willing to hear
reason, and resolved to follow it wherever they find it. And therefore in the
first place, their minds must be disingaged from these unjust prejudices, that
they conceive of our Religion: and such just prejudices must be offered them
against the Romish Religion, as may at least beget in them some jealousies
concerning it, by which they may be brought so far, as to think the matter
suspicious. If then there be such reasons offered them, for susspecting foul
dealing from their Priests and Church, as would make them suspect an Attorney,
Physician, or any other person with whom they were to deal, they will be
prepared to hear reason; which is all that we desire: and upon this Head these
following Considerations may be laid before them.

1. All people that pretend to great Power and Dominion over our consciences,
are justly to be suspected. If any man designed to make himself Master of any
of our other Liberties, we would examine his Title, and suspect all his other
motions, when we see they tend to subject us to him: Therefore a Church that
designs to keep all her Votaries under an absolute obedience, is justly to be
suspected: and our Church that pretends to no such power, is more likely to
deal fairly.

2. A Church that designs to keep her Members in ignorance, is more to be
suspected, than a Church that brings every thing to a fair Trial. A Church that
denies the use of the Scriptures in a known tongue, except to a few, and wraps
up their Worship in a Language that is not understood, is reasonably to be
suspected, more than a Church that gives the free use of the Scriptures to all
persons, and worships God in a Language, which the people understand.

3. A Church whose Opinions tend to engross the Riches of the world to its
Officers, is more to be suspected, than a Church that pretends to nothing but a
competent maintenance of the several Officers in it. The Redeeming Souls out of
Purgatory, and the Enriching the Shrines, or Relics of Saints, Pardons,
Jubilees, and many more Tenets of the Church of Rome, are so calculated for
enriching their Societies; that every cautious man must needs suspect some
design in it: which he cannot charge on a Church that has none of these Arts to
get money.

4. A Church that has carried on its Designs, by the most dishonest methods
possible, the forging of Writings, and Deeds, of Miracles, Visions, Prophesies
and other things of that Nature, is more justly to be suspected, than a Church
that cannot be charged with any such practices. The Forging so many Epistles
for the Popes of the first Ages, which are now by themselves confessed to be
Spurious, with many other Forgeries, were the Engines by which the Papal Power
was chiefly advanced. The Legends and Extravagant Fables of which they are now
ashamed, were the chief Motives of Devotion for many Ages. And by these, Saints
and Images were so much magnified, and Monasteries so enriched. A Noted Liar
after a Discovery is no more to be trusted.

5. Any that considers the present State of Rome, the manner of Electing Popes,
the Practices of that Court, and the Maxims they move by, must see that every
thing there is secular, corrupt, and at best directed by rules of Policy. But
to fancy the Holy Ghost can come upon any Election so managed, as their own
Books show that is, is the most unreasonable thing that can be devised.
Therefore a Church that neither pretends so high, nor can be charged with such
proceedings, is more likely to be the true Church.

6. A Church that teaches Cruelty against poor Innocent people, that differ in
opinion; and sets on Plots, Conspiracies, and Rebellion against Princes, that
are judged Heretics, is more likely to be corrupted, than a Church that is so
merciful, as to condemn all capital proceedings for difference of Opinion, and
teaches an absolute Submission to the Sovereign Power, even when it persecutes
and oppresses them.

7. A Church that is false to her own Principles, is not so likely to Instruct
her members aright, as a Church that is in all things consistent to her self.
The great Foundation of their Doctrine, is, That there must be a speaking Judge
to decide all Controversies: Now they have no such Judge, for it is not of
Faith, that the Pope is this Judge, or is Infallible: And for a general Council,
they have had none these 112. years, nor are they like to see another in have.
So they have no Speaking Infallible Judge among them. And thus they deceive
people by a false Pretense: whereas we appeal to nothing, but what we really
have among us, which are the Scriptures.

8. A Church that appeals to Marks, which are not possible to be searched out,
is more likely to mislead people, than a Church that pretends to nothing but
what can be certainly proved. The great thing they appeal to is the Constant
Succession of the Bishops of Rome, and their other Pastors. This cannot be
known, no not by a probable conjecture. But there are on the contrary, as great
grounds for History to deny it in the Sea of Rome, as in any other Ancient See
whatsoever: but though they have it, both the Greek Church, and our Church has
it likewise.

These are such plain things, and the Truth of them is so notoriously known,
that I should ask any of that Communion, whether upon the like reasons he would
not be Jealous of any person or sort of persons whatsoever? And if these
grounds of jealousy would work in other matters, it is much more reasonable,
that they should take place in matters of Religion; In which as an Error is of
far greater Importance; So Impostors in all Ages have studied to make gain by
Religion. Therefore it is most just upon these violent presumptions, to look
about us, and take care we be not cheated.

But before I would descend to particulars, there is one General prejudice that
works most universally, on weaker minds to be removed, which is, that the true
Church cannot Err. If then it be made appear unanswerably, that the true
Church may Err, and that in a most weighty Point, all these Arguments fall to
the ground.

That the Church of* the Jews, in our Saviors days was the true Church, cannot
be denied; for our Savior owned it to be such. He joined with them in their
worship, He sent the Lepers to the Priest, He commanded them to hear the
Doctors that sat in Moses Chair, and himself acknowledged the High Priest.
This is sufficient to prove that it was the true Church, and yet this Church
erred, in a most Important point, whether Jesus Christ was the true Messiah, in
whom the Prophecies were fulfilled or not? they Judged falsely: The High Priests
with all the Sanhedrim, declared him a Blasphemer, and condemned him guilty of
Death. Here the true Church expounds the Scriptures falsely, and erred in the
Foundation of Religion.

And it is well known, that the chief arguments which they of the Romish party
bring to prove, that a Church cannot Err, do agree as well to the Jewish, as
the Christian Church: the one being the true Church, under that dispensation,
as well as the other is now. If then this Decision made by the true Church in
Christ's time, did not oblige all in that Church, to go on in that error, but
private persons might have examined their Sentence, and depart from them upon
it; then upon the same reasons, though we acknowledge the Church of Rome a true
Church, yet we may examine her Doctrines, and separate from her errors. This
grand prejudice being thus removed, there are two things in the next place to
be laid before them.

One is, that the Scriptures, being acknowledged to come from Divine
Inspiration, on all hands, can only decide the Controversies among us: and the
places I shall make use of, shall be cited according to the Doway Translation,
to which, being made by themselves, they cannot except.

Another is, that a man must judge of things as they appear plainly to his
reasonable Faculties. It is against all reason to say that because it is
possible for a man to be mistaken, therefore he ought to doubt his Judgment in
things that are clear to him. This must turn a man Skeptical both to all
Religions, and all the concerns of human life: Therefore every man must follow
his Judgment, when after a diligent Inquiry, any thing appears plain to him.

And now to come up close to those of that persuasion, they are to consider,
that the chief parts of Religion are, First, Articles of Faith: Secondly, Rules
of Life: Thirdly, The worship of God chiefly in the Sacraments: And Fourthly,
The Government of the Church. If then in every one of these Heads, the Church
of England agrees clearly with the Scriptures, and the Church of Rome does
either manifestly contradict them, or differs matterially from them, in all
these points, in which we and they differ; then the Resolution of the Question,
Whether a man ought to join himself to our Church, or theirs? will be easily
made.

For Articles of Faith, if either the Apostles Creed or the Creeds of the First
4. General Councils, contain a just abstract of the Faith; then we who receive
every Article in these Creeds, do agree more exactly to the Apostolical
Doctrine, than they who have added many new Articles to their Creed.

The chief Article of Faith, is, The Covenant made between God and Man through
Jesus Christ, by which upon the Account of his Merits and Intercession, all who
follow the Rules of the Gospel, may expect the Blessings of it, both here, and
hereafter. Penance toward Acts 20. 21.
God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, being the conditions upon which
we hope for Eternal life. This we plainly teach, without Addition or Change:
But in how many things have they departed from this Simplicity of the Gospel?
First, In teaching People to address to God, for the Merits and by the
Intercession of the Saints: From whom these things are asked, for which the
Scriptures direct us only to God and Christ. And in the very words pronounced
after absolution, The Merits of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints, are joined
with the passion of Christ; as the grounds on which we obtain pardon of Sin,
Grace, and Eternal life. Secondly, In persuading People, That a Simple
attrition with the use of the Sacraments, without any real conversion of the
Soul or change of life, is sufficient to Salvation. Thirdly, In persuading
People, That there is a Communication of the Merits of Saints to other Persons,
though the Scriptures mention only the Communication of Christ's Merits.
Fourthly, by Teaching that tho our sins are pardoned thorough Christ; yet,
there are terrible and long lasting torments to be endured in another State.
F^^tly, that saying Masses, and going of Pilgrimages can Redeem from these. Now
in all these, the two chief Designs of the Gospel are plainly contradicted:
Which be; First, To Change our hearts and lives: Secondly, To persuade us to a
humble Dependence upon Christ, and an high acknowledgment of him: But these
Doctrines of theirs as they show us a way to be sure of Heaven, without a real
Conversion; so they take off so much from Faith in Christ as they carry us to
trust to somewhat else.

These are Errors of great Importance: Since they corrupt the Fountain, and
overthrow the chief design of the Christian Religion. They are also late
devices brought in, in the dark and ignorant Ages.

No mention is made of praying to Saints, in any Ancient Liturgy. There is a
great deal against it in the most Ancient Authors. And though in the Fourth
Century, upon the Conversion of many Heathens to the Christian Faith, to humor
them in their conceit, of some Intermedial Agents, between the Divinity and us
Mortals, there was a Reverence for the Saints set up, to deive out the worship
of those Secondary Deities; yet, this was no direct Adoration, though they then
began to use Rhetorical addresses to Saints like prayers: Yet, even in Gregory
the Great his time (in the beginning of the Seventh Century) we find no Prayers
made to them in all his Liturgies. And for the Belief of a simple Attrition
being sufficient with the Sacrament, no body ever dreamed of it, before the
Schoolmen found out the Distinction, between Attrition and Contrition in the
later Ages. For the Communication of the Merits of Saints, the whole Fathers in
one voice, speak only of the Merits of Christ being Communicate to us. The
Friars first invented it, to invite People at least to die in their habits, by
persuading them, that all the merits of the Saints of their Order, were shared
among the whole Order. And for Redeeming out of Purgatory, the first Four Ages
knew nothing of it. In the beginning of the Fifth Century St. Austin plainly
speaks of it as an Opinion which some had taken up without any ground, and that
it was no way certain, nor could we ever be sure of it. And though in Gregory
the Great's time, the Belief of it was pretty far advanced; yet, the Trade of
Redeeming out of it, by saying Masses for Departed Souls was not even then
found out.

So that all these are both gross Errors, and late Inventions.

The next Branch of Religion, is the Rule of human life: which one would think
could be taken from no other Standard so certainly, as the 10. Commandments:
and the Expositions given of these in Scripture, chiefly our Saviors Sermon on
the Mount. Let Malice it self appear, to Declare wherein our Church strikes at
any of these: or Teaches men to disobey even the least of them. If then our
Rule of life be exactly the same; with that which the Scriptures prescribe, we
are safe as to this, which may be well called, The most important piece of
Religion. For it is to be considered that God making man after his own Image,
the end of his Creation was, that he might be made like God. The Attributes of
God to be Imitated, are Goodness, Mercy, Justice, Wisdom and Truth. And it is
certain that the Design of Revealed Religion was to give men clearer Notions of
these Moral perfections, to press them by stronger Arguments, and encourage our
Endeavors by suitable Rewards and punishments. So that if any Religion
contradict these Moral Duties, we are sure it is false; for the Revelation of
God's will must be designed to make us better than we would otherwise be,
following barely the Light of Nature, and not worse. If then the Church of Rome
over-throws Morality, and contradicts any of the Ten Commandments we are sure
it is not of God. And how far it has done this, they may judge by these
Particulars.

First, Whatever Church offers cheap and easy pardons for sin, does take off
so much from our sense of the evil of sin. We cannot have a very ill opinion of
any thing that is easily forgiven. Now what are the Popes Pardons, Indulgences,
Jubilees, Privileged Altars, the going of Pilgrimages, the saying of some
Collects, the wearing of Agnus Dei's, Peebles, or other such like trash, but so
many Engines to root out of men's minds any deep horror or great sense of sin.
Is not this the very thing which the People of the Jews of old offered at, to
bring Thousands of Rams, Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil, their First born, or the
fruit of their Body, to offer for their sins? All which were rejected in the
name of God in these words, I will show thee O man what is good, and what our
Lord requires of thee: Verily to do Judgment, Micha 6. 8.
and to love mercy, and to walk solicitous with thy God. This is a Moral matter
and unchangable; therefore whoever go to beat down the sense of sin, by the
offer of Pardon, on any other terms, but the sincere change of a man's life,
destroy Morallity, which is the Image of God in man. If from this general
Consideration we descend to Examine the Commandments in particular, we shall
find matter enough for a severe Charge against their Church.

Is not the First Commandment broken when Devotions are offered to Saints which
Import their being Omniscient; Omnipresent and Almighty; that are the
Incommunicable Attributes of the Godhead: and when pardon of sin,
preservation, Grace against Temptations, and Eternal life, are immediately
begged from Saints. It is true, they say the sense of these prayers, is only
that we desire their assistance at Gods hands for these blessings. But the
words of their Offices import no such matter. And though for above One Hundred
and Sixty Years these things have been complained of; and in the Correction of
their Offices, some of them were cast out; yet, many of them do still continue:
In which the plain sense of the words of their Offices is Idolatrous: Only they
make a shift with another and forced sense put on them, to defend themselves
from that charge. And for such Devotions they can show no Warrant for the first
Thousand years after Christ.

The Second Commandment is so openly and confessedly broken by them, that many
of them maintain, it does not all oblige Christians: but belonged only to the
Jewish Dispensation. And in all their Catechisms it is left out, which was done
very wisely; (with what honesty let them answer) for it was not fit the people
should look on that as a Commandment, which they saw so notoriously broken
throughout their whole Church: A great trade being also driven by the breach of
it. That this was not in the Primitive Church, themselves confess: all the
Books the Fathers wrote against the Idolatry of the Heathens, demonstrate this.
Nor were Images so much as set up in Churches before the Sixth Century. And
then care was taken that they should not be worshipped: and not before the
Eighth Century were they worshipped in any place of the Christian Church.

The Doctrine of the Popes power of Relaxing of Oaths, and discharging men from
the Obligation of them, joined with the practice of their Popes for above 800
years, is as formal an Opposition to the Third Commandment as can be Imagined.
This was also begun in the Eighth Century.

The vast multiplication of Holy Days, made the Observation of the Lords day of
necessity slacken.

They have destroyed the Order of Societies, established in the Fifth
Commandment; by the Power they allow the Pope to Depose Princes, and absolve
Subjects from their Allegiance.

They teach the murdering and burning all Heretics, that is to say, all that
will not submit to their Tyranny: by which Infinite numbers of Innocent persons
have been murdered, against the Sixth Commandment. And these two Doctrines of
deposing Princes, and putting Heretics to death, were abhorred by the Church
for the first Eight ages, and were brought in by the Popes since that time.

The frequent practice of the Court of Rome, in granting Divorces, on the
pretense either of Spiritual kindred, or of Degrees not forbidden, either by
the Law of Nature, or the word of God, and allowing second Marriages to both
Parties, upon such Divorces, is an avowed breach of the Seventh Commandment.

The setting on, some Princes to Invade other Princes in their just Rights, is
the Doctrine, as well as it has been the practice of their Church for some
Ages. And as their Popes have wrested many Territories from Temporal Princes,
so for many Ages they set on Public Robbery against the Eighth Commandment.

The Doctrine of Equivocating, both taught, and practiced, the breaking of safe
Conducts, and public Faith decreed by their, General Councils, is also against
the Ninth Commandment.

For the Tenth I shall say nothing of it, because the meaning of it is not so
generally agreed on. But thus we see all the Rules of Morality are contradicted
by that Church.

It might be justly added to swell up this Charge; that of late there have been
Doctrines published to the world by the approved Casuists of that Church, with
License, which subvert all Justice, destroy all security, and take away the
most sacred ties of mankind. By the Doctrines of Probability, and of Ordering
the Intention aright, there is no crime how black soever, but a man may
adventure on it with a good conscience. These things were long and openly
taught amongst them, without any Censure. And when many of the French Clergy
complained of these at the Court of Rome (perhaps more out of spite to the
Jesuits, than zeal for the Truth) it was long before these so just
Remonstrances, were heard. And in conclusion a trifling Censure was past on
them: by which they were declared Scandalous (neither Impious, nor Wicked) and
all were forbidden to teach them any more, but they stand yet, in the Books
formerly published with License.

After all these particulars, is it to be wondered at, if the morals of the men
of that Church be vitiated, when their Doctrine is so corrupted, for peoples
practices are generally worse than their Opinions. And thus the Second point is
made good, that in our Church, we teach the same Rules of Living that are in
the Scriptures, which are grossly corrupted by their Doctrines.

The Third Branch of the Christian Religion is the Worship of God and that
chiefly the use of the Sacraments. For the Worship of God, let it be considered
that we pray to God, and praise him only, for all these things about which the
Scriptures command us to address to him. Our worship is in a Language that all
the people understand, and so are edified by it according to St. Paul, who has
enlarged so much on this matter, in a 1 Cor. 14.
whole Chapter, that it is strange, how any who acknowledge the Authority of
that Epistle, can deny it. Our Liturgies are such, that the Romanists cannot
except to any part of them: Our ceremonies are few, and these be both decent
and useful: So that in all the parts of our Worship, we do so exactly agree to
the Rule of the Scriptures, and the Primitive Church, that they cannot blame us
for any one Rubric or Collect in it. But for their worship, It is in a
Language not understood by the people: who to be sure can receive no
Edification, from that they understand not; nor can they say Amen to such
Devotions. This is as it were in spite to St. Paul, who took special care that
as long as his Authority was in any esteem in the Church, such an abuse should
never creep into it. Nor is there a shadow of Authority for such a practice,
from the Primitive Church, in which for many Ages, the Worship was still in the
vulgar Tongues.

Next their Worship is so overcharged with many Rites and Ceremonies, that the
seriousness of Devotion must needs be much alloyed by them. A great part of the
Worship is so whispered, as if they were muttering Spells. Their Books of
Exorcisms are the most indecent things that can be: full of Charms and other
ridiculous Rites. And for the Pontifical and Ceremonial of their Church, they
may match with Heathenism for Superstition. Their Offices are so various, and
numerous, and the Rubricks seem so full of disorder, that a man may as soon
learn a Trade, as know all the several parts of them. How this can be
reconciled to the Simplicity of the Gospel, or the Worshipping God in spirit
and truth, may be easily judged by those who can compare things.

For the Sacraments, we have the Two that Christ Instituted, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper; And for Penance, Confirmation, Ordination and Marriage, we have
them also among us, as they were appointed by Christ and his Apostles: though
we do not call these Sacraments. For Extreme Unction we find no warrant at all
for it, as a sacred Ordinance: and we are sure the Church for many Ages did not
think of it. For Baptism it is done Matt. 28. 19.
among us, in the very Form our Savior appointed: and this they do not deny.
But among them they cannot be assured that they are at all Baptized: since
according to the Doctrine of the necessity of the Intention of the Priest, to
the Being of a Sacrament, they cannot be assured of it: for an Atheistical
Priest can spoil their Baptism, so that unless they can be certain of that,
which is impossible for them to know, I mean the Intention of the Priest, they
are not sure that they were ever truly Baptized.

But for the Lords Supper, if any person will so far trust his own Reason and
senses, as to compare all the Warrants we have in Scripture for that Ordinance,
with the Practice of our Church and theirs, they will soon see who agree most
to them. Christ took Bread which Matt. 26. 26, 27. 28. ver.
he blessed and gave, saying, This is my Body which is given for you. He also
took the Chalice and said, Drink ye all of it, etc. All this we do, and no
more, so that it is indeed a Communion among us: and those who have read the
account that Justin Martyr gives us of the Rites in the Communion in his days,
would think he were reading the very Abstract of our Office. But in the Church
of Rome, besides the less material things, of the Form of the Bread, the
Consecration of Altars and Vessels, with the numberless little devices in the
Canon of the Mass, that they seem not of such importance let these considerable
changes they have made be looked into.

1. They have brought in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, against the
clearest Evidence both of sense and reason, against the nature of a Sacrament,
and its being a Memorial of Christ's Death, and that by the very words of
Consecration, the Bread and Wine are Christ's Body and Blood, as the one was
given for us, and the other shed for us, on the Cross: and not as he is now at
the Right hand of God. The belief of this crept in by degrees, from the eighth
Century, in which it was first set on foot, but much contradicted both in the
Eastern and Western Church: and was not fully settled till the 13th Century. We
are sure it was not the Doctrine of the Churches of Rome, Constantinople, Asia,
Antioch, nor Africa in the 5th and 6th Centuries, by express Testimonies from
the most esteemed Authors of that time, Gelasius, Chrysostom, Ephrem,
Theodoret, and St. Austin.

2. They deny the Chalice to the Laity against the express words of the
Institution; and contrary both to the Doctrine and Tradition of the Church for
1300 years.

3. They have declared the Priests saying Mass, to be an Expiatory Sacrifice
for the Dead, and the Living, though the Scripture plainly says, That Christ
was once offered for us. It is true the Primitive Church used the Heb. 9. 26,
28.
words Sacrifice and Oblation as our Church yet does, but their meaning by
that, was only in the general sense of these terms, as Prayers, Praises, and
Alms are called Sacrifices.

4. They have brought in a new piece of Worship, which is the hearing of Mass,
without receiving the Sacrament: and it is now the great Devotion of their
Church. Though by the Institution, it is as express as can be, that the
Consecration is only in order to its being a Communion. And by the Apostolical
Canons, which some in their Church believe to be the work of the Apostles, and
are by them all acknowledged to be a Collection of the Rites of the first Ages,
all persons that were present at the Worship, and did not communicate were to
be severely censured.

5. The adoring the Sacrament, the exposing it on the Altar, and carrying it
about in solemn Processions, to be worshipped, as they are late Inventions; so
if Transubstantiation be not true, they are by their own confession the
grossest Idolatries that ever were,

And are not these considerable variations from the first Institution of this
Sacrament?

As for their own Sacraments, though there is no reason to equal them, to
either of these that were instituted by Christ; yet some of them we use, as
they were at first appointed. Persons Baptized, are Confirmed with Imposition
Acts 8. 17.
of hands, the only Ceremony used by the Apostles.

We allow the use of Confession, and do press it in many cases; and give the
benefit of Absolution: but we do not make this an Engine to screw peoples
secrets from them. For which there is no warrant in Scripture; nor was it
thought necessary for many Ages after the Apostles. Confession of public
Scandals was enjoined, and for private sins it was recommended: but this latter
was not judged simply necessary for obtaining the pardon of sin. And what noise
soever they make of the good that Confession, and the enjoining of Penance,
may do, if well managed, we need only appeal to some of their own best Writers,
now in France, whether as they have been practiced, they have not rather driven
all true Piety out of the world. If these abuses had been only the faults of
some Priests, the blame could not have been justly cast on their Church; but
when the public Rules given to Confessors, printed with License, are their
warrants for so doing, then their Church is in fault. So that nothing is more
common among them, than for persons after a confession made of their sins, with
a slight sorrow, and some trifling penance undergone, together with the
Priestly Absolution, to fancy themselves as clean from all sin, as if they had
never offended God. And this being the Doctrine of their Church, it both lessens
the sense of sin, and takes men off from making such earnest applications to
God through Christ, as the Gospel commands.

For Orders they are among us with the same Rites that Christ and the Apostles
gave them first: And a learned Morinus.
Man of their own Church has lately published the most ancient Forms of
Ordinations he could find: From which it appears, that all the Ceremonies in
their Ordinations, for the want of which they accuse us, were brought in since
the eighth Century: so that even by their own Principles these things cannot be
necessary to Ordination, otherwise there were no true Orders in the Church for
the first eight Ages.

For Marriage we honor it as Gods Ordinance; and Heb. 13. 4.
since the Scriptures declare it honorable in all, without exception, we dare
deny it to none who desire it. St. Paul delivers the Duty of Clergymen toward
their Wives, with Rules for their Wives behavior, which had 1 Timothy 3. 2. 4. 11.
been very impertinent if Clergymen might have no Wives. We find a married
Clergy in the first ten Centuries: And we know by what base Arts the Caelibate
of the Clergy was brought in; and what horrid ill effects it has produced.
Neither do we allow of any devices to hinder Marriage, by degrees of kindred
not prohibited in the Law of God, or the trade that was long driven in granting
Dispensations in those degrees, and afterward annulling these, and avoiding
the Marriages that followed upon them, upon some pretenses of Law.

Thus it appears, how they have corrupted the Doctrine of the Sacraments,
together with the Worship of God.

The last head of Religion is Government; and as to this, we can challenge any
to see what they can except to us. First in reference to the Civil Power, we
declare all are bound for conscience sake to obey every lawful Command of the
Supreme Authority, and to submit when they cannot obey. We pretend to no
Exemption of Clarks from the Civil Jurisdiction, but give to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's. We do not obey the King only because he is of our Religion:
much less do we allow of Conspiracies or Rebellions upon our judging him an
Heretic, so that we deliver no Doctrine that can be of any ill consequence to
the Society we live in.

And for the Ecclesiastical Government we have Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
rightly Ordained, and in their due subordination to one another; every one
administering these Offices due to his Function, which has been the Government
of the Christian Church, since the times of the Apostles. So that we have a
clear vocation of Pastors among us, from whose hands every person may without
scruple receive all the Sacraments of the Church.

But for the Church of Rome, how unsafe is the Civil Government among them? not
to mention the Doctrine of deposing Princes, for which I refer you to my former
Letter; What a security does the Exemption of Clerks from the Civil Courts in
cases criminal, give to loose and debauched Churchmen; and what disturbance
must this breed to a Commonwealth? The denying the Civil Magistrate power to
make Laws that concern Religion, or oblige Churchmen, takes away a great deal
of his Rights; for scarce any Law can be made but wrangling and ill-natured
Churchmen, may draw it within some head of Religion. And that this was
frequently done in former Ages, all that have read History know. The quarrels
that were in the beginning of this Century between the Pope and the Republic
of Venice were a fresh Evidence of it.

But for the Ecclesiastical Government, they have spoiled it in all the parts
of it. The Pope has assumed a power of so vast an extent, and so arbitrary a
nature, that all the ancient Canons are thrown out of doors by it. We know that
originally the Bishops of Rome were looked on by the rest of the Church, as
their Colleagues and fellow Bishops. The Dignity of the City made the Sea more
remarkable; and the belief of St. Peter's having founded it, with his suffering
Martrydom there, with St. Paul, made it much honored: so that when the Empire
became Christian, then the Dignity of the Imperial City made the Bishop of Rome
be acknowledged the first Patriarch. From this beginning they arose by many
degrees to the height of pretending to a Supremacy both Civil and Spiritual:
and then they not only received appeals, which was all they at first pretended
to, but set up Legantine Courts every where, made the Bishops swear Obedience
and Homage to them, and the Archbishops receive the Pall from their hands, in
sign of their dependence on them: Exempted Monasteries, and other Clarks from
Episcopal Jurisdiction, broke all the Laws of the Church by their
Dispensations: So that no shadow of the primitive Government does now remain.
And though Gregory the Great wrote with as much indignation against the Title
of Universal Bishop, as ever any Protestant did; yet his Successors, have since
assumed both the Name and thing. And to that height of Insolence, has this
risen, that in the Council of Trent, all the Papal Party opposed the Decree
that was put in, for declaring Bishops to have their Jurisdictions by Divine
Right. The Court Party not being ashamed to affirm, that all Jurisdiction was
by Divine Right only in the Pope; and in the other Bishops, as the Delegates of
the Apostolic See; and they were in this too hard for the other Party. So that
now a Bishop, who by the Divine appointment ought to feed the Flock, can do no
more in that, then as the Pope gives him leave. The greatest part of the
Priests have no dependence on their Bishops. The Monks, Friars, and Jesuits,
being immediately subordinate to the Pope; so that they do what they please,
knowing they can justify any thing at Rome, and they fear no Censure any where
else.

From this so many abuses have crept in, and the Canonists have found out, so
many devices to make them Legal, that there is no hope of Reforming these at
Rome. The whole State of Cardinals is one great Corruption, who, from being
Originally the Parish Priests of Rome, and so under all Bishops, have raised
themselves so high that they do now trample on the whole Order; and pretend to
an Equality with Princes. The giving Benefices to Children, the unlimitted
Plurality of Benefices in one Person; the Comendam's, the reserved Pensions,
with many other such like, are gross, as well as late Corruptions. And no
wonder if all men despair of Reforming the Court of Rome, when these abuses are
become necessary to it, by which the greatness of the Cardinals and the other
Officers, or Ministers there, is kept up.

I need not mention the gross Simony of that Court, where all the world knows,
every thing may be had for money. The Popes themselves, are often Chosen by
these Arts: and if their own Rules be true, such Elections, with every thing
that follows on them are void. The Infinite Swarms of the Inferior Clergy, do
plainly drive a Simoniacal Trade, by the Masses they say for Departed Souls,
for Money. And for Public Penance, they have Universally let it fall, in
stead whereof private Penance is now in use. And if their own Writers say
true, this is made an Engine to serve other ends, when by enjoining slight and
easy Pennances, they draw the People after them; upon which the Jesuits have
been loudly accused, these Forty Years last past. In Sum, all the Corruptions
or rather defects, that are in the Government of our Church, are only such as
they brought in and have not met yet with such effectual remedies, as must cure
the Church of these inveterate Distempers, their ill Conduct did cast her into.

If any of that Party will review these Particulars, and so far trust their own
Reasons, as to judge according to the plainest Evidence, they cannot resist the
conviction that they must needs meet with: when they see the simplicity of our
Faith, the Morality of our Doctrine, the Purity of our Worship, and our
Primitive Government; and compare it with their vast Superfetation of Articles
of Faith, the Immorality of their Rules of living, the Superstition, if not
Idolatry of their Worship, and the most extravagant Innovations in Government,
that are in the Church of Rome.

And indeed these things are so clear that few could resist the force of so
much plain truth, if it were not for some prejudices, with which they are so
fettered that they cannot examine matters with that freedom of mind, that is
necessary. Therefore much care must be taken, to clear these, in the most
familiar and demonstrative manner that is possible.

They may be reduced to these Five chief Ones. First, That the true Church
cannot Err. Secondly, That out of the true Church there is no salvation.
Thirdly, That the case of the Church of Rome is much safer than ours is; since
the Church of England acknowledges a possibility of salvation in the Church of
Rome; which they on the other hand deny to the Church of England. Fourthly,
That unless there be a Supreme Judge set up, we can be sure of nothing in
Religion, but must fall into many Factions and Parties. And Fifthly, That the
Reformation was but a Novelty begun in the former Age, and carried on in this
Nation, out of an ill design* and managed with much Sacrilege.

The First of these seemed necessary to be cleared in the beginning of this
Discourse, and I am deceived if it was not done convincingly. And for the
Second we agree to it, That out of the true Church there is no S^lvation.

But then the Question comes, What makes one a Member of the true Church? The
Scriptures call the Church the Body of Christ, of which he is the Head. Ephesians. 1.
22, 23.
So then whoever are joined to Christ according to the Gospel, must be within
the true Church. But the deceit that lies hid under this, is, That from hence
they fancy that the Unity of the Church, does consist in an outward Communion
with the Sea of Rome. And upon that they calculate, that there must be an Unity
in the Body of the Church: And that cannot be, except all be joined to the Sea
of Rome. Now, we grant there is but one Church, but this Unity consists not in
an Outward Communion, though that is much to be desired, but consists in an
Unity of Belief, about the essentials of Christianity.

There is nothing more evident, than, that even according to their own
Principles, other Churches are not bound upon the hazard of Damnation to hold
Communion with the Sea of Rome; for it is not an Article of Faith, nor certain
according to their own Doctrine, That the Pope is Infallible: And except that
were certain, we cannot be obliged to hold Communion under such a Sanction with
that See. For if it be possible that a Pope may become an Heretic or
Schismatic (which many of them confess, and all agree that the contrary is not
of Faith,) then other Churches are not in that case obliged to hold Communion
with that See. If therefore the possibility of Error in that See be
acknowledged, then holding Communion with it, cannot be the measure of the
Unity of the Church. So we bring it to this Issue, It is not Heresy to say,
The Pope may Err: Therefore this is no just prejudice against our Church,
because we have departed from Communion with him, when he imposed his Errors on
us. So all the high things they boast of that See, come to nothing, except they
say, This Proposition is of Faith, That the Pope is Infallible. And for these
Meetings that they call General Councils; they were at best but the Councils of
the Western Patriarchate artificially packt, and managed with much Art; as
appears even from Cardinal Pallavicini's History of the Council of Trent.

For the Third Prejudice, It is the most disingenuous thing that can be;
Because our Church is charitable, and modest in her Censures, and theirs is
uncharitable, and cruel in her Judgments; therefore to conclude, That Communion
with them is safer, than with us. If confidence, and Presumption, Noise, and
Arrogance, are the marks to judge a Church by, we must yield to them in these:
but if Truth, and Peace, Charity and holy Doctrines, be the better Standards,
then we are as sure, that our Communion is much safer. Let this Rule be applied
to the other concerns of human life, and it will appear how ridiculous an abuse
it is to take measures from so false a Standard. If a man were sick, the
Question comes, Whether he shall use an approved Physician, or a Montebanks. On
the one hand, the Montebank says, He will certainly cure him, and the Doctors
will undoubtedly kill him. On the other hand, the Doctor modestly says, he will
undertake nothing, but will do the best he can; and for the Montebank he tells
him, It is very dangerous to trust to him, though he will not deny but
sometimes great cures are done by them. The Insolence of the Montebank will
never carry it against a Doctors modesty, but among weak and credulous People;
and such must they also be, who are taken with this Montebankry in Religion.

But if this be taken to pieces, the folly of it will yet appear more manifest.
For First, the reason we give for a possibility of Salvation in the Church of
Rome* is, because we look on such and such things as the Essentials of
Christianity, which are yet retained in that Church: And either this Reasoning
is true or false. If it be true, then it is as true, that we may be saved, who
retain these Essentials of Christianity: If it is false, then no Inference can
be drawn from it. Secondly, Though we yield a possibility of Salvation in that
Church, we declare that they are in great danger, by many opinions among them,
which if fully understood and believed, do even vitiate the Essentials of
Christanity; particularly that Foundation of Religion, The Covenant between God
and Man thorough Christ, formerly insisted on. So that we declaring a Certainty
of Salvation to those who sincerely follow the rules of our Church, and a great
danger in their Church, the preferring their Communion to ours, upon this
account, is, as unreasonable, as to sleep without shutting our Doors, because
it is possible we shall not be robbed, in so doing: Or when we are at Sea to
prefer a Cock-boat to a good clean Ship. These are such absurdities, that an
ordinary measure of weakness cannot swallow them down. Thirdly, We are not so
forward as they imagine in yielding a possibility of Salvation in their Church.
For our concession amounts rather to this, that we do not deny it, than that we
positively affirm it: And therefore they have no reason to draw these
advantages from it.

4. A great difference is to be made between what God in the Infiniteness of
his mercy may do, and what he is bound to by the Covenant made with man in the
Gospel; for the former we acknowledge, it is impossible to fix the limits of
that mercy which is as far above our thoughts, as the Heavens are above the
Earth. And how far it extends to all sincere minds, we are not so presumptuous
as to define; therefore we will not Damn at pleasure, as they do but we do
assert, Their Church is guilty of such gross Corruptions, by which the vitals
of Religion are vitiated, that they have not that reason to claim the Mercies
of the Gospel due by that Covenant.

5. The Church of Rome has a dark and fair side; the dark side is, what the
true consequence of their Opinions is, the fair side is, what some witty men
have devised to palliate these corruptions with, and to deceive the Vulgar by.
We know many of that Communion, either do not at all know these corrupt
Doctrines, or have such a fair representation made of them, that they are
thereby both more easily and more innocently misled. From hence it is that we
are inclined to hope more charitably concerning some, that are abused by them.
But for those that have examined things more fully, or that having been bred
among us, yet reject the Truth, and go over to them, we are not so much
inclined to have so good hopes of them, as they imagine: So this is a weak and
ill grounded conceit in all the parts of it.

The Fourth Prejudice, is concerning the necessity of Submitting to some Common
Judge, of distrusting our own reasons, and believing the Church, without which
there must be many Sects and Divisions: and this they aggravate from the many
different Parties that are among us.

But these are only specious pretenses to deceive weak people by. For First, If
it is necessary that there be a Common Judge, it is most necessary that it be
known, who this Judge is, otherwise it is to no purpose to talk of a Judge, if
they cannot point him out. This is like him that came to discover a huge
Treasure that he knew was hid under ground; but being asked in what place it
was? he answered he did not know that: and he believed no body else knew. Some
say the Pope is the Judge, others as confidently, that the Council is Judge
even without the Pope, others think it is sure work to say, the Pope and
Council together: and others say the Body of the Church spread over the World.

For the Popes, some of them have been condemned for Heresy, and others for
making Schism; many of them have been most horrid men: they are generally
ignorant in Divinity, being for most part bred to the Law: so that a great part
of their own Church rejects the Popes Infallibility.

For Councils, they have had none these 115 years, and the last was so
overruled by the Popes, that no other has been desired since: so that if
either a Council without the Pope, or with him, be the Infallible Judge they
have lost their infallibility; and except a Council were constantly sitting,
they can show no living and speaking Judge. So that either this is not necessary
to a Church, or otherwise they are not a complete Church. And for the Body of
the Church, how shall a man find out their sense, unless gathered together in
some Assembly? or must a Man go over Christendom, and gather the Suffrages of
all the Pastors of the Church? Upon the whole matter it is plain that after all
their Canting about the Church, they must say, that it is of Faith that the
Pope is Infallible, otherwise they have no Infallible Judge, and since a Council
cannot be called but by the Pope, what ever Authority the Council has it can
never be exercised, but by the Popes leave.

And for all the sad consequences they say, follow the want of a Common
infallible Judge, it appears they are under them as well as we; but with this
difference, that we plainly acknowledge, we have none, but do the best we can
without one: But they, as they have none, no more than we, yet are under the
Tyranny of one, and though they are not bound to believe him Infallible, yet
are as much enslaved to him, and obliged to obey him, as if he were really
exempted from all possibility of Erring. So that in short, they are slaves and
we are freemen. And for these ill consequences, they are, we confess,
unavoidable; for which we have very good Authority, from his words, who on all
sides is acknowledged to be Infallible, that said, Woe be to the World for
scandals, for Matt* 18. 7.
it is necessary that scandals do come.

But to discuss this Objection, which works much on ignorant people, let it be
considered that sin and Error are the two things, that do chiefly cross the
design of the Gospel: and of these two, sin, is the more dangerous and
destructive: since there is great reason to hope that Error cannot be so fatal,
when it infects a mind that is otherwise sincere, as Sin, which clearly defaces
the Image of God in the Soul. We ought not therefore to expect that the Gospel,
should give any further security against Error, than it gives against Sin: On
the contrary we should rather expect a further security from Sin, because it is
most hurtful. But all the Provision made against Sin, is this, that in the
Scriptures we are warned of the evil of it, and are directed to such methods,
and have the promises of such Assistance, that if we use our endeavor, we
shall not be overcome by sin, nor perish in it: So as to Error, we have the
same security. The Gospel affords us a very clear light for directing our
Belief in the most important things, which if we study with due humility, and
sincerity, imploring God for the grace of his holy Spirit, for our instruction,
we shall be preserved from Error. And thus the same provision is made against
Error, that is against Sin. And we have no reason to expect more. And as it
were not fit, that Salvation should be offered without obliging men to use
their utmost endeavors, so it were not fit to give such an easy Remedy
against Error, as that a man should not need to employ his reason to discover
Truth, and avoid Mistakes. If our Gospel be also hid, it is hid in them that 2
Cor. 3. 3.
perish. Therefore that our Searches after Truth, may be both encouraged and
rewarded, God sets it before us in such a Light, that it is our own fault if we
do not see and follow it. But if men will either blindly give themselves up, to
the conduct of such Guides, whose interest it is to mislead them, which is the
case of the Church of Rome; or out of humor, or other base ends, will invent
or follow some erroneous Tenets, as other Heretics do, they have themselves to
blame; and shall bear their own Iniquity: but they have no reason to cast the
fault upon God, or accuse the Scriptures, of Darkness, or Defectiveness, in
these things that are necessary to Salvation.

I come now to the last Prejudice, which will require a fuller Discussion,
because it relates to matter of Fact: which as it is better understood, so it
makes deeper Impressions on people, that are not so much wrought on by
speculative points, as by these things that fall under their senses.

They first except to the Novelty of our Reformation, and always insult with
this Question, Where was your Religion before Luther? To this, these things are
to be opposed. First, we turn back the Question, and ask them where was their
Religion the first six hundred years after Christ? Where was the Worship of
Images, the Doctrine of the Corporal Presence, of Redeeming out of Purgatory,
of Deposing Princes, and of the Worshipping Saints, before the Eighth Century?
If the Reformation be now to be condemned, because of its Novelty, these things
were then to be as much condemned, because they were then Novelties.

Secondly. If the Reformation had brought in any new Doctrine, its Novelty were
indeed a just Prejudice against it: but it was only the throwing out of these
Corruptions which had been brought in, in some dark and Ignorant Ages.

Thirdly. The Doctrine of the Reformed Church, is no other than what Christ and
his Apostles taught; and what the Church believed for many Ages after them. And
as to the Positive part of it, it has been still held by the Church of Rome,
and is yet acknowledged by them: but with so many Additions, that there was a
Necessity of Reforming these: And this is often to be inculcated in them, that
there is no Article of Faith, nor any other material point of Religion, among
us that is condemned by the Church of Rome. They only blame us because we do
not in many other points believe as they do: and this we ought not to do,
unless we could see an equal Authority binding us to all alike.

Another Exception is, that in the Reformation we made a Schism, and broke the
Unity of the Church, whereas if there had been any things amiss in the Church,
they say the Reformers should have endeavored to remove them, without tearing
the Body of Christ in pieces.

But in answer to this, we acknowledge if the things complained of, could have
been continued without sin, they ought not to have departed from the Communion
of other Churches: but when the public Liturgies and the Worship was found to
be full of such Corruptions, that without Idolatry and Superstition, they could
be no longer kept up, then it was not time to stay for the leisure of their
Neighboring Churches.

Yet if there had been any probable hopes, that the Sea of Rome, would have
concurred in such a Reformation, it had been worth staying for, as long, as was
possible. But when it was on the contrary, apparent, that all the most just
Remonstrances made to that Court, were answered at best with delays and
Excuses, if not with Excommunications and other censures; they had no reason to
expect any concurrence from thence. So the case being thus put, that they
discovered such Corruptions in the Worship of God, with which they could not
comply any longer; either they were obliged to Worship God against their
Consciences, or to lay aside all public Worship, or else to cast out these
Corruptions by a Reformation. Let any man of good reason judge, whether the
last of these was not to be chosen?

There was no Obligation lying on this Church to wait for the pleasure of the
Court of Rome, or our neighboring Churches in this matter. We are a free and
Independent Church: we owe a charitable and neighbourly Correspondence to
foreign Churches; but we are subject to none of them. And according to the
express Decision of one of the first General Councils, in the like case, we
were no way subordinate to the Sea of Rome, even as it was the Patriarchate of
the West. Themselves do confess that it is no Heresy to say, That See is
fallible: and therefore we were not obliged to dance attendance at that Court,
when we discovered the Corruptions, with which it had deceived the World; but
might in our National or Provincial Synods at home, examine and Reform whatever
errors were among us. And the multitude of those who held these errors, could
be no just ground for delaying any advances toward a Reformation; no more than
in the ancient Church, the Orthodox Bishops when chosen into a See corrupted
with Arrianism, were obliged because that Contagion was generally spread, to
make no attempts toward Reformation.

They Except further, That the Reformation was begun here by a vicious Prince,
King Henry the Eighth, who partly out of revenge, because the Pope would not
grant his desire about the Divorce of his Queen, and partly to enrich himself
and his Courtiers with the sale of Abbey-lands did suffer these Doctrins first
to take head here: and therefore they can have no good opinion of any thing
that came from so wicked a man, and upon such ill motives.

If this be a good Argument against the Reformation, it was as good against
Christianity upon Constantine's turning Christian; for the Heathen Writers
represent him with as black a character as they can do King Henry. But we must
not think ill of every thing that is done by a bad man, and upon an ill
Principle: Otherwise if we had lived in Iehu's days, the same Plea would have
been as strong, for keeping up the Idolatry of Baal: since Iehu had in a very
unsincere manner destroyed it: and yet God rewarded him for what he had done.

But whatever might have been King Henry's secret motives, his proceedings were
regular and justifiable. He found himself married to her that had been his own
Brothers Wife, contrary to the express words of the Law of God. The Popes
Legate, and his own Confessor and all the Bishops of England (except one)
thought his scruples were well grounded. Upon which according to the
superstition of that time, he made his applications to the Court of Rome for a
Divorce: which were at first well received, and a Bull was granted. Afterward
some defects being found in that, a more ample one was desired, which was also
granted: and Legates were appointed to try the matter. But the Pope soon after
turned over to the Emperors Party, whose Aunt the Queen was: and was thereupon
prevailed with, to recall the Legates Commission, destroy the Bull, and cite the
King to appear at Rome, where all things and persons were at the Emperors
devotion. Upon all this, the King did expostulate with the Pope, that either
his business was just, or unjust: if it was just why did he recall what he had
granted, and put him off with such delays. If it was not just, why did he at
first grant the Bull for the Divorce. This was unanswerable, but the Pope did
still feed him with false hopes, yet would do nothing. Upon which he consulted
the chief Universities, and the most learned men in Christendom, about his
Marriage. Twelve famous Universities, and above an hundred learned Doctors, did
declare under their hands and Seals (some writing larger Treatises about it)
that his Marriage was against the Law of God. And that in that case the Popes
Dispensation, which had allowed the Marriage, was void of it self. So after the
King had been kept in suspense from December 1527 till February 1533/4. above
six years, he set his Divines to examine what authority the Pope had in England,
either by the Law of God, or the practice of the Primitive Church, or the Law
of the Land, and after a long and accurate search, they found He had no
authority at all in England, neither by the Laws of God, of the Church, nor of
the Land: so this Decision was not made rashly, nor of a sudden.

The Popes Authority being thus cast off, it was Natural in the next place to
Consider, what Doctrines were then held in England, upon no other grounds than
Papal Decrees. For it was absurd to reject the Popes power; and yet to retain
these Opinions, which had no better Foundation than his Authority. Upon this
many of the things, which had been for some Ages received in the Church of
Rome, fell under debate: And, a great many particulars were reformed. Yet, that
King was so leavened with the Old Superstition, that the progress of the
Reformation, was but slow during his Reign. But it was carried on to a further
perfection, under King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth. In all their Methods of
proceeding, there is nothing that can be reasonably censured: if it be
confessed that the Pope is not Infallible, and the whole Church of Rome,
acknowledges that it is no Heresy to deny his Infallibility.

And for the Sale of the Abby-lands, they only spoiled the spoilers. For the
Monks, and Friars, had put these public cheats on the Nation, of Redeeming
Souls out of Purgatory, going on Pilgrimages, with the worship of Saints, and
Images, which were infused in the vulgar, by many lying Stories, pretended
Apparitions, the false show of Miracles, with other such like Arts. And the
credulous and superstitious Multitudes were thereby wrought on, to endow these
Houses with their best Lands, and adorn their Churches with their Plate and
richest Furniture. It was not to be expected that when their Impostures were
discovered, they should enjoy the spoil they had made by them: nor was it for
the public interest of the Nation, to give such encouragement to idleness, as
the converting all these Houses to Foundations for an unactive life would have
been. Many of them were applied to good Uses, Bishoprics, Cathedral and
Collegiat Churches, Hospitals, and free Schools: And more of them ought indeed
to have been converted to these ends. But the excesses of King Henry, and his
Courtiers must not be charged on the Reformers; who did all they could to
hinder them.

And thus all these prejudices with which the Vulgar are misled, appear to be
very unjust, and ill grounded. In conclusion, If by these or such like
considerations, any that are now of that Communion, can be brought to mind
Religion in earnest, considering it, as a Design to save their Souls, by making
them truly pure and holy; and so reconciling them to God through Christ: And if
they will examine Matters without Partiality, seeking the truth and resolving
to follow it, wherever they find it; and join with their Enquiries, earnest
Prayers to God, the Father of lights, to open their eyes, and grant them his
Holy Spirit, to lead them into all truth; there is little doubt to be made, but
the great Evidence that is in Truth, will in due time appear so clear to them
as to dissipate all these mists, which Education, implicit Faith, and
Superstition have raised, by which they have hitherto darkened.

FINIS.
A RELATION Of the Barbarous and Bloody MASSACRE Of about an hundred thousand
PROTESTANTS,

BEGUN At PARIS, and carried on over all FRANCE by the PAPISTS, in the Year
1572.

Collected out of Mezeray, Thuanus, and other approved Authors.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

A Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants, begun in Paris, and carried on
over all France, in the Year 1572.
THere are no Principles of Morality more universally received, and that make
deeper impressions on the minds of all Men, that are more necessary for the
good of humane Society, and do more resemble the Divine Perfections, than Truth
and Goodness: So that if our Savior denounced a Woe against those who teach
Men to break the least of his Commandments, what may they look for, who design
to subvert these that may be justly called the greatest of them?

That the Church of Rome teaches Barbarity and Cruelty, against all who receive
not their Opinions; and that Heretics are to be delivered to secular Princes,
who must Can. 3.
burn them without mercy; or if they have either Bowels or Conscience, so that
they will not be the Instruments of their Cruelty, that they shall lose their
Kingdoms or Dominions, is known to all that have read the Decrees of the 4th
Council in the Lateran. The violation of Public Faith, was also decreed by
another of their General Councils at Constance; in which, notwithstanding the
Sess. 19.
safe conduct that Sigismund had granted to John Husse and Jerome of Prague,
care was not only taken that they should be burnt; but they made it a standing
Rule for the time to come, That tho Heretics came to the place of Judgment,
trusting to their safe conduct, and would not have come without it; yet the
Prince who granted it, was under no Obligation by it, but the Church might
proceed to Censures and Punishment. By these Decrees, Cruelty and Treachery are
become a part of their Doctrine, and they may join them to their Creed, upon as
good Reasons as they can show for many of their other Additions.

The Nature of Man is not yet sunk so low, as easily to hear these things
without horror: therefore it is fit they should be kept among the Secrets of
their Religion, till a fit opportunity appear, in which they may serve a turn:
and then we need not doubt but they will be made: use of. If any will be so
charitable to their Church, as not easily to believe this, the History of the
Parisian Massacre may satisfy them to the full: which Thuanus says, was a
Pitch of Barbarity beyond any thing that former Ages had ever seen: And if the
Irish Massacre, flowing from the same Spirit, and the same Principles, had not
gone beyond it, we might have reasonably concluded, that it could never be
matched again. But we may be taught from such Precedents, what we ought to
expect, when ever we are at the mercy of Persons of that Religion, who, if they
be true Sons of the Church of Rome, must renounce both Faith and Mercy to all
Heretics.

I shall give the Relation of this Massacre from that celebrated late Writer of
the French History, Mr. de Mezeray, only adding some Passages out of Thuanus,
Davila, and others, where he is defective.

But I shall premise a short representation of the Civil Wars of France, which
are made use of as the Arguments for justifying that Cruelty, and by which they
do still blemish the Protestant Religion, as teaching Rebellion against Princes.

During the Reign of Francis the 1st, and Henry the 2d, the Protestant Religion
got great footing in France; the usual severities of the Church of Rome were
then employed to extirpate it; yet tho their Numbers were very great, and the
Persecution most severe, they made no resistance. But upon the death of Henry
the 2d, Catherine de Medici, the Queen Mother, with the Cardinal of Lorrain,
and the Duke of Guise, took the Government in their Hands; pretending that the
King ( Francis Thuanus.
the 2d) was of Age, being then sixteen. The Princes The abstract of the Books
written upon the Head, is in the Voluminous but Anonymous Historian of these
Wars, printed at Paris, An. 1581.
of the Blood on the other hand alleged, That the Kingdom ought to be under a
Regency till the King was at least 22 Years of Age: Since Charles the 6th had
been admitted at that Age to the Government, as a particular mark of their
esteem of him: So that tho the Age of Majority was at 25 Years, and that was a
singular exception from a general Rule, yet at furthest, it showed that the
King could not assume the Government before he was two and twenty.

It was also an undoubted Right of the Princes of the Blood to hold the
Regency, during the Minority of their Kings: and to administer it, by the
Direction of the Parliaments, and the Assembly of the States. Upon these
Points, many things were written on both sides. Thuanus, lib. 16.
The Princes of the Blood pretended, they were excluded from the Government,
against Law, and upon that were projecting how to possess themselves of the
Power; which, with the Person of the King, were violently kept from them. But
the Prince of Conde being advised to it, by Coligny then Admiral of France, did
also declare for mitigating the Severities against the Protestants. This being
the Case, that the Point was truly disputable, no Man can blame the Protestants
for joining with their Friends against their Enemies. And yet this Plot was
driven no further, than an endeavor to take the King out of the Hands of his
Mother, and the Brothers Thuanus. Mezeray.
of Lorrain, who were all Foreigners. The chief Promoter of it was a Papist,
Renaudy, and it was discovered by Avennelles; who tho he was most firm to his
Religion, being a Protestant, yet having an aversion to all Plots, revealed it
out of scruple of Conscience.

Soon after this Discovery, Francis the 2d died; and his Brother that succeeded
him, Charles the 9th was without dispute under Age, he not being then full
eleven years old. And according to the resolution of many great Lawyers, in the
case of his Brother, the Kingdom ought to have been under a Regency, during all
the Wars that preceded the Massacre, for he was then but two and twenty. At
first it was agreed to, that the King of Navarre, as the first Prince of the
Blood, ought to be Regent; but he being wrought on, by the Queen Mother and her
Party, and drawn over to them, the Lawyers were again set to examine, How far
the Power of the Regent did extend: Many published their Opinions, That the
other Princes of the Blood ought to have their share in the Regency, and that
the Regents might be checked by the Courts of Parliaments, and were subject to
an Assembly of the States.

The chief Point of State, then under Consideration, was, What way to proceed
with the Protestants, whose Numbers grew daily, and were now more considerable,
having such powerful Heads. A severe Edict came out against them in July 1561,
condemning all Meetings for Religious Worship, except those that were
celebrated with the Rites of the Church of Rome, banishing all the Protestant
Ministers, and appointing the Bishops to proceed against Heretics; with this
only mitigation of former Cruelties, That Banishment should be the highest
Punishment. But the Nation could not bear the Execution of this: So next
January there was a great Assembly called of the Princes of the Blood, the
Privy Counselors, and eight Courts of Parliament, in which the Edict that
carried the name of the Month, was passed. By it, the free exercise of that
Religion was tolerated, and the Magistrates were required to punish all who
should hinder or interrupt it.

Not long after that, the Duke of Guise did disturb a Davila. lib. 3
Meeting of Protestants at Vassy, as he was on his Journey to Paris; his
Servants began with reproachful words, and from these they went to blows. It
ended in a throwing of Stones, one of which hurt the Duke; but that was
severely revenged, about 60 were killed, and 200 wounded, no Age or Sex being
spared. Upon this he encouraged the violation of the Edict every where; so that
it was universally broken. The King of Navarre joined with him in these
Courses; but the Prince of Conde, that was next to him in the Royal Blood,
declared for the Edicts: Many great Lawyers were of opinion, That the Regents
Power was not so vast as to suspend, or break the Edict, and that therefore the
People might follow any Person, much more the next Prince of the Blood, in
defense of it. This Plea was yet stronger, before the Year ended, for the King
of Navarre being killed, the Prince of Conde was then by the Law of France the
Rightful Regent: So that all the Wars that followed afterward, till the Year
1570, had this to be said for them, That in the Opinion of very Learned Men,
the King was all that while under Age, that the Edicts were broken, the Kingdom
governed by a Woman, and Foreigners, against Law, and that the lawful Regent
was excluded from the Government; which made King James, whose Judgment is not
to be suspected in this Case, always justify the Protestants in France, and
excuse them from Rebellion.

This is a piece of History little understood, and generally made use of to
blemish the Reformation; therefore I thought it necessary to introduce the
following Relation, with this just account of these Wars, that were the
pretended grounds with which the House of Guise covered their own Ambition, and
hatred of the Family of Burbon.

After France had suffered all the Miseries which a course of Civil Wars, for
ten years together, carries after it, the King was advised to set on foot a
Treaty of Peace; not so much out of a design to quiet Matters by a happy
settlement, as to ensnare the Protestants into some fatal Trap, in which they
being catched, might be safely and easily destroyed. The chief Authors of this
advice, were the Queen Mother, the Cardinal of Lorrain, the Duke of Nevers, the
Count of Rets, and Birague; the last three were Italians, and so better fitted
both for designing and carrying on so wicked a Council, to which the Duke of
Anjou, afterward Henry the third, was also admitted.

They said the extirpation of Heresy might be done much cheaper than by a Civil
War. It was fit first to grant the Protestants what conditions they desired,
then to treat them with all possible kindness; by which their Jealousies were
to be once extinguished; and a confidence being begotten in them; then to draw
the chief Heads of the Party to Court, upon some specious Attractive, and there
they were sure of them. The first Bait to be offered, was the marriage of the
King's Sister to the King of Navarre, and if that succeeded not, they were to
invent still a new one, till they found that which would do the Business. All
the danger of this Council was, that the Pope and the King of Spain would be
much provoked by it; and there might be some hazard of Tumults, among the
zealous People of France, if the King seemed to favor the Heretics too much.
But they reckoned, that when the Design took effect, all who might be
discontented with the appearance of favor showed to them, would be well
satisfied, and the more the Pope and Spaniard complained of it, it would
advance their chief end, of creating a confidence in the Protestants more
effectually. Thus were their Councils laid. The Room in which this was first
projected, Thuanus lib. 49.
was the Council Chamger of Blois, where 16 Years after the Duke of Guise was
killed, by Henry the third's orders. And it was more fully concluded in that
Chamber at St. Clou, where the same Henry the third was murdered by a Dominican.

The Design being agreed on, the Queen Mother made some of her Spies, among the
Protestants, assure them, that she hated the King of Spain mortally, both on
her Daughter's account, that was his Queen, and as was universally believed,
had been poisoned by his Orders; as also upon the consideration of her own
Family of Florence, to which the Spaniard was then an uneasy Neighbor: and
designed to take the Territory of Siena out of their Hands. It was reasonable
enough to believe, that upon such Motives, a Woman of her temper would set on a
War with Spain. The King did also express a great inclination to the same War,
and to undertake the Protection of the Netherlands, which were then under the
Tyranny of the Duke of Alva's Government. This wanted not a fair pretense,
Flanders having been formerly subject to the Crown of France. He also seemed
weary of the greatness of the Duke of Guise and his party, which a Civil War
did still increase.

The King and the Queen Mother employed also in these Messages, Biron,
Momorancy, Cosse and others, who were Men of great Integrity, and had much
Friendship for the Queen of Navarre and the Admiral, that were the Heads of the
Protestant Party. The Queen of Navarre was sensible of the great advantages her
Son would receive from such an Alliance. An Army was also promised her, for the
recovery of her Kingdom from the Spaniards; which had been easily regained, if
the Crown of France had assisted her; since the Southern Parts of France were
almost all Protestants, who would have w^llingly served her against Spain. Only
she being a most Religious Woman, had great apprehensions of the unlawfulness,
at least the extreme danger of matching her Son to one of a different Religion;
therefore she took some time to consider of that part of the Proposition. The
Admiral was very weary of the Civil War, it both ruined his Country, and
slackened the discipline of War, which he had formerly observed with a Roman
Severity.

He thought the Conquest of the Netherlands would be an easy and a great
accession to the Crown; he knew there was none so likely to be employed in it
as himself, and he was resolved to carry all the Soldiers of the Religion with
him. And being Admiral, he also designed to raise the greatness of the Crown
both at Sea, and in the newfound World, which was then sending over an
incredible deal of Wealth to Spain; in which the Spaniards who had landed in
Florida, and killed a Colony of the French, that was settled there, had given
just cause to make War upon them. Therefore as he had often expressed his being
so averse to a Civil War, that he could no longer look on and see the Miseries
it brought on his Country; so he was made believe the King did in good earnest
intend to assist the Flemings, which being both against the Spaniard, and in
defense of those of the same Religion, he would by no means hinder.

Upon these Considerations, there was a Peace concluded between the King and
the Protestants, by which the free exercise of their Religion was granted: some
Cautionary Towns were also put in their Hands, to be kept by them two Years,
till there were a full settlement made of the Edicts, and the other things
agreed to, for their Security. The King acted his part with all the Artifice
possible, he became much kinder to the Family of Momorancy and the rest of the
Admirals Friends, and seemed to neglect those of Lorrain. He threatened the
Parliament of Paris, because they made some difficulty in passing the Edict in
favors of the Protestants. He went secretly to meet with Lewis Count of
Nassaw, and treated with him about the Wars of the Netherlands. He married the
Emperor's Daughter, who was thought a Protestant in his Heart. He entered in a
Confederacy with Q. Elizabeth: and the Cardinal of Chastilion (the Admiral's
Brother, who had renounced his red Hat, and turned a Protestant) being then in
England, was employed to set on foot a Treaty of Marriage between the Duke of
Anjou and the Queen: A Peace was also made with the Princes of the Empire. And
tho both the Spanish Ambassador and the Legate did all they could to hinder the
Peace, and the Marriage of the King of Navarre, yet they seemed to make no
account of that at Court: Only the King gave the Legate great assurances of his
Fidelity to the Apostolic See, and that all that he was doing, was for the
interest of the Catholic Religion. And taking him one day by the Hand: He
desired him to assure the Caten. vita d^ Pio Quinto.
Pope, that his design in this Marriage, was that he might be revenged on those
that were Enemies to God, and Rebels against himself, and that he would either
punish them severely, and cut them all in pieces, or lose his Crown. All which
he would do in compliance with the Advices he had received from the Pope, who
had continually set him on to destroy them; and he saw no way of doing it so
securely, as by getting them once to trust him, having tried all other methods
in vain. And for a pledge of his Faith, he offered him a Ring of great value;
which the Legate refused to take, pretending that he never took Presents from
any Prince, and that the Word of so great a King, was a better security than
any Pledge whatsoever.

Upon all these demonstrations of Friendship made to the Protestants, it was no
wonder if Persons of such Candor, as the Queen of Navarre, and the Admiral,
were deceived. The Admiral went first to Court, where he was received by the
King with the greatest show of kindness and respect that was possible. He
embraced him thrice, laid his Cheek to his, squeezing his Hands, called him
Father, and left nothing undone that might possess him with a firm Opinion of
his Friendship. Nor was the Queen Mother less officious to express her kindness
to him. He was allowed to keep fifty armed Gentlemen about him. An hundred
thousand Franks were sent him, for furnishing his Houses that had been spoiled
during the Wars. And which was more than all the rest, when Complaints were
carried by him to the King, of some who violated the Edict, great Insolences
being committed in many places; the King ordered them to be exemplarily
punished. So that there was a general repining over all France, at the King's
kindness to him. The King had also told him, that now he had got him near him,
he would never suffer him to leave him any more.

The Design succeeding so well on the Admiral, the Proposition of the Marriage
was also carried on; and the Queen of Navarre was next brought to Court, but
soon after died (as was generally believed) of Poison, that was given her in
some perfumed Gloves; to conceal which, the Surgeons that opened her, would
not touch her Head, but pretended she died of an Imposthume in her side. The
Cardinal of Chastilion was also at that time poisoned, which tho afterward
confessed by him that had done it, yet was not then so much as suspected.

The King seemed more and more set on the War in Flanders. He sent both to
England, and Germany, to consult about the Preparations for it, and had agreed
with the Prince of Orange, about the Division of the Netherlands: That all on
their side of Antwerp should come to the Crown of France: And what lay on the
other side of it should belong to the States. He sent a Protestant his
Ambassador to Constantinople, to engage the Grand Signior unto a War with
Spain. He also furnished the Count of Nassaw with Money, and sent some of his
best Captains with him to try if they could surprise any Towns near the
Frontier, who did their part so dexterously, that Mons was surprised by the
Count of Nassaw, and Valenciennes by La Noiie, according to Mezeray; tho he
seems to be mistaken as to Valenciennes, for Thuanus and Davila say nothing of
it, but mention Mons only. And Veremundus Frisius, who wrote the History
Printed at Edingburgh, 1573.
of that Massacre the Year after, says, That they missed their Design in
surprising Valenciennes, upon which they went to Mons and carried it. Upon this
all reckoned that the King was now engaged, and the War begun. So the King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, were brought to Court, and received with all
the Marks of a firm Friendship, that could be invented. A Dispensation was
obtained from the new Pope for the Marriage. Veremundus says, Pope Pius the 5th
had always opposed it, but upon the Cardinal of Alexandria's return to Rome,
who went to assist in the Conclave, where Gregory the 13th was chosen, the new
Pope easily granted the Bull, which was believed to have flowed from the
Information he received from that Cardinal, of the King's Design in this
Marriage, which to be sure his Holiness would neither obstruct nor delay. So
the Bull being sent to the Cardinal of Burbon, the day was set, and the chief
heads of the Protestants were all drawn into Paris, partly to assist at the
Solemnities of a Marriage, which they hoped would put an end to all their
Troubles; partly to get Charges in the Army, which all People believed would be
commanded by the Admiral. Only many of the hottest of them had followed Ienlis
and La Noiie into Flanders, where it was intended to abandon them to the
cruelty of the Duke of Alva, who had intercepted and cut off a great Body of
them commanded by Ienlis. The Admiral pressed the King to declare the War
immediately; foreseeing that unless it followed suddenly, his Friends that had
surprised these Towns, would be destroyed, and the whole Design spoiled. But
the King put him off with delays, in which he expressed much Confidence in him,
by telling him the secret grounds he had to distrust almost every Person about
him: and that therefore he must of necessity settle his Court and Councils
first, before he could enter upon such a War.

But now the Design being ripe, the Duke of Guise, to whom it had also been
communicated, was employed to gather many desperate Men about him, who might be
fit to execute all Orders; and the thing getting into more hands, took wind, so
that they at Rochel being informed of some suspicious Passages, wrote to the
Admiral, to disabuse him, and desired he would leave the Court, and trust no
more to the fair appearances he saw there; since these were only the Masks of
some great Mischief that was framing. To them he wrote a long Answer, and
assured them, That the King's Heart was wholly changed, that there was never a
better Prince in the World, and that for his owe part, he would die a thousand
Deaths, rather than suspect him capable of so base a Design. Then he laid
before them all the reasons which induced him to believe the War with Spain was
really intended, and therefore he desired, that they would lay dow their
groundless Jealousies. And when some that were about him, pressed the same
things upon him; he told them plainly, He would rather be destroyed, than make
a new Rupture; and would be dragged at Horse-heels through Paris, rather than
begin another Civil War. His Authority was so great, and his Experience so
approved, that the whole Party submitted to his Judgment: And he got some
Cautionary Towns, that were by the Treaty of Peace to be restored at the end of
two Years, to be delivered up three Weeks before the time was elapsed: Only the
Rochellers were a little more apprehensive, and would not receive a Garrison.

On the 17th of August was the King of Navarre Married, and four days were
spent in all the gallant Diversions, that are usual on such Occasions, but were
now performed with more than ordinary Magnificence and Joy.

Hitherto the Mine was working under ground, and now it was time for it to
play. There was nothing could be blamed in the Conduct of the Protestants, but
too much Candor and too great Confidence. They knew they designed nothing, but
the quiet of their Country, and the greatness of the Crown. They were cajoled
with the most engaging tokens of Friendship, that ever were showed on any such
Occasion; they thought the King was sincere, and being then but coming to be of
Age, was taking new Measures. And he had so covered the Cruelty of his Temper,
with a show of good Nature, that they expected they should be most happy under
him. And for the Queen Mother, tho they knew her too well to put any confidence
in her; yet her Passion for her Family, and her Revenge for the poisoning of
her Daughter, made them think they were also well assured of her. And indeed so
deep and so refined a Dissimulation was perhaps never before acted. There was
but one part of the King's Deportment that could give any ground for Jealousy,
the horrid and blasphemous Oaths and Imprecations, which he made use of on all
occasions to persuade them of the reality of his Professions; which always
raise suspicion in sober and wary Persons. These the King used so frequently,
that the Writers of that Time, say, That he seldom spoke three words without
some terrible Oath, or blasphemous Expression, which from his ill Example, was
so spread over all France, that none but the Protestants, spoke in any other
strain.

But now when it fell under Consideration, how their Designs should be
executed, the Queen with her two Italian Confidents, the Count de Rets, and
Birague, who, next to the Protestants, hated the House of Guise beyond all the
World, yet dissembling it most artificially; intended that the business should
be so managed, as to ruin both the Protestants, and that Family at once:
Therefore they thought, that if some of their Followers would assassinate the
Admiral, the Protestants would turn their Revenge on them, and they knew the
Parisians, would be easily moved to rise against the Protestants; and so they
reckoned, that if an attempt was made upon the Admiral, by any of the Duke of
Guise's Creatures, his Party would presently take a severe Revenge on the Head
of the House of Guise, and the Parisians would be soon brought out to destroy
them.

They concealed this part of their Design, and in the Cabinet-Council only
proposed, that the Duke of Guise would find some person to kill the Admiral,
which should pass like an act of private Revenge; and they said, they did not
doubt, but the whole party would upon that take arms, and thereupon, there
would be a good color given, to bring out the City of Paris upon them. The
Duke of Guise being young and hot, and boiling with Revenge for his Father's
Blood, undertook it, not considering that himself might perish in the first
heat of action, as the Queen hoped he should. He pitched on Maurenel, who had
formerly assassinated another Person, and placed him in the House of one that
had been his Tutor, near St. German of Auxerre, where the Admiral used to pass,
as he went or came from the Louvre.

It was now necessary to execute their Design quickly, for the Protestants were
beginning to apprehend some danger. They saw the King was resolved, to let
those who had surprised the Towns in Flanders perish, without sending them any
Relief. The Admiral was resolved to take leave within a few days: His Friend,
the Duke of Montmorency, tho no Protestant, yet saw the Storm coming, and
retired to his House: and many little Circumstances occurred, which gave them
all just cause of fear: So the other Party had no time to lose. Therefore on
the 22d of August, about Noon as the Admiral was going Home from the Court,
reading a Paper that he had in his hand, the Assassinate that was laid for him,
shot him from the House, where the Duke of Guise had placed him; his Fuzee was
charged with three Bullets, that were believed to be poisoned. One of these
carried away part of the Forefinger of his right Hand; the other stuck in his
left Arm, and the third missed him. He received it with great presence of mind,
and pointed to the House from whence it came; he also sent one to the King to
give him notice of it, and then ordered his Arm to be bound up, and so went
Home leaning on his Servants. Some run to the House and broke into it, but
found none there, save a Lacquey, and a Maid, and the Fuzee, which the Murderer
left behind him, when he made his escape. The King was in the Tenis-Court when
the news were brought him: He personated a deep resentment, and said in a Tone
that seemed full of affliction, and with a terrible Oath, Shall I never have
quiet! and so threw away his Racquet, and went out in a rage. The Duke of Guise
did also counterfeit some Surprise.

But they missed their designs, both ways, for neither was the Admiral killed,
nor did the Protestants fly out into any disorder. The King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, came upon this to the King to complain, and desired leave to
go out of Town, since Men were not safe so near the Court. The King seemed to
resent it, more than they did, and with the horriblest Oaths he could think of,
swore he would execute such a Revenge on all that were found guilty of it,
whoever they were, that it should never be forgotten; and desired them to stay
and be Witnesses of it. The Queen Mother made also show of inflaming his Rage
with most vehement Expressions, so that they were persuaded to stay. The King
ordered the Murderer to be pursued, the two Servants to be Examined, and all
the Gates of Paris (except two) to be kept shut. The Admirals carriage on this
occasion, was suitable to the rest of his behavior, and equal to what the
greatest Hero's had ever showed. Ambrose Pare, the famous Surgeon, dressed his
Wound, he madethe Incision into his Arm, that he might take out the Bullet, and
did cut off his Finger for fear of a Gangreen: But his Scissars not being sharp
enough, he put him to extreme pain, and did not cut it off but at the third
reprise: during all which, the Admiral expressed no impatience nor anger. But
as Pare told Thuanus, he said to Mr. Maur a Minister that stood by, Now I
perceive that I am beloved of God, since I suffer these Wounds for his most
holy Name. And during the Operation, he often repeated these words, O my God,
forsake me not, and withdraw not thy wonted Favor from me! And whispered one
that was holding his Arm, in the Ear, that he should distribute an hundred
Crowns among the poor of Paris.

Next day Damvil, Cosse, and Villars, came to visit and comfort him, but
confessed it was needless, for he expressed great resolution of mind and
readiness to die, only he desired to see the King, and speak with him before he
died. Damvil and Teligny (the Admirals Son in Law) carried this Message to the
King, who very readily yielded to it. The Queen Mother apprehending the great
Genius of the Admiral, and fearing lest he should turn her Son to better
Councils, would needs go with the King. His two Brothers, with twelve of the
chief Persons in the Court, waited also on him, to make a show of putting the
more Honor on the Admiral, but really to watch the King, that he might have no
opportunity of speaking with him alone. When the King came to his Bedside, he
expressed the greatest tenderness possible, and in his Looks, and the of his
Voice counterfeited a most profound sorrow, and said to him, You, my Father,
have received the Wound, but I feel the smart of it, and will punish it in so
severe a manner, that the like was never seen. The Admiral thanked him, and
told him, By his Wound, he might well perceive, who were the Authors of the
Troubles of France. He pressed him earnestly to go on with the War in Flanders,
and not leave all those Gallant Persons to the Duke of Alva's Insolence and
Cruelty, who had trusted to his Protection. He complained of the Violation of
the Edict in several parts of France; and desired the King, to consider how
much it concerned him both in Honor and Interest, to keep his Faith
inviolated. The King gave him full assurances of this, but avoided the
discourse of Flanders, and with repeated Oaths told him, he would punish this
Fact against him, as if it had been done against himself. Then the Admiral
desired to speak privately with the King, which lasted not long; for the
Queen Mother, apprehending what the subject of his Discourse might be, came to
the Bedside and told the King, that so long a Conversation would much endanger
the Admirals health, and so broke it off. Yet it seems, as short as it was, it
made some Impression, for when she asked the King, what it was that he had said
to him? He answered, He had advised him to Reign himself, and he was resolved
to follow it. When this was over, the King asked the Admirals Friends, and the
Physicians many questions about his Health, and proposed for his greater
security, the carrying him to the Louvre. But the Physicians said, he could not
be safely removed. So after he had stayed an hour he left him, during which
time he acted the part, he intended to play, so well, that all the Witnesses
were satisfied with the Sincerity and Passion he expressed.

The Court of Parliament examined the Maid, and Lackquey, that were taken in
the House from whence he was shot, about the Murderer: and many presumptions
appeared against the Duke of Guise, whose Servants, they found, had brought him
to that House, and had provided an Horse for his escape. The King wrote that
same day both to his Ambassadors in foreign parts, and to the Governors of
the Provinces, showing them what had befallen the Admiral, and how much he
resented it. The next day being the 23d, the Duke of Guise and his Uncle the
Duke of Aumale, came and desired leave to go out of Town. The King by his Looks
and Carriage seemed to abhor them; and said, they might do what they pleased;
but as they went away, he said, they might go whither they would, but he should
find them out, if they appeared to be guilty of that Fact. And so they mounted
on Horseback and rode to the Port St. Anthony, as if they had intended to go
out of Town, but came back to Guise-house: and began to raise a great stir in
Paris. They called many about them, and sent their Agents all over the Town,
and sent Arms to diverse places. When News of this was brought to the Admiral,
he sent to the King to desire a Guard, so 50 were sent under the Command of
Cosseins, one of his bitterest Enemies. But to cover the matter better, some of
the King of Navarres Swisses, were sent to Guard within his House. The King did
also order all the Papists that lay near his House, to remove their Lodgings,
that the Protestants might have convenience to be about him, and gather
together if there should be any Tumult. He also desired the King of Navarre,
and the Prince of Conde would gather about them their best Friends, that they
might be prepared to defend themselves, in case the Duke of Guise should raise
any disorders.

All this seemed not only sincere, but kind; and by these Arts were the
Protestants, not only secured from their fears, but had great hopes raised in
them: And thus the greatest part of them were brought within the Net, that was
laid for their ruin. Only the Vice-Lord (or Vidam) of Chartres saw through the
disguise: And a Council of their Party being held in the Admirals Chamber, he
spoke freely, and told them, the Admirals Wound was the first Act of the
Tragedy, and more would soon follow. Therefore he proposed, that he might be
carried to Chastilion, ill as he was, in which there was less danger, than to
stay in a place where they and all their Friends would be suddenly destroyed.
Teligny and others, that were fully persuaded of the Kings good Intentions,
opposed this much, and said, it would show such a distrust of the King, as
might for ever lose him, that was then beginning to favor their Party. But the
Vidam answered, that stay who would, he would not stay longer than to Morrow,
for he was assured their stay would be fatal to themselves, and all their
Friends.

There was a perfidious Person in that Assembly, one Bouchavannes, who was an
Intelligencer to the Queen Mother, and carried presently an account of their
Consultation to her. She and her Party were now pressed with time, therefore
the execution of their Design could be no longer delayed than the next Night.
So the Council met and resolved, that not only the Persons of Quality of the
Religion should be killed, but that every one of what condition soever, that
were of that Profession should be Massacred. It was debated long, whether the
King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, should perish with the rest? for the
Duke of Guise his Party had a great mind to destroy the whole Family of
Bourbon: but as for the King of Navarre, it was thought contrary to the Laws of
Nations, of Hospitality, and of Nature, to murder a King, that had come under
trust to the Court, and was now so nearly allied to the King: and was guilty of
no Crime, but what he had from his Education. So it was resolved, he should be
spared, and made change his Religion. But for the Prince of Conde, he was
naturally fierce, and that temper, joined with the memory of his Father, made
them less inclined to save him; Only the Duke of Nevers, who had married his
Wifes Sister, interposed vigorously for him, and undertook that he should
become a good Catholic, and a faithful Subject: And he prevailed, tho with
great difficulty, that he should be spared. But for the rest, it was agreed on,
to raise the Town of Paris, and set them upon them, who were inflamed into such
a rage against that Party, that they knew it would be an easy work to engage
them in any sort of Cruely against them.

The conduct of it was committed to the Duke of Guise, who undertook it very
cheerfully. He did first communicate it to the Guards, and ordered them to keep
a strict Watch, both about the Louvre, and the places where the Admiral and his
Friends were lodged, that none might escape; then he desired the Provost (or
Major) of Paris, and the chief Magistrates and Officers of the City, would meet
at Midnight in the Townhouse, where they should receive their Orders. They met
accordingly, and it was intimated to them, that the King was now resolved to
destroy the Heretics, who had so long distracted his Kingdom: that therefore
every one should go to his Quarter, and have all People in readiness, with the
greatest secrecy that might be, and that they should have many Torches and
Flambeaus ready, to light out at their Windows. The Sign should be a white
Linen Sleeve on their left Arm, and a white Cross in their Caps: and at the
tolling of the great Bell of the Palace, which should be done near the break of
Day, they should light their Torches and march.

The King in the mean while, was under great irresolution. The horror of the
Fact, the infamy that would follow it, and the danger he might be in, if it
either miscarried, or were not fully executed, could not but fill him with
Confusion. But the Queen, who had overcome all the impressions of Tenderness
and Pity, that are natural to her Sex, hearing of it, came to him, and studied
to confirm him in his former resolutions, representing to him all the trouble
they had given him in the former Wars, and that he might expect yet worse, if
he would let go this opportunity, of securing the quiet of his whole Reign. She
knew how to work upon him so well, that in end she prevailed, and the King
swore deeply he would go through with it. Upon that, she being impatient, and
fearing a new turn in the Kings Thoughts, made the Bell of St. Germans be
tolled, which was the warning for tolling that in the Palace.

This fatal Signal was given the Morning of the 24th of August, St.
Bartholomews day, being Sunday; and was followed with a general Rising of the
whole City of Paris. The March of Soldiers, the noise of their Arms, and the
lightning of so many Torches, awakened the poor Protestants, who now saw
visibly that their ruin was both near and inevitable. Some of them went out to
the Streets, and asked what the matter might be, of so great a Concourse, and
so many Torches and armed Men, at such an hour? Some answered, as they had been
instructed to say, till all things should be ready, that there was to be a
Mock-Siege of a Fort in the Louvre, for the Kings Diversion. So they went
forward to satisfy their Curiosity, but quickly found it was a real Massacre,
and not a Mock-Siege that was intended, and they were the first Sacrifices of
that bloody Festivity. There were now about threescore thousand Men brought
together. The Duke of Guise, with his Uncle Aumale, resolved first to satisfy
their revenge on the Admiral, and therefore went to his Gate, where Cosseins
kept guard, on design to betray him the more effectually. He called to open the
Gate; which being done, they killed the Porter and broke into the Court. But
the King of Navarr's Swisses barricado'd the next Gate, and made some
resistance. This dismal noise awakened the Admiral, who at first apprehended,
it might be some Tumult of the Populace, which he hoped the King's Guards would
easily disperse. But when he perceived it increased, then he saw he was to be
destroyed. So he took his Nightgown and got up: Those that were about him were
amazed at the constancy of his mind, his Minister Merlin prayed; and when that
was ended, He said to those that were about him, I see now what this will end
in, but I am prepared to meet Death, which I have often looked for, but was
never afraid of: I account my self happy since it is so near me, having in this
my Death, through the Grace of God the hope of Eternal Life. I need no more the
help of Men, therefore farewell, my Friends, and try how you can save your
selves, that you be not involved in my ruin, lest by my death I make more
Widows than one: I have help enough in the presence of God, into whose hands I
commit my Soul, which is soon to be discharged out of this Body. All this he
spoke without the least commotion or appearance of fear. Then those about him
left him, and got up to the Roof of the House. By that time the Murderers had
brook in, and seven of them being all in Armor, came into his Chamber. Besme,
that had been one of the Duke of Guises Grooms, advanced toward him; to whom
he said, Young Man, you ought to reverence my gray Hairs, but you cannot
shorten my Life much. They all stood a while amazed at such undaunted courage,
and so composed a behavior, which as one of them told Thuanus, was the most
extraordinary thing that ever he saw his whole Life. Besme did first thrust him
into the Belly, and then cut him over the Face: at which he fell, and the
others struck at him, till he was quite dead. The Duke of Guise being below in
the Court, heard the noise, and called to them to throw him out at the Window,
which Besme and another did. And either the Duke, or the Count of Angoulesme
(for it is differently reported) wiped his Face, which was disfigured with
Blood, to know if it was he indeed, and perceiving it was so, trampled on his
Belly, and went away. An Italian cut off his Head, and carried it first to the
Queen Mother, and then embalmed it, and sent it to Rome, (not only as the
Protestants say, which is disingeniously added, by Mezeray, for Thuanus affirms
it): Then all the ignominy and barbarity possible, was exercised about the dead
Carcass, his Fingers and Hands were cut off, his Body dragged about the
Streets, thrown in the Sein, and hanged up in Chains his Feet uppermost: and a
fire was set under to burn it, but it only dried it and did not consume it.
Some days after Monmorancy caused it to be taken down secretly, and buried it
in his Chapel at Chantilly.

Thus fell the Admiral, that for all noble Qualities necessary, either to a
great Captain, or a complete Statesman, may be equalled to any of the Ancient
Greeks or Romans; and for Piety and other Christian Virtues, was the Wonder of
the Age he lived in.

But the Cruelty of the Duke of Guise and his Party, was rather kindled than
satiated with his Blood. So he and his Company went out to the streets, and
cried aloud, It was the King's command they should go on, and finish what they
had begun. And so the Multitude was let loose, to murder all that were of the
Religion, and the plunder of their Houses was to be their reward. This was
followed with the most enraged and cruel Massacre that ever was heard of. It
exceeded all that either the Heathens had done, or their Poets had feigned.
Every Man seemed a Fury, and as if they had been transformed into Tigres and
Wolves, out-did the very cruelty of Beasts of Prey. The bare relation of
Matters of Fact, is beyond all that Eloquence can invent, by which it may be
aggravated: and indeed a strict Narrative of what was really done, will appear
some Ages hence, as a Tragical description of an imaginary Cruelty, rather than
a true History. Five hundred Persons of Quality were murdered, and in all 4000
according to Thuanus and Mezeray. Perefixe the late B. of Paris says, there
were twenty Lords of note killed, and twelve hundred Gentlemen, and between
three and four thousand others. But Veremundus says, they were ten thousand. No
Age nor Sex was spared; Husbands and Wives were killed in one another Arms,
after they saw their Children murdered at their feet. One butchered an
innocent Babe, as it was playing with his Beard. Men of fourscore were not left
to the course of Nature, but hewn down. Nor did a single death satisfy their
brutal rage, but they made them die many deaths, before death relieved them.
One would cut off the Nose, another the Ear, a third the Hands, and a fourth
the Arms of the same Person, before they would be so merciful as to kill him
outright. Those that fled up to the tops of their Houses, were made leap over
to the Streets, where they were knocked down with Halberts. Such as ran out to
escape through dark Passages, were either instantly killed, or driven to the
Sein, where they took pleasure to kill and drown them with much art. Dead
Bodies floated all along the Seine, and were lying in heaps thorough the
Streets. In many places the Kennels ran Blood. There was nothing to be heard
but the howlings of mangled and dying Persons; or the horrid blasphemies of
their accursed Butchers. They searched all the Corners of their Houses, as
Hounds pursuing for prey. No Man delivered his Friend; no Host had pity on his
Guest: Only one brave Man saved his Enemy.

The Louvre it self was full of Blood, and the dead Corpse of those whom the
King of Navarre and Prince of Conde had brought about them for their security:
but where they expected a Sanctuary, they found a Massacre. It is needless to
reckon up the Names of those noble Persons who were then destroyed, for the
memory of Rochfoucant, Teligny, Renel, Piles, Pluvial, Baudine, Guerchy,
Lavardin, Nompar or La Force, and five hundred more will be ever sacred; yet in
this Nation where these Families are not known, the recital would be tedious
and useless. Of all those Guerchy alone died with a Sword in his Hand, but
could hurt none of those that assaulted him, they having Armor on them.

This horrible Confusion, gave the Allarm to those who lay in the Suburbs on
the other side of the Seine to make haste and be gone; and they, having no
suspicion of the King himself, were thinking to have gone over and sheltred
themselves within the Louvre. The Parisians had now lost all order, and were
fallen to plunder, so that they could not be brought together: Therefore the
Duke of Guise sent over some of the Swisse Guards in Boats to kill them, and
himself followed with some Horse; and had it not been for the mistake of him
who brought the wrong Keys of the Gate, thorough which he was to pass, they had
been all surprised before they had resolved what course to take. But day
appearing, they saw enough to convince them, it was not time to delay any more:
So in the greatest confusion possible, they got on Horseback, and fled away.
The Duke of Guise pursued them, but they were out of his reach, and not being
strong enough to defend themselves, and keep in a Body, they dispersed and
escaped.

But the fury that they fled from, continued in Paris all that day, and the two
following days: In which nothing was left undone that ingenious and desperate
cruelty could suggest. Six hundred Houses were pillaged. And after such a glut
of Blood, Men's minds becoming savage, they fell to revenge private Enmities,
even upon their Fellow Papists; many of whom were in the end also murdered, but
those were chiefly Monorancy his Friends, who were thought cold in the matter
of Religion.

The most enraged of their Bloodhounds were Tanchou, Pesou, and Crosier a
Goldsmith; the two former drove many to the Mills, and forced them to leap from
thence into the River. Pesou boasted to the King himself, that he had made an
hundred and fifty leap that night. And Thuanus says, he often heard Crosier
say, That with that Hand he had killed 400: by which it seems he was thought so
sanctified, that he would live no longer a common life, but as a sacred Person
went to an Hermitage; where yet his cruelty left him not; for during the Wars
of the League, he drew a Flemish Merchant into his Cell and murdered him there.
Thus were the Protestants destroyed in Paris, with a Treachery and Cruelty that
the uncivilized Nations had never showed to one another, nor had the Heathens
been ever guilty of any thing like it toward the Christians. The Precedent
which the Church of Rome had formerly given in the Massare of the Albigenses,
was the likest thing in History to it for Barbarity; but never had Treachery
and Cruelty met together in such a manner before this execrable day.

At Court all those generous Impressions which follow noble Blood, seemed
extinguished. Men threw off Humanity, and Women had neither compassion nor
modesty. The Queen Mother and her Ladies took pleasure to look upon the most
detestable Objects, and greedily beheld some obscene and indecent sights; but
it is not fit to write all that was then done. About nine of the Clock, the
King sent for the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, and told them he was
forced to use that severe Remedy to put an end to War and Rebellion, and had
therefore destroyed those, whom he could not induce to obey: And for them, tho
he had good reason to hate them mortally, since they had led on a Rebellion
against him, yet in consideration of their Blood and Alliance, he was resolved
to spare them if they would change their Religion, otherwise they must look for
no better usage than their Servants had met with. The King spoke this with
great rage, so that the King of Navarre being terrified, said, That if the King
would save their lives, and leave them their Consciences free, they should in
all other things be commanded by him. But the Prince of Conde answered more
boldly, That he might dispose of his Life and Estate as he pleased, but for his
Religion, he owed an account of it to God alone, from whom he had received the
knowledge of it. This resolute Answer put the King in such a rage, that after he
had treated him with most abusive language, he swore, That if he did not change
within three days, he should hang for it. And so ordered them to be strictly
guarded. At the same time there were Expresses dispatched over all France, to
set on the People both in the Towns and Country, to imitate the example of the
Parisians, and destroy the Heretics. Yet the King either out of some remorse
or shame, wrote to his Ambassadors and the Governors of the Provinces, that
same day: That the Duke of Guise, and others that adhered him, having a great
interest in the City of Paris, and apprehending that the Admirals Friends were
resolved to revenge his Wound, had therefore, both to secure themselves, and to
prosecute their former Quarrels, raised the City of Paris: and had broke
through the Guards set to defend the Admiral, and killed him, and many other
Persons of Quality; the rage of the People being such, that the King's Guards
could do nothing to repress it: Therefore he was forced to keep himself within
the Louvre, but had, as soon as was possible, quieted the Town; so that all
things were put in order again; and he was resolved still to maintain his
Edict, made for the free Exercise of their Religion. Veremundus has printed the
Copies of the Letters, directed to the Governors of Burgundy and Tourain, and
to the Town of Bourges, with the Memorial sent to the Swiss Cantons, all to the
same purpose, bearing date the 24th of August. And in another Letter the King
wrote, That he had made up a new agreement with the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, and was resolved to run the same hazard with them, for
revenging the death of his Cousin the late Admiral. But the House of Guise
would not bear this, and made the King own, that all was done by his express
Orders. So on the 26th of August, the King went to the Court of Parliament, and
after an invidious repetition of all the Troubles of his Reign, which yet he
said, he intended to have quieted by the late Treaty of Peace, he discovered
that the Admiral had conspired to kill him, his Brothers, and the King of
Navarre, and to set up the young Prince of Conde, whom he also designed
afterward to kill, that so the whole Royal Family being destroyed, he might
make himself King: and since extreme Diseases required extreme Remedies, he was
forced to do what he had done; and concluded, that all was done by his express
Order and Command. Thuanus the Father, tho he abhorred the thing, yet out of
fear and compliance, made a base flattering Speech, of the necessity of
dissimulation in Princes, and did much commend that saying of Lewis the 11th.
He who knows not how to Dissemble, knows, not how to Reign. And Pibrac the
Attorney General, moved the King, that the Declaration he had made might be
entered in their Registers, and that strict Orders might be given, to put an end
to the Blood and Confusion with which the City was filled: Both which the King
ordered to be done. The Declaration which was thereupon published on the 28th,
is printed by Veremundus. By it the King charged all Persons, under pain of
Death, through the whole Kingdom, to do no injury to the Protestants. And at
the same time declared it Capital, for the Protestants to have any Assemblies.
This was believed to be done rather on design to destroy, than save the
Hugonets: That they being out of apprehension of danger, might stay all at
Home, and so be more easily Massacred. On the 28th of August, a Jubilee was
granted to all, who had been in this Butchery; and they were commanded to go
every where to Church, and bless God, for the success of that Action. So little
relenting had they, after all these black Crimes, that they imagined they had
done God good service: And to that height did their Impudence rise, that they
presumed to address to that Merciful Being, who abhors cruel and blood-thirsty
Men, and that with hands not only defiled with Blood, but boasting of it as a
Sacrifice offered to God, which had been a fitter Oblation to him that was a
Liar and a Murderer from the beginning, than the God of Truth, and Father of
Mercies.

One remarkable Passage fell out, which occasioned much Discourse, and was
variously constructed by the several Parties. On the day of the Massacre, about
Noon, a white Thorn in the Churchyard of the Innocents, that was almost dead,
and had no Leaves on it, flourished all of a sudden. This was published through
the Streets of Paris, as a Sign, that Heaven approved their actions, and was
made use of to animate them to new heats in their Cruelty: For every one was
set on to kill one or other, that he might be honored with the sight of so
unusual a thing. Some thought it might come from the nature of the Tree, and it
was said, such things were not extraordinary in Trees of that kind, a little
before they became quite dead. Others believed it might be the Trick of some
Monk, who pouring either hot Water, or some prepared Water at the Root of it,
might have done the feat. But the Rabble did universally ascribe it to some
miraculous Cause, only they differed about that to which it referred. The
Protestants said, it signified their Innocence, and that a new Troop of
Innocents were sent to Heaven, and therefore the Tree in the Churchyard of the
Innocents flourished afresh. The Papists said, is signified the joy in Heaven
at that days work, and that the Church was to flourish again by the death of
the Heretics.

But leaving these discantings on this seeming Miracle, Morvillier that was
Lord Keeper, advised, That for justifying, or at least mitigating the Censures
that might be made on these proceedings, there should be a Process carried on,
against the dead Admiral, to prove him guilty of a Conspiracy against the King
and the Royal Blood; and there were some few Protestants kept Prisoners, who
had been taken out of the English Ambassadors Lodgings, who to save themselves,
they hoped might be brought to accuse the Admiral. But while this Mock-Process
was making, there was a real prosecution of the like Cruelties in many other
parts of France.

At Meaux, a little Town not far from Paris, they began on the 25th of August,
being Monday, and spent the whole Week in shedding more Blood. They killed two
hundred; many of those were Women, whom they Forced before they Murdered them.
At Troy in Champaigne, about the same number was killed. At Orleans, a
thousand were also killed. Six or seven hundred at Roan, tho the Governor did
what he could to hinder it. At Bourges, Nevers, and Charity, all they found
were killed. At Toulouse two hundred were killed. At Bordeaux, they were for
some time in suspense, being afraid of the Rochellers; but the Priests did so
inflame the Multitude, that the Governor could not restrain their rage longer,
than the beginning of October; so then they Massacred all that they could find.
This beginning, was followed by all the Towns on the Garvinne. But next to
Paris, Lions was the place where the most barbarous Cruelties were acted. The
Governor had a mind to save the Protestants, and gathered together about six
or seven hundred of them, whom he lodged in several Prisons, that so he might
preserve them: And to give the People some content, he granted them the pillage
of their Houses. But they were so heated by the Clergy, and by some that were
sent from the Court, to promote the Massacre every where, that they broke open
the Prisons and murdered them all* dragged their Bodies through the Streets,
and opened the Bellies of the fattest of them, to sell their Greese to
Apothecaries. And when they could do no more, they threw ^em into the River of
Rhosne, which was colored with the Blood, and filled with the Carcases of the
slain. These Examples were followed in many more places, but detested by
others, who were not Papists enough, to overcome Nature and all Morality. The
Governors in some places restrained the People; and in many places the
Soldiers, tho more inured to Blood, defended the Protestants from the Rabble,
that were set on by the Priests. The Answer the Governor of Bayonne made,
deserves to be remembered, who wrote to the King in these Words.

SIR,
I Have communicated your Majesty's Command to the Inhabitants of the Town, and
the Soldiers of the Garrison. I find many good Citizens, and brave Soldiers,
but never a Hangman here: And therefore in their Name and my own, I humbly beg
your Majesty would employ our Arms, and Lives in things, which are possible for
us to do, how dangerous soever they may be, and we will spend the last drop of
our Blood in your Service.


This gave great Offense at Court, and soon after, both Mezeray.
he and the Count of Tendes, Governor of Provence, who had also given Orders,
that there should be no Massacre made within his Jurisdiction, died very
suddenly: And it was believed they were both poisoned. In all there were, as
Thuanas says, Thirty thousand massacred over France, tho he believes they were
not quite so many. Mezeray estimates them at five and twenty Hist. Hen. the 4th.
Thousand. But Perefixe says, that over all France, near an hundred thousand
were butchered. And Veremundus says, that besides those who were killed, an
hundred Thousand Persons were set a begging, most of those being Widows and
Orphans. Many of t^^m fled to the places of strength in France, and great
numbers went out of the Kingdom. For when they had escaped the first rage of
the Massacre, they clearly perceived the design of their Enemies, was to
extirpate them Root and Branch. And tho the King at first declared he would
observe the Edict inviolably, they had learned from sad experience, how little
his Faith was to be depended on, and they were further convinced of it by fresh
Proofs. For the King pressed the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde very
hard, to change their Religion: the former was tractable and hearkened to
instruction; but the latter continued resolute and would hear nothing. This put
the King once into such a Rage, that he called for his Arms, and was going in
Person, either to kill him, or see him killed; had not his virtuous Queen, who
had been instructed by her Father, to abhor all cruel Proceedings about
Religion, cast her self at his Feet, and with many Tears diverted him from so
ignominious an Action. But he sent for him and said only these three words to
him, Mass, Death, or the Bastil. Yet he generously resolved to suffer Death, or
perpetual Imprisonment, rather than go to Mass, had they not found out a Tool
fit to work on him. One Sureau-des Rosiers, that had been Minister of the
Protestants at Orleans, had now to save his Life, changed his Religion; But to
have some reputation in it, pretended that he had resolved to have done it
sooner, tho when that fear was over, he returned to them again, but was never
much considered after that. He was therefore employed to persuade the Prince of
Conde: and what by his endeavors, and what by fear of Death, both the King of
Navarre and he went to Mass, and wrote Letters full of Submission and Obedience
to the Pope; tho they were no sooner out of that Snare, than they declared,
that what had been obtained of them, was extorted by force.

This being done, the King sent his Orders over all France, bearing date the
22d of September, to turn all Persons out of any considerable Employments, that
would not renounce their Religion, and a long form of Abjuration was sent with
it, which was to be the Test: both which are printed by Veremundus.

The Process against the Admiral was carried on before the Parliament of Paris,
and (without any proofs that ever were published) they on the 27th of October,
judged him guilty of a Conspiracy against the King and his Crown: And therefore
ordained his Body to be hanged, if it could be found; or if not, that he should
be hanged in Effigy: his House of Chastilion to be razed, and a Pillar set up
with an Inscription to defame his Memory, his Blood was also attainted, and his
Children declared ignoble and incapable of any Privileges in France. And the
Sentence concluded with an Order, for celebrating St. Bartholomews day in all
time coming, with Processions and public Thanksgivings for the Discovery and
Punishment of that Conspiracy. There were also two other Persons of Quality,
Cavagnes and Briquemaut who had been dealt with to accuse the Admiral, but they
would not save themselves by so base a ransom; so they were both condemned as
Accomplices with him. But when the Sentence was pronounced against them, Thuanus,
that was an Eyewitness, says, Briquemaut cried out, when that part of the
Judgment was read that concerned his Children; Ah Innocents! what have they
done? And then he, who for 50 years together had served in the Wars, with a
high and approved Valor, being then 70, what for fear of Death, what out of
pity to his Children, would have done any thing, to have saved himself. He sent
the King word, first that he would put Rochel in his Hands, if he would spare
his Life: But that being rejected, he offered to accuse the Admiral, to
preserve himself. But neither was that considered. All that while, his
Fellow-Sufferer Cavagnes continued most serious in his Devotions, and for three
hours together, was either Praying or reciting some Psalms: and expressed no
concern for his Life, his thoughts being wholly employed about Eternity. He
encouraged Briquemaut to die as he had lived, and to turn himself to God, and
not to stain so honorable a Life, as he had led, with an ignominious end. And
he seeing, he must die, recollected his Thoughts, and seemed ashamed of his
former abject behavior, and composed and prepared himself for Death. They both
were carried to the place of Execution in Hurdles, where they not only suffered
the reptoches of the Multitude, as they went along (who threw Filth and Clay at
them with their most scurrilous Language) but Death it self with much Christian
Patience and Magnanimity. They were hanged at the Greve, and their Bodies,
after they were dead, were barbarously mangled by the cruel Multitude. With
them the brave Admiral was hanged in Effigy, whose Innocence, as well as their
own, they did to their last Breath assert. The King who delighted in such
bloody Spectacles, did not only look on himself, with the Queen Mother, and the
Court; but forced the King of Navarre likewise to be a Witness of it.

It is needless to say much, for evincing the Admiral's Innocence, for all the
Writers of the time acknowledge, the Process was only to cover the infamy of the
Massacre. And Thuanus has so fully demonstrated it, that none can so much as
doubt of it. If the Admiral had any such design, why came he to Court? Why to
Paris, where he knew he had few Friends, and a vast number of mortal Enemies?
and why did he desire a Guard from the King? But since they could not find a
better color for so foul a Business, they must make use of the best they had.
They took another course to stop the Queen of Englands resentments, who,
besides the common Cause of Religion, had a particular esteem for the Admiral,
for they showed a Memorial, which he had given the King to persuade the War of
Flanders, to Walsingham (the ever renowned Secretary of State) then her
Ambassador in France; In which one of the reasons was; That if the King would
not receive these oppressed Provinces into his Protection, they would throw
themselves into the Queen of Englands Hands; and if the English made themselves
Masters of them, or of any considerable Ports in them, they would be again
uneasy and formidable Neighbors to France, which would thereby lose the great
security they had in taking Calice out of their Hands. When Walsingham read
this, and was asked, what he thought of the Admirals Friendship to his
Mistress? he answered, as became so great a Man. That he could not say much of
his Friendship to the Q. of England, but he was sure, it appeared from that,
what a faithful Subject he was to the King of France.

A Week after this was done, the King completed the Treachery of this
Precedure: for by his Letters directed to the Governors of the Provinces,
bearing date the 3d of November, He declared he would Tolerate no Religion,
but the Roman Catholic in all his Dominions. Upon which the following Civil
Wars began, and in excuse of them, I shall only say, that besides the barbarous
and persidious Treatment the Protestants had now received, they had this legal
Warrant for standing on their own defense, That by the former Treaty the King
granted them Cautionary Towns, for Pledges of the observation of the Edict. And
it is certain, that if a Prince grants his Subjects Cautionary Towns for their
Security, he does thereby relax their Alleagiance to him, and gives them a
right to defend themselves, if the Agreement upon which these Pledges were
given, should come to be broken.

This is the true and just account of that foul and treacherous Massacre, even
as it is represented by the Historians of that Age and Church, who can neither
deny nor excuse the Infamy of it; tho some rejoiced at it, and others wrote in
defense of it. The King gloried so much in it, that three Meddals were struck,
to perpetuate the memory of it. In one, Hercules is both with his Club, and a
Flambeau, fighting against the sevenheaded Serpent, with this Motto. Ne ferrum
temnat, simul ignis obsto. On the reverse, the King with his Hand, supports two
Crowned Pillars, ready to fall, with this Motto. Mira fides, lapsas relevat
manus una Columnas. Hereby intimating, that Heresy was the Serpent, which was
to be destroyed by main Force, and by Fire: And that by this Act, the King had
supported Religion and Justice. In the second, the King sits in his Chair of
State, with a Sword in his right Hand, and an Hand on the Head of a Scepter in
his left. And many Heads lying about his Feet, with this Motto. Virtus in
Rebels. On the Reverse, were the Arms of France, between two Pillars and two
Laurel Branches, with this Motto, Virtus excitavit Iustitiam. The third had, on
the one side, a Woman environed with Rays, and a Book open in one Hand, and a
Palmin the other, and at her Feet many Heads in Flames, with this Motto,
Subducendis rationibus. The Reverse was the same with the first. The
Signification of this, was, Religion triumphing over Heresy.

But this was only a false show of Joy, for he was ininvardly tormented with
the horrors of a guilty Conscience, which the effusion of so much Blood did
justly raise in him; so that being often troubled with Visions, he was
frequently heard say, Ah! my poor Subjects, what had you done? But I was forced
to it. The strange manner of his Death, looked like a signal Judgment from
Heaven for that bloody day; for after a long Sickness, which was believed the
effect of a lent Poison given him by the Queen Mother, Blood not only came out
through all the Conduits of his Body, but through the very Pores, so that he
was sometimes found, all bathed in his own Blood. And he that had made his
Kingdom swim with Blood, died thus wallowing in his own.

All the servile Pens of the Lawyers, and the bitter ones of enraged Priests,
were also set on work, to appear in Defense of it; Of whose Writings Thuanus
gives a full account. One mercenary Protestant was also hired, to excuse, if
not to defend it. I have never been able to meet with any of these Books, only
Rosseus that wrote in defense of the Holy League, calls it the Justice of St.
Bartholomews day. And Andreas Eudemon Johannes does also commend it.

The Arguments they used, have been formerly glanced at. The late Civil Wars;
the pretended Conspiracy of the Admiral; the necessity of using desperate
Remedies in extreme Cases; and the Sovereign Power of Kings, were what the
Lawyers could pretend. But the Divines had a better Plea, that by one General
Council, all Heretics were to be extirpated. And by another, Faith was not to
be kept to them. And it cannot be denied, but this is unanswerable, according
to the Principles of the Roman Church. The Protestants were not wanting to
their own Cause, but answered these Books, and sufficiently discovered the
impudent Allegations of those shameless Persons, who hired themselves out to
defend so horrid an Action.

Maximilian the 2d, the Emperor, is the Person whose Judgment we have least
reason to suspect. He was the King of France his Father-in-Law, and both by
Blood and Alliance was joined to the Crown of Spain, yet he in a private
Letter, writing to Scuendi his chief Minister in Hungary, has delivered his
sense of this Matter so sincerely and fully; And that whole Letter is so
excellently well written, and shows so much true piety, and so rare a temper of
mind, that I shall not fear the Reader's censure for inserting it at its full
length. It is but in one Book that Comingii Collectio p. 278.
I know, and that is very scarce.

Dear Scuendi,
I Received your Letter, and took in good part your Christian and Friendly
Condoleance for my late Sickness. The Eternal God, in whose hands are all
things, do with me according to his Will. I bless him for every thing that
befalls me. He only knows best what is healthful and profitable, and what is
hurtful to me: I do patiently and cheerfully acquiesce in his Divine Pleasure.
And indeed Matters go so in this World, that a Man can have little pleasure or
quiet in them: for every where there is nothing to be found but trouble,
treachery, and foul dealing. God pity us, and deliver his Church from these
mischiefs. It were no wonder, if from such a prospect of Affairs, a Man should
become stupid or mad; of which I could say much to you. I begin to recover, and
am now so strong, that I walk about with a Stick. God be blessed in all his
Works.

For that strange thing which the French have lately acted, most tyrannically
against the Admiral and his Friends, I am far from approving it: and it was a
great grief to me, to hear that my Son-in-Law had been persuaded to that vile
Massacre; tho I know that others reign rather than he; yet that is not
sufficient to excuse him, nor to palliate such a wickedness. I would to God he
had asked my advice, I should have given him faithful and fatherly Counsel, and
he should never have had my consent to this Crime, which has cast such a
blemish on him, that he will never wash it off.

God forgive them that lie under such guilt. I apprehend within a little while,
they shall perceive what they have gained by this method. For indeed, as you
observe well, the Matters of Religion are not to be handled or decided by the
Sword: and no Man can think otherwise, that is either pious or honest, or
desirous of Public Peace and Happiness. Far otherwise did Christ teach, and
his Apostles instruct us; their Sword was their Tongue, their Doctrine, the
Word of God, and a Life worthy of Christ. Their Example should draw us to
follow them, in so far as they were followers of Christ.

Besides, that mad sort of People might have seen after so many years Trials,
and so many Experiments, that by their Cruelties, Punishments, Slaughters and
Burnings, this Business cannot be effected. In a word, Their ways do not at all
please me, nor can I ever be induced to approve them, unless I should become
mad or distracted which I pray God earnestly to preserve me from.

And yet I shall not conceal from you, that some impudent and lying Knaves,
have given out, That whatever the French have done, was by my knowledge and
approbation. In this I appeal to God, who knows how deeply I am injured by it;
but such Lies and Calumnies are no new things to me. I have been often forced
to bear them formerly: and in all such cases, I commit my self to God, who
knows in his own good time, how to clear me, and vindicate my innocence.

As for the Netherlands, I can as little approve of the Excesses committed
there. And I do well remember how often I wrote to the King of Spain, Advices
far different from those they have followed. But what shall I say? The Councils
of the Spaniards relished better than mine. They now begin to see their Error,
and that they themselves have occasioned all the mischief that has since
followed. I had a good end bebefore me, that these noble and renowned Provinces
might not be so miserably destroyed. And tho they would not follow my Counsel,
so that I may well be excused from meddling any more, yet I do not give over,
but am sincerely pressing them all I can to follow another method.

God grant I may see the wished-for effect of these endeavors, and that Men
may be at last satisfied with what they have done, and may use no more such
violent Remedies. In a word, Let the Spaniards or the French do what they will,
they shall be made to give an account of their Actions to God, the Righteous
and Just Judge. And for my part, by the help of God, I shall carry my self
honestly, christianly, and faithfully, with all candor and uprightness; and I
hope God will so assist me with his Grace and Blessing, that I may approve all
my Designs and Actions, both to him and to all Men. And if I do this, I little
regard a wicked and malicious World.


How the rest of the World looked on this Action, may be easily gathered from
the Inclinations and Interests of the several Parties. That all Protestants did
every where abhor it, and hold the remembrance of it, still in detestation,
needs not be doubted. All that were noble or generous in the Roman Church were
ashamed of it, but many extolled it to the Heavens as a work of Angels; and
others did cast the blame of it on the Protestants. The Court of Spain rejoiced
openly at it. They delighted in the shedding of Protestant Blood, and were also
glad to see France again embroiled, and to be freed of the fears they had of a
War in Flanders. In which if the French King had engaged, he had in all
appearance conquered in one year, that for which his Successors have been since
fighting a whole Age.

But let us next examine how the tidings of this Massacre were received at
Rome, by which we may judge how fitly that part of Antichrist's Character, of
being drunk with the Blood of the Saints, agrees to it. The News was brought
thither the 6th of September, upon which a Consistory of the Cardinals was
presently called, and the Legate's Letter, that contained a Relation of the
Massacre, being read, they went straight in a Procession to St. Mark's Church,
where they offered up their solemn thanks to God for this great Blessing to the Sea of Rome, and the Catholic Church. And on Monday following, there was
another Procession made by the Pope and Cardinals to the Minerva, where they
had high Mass, and then the Pope granted a Jubilee to all Christendom: And one
of the Reasons was, That they should thank God for the slaughter of the Enemies
of the Church, lately executed in France. Two days after that, the Cardinal of
Lorrain, had another great Procession of all the Clergy, the Ambassadors,
Cardinals, and the Pope himself, who came to St. Lewis Chapel, where the
Cardinal celebrated Mass himself. And in the King of France his Name he thanked
the Pope and the Cardinals, for their good Councils, the help they had given
him, and the assistance he received from their Prayers, of which he had found
most wonderful effects. He also delivered the King's Letters to the Pope, in
which he History de France, An. 1581.
wrote, That more Heretics had been destroyed in that one day, than in all
the twelve years of the War.

Nor did the Pope think there was yet Blood enough shed, but that which all the
World condemned as excessive Cruelty, he apprehended was too gentle. Therefore
he sent Cardinal Ursin his Legate in all haste to France, to thank the King for
so great a Service done the Church, and to desire him to go on, and extirpate
Heresy Root and Branch, that it might never grow again. In order to which, he
was to procure the Council of Trent to be received in France; and as the Legate
passed through, in his Journey to Paris, he gave a Plenary Absolution to all
that had been Actors in the Massacre.

The best Picture-drawers, and workers of Tapistry, were also put to work to
set off this Action with all possible glory, and a Suit of these Hangings are
to this day in the Pope's Chapel. So well do they like the thing, that they
preserve the remembrance of it still, even in the place of their Worship. Such
a representation does indeed very well agree with their Devotion, whose
Religion and Doctrine led on their Votaries to the thing so expressed. By this
we may easily gather what is to be expected from that Court, and what we ought
to look for, whenever we are at the mercy of Men, whose Religion will not only
bear them through* but set them on to commit the most Treacherous and Bloody
Massacres.

FINIS.

