A CALL TO Backsliding Israel, And may be as a Necessary Word of Caution and
Admonition to the Inhabitants of East and West-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, etc. as a
Remembrancer to them to call to mind their former state, and whence they are
fallen. With some short Account of my leaving a second time that Party of them
called Quakers, which have Condemned G. Keith, and all that own him, or his
Testimony for the crucified Jesus, our alone Advocate in Heaven. By Elias
Burling.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
1694.

A Call to Backsliding Israel, and may be as a necessary Word of Caution to
many of the Inhabitants of Burlington, etc.
HEar, O Israel! This short Message and Testimony is to you, who have long made
Profession of the holy Truth, yet have not known or witnessed the pure purging
Power of it, thoroughly to cleanse, wash and sanctify, and to set you free from
sin, and the power and servitude of it, but have taken up a false Rest, and are
sat down at ease in Zion, in a Profession of Truth, with a Name to live,
whilst dead, dead as ^o Holiness, dead as to the Life, Power of Truth, and
divine Knowledge of the Mystery of Christ, Enemies to the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that should thoroughly crucify you to the World, and the World to
you, which raises up the Soul into the Life of Holiness; this you are Enemies
unto in your Minds, by reason of wicked Works, so hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, and are crucifying that afresh to your selves, which should
slay and crucify you to the World and the Evils of it; but what will ye do in
the end thereof? Though now for a Time you may live over and trample upon th^^
innocent Life, yet in the end it will be too h^avy for you, if ye will not bow
and bend to it, and be willing to fall upon it, and be b^oken by it, it will at
last fall heavy upon you, and will grind you to Powder; and this I have long
seen and foreseen in the Lig^t of the Lord, to be your state, many of you; the
efore hear and fear, all ye Disobedient and Rebellious Ones, who have long
professed me in words, says the Lord, yet in works have denied me, who honor
me not, nor is my N^m^ feared and sanctified in the mid^t of you, but my holy
Spirit is and has been long grieved by you; for you are a Rebellious House,
says the Lo^d, the^efo^e I delight not in you, nor are your Offerings pleasant
or acceptable in my sight, as in days and years past, when they were as a sweet
smell unto me, whilst you retained your love and sincerity to my Name and
Truth, and held fast your Integrity, and my holy fear was before you, and
whilst yet kept and abode in it, it kept and preserved you out of many of the
Evils of the World, which you a^e since again run unto, and into this must you
come again, even to your first Love, and ^o Repent, and do your first Works, if
ever ye come into my favor again, and be owned and received of me, and that I
again receive an Offering at your hands, with Acceptance.

Hear therefore, O Israel! what the Lord by his Spirit may signify unto you,
Though very long has the Lord bo^n with a people in this day, even as he bore
long with Israel of Old, forty Years was he grieved and tempted with that
Generation, who after that, He by a mighty hand, and an out stretched Arm had
saved them out of the Land of Egypt, and had led them through the Red Sea, and
brought them safe upon the Banks of Deliverance, where they sang his Praise,
yet he afterward destroyed them that believed not; which things are written
for our Admonition, that we grieve not the Lord in rebelling against his good
Spirit, as they did, of which we had need to take heed, least we also come to
fall in this Wilderness, through the same Example of Unbelief; for the Lord
has born long with a People and Generation in this our Day, and for whom he
has also done much, who have long p^ofessed him in words, some of them forty
or near fifty years, but what Fruit is there brought forth by too to many of
them, though he has waited long, year after year, seeking and expecting Fruit,
of whom he now grows weary, and the Day of his long-suffering and forbearance
is come near unto an end, and that he will say, Cut it down, why cumbereth it
the Ground? And this will be the lot and portion of many, unless they speedily
Repent: Its Fruit that he expects and looks for, and he will not be longer put
off or satisfied without Fruits that may honor him; for barely, a Profession
of the holy Truth, without a holy Life, will stand no Soul of us in any stead
at all, in the great Day of Account, but he will have an Improvement made by us
of his own and what he has committed to our Trust, and he that has not
improved his Gift, but has been idle, sloathful and negligent in his Lords
business in his Day and Time, this Gift or Talent will at last be called for by
the Give^ of it, and taken from him, and the Portion of that Servant will be in
utter Darkness forever. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear this Word,
The Lord is taking away thy Diadem, the Crown is falling from thy head, thy
flourishing Beauty is passing away quickl, the heavenly Sun which thou rejoiced
in for a time, now with-draws its shining, the Da^kness is now thickening upon
thee; in stead of spiritual Mirth and Gladness, a Day of Sorrow, Mourning and
Lamentation; in st^ad of a Girdle, a Rent, instead of well set Hair, Baldness,
and instead of a sweet Smell, behold a stink; and thy Name shall be for a
perpetual Shame and Reproach amongst the H athen, because ye have not
sanctified the N^me of the holy One, but have greatly polluted it in this Land;
therefore I will make ye a Scorn, a Byword and a Hissing to Nations, and Women
shall rule over thee, and strangers shall come up and eat your Bread, and shall
possess your Habitations, and the Lord will call in others to the heavenly
Banquet, the Supper of the Lamb, and who are more worthy than ye, and they
shall enter into the Ma^riage Chamber, and partake of the heavenly Dainties,
and they shall come from the East and from the West, and shall enter in, and
shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and Ye who
have accounted your selves the Children of it, shall be th^ust out for your
Disobedience; for there are fl^st at shall be last, and last that shall be
first; and as ye were in times past, when little in your own Eyes, and in a
bowed sense before the Lo^d, you were th^n reproach d, sco^ned, mocked and
derided of the World, and such as knew not God, for your Plainness, your
Ch^istian Modesty, your Seriousness, Sobriety, Gravity and Moderation, your
Self denial, holy and harmless Conversations, and serious Deportment, and good
Behavior and Testimony a^^i^st the World, and the Evi^s and Fashions of it,
which your Mind^ were fa^ drawn out of in that Day; and because ye could not
fashion your selves after the former Lusts, whilst in your Ignorance, nor walk
as other Gentiles, that knew not God, in the vanity of their Minds; for that
c^^s^, how were ye hated, reproached and re^iled, for the Truths sake, while ye
thus stood the Cross; but now on the contrary, since the Offense of the C^oss
is ceased with many, to my grief, and many mo^e, I now speak even with sorrow
of heart, and not to upbraid you, may it not now be said, and that truly, That
ye are now become a Scorn to Fools, and a Reproach justly among the Heathen,
for your evil doing, and for your disagreeable Practices to what the innocent
harmless Quakers use to be found in, witness your Persecution, by Imprisoning,
Fining, and taking away Goods from your innocent Neighbors and Brethren, who
for Conscience sake could not conform to you.

And now, that your Evil, Vn-C^ristian and Vn-Quaker-like Deeds and
Corruptions, both in Principle and Practice, are brought to light, and which
cannot now longer be hid, but they must come forth to public view, and t^eir
Covering, who have not the Truth purely for their Covering, is stripping of^
them, and their Nakedness, and the Shame of it must and will appear to the view
of all. And now instead of looking at the hand of the Lo d in it, and humbling
of themselves under it, and owning it to be just upon them, for their
Hypocrisy and great Unfaithfulness, instead of this lay all the blame upon
others, excusing ^^emselves, and blaming and accusing of others wi^h it, and
say, Its this Man or the other has done it, and brought this Dishonor and
Reproach to Truth; and its not w^, but G. K. and those in the Sep^^a^^on, who
^ave b^ok^^ Unity with their B^et^re^, ^ut will not ^w^ that they h^ve done any
thing that has ju^^l^ b^ought the Disl^ our, but wipe their Mouths, and say,
T^^y have do^e no Evil. Yet this I must tell, a (...) am certainly persuaded of
it, That had y^u bu^ con^inu^d f^ithful, and retained your fi^^t purity and
love to God and his Truth, as ye we^e once in, this ^hen had not happened, nor
should G. Keith, or any other, ^^en suffered thus to lay open and ex^osed you
to the world, which you have all along much endeavored to ^ide your Evils and
Fil^hyness from, but now, that which has been long hid and kept secret is made
manifest, and brought to light, for as Christ said, There is nothing hid, that
shall not be revealed, nor covered, that shall not be uncovered, and that which
has been spoken in secret shall be proclaimed upon the House top; and since
you have lost that which once made you a good savor in your Neighbourhoods and
Families, and that reached the Witness of Truth in many hearts, having lost
this, you will be le^t as destitute, as naked, and as bear as ever People was
left, without timely and sincere Repentance.

Friends, as touching my last Paper which I fent, with the other of B. D's to
your Monthly Meeting, in which was some things hard to he rightly understood by
you, especially since I am ag^in with drawn from you, being warned of God so to
do, and that I may keep Truth clea^, and my Testimony thereunto, however
censured and looked upon by you, the great thing with me, is, and has been, ^o
app^ove my heart to God, and to speak the Truth uprigh^ly, without partiality
o^ respect to any Man's Person, and whilst I am kept there, I heed it little who
comm^nds, o^ who discommends me; for not he who commends himself, or whom
another comm^nds, but whom the Lord commends, that is approved; I say, that I
may be the more Intelligible, and prevent and take off, what in me lies, those
evil and hard Constructions which very ^ptly and readily you may put upon wh^^
I there writ, as concerning P^^^^ng and Exposing, as has been of late, both by
on^ side and the other, which I shall explain, and give you my sense, thus,
That I have and c^n honestly and safely testify against such m^^^^r of
Exposing as has been of late by b th, as that which ought not to be amongst
^^^^hren, who are to dwell together in Unity; y^^ if the Lord will make use of,
or permit an ^^^^ument to lay open and expose a People for their
U^faithfulness, and f^r their trea^^^ous d^^ling with him, who shall then
with^^^d the Lord in what he does, who does whatsoever he will? and though men
cannot see it so, yet whatsoever the Lord does, is well, and he is and will be
g^o^ified over all; and if he be not glorified in men's Salvation, he will be
glorified in their Destr^ction, as he was upon hard hearted P^aroa^ and his
people when he w^^ught that mighty ^eliverance for Israel; for the Scripture
says co^^^ning Pharaoh, For ^^s some purpose have I raised thee up, that I may
show my Power in thee, and that my Name might be declared thro^ghout all the
Earth. Thus you may see, in one sense we may safely condemn such manner of
exposing, dividing, ^ending and tearing Member from Member, as that which ought
not to be among Brethren, as the Apostle mentions in one of his Epistles, T^ese
things, my Brethren, ought not so to be; so say I, Br^thren ought not to
differ, f^ll out, and be at strife, but all ra her dwell together in Love and
Amity, being all of the same Mind, and ^f the same Judgment; and this is very
aimable, and a comely thing for Brethren thus to dwell together in Unity; but
if that a People who have professed themselves to be in the gre^test Unity of
any People besides, and all to believe the same things, professing the one
Faith, one Lord Jesus Christ, and one Hope of their Calling, if this People, or
a part of them shall be found in Error, and certain men from among themselves
shall arise, and sha l teach and assert things contrary to sound Doctrine, and
shall continue and persist to maintain such corrupt and erroneous Principles
and Doctrines, o the infecting and corrupting of one another, so far as to the
Denying of our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and if for this their great
Degeneracy, and contemning of the Word and Testimony of Jesus, God shall
immedia^ely concern and raise up some from amongst themselves, to correct,
reprove, reprehend, and sharply to testify against the same, in the zeal an^
fervency of their Spirits, and also to with draw from their Fellowship and
Communion; and whether it be not right and justifiable in the sight of God so
to do, I leave to the Wise in heart to judge.

Thus you may plainly see I have and can freely condemn the Printing, Exposing,
Seperating and Dividing one from another in the Church of Christ, and amongst
Brethren, that it ought not to be, but in that other sense, as I have told you,
if the Lord does it for (...) good end and purpose, to make manifest Hypocrites
and evil Workers, who live in Error, and to search out the hidden Workers of
Darkness, and the Hypocrites in Zion, and who pro ess themselves to be Jews,
and are not, but do lie, and for the laying open H^^esie and Error, that has
long lain undiscovered, that so those that are approved of him may be made
manifest; and if he will raise up some from amongst our selves to do this Work,
which you account so ill a Work, yet in this sense, as the Lord does it, in
order to effect and bring to pass his own Purpose, I may not condemn it, it
being the Day that I have much wished for, that those that are approved might
be manifest, and no place found where the Worker of Iniquity might hide his
head; and the Day is come and coming that wi^^ find them out of all the dark
Places and lurking Holes.

So, with little more, I shall conclude, desiring the Lord, if it be his Will,
to turn your hearts to him, and to work a true Reformation and change in your
Minds, that so the thick Vail of Darkness and Error, that is over many of your
^earts, may be effectually rent off and taken away, and that you may come to
know the holy Covering of God, and to put on the Lord Jesus christ, and to be
covered with his Righteous Power and Spirit, and then I know you will not be
found naked, but might be able to stand before the Son of Man.

Now as to any amongst you who may be conscientiously conc^rred, as to me, if
any such there be, I am able to give a further or more full and satisfactory
Account of my leaving you again, if desired; and as to my going to and f^o for
my own satisfaction, which ye ^ender so ill, and as being now worse than
before, and that it ^espeak^ me and us of an unstable Mind, and wavering too
and again, for my late condescension in coming so near you (as I was willing to
come as ne^ to you as the Truth would possibly admit) and that in love, for the
Bodies s^ke, the church; but how I am the worse for so doing, I may t^ll you,
and what my Experience has been since I come last amongst you, or rather that
you came to us in your appointed time, for I never did ^^e my way clear to come
to you; indeed I can own, in one sense, I am not the better for my being last
with you; and though it was not long that I was with you, yet I now think it
was long enough, and shall truly and honestly declare my experience, and how I
found it in that tim^, which thing I kept secret to my self, but I minded it
well, and how the Lord was to me in that time, and whether I enjoyed him ^^w
amongst you, so as I did before, when in the S^peration, as knowing what he h^d
been unto me then; and this Experience I have, and am now free to tell it, That
the nearer I came to you, the Lord he withdrew himself the further from me,
and I wanted those Soul refreshing Comforts that I had from him before; and as
I withdrew my self ag^in from ^ou, the Lord immediately drew near to me ag^in,
and then my Love and Zeal began to s e ^ en and increase more to him, which (w
i will near to ^^u) began to ^^^tten and decl ne, because I was not to sit down
with you in an evil secu^e state, nor could I sit down with you in the state I
saw you in, nor was it ever in my heart so to do, as knowing certainly, if I
did, the Lord would wholly withdraw himself from me, and shut up, and
withold his wonted goodness from me, and whom my Soul was still concerned
for, that I might not loose him, ^or do that which might give him cause ag^in
to hide his face. These things I made Observation of betwixt the Lord and my
own Soul. Also, a a little before I left you, the Lord set it clearly before
me, your unpro^^table state, and where you are, and what your lot and po^tion
will be, and mine also, if I continued with you, so as to sit down and have
fellowship with you in that dark evil corrupt state, which the Lord knows, and
my Soul knows, you are now sitten down in, and he hastened me much before I
left you, as Lot out of Sodom, To haste, and flee as for my Life, and to save
my sell from such a Generation as are out of the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which I can now with greater boldness affirm, than I could before, having had
the advantage to hear and se^ the second time again for my self, and which was
the main and great cause of my being amongst you the second time, that so I
might have a more perfect kn^wledge of these things, and like the Noble
B^raeans, desired to find and se^rch out, whether th^se things were alt^gether
so, as the Cry and Report has been; And why should any blame me for this, or
resent so ill, my coming and going to and fro, as being under a Soul concern? I
wish that many amongst you, that are settled on their Lees, were in like manner
so concerned, and that I could see many going to and fro; for it said, In the
latter days they shall ran to and fro, and Knowl^dge shall increase. And seeing
I came to seek the good amongst you, (had it been to be found) and not to spy
out your liberty in Christ, and bring you into Bondage, yet was willing to spy
out whether ye h^ve indeed the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; and finding that
you have it not, am wa^ned to withdraw, and have no fellowship with such as
cannot bear to have the Lord Jesus Christ preached amongst you, the which
advantage I have had by my being last with you, seeing plainly, that its not as
you have endeavored to make People believe, viz. that its not for the
Testimonies sake, that ye deny these in the Separation, but for this dividing
Spirit, and for reviling and exposing; But this ^over is now stripping off, and
will not longer hide you, but you must now appear as year, and that ye are of
those that love not the Lord Jesus Christ, as your doings have and do
manifestly declare.

Elias Burling.

Postscript.
AN^ whereas it was questioned by some in the time of my being last amongst
you, Whether I did really intend and desire to come into Unity with you again?
To which I can say, I did innocently and truly desire it, could I have so done,
and not have joined with men of evil and corrupt Principles and Practices, who
I see, had and have free liberty to preach and pray in your Meetings without
let or interruption, but such as bring the Doctrine of Christ, and set him
before you as the Object of your Faith, cannot have the like liberty, but their
Doctrine and Testimony opposed and contradicted time after time.

Also, whereas it may look strange that I lay so deep a Charge upon some, as
their Denying our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; I say, I know none that
have done it in express words, for in pretense they own him largely, but by
necessary and undeniable Consequences they have done it, as can well be made
appear, not only by what mine Ears have heard, but by many more Ear Witnesses
with me, which these Instances following are Evidences, viz. 1st, Their
Preaching publicly, That the Jews did not see the Worlds Savior; which
naturally is to deny Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary, Abraham and David, to
be he, and contrary to his own words, John 6. and this received by the said
public Meeting, and at th same time ^he contrary plain Scripture Doctrine and
Testimony, denied and opposed, as also at the next Monthly Meeting. 2dly, The
Testimony of G. Hutcheson, That Christ is now in Heaven glorified in the true
Nature o^ Man, was opposed by several Persons in the public Meeting, and said
Meeting owned them therein. 3dly, In that G. H. has been publicly opposed, in
testifying, That the great Mystery of Godliness, (1 Timothy 3.16.) was God
manifest in the Flesh of Christ, (f^e one had applied it wholly to God being
mani^est in our Flesh to destroy sin) and by one called a Novelty, and said, G.
H's Interpretation of said Scripture, was a Perversion, and gi^ing his own, and
a wrong Construction upon it, and an adding thereunto; and with hands stretched
out, Threa^ened him with the Plagues in Rev. 22.18. and this in a public
Meeting, and no one that I heard reproved him for it, but rather justified him
therein. These, with diverse other Instances that might be given, a^^ Proof
sufficient, that you are greatly ignorant of Jesus Christ, whom God raised
^^ain from the Dead, and has set him at his own Right Hand of Power, having
also appointed a Day in which he will judge the Wo^ld, even by the Man Christ
Jesus, of which he has given ass^rance to all men, in that he raised him from
the Dead; and whomsoever have the true Faith, believe, that God raised from the
dead, and that he was received up into Glory, That he that was dead is still in
being, and that he ever lives, and shall come again in the Day appointed to
judge all Mankind; but this is denied by them whom we are separated from,
witness H. W. lately, wh^^ G H. was saying, That it was his Beli^f, Th^^ that
same Jesus that ascended out of the ^^ght of his Disciples into Heaven, should
ou^w^rdly appear again, and that he should se^ him with the Eyes of his
Resurrect^o Body, which H. Willis wondered at, an with Hands lifted up, said,
He never expected any such thing.

Now I have this advantage by my being last with you, That whereas you have
endeavored to make me and others believe, That its not for the Doctrine or
Testimony's sake that you have denied us, but for Reviling, Printing and
Exposing the Faults and Weaknesses of Brethren, which I also am against as well
as you, and ^ave and can condemn it, so far, That it ought not to be done
against the true Breth^en and Israel of God; but Antichrists, and all
Antichristian Practices and Principles are and ought to be born witness and
testified against in the Zeal of the Lord; so that this false Cover and
Pretense will not longer do, it being already seen through by many of the
honest hea^ted, whose Eyes are so far opened, that they begin now to see you,
and there is no hiding of your Iniquities and Hypocrisy, with this or the
other pretense, for the Lord is about thoroughly to search his Camp, and to rip
off every false Cover, till he ha^h said all open, naked and bare; and there
shall be nothing able to hide any from the face of the Lamb but the pure Power,
and heavenly divine Covering of the holy Spirit of the Lord; therefore it
concerns us all and every particular to see to it, whether we have got this
Covering on, yea or nay.

E. B.

THE END

