THE LIFE OF WILLIAM BEDELL, D. D. Lord Bishop OF Killmore in Ireland.

WRITTEN By GILBERT BURNET, D. D. Now Lord Bishop of Sarum.

To which are Subjoyned Certain Letters, which passed betwixt Spain and England
in Matter of Religion; concerning the general motives to the Roman Obedience,
between Mr. James Waddesworth, a late Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in
Sevil, and the said William Bedell, then a Minister of the Gospel in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell at the Rose and Crown, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

THE PREFACE.
THe Contests that have been raised in this Age concerning the lawfulness and
the usefulness of the Episcopal Government, have engaged so many learned Men to
treat that Argument so fully, that as there is very little excuse left for the
Ignorance or obstinacy of those who still stand out against the Evidence of a
Cause made out so clearly, so there is scarce any thing left to be said by any,
whose zeal may set him on to handle a matter that seems to be now exhausted.
There is one sort of Arguments yet remaining, that as they are more within
every ones compass to apprehend and apply, so they have a greater force on Men's
affections, which commonly give a biass to their understandings. For conviction
has an easy access to us when we are already inclined to wish that were true,
concerning which we employ our enquiries: And in practical matters, such as
Government, Arguments fetched from great Patterns do not only prepare us to
think well of such Forms, but really give us truer and juster Ideas of them
than speculative Discourses can raise in us; which work but coldly on persons
unconcerned. An Argument not foreign to this, is used by all the Assertors of
Episcopacy, in which the force of the reasoning is equal to the truth of the
assertion; Which is, that it is not possible to think that a Government can be
criminal, under which the World received the Christian Religion, and that in a
course of many Ages, in which as all the corners of the Christian Church, so
all the parts of it, the sound as well as the unsound, that is the Orthodox as
well as the Heretics and Schismatics, agreed: the persecutions that lay then
so heavy on the Church made it no desirable thing for a Man to be exposed to
their first fury, which was always the Bishops portion; and that in a course of
many Centuries, in which there was nothing but Poverty and labor to be got by
the Employment: There being no Princes to set it on as an Engine of Government,
and no Synods of Clergymen gathered to assume that Authority to themselves by
joint designs and endeavors. And can it be imagined that in all that glorious
Cloud of Witnesses to the truth of the Christian Religion, who as they planted
it with their Labors, so watered it with their Blood, there should not so much
as one single person be found, on whom either a love to truth, or an envy at
the advancement of others prevailed so far as to declare against such an early
and universal corruption (if it is to be esteemed one.) When all this is
complicated together, it is really of so great Authority, that I love not to
give the proper name to that temper that can withstand so plain a
demonstration. For what can a Man, even heated with all the force of
imagination, and possessed with all the sharpness of prejudice, except to the
inference made from these Premises, that a Form so soon introduced, and so
wonderfully blessed, could not be contrary to the Rules of the Gospel: and cannot
be ascribed to any other Original, but that the Apostles every where
established it, as the Fence about the Gospel which they planted, so that our
Religion and Government are to be reckoned Twins born at the same time, and
both derived from the same Fathers.

But things so remote require more than ordinary knowledge to set them before us
in a true light: And their distance from us makes them lessen as much to our
thoughts, as Objects that are far from us do to our Eyes. Therefore it will be
perhaps necessary in order to the giving a fuller and amiabler prospect of that
Apostolical Constitution, to choose a Scene that lies nearer, and more within
all peoples view; that so it may appear, that for the living Arguments in
favor of this Government we need not go so far as to the Clement's, the
Ignatius's, the Polycarp's, the Ireneus's, the Denys's and the Cyprian's that
were the glories of the Golden Ages: Nor to the Athanasius's, the Basil's, the
Gregorie's, the Chrysostom's, the Martin's, the Ambrose's and the Austin's,
that were the beauties of the Second but Silver Age of Christianity; but that
even in this Iron Age, and dreg of time, there have been such Patterns, as
perhaps can hardly be matched since Miracles ceased.

We ought not to deny the Church of Rome the just Praises that belong to some
of the Bishops she has produced in this and the last Age, who were burning and
shining Lights: and we ought not to wonder if a Church so blemished all over
with the corruptions of her Clergy, and in particular of the Heads of them,
covers her self from those deserved Reproaches by the brightness of such great
names; and by the exemplary Virtues of the present Pope, which being so unusual
a thing, it is not strange to see them magnify and celebrate it as they do.
France has likewise produced in this Age a great many Bishops, of whom it must
be said, That as the World was not worthy of them so that Church, that used
them so ill, was much less worthy of them. And though there are not many of
that stamp now left, yet Cardinal Grimaldy Who is dead since this was first
written.
, the Bishop of Angiers, and the Bishop of Grenoble, may serve to dignifie an
Age, as well as a Nation. The Bishop of Alet was, as, a great and good Man told
me, like a living and speaking Gospel.

It is true their intanglements with the Sea of Rome and the Court of France,
were things both uneasy and dangerous to them; but I love not to point at
their blind Sides, it is their fair one that I would set out: and if we can
bear the highest commendations that can be given to the Virtues of Heathen
Philosophers, even when they do eclipse the reputation of the greater part of
Christians; it will be unjust for any to be uneasy at the Praises given to
Prelates of another Communion, who are to be so much the more admired, if
notwithstanding all the corruptions that lie so thick about them, that they
could hardly break through them, they have set the World such examples as ought
indeed to make others ashamed that have much greater advantages. But since the
giving of Orders is almost the only part of their function, that is yet
entirely in their Hands, they have indeed brought a regulation into that which
was so grossly abused in former times, that cannot be enough commended, nor too
much imitated; they have built and endowed Seminaries for their Diocesses, in
which a competent number of young Ecclesiastics are bred at Studies and
Exercises suitable to that Profession, to which they are to be dedicated; and
as they find them well prepared, they are, by the several steps and degrees of
the Pontifical, led up to the Altar, and kept there till Benefices fall, and so
they are removed from thence, as from a Nursery, into the several parts of the
Diocesses. By this means the Secular Clergy of France have in a great measure
recovered their reputation, and begin now to bear down the Regulars, whose
Credit and Wealth had risen chiefly by the Ignorance and Scandals of the
Curates. In this the present Archbishop of Rheims has set a pattern to the
rest, suitable to the high Rank he holds in that Church, for he has raised a
Seminary that cost him Fifty thousand Crowns a building, and above Five
thousand Crowns a Year in supporting the expense of it: in which there are
about One hundred Ecclesiastics maintained; and out of these he Ordains every
Year such a number as the extent of his Diocese does require: And with these he
supplies the Vacancies that fall. This is a way of employing the Revenues of
the Church, that is exactly suitable to the sense of the Primitive times, in
which a Bishop was not considered as the Proprietor, but only as the
Administrator and Dispencer of the Revenue belonging to his See: And there is
scarce any one thing concerning which the Synods in those Ages took more care
than to distinguish between the Goods and Estate that belonged to a Bishop by
any other Title, and those that he had acquired during his Episcopat: for
though he might dispose of the one, the other was to fall to the Church.

But now to return to the Subject that led me into this digression, there is
nothing that can have a stronger operation to overcome all prejudices against
Episcopacy, than the proposing eminent Patterns, whose Lives continue to speak
still, though they are dead: Of which my native Country has produced, both in
the last and in the present Age, some great and rare Instances, of which very
eminent effects appeared, even amidst all that rage of furious Zeal, into which
that Nation was transported against it: And I suppose the Reader will not be
ill pleased if I make a second digression to entertain him with some passages
concerning them, but will bear with it perhaps better than with the former.

And since my Education and the course of my Life has led me most to know the
Affairs of Scotland, I will not enter upon a Province that is Foreign to me,
and therefore shall leave to others the giving an account of the great Glories
of the Church of England, and will content my self with telling some more
eminent things of some of our Scottish Bishops: In which I will say nothing
upon flying Reports, but upon very credible, if not certain Information. There
was one Patrick Forbes of Aberdeenshire, a Gentleman of Quality and Estate, but
much more eminent by his Learning and Piety, than his Birth or Fortune could
make him. He had a most terrible Calamity on him in his Family, which needs not
be named: I do not know whether that or a more early principle determined him
to enter into Orders: He undertook the labor of a private Cure in the Country,
upon the most earnest invitations of his Bishop, when he was Forty Eight Years
old, and discharged his Duty there so worthily, that within a few Years he was
promoted to be Bishop of Aberdeen; in which See he sat about Seventeen Years.
It was not easy for King James to persuade him to accept of that Dignity, and
many Months past before he could be induced to it, for he had intended to have
lived and dyed, in a more obscure corner. It soon appeared how well he deserved
his Promotion, and that his unwillingness to it was not feigned, but the real
effect of his humility: He was in all things an Apostolical Man, he used to go
round his Diocese without noise, and but with one Servant, that so he might be
rightly informed of all matters. When he heard reports of the weakness of any
of his Clergy, his custom was to go and lodge unknown near their Church on the
Saturday Night, and next day, when the Minister was got into the Pulpit, he
would come to Church, that so he might observe what his ordinary Sermons were,
and accordingly he admonished or encouraged them. He took such care of the two
Colleges in his Diocese, that they became quickly distinguished from all the
rest of Scotland: So that when the troubles in that Church broke out, the
Doctors there were the only persons that could maintain the Cause of the
Church; as appears by the Papers that past between them and the Covenanters.
And though they begun first to manage that Argument in Print, there has nothing
appeared since more perfect than what they writ. They were an honor to the
Church both by their Lives, and by their Learning, and with that excellent
temper they seasoned that whole Diocese, both Clergy and Laity, that it
continues to this day very much distinguished from all the rest of Scotland,
both for Learning, Loyalty and Peaceableness; and, since that good Bishop died
but three years before the Rebellion broke out, the true source of that
advantage they had, is justly due to his Memory: One of these Doctors was his
Son John, the Heir of his Virtues and Piety, as well as of his Fortune: But
much superior to him in Learning; and he was perhaps inferior to no Man of his
Age, which none will dispute, that have read his Instructiones
Historico-Theologicae, a Work which if he had finished it, and had been
suffered to enjoy the privacies of his Retirement and Study, to give us the
Second Volume, had been the greatest Treasure of Theological Learning that
perhaps the World has yet seen. He was Divinity Professor at Aberdeen, an
endowment raised by his Father: But was driven out by the Covenant, and forced
to fly beyond Sea. One memorable thing of his Father ought not to be left
unmentioned; he had Synods twice a year of his Clergy, and before they went
upon their other business, he always began with a short discourse, excusing his
own infirmities and charging them that, if they knew or observed any thing
amiss in him, they would use all freedom with him, and either come and warn him
in secret of secret errors, or if they were public, that they would speak of
them there in public; and upon that he withdrew to leave them to the freedom
of Speech. This condescension of his was never abused but by one petulant Man,
to whom all others were very severe for his insolence, only the Bishop bore it
gently and as became him.

One of the Doctors of Aberdeen bred in his time and of his name William
Forbes, was promoted by the late King, while he was in Scotland in the Year one
thousand six hundred thirty and three, to the Bishopric of Edinburgh, that was
then founded by him, so that that glorious King said on good grounds, that he
had found out a Bishop that deserved that a See should be made for him; he was
a grave and eminent Divine; my Father, that knew him long, and being of Council
for him in his Law-matters, had occasion to know him well, has often told me,
That he never saw him but he thought his Heart was in Heaven, and he was never
alone with him but he felt within himself a Commentary on these Words of the
Apostles, Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he yet talked with us, and
opened to us the Scriptures? He preached with a zeal and vehemence, that made
him often forget all the measures of time, two or three Hours was no
extraordinary thing for him; those Sermons wasted his Strength so fast, and his
ascetical course of life was such, that he supplied it so scantly that he dyed
within a Year after his Promotion; so he only appeared there long enough to be
known, but not long enough to do what might have been otherwise expected from
so great a Prelate. That little remnant of his that is in Print shows how
Learned he was. I do not deny but his earnest desire of a general Peace and
Union among all Christians has made him too favorable to many of the
Corruptions in the Church of Rome: but though a Charity that is not well
balanced, may carry one to very indiscreet things; yet the Principle from
whence they flowed in him was so truly good, that the errors to which it
carried him ought to be either excused, or at least to be very gently censured.

Another of our late Bishops was the noblest born of all the Order, being
Brother to the Lord Boid, that is one of the best Families of Scotland, but was
provided to the poorest Bishopric, which was Argile; yet he did great things
in it. He found his Diocese overrun with ignorance and barbarity, so that in
many places the name of Christ was not known; but he went about that
Apostolical Work of planting the Gospel, with a particular industry, and almost
with equal success. He got Churches and Schools to be raised and endowed every
where; and lived to see a great blessing on his endeavors; so that he is not
so much as named in that Country to this day but with a particular veneration,
even by those who are otherwise no way equitable to that Order. The only answer
that our angry people in Scotland used to make when they were pressed with such
Instances, was, that there were too few of them: But some of the severest of
them have owned to me, that if there were many such Bishops, they would all be
Episcopal.

I shall not add much of the Bishops that have been in that Church since the
last re-establishing of the Order, but that I have observed among the few of
them, to whom I had the honor to be known particularly, as great, and as
exemplary things, as ever I met with in all Ecclesiastical History: Not only
the practice of the strictest of all the Ancient Canons, but a pitch of Virtue
and Piety beyond what can fall under common imitation, or be made the measure
of even the most Angelical rank of Men; and saw things in them that would look
liker fair Ideas, than what Men clothed with Flesh and Blood could grow up to.
But of this I will say no more, since those that are concerned are yet alive,
and their Character is too singular, not to make them to be as easily known, if
I enlarged upon it, The worthy person here meant, is dead since this was put in
the Press; but both his Name and a more particular account of him, as it well
deserves a Book by it self, so will perhaps be given on another occasion.
as if I named them.

But of one that is dead I may be allowed to say somewhat; with whom the Sea of
Aberdeen was as happy in this Age, as it was in his worthy Predecessor Forbes
in the last; both in the number of the Years, for he sat seventeen Years in
that Chair, and in the rare qualities that dignified them both almost equally.
He also saw his Son fill the Divinity Chair, as the other had done; but here
was the fatal difference, that he only lived long enough to raise the greatest
expectation that I ever knew upon any of that Nation of his standing; for when
all hoped to se in him a second Dr. Forbes, or, to bring it nearer home,
another Bishop Scougall, for that was his Fathers name, he dyed very young. The
endearing gentleness of the Father to all that differed from him, his great
strictness in giving Orders, his most unaffected humility and contempt of the
World, were things so singular in him, that they deserved to be much more
admired than his other Talents, which were also extraordinary, a wonderful
strength of Judgment, a dexterity in the conduct of Affairs, which he employed
chiefly in the making up of Differences, and a Discretion in his whole
deportment. For he had a way of Familiarity, by which he gave every body all
sort of freedom with him, and in which at the same time he inspired them with a
veneration for him, and by that he gained so much on their affections, that he
was considered as the common Father of his whole Diocese, and the Dissenters
themselves seemed to esteem him no less than the Conformists did. He took great
pleasure in discoursing often with young Divines, and set himself to frame in
them right and generous Notions of the Christian Religion, and of the Pastoral
Care; so that a Set of Men grew up under his Labors, that carry still on them
clear Characters of his spirit and temper.

One thing more I will add, which may afford a more general Instruction.
Several years ago he observed a great heat in some young Minds, that, as he
believed, had very good intentions, but were too forward, and complained much
of abuses, calling loudly, and not very decently, for a Reformation of them:
upon which he told them, the noise made about reforming abuses was the
likeliest way to keep them up; for that would raise Heats and Disputes, and
would be ascribed to envy and faction in them; and ill-minded Men, that loved
the abuses for the advantages they made by them, would blast and misrepresent
those that went about to correct them, by which they would fall under the
jealousy of being ill affected to the Church; and they being once loaded with
this prejudice, would be disabled from doing the good, of which they might
otherwise be the Instruments: Therefore he thought a Reformation of Abuses
ought to be carried on by every one in his station, with no other noise than
what the things themselves must necessarily produce, and then the silent way of
conviction that is raised by great Patterns would speak louder, and would
recommend such Practices more strongly, as well as more modestly. Discourses
work but upon speculative people; and it has been so long the method of
factious and ill designing Men, to accuse public Errors, that he wished those,
to whom he addressed his advice, would give over all thoughts of mending the
world, which was grown too old in wickedness to be easily corrected; and would
only set themselves to do what good they could, with less noise; and so to give
less occasion to angry people to quarrel with them; and to justify those
abuses which are by such indiscreet opposition kept in some credit, and
preserved; whereas without that they must have fallen under so general an
Odium, that few could have the face to excuse them.

And now I have done with this digression; which not being at all foreign to my
design of raising the credit due to that venerable Order. I shall make no
Apology for it; but shall come next to the subject of the following Book. I had
a great Collection of Memorials put in my hands by a worthy and learned Divine,
Mr. Clogy, who as he lived long in this Bishops House, so being afterward
Minister at Cavan, had occasion to know him well: And as he had a great zeal to
see the Justice done to his Memory and the Service done to the World, which the
putting these in order, and the publishing them must needs produce; so he
judged it would come better from another hand than his, that was so much
obliged by him, that it might be thought affection and gratitude had biassed
him too much. I confess my part in this was so small, that I can scarce assume
any thing to my self, but the copying out what was put in my hands. Lives must
be written with the strictness of a severe Historian, and not helped up with
Rhetoric and Invention. But there are two great Imperfections that must be
pardoned in this account: The one is, That there is so little said of him
gathered from any of his own Writings, which would raise his Character much
higher than any thing that others, though of his most intimate Acquaintance,
could preserve in their Memories: The other is, That such Journals as perhaps
some that intended to give a full representation of him to Posterity, might
have writ, were all lost in the same common Shipwreck of the Irish Rebellion:
In which though our Bishops Works were swallowed up, yet he himself met with a
most distinguished Fate, more suitable to his own rare merit, than to the
enraged fury of those Cannibals. And it was so unlike their deportment in all
other places, and to all other persons, that it ought rather to be ascribed to
a tender and watchful Providence, and to be reckoned among its Miracles, than
to any impressions that his worth made on those Barbarians, who seemed to be as
incapable of all the tendernesses of Humane Nature, and as regardless of
Religion and Virtue, as Bears or Wolves are: Or if there was any difference, it
lay in this, that the one are satiated with Blood and Prey, whereas these burnt
with a thirst of Blood that seemed unsatisfiable: And their cruel tempers being
excited by the Priests of a Religion whose proper character is Blood, as their
Element is Fire, no wonder if they made havoc of all that fell in their way:
The greatest Wonder was, how one that had so just a title to the rage of their
Priests, that is chiefly founded on extraordinary Worth and great zeal for the
Truth, should have been so preserved among them, when he fell into their Hands,
and so honored by them at his Death: By which it appeared that the same mighty
Power that saved Daniel's three Friends from the violence of the Fire, and
himself from the rage of the Lions, is not yet exhausted.

The Memorials here put in order, are nothing but what the memory of that good
Man could afford, together with some few Remnants of the Bishops own Pen,
gathered up like Boards after a Shipwreck. But in them we may find all that is
Great in a Man, in a Christian, and in a Bishop: And that in so eminent a
manner, that if the fame of the person were not so great, and if the usage he
met with among the Irish, were not a Testimony beyond exception, I could scarce
hope to be believed. I will give only a bare and simple Relation of his Life,
and will avoid the bestowing on him or his Actions such Epithets and Praises as
they deserve: But will leave that to the Reader* For in writing of Lives all
big Words are to be left to those who dress up Legends, and Make Lives rather
than Write them: the things themselves must praise the Person, otherwise all
the good Words that the Writer bestows on him, will only show his own great
kindness to his Memory, but will not persuade others: On the contrary it will
incline them to suspect his partiality, and make them look on him as an Author
rather than a Writer.

Letters inserted in the Life of Bishop Bedell.
1. A Letter of Sir Henry Wottons to K. Charles I. concerning Bishop Bedell.
page 31 2 A Letter of Bishop Bedells upon his being invited to go over to
Ireland. p. 34. 3 A Letter of B. Bedells to Archbishop Laud concerning the
state of the Clergy, and other particulars relating to his Diocese. p. 45 4. A
Letter of B. Bedells to Archbishop Usher, against Pluralities. p. 52 5. A
Letter of B. Bedells to Archbishop Laud, setting forth the insolence of the
Irish Priests. p. 69 6, 7. Two Letters of B. Bedells to Archbishop Usher
concerning the abuses of the Spiritual Courts, and of the Lay Chancellours. p.
94, 96 8. A Letter of B. Bedells to Archbishop Usher, justifying himself in
several particulars. p. 126 9. A Letter of B. Bedells to the E. of Strafford,
concerning the Translation of the Bible into the Irish Tongue. p. 131 10. A
part of a Sermon of B. Bedells concerning brotherly love and moderation in the
managing of Controversies. p. 148 11. A part of a Sermon of B. Bedells,
excusing some well meaning persons that were in the Church of Rome. p. 156 12.
The Conclusion of that Sermon, exhorting to a more entire Reformation of
abuses. p. 166 13. The Remonstrance of the Rebels in the County of Cavan
setting forth the Grievances that had provoked them to the Rebellion. p. 185
14. A Letter of B. Bedells to the Popish Bishop of Kilmore when he was beset by
the Rebels. p. 188 15. A Letter containing Christian directions in time of
Persecution, writ by B. Bedel for a Lady that desired them. p. 192 16. B.
Bedells last Words. p. 210
At the end of the Life there are added some Papers in Latin.

1. B. Bedells form of Institution to Benefices. p. 235 2. The Decrees of a
Diocesan Synod that he held at Kilmore. p. 237 3. B. Bedells Declinator of
Archbishop Ushers Lay Chancellor upon an Appeal. p. 243 4. His Letter to
Bishop Swiney. p. 251
THE LIFE OF WILLIAM BEDELL, D. D. Bishop of KILMORE IN IRELAND.
WILLIAM BEDELL was born at Black Notley in Essex, in the year 1570. he was the
younger Son of an ancient and good Family, and of no inconsiderable Estate,
which has now descended to his Son (his elder Brother dying without Issue):
After he had past through the common education at Schools, he was sent to
Emmanuel College in Cambridge, and put under Dr. Chadderton's care, the famous
and long-lived Head of that House; and here all those extraordinary things,
that rendered him afterward so conspicuous, began to show themselves in such a
manner, that he came to have a very eminent Character both for Learning and
Piety: so that Appeals were often made to him, as Differences or Controversies
arose in the University. He was put in Holy Orders by the Bishop Suffragan of
Colchester. THE I met with this passage, I did not think these Suffragans had
been continued so long in England: How they came to be put down, I do not kn^w;
it is probable they did ordain all that desired Orders, so promiscuously, that
the Bishops found it necessary to let them fall. For complaints were made of
this S^ffragan, upon which he was threatened with the taking his Commission from
him: for though they could do nothing but by a Delegation from the Bishop, yet
the Orders they gave were still valid, even when they transgressed in
conferring them: Upon that the Suffragan said a thing that was as insolent in
him, as it was honorable for Mr. Bedell, That he had ordained a better Man
than any the Bishop had ever ordained, naming Bedell. He was chosen Fellow of
the College in 1593. and took his Degree of Batchelour of Divinity in the year
1599.

From the University he was removed to the Town of S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk,
where he served long in the Gospel, and with great success* he and his
Colleague being of such different characters, that whereas it was said of him
that he made the difficultest places of Scripture appear plain, it was said,
That his Colleague made the plainest places appear difficult; the opening of
dark passages* and the comparing of many Texts of Scripture, together with a
serious and practical application of them, being the chief subject of His
Sermons: Which method several other great Men at that time followed, such as
Bishop Usher, Dr. Iackson, and Mr. Mede. He had an occasion given him not long
after his settlement in this charge, to show his courage, and how little he
either courted preferment, or was afraid of falling under the displeasure of
great Men: For when the Bishop of Norwich proposed some things to a meeting of
his Clergy, with which they were generally dissatisfied, though they had not
resolution enough to oppose them; He took that hard Province upon himself, and
did it with so much strength of reason, as well as discretion, that many of
those things were let fall: upon which when his Brethren came and magnified him
for it, he checked them and said, He desired not the praises of Men. His
reputation was so great and so well established both in the University and in
Suffolk, that when King James sent Sir Henry Wotton to be his Ambassador at
Venice, at the time of the Interdict; he was recommended as the fittest Man to
go Chaplain in so critical a conjuncture. This Employment proved much happier
and more honorable for him than that of his fellow Student and Chamber-fellow
Mr. Wadsworth, who was at that time beneficed in the same Diocese with him, and
was about that time sent into Spain, and was afterward appointed to teach the
Infanta the English Tongue, when the match between the late King and her was
believed concluded: for Wadsworth was prevailed on to change his Religion and
abandon his Country, as if in them those Words of our Savior had been to be
verified, There shall be two in one Bed, the one shall be taken, and the other
shall be left. For as the one of these was wrought on to forsake his Religion,
the other was very near the being an Instrument of a great and happy change in
the Republic of Venice. I need not say much of a thing so well known as were
the quarrels of Pope Paul the V. and that Republic; especially since the
History of them is written so particularly by him that knew the matter best, P.
Paulo. Some Laws made by the Senate, not unlike our Statutes of Mortmain,
restraining the excessive Donations, extorted from superstitious Men, and the
imprisoning two lewd Friars, in order to the executing Justice on them, were
the grounds of the quarrel; and upon those pretenses* the Ecclesiastical
Immunity from the Secular Tribunals was asserted to such a degree, that after
that high spirited Pope had tried what the spiritual Sword could do, but
without success, (his Interdict not being observed by any, but the Jesuits,
the Capucins and Theatines, who were upon that banished the State, for the age
of the Anselms and the Beckets could not be now recalled) he resolved to try
the Temporal Sword next, according to the advice Cardinal Baronius gave him;
who told him in the Consistory, That there were two things said to S. Peter,
the first was, Feed my Sheep, the other was, Arise and kill; and therefore
since he had a^^eady executed the first part of S. Peter's duty, in feeding the
Flock, by Exhortations, Admonitions, and Censures, without the desired effect,
he had nothing left but to arise and kill: and that not being an Age in which
Croisades could pass upon the World; and the Pope not finding any other Prince
that would execute his Bulls, he resolved to make War upon them himself, hoping
to find assistance from the Crown of Spain, who, he believed, would be willing
to enlarge their Dominions on that side: but when all help failed him, and he
saw that his Censures had not created any distractions in the Republic, and
found their Treasure and F^rce like to prove a match too hard to the
Apostolical Chamber, and to such Forces as he could levy and pay, he was at
last willing to accept of a mediation, in which the Senate, though they were
content to deliver up the two profligate Friars, yet asserted their Right, and
maintained their Laws, notwithstanding all his threatenings; nor would they so
much as ask pardon, or crave absolution. But without going further into matters
so generally known, I shall only mention those things in which Mr. Bedell had
some share.

P. Paulo was then the Divine of the State, a man equally eminent for vast
learning and a most consummated prudence; and was at once one of the greatest
Divines, and of the wisest Men of his Age. But to commend the celebrated
Historian of the Council of Trent, is a thing so needless that I may well stop;
yet it must needs raise the Character of Bedell much, that an Italian, who,
besides the caution that is natural to the Country, and the prudence that
obliged one in his circumstances to a more than ordinary distrust of all the
World, was tied up by the strictness of that Government to a very great
reservedness with all people, yet took Bedell into his very Soul; and, as Sir
Henry Wotton assured the late King, He communicated to him the inwardest
thoughts of his Heart, and profesed that he had learnt more from him in all the
parts of Divinity, whether Speculative or Practical, than from any he had ever
conversed with in his whole life. So great an intimacy with so extraordinary a
person is enough to raise a Character, were there no more to be added. P. Paulo
went further, for he assisted him in acquiring the Italian Tongue, in which
Bedell became such a Master, that he spoke it as one born in Italy, and penned
all the Sermons he then preached, either in Italian or Latin; in this last it
will appear by the productions of his Pen yet remaining, that he had a true
Roman Style, inferior to none of the Modern Writers, if not equal to the
Ancients. In requital of the Instruction he received from P. Paulo in the
Italian Tongue, he drew a Grammar of the English Tongue for his use, and for
some others that desired to learn it, that so they might be able to understand
our Books of Divinity, and he also translated the English Common Prayer Book
into Italian; and P. Paulo and the seven Divines that during the Interdict were
commanded by the Senate both to preach and write against the Popes authority,
liked it so well, that they resolved to have made it their pattern, in case the
differences between the Pope and them had produced the effect which they hoped
and longed for.

The intimacy between them grew so great and so public, that when P. Paulo was
wounded by those Assassinates that were set on by the Court of Rome to destroy
so redoubted an Enemy, upon the failing of which attempt a Guard was set on him
by the Senate, that knew how to value and preserve so great a Treasure; and
much precaution was used before any were admitted to come to him, Bedell was
excepted out of those rules, and had free access to him at all times. They had
many and long discourses concerning Religion: He found P. Paulo had read over
the Greek New Testament with so much exactness, that having used to mark every
Word when he had fully weighed the importance of it as he went through it; he
had by going often over it, and observing what he past over in a former
reading, grown up to that at last, that every word was marked of the whole New
Testament: and when Bedell suggested to him critical explications of some
passages that he had not understood before, he received them with the
transports of one that leapt for joy, and that valued the discoveries of divine
Truth beyond all other things.

During his stay at Venice, the famous Ant. de Dominis Archbishop of Spalata
came to Venice; and having received a just character of Mr. Bedell, he
discovered his secret to him, and showing him his ten Books De Republica
Ecclesiastica, which he afterward printed at London: Bedell took the freedom
which he allowed him, and corrected many ill applications of Texts of
Scripture, and Quotations of Fathers. For that Prelate being utterly ignorant
of the Greek Tongue, could not but be guilty of many mistakes both in the one
and the other; and if there remain some places still that discover his
ignorance of that Language too plainly, yet there had been many more, if Bedell
had not corrected them: but no wonder if in such a multitude some escaped his
diligence. De Dominis took all this in good part from him, and did enter into
such familiarity with him, and found his assistance so useful, and indeed so
necessary to himself, that he used to say he could do nothing without him.

A passage fell out during the Interdict, that made greater noise than perhaps
the importance of it could well amount to: but it was suited to the Italian
Genius. There came a Jesuit to Venice, Thomas Maria Caraffa, who printed a
Thousand Theses of Philosophy and Divinity, which he dedicated to the Pope with
this extravagant Inscription, PAULO V. VICE-DEO Christianae Reipublicae
Monarchae invictissimo, and Pontificiae Omnipotentiae conservatori accerrimo.
To Paul the U. the Uice-God, the most invincible Monarch of the Christian
Commonwealth, and the most zealous asserter of the Papal Omnipotency.

All people were amazed at the impudence of this Title, but when Mr. Bedell
observed that the numeral Letters of the first Words, PAVLO V. VICE-DEO being
put together, made exactly 666. the number of the Beast in the Revelation, he
communicated this to P. Paulo and the Seven Divines, and they carried it to the
Duke and Senate: it was entertained almost as if it had come from Heaven, and
it was publicly preached over all their Territories, that here was a certain
evidence that the Pope was Antichrist: And it is like this was promoted by them
more, because they found it took with the Italians, than that they could build
much upon it; though it was as strong as the like computation from the Greek
Word (...), upon which some of the Ancients laid some weight. This flew so over
Italy, that lest it should take too much among the people, the Pope caused his
Emissaries to give it out every where, That Antichrist was now born in Babylon,
and was descended of the Tribe of Dan; and that he was gathering a vast Army,
with which he intended to come and destroy Christendom: and therefore all
Christian Princes were exhorted to prepare all their Forces for resisting so
great an Invasion. And with this piece of false news that was given out very
confidently, the other conceit was choked. But though Mr. Bedell makes use of
it in his Book against Wadsworth, yet he was too modest a Man to claim the
discovery of it to himself, but Sir Henry Wotton assured King James, That he
first observed it.

Here I must add a passage, concerning which I am in doubt whether it reflected
more on the sincerity, or on the understanding of the English Ambassador. The
breach between the Pope and the Republic was brought very near a Crisis; so
that it was expected a total separation, not only from the Court, but the
Church of Rome, was like to follow upon it. It was set on by P. Paulo and the
Seven Divines with much zeal, and was very prudently conducted by them. In
order to the advancing of it, King James ordered his Ambassador to offer all
possible assistance to them, and to accuse the Pope and the Papacy as the chief
Authors of all the mischiefs of Christendom. The Prince and Senate answered
this in words full of respect to King James, and said, That they knew things
were not so bad as some endeavored to make the World believe, on design to sow
discord between Christian Princes: and when the Popes Nuncio objected, That
King James was not a Catholic, and so was not to be relied on; The Duke
answered, The King of England believed in Jesus Christ, but he did not know in
whom some others believed. Upon which P. Paulo and the Seven Divines pressed
Mr. Bedell to move the Ambassador to present King James's Premonition to all
Christian Princes and States, then put in Latin, to the Senate, and they were
confident it would produce a great effect. But the Ambassador could not be
prevailed on to do it at that time, (...) pretended that since S. James's day
was not far off, i^ would be more proper to do it on that day. If this was only
for the sake of a Speech that he had made on the conceit of S. James's Day and
K. James's Book, with which he had intended to present it, that was a weakness
never to be excused. But if this was only a pretense, and that there was a
design under it, it was a crime not to be forgiven. All that Bedell could say
or do to persuade him not to put off a thing of such importance was in vain;
and indeed I can hardly think that Wotton was so weak a Man as to have acted
sincerely in this matter. Before S. James's day came, which I suppose was the
First of May, and not the Twenty fifth of July, the difference was made up, and
that happy opportunity was lost; so that when he had his audience on that Day,
in which he presented the Book, all the answer he got, was, That they thanked
the King of England for his good will, but they were now reconciled to the
Pope, and that therefore they were resolved not to admit of any change in their
Religion, according to their agreement with the Court of Rome.

It may be easily imagined what a Wound this was to his Chaplain, but much more
to those who were more immediately concerned in that matter; I mean P. Paulo
with the Seven Divines, and many others, who were weary of the corruptions of
their Worship, and were groaning for a Reformation. But now the reconciliation
with Rome was concluded: the Senate carried the matter with all the dignity and
Majesty that became that most se^ene Republic, as to all civil things: for
they would not ask Absolution; but the Nuncio, to save the Popes credit, came
into the Senate House, before the Duke was come, and crossed his Cushion, and
absolved him. Yet upon this they would not suffer any public signs of joy to
be made; nor would they recall the Jesuits. But in all these things greater
regard was had to the dignity of their State, than to the interest of Religion;
so that P. Paulo was out of all hopes of bringing things ever back to so
promising a conjuncture; upon which he wished he could have left Venice and come
over to England with Mr. Bedell: but he was so much esteemed by the Senate for
his great Wisdom, that he was consulted by them as an Oracle, and trusted with
their most important Secrets: so that he saw it was impossible for him to
obtain his Conge; and therefore he made a shift to comply as far as he could
with the established way of their Worship; but he had in many things particular
methods, by which he in a great measure rather quieted than satisfied his
Conscience. In saying of Mass, he past over many parts of the Canon, and in
particular those Prayers, in which that Sacrifice was offered up to the honor
of Saints: He never prayed to Saints, nor joined in those parts of the Offices
that went against his Conscience; and in private Confessions and Discourses, he
took people off from those abuses, and gave them right Notions of the purity of
the Christian Religion; so he hoped he was sowing Seeds that might be fruitful
in another Age: and thus he believed he might live innocent in a Church that he
thought so defiled. And when one pressed him hard in this matter, and objected
that he still held communion with an Idolatrous Church, and gave it credit by
adhering outwardly to it, by which means others that depended much on his
example would be likewise encouraged to continue in it: All the answer he made
to this was, That God had not given him the Spirit of Luther. He expressed
great tenderness and concern for Bedell, when he parted with him; and said that
both he and many others would have gone over with him, if it had been in their
power: but that he might never be forgot by him, he gave him his Picture, with
an Hebrew Bible without Points, and a little Hebrew Psalter, in which he writ
some Sentences expressing his esteem and friendship for him; and with these he
gave him the unvaluable Manuscript of the History of the Council of Trent,
together with the History of the Interdict and of the Inquisition; the first of
these will ever be reckoned the chief pattern after which all, that intend to
succeed well in writing History, must copy. But among other Papers that P.
Paulo gave him, some that were of great importance are lost: for in a Letter of
Mr Bedells to Dr. Ward, he mentions a Collection of Letters that were sent him
Weekly from Rome during the contests between the Jesuits and Dominicans,
concerning the efficacy of Grace; of which P. Paulo gave him the Originals; and
in his Letter to Dr. Ward he mentions his having sent them to him. These, very
probably, contained a more particular relation of that matter than the World
has yet seen, since they were writ to so curious and so inquisitive a Man; but
it seems he did not allow Bedell to print them, and so I am afraid, they are
now irrecoverably lost.

When Bedell came over, he brought along with him the Archbishop of Spalata,
and one Despotine a Physician, who could no longer bear with the corruptions of
the Roman Worship; and so chose a freer air. The latter lived near him in S.
Edmundsbury, and was by his means introduced into much Practice, which he
maintained so well, that he became eminent in his Profession, and continued to
his death to keep up a constant correspondence with him. As for the Archbishop
of Spalata his Story, it is too well known to need to be much enlarged on. He
was an ambitious Man, and set too great a value on himself, and expressed it so
indecently, that he sunk much in the estimation of the English Clergy, by whom
he was at first received with all possible respect; but after he had stayed
some years in England, upon the promotion of Pope Gregory the XIV. that had
been his School-fellow, and old acquaintance, he was made believe that the Pope
intended to give him a Cardinals Hat, and to make great use of him in all
a^fairs; so that he fancied that he should be the instrument of a great
Reformation in the Church: his Pride made him too easy to flatter himself with
these vain Hopes, and the distaste some of the English Clergy had taken at him
for his ambition and covetousness, gave Gundamor the Spanish Ambassador great
advantages in the conduct of that matter: for his mind that was blown up with
vanity, and sharpened with resentment, was easily wrought on, so that he,
believing that the Promises made him would not only be performed, but that he
might be the instrument of bringing about a great change, even at Rome, went
thither. He was at first well received by the Pope himself: But he happened to
say of Cardinal Bellarmine, that had writ against him, That he had not answered
his Arguments. Upon which a complaint was carried to the Pope, as if he had
been still of the same mind, in which he was when he published his Books. He
excused himself, and said, That though Bellarmine had not answered his
Arguments, yet he did not say they were unanswerable: and he offered to answer
them himself* if they would allow him time for it. But this excuse was not
accepted, so he was cast into the Inquisition, but was never brought to any
Trial: He was poisoned not long after, and his Body was cast out at a Window,
and all his Goods were confiscated to the Pope. This was the tragical end of
that great but inconstant Man: If he had had as good a Soul as he had a great
understanding, together with vast learning, considering his education and other
disadvantages, he had deserved to have been reckoned among the greatest Men of
his Age. In his Fate it appeared, how foolishly credulous, Vanity makes a Man;
since he that was an Italian born, and knew the Court of Rome so well, could be
wrought on so far, as to believe that they were capable of pardoning and
promoting him after the mischief he had done their Cause. This account of that
matter, my Author had from Master Bedell's own Mouth.

But now Mr. Bedell had finished one of the Scenes of his life with great
honor. The most considerable addition he made to his learning at Venice, was
in the improvements in the Hebrew, in which he made a great progress by the
assistance of R. Leo, that was the chief Chacham of the Jewish Synagogue there:
From him he learned their way of pronunciation, and some other parts of
Rabbinical learning; but in exchange of it, he communicated to him, that which
was much more valuable, the true understanding of many passages in the Old
Testament, with which that Rabbi expressed himself often to be highly
satisfied: And once in a solemn dispute, he pressed his Rabbi with so clear
proofs of Jesus Christ being the true Messiah, that he, and several others, of
his Brethren, had no other way to escape, but to say that their Rabbis every
where did expound those Prophecies otherwise, according to the Tradition of
their Fathers. By R. Leo's means, he purchased that fair Manuscript of the Old
Testament, which he gave to Emmanuel College; and, as I am credibly informed,
it cost him its weight in Silver.

After Eight Years stay in Venice, he returned to England, and without
pretending to Preferment, or aspiring to it; he went immediately to his charge
at S. Edmundsbury, and there went on in his ministerial labors; with which he
mixed the translating P. Paulo's immortal Writings into Latin. Sir Adam Newton
translated the two first Books of the History of the Council of Trent, but was
not master enough of the two Languages; so that the Archbishop of Spalata said
it was not the same Work; but he highly approved of the two last, that were
translated by Mr. Bedell, who likewise translated the History of the Interdict,
and of the Inquisition, and dedicated them to the King. But no notice was taken
of him, and he lived still private and unknown in that obscure corner. He had a
Soul of too generous a composition to stoop to those servile compliances, that
are often expected by those that have the distribution of Preferments in their
power. He thought that was an abjectness of Spirit that became not a Christian
Philosopher, much less a Churchman, who ought to express a contempt of the
World, a contentedness with a low condition, and a resignation of ones outward
circumstances wholly to the conduct of Divine Providence; and not to give that
advantage which Atheists and Libertines take from the covetousness and
aspirings of some Churchmen, to scoff at Religion, and to call Priesthood a
Trade. He was content to deserve Preferment, and did not envy others, who upon
less merit, but more industry arrived at it. But though he was forgot at Court,
yet an eminent Gentleman in Suffolk, Sir Thomas Iermyn, who was a privy
Counselor, and Vice-Chamberlain to King Charles the First, and a great Patron
of Virtue and Piety, took such a liking to him, that as he continued his whole
life to pay him a very particular esteem; so a considerable Living that was in
his Gift, falling void, he presented him to it in the Year 1615. When he came
to the Bishop of Norwich to take out his Title to it, he demanded large Fees
for his Institution and Induction: But Bedell would give no more than what was
sufficient gratification for the Writing, the Wax, and the Parchment; and
refused to pay the rest. He looked on it as Simony in the Bishop, to demand
more, and as contrary to the command of Christ, who said to his Apostles,
Freely ye have received, and freely give. And thought it was a branch of the
sin of Simony to sell Spiritual things to Spiritual persons; and since
whatsoever was asked, that was more than a decent Gratification to the Servant
for his pains, was asked by reason of the thing that was granted, he thought
this was unbecoming the Gospel, and that it was a sin both in the Giver and in
the Taker. He had observed that nothing was more expressly contrary to all the
Primitive Rules. Chrysostom examined a complaint made against Autonine Bishop
of Ephesu^, for exacting Fees at Ordination. Autonine dyed before the Process
was finished; but some Bishops, that had paid those Fees, were upon that
degraded and made incapable to officiate any more, though they pretended, that
they paid that Money as a Fee for obtaining a Release from such Obligations as
lay on them by Law, to serve the Court. Afterward not only all Ordinations for
Money, but the taking Money for any Employment that depended upon the Bishops
Gift, was most severely condemned by the Council of Chalcedon The Buyer was to
lose his Degree, and the Seller was to be in danger of it: And after that,
severe censures were every where decreed against all Presents that might be
made to Bishops, either before or after Ordinations, or upon the account of
Writings, or of Feasts, or any other expense that was brought in use to be made
upon that occasion; and even in the Council of Trent, it was Decreed, That
nothing should be taken for Letters dimissory, the Certificates, the Seals, or
upon any such like ground* either by Bishops or their Servants, even though it
was freely offered. Upon these accounts Mr. Bedell resolved rather to lose his
Presentation to the Parsonage of Horingsheath, than to purchase his Title to it
by doing that which he thought Simony. And he left the Bishop and went home:
But some few days after, the Bishop sent for him, and gave him his Titles,
without exacting Fees of him; and so he removed to that place, where he stayed
Twelve Years, during which time he was a great honor to the Church, as well as
a pattern to all Churchmen. His habit and way of living was very plain, and
becoming the simplicity of his Profession. He was very tender of those that
were truly poor, but was so strict in examining all Vagabonds, and so dexterous
in discovering counterfeit Passes, and took such care of punishing those that
went about with them, that they came no more to him, nor to his Town. In all
that time no notice was ever taken of him, though he gave a very singular
evidence of his great capacity. For being provoked by his old acquaintance
Wadsworth's Letters, he writ upon the points in controversy with the Church of
Rome, with so much learning and judgment, and in so mild a strain, that no
wonder if his Book had a good effect on him, for whom it was intended: It is
true he never returned and changed his Religion himself, but his Son came from
Spain into Ireland, when Bedell was promoted to the Bishopric of Kilmore
there, and told him, That his Father commanded him to thank him for the pains
he was at in writing it: he said, It was almost always lying open before him,
and that he had heard him say, He was resolved to save one. And it seems he
instructed his Son in the true Religion, for he declared himself a Protestant
on his coming over. This Book was printed, and dedicated to the late King,
while he was Prince of Wales, in the Year 1624. The true Reasons that
obstructed Bedell's preferment seem to be these; He was a Calvinist in the
matter of Decrees and Grace; and Preferments went generally at that time to
those that held the other Opinions. He had also another Principle, which was
not very acceptable to some in power: he thought, Conformity was an exact
adhereing to the Rubric; and that the adding any new Rite or Ceremony, was as
much Nonconformity, as the passing over those that were prescribed: So that he
would not use those Bowings or Gesticulations that grew so much in fashion,
that Men's affections were measured by them. He had too good an understanding,
not to conclude, That these things were not unlawful in themselves; but he had
observed that when once the humor of adding new Rites and Ceremonies got into
the Church, it went on by a fatal increase, till it had grown up to that bulk,
to which we find it swelled in the Church of Rome. And this began so early, and
grew so fast, that S. Austin complained of it in his time, saying, That the
condition of Christians was then more uneasy by that Yoke of Observances, than
that of the Jews had been. And therefore Bedell thought the adhering to
established Laws and Rules was a certain and fixed thing; whereas Superstition
was infinite. So he was against all Innovations, or arbitrary and assumed
Practices; and so much the more, when Men were distinguished, and marked out for
Preferment, by that which in strictness of Law was a thing that deserved
punishment. For in the Act of Uniformity, made in the first Year of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, it was made highly penal, to use any other Rite or Ceremony,
Order or Form, either in the Sacraments, or in Morning or Evening Prayers, than
what was mentioned and set forth in that Book. And this was particularly
intended to restrain some that were leavened with the former Superstition, and
yet for saving their Benefices, might conform to the New Service, but retain
still with it many of the old Rites in sacred Offices. And it seems our
Legislators were of the same mind, when the last Act of Uniformity was past;
for there is a special Proviso in it, That no Rites or Ceremonies should be
openly used in any Church, other than what was prescribed and appointed to be
used in and by the said Book. Therefore he continued to make the Rubric the
measure of his Conformity, as well before his promotion as after it.

But he was well satisfied with that which the Providence of God laid in his
way, and went on in the duties of his pastoral care, and in his own private
Studies; and was as great a Pattern in Suffolk, of the pastoral care, in the
lower degree, as he proved afterward in Ireland in the higher Order. He
labored not as an Hireling that only raised a Revenue out of his Parish, and
abandoned his Flock, trusting them to the cheapest Mercenary that he could
find; nor did he satisfy himself with a slight performance of his duty only
for fashions sake; but he watched over his Flock like one that knew he was to
answer to God for those Souls committed to his charge: so he preached to the
understandings and Consciences of his Parish, and Catechized constantly. And,
as the whole course of his own most exemplary behavior was a continued Sermon;
so he was very exact in the more private parts of his Function, visiting the
Sick, and dealing in secret with his people, to excite or preserve in them a
deep sense of Religion. This he made his work, and he followed it so close, and
lived so much at home, that he was so little known, or so much forgot, that
when Diodati came over to England, many years after this, he could hear of him
from no person that he met with; though he was acquainted with many of the
Clergy. He was much amazed at this, to find that so extraordinary a Man, that
was so much admired at Venice, by so good Judges, was not so much as known in
his own Country; and so he was out of all hope of finding him out, but by a
mere accident he met him on the Streets of Londen, at which there was a great
deal of joy on both sides. And upon that Diodati presented him to Morton the
learned and ancient Bishop of Duresme, and told how great a value P. Paulo set
on him; upon which that Bishop treated him in a very particular manner. It is
true, Sir Henry Wotton was always his firm and faithful Friend; but his Credit
at Court had sunk: for he fell under necessities, having lived at Venice in an
expense above his appointments. And as necessitous Courtiers must grow to
forget all concerns but their own; so their interest abates, and the favor
they are in lessens, when they come to need it too much. Sir Thomas Iermyn was
in more credit, though he was always suspected of being too favorable to the
Puritans; so that his inclinations being known, the characte^ he could give of
him, did not serve to raise him in England.

While he was thus neglected at home, his fame was spread into Ireland; and
though he was not known either to the famous Bishop Usher, or to any of the
Fellows of Trinity College in Dublin, yet he was chosen by their unanimous
consent, to be the Head of their College, in the Year 1627. and as that worthy
Primate of Ireland, together with the Fellows of the College, writ to him,
inviting him to come and accept of that Mastership, so an Address was made to
the King, praying that he would command him to go over. And that this might be
the more successful, Sir Henry Wotton was moved to give his Majesty a true
account of him, which he did in the following Letter.

May it please your most gracious Majesty,
HAving been informed, That certain persons have, by the good Wishes of the
Archbishop of Armagh, been directed hither, with a most humble Petition unto
your Majesty, That you will be pleased to make Mr. William Bedell (now resident
upon a small Benefice in Suffolk) Governor of your College at Dublin, for the
good of that Society: and my self being required to render unto your Majesty
some Testimony of the said William Bedell, who was long my Chaplain at Venice,
in the time of my employment there; I am bound in all Conscience and Truth (so
far as your Majesty will accept of my poor Judgment) to affirm of him, That, I
think, hardly a ^itter Man could have been propounded to your Majesty in your
whole Kingdom, for singular Erudition and Piety, Conformity to the Rites of the
Church, and Zeal to advance the Cause of God; wherein his Travells abroad were
not obscure, in the time of the Excommunication of the Venetians. For, may it
please your Majesty to know, That this is the Man whom Padre Paulo took (I may
say) into his very Soul, with whom he did communicate the inwardest Thoughts of
his Heart; from whom he professed to have received more knowledge in all
Divinity, both scholastical and positive, than from any that he had practiced
in his Days: of which all the passages were well known unto the King your
Father, of blessed memory. And so with your Majesty's good favor, I will end
this needless office: for the general fame of his Learning, his Life, and
Christian Temper, and those religious Labors which himself has dedicated to
your Majesty, do better describe him than I am able.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Servant, H. Wotton.


But when this matter was proposed to Mr. Bedell, he expressed so much both of
true Philosophy, and real Christianity in the Answer that he made to so
honorable an offer, that I will not undertake to give it otherwise than in his
own Words, taken from a Letter which he writ to one that had been employed to
deal with him in this matter. The Original of this and most of the other
Letters that I set down, were found among the Most Reverend Primate Usher's
Papers, and were communicated to me by his Reverend and worthy Friend Dr. Parre.

SIR,
WIth my hearty commendations remembered: I have this Day received both your
Letters, dated the 2. of this Month; I thank you for your care and diligence in
this matter. For answer whereof, although I could have desired so much respite,
as to have conferred with some of my Friends, such as possibly do know the
condition of that place better than I do, and my insufficiencies better than my
Lord Primate; yet since that I perceive by both your Letters, the matter
requires a speedy and present answer, thus I stand: I am married, and have
three Children; therefore if the place requires a single Man, the business is
at an end. I have no want, I thank my God, of any thing necessary for this
life; I have a competent Living of above a hundred pound a Year, in a good Air
and Seat, with a very convenient House near to my Friends, a little Parish, not
exceeding the compass of my weak Voice. I have often heard it, That changing
seldom brings the better; especially to those that are well. And I see well,
That my Wife, (though resolving, as she ought, to be contented with whatsoever
God shall appoint) had rather continue with her Friends in her native Country,
than put her self into the hazard of the Seas, and a foreign Land, with many
casualties in Travel, which she perhaps out of fear, apprehends more than there
is cause.

All these reasons I have, if I consult with Flesh and Blood, which move me
rather to reject this offer; (yet with all humble and dutiful thanks to my Lord
Primate for his Mind and good Opinion of me:) on the other side, I consider the
end, wherefore I came into the World, and the business of a Subject to our Lord
Jesus Christ, of a Minister of the Gospel of a good Patriot, and of an honest
Man. If I may be of any better use to my Country, to Gods Church, or of any
better service to our common Master, I must close mine eyes against all private
respects; and if God call me, I must answer, Here I am. For my part therefore I
will not stir one Foot, or lift up my Finger for or against this motion; but if
it proceed from the Lord, that is, If those whom it concerns there, do procure
those who may command me here, to send me thither, I shall obey, if it were not
only to go into Ireland, but into Virginia, yea though I were not only to meet
with troubles, dangers, and difficulties, but death it self in the performance.
Sir, I have as plainly as I can, showed you my mind; desiring you with my
humble service to represent it to my reverend good Lord, my Lord Primate. And
God Almighty direct this affair to the glory of his holy name, and have you in
his merciful protection; so I rest

From Bury March 6. 1626. Your loving Friend Will. Bedell.


The conclusion of this matter was, That the King being well informed
concerning him, commanded him to undertake this charge, which he did cheerfully
obey; and set about the duties incumbent on him, in such a manner, as showed
how well he had improved the long time of retirement, that he had hitherto
enjoyed, and how ripely he had digested all his thoughts and observations. He
had hitherto lived as if he had been made for nothing but speculation and
study; and now when he entered upon a more public Scene, it appeared that he
understood the practical things of Government and humane life so well, that no
man seemed to be more cut out for business than he was. In the Government of
the College, and at his first entry upon a new Scene, he resolved to act
nothing till he both knew the Statutes of the House perfectly well, and
understood well the tempers of the people; therefore when he went over first,
he carried himself so abstractly from all affairs, that he past for a soft and
weak Man. The zeal that appeared afterward in him, showed, That this coldness
was only the effect of his Wisdom, and not of his Temper: but when he found
that some grew to think meanly of him, and that even Usher himself began to
change his opinion of him: Upon that when he went over to England some Months
after, to bring his Family over to Ireland, he was thinking to have resigned
his new Preferment, and to have returned to his Benefice in Suffolk; but the
Primate writ so kind a Letter to him, that as it made him lay down those
thoughts: so it drew from him the following Words in the Answer that he writ to
him.

Touching my return, I do thankfully accept your Graces exhortation, advising
me to have Faith in God, and not to consult with Flesh and Blood, nor have mind
of this Country. Now I would to God, that your Grace could look into my Heart,
and see how little I fear lack of Provision, or pass upon any outward thing in
this World: My chief fear in truth was, and is, lest I should be unfit and
unprofitable in the place; in which case, if I might have a lawful and honest
retreat, I think no wise Man could blame me to retain it: Especially having
understood that your Grace, whose authority I chiefly followed at the first,
did from your own Judgment, and that of other wise Men, so truly pronounce of
me, That I was a weak Man. Now that I have received your Letters so full of
life and encouragement, it puts some more life in me. For sure it cannot agree
with that goodness and ingenuity of yours, praised among all Gods Graces in
you, by those that know you, to write one thing to me, and to speak another
thing to others of me, or to go about to beguile my simplicity with fair Words,
laying in the mean while a Net for my Feet, especially since my weakness shall
in truth redound to the blaming of your own discretion in bringing me thither.
Thus was he prevailed on to resign his Benefice, and carry his Family to
Ireland, and then he applied himself with that vigor of Mind, that was
peculiar to him, to the government of the College.

He corrected such abuses as he found among them; he set such rules to them,
and saw these so well executed, that it quickly appeared how happy a choice
they had made: And as he was a great promoter of learning among them, so he
thought his particular Province was to instruct the House aright in the
Principles of Religion. In order to this he catechized the Youth in the
College once a Week, and preached once a Sunday, though he was not obliged to
it: And that he might acquaint them with a plain and particular body of
Divinity, he divided the Church Catechism into Two and Fifty Parts, one for
every Sunday, and did explain it in a way so mixed with Speculative and
Practical Matters, that his Sermons were both learned Lectures of Divinity, and
excellent exhortations to Virtue and Piety: Many took notes of them, and Copies
of them were much enquired after; for as they were fitted to the capacity of
his Hearers, so they contained much matter in them, for entertaining the most
learned. He had not stayed there above two Years, when by his Friend Sir Thomas
Iermyn's means, a Patent was sent him to be Bishop of Kilmore and Ardagh, two
contiguous Sees in the Province of Vlster. And in the Letters by which the King
signified his pleasure for his Promotion, he likewise expressed his acceptance
of the service he had done in the College, in very honorable terms as
follows: And as we were pleased by our former gracious Letters to establish the
said William Bedell, by our Royal Authority in the Provostship of the said
College of the Blessed Trinity near Dublin, where we are informed that by his
care and good Government, there has been wrought great Reformation, to our
singular contentment; so we purpose to continue our care of that Society, being
the principal Nursery of Religion and Learning in that our Realm; and to
recommend unto the College some such person from whom we may expect the like
worthy effects for their good, as we and they have found from Mr. Bedell.

And now in the 59 th. Year of his Age, he entered upon a different course of
Life and Employment, when it might have been thought, that the vigor of his
Spirits was much broken and spent. But by his administration of his Diocese, it
appeared that their remained yet a vast heat and force of Spirit to carry him
through those difficult undertakings, to which he found himself obliged by this
new Character; which if it makes a Man but a little lower than the Angels, so
that the term Angel is applied to that Office in Scripture, he thought it did
oblige him to an angelical course of life, and to divide his time, as much as
could consist with the frailties and necessities of a Body made of Flesh and
Blood, as those glorious Spirits do, between the beholding the Face of their
Father which is in Heaven, and the ministering to the Heirs of Salvation: he
considered the Bishops office made him the Shepherd of the inferior Shepherds,
if not of the whole Diocese; and therefore he resolved to spare himself in
nothing, by which he might advance the interest of Religion among them: and he
thought it a disingenuous thing to vouch Antiquity for the Authority and
Dignity of that Function, and not at the same time to express those Virtues and
Practices that made it so Venerable among them. Since the Forms of Church
Government must appear amiable and valuable to the Word, not so much for the
reasonings and arguments that learned Men use concerning them, as for the real
advantages that mankind find from them. So that he determined with the great
Nazianzen, To give Wings to his Soul, to rescue it wholly from the World, and
to dedicate it to God: And not to think it enough to perform his duty in such a
manner, as to pass through the rest of his life without reproach: for according
to that Father, This was to weigh out Virtue by small weights; but in the
Language of that Father he resolved to live, As one that had got above his
Senses, and all sensible things, that was recollected within himself, and had
attained to a familiarity with divine matters, that so his mind might be as an
unsullied Mirror, upon which he might receive and represent the impresses of
God and divine things, unallyed with the Characters of lower objects. He saw he
would fall under some envy, and meet with great oppositions, but he considered
that as a sort of martyrdom for God, and resolved cheerfully to undergo
whatsoever uneasy things he might be forced to suffer, in the discharge of his
Conscience and Duty.

In laying open his designs and performances in this last and greatest period
of his life, I have fuller materials than in the former parts. For my Author
was particularly known to him during a large part of it, and spent several
Years in his Family; so that his opportunities of knowing him were as great as
could be desired, and the Bishop was of so gentle a temper, and of so
communicative a nature, that he easily opened himself to one, that was taken
into his alliance as well as into his heart, he being indeed a Man of primitive
simplicity. He found his Diocese under so many disorders, that there was scarce
a sound part remaining. The Revenue was wasted by excessive dilapidations, and
all sacred things had been exposed to sale in so sordid a manner, that it was
grown to a Proverb. But I will not enlarge further on the ill things others had
done, than as it is necessary to show the good things that were done by him.
One of his Cathedrals, Ardagh, was fallen down to the ground, and there was
scarce enough remaining of both these Revenues to support a Bishop that was
resolved not to supply himself by indirect and base methods: he had a very
small Clergy, but Seven or Eight in each Diocese of good sufficiency; but every
one of these was multiplied into many Parishes, they having many Vicarages a
piece; but being English, and his whole Diocese consisting of Irish, they were
barbarians to them; nor could they perform any part of divine Offices among
them. But the state of his Clergy will appear best from a Letter that he writ
to Archbishop Laud concerning it, which I shall here insert.

Right reverend Father, my honorable good Lord.
SInce my coming to this place, which was a little before Michaelmas (till
which time, the settling of the state of the College, and my Lord Primate's
Visitation deferred my Consecration) I have not been unmindful of your
Lordships commands, to advertise you, as my experience should inform me, of the
state of the Church, which I shall now the better do, because I have been about
my Diocesses, and can set down, out of my knowledge and view, what I shall
relate: and shortly to speak much ill matter in a few words, it is very
miserable. The Cathedral Church of Ardagh, one of the most ancient in Ireland,
and said to be built by S. Patrick, together with the Bishops House there, down
to the ground. The Church here, built, but without Bell or Steeple, Font or
Chalice. The Parish Churches all in a manner ruined, and unroofed, and
unrepaired. The people, saving a few British Planters here and there, (which
are not the tenth part of the remnant) obstinate Recusants. A Popish Clergy
more numerous by far than we, and in full exercise of all Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, by their Vicar General and Officials; who are so confident as
they Excommunicate those that come to our Courts, even in matrimonial causes:
which affront has been offered my self by the Popish Primates Vicar General;
for which I have begun a Process against him. The Primate himself lives in my
Parish, within two Miles of my House; the Bishop in another part of my Diocese
further off. Every Parish has its Priest; and some two or three a piece, and
so their Mass-Houses also; in some places Mass is said in the Churches. Friars
there are in diverse places, who go about, though not in their Habit, and by
their importunate begging impoverish the people; who indeed are generally very
poor, as from that cause, so, from their paying double Tithes to their own
Clergy, and ours, from the dearth of Corn, and the death of their Cattle these
late Years, with the Contributions to their Soldiers and their Agents: and
which they forget not to reckon among other causes, the oppression of the Court
Ecclesiastical, which in very truth, my Lord, I cannot excuse, and do seek to
reform. For our own, there are Seven or Eight Ministers in each Diocese of good
sufficiency; and (which is no small cause of the continuance of the people in
Popery still) English, which have not the Tongue of the people, nor can perform
any Divine Offices, or converse with them; and which hold many of them Two or
Three, Four, or more Vicarages apiece; even the Clerkships themselves are in
like manner conferred upon the English; and sometimes Two or Three, or more,
upon one Man, and ordinarily bought and sold or let to farm. His Majesty is now
with the greatest part of this Country, as to their Hearts and Consciences,
King, but at the Popes discretion.

Kilmore Apr. 1. 1630. Will. Kilmore and Ardagh.


Here was a melancholy prospect to a Man of so good a mind, enough to have
disheartened him quite, if he had not had a proportioned degree of Spirit and
courage to support him under so much weight. After he had recovered somewhat of
the spoils made by his Predecessor, and so put himself into a capacity to
subsist, he went about the reforming of abuses: And the first that he undertook
was Pluralities, by which one Man had a care of Souls in so many different
places, that it was not possible to discharge his duty to them, nor to perform
those Vows, which he made at his Ordination, of feeding and instructing the
Flock committed to his care. And though most of the Pluralists did mind all their
Parishes alike, that is, They neglected all equally; yet he thought this was an
abuse contrary both to the nature of Ecclesiastical Functions, to the
obligations that the care of Souls naturally imported, and to those solemn Vows
that Churchmen made at the Altar when they were ordained: And he knew well
that this corruption was no sooner observed to have crept into the Christian
Church, than it was condemned by the Fourth general Council at Chalcedon. For
when some that had removed from one Diocese to another, continued to have their
share in the dividend of the Church, which they had left, as well as of that to
which they had gone; the Council decreed, That such transgressors should
restore all that they had got from the Church, which they had left, and should
be degraded, if they refused to submit to this regulation. He thought it a
vain, and indeed an impudent thing, for a Man to pretend that he answered the
obligation of so sacred a trust, and so holy a Vow, by hiring some mercenary
Curate to perform Offices: since the Obligation was personal, and the
ecclesiastical Functions were not like the Levitical Service in the Temple, in
which the observing their Rites, was all that was required. But the watching
over Souls had so many other things involved in it, besides officiating
according to the Rubric, that it drew this severe reflection from a witty Man,
in which though the Wit of it may seem too pleasant for so serious a subject,
yet it had too much sad truth under it; That when such Betrayers and Abandoners
of that trust which Christ purchased with his own Blood, found good and
faithful Curates that performed worthily the obligations of the pastoral Care,
the Incumbent should be saved by Proxy, but be damned in Person. Therefore the
Bishop gathered a meeting of his Clergy, and in a Sermon with which he opened
it, he laid before them, both out of Scripture, and Antiquity, the Institution,
the Nature, and the Duties of the Ministerial Employment; and after Sermon he
spoke to them largely on the same subject in Latin, stiling them, as he always
did, His Brethren and fellow Presbyters: And exhorted them to reform that
intolerable abuse, which as it brought a heavy scandal on the Church, and gave
their Adversaries great advantages against them; so it must very much endanger
both their own Souls, and the Souls of their Flocks. And to let them see that
he would not lay a heavy Burden on them, in which he would not bear his own
share, he resolved to part with one of his Bishoprics. For though Ardagh was
considered as a ruined See, and had long gone as an accessory to Kilmore, and
continues to be so still; yet since they were really two different Sees, he
thought he could not decently oblige his Clergy to renounce their Pluralities,
unless he set them an example, and renounced his own; even after he had been at
a considerable charge in recovering the Patrimony of Ardagh, and though he was
sufficiently able to discharge the duty of both these Sees, they being
contiguous, and small; and though the Revenue of both did not exceed a
competency, yet he would not seem to be guilty of that which he so severely
condemned in others: And therefore he resigned Ardagh to Dr. Richardson; and so
was now only Bishop of Kilmore. The Authority of this example, and the efficacy
of his Discourse, made such an impression on his Clergy, that they all
relinquished their Pluralities. The Arguments that arise out of interest are
generally much stronger than those of mere speculation, how well soever it be
made out; and therefore this concurrence that he met with from his Clergy in so
sensible a point, was a great encouragement to him to go on in his other
designs. There seemed to be a Finger of God in it; for he had no authority to
compel them to it, and he had managed the minds of his Clergy so gently in this
matter, that their compliance was not extorted, but both free and unanimous.
For, one only excepted, they all submitted to it: and he being Dean, exchanged
his Deanery with another; for he was ashamed to live in the Diocese, where he
would not submit to such terms, after both the Bishop himself and all his
Clergy had agreed to them. But the opposition that was given him by the Dean,
and both his sense of that matter, and his carriage in it, will appear from the
following Letter, which he writ concerning it to the Primate; which, though it
be long and particular, yet it seemed to me too important to be either stifled
or abridged.

Most reverend Father, my honorable good Lord,
I Cannot easily express what contentment I received at my late being with your
Grace at Termonseckin. There had nothing happened to me, I will not say, since I
came into Ireland, but, as far as I can call to remembrance, in my whole life,
which did so much affect me in this kind, as the hazard of your good opinion.
For, loving and honoring you in Truth (for the truths sake, which is in us,
and shall abide with us for ever) without any private interest, and receiving
so unlookt for a blow from your own Hand, (which I expected should have
tenderly applied some remedy to me, being smitten by others) I had not present
the defenses of Reason and Grace. And although I knew it to be a fault in my
self, since in the performance of our duties, the Judgment of our Master, even
alone, ought to suffice us; yet I could not be so much Master of mine
Affections as to cast out this weakness. But blessed be God, who (as I began to
say) at my being with you refreshed my Spirit by your kind renewing and
confirming your love to me: and all humble thanks to you, that gave me place to
make my Defense, and took upon you the cognizance of mine innocence. And as for
mine Accuser (whose hatred I have incurred only by not giving way to his
covetous desire of heaping Living upon Living, to the evident damage, not only
of other Souls committed to him, but of his own) truly I am glad, and do give
God Thanks that this malignity, which a while masked it self in the pretense of
friendship, has at last discovered it self by public opposition. It has not,
and I hope it shall not be in his power to hurt me at all; he has rather
shamed himself: and, although his high Heart cannot give his Tongue leave to
acknowledge his folly, his Understanding is not so weak and blind as not to see
it. Whom I could be very well content to leave to taste the Fruit of it also,
without being further troublesome to your Grace, save that I do not despair,
but your Grace's Authority will pull him out of the snare of Satan, whose
instrument he has been to cross the Work of God, and give me more occasion of
joy by his amendment, than I had grief by his perversion and opposition.

Your Grace's Letters of Aug. 23. were not delivered to me till the 29th. In
the mean space what effect those that accompanied them had with Mr. Dean you
shall perceive by the enclosed which were sent me the 28th. the Evening before
our Communion. I answered them the next Morning, as is here annexed. As I was
at the Lord's Table, beginning the service of the Communion before the Sermon,
he came in, and after the Sermon was done, those that communicated not being
departed, he stood forth and spoke to this purpose:

That whereas the Book of Common Prayer requires, That before the Lord's
Supper, if there be any variance or breach of charity, there should be
reconciliation; this was much more requisite between Ministers: And because
they all knew that there had been some difference between me and him, he did
profess, That he bare me no malice nor hatred, and if he had offended me in any
thing, he was sorry. I answered, That he had good reason to be sorry,
considering how he had behaved himself. For my part I bare him no malice, and
if it were in my power, would not make so much as his Finger ache. Grieved I had
been that he, in whom I knew there were many good Parts, would become an
instrument to oppose the Work of God, which I was assured he had called me to.
This was all that passed. He offered himself to the Lord's Board, and I gave
him the Communion. After Dinner he preached out of 1 John 4.10. And this
Commandment have we from him, that he that loves God, etc. When we came out of
the Church, Dr. Sheriden delivered me your Grace's Letters. And thus Mr. Dean
thinks he has healed all, as you may perceive by his next Letters of August
30. Only he labors about Kildromfarten. Whereabouts I purposed to have spoken
with your Grace at my being with you; but I know not how it came not to my
mind, whether it be that the Soul, as well as the body, after some travel
easily falls to rest; or else God would have it reserved perhaps to a more
seasonable time.

It is now above a Twelvemonth (the Day in many respects I may well wish that
it may not be reckoned with the days of the year) that your Grace, as it were,
delivered to me with your own Hands, Mr. Crian a converted Friar. To whom I
offered my self as largely as my Ability would extend unto: though I had
already at your Grace's commendation received Mr. Dunsterville to be in my
House, with the allowance of Twenty Pound per annum. The next Day before my
departing, Mr. Hilton made a motion to me, That where he had in his Hands
sufficient to make the Benefice of Kildromfarten void, if I would bestow it
upon Mr. Dean he would do so; otherwise it should remain in statu. I answered
with profession of my love and good opinion of Mr. Dean, whereof I showed the
reasons. I added, I did not know the place nor the people, but if they were
mere Irish, I did not see how Mr. Dean should discharge the duty of a Minister
to them. This motion was seconded by your Grace: But so as I easily conceived,
That being solicited by your old Servant, you could do no less than you did;
and notwithstanding the Lecture he promised your Grace should be read to me in
the matter of Collations, would not be displeased, if I did as became me,
according to my Conscience, and in conformity to your former motion for Mr.
Crian* Mr. Dean after pressed me, that, if without my concurrence your Grace
would conferr that Living upon him, I would not be against it; which I
promised, but heard no more of it till about April last. In the mean while the
Benefice next unto that which Mr. Dunsterville was already possessed of,
falling void: Mr. Crian not coming to me, nor purposing to do so till after
Christmas, and whenever he should come, my House, as I found, not affording
room for him and Mr. Dunsterville both, whose former Benefice was unable, be
said, to maintain him, chiefly he promising Residence, and taking of me for
that purpose an Oath, absolutely without any exception of Dispensation, I
united it to his former, and dismissed him to go to his Cure; wherein how
carelessly he has behaved himself, I forbear to relate. To return to Mr. Dean.
About mid- April he brought me a Presentation to Kildromfarten under the broad
Seal. I could do no less but signify to the Incumbent, who came to me, and
maintained his Title, requiring me not to admit. Whereupon I returned the
Presentation, indorsing the reason of my refusal; and being then occasioned to
write to the Lords Justices, I signified what I thought of these Pluralities,
in a time when we are so far overmatcht in number by the adverse part. This
passed on till the Visitation; wherein Mr. Dean showed himself in his Colors.
When the Vicar of Kildromfarten was called, he said, he was Vicar; but would
exhibit no Title. After, the Curate, Mr. Smith, signified to me, That his
Stipend was unpaid, and he feared it would be still in the contention of two
Incumbents. Upon these and other Reasons, I sequestered the Profits, which I
have heard by a Simonaical compact betwixt them should be for this Year the
former Incumbents. Neither did Mr. Dean write or speak a Word to me hereabout,
till the day before the Communion in the enclosed. That very Morning I was
certified that he purposed to appeal to your Grace, which made me in answer to
his next ^o add, Quod facias, faccitius.

Here I beseech your Grace give me leave to speak freely touching this matter,
so much the rather, because it is the only root of all Mr. Dean's despite
against me. Plainly I do thus think, That of all the diseases of the Church in
these times, next to that of the corruption of our Courts, this of Pluralities
is the most deadly and pestilent, especially when those are instituted into
charges Ecclesiastical, who, were they never so willing, yet for want of the
Language of the people, are unable to discharge them. Concerning which very
Point, I know your Grace remembers the Propositions of the learned and zealous
Bishop of Lincoln before Pope Innocent. I will not add the Confession of our
Adversaries themselves in the Council of Trent, nor the judgment of that good
Father, the Author of the History thereof, touching non-Residency. Let the
thing it self speak. Whence flow the ignorance of the people, the neglect of
Gods worship, and defrauding the Poor of the remains of dedicate things, the
ruin of the mansion-Houses of the Ministers, the desolation of Churches, the
swallowing up of Parishes by the Farmers of them, but from this Fountain? There
may be cause, no doubt, why sometimes, in some place, and to some Man, many
Churches may be committed; but now that, as appears by the late Certificates,
there are, besides the titular Primate and Bishop, of Priests in the Diocesses
of Kilmore and Ardagh, 66. of Ministers and Curates but 32. of which number
also 3. whose wives came not to Church: In this so great odds as the
adversaries have of us in number, (to omit the advantage of the Language, the
possession of peoples Hearts, the countenancing of the Nobility and Gentry, Is
it a time to commit many Churches to one Man, whom I will not disable, and he
says he has a very able Interpreter, and I think no less (which made me once
to say, That I would sooner confer the Benefice of Kildromfarten upon him than
upon himself, which resolution I do yet hold, in how ill part soever he take
it.) But what has he done in the Parishes already committed to him, for the
instruction of the Irish, that we should commit another unto him? he that
cannot perform his duty to one without a helper, or to that little part of it
whose Tongue he has, is he sufficient to do it to three? No it is the Wages is
sought, not the Work. And yet with the means he has already, that good Man his
Predecessor maintained a Wife and a Family; and cannot he in his solitary (he
had once written Monkish) life defray himself? Well, if there can be none found
fit to discharge the duty, let him have the Wages to better his maintenance.
But when your Grace assures us we shall lack no Men, when there is besides Mr.
Crian (whom Dr. Sheriden has heard preach as a Friar in that very place; which
I account would be more to Gods Glory, if there now he should plant the Truth,
which before he endeavored to root out) besides him we have Mr. Nugent, who
offers himself in an honest and discreet Letter lately written to me, we have
sundry in the College, and namely, two trained up at the Irish Lecture, one
whereof has translated your Grace's Catechism into Irish; besides Mr. Duncan
and others; with what color can we pass by these; and suffer him to fat
himself with the blood of Gods people? Pardon me, I beseech your Grace, when I
say We: I mean not to prescribe any thing to you; my self, I hope, shall never
do it, or consent to it. And so long as this is the cause of Mr. Dean's wrath
against me, whether I suffer by his Pen or his Tongue, I shall rejoice, as
suffering for Righteousness sake. And, since himself in his last Letter excuses
my intent, I do submit my actions after God, to your Grace's Censure, ready to
make him satisfaction, if in any things, in word or deed, I have wronged him.

For conclusion of this business (wherein I am sorry to be so troublesome to
your Grace) let him surcease this his greedy and impudent pretense to this
Benefice, let Mr. Nugent be admitted to it, or Mr. Crian, if he be not yet
provided for: To whom I will hope ere long to add Mr. Nugent for a Neighbor,
(...), If these second (questionless better) thoughts have any place in him; as
in his last Letters he gives some hope, let my complaints against him be cast
into the Fire. God make him an humble and modest Man. But if Mr. Dean will
needs persist, I beseech your Grace to view my Reply, to the which I will add
no more. As touching his traducing me in your Pulpit at Cavan, I have sent your
Grace the Testimonies of Mr. Robinson and Mr. Teate; although he had been with
them before, and denied what they formerly conceived. And if your Grace will be
pleased to enquire of Mr. Cape, by a line or two, (with whom I never spoke Word
about the matter) or compare the Heads of his Sermon (which he says were
general) with his former Reports made of me, I doubt not but you will soon find
the truth.

I have sent also his Protestation against my Visitation, wherein I desire your
Grace to observe the blindness of Malice: He pretends that I may not visit but
at or after Michaelmas every Year. As if the Month of July, wherein I visited,
were not after Michaelmas: For before the last Michaelmas I visited not. I omit
that he calls himself the Head of the Chapter. The Canon Law calls the Bishop
so: he will have the Bishop visit the whole Diocese together; directly contrary
to that Form, which the Canons prescribe. But this Protestation having neither
Latin, nor Law, nor common Sense; does declare the skill of him that drew it,
and the Wit of him that uses it. which, if your Grace enjoin him not to revoke
it, I shall be enforced to put remedy unto otherwise, in respect of the evil
example and prejudice it might bring to posterity. And now to leave this
unpleasing subject. Since my being with you, here was with me Mr. Brady,
bringing with him the resignation of the Benefice of Mullagh, which I had
conferred upon Mr. Dunsterville, and united to his former of Moybolke; He
brought with him Letters from my Lord of Cork, and Sir William Parsons, to whom
he is allied. But examining him, I found him (besides a very raw Divine) unable
to read the Irish, and therefore excused my self to the Lords for admitting
him. A few Days after, viz. the 10th. of this Month, here was with me Mr.
Dunsterville himself, and signified unto me that he had revoked his former
Resignation. Thus he plays fast and loose, and most unconscionably neglects
his duty. Omnes quae sua sunt, quaerunt. Indeed I doubted his Resignation was
not good, in as much as he retained still the former Benefice, whereunto this
was united. Now I see clearly there was a compact between him and Mr Brady,
that if the second could not be admitted, he should resume his Benefice again.

I have received Letters from Mr. Dr. Ward, of the Date of May 28. in which he
mentions again the point of the justification of Infants by Baptism. To whom I
have written an answer, but not yet sent it. I send herewith a Copy thereof to
your Grace, humbly requiring your advice and censure (if it be not too much to
your Grace's trouble) before I send it. I have also written an answer to Dr.
Richardson in the question touching the root of Efficacy or Efficiency of
Grace; but it is long, and consists of 5. or 6. sheets of Paper, so as I cannot
now send it; I shall hereafter submit it, as all other my endeavors, to your
Grace's censure, and correction. I have received also a large answer from my
Lord of Derry, touching justifying Faith; whereto I have not yet had time to
reply; nor do I know if it be worth the labor, the difference being but in the
manner of teaching, As whether justifying Faith be an assent working affiance;
or else an affiance following Assent. I wrote presently upon my return from
your Grace to my Lords Justices, desiring to be excused from going in person to
take possession of the Mass-House; and a Certificate that my suit with Mr. Cook
is depending before them. I have not as yet received answer, by reason (as Sir
William Usher signified to my Son) the Lord Chancellor's indisposition did not
permit his hand to be gotten.

I do scarce hope to receive any Certificate from them, for the respect they
will have not to seem to infringe your Grace's Jurisdiction. Whereupon I shall
be enforced to entertain a Proctor for me at your Grace's Court, when I am next
to appear, it being the very time when my Court in the County of Leatrym was
set before I was with you.

Ashamed I am to be thus tedious. But I hope you will pardon me, since you
required, and I promised, to write often; and having now had opportunity to
convey my Letters, this must serve in stead of many: Concluding with mine and
my Wives humble service to your Grace and Mrs. Usher, and thanks for my kind
entertainment, I desire the blessing of your Prayers, and remain always

Your Grace's humble Servant, Will. Kilmore and Ardagh.
Kilmore, Sept. 18. 1630.

The condemning Pluralities was but the half of his Project. The next part of
it was to oblige his Clergy to reside in their Parishes: but in this he met
with a great difficulty. King James upon the last reduction of Vlster after
Tyrone's Rebellion, had ordered Glebe-lands to be assigned to all the Clergy:
And they were obliged to build Houses upon them, within a limited time, but in
assigning those Glebe-lands, the Commissioners that were appointed to execute
the Kings Orders, had taken no care of the conveniences of the Clergy: For in
many places these Lands were not within the Parish, and often they lay not all
together, but were divided in parcells. So he found his Clergy were in a
strait. For if they built Houses upon these Glebe-lands, they would be thereby
forced to live out of their Parishes, and it was very inconvenient for them to
have their Houses remote from their Lands. In order to a remedy to this, the
Bishop that had Lands in every Parish assigned him, resolved to make an
exchange with them, and to take their Glebe-lands into his own hands for more
convenient portions of equal value that he assigned them: and that the exchange
might be made upon a just estimate, so that neither the Bishop nor the
inferior Clergy might suffer by it, he procured a Commission from the Lord
Lieutenant* for some to examine and settle that matter, which was at last
brought to a conclusion with so universal a satisfaction to his whole Diocese,
that, since the thing could not be finally determined without a Great Seal from
the King, confirming all that was done, there was One sent over in all their
names to obtain it; but this was a work of time, and so could not be finished
in several Years: and the Rebellion broke out before it was fully concluded.

The Lord Lieutenant at this time was Sir Thomas Wentworth, afterward Earl of
Strafford, a name too great to need any enlargement or explanation: for his
Character is well known. At his first coming over to Ireland, he was possessed
with prejudices against the Bishop upon the account of a Petition sent up by
the County of Cavan, to which the Bishop had set his hand, in which some
complaints were made, and some regulations were proposed for the Army: Which
was thought an insolent attempt, and a matter of ill example. So that
Strafford, who was severe in his administration, was highly displeased with
him: And when any Commission or Order was brought to him, in which he found his
name, he dashed it out with his own Pen; and expressed great indignation
against him. When the Bishop understood this, he was not much moved at it,
knowing his own innocence; but he took prudent methods to overcome his
displeasure. He did not go to Dublin upon his coming over, as all the other
Bishops did, to congratulate his coming to the Government: but he writ a full
account of that matter to his constant Friend Sir Thomas Iermin, who managed it
with so much zeal, that Letters were sent to the Deputy from the Court, by
which he was so much mollified toward the Bishop, that he going to
congratulate, was well received, and was ever afterward treated by him with a
very particular kindness. So this Storm went over, which many thought would
have ended in imprisonment, if not in deprivation. Yet how much soever that
Petition was mistaken, he made it appear very plain, that he did not design the
putting down of the Army: For he saw too evidently the danger they were in from
Popery, to think they could be long safe without it. But a Letter that contains
his vindication from that aspersion, carries in it likewise such a
representation of the state of the Popish interest then in Ireland, and of
their numbers, their tempers, and their principles, that I will set it down. It
was written to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and is taken from the printed copy
of it that Mr. Prynne has given us.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
IN the midst of these thoughts, This seems to be but the half of the Letter by
the beginning.
I have been advertized from an honorable Friend in England, that I am accused
to his Majesty to have opposed his service; and that my hand with two other
Bishops only, was to a Writing touching the Money to be levied on the Papists
for maintenance of the Men of War. -- Indeed, if I should have had such an
intention, this had been not only to oppose the service of his Majesty, but to
expose with the public peace, mine own Neck, to the Skeans of the Romish
Cutthroats. I that know, that in this Kingdom of his Majesty's, the Pope has
another Kingdom far greater in number, and as I have heretofore signified to
the Lord Justices and Council (which is also since justified by themselves in
Print) constantly guided and directed by the Orders of the new Congregation De
propaganda Fide, lately erected at Rome, transmitted by the means of the Popes
Nuntio's residing at Brussells or Paris; that the Pope has here a Clergy, if I
may guess by my own Diocese, double in number to us, the heads whereof are by
corporal Oath bound to him, to maintain him and his regalities contra omnem
hominem, and to execute his Mandates to the uttermost of their Forces; which
accordingly they do, stiling themselves in Print, Ego N. Dei and Apostolicae
Sedis gratia Episcopus Fermien and Ossorien. I that kn^w there is in the
Kingdom for the moulding of the people to the Popes obedience, a rabble of
irregular Regulars, commonly younger Brothers of good Houses, who are grown to
that insolency, as to advance themselves to be members of he Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy in better ranks than Priests, in so much that the censure of the
Sorbon is fain to be implored to curb them, which yet is called in again; so
tender is the Pope of his own Creatures. I that know that his Holiness has
erected a new University in Dublin to confront his Majesty's College there,
and to breed the youth of the Kingdom to his Devotion, of which University one
Paul Harris, the Author of that infamous libel, which was put forth in Print
against my Lord Armach's Wansted Sermon, styles himself in Print to be Dean: I
that know and have given advertisements to the State, that these Regulars dare
erect new Fryeries in the Country, since the dissolving of those in the City;
that they have brought the people to such a sottish senselesness, as they care
not to learn the Commandments as God himself spoke, and writ them; but they
flock in great numbers to the preaching of new superstitions and detestable
Doctrines, such as their own Priests are ashamed of; and at all those they levy
Collections, Three, Four, Five, or Six Pounds at a Sermon. Shortly, I that
kn^w, that those Regulars and this Clergy have at a general meeting like to a
Synod, as themselves style it, decreed, That it is not lawful to take the Oath
of Allegiance; and if they be constant to their own Doctrine, do account his
Majesty in their Hearts to be King but at the Popes discretion. In this estate
of this Kingdom, to think the Bridle of the Army may be taken away, should be
the thought not of a brainsick, but of a brainless Man. --

The day of our deliverance from the Popish Powder Plot, Anno 1633. Your
Lordsship's in all Duty, Will. Kilmore.


By his cutting off Pluralities there fell to be many Vacancies in his Diocese,
so the care he took to fill these, comes to be considered in the next place. He
was very strict in his Examinations before he gave Orders to any. He went over
the Articles of the Church of Ireland so particularly and exactly, that one who
was present at the Ordination of him that was afterward his Archdeacon, Mr.
Thomas Price, reported that though he was one of the Senior Fellows of the
College of Dublin, when the Bishop was Provost; yet his Examination held two
full Hours: And when he had ended any examination, which was always done in
the presence of his Clergy, he desired every Clergyman that was present to
examine the person further, if they thought that any material thing was omitted
by him; by which a fuller discovery of his temper and sufficiency might be
made. When all was ended, he made all his Clergy give their approbation before
he would proceed to Ordination: For he would never assume that singly to
himself, nor take the Load of it wholly on his own Soul. He took also great
care to be well informed of the moral and religious qualities of those he
ordained, as well as he satisfied himself by his Examination of their capacity
and knowledge. He had always a considerable number of his Clergy assisting him
at his Ordinations, and he always Preached and administered the Sacrament on
those occasions himself: And he never ordained one a Presbyter, till he had
been at least a year a Deacon, that so he might have a good account of his
behavior in that lower degree, before he raised him higher. He looked upon that
power of Ordination as the most sacred part of a Bishop's trust, and that in
which the Laws of the Land had laid no sort of imposition on them, so that this
was entirely in their Hands, and therefore he thought they had so much the more
to answer for to God on that account; and he weighed carefully in his thoughts
the importance of those Words, Lay hands suddenly on no Man, and be not a
partaker of other Men's Sins. Therefore he used all the precaution that was
possible for him in so important an affair. He was never prevailed on by any
recommendations nor importunities to ordain any* as if Orders had been a sort
of Freedom in a Company, by which a Man was to be enabled to hold as great a
portion of the Ecclesiastical Revenue as he could compass, when he was thus
qualified: Nor would he ever ordain any without a title to a particular Flock.
For he thought a title to a maintenance was not enough; as if the Church should
only take care that none in Orders might be in want; but he saw the abuses of
those emendicated titles, and of the Vagrant Priests that went about as
Journeymen, plying for Work, to the great reproach of that sacred Employment;
and in this he also followed the Rule set by the fourth general Council that
carried this matter so high, as to annul all Orders that were given without a
particular designation of the Place, where the person was to serve. For he made
the Primitive times his Standard, and resolved to come as near it as he could,
considering the corruption of the Age in which he lived. He remembered well the
grounds he went on, when he refused to pay Fees for the Title to his Benefice
in Suffolk, and therefore took care that those who were ordained by him, or had
Titles to Benefices from him, might be put to no charge: For he wrote all the
Instruments himself, and delivered them to the persons to whom they belonged,
out of his own Hands, and adjured them in a very solemn manner, to give nothing
to any of his Servants. And, that he might hinder it all that was possible, he
waited on them always on those occasions to the Gate of his House, that so he
might be sure that they should not give any gratification to his Servants. He
thought it lay on him to pay them such convenient wages as became them, and not
to let his Clergy be burdened with his Servants. And indeed the abuses in that
were grown to such a pitch, that it was necessary to correct them in so
exemplary a manner.

His next care was to observe the behavior of his Clergy; he knew the lives of
Churchmen had generally much more efficacy than their Sermons, or other labors
could have; and so he set himself much to watch over the Manners of his
Priests; and was very sensibly touched, when an Irishman said once to him in
open Court, That the Kings Priests were as bad as the Popes Priests. These were
so grossly ignorant, and so openly scandalous, both for drunkenness, and all
sort of lewdness, that this was indeed a very heavy reproach: Yet he was no
rude nor morose Reformer, but considered what the times could bear. He had
great tenderness for the weakness of his Clergy, when he saw reason to think
otherwise well of them: and he helped them out of their troubles, with the care
and compassion of a Father. One of his Clergy held two Livings; but had been
cousened by a Gentleman of Quality to farm them to him for less than either of
them was worth; and he acquainted the Bishop with this: Who upon that writ very
civilly, and yet as became a Bishop, to the Gentleman, persuading him to give
up the bargain: but having received a sullen and haughty answer from him, he
made the Minister resign up both to him; for they belonged to his Gift, and he
provided him with another Benefice, and put two other worthy Men in these two
Churches, and so he put an end both to the Gentleman's fraudulent bargain, and
to the Churchman's Plurality. He never gave a Benefice to any without obliging
them by Oath to perpetual and personal residence, and that they should never
hold any other Benefice with that. So when one Buchanan was recommended to him,
and found by him to be well qualified, he offered him a Collation to a
Benefice, but when Buchanan saw that he was to be bound to Residence, and not
to hold another Benefice; he that was already possessed of one, with which he
resolved not to part, would not accept of it on those Terms. And the Bishop was
not to be prevailed with to dispense with it, though he liked this Man so much
the better, because he found he was akin to the great Buchanan, whose
Paraphrase of the Psalms he loved beyond all other Latin Poetry. The Latin form
of his Collations will be found at the end of this Relation, which concluded
thus; See at the end, Numb. 1.
Obtesting you in the Lord, and enjoining you, by virtue of that obedience
which you owe to the great Shepherd, that you will diligently feed his Flock
committed to your care, which he purchased with his own Blood; that you
instruct them in the Catholic Faith, and perform Divine Offices in a Tongue
understood by the people: and above all things that you show your self a
pattern to Believers in good Works, so that the adversaries may be put to
shame, when they find nothing for which they can reproach you. He put all the
Instruments in one, whereas devices had been found out, for the increase of
Fees, to divide these into several Writings: nor was he content to write this
all with his own hand, but sometimes he gave Induction likewise to his Clergy;
for he thought none of these Offices were below a Bishop: and he was ready to
ease them of charge all he could. He had by his zeal and earnest endeavors
prevailed with all his Presbyters to reside in their Parishes; one only
excepted, whose name was Iohnston. He was of a mean Education, yet he had very
quick Parts, but they lay more to the Mechanical than to the Spiritual
Architecture. For the Earl of Strafford used him for an Engineer, and gave him
the management of some great Buildings that he was raising in the County of
Wicklo. But the Bishop finding the Man had a very mercurial Wit, and a great
capacity, he resolved to set him to work, that so he might not be wholly
useless to the Church; and therefore he proposed to him the composing an
universal Character, that might be equally well understood by all Nations: and
he showed him, that since there was already an universal Mathematical
Character, received both for Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astronomy, the other
was not impossible to be done. Iohnston undertook it readily, and the Bishop
drew for him a Scheme of the whole Work, which he brought to such perfection,
that, as my Author was informed, he put it under the Press, but the Rebellion
prevented his finishing it.

After the Bishop had been for many years carrying on the Reformation of his
Diocese, he resolved to hold a Synod of all his Clergy, and to establish some
Rules for the better government of the Flock committed to him: The Canons then
established will be found at the end of this Work. See at the end, Numb. 1.
He appointed that a Synod should be held thereafter once a Year, on the Second
Week of September; and that in the Bishop's absence, his Vicar General, if he
were a Priest, or his Archdeacon should preside; That no Vicar should be
constituted after that, unless he were in Orders, and should hold his place
only during the Bishop's Pleasure. He revived the ancient custom of Rural
Deans, and appointed, That there should be three for the three Divisions of his
Diocese; who should be chosen by the Clergy, and should have an inspection into
their deportment, and make report to the Bishop of what past among them, and
transmit the Bishop's Orders to them; and that once a Month the Clergy of each
Division should meet, and Preach by turns, without long Prayers or Preambles:
And that no Excommunication should be made but by the Bishop in person, with
the assistance of such of his Clergy as should be present. The rest related to
some things of less importance, that required amendment. When the News of this
was carried to Dublin, some said it was an illegal Assembly, and that his
presuming to make Canons, was against Law, and brought him within the guilt of
a Praemunire. So that it was expected that he should be brought up as a
Delinquent, and censured in the Starr-Chamber, or High Commission-Court: But
others looked on what he had done, as nothing but the necessary discharge of his
Episcopal Function. And it seemed strange if some Rules laid down by common
consent, for the better Government of the Diocese, should have furnished matter
for an Accusation or Censure. His Archdeacon, that was afterward Archbishop
of Cashill, gave such an account of this matter to the State, that nothing
followed upon it. The Bishop had indeed prepared such a Justification of
himself, as would have vindicated him fully before equitable Judges, if he had
been questioned for it. Archbishop Usher, who knew well how much he could say
for himself upon this Head, advised those that moved that he might be brought
up upon it, To let him alone, lest he should be thereby provoked to say more
for himself, than any of his Accusers could say against him.

When he made his Visitations, he always preached himself, and administered the
Sacrament; and the business of his Visitations was, what it ought truly to be,
to observe the state of his Diocese, and to give good Instructions both to
Clergy and Laity. The Visitations in Ireland had been matters of great Pomp and
much Luxury, which lay heavy on the inferior Clergy. Some slight enquiries
were made, and those chiefly for Forms sake; and indeed nothing was so much
minded, as that which was the reproach of them, the Fees, that were exacted to
such an intolerable degree, that they were a heavy grievance to the Clergy.
And as the Bishops Visitation came about every Year; so every third Year the
Archbishop made his Metropolitical Visitation, and every seventh Year the Kings
Visitation went round: And in all these as they were then managed, nothing
seemed to be so much aimed at, as how to squeeze and oppress the Clergy, who
were glad to purchase their Peace by paying all that was imposed on them, by
those severe Exactors. These Fees at Visitations were not known in the
Primitive Times, in which the Bishop had the whole Stock of the Church in his
hands to defray what expense necessarily fell on him, or his Church. It is
true, when the Metropolitan, with other Bishops, came and ordained the Bishop
at his See, it was but reasonable that their expense should be discharged; and
this came to be rated to a certain Sum, and was called the Inthronistick: and
when these grew unreasonably high, the Emperors reduced them to a certain
proportion, according to the Revenues of the Sees. But when the Bishops and the
inferior Clergy came to have distinct Properties, then the Bishops exacted of
their Clergy that which other Vassalls owed by their Tenure to the Lord of the
Fee, which was the bearing the expense of their Progress: but when they began
first to demand those Subsidies from their Clergy, that Practice was condemned,
and provision was made, That in case a Bishop was so poor that he could not
bear the charge to which his Visitation put him, he should be supplied by the
richer Bishops about him; but not prey upon his Clergy. And both Charles the
Great, and his Son Lewis took care to see this executed: Yet this abuse was
still kept up, so that afterward, in stead of putting it quite down, it was
only regulated, so that it might not exceed such a proportion; but that was not
observed: So that an arbitrary Tax was in many places levied upon the Clergy.
But our Bishop reformed all these excesses, and took nothing but what was by
Law and Custom established, and that was employed in entertaining the Clergy:
And when there was any overplus, he sent it always to the Prisons, for the
relief of the Poor. At his Visitation he made his Clergy sit all with him, and
be covered, whenever he himself was covered. For he did not approve of the
State, in which others of his Order made their Visitations; nor the distance to
which they obliged their Clergy. And he had that Canon often in his Mouth, That
a Presbyter ought not to be let stand after the Bishop was set. He was much
troubled at another abuse which was, that when the Metropolitical and Regal
Visitations went round, a Writ was served on the Bishops, suspending their
Jurisdiction for that year: And when this was first brought to him, he received
it with great indignation, which was increased by two Clauses in the Writ: By
the one it was asserted, That in the year of the Metropolitans Visitation, the
whole and entire Jurisdiction of the Diocese belonged to him; the other was the
Reason given for it, Because of the great danger of the Souls of the people:
Whereas the danger of Souls rise from that suspension of the Bishops Pastoral
power, since during that Year he either could not do the duty of a Bishop; or
if he would exercise it, he must either purchase a Delegation to act as the
Archbishop's Deputy, and that could not be had without paying for it, or be
liable to a Suit in the Prerogative Court.

He knew the Archbishop's power over Bishops was not founded on Divine, or
Apostolical right, but on Ecclesiastical Canons and Practice, and that it was
only a matter of Order, and that therefore the Archbishop had no Authority to
come and invade his Pastoral Office, and suspend him for a Year. These were
some of the worst of the abuses that the Canonists had introduced in the later
Ages; by which they had broken the Episcopal Authority, and had made way for
vesting the whole power of the Church in the Pope. He laid those things often
before Archbishop Usher, and pressed him earnestly to set himself to the
reforming them, since they were acted in his name, and by virtue of his
Authority deputed to his Chancellor, and to the other Officers of the Court,
called the Spiritual Court. No Man was more sensible of those abuses than Usher
was; no Man knew the beginning and progress of them better, nor was more
touched with the ill effects of them: and together with his great and vast
learning, no Man had a better Soul and a more Apostolical mind. In his
conversation he expressed the true simplicity of a Christian: For Passion,
Pride, self-Will, or the Love of the World, seemed not to be so much as in his
Nature. So that he had all the innocence of the Dove in him. He had a way of
gaining peoples Hearts, and of touching their Consciences that looked like
^omewhat of the Apostolical Age revived; he spent much of his time in those two
best Exercises, secret Prayer, and dealing with other peoples Consciences,
either in his Sermons or private Discourses; and what remained he dedicated to
his Studies, in which those many Volumes that came from him, showed a most
amazing diligence and exactness, joined with great Judgment. So that he was
certainly one of the greatest and best Men that the Age, or perhaps the World,
has produced. But no Man is entirely perfect; he was not made for the governing
part of his Function. He had too gentle a Soul to manage that rough Work of
reforming Abuses: And therefore he left things as he found them. He hoped a
time of Reformation would come: He saw the necessity of cutting off many
abuses, and confessed that the tolerating those abominable corruptions that the
Canonists had brought in, was such a stain upon a Church, that in all other
respects was the best reformed in the World, that he apprehended it would bring
a Curse and Ruin upon the whole Constitution. But though he prayed for a more
favorable conjuncture, and would have concurred in a joint Reformation of
these things very heartily; yet he did not bestir himself suitably to the
Obligations that lay on him for carrying it on: And it is very likely that this
sat heavy on his thoughts when he came to dye; for he prayed often, and with
great humility, That God would forgive him his sins of Omission, and his
failings in his Duty. It was not without great uneasiness to me that I overcome
my self so far, as to say any thing that may seem to diminish the Character of
so extraordinary a Man, who in other things was beyond any Man of his time, but
in this only he fell beneath himself: And those that upon all other accounts
loved and admired him, lamented this defect in him; which was the only allay
that seemed left, and without which he would have been held, perhaps, in more
veneration than was fitting. His Physician Dr. Bootius, that was a Dutchman,
said truly of him, If our Primate of Armagh were as exact a Disciplinarian, as
he is eminent in searching Antiquity, defending the Truth, and preaching the
Gospel, he might without doubt deserve to be made the chief Churchman of
Christendom. But this was necessary to be told, since History is to be writ
impartially; and I ought to be forgiven for taxing his Memory a little; for I
was never so tempted in any thing that I ever writ, to disguise the Truth, as
upon this occasion: Yet though Bishop Usher did not much himself, he had a
singular esteem for that vigor of Mind, which our Bishop expressed in the
reforming these matters. And now I come to the next instance of his Pastoral
care, which made more noise, and met with more opposition, than any of the
former.

He found his Court, that sat in his name, was an entire abuse: It was managed
by a Chancellor, that had bought his place from his Predecessor; and so
thought he had a right to all the Profits that he could raise out of it, and
the whole business of the Court seemed to be nothing but Extortion and
Oppression. For it is an old observation, That men, who buy Justice, will also
sell it. Bribes went about almost barefaced, and the exchange they made of
Penance for Money was the worst sort of Simony; being in effect the very same
abuse that gave the World such a scandal when it was so indecently practiced in
the Church of Rome, and opened the way to the Reformation. For the selling of
Indulgences is really but a commutation of Penance. He found the Officers of
the Court made it their business to draw people into trouble by vexatious
Suits, and to hold them so long in it that for three Pence worth of the Tithe
of Turf, they would be put to five Pounds charge. And the solemnest and
sacredest of all the Church Censures, which was Excommunication, went about in
so sordid and base a manner, that all regard to it, as it was a Spiritual
Censure, was lost, and the effects it had in Law made it be cried out on as a
most intolerable piece of Tyranny. The Officers of the Court thought they had a
sort of right to oppress the Natives, and that all was well got that was wrung
from them. And of all this the good Primate was so sensible, that he gives this
sad account of the Venality of all sacred things in a Letter to the Archbishop
of Canterbury: As for the general state of things here, they are so desperate,
that I am afraid to write any thing thereof. Some of the adverse part have
asked me the Q^estion, Where I have heard or read before, that Religion and
Men's Souls should be set to sale, after this manner? Unto whom I could reply
nothing, but that I had read in Mantuan, That there was another place in the
World where Coelum est venale, Deusque. Both Heaven and God himself are set to
sale. But our Bishop thought it not enough to lament this; he resolved to do
what in him lay to correct these abuses, and to go and sit and judge in his
own Courts himself. He carried a competent number of his Clergy with him, who
sat about him, and there he heard Causes, and by their advice he gave
Sentence. By this means so many Causes were dismissed, and such a change was
wrought in the whole Proceedings of the Court, that instead of being any more a
griev^nce to the Country, none were now grieved by it but the Chancellor, and
the other Officers of the Court; who saw their Trade was sunk, and their
Profits were falling; and were already displeased with the Bishop, for writing
the Titles to Benefices himself, taking that part of their Gain out of their
Hands. Therefore the Lay Chancellor brought a Suit against the Bishop into
Chancery, for invading his Office. The matter was now a common Cause; the other
Bishops were glad at this step our Bishop had made, and encouraged him to go on
resolutely in it, and assured him they would stand by him: and they confessed
they were but half Bishops till they could recover their authority out of the
hands of their Chancellours. But on the other hand all the Chancellours and
Registers of Ireland combined together; they saw this struck at those Places
which they had bought, valuing them according to the Profits that they could
make by them: and it cannot be denied but they had reason to move, That if
their places were regulated, the Money, by which they had purchased that right
to squeeze the Country, ought to have been restored. The Bishop desired that
he might be suffered to plead his own Cause himself; but that was denied him,
which he took ill: But he drew the Argument that his Council made for him; for
it being the first Suit that ever was of that sort, he was more capable of
composing his Defense than his Council could be.

He went upon these Grounds, That one of the most essential parts of a Bishop's
duty was to govern his Flock, and to inflict the Spiritual Censures on
obstinate Offenders: That a Bishop could no more delegate this power to a
Layman, than he could delegate a power to Baptize or Ordain, since
Excommunication and other Censures were a suspending the Rights of Baptism and
Orders; and therefore the judging of these things could only belong to him that
had the power to give them: and that the delegating that power was a thing null
of it self. He showed, That feeding the Flock was inherent and inseparable from
a Bishop, and that no Delegation he could make, could take that power from
himself; since all the effect it could have, was to make another his Officer
and Deputy in his absence. From this he went to show how it had been ever looked
on as a necessary part of the Bishop's Duty, to Examine and Censure the
Scandals of his Clergy and Laity in Ancient and Modern times: That the Roman
Emperors had by many Laws supported the Credit and Authority of these Courts,
that since the practices of the Court of Rome had brought in such a variety of
Rules, for covering the corruptions which they intended to support; then that
which is in it self a plain and simple thing was made very intricate: So that
the Canon Law was become a great study; and upon this account Bishops had taken
Civilians and Canonists to be their Assistants in those Courts: but this could
be for no other end but only to inform them in points of Law, or to hear and
prepare matters for them. For the giving Sentence, as it is done in the Bishops
name, so it is really his Office; and is that for which he is accountable both
to God and Man: and since the Law made those to be the Bishops Courts, and
since the King had by Patent confirmed that Authority, which was lodged in him
by his Office of governing those Courts, he thought all Delegations that were
absolute and exclusive of the Bishop, ought to be declared void. The Reader
will perhaps judge better of the force of this Argument, than the Lord
Chancellor of Ireland Bolton did, who confirmed the Chancellours right, and
gave him an hundred Pound Costs of the Bishop. But when the Bishop asked him,
How he came to make so unjust a Decree? he answered, That all that his Father
had left him was a Register's place; so he thought he was bound to support
those Courts, which he saw would be ruined, if the way he took had not been
checked. This my Author had from the Bishop's own mouth.

But as this matter was a leading Case, so great pains were taken to possess
the Primate against the Bishop; but his Letters will best discover the Grounds
on which he went, and that noble temper of mind, that supported him in so great
an undertaking. The one is long but I will not shorten it.

Right Reverend Father, my honorable good Lord,
I Have received your Grace's Letters concerning Mr. Cook, and I do acknowledge
all that your Grace writes to be true concerning his sufficiency and experience
to the execution of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: neither did I forbear to
do him right in giving him that Testimony, when before the Chapter I did
declare and show the nullity of his Patent. I have heard of my Lord of attempt,
and I do believe, That if this Patent had due form, I could not overthrow it;
how unequal soever it be. But failing in the essential parts, besides sundry
other defects, I do not think any reasonable creature can adjudge it to be
good. I shall more at large certify your Grace of the whole matter, and the
reasons of my Council herein. I shall desire herein to be tried by your Grace's
own Judgment, and not by your Chancellors; or (as I think in such a case I
ought to be) by the Synod of the Province. I have resolved to see the end of
this matter: and do desire your Grace's favor herein no farther than the
equity of the Cause and the good, as far as I can judge, of our Church in a
high degree do require. So with my humble Service to your Grace, and respectful
commendations to Mrs. Usher, I rest

Kilmore, October. 28. 1629. Your Grace's in all duty, Will. Kilmore.


Most reverend Father, my honorable good Lord,
THe report of your Grace's indisposition, how sorrowful it was to me, the Lord
knows. Albeit the same was somewhat mitigated by other News of your better
estate. In that fluctuation of my mind (perhaps like that of your health) the
Saying of the Apostle served me for an Anchor, That none of us lives to
himself, neither does any dye to himself. For whether we live, we live to the
Lord; or whether we dye, we dye to the Lord. Whether we live therefore or dye,
we are the Lords. Thereupon from the bottom of my Heart commending your estate,
and that of the Church here, (which how much it needs you, He knows best) to
our common Master, though I had written large Letters to you, which have lain
by me sundry Weeks, fearing in your sickness to be troublesome; I thought not
to send them, but to attend some other opportunity after your present recovery
to send, or perhaps bring them. When I understood by Mr. Dean of his journey,
or at least sending an express Messenger to you with other Letters; putting me
also in mind, That perhaps it would not be unwelcome to you to hear from me,
though you forbear to answer. I yielded to the example and condition: so much
the rather, because I remembered my self a Debtor to your Grace by my promise
of writing to you more fully touching the Reasons of my difference with Mr.
Cook; and now a suitor in your Court at his instance.

And, First, I beseech your Grace, let it be a matter merely of merriment, that
I skirmish a little with your Court touching the Inhibition and Citation which
thence proceeded against me, as you shall perceive by the enclosed Recusation.
For the thing it self, as I have written, I do submit it wholly to your Grace's
decision. And to enlarge my self a little, not as to a Judge, but a Father, to
whom, besides the bond of your undeserved love, I am bound also by an Oath of
God; I will pour out my Heart unto you, even without craving pardon of my
boldness. It will be perhaps some little diversion of your thoughts from your
own infirmity, to understand that you s^ffer not alone, but you in Body, others
otherwise; each must bear his Cross, and follow the steps of our high Master.
My Lord, since it pleased God to call me to this place in this Church, what my
intentions have been to the discharge of my duty, he best knows. But I have met
with many impediments and discouragements; and chiefly from them of mine own
Profession in Religion. Concerning Mr. Hoile, I acquainted your Grace: Sir
Edward Bagshaw, Sir Francis Hamilton, Mr. William Flemming, and diverse more
have been, and yet are, pulling from the Rights of my Church. But all these
have been light in respect of the dealing of some others, professing me
kindness, by whom I have been blazed a Papist, an Arminian, a Neuter, a
Politician, an Equivocator, a niggardly Housekeeper, an Usurer: That I bow at
the name of Jesus, pray to the East, would pull down the Seat of my Predecessor
to set up an Altar, denied burial in the Chancel to one of his Daughters: and
to make up all, That I compared your Grace's preaching to one Mr. Whiskins, Mr.
Creighton, and Mr. Baxters; and preferred them: That you found your self
deceived in me. These things have been reported at Dublin, and some of the best
affected of mine own Diocese (as has been told me) induced hereby to bewail
with tears the misery of the Church: some of the Clergy also, as it was said,
looking about how they might remove themselves out of this Country. Of all
this I heard but little, till Mr. Price; coming from Dublin before Christmas to
be ordered Deacon, having for his memory set down Twelve Articles, among a
number of Points more, required satisfaction of me concerning them. Which I
endeavored to give both to him, and to them of the Ministry, that met at our
Chapter for the examination of Mr Cooks Patent. Omitting all the rest; yet
because this Venom has spread it self so far, I cannot but touch the last,
touching the preferring others to your Grace's preaching. To which Mr. Price's
answer was, as he told me, I will be quartered if this be true. Thus it was,
Mr. Dunsterville acquainted me with his purpose to preach out of Prove. 20.6.
But a faithful Man who can find; where he said, the Doctrine he meant to raise
was this, That Faith is a rare gift of God. I told him I thought he mistook the
meaning of the Text, and wished him to choose longer Texts, and not bring his
Discourses to a Word or two of Scripture; but rather to declare those of the
Holy Ghost. He said your Grace did so sometimes. I answered, there might be
j^st cause, but I thought you did not so ordinarily. As for those Men, Mr.
Whiskins, and the rest, I never heard any of them preach to this day.
Peradventure, their manner is to take longer Texts; whereupon the comparison is
made up, as if I preferred them before you. This slander did not much trouble
me. I know your Grace will not think me such a Fool (if I had no fear of God)
to prefer before your excellent gifts, Men that I never heard. But look as the
French Proverb is, He that is disposed to kill his Dog, tells Men he is mad:
And whom Men have once wronged, unless the Grace of God be the more, they ever
hate. Concerning the wrongs which these people have offered me, I shall take
another fit time to inform your Grace. Where they say, Your Grace does find
your self deceived in me, I think it may be the truest word they said yet. For
indeed I do think both you and many more are deceived in me, accounting me to
have some honesty, discretion, and Grace, more than you will by proof find. But
if, as it seems to me, that form has this meaning that they pretend to have
undeceived you, I hope they are deceived; yea I hope they shall be deceived, if
by such courses as these they think to unsettle me; and the Devil himself also,
if he think to dismay me.

I will go on in the strength of the Lord God, and remember his righteousness,
even his alone, as by that reverend and good Father my Lord of Canterbury, when
I first came over, I was exhorted, and have obtained help of God to do to this
day.

But had I not work enough before, but I must bring Mr. Cook upon my top? One
that for his Experience, Purse, Friends, in a Case already adjudged, wherein he
is engaged, not only for his profit, but reputation also, will easily no doubt
overbear me. How much better to study to be quiet, and to do mine own business;
or, as I think Staupitius was wont to bid Luther, go into my Study and pray. My
Lord, all these things came to my mind, and at the first I came with a
resolution to take heed to my self, and, if I could, to teach others moderation
and forbearance by mine own example. But I could not be quiet, nor without pity
hear the complaints of those that resorted to me, some of them of mine own
Neighbors and Tenants, called into the Court, commonly by information of
Apparitors, holden there without just cause, and not dismissed without
excessive Fees, as they exclaimed. Lastly, one Mr. Mayot, a Minister of the
Diocese of Ardagh, made a complaint to me, That he was excommunicated by Mr.
Cook, notwithstanding, as I heard also by others, the correction of Ministers
was excepted out of his Patent. Whereupon I desired to see the Patent, and to
have a Copy of it, that I might know how to govern my self. He said Mr. Ask,
being then from home, should bring it to me at his return. Himself went to
Dublin to the Term. At the first view I saw it was a formless Chaos of
Authority, conferred upon him against all reason and equity. I had not long
after, occasion to call the Chapter together at the time of Ordination. I
showed the Original, being brought forth by Mr. Ask, desired to know if that
were the Chapter Seal, and these their Hands; they acknowledged their Hands and
Seal, and said they were less careful in passing it, because they accounted it
did rather concern my Predecessor than them. I showed the false Latin,
Nonsense, Injustice of it, Prejudice to them, Contrariety to it self, and the
Kings Grant to me. I showed there were in one Period above 500 Words, and,
which passed the rest, hanging in the air without any principal Verb. I desired
them to consider if the Seal hanging to it were the Bishop's Seal; they
acknowledged it was not. Therefore with protestation, That I meant no way to
call in question the sufficiency of Mr. Cook or his former Acts, I did judge
the Patent to be void, and so declared it; inhibiting Mr. Cook to do any thing
by virtue thereof, and them to assist him therein. This is the true History of
this business howsoever Mr. Cook disguise it. I suspend him not absent, and
indicta causa; it was his Commission, which was present, that I viewed, which,
with the Chapter, I censured; which if he can make good, he shall have leave,
and time, and place enough.

And now to accomplish my promise, to relate to your Grace my purpose herein.
My Lord I do thus account, that to any work or enterprise, to remove
impediments is a great part of the performance. And amongst all the impediments
to the work of God amongst us, there is not any one greater, than the abuse of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. This is not only the opinion of the most Godly,
Judicious, and Learned Men that I have known; but the cause of it is plain. The
people pierce not into the inward and true Reasons of things; they are sensible
in the Purse. And that Religion that makes Men that profess i^, and shows them
to be despisers of the World, and so far from encroaching upon others in matter
of base gain, as rather to part with their own; they magnify. This bred the
admiration of the Primitive Christians, and after of the Monks. Contrary causes
must needs produce contrary effects. Wherefore let us preach never so
painfully, and piously: I say more, let us live never so blamelesly our selves,
so long as the Officers in our Courts prey upon them, they esteem us no better
than Publicans and Worldlings: and so much the more deservedly, because we are
called Spiritual Men, and call our selves reformed Christians. And if the
honestest and best of our own Protestants be thus scandalized, what may we
think of Papists, such as are all, in a manner, that we live among? The time
was when I hoped the Church of Ireland was free from this abuse, at least freer
than her Sister of England: But I find I am deceived; whether it be that
distance of place, and being further out of the reach of the Scepter of
Justice, breeds more boldness to offend, or necessarily brings more delay of
redress. I have been wont also in Ireland, to except one Court, (as he does
Plato) but trust me my Lord, I have heard that it is said among great
personages here, That my Lord Primate is a good Man; but his Court is as
corrupt as others. Some say worse, and which, I confess to your Grace, did not
a little terrify me from visiting till I might see how to do it with Fruit,
that of your late Visitation they see no profit, but the taking of Money.

But to come to Mr. Cook, of all that have exercised Jurisdiction in this Land
these late Years, he is the most noted Man, and most cried out upon. Insomuch
as he has found from the Irish, the nickname of Pouc: Albeit he came off with
credit when he was questioned, and justified himself by the Table of Fees, (as
by a leaden Rule any Stone may be approved as well as hewed). By that little I
met with since I came hither, I am induced to believe, it was not for lack of
matter, but there was some other course of his escaping in that Trial. By this
pretended Commission, and that Table of Fees, he has taken in my Predecessors
time, and seeks to take in mine for Exhibits at Visitations, and his Charges
there above the Bishop's Procurations, for Unions, Sequestrations, Relaxations,
Certificates, Licenses, Permutations of Penance, Sentences (as our Court calls
them) Interlocutory in Causes of Correction. Such Fees as I cannot in my
Conscience think to be just. And yet he does it in my Name, and tells me I
cannot call him into question for it. Alas, my Lord! if this be the condition
of a Bishop, that he stands for a Cipher, and only to uphold the Wrongs of
other Men, What do I in this place? Am I not bound by my Profession made to God
in your presence, and following your Words, To be gentle and merciful for
Christ's sake to poor and needy people, and such as be destitute of help. Can I
be excused another day, with this, that thus it was ere I came to this place,
and that it is not good to be over just? Or, since I am persuaded Mr. Cooke's
Patent is unjust and void, am I not bound to make it so? and to regulate, If I
may, this matter of Fees, and the rest of the disorders of the Jurisdiction,
which his Majesty has entrusted me withal? Your Grace says, Truly it is a
difficult thing, if not impossible, to overthrow a Patent so confirmed; and I
know in deliberations it is one of the most important considerations, what we
may hope to effect. But how can I tell till I have tried: To be discouraged ere
I begin, is it not to consult with Flesh and Blood? Verily I think so. And
therefore must put it to the Trial, and leave the success to God. If I obtain
the Cause, the Profit shall be to this poor Nation; if not, I shall show my
consent to those my Reverend Brethren that have endeavored to redress this
enormity before me; I shall have the testimony of mine own Conscience, to have
sought to discharge my duty to God and his People. Yea, which is the main, the
work of my Ministry and service to this Nation, shall receive furtherance
howsoever rather than any hinderance thereby. And if by the continuance of such
oppressions any thing fall out otherwise than well, I shall have acquitted my
self toward his Majesty, and those that have engaged themselves for me. At
last I shall have the better reason and juster cause to resign to his Majesty
the jurisdiction which I am not permitted to manage. And here I beseech your
Grace, to consider seriously whether it were not happy for us to be rid of this
Charge, which not being proper to our Calling, is not possible to be executed
without such Deputies, as subject us to the ill conceit of their unjust or
indiscreet carriage, and no way further our own Work? Or if it shall be thought
fit to carry this load still, whether we ought not to procure some way to be
discharged of the envy of it, and redress the abuse, with the greatest
strictness we can devise? For my part I cannot bethink me of any course fitter
for the present, than to keep the Courts my self, and set some good order in
them. And to this purpose I have been at Cavan, Belturbet, Granard, and
Longford, and do intend to go to the rest, leaving with some of the Ministry
there, a few Rules touching those things that are to be redressed, that if my
health do not permit me to be always present, they may know how to proceed in
my absence. I find it to be true that Tully says, Justitia mirifica quaedam
res multitudini; and certainly to our proper work a great advantage it is to
obtain a good opinion of those we are to deal with. But besides this there fall
out occasions to speak of God and his presence, of the Religion of a Witness,
the danger of an Oath, the purity of a Marriage, the preciousness of a good
name, repairing of Churches, and the like. Penance it self may be enjoined, and
Penitents reconciled, with some profit to others besides themselves.

Wherefore, albeit Mr. Cook were the justest Chancellor in this Kingdom, I
would think it fit for me, as things now stand, to sit in these Courts; and the
rather since I cannot be heard in the Pulpits to preach as I may in them: Albeit
innocence and Justice is also a real kind of preaching. I have showed your
Grace my intentions in this matter. Now should I require your direction in many
things, if I were present with you. But for the present it may please you to
understand, that at Granard one Mr. Nugent, a Nephew as I take it to my Lord of
Westmeath delivered his Letter to Mr. Ask, which he delivered me in open
Court, requiring that his Tenant might not be troubled for Christnings,
Marriages, or Funerals, so they pay the Minister his due. This referred to a
Letter of my Lord Chancellors to the like purpose, which yet was not delivered
till the Court was risen. I answered generally, That none of my Lord's Tenants
or others should be wronged. The like motion was made at Longford, by two or
three of the Farralls, and one Mr. Fagarah, and Mr. Rosse to whom I gave the
like answer, and added, That I would be strict in requiring them to bring their
Children to be Baptized, and Marriages to be solemnized likewise with us, since
they acknowledged these to be lawful and true; so as it was but wilfulness if
any forbear. Here I desire your Grace to direct me. For to give way that they
should not be so much as called in question, seems to further the Schism they
labor to make To lay any pecuniary mulct upon them, as the value of a License
for Marriage, three Pence or four Pence for a Christning, I know not by what
Law it can be done. To Excommunicate them for not appearing or obeying, they
being already none of our body, and a multitude; it is to no profit, nay rather
makes the exacerbation worse.

Many things more I have to confer with your Grace about, which I hope to do
coram; as about the re-edifying of Churches, or employing the Mass-houses,
(which now the State inquires of) about Books, Testaments, and the Common
Prayer Book, which being to be reprinted would perhaps be in some things
bettered: But especially about Men to use them; and Means to maintain them, now
that our English have engrossed the Livings. About the printing the Psalter,
which I have caused to be diligently surveyed by Mr. James Nangle, who advises
not to meddle with the Verse, but set forth only the Prose: Which he has begun
to write out fair to the Press. Mr. Murtagh King I have not heard of a long
time, I hope he goes on in the Historical Books of the Old Testament. Mr.
Crian was with me about a Forthnight after I came to Kilmore; since I heard not
of him. Of all these things, if by the will of God, I may make a journey over
to you, we shall speak at full.

As I was closing up these, this Morning, there is a complaint brought me from
Ardagh, That where in a cause Matrimonial in the Court at Longford, a Woman had
proceeded thus far, as after contestation, the Husband was enjoined to appear
the next Court to receive a Libel; one Shaw-oge, Mr. Ingawry, the Popish Vicar
General of Ardagh, had excommunicated her, and she was by one Hubart, and Mr.
Calril a Priest upon Sunday last, put out of the Church and denounced
excommunicate. Herein, whether it were more fit to proceed against the Vicar
and Priest by virtue of the last Letters from the Council; or complain to them:
I shall attend your Graces advice. And now for very shame ceasing to be
troublesome, I do recommend your Grace to the protection of our merciful
Father, and rest, with my respective salutations to Mrs. Usher,

Kilmore, Feb. 15. 1629. Your Grace's in all duty, Will. Kilmore and Ardaghen.


The other Bishops did not stand by our Bishop in this matter; but were
contented to let him fall under Censure, without interposing in it as in a
cause of common concern: Even the excellent Primate told him, The tide went so
high that he could assist him no more; for he stood by him longer than any
other of the Order had done. But the Bishop was not disheartened by this. And
as he thanked him for assisting him so long; so he said he was resolved by the
help of God, to try if he could stand by himself. But he went home, and
resolved to go on in his Courts as he had begun, notwithstanding this Censure.
For he thought he was doing that which was incumbent on him, and he had a
Spirit so made, that he resolved to suffer Martyrdom, rather than fail in any
thing that lay on his Conscience. But his Chancellor was either advised by
those that governed the State, to give him no disturbance in that matter; or
was overcome by the authority he saw in him, that inspired all people with
reverence for him: For as he never called for the 100 Pound Costs, so he never
disturbed him any more, but named a Surrogate, to whom he gave order to be in
all things observant of the Bishop, and obedient to him: So it seems, that
though it was thought fit to keep up the Authority of the Lay Chancellours over
Ireland, and not to suffer this Bishop's practice to pass into a Precedent; yet
order was given under hand to let him go on as he had begun; and his
Chancellor had so great a value for him, that many Years after this, he told
my Author, That he thought there was not such a Man on the face of the earth as
Bishop Bedell was; that he was too hard for all the Civilians in Ireland, and
that if he had not been born down by mere force, he had overthrown the
Consistorial Courts, and had recovered the Episcopal Jurisdiction out of the
Chancellours hands. But now that he went on undisturbed in his Episcopal Court
he made use of it as became him, and not as an Engine to raise his power and
dominion; but considering that all Church power was for Edification, and not
for Destruction, he both dispensed that Justice that belonged to his Courts
equally and speedily, and cut off many Fees and much expense, which made them
be formerly so odious; and also when scandalous persons were brought before him
to be censured, he considered that Church Censures ought not to be like the
acts of Tyrants, that punish out of revenge, but like the Discipline of
Parents, that correct in order to the amendment of their Children: So he
studied chiefly to beget in all offenders a true sense of their sins. Many of
the Irish Priests were brought often into his Courts for their lewdness; and upon
that he took occasion with great mildness, and without scoffing, or insultings
to make them sensible of that tyrannical imposition in their Church, in denying
their Priests leave to marry, which occasioned so much impurity among them; and
this had a good effect on some.

This leads me to another part of his Character, that must represent the care
he took of the Natives; he observed with much regret that the English had all
along neglected the Irish, as a Nation not only conquered but undisciplineable:
and that the Clergy had scarce considered them as a part of their Charge, but
had left them wholly into the hands of their own Priests, without taking any
other care of them, but the making them pay their Tithes. And indeed their
Priests were a strange sort of people, that knew generally nothing but the
reading their Offices, which were not so much as understood by many of them:
and they taught the people nothing but the saying their Paters and Aves in
Latin. So that the state both of the Clergy and Laity was such, that it could
not but raise great compassion in a Man that had so tender a sense of the value
of those Souls that Christ had purchased with his Blood: therefore he resolved
to set about that Apostolical work of converting the Natives with the zeal and
care that so great understanding required. He knew the gaining on some of the
more knowing of their Priests was like to be the quickest way; for by their
means he hoped to spread the knowledge of the reformed Religion among the
Natives; or rather of the Christian Religion, to speak more strictly. For they
had no sort of notion of Christianity, but only knew that they were to depend
upon their Priests, and were to confess such of their actions, as they call
sins, to them; and were to pay them Tithes. The Bishop prevailed on several
Priests to change, and he was so well satisfied with the truth of their
conversion, that he provided some of them to Ecclesiastical Benefices: which
was thought a strange thing, and was censured by many, as contrary to the
interest of the English Nation. For it was believed that all those Irish
Converts were still Papists at Heart, and might be so much the more dangerous,
than otherwise, by that disguise which they had put on. But he on the other
hand considered chiefly the duty of a Christian Bishop: he also thought the
true interest of England was to gain the Irish to the knowledge of Religion,
and to bring them by the means of that which only turns the heart to love the
English Nation: And so he judged the wisdom of that course was apparent, as
well as the piety of it. Since such as changed their Religion would become
thereby so odious to their own Clergy, that this would provoke them to further
degrees of zeal in gaining others to come over after them: And he took great
care to work in those whom he trusted with the care of Souls, a full conviction
of the truth of Religion, and a deep sense of the importance of it. And in this
he was so happy, That of all the Converts that he had raised to Benefices,
there was but one only that fell back, when the Rebellion broke out: And he not
only apostatized, but both plundered and killed the English among the first.
But no wonder if one murderer was among our Bishop's Converts, since there was
a traitor among the twelve that followed our Savior. There was a Covent of
Friars very near him, on whom he took much pains, with very good success: That
he might furnish his converts with the means of instructing others, he made a
short Catechism to be printed in one sheet, being English on the one Page, and
Irish on the other; which contained the Elements, and most necessary things of
the Christian Religion, together with some forms of Prayer, and some of the
most instructing and edifying passages of Scripture: This he sent about all
over his Diocese; and it was received with great joy, by many of the Irish, who
seemed to be hungering and thirsting after* Righteousness, and received this
beginning of knowledge so well, that it gave a good encouragement to hope well
upon further endeavors.

The Bishop did also set himself to learn the Irish Tongue; and though it was
too late for a Man of his years to learn to speak it, yet he came to understand
it to such a degree, as to compose a complete Grammar of it, (which was the
first that ever was made, as I have been told) and to be a Critic in it: he
also had Common Prayer read in Irish every Sunday in his Cathedral for the
benefit of the Converts he had made, and was always present at it himself, and
he engaged all his Clergy to set up Schools in their Parishes: For there were
so very few bred to read or write, that this obstructed the conversion of the
Nation very much. The New Testament and the Book of Common Prayer were already
put in the Irish Tongue; but he resolved to have the whole Bible, the Old
Testament as well as the New, put also into the hands of the Irish; and
therefore he labored much to find out one that understood the Language so well
that he might be employed in so sacred a work: And by the advice of the
Primate, and several other eminent persons, he pitched on one King, that had
been converted many years before, and was believed to be the elegantest Writer
of the Irish Tongue then alive, both for Prose and Poetry. He was then about
seventy, but notwithstanding his age and the disadvantages of his Education,
yet the Bishop thought him not only capable of this Employment, but qualified
for an higher character; therefore he put him in Orders, and gave him a
Benefice in his Diocese, and set him to work, in order to the translating the
Bible: which he was to do from the English Translation; since there were none
of the Nation to be found that knew any thing of the Originals. The Bishop set
himself so much to the revising this Work, that always after Dinner or Supper
he read over a Chapter; and as he compared the Irish Translation with the
English, so he compared the English with the Hebrew and the Seventy
Interpreters, or with Diodati's Italian Translation, which he valued highly;
and he corrected the Irish where he found the English Translators had failed.
He thought the use of the Scriptures was the only way to let the knowledge of
Religion in among the Irish, as it had first let the Reformation into the other
parts of Europe: And he used to tell a passage of a Sermon that he heard
Fulgentio preach at Venice, with which he was much pleased: It was on these
Words of Christ, Have ye not read; and so he took occasion to tell the
Auditory, That if Christ were now to ask this Question, Have ye not read? all
the Answer they could make to it, was, No, for they were not suffered to do it.
Upon which he taxed with great zeal the restraint put on the use of the
Scriptures, by the Sea of Rome. This was not unlike what the same person
delivered in another Sermon preaching upon Pilate's Question, What is Truth? he
told them that at last after many searches he had found it out, and held out a
New Testament, and said, There it was in his Hand, but then he put it in his
Pocket, and said coldly, But the Book is prohibited; which was so suited to the
Italian genius, that it took mightily with the Auditory. The Bishop had
observed that in the Primitive times as soon Nations, how barbarous soever they
were, began to receive the Christian Religion, they had the Scriptures
translated into their vulgar Tongues: And that all people were exhorted to
study them; therefore he not only undertook and began this Work, but followed
it with so much industry, that in a very few years he finished the Translation;
and resolved to set about the printing of it: for the bargain was made with one
that engaged to perform it. And as he had been at the great trouble of
examining the Translation, so he resolved to run the venture of the Impression,
and took that expense upon himself. It is scarce to be imagined what could have
obstructed so great and so good a Work. The Priests of the Church of Rome had
reason to oppose the printing of a Book, that has been always so fatal to them;
but it was a deep fetch to possess reformed Divines with a jealousy of this
work, and with hard thoughts concerning it: Yet that was done; but by a very
well disguised method: For it was said that the Translator was a weak and
contemptible Man, and that it would expose such a work, as this was, to the
scorn of the Nation, when it was known who was the Author of it: And this was
infused both into the Earl of Strafford, and into the Archbishop of Canterbury:
And a bold young Man pretended a lapse of the Benefice that the Bishop had
given to the Translator, and so obtained a Broad Seal for it; though it was in
the Bishop's Gift. This was an abuse too common at that time, for licentious
Clerks to pretend either that an Incumbent was dead, or that he had no good
right to his Benefice, or that he had forfeited it; and upon that to procure a
Grant of it from the King, and then to turn the Incumbent out of Possession,
and to vex him with a Suit till they forced him to compound for his peace. So
upon this occasion it was pretended that the Translator had forfeited his
Living; and one Baily that had informed against him, came down with a Grant of
it under the great Seal, and violently thrust him out of it. The Bishop was
much touched with this, and cited Baily to appear before him. He had given him
a Vicarage, and had taken an Oath of him never to hold another; so he objected
to him both his violent and unjust intrusion into another man's right, and his
Perjury. Baily to cover himself from the last, procured a Dispensation from the
Prerogative Court, notwithstanding his Oath, to hold more Benefices. The Bishop
looked on this as one of the worst and most scandalous parts of Popery, to
dissolve the most sacred of all Bonds; and it grieved his Soul to see so vile a
thing acted in the name of Archbishop Usher, though it was done by his
Surrogates: So without any regard to this he served this obstinate Clerk with
several Canonical admonitions; but finding him still hardened in his wickedness,
he deprived him of the Benefice he had given him, and also excommunicat'd him,
and gave orders that the Sentence should be published through the whole Deanery:
upon which Baily's Clerk appealed to the Prerogative Court, and the Bishop was
cited to answer for what he had done. He went and appeared before them, but
declined their Authority, and would not answer to them. He thought it below the
Office and Dignity of a Bishop to give an account of a spiritual Censure, that
he had inflicted on one of his Clergy, before two Laymen that pretended to be
the Primate's Surrogates; and he put his Declinator in 24 Articles, all written
with his own Hand, which will be found at the end of this Narrative: he
excepted to the incompetency of the Court, Se at the end, Numb. 3.
both because the Primate was not there in person, and because they that sat
there had given clear Evidences of their partiality, which he had offered to
prove to the Primate himself. He said the appeal from his Sentence lay only to
the Provincial Synod, or to the Archbishop's Consistory; and since the ground
of Bailys Appeal, was the dispensation that they had given him from his Oath,
they could not be the competent Judges of that, for they were Parties: And the
Appeal from abusive faculties lay only to a Court of Delegates by the express
words of the Law: And by many Indications it appeared, that they had prejudged
the matter in Baily's favors, and had expressed great resentments against the
Bishop; and notwithstanding the dignity of his Office, they had made him wait
among the crowd an hour and an half, and had given directions in the management
of the Cause as Parties against him; they had also manifestly abused their
power in granting Dispensations contrary to the Laws of God: and now they
presumed to interpose in the just and legal Jurisdiction that a Bishop
exercised over his Clergy both by the Laws of God and by the Kings Authority.
Upon these grounds he excepted to their Authority; he was served with several
Citations to answer, and appeared upon every one of them: but notwithstanding
the highest contempts they put upon him, he showed no indecent passion, but
kept his ground still. In conclusion he was declared Contumax, and the perjured
Intruder was absolved from the Sentence, and confirmed in the possession of his
ill-acquired Benefice. It may be easily imagined, how much these Proceedings
were censured by all fair and equitable Men: The constancy, the firmness, and
the courage that the Bishop expressed being as much commended, as the injustice
and violence of his Enemies was cried out upon. The strangest part of this
transaction was, that which the Primate acted, who though he loved the Bishop
beyond all the rest of the Order, and valued him highly for the zealous
discharge of his office, that distinguished him so much from others; yet he
could not be prevailed on to interpose in this matter; nor to stop the injust
Prosecution that this good Man had fallen under, for so good a Work. Indeed it
went further, for upon the endeavors he used to convert the Irish; and after
he had refused to answer in the Archbishop's Court, it appears that he was in
some measure alienated from him, which drew from the Bishop the following
Answer to a Letter, that he had from him.

Most Reverend Father, my honorable good Lord,
THE Superscription of your Grace's Letters was most welcome unto me, as
bringing under your own hand the best evidence of the recovery of your health,
for which I did and do give hearty thanks unto God. For the Contents of them,
as your Grace conceived, They were not so pleasant. But the Words of a Friend
are faithful, says the Wise Man: Sure they are no less painful than any other.
Unkindness cuts nearer to the Heart than Malice can do. I have some experience
by your Grace's said Letters, concerning which I have been at some debate with
my self, whether I should answer them with David's demand, What have I now
done? or as the wrongs of Parents, with Patience and Silence. But Mr. Dean
telling me, That this day he is going toward you, I will speak once, come of
it what will.

You write that the course I took with the Papists, was generally cried out
against, neither do you remember in all your life that any thing was done here
by any of us, at which the Professors of the Gospel did take more offense, or
by which the Adversaries were more confirmed in their Superstitions and
Idolatry; wherein you could wish that I had advised with my Brethren before I
would adventure to pull down that which they have been so long a building.
Again; What I did, you know, was done out of a good intention; but you were
assured that my project would be so quickly refuted with the present success
and event, that there would be no need my Friends should advise me from
building such Castles in the air, etc.

My Lord, All this is a riddle to me. What course I have taken with the
Papists; what I have done at which your Professors of the Gospel did take such
offense, or the Adversaries were so confirmed; what it is that I have
adventured to do; or what piece so long a building, I have pulled down; what
those Projects were, and those Castles in the air so quickly refuted with
present success, as the Lords knows, I know not. For truly since I came to this
place I have not changed one jot of my purpose or practice, or course with
Papists from that which I held in England, or in Trinity College, or found (I
thank God) any ill success, but the slanders only of some persons discontented
against me for other occasions. Against which I cannot hope to justify my
self, if your Grace will give ear to private informations. But let me know, I
will not say, my Accuser, (let him continue masked till God discover him) but
my Transgression, and have place of defense; and if mine Adversary write a Book
against me, I will hope to bear it on my Shoulder, and bind it to me as a Crown.

For my recusation of your Court, and advertisement of what I heard thereof, I
see they have stirred not only laughter, but some coals too. Your Chancellor
desires me to acquit him to you, That he is none of those Officers I meant; I
do it very willingly: For I neither meant him nor any Man else. But though it
concerned your Grace to know what I credibly heard to be spoken concerning your
Court; neither, as God knows, did I ever think it was fit to take away the
Jurisdiction from Chancellours, and put it into the Bishops hands alone; or so
much as in a dream condemn those that think they have reason to do otherwise,
nor tax your Grace's Visitation: Nor imagine you would account that to pertain
to your reproof, and take it as a wrong from me, which out of my duty to God
and you, I thought was not to be concealed from you. I beseech you pardon me
this one error, Si unquam posthac -- For that knave whom (as your Grace
writes) they say I did absolve; I took him for one of my Flock, or rather
Christ's, for whom he shed his blood. And I would have absolved Julian the
Apostate under the same form. Some other passages there be in your Grace's
Letters, which I, -- but I will lay mine Hand upon my Mouth and craving the
blessing of your prayers, ever remain,

Your Grace's poor Brother, and humble servant, Will. Kilmore.
Kilmore, March 29. 1630.

The malice of Mr. King's Enemies was not satiated with the spoiling him of his
Benefice. For often it falls out, That those who have done acts of high
injustice seek some excuse for what they have done, by new injuries, and a
vexatious prosecution of the injured person, designing by the noise, that such
repeated accusations might raise, to possess the World with an Opinion of his
guilt, which much clamor does often produce: and so to crush the person so
entirely that he may never again be in a capacity to recover himself, and to
obtain his right, but be quite sunk by that vast increase of weight that is
laid upon him. But I will give the Reader a clearer view of this invidious
affair from a Letter which the Bishop writ concerning it to the Earl of
Strafford.

Right honorable, my good Lord.
THat which I have sometimes done willingly, I do now necessarily, to make my
address to your Honor by writing. My unfitness for conversation heretofore
has pleaded for me, and now your Lordship's infirmity allows, and in a sort
inforces it. The occasion is, not my love of contention (which I have committed
to God) or any other matter of profit, but God's honor, and (as he is witness)
yours. I have lately received Letters from my Lord of Canterbury; whereby I
perceive his Grace is informed that Mr. King, whom I employed to translate the
Bible into Irish, is a Man so ignorant that the Translation cannot be worthy
public use in the Church, and besides, obnoxious, so as the Church can receive
no credit from any thing that is his. And his Grace adds, That he is so well
acquainted with your Lordship's disposition, that he assures himself you would
not have given away his Living, had you not seen just cause for it. I account
my self bound to satisfy his Grace herein, and desire, if I may be so happy,
to do it by satisfying you. I do subscribe to his Grace's assured persuasion
that your Lordship, had you not conceived Mr. King to be such as he writes,
would not have given away his Living. But (my Lord) the greatest, wisest, and
justest Men do, and must take many things upon the information of others; who
themselves are Men, and may sometimes out of weakness, or some other cause, be
deceived. Touching Mr. King's silliness, (which it concerns me the more to
clear him of, that I be not accounted silly my self) I beseech your Lordship to
take information, not by them which never saw him till yesterday, but by the
ancient either Church- or Statesmen of this Kingdom (in whose eyes he has
lived these many Years) as are the Lord Primate, The Bishop of Mead, the Lord
Dillon, Sir James Ware, and the like: I doubt not but your Lordship shall
understand that there is no such danger that the Translation should be
unworthy, because he did it; being a Man of that known sufficiency, for the
Irish especially, either in Prose or Verse, as few are his matches in the
Kingdom. And shortly, not to argue by conjecture and divination, Let the Work
it self speak, yea let it be examined rigoroso examine: If it be found
approveable, let it not suffer disgrace from the small boast of the Workman,
but let him rather (as old Sophocles accused of dotage) be absolved for the
sufficiency of the Work. Touching his being obnoxious, it is true that there is
a scandalous Information put in against him in the High Commission Court, by
his despoiler Mr. Baily (as my Lord of Derry told him in my hearing he was) and
by an excommunicate despoiler, as my self before the Execution of any sentence,
declared him in the Court to be. And Mr. King being cited to answer, and not
appearing, (as by Law he was not bound) was taken pro confesso, deprived of his
Ministry, and Living, Fined an hundred Pound, Decreed to be attached, and
imprisoned. His Adversary Mr. Baily, before he was sentenced, purchased a new
Dispensation to hold his Benefice, and was the very next day after (as appears
by the date of the Institution) both presented in the King's Title (although
the Benefice be of my Collation) and instituted by my Lord Primate's Vicar:
Shortly after inducted by an Archdeacon of another Diocese, and a few days
after, he brought down an Attachment, and delivered Mr. King to the Pursevant:
He was haled by the Head and Feet to Horseback; and brought to Dublin, where he
has been kept, and continued under Arrest these four or five Months: and has
not been suffered to purge his supposed Contempt, by Oath and Witnesses, that
by reason of his sickness he was hindered, whereby he was brought to Death's
Door, and could not appear and prosecute his defense: And that by the cunning
of his Adversary he was circumvented, entreating that he might be restored to
liberty, and his cause into the former estate. But it has not availed him: my
Reverend Colleagues of the High Commission do some of them pity his Case,
others say the Sentence past cannot be reversed, lest the credit of the Court
be attached. They bid him simply submit himself, and acknowledge his Sentence
just. Whereas the Bishops of Rome themselves, after most formal proceedings, do
grant restitution in integrum, and acknowledge, That, Sententia Romanae Sedis
potest in melius commutari. My Lord, if I understand what is Right Divine or
humane, these be wrongs upon wrongs; which if they reached only to Mr. King's
person, were of less consideration; but when through his side, That great Work,
the Translation of God's Book, so necessary for both his Majesty's Kingdoms, is
mortally wounded; pardon me (I beseech your Lordship) if I be sensible of it. I
omit to consider what feast our adversaries make of our rewarding him thus for
that service; or what this example will avail to the alluring of others to
conformity. What should your Lordship have gained if he had dyed (as it was
almost a miracle he did not) under Arrest, and had been at once deprived of
Living, Liberty and Life. God has reprieved him, and given your Lordship means
upon right information, to remedy with one word all inconveniences. For
conclusion (good my Lord) give me leave a little to apply the Parable of Nathan
to King David to this purpose: If the wayfaring man, that is come to us (for
such he is, having never yet been settled in one place) have so sharp a Stomach
that he must be provided for with Pluralities, since there are Herds and Flocks
plenty; suffer him not, I beseech you, under the color of the King's name to
take the coset Ewe of a poor Man, to satisfy his ravenous appetite. So I
beseech the Heavenly Physician to give your Lordship health of Soul and Body. I
rest,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble servant in Christ Jesus, Will. Kilmore.
December. 1. 1638.

By these practices was the printing of the Bible in Irish stopped at that time,
but if the Rebellion had not prevented our Bishop, he was resolved to have had
it done in his own House, and at his own charge; and as preparatory to that, he
made some of Chrysostom's Homilies, the three first upon the parable of the
rich Man and Lazarus, together with some of Leo's; all which tended chiefly to
commend the Scriptures in the highest strains of Eloquence that were possible,
to be translated both into English and Irish; and reprinting his Catechism, he
added these to it in both Languages: and these were very well received, even by
the Priests and Friars themselves.

He lived not to finish this great design; yet, notwithstanding the Rebellion
and confusion that followed in Ireland, the Manuscript of the Translation of
the Bible escaped the storm, and falling into good Hands, it is at this time
under the Press, and is carried on chiefly by the zeal, and at the charge of
that Noble Christian Philosopher Mr. Boil, who as he reprinted upon his own
charge the new Testament, so he very cheerfully went into a Proposition for
reprinting the Old. But this is only one of many instances, by which he has
expressed, as well his great and active zeal for carrying on the true interest
of Religion, as by his other public labors he has advanced and improved
Philosophy.

But to go on with the concerns of our Bishop, as he had great zeal for the
purity of the Christian Religion in opposition to the corruptions of the Church
of Rome; so he was very moderate in all other matters, that were not of such
importance. He was a great supporter of Mr. Dury's design of reconciling the
Lutherans and the Calvinists; and as he directed him by many learned and
prudent Letters, that he wrote to him on that subject, so he allowed him 20 l.
a year in order to the discharging the expense of that negotiation; which he
paid punctually to his Correspondent at London. And it appeared by his
managing of a business that fell out in Ireland, That if all that were
concerned in that matter, had been blessed with such an understanding, and such a
temper as he had, there had been no reason to have despaired of it. There came
a company of Lutherans to Dublin, who were afraid of joining in Communion with
the Church of Ireland, and when they were cited to answer for it to the
Archbishop's Consistory, they desired some time might be granted them for
consulting their Divines in Germany: And at last Letters were brought from
thence concerning their Exceptions to Communion with that Church; Because the
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament was not explained in such a manner, as
agreed with their Doctrine. The Archbishop of Dublin sent these to our Bishop,
that he might answer them; and upon that he writ so learned and so full an
answer to all their Objections, and explained the matter so clearly, that when
this was seen by the German Divines, it gave them such entire satisfaction,
that upon it they advised their Countrymen to join in Communion with the
Church. For such is the moderation of our Church in that matter, that no
positive definition of the manner of the Presence being made, Men of different
sentiments may agree in the same acts of Worship, without being obliged to
declare their Opinion, or being understood to do any thing contrary to their
several Persuasions.

His moderation in this matter was a thing of no danger to him, but he
expressed it on other instances, in which it appeared that he was not afraid to
own it upon more tender occasions. The Troubles that broke out in Scotland upon
the account of the Book of Common Prayer, which increased to the height of the
swearing the Covenant and putting down of Episcopacy, and the turning out of
all Clergy Men that did not concur with them, are so well known, that I need
not enlarge upon them. It is not to be denied but provocations were given by
the heats and indiscretions of some Men; but these were carried so far beyond
all the bounds either of Order in the Church, or Peace in the State, that, to
give things their proper names, it was a Schismatical rage against the Church,
backed with a rebellious fury against the State. When the Bishop heard of all
these things, he said, that which Nazianzene said at Constantinople, when the
stir was raised in the second General Council upon his account, If this great
tempest is risen for our sakes, take us up, and cast us into the Sea, that so
there may be a Calm. And if all others had governed their Diocesses, as he did
his, one may adventure to affirm after Dr. Bernard, That Episcopacy might have
been kept still upon its Wheels. Some of those that were driven out of
Scotland, by the fury of that time, came over to Ireland: among these there was
one Corbet, that came to Dublin, who being a Man of quick Parts, writ a very
smart Book, showing the parallel between the Jesuits and the Scotch
Covenanters, which he printed under the Title of Lysimachus Nicanor. The Spirit
that was in this Book, and the sharpness of the style procured the Author such
favor, that a considerable Living falling in the Bishop of Killala's Gift, he
was recommended to it, and so he went to that Bishop; but was ill received by
him. The Bishop had a great affection to his Country (for he was a Scotchman
born) and though he condemned the courses they had taken, yet he did not love
to see them exposed in a strange Nation, and did not like the Man that had done
it. The Bishop was a little sharp upon him; he played on his Name: Corby in
Scotch being a Raven, and said it was an ill Bird that defiled its own Nest.
And whereas he had said in his Book, That he had hardly escaped with his own
life, but had left his Wife behind him to try the humanity of the Scots; he
told him, He had left his Wife to a very base office. Several other things he
said, which in themselves amounted to nothing, but only expressed an
inclination to lessen the faults of the Scots, and to aggravate some
provocations that had been given them. Corbet came up full of wrath, and
brought with him many Informations against the Bishop, which at any other time
would not have been much considered; but then, it being thought necessary to
make examples of all that seemed favorable to the Covenanters, it was resolved
to turn him out of his Bishopric, and to give it to Maxwell, that had been
Bishop of Rosse in Scotland, and was indeed a Man of eminent parts, and an
excellent Preacher; but by his forwardness and aspiring he had been the unhappy
instrument of that which brought on all the disorders in Scotland.

A Pursevant was sent to bring up the Bishop of Killala; and he was accused
before the high Commission Court for those things that Corbet objected to him;
and every Man being ready to push a Man down that is falling under disgrace,
many designed to merit by aggravating his faults. But when it came to our
Bishop's turn to give his Sentence in the Court, he that was afraid of nothing
but sinning against God, did not stick to venture against the Stream: he first
read over all that was objected to the Bishop at the Bar, then he fetched his
Argument from the qualifications of a Bishop set down by S. Paul in his
Epistles to Timothy and Titus; and assumed that he found nothing in those
Articles contrary to those qualifications; nothing that touched either his Life
or Doctrine. He fortified this by showing in what manner they proceeded against
Bishops both in the Greek and Latin Churches, and so concluded in the Bishops
favor. This put many out of countenance, who had considered nothing in his
Sentence but the consequences that were drawn from the Bishop's expressions,
from which they gathered the ill disposition of his mind, so that they had gone
high in their Censures, without examining the Canons of the Church in such
Cases. But though those that gave their Votes after our Bishop, were more
moderate than those that had gone before him had been; yet the current run so
strong that none durst plainly acquit him, as our Bishop had done: So he was
deprived, fined, and imprisoned, and his Bishopric was given to Maxwell, who
enjoyed it not long. For he was stripped naked, wounded, and left among the dead,
by the Irish; but he was preserved by the Earl of Tomond, who passing that way
took care of him; so that he got to Dublin. And then his Talent of Preaching,
that had been too long neglected by him, was better employed; so that he
preached very often, and very much to the edification of his Hearers, that were
then in so great a consternation, that they needed all the comfort that he
could minister to them; and all the Spirit that he could infuse in them. He
went to the King to Oxford, and he said in my Author's hearing, That the King
had never rightly understood the innate hatred that the Irish bore to all that
professed the true Religion, till he had informed him of it. But he was so much
affected with an ill piece of News, that he heard concerning some misfortune in
the King's affairs in England, that he was some hours after found dead in his
Study. This short digression, I hope, may be forgiven me; for the person was
very extraordinary, if an unmeasured ambition had not much defaced his other
great abilities and excellent qualities.

The old degraded Bishop Adair was quickly restored to another Bishopric,
which came to be vacant upon a dismal account, which I would gladly pass over,
if I could; for the thing is but too well known. One Adderton Bishop of
Waterford, who, as was believed, had by a Symoniacal compact p^ocured such
favor, that he was recommended to that Bishopric; and had covered his own
unworthiness, as all wicked Men are apt to do, by seeming very zealous in every
thing that is acceptable to those who govern, and had been in particular very
severe on Bishop Adair; came to be accused and convicted of a crime not to be
named, that God punished with fire from Heaven; and suffered publicly for it:
He expressed so great a repentance, that Dr. Bernard, who preached his funeral
Sermon, and had waited on him in his Imprisonment, had a very charitable
opinion of the state in which he dyed. Upon this, Adair's Case was so
represented to the King, that he was provided with that Bishopric. From which
it may appear, That he was not censured so much for any guilt, as to strike a
terror in all that might express the least kindness to the Scotch Covenanters.
But our Bishop thought the degrading of a Bishop was too sacred a thing to be
done merely upon politic Considerations.

Bishop Bedell was exactly conformable to the Forms and Rules of the Church; he
went constantly to Common Prayer in his Cathedral, and often read it himself,
and assisted in it always, with great reverence and affection. He took care to
have the Public Service performed strictly according to the Rubric; so that a
Curate of another Parish being employed to read Prayers in the Cathedral, that
added somewhat to the Collects; the Bishop observing he did this once or twice,
went from his place to the Reader's Pew, and took the book out of his Hand, and
in the hearing of the Congregation suspended him for his presumption, and read
the rest of the Office himself. He preached constantly twice a Sunday in his
Cathedral on the Epistles and Gospels for the Day; and catechized always in
the Afternoon before Sermon; and he preached always twice a Year before the
Judges, when they made the Circuit. His Voice was low and mournful, but as his
matter was excellent, so there was a gravity in his looks and behavior that
struck his Auditors. He observed the Rubric so nicely, that he would do
nothing but according to it; so that in the reading the Psalms and the Anthems
he did not observe the common custom of the Minister and the People reading
the Verses by turns; for he read all himself, because the other was not
enjoined by the Rubric. As for the placing of the Communion Table by the East
wall, and the bowing to it, he never would depart from the Rule of observing
the Conformity prescribed by Law; for he said, That they were as much
Nonconformists who added of their own, as they that came short of what was
enjoined; as he that adds an Inch to a measure disowns it for a Rule, as much
as he that cuts an Inch from it: and as he was severe to him that added Words
of his own to the Collect, so he thought it was no less censurable to add Rites
to those that were prescribed. When he came within the Church, it appeared in
the composedness of his behavior, that he observed the Rule given by the
Preacher, of Keeping his Feet when he went into the House of God; but he was
not to be wrought on by the greatness of any Man, or by the Authority of any
persons example, to go out of his own way; though he could not but know that
such things were then much observed, and measures were taken of Men by these
little distinctions, in which it was thought that the zeal of Conformity
discovered it self.

There is so full an account of the tenderness with which he advised all Men,
but Churchmen in particular, to treat those that differed from them, in a
Sermon that he preached on those Words of Christ, Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly; that I am assured the Reader will well bear with the length of it.
It was preached soon after some heats that had been in the House of Commons in
the Parliament of Ireland, in which there were many Papists; and in it the
sense he had of the way of treating all differences in Religion, whether great
or small, is so well laid down, that I hope it will be looked on as no
ordinary, nor useless piece of Instruction.

IS it not a shame that our two Bodies, the Church and Commonwealth, should
exercise mortal hatreds, (or immortal rather) and being so near in place should
be so far asunder in affection? it will be said by each that other are in
fault, and perhaps it may truly be said, that both are; the one in that they
cannot endure with patience the lawful superiority of the worthier Body; the
other in that they take no care so to govern, that the governed may find it to
be for their best behoof to obey: until which time it will never be, but there
will be repining and troubles, and brangles between us. This will be done in my
Opinion, not by bolstering out and maintaining the errors and unruliness of
the lower Officers or Members of our body, but by severely punishing them; and
on both sides must be avoided such Men for Magistrates and Ministers, as seek
to dash us one against another all they may.

And would to God this were all; but is it not a shame of shames, that Men's
emulations and contentions cannot stay themselves in matters of this sort, but
the holy profession of Divinity is made fuel to a public fire; and that when
we had well hoped all had been either quenched or raked up, it should afresh be
kindled and blown up with bitter and biting Words? God help us! we had need to
attend to this Lesson of Christ, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart;
or to that of the Apostle, It behooves the servant of God not to contend, but to
be meek toward all, instructing with lenity those that be contrary affected,
waiting if at any time God will give them a better mind to see the truth, 2 Timothy 2.25.

And here give me leave ( R. W. and beloved Brethren and Sisters) to speak
freely my mind unto you: I know right well that I shall incur the reproof of
diverse, yet I will never the more for that spare to utter my Conscience; I hope
wise Men will assent or show me better. For my part, I have been long of this
mind, that many in their Sermons and Writings are to blame for their manner of
dealing with the adversaries of their Opinions, when they give Reins to their
Tongues and Pens, to railing and reproachful Speeches, and think they have done
well, when they exceed or equal them in this Trade; wherein to have the better
is indeed to be the worse: and alleging that Text for themselves, That a fool
is to be answered according to his folly; Prove. 26.5.
they do not consider that other, where such manner of answer is forbidden,
whereby the answerer becomes like him: Prove. 26.4.15.1.24.26.

And this is yet more to be blamed, because sometimes all reasons are laid by,
and nothing is soundly refuted, but only hot Words are given, yea, and with a
misconceiving, or misreporting at least, of there Opinions, and making every
thing worse than it is: which many times arises upon ambiguity of Words not
used in the like sense by both sides. What then? Do I approve of tolerations
and unions with errors and heresies? truly I wish not to live so long. And yet
as our sins are, and our folly too to fall together by the Ears about small
matters amongst our selves, there is just cause to fear it: but yet such Points
as may be reconciled, saving the truth, I see not what should move us to hold
off in them, and why we may not seek to agree in word? as we do in meaning: For
the rest, their purpose and endeavors shall deserve thanks, who, bringing them
to the fewest and narrowest terms, shall set down how far we are to join with
our dissenting Brethren, and where for ever to dissent; that so controversies
being handled without the vain flourish of swelling Words, and (like
proportions) our Opinions being set down in the least terms, Men may know what
to bend their Wits to, and where against to plant their Arguments, not, as many
do, roving always at random; but may always remember to imitate Christ's
meekness, and to deal with Arguments rather: let us not envy the Papists and
other Heretics, the glory and pre-eminence in railing, wherein the more they
excel, the more unlike they are to Christ, whose pattern is of meekness, Learn
of me, etc.

Yea, Object.
but will some Man say, This course will not stay Men from backsliding to any
error or heresy, etc. Who can keep off his enemy without shot, etc.

I. Resp. 1.
Gods Truth needs not to be graced, nor his Glory sought by my sin.

II. Resp. 2.
Again it is so perhaps in an ignorant Auditor, and at the first; but if
inquiring himself, he shall find that they or their Opinions are not so bad as
we make them to be, and would have them seem, it will be a hundred to one that
in other things too, they will not seem to be so bad as they are; and, unless I
much mistake, it is not the storm of Words, but the strength of Reasons, that
shall stay a wavering Judgment from errors, etc. when that like a tempest, is
overblown, the tide of others examples will carry other men to do as the most
do; but these like so many Anchors will stick, and not come again.

Resp. 3.
III. Besides, our Calling is to deal with errors, not to disgrace the Man with
scolding Words. It is said of Alexander, I think, when he overheard one of his
Soldiers railing lustily on Darius his enemy, he reproved him, and added,
Friend (quoth he) I entertain thee to fight against Darius, not to revile him.
Truly it may be well thought that those that take this course shall find but
small thanks at Christ's, our Captains, hands; and it is not unlike but he
would say to them, were he here on earth again, Masters, I would you should
refute Popery, and set your selves against Antichrist my enemy, with all the
discolored Sects and Heresies, that fight under his banner against me, and not
call him and his Troops all to naught.

And this is my poor Opinion concerning our dealing with the Papists
themselves, perchance differing from the practice of Men of great note in
Christ's Family, Mr. Luther and Mr. Calvin, and others; but yet we must live by
Rules, not examples; and they were Men, who perhaps by complexion, or
otherwise, were given over too much to anger, and heat: sure I am, the Rule of
the Apostle is plain, even of such as are the slaves of Satan, that we must
with lenity instruct them, waiting that when escaping out of his snare, they
should recover a sound mind to do Gods will, in the place I quoted before. 2 Timothy 2.25.


But now when Men agreeing with our selves in the main (yea and in profession
likewise enemies to Popery) shall, varying never so little from us in Points of
less consequence, be thereupon censured as favorers of Popery, and other
errors; when Mole-hills shall be made Mountains, and unbrotherly terms given:
alas! methinks this course savours not of meekness, nay it would hurt even a
good cause, thus to handle it; for where such violence is, ever there is error
to be suspected; Affection and Hate are the greatest enemies that can be to
soundness of judgment, or exactness of comprehension; he that is troubled with
passion, is not fitly disposed to judge of truth.

Besides, Is my conceit ever consonant with truth? and if I be subject to
error my self, have I forgotten so much the common condition of mankind, or am
I so much my own enemy, as to pursue with a terrible Scourge of Whipcord, or
wire, that which was worthy of some gentler lashes: for indeed he that takes
pet, and conceives indignation, that another should, I will not say, differ
from himself, but err, and be deceived, seems to proclaim war to all mankind,
and may well look himself to find small favor, but rather to endure the Law
that he had made, and be bated with his own rod.

To make an end of this point, which I would to God, I had not had an occasion
to enter into: if this precept of our Lord Jesus Christ be to be heard, these
things should not be so; if it were heard, they would not be so; and
undoubtedly, if it be not heard, they that are faulty shall bear their
judgment, whosoever they be. Mean while they shall deserve great praise of all
that love Peace, who shall maintain quietness, even with some injury to
themselves: And in a good Cause do still endeavor to show forth the virtue of
Christ, that has called us, as the Apostle Peter exhorts us at large from
this example of Christ, in his first Epistle, 21.20, 21, 22, 23. It is the
glory of a Man to pass by an offense. Injuries, if by regarding them a man lay
himself open to them, Prove. 19.11.
wound and hurt us: if they be contemned, or born off with the Shield of
Meekness, they glance off, or rebound unto the party that offers them.

Finally, he that in matters of controversy shall bring meekness to his
defense, undoubtedly he shall overcome in the manner of handling; and if he
bring truth also, he shall prevail at last in the matter.

This is a part of one of his Sermons; of which I have seen but very few; and
because they are not sufficient to give a full Character of him, I have not
published them: But I will add to this two parcells of another Sermon that is
already in print, and was published by Dr. Bernard, the Text is that of the
Revelation 18.4. Come out of her (Babylon) my people: And the design of it is
to prove that the Sea of Rome is the Babylon meant in that Text; but in this he
mixes an Apology for some that were in that Communion; and I doubt not but he
had his Friend P. Paulo in his thoughts when he spoke it: The passage is
remarkable, and therefore I will set it down.

WHerein observe first, (he calls his people to come out of Babylon,) a plain
Argument that there are many not only good Moral and Civil honest Men there,
but good Christians, not redeemed only, but in the possession of the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ; which may be confirmed by these reasons.

First, There is amongst these that are under the tyranny of the Romish
Babylon, the Sacrament of entrance into the Covenant of Grace; Baptism, by
which those that are partakers thereof are made Members of Christ, the Children
of God, and Heirs of Eternal Life: And these that have but this Seal of God's
Covenant, ( viz. Infants) are no small and contemptible part of God's people,
though as yet, they cannot hear this Voice of Christ calling out of Babylon;
besides this there is a publication of the tenure of the Covenant of Grace to
such as are of Years, though not so openly and purely as it might and ought,
yet so as the grounds of the Catechism are preached, sin is showed, Christ's
redemption (or the Story of it) is known, John 3.18.36.5.24.
Faith in him is called for, and this Faith is by the Grace of God, wrought in
some: For the Word of God and his Calling is not fruitless, but like the rain
returns not in vain; and where true Faith is, John 3. ult.
Men are translated from death to life, he that believes in the Son, has
everlasting life.

Some Men perhaps may object, the Faith which they describe and call by this
name of Catholic Faith, is none other but such as the Devils may have.

I answer, Religion is not Logic, He that cannot give a true definition of the
Soul, is not for that, without a Soul; so he that defines not Faith truly, yet
may have true Faith: Learned Divines are not all of accord touching the
definition of it; But if (as by the whole stream of the Scripture it should
seem) it be a trust and cleaving unto God; this Faith many there have, the Love
of our Lord Jesus Christ is wrought in many there; John 14.21.23.
now he that loves Christ is loved of him, and of the Father also; and because
the proof of true love to Christ is the keeping of his Sayings, there, are good
Works, and according to the measure of knowledge great conscience of obedience.

Yea, will some Man say, But that which marreth all is the Opinion of merit and
satisfaction. Indeed that is the School Doctrine, but the Conscience enlightened
to know it self, will easily act that part of the Publican, who smote his
Breast, and said, God be merciful to me a sinner. I remember a good advice of
one of that side: Let others (says he) that have committed few sins, and done
many good works satisfy for their sins; But whatsoever thou do, refer it to
the Honor of God: so as whatsoever good come from thee, thou resolve to do it
to please God, accounting thy works too little to satisfy for thy sins: For as
for thy sins thou must offer Christ's Works, his Pains and Wounds, and his
death it self to him, together with that love of his out of which he endured
these things for thee. These are available for the satisfaction for thy sins.
But thou whatsoever thou do or suffer, offer it not for thy sins to God,
for but his love and good pleasure, wishing to find the more grace with him,
whereby thou may do more, greater and more acceptable Works to him; let the
love of God then be to thee the cause of well-living, and the hope of
well-working. Thus he, and I doubt not but many there be on that side that
follow this counsel; herewith I shall relate the Speech of a wise and discreet
Gentleman, my neighbor in England, who lived and dyed a Recusant; he demanded
one time, What was the worst Opinion that we could impute to the Church of
Rome? It was said, There was none more than this of our merits: De justifica.
lib. 5. cap. 7.
And that Cardinal Bellarmine not only does uphold them, but says, we may
trust in them, so it be done soberly; and says, they deserve Eternal life, not
only in respect of God's Promises and Covenant, but also in regard of the Work
it self: Whereupon he answered, Bellarmine was a learned Man, and could perhaps
defend what he wrote by learning; But for his part he trusted to be saved only
by the merits of his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and as for good Works he
would do all that he could; Et valiant quantum valere possint.

To proceed: In or under the Obedience of Rome there is Persecution, and that
is a better mark of Christ's people, then Bellarmine's Temporal felicity. All
that will live godly in Christ Jesus (says the Apostle) shall suffer
persecution; ye shall be hated of all Men for my Names sake, (says our
Savior) and so are all they on that side that are less superstitious than
others, or dare speak of redress of abuses; yea, there is Martyrdom for a free
opposing Men's Traditions, Image-worshippers, Purgatory, and the like.

Add, That in obedience to this call of Christ, there do some come daily from
thence; and in truth how could our Savior call his people from thence if he
had none there? How could the Apostles say that Antichrist, from whose
captivity they are called, shall sit in the Temple of God, (since that
Jerusalem is finally and utterly desolated) unless the same Apostle otherwhere
declaring himself, had showed us his meaning, that the Church is the House of
God: and again, 1 Timothy 3.15.
ye are the Temple of the living God, and the Temple of God is Holy, which are
ye. It will be said that there are on that side many gross errors, many open
Idolatries, and Superstitions, so as those which live there must needs be
either partakers of them, and like minded, or else very Hypocrites. But many
errors and much ignorance, so it be not affected, may stand with true Faith in
Christ; and when there is true Contrition for one sin, (that is, because it
displeases God) there is a general and implicit repentance for all unknown
sins. God's Providence in the general revolt of the ten Tribes, when Elias
thought himself left alone, had reserved seven thousand, 1 Kings 19.18.
that had not bowed to the Image of Baal: and the like may be conceived here,
since especially, the Idolatry practiced under the obedience of Mystical
Babylon, is rather in false and will worship of the true God, and rather
commended, as profitable, than enjoined as absolutely necessary, and the
corruptions there maintained are rather in a superfluous addition than
retraction in any thing necessary to salvation.

Neither let that hard term of hypocrisy be used of the infirmity, and
sometime, of humble and peaceable carriage of some that oppose not common
errors, nor wrestle with the greater part of Men, but do follow the multitude,
reserving a right knowledge to themselves: and sometimes, (by the favor which
God gives them to find where they live,) obtain better conditions than others
can. We call not John the beloved Disciple an hypocrite, because he was known
to the High Priest, John 18.15, 16.
and could procure Peter to be let to see the arraignment of our Savior: nor
call we Peter himself one that for fear denied him; much less Daniel and his
companions, that by Suit, obtained of Melzar their keeper that they might feed
upon Pulse, and not be defiled with the King of Babel 's meat, Dan. 1. v. 16.2.
and these knew themselves to be captives and in Babel. But in the new Babel
how many thousands do we think there are that think otherwise; that they are in
the true Catholic Church of God, the name whereof this harlot has usurped:
And although they acknowledge that where they live there are many abuses, and
that the Church has need of reformation, yet there they were born, and they
may not abandon their Mother in her sickness. Those that converse more inwardly
with Men of Conscience, on that side, do know that these are speeches in
secret; which how they will be justified against the commands of Christ, (come
out of her, my people) belongs to another place to consider. For the purpose we
have now in hand, I dare not but account these the people of God, though they
live very dangerously under the captivity of Babylon, as did Daniel, Mordechai,
Hester, Nehemiah, and Ezra, and many Jews more, notwithstanding both Cyrus's
Commission, and the Prophets command to depart.

This point may give some light in a Question that is on foot among learned and
good Men at this day, Whether the Church of Rome be a true Church or no? where
I think surely if the matter be rightly declared, for the terms, there will
remain no question. As thus, whether Babylon pretending to be the Church of
Rome, yea the Catholic Church, be so or not? or this, Whether the people of
Christ that are under that Captivity be a true Church or no? either of both
ways if declared in these terms, the matter will be soon resolved.

Except some Man will perhaps still object, Object.
Though there be a people of God, yet they can be no true Church, for they have
no Priesthood which is necessary to the Constitution of a Church, Epistola 69.
as S. Cyprian describes it, Plebs Sacerdoti adunata, people joined to their
Priest: They have no Priesthood, being by the very form of their Ordination,
Sacrificers for the quick and the dead.

Answ.
I answer, under correction of better judgments, they have the Ministry of
Reconciliation by the Commission which is given at their Ordination; being the
same which our Savior left in his Church, Joh. 20.23.
Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, whose sins ye retain they are retained.

As for the other power to sacrifice, if it be any otherwise than the
celebrating the Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice once offered upon the
Cross, it is no part of the Priesthood or Ministry of the New Testament, but a
superfluous addition thereunto, which yet works not to the destruction of
that which is lawfully conferred otherwise. This Doctrine I know not how it can
offend any, unless it be in being too Charitable, and that I am sure is a good
fault, and serves well for a sure mark of Christ's Sheep, and may have a very
good operation to help Christ's people out of Babel: By this, Joh. 13.35.
says he, shall Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Charity one to
another. But they call us Heretics, Miscreants, Dogs, etc. and persecute us
with more deadly hatred than Jews and Turks; yea, this is Babylon, and perhaps
some of God's People in it that are misinformed of us. Thus did Saul for a
while, yet a chosen vessel to bear Christ's Name over the World. But let us
maintain our Charity to them, as we are wont to bear with the weakness of our
Friends or Children, when in hot Fevers or Phrensies, they miscal us. Let us
remember if they be Christ's people, how little loving soever they be to us,
they must be our beloved Brethren, and this of the Persons.

To this I shall add the conclusion of that excellent Sermon in which there is
such a mixture both of serious Piety and of an undissembled sincerity, that I
hope the Reader will not be displeased with me for laying it in his way.


NOW should I come to the Motives from the Danger of sin, and of partaking in
punishment. But the handling of these would require a long time, let me rather
make some Application of that which has been said already. And First and most
properly to those that this Scripture most concerns and is directed unto: The
People of God holden in the Captivity of the Roman Babylon: But alas they are
not here, for this is one part of their Captivity, that they are kept, not only
from hearing the voice of the Servants of Christ, or of S. John the beloved
Disciple, but of himself speaking here from Heaven; and since they are so
contented, what remedy may there be for those that are thus bewitched, unless
you ( My L. L's. and Brethren) will be contented to become faithful Feoffees in
trust, to convey this voice and Message of Christ unto them: and by my request
you shall be pleased to do it, with a great deal of Love. As this President of
our Lord himself does lead you as to Brethren, and, as you hope, faithful
People, loath to sin against him, and desirous to please him in all things. Tell
them then, that it is acknowledged by their own Doctors: That Rome is Babylon,
and it is averred, That this is the present Papal Monarchy, that out of this
they must depart by the Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ's own Voice, under
pain of being accessory to all her sins, and liable to all her punishments:
wish them to use the Liberty to read the Holy Scripture, and to come out of the
blind Obedience of Men's Precepts and Traditions; be pleased to tell them
further, that others may have some color of excuse, that live in such places
where they may not discover themselves without danger of the loss of their
Goods, Honor or Life; they may do it here, not only with safety, but with
Reputation and Profit: entreat them to beware lest they make themselves
extremely Culpable, not only of partaking with the former Idolatries,
Extortions, Massacres, Powder Treasons, and King-killings of that bloody City,
but the new detestable Doctrines, Derogatory to the blood of Christ, which
moderate Men even of her own Subjects detest: But which she, for fear it should
discontent her own Creatures, and devoted Darlings will not disavow: O if they
would fear the plagues of Babylon, and that of all others the fearfulest, 2
These. 2.11.
Blindness of Mind, and strong delusions to believe Lies, that they may be
damned that believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. But
you hope better things of them, accompanying Salvation; and this Message of our
Lord Jesus Christ, if you will be pleased to deliver, accompanying it with
those General and common goods of Charity and Meekness, Integrity, good
Example, and the special furtherance, which your Callings and Places in State,
Church or Family can give it, doubtless to Christ's people, it will not be
uneffectual.

Blessed be God that has long ago stirred up the Spirits of our Princes, Ez^^
1.1.
like Cyrus to give liberty to God's People to go out of Babylon, and to give
large Patents, C. 6.3. and 7.12.
with Darius, and Artaxerxes, for the building of the Temple, and establishing
the Service of God.

And blessed be God, and his Majesty that has sent us another Nehemiah, to
build up the Walls of Jerusalem, Neh. 2.18.
and to procure that the Portion of the Levites should be given them. Give me
leave ( Right Honorable) to put you in mind, C. 10.37. and 13.10.
That this also belongs to your Care, to cooperate with Christ in bringing
his People out of the Romish Captivity. And if to help away a poor Captive out
of Turkey has been Honorable to some Public Ministers: What shall it be to
help to the enlarging of so many thousand Souls out of the bondage of Men's
Traditions, and gaining to his Majesty so many entire Subjects. Your wisdom (my
Lord) is such, as it needs not to be advised; and your Zeal as it needs not
to to be stired up: yet pardon me one Word, for the purpose of helping Christ's
People out of Babylon.

They are called by himself often in Scripture, His Sheep; and verily, as in
many other, so in this they are like to Sheep; which being cooped up in a
narrow Pent, though they find some pressure, and the Passage be set open, are
not forward to come out; unless they be put on, but strain Courtesy, which
should begin; yet when they are once out with a joyful frisk they exult in
their Freedom, yea, and when a few of the foremost lead, the rest follow; I
shall not need to make Application: Do according to your wisdom in your place,
and Christ whose Work it is shall be with you, and further your endeavors.

The like I say unto you the rest of my Lords, Fathers and Brethren, help your
Friends, Followers, and Tenants out of Babylon, what you may in your places;
you have the Examples of Abraham, Joshua, Cornelius, praised in Scripture for
propagating the Knowledge and Fear of God in their Families and Commands, with
the report of God's accepting it, and rewarding it, and this to the use of
others.

But shall you not carry away something for your selves also; yes verily, take
to your selves this Voice of our Savior, Come out of Babylon; you will say we
have done it already, God be thanked we are good Christians, good Protestants,
some of us Preachers and that call upon others to come out of Babylon: But if
S. Paul prayed the converted Corinthians to be reconciled to God; 2 Cor. 5.2.
And S. John writing to Believers, sets down the Record of God touching his
Son, 1 John 5.13.
That they might believe in the Name of the Son of God; Why may not I exhort in
Christ's Name and Words, even those that are come out of Babylon, to come out
of her, Qui monet ut f^^ias, etc. He that persuades another to that which he
does already, in persuading incourageth him, and puts him on in his
performance; but if there be any yet unresolved, and halting or hanging between
two, (as the people did in Elias time) that present their bodies at such
meetings as this is, 1 Kings 18.21.
when their hearts are perhaps at Rome, or no where; If any are in some points
rightly informed and cleared, and in others doubtful, to such Christ speaks,
Come out of her, my people, press on by Prayer, Conference, Reading, (if
Christ's Voice be to be heard) If Rome be Babylon, Come out of her.

And let it be spoken with as little offense as it is delight: we that seem to
be the forwardest in Reformation, are not yet so come out of Babylon, as that
we have not many shameful badges of her Captivity, witness her Impropriations,
being indeed plain Church-robberies, devised to maintain her Colonies of idle
and irregular Regulars; idle to the Church and State, zealous and pragmatical
to support and defend her power, pomp, and pride, by whom they subsisted:
witness her Dispensations, or dissipations rather, of all Canonical Orders;
bearing down all with her Non obstante, her Symoniacal and Sacrilegious
Venality of holy things, her manifold Extortions in the exercise of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which we have not wholly banished: Let each of us
therefore account it as spoken to himself, ( Come out of her my people.)

In this Journey let us not trouble and cast stumbling blocks before God's
people, that are ready to come out; or hinder one another with Dissentions in
matters either inexplicable, or unprofitable: Let it have some pardon, if some
be even so forward in flying from Babylon, as they fear to go back, to take
their own goods for haste: and let it not be blamed or uncharitably censured,
if some come in the Rear, and would leave none of Christ's people behind them:
Et qui tardius ambulant, non sunt relinquendi.

S. Aug. in Epistola 1. Joh. Tract. 5.


No man reaches his hand to another whom he would lift out of a Ditch, but he
stoops to him. Our ends immediate are not the same, but yet they meet in one
final intention; The one hates Babylon, and the other loves and pities Christ's
people: The one believes the Angel that cast the Millstone into the Sea; in the
end of this Chapter, with that Word ( so shall Babylon rise no more.) The other
fears the threatening of our Savior against such as scandalize any of the
little ones believing in him, that it is better for such a one to have a
Millstone hanged upon his neck, and be cast into the Sea himself.

Finally, let us all beseech our Lord Jesus Christ to give us Wisdom and
opportunity to further his work, and to give success unto the same himself, to
hasten the judgment of Babylon, to bring his people out of this bondage, that
we with them and all his Saints in the Church Triumphant, Matt. 18.6.
may thereupon sing a joyful Hallelujah, as is expressed in the next Chapter.

Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto the LORD our GOD, Amen.
Hallelujah.

He preached very often in his Episcopal habit, but not always, and used it
seldom in the Afternoon; nor did he love the pomp of a Quire, nor Instrumental
Music; which he thought filled the ear with too much pleasure, and carried
away the mind from the serious attention to the matter, which is indeed the
singing with grace in the Heart, and the inward melody with which God is
chiefly pleased. And when another Bishop justified these things, because they
served much to raise the affections; he answered, That in order to the raising
the affections, those things that tended to edification ought only to be used:
And thought it would be hard otherwise to make stops; for upon the same
pretense an infinity of Rites might be brought in. And the sense he had of the
excesses of superstition, from what he had observed during his long stay in
Italy, made him judge it necessary to watch carefully against the beginnings of
that disease, which is like a green Sickness in Religion. He never used the
Common Prayer in his Family; for he thought it was intended to be the solemn
Worship of Christians in their Public Assemblies, and that it was not so
proper for private Families. He was so exact an observer of Ecclesiastical
Rules, that he would perform no part of his Function out of his own Diocese,
without obtaining the Ordinaries leave for it; so that being in Dublin, when
his Wife's Daughter was to be married to Mr. Clogy, (that is much more the
Author of this Book than I am) and they both desired to be blessed by him, he
would not do it till he first took out a License for it in the Archbishop of
Dublin's Consistory.

So far I have prosecuted the Relation of his most exemplary discharge of his
Episcopal Function; reserving what is more personal and particular to the end
where I shall give his Character. I now come to the conclusion of his life,
which was indeed suitable to all that had gone before. But here I must open one
of the bloodiest Scenes, that the Sun ever shone upon, and represent a Nation
all covered with Blood, that was in full peace, under no fears nor
apprehensions, enjoying great plenty, and under an easy yoke, under no
oppression in Civil matters, nor persecution upon the account of Religion: For
the Bishops and Priests of the Roman Communion enjoyed not only an impunity,
but were almost as public in the use of their Religion, as others were in that
which was established by Law; so that they wanted nothing but Empire, and a
power to destroy all that differed from them. And yet on a sudden this happy
Land was turned to be a Field of Blood. Their Bishops resolved in one
particular to fulfill the Obligation of the Oath they took at their Consecration
of persecuting all Heretics to the utmost of their power; and their Priests,
that had their breeding in Spain, had brought over from thence the true Spirit
of their Religion, which is ever breathing cruelty, together with a tincture of
the Spanish temper, that had appeared in the conquest of the West Indies, and
so they thought a Massacre was the surest way to work, and intended that the
Natives of Ireland; should vie with the Spaniards for what they had done in
America.

The Conjuncture seemed favorable; for the whole Isle of Britain was so
imbroiled, that they reckoned they should be able to master Ireland, before any
Forces could be sent over to check the progress of their butchery. The Earl of
Strafford had left Ireland some considerable time before this. The Parliament
of England was rising very high against the King; and though the King was then
gone to Scotland, it was rather for a present quieting of things that he gave
all up to them, than that he gained them to his Service. So they laid hold of
this conjuncture, to infuse it into the people, That this was the proper time
for them to recover their ancient Liberty, and shake off the English Yoke, and
to possess themselves of those Estates that had belonged to their Ancestors:
And to such as had some rests of Duty to the King it was given out, That what
they were about was warranted by his Authority, and for his service. A Seal was
cut from another Charter, and put to a forged Commission, giving warrant to
what they were going about. And because the King was then in Scotland, they
made use of a Scotch Seal. They also pretended that the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms being either in rebellion against the King, or very near it, That the
English of Ireland would be generally in the interest of the English
Parliament; so that it was said, That they could not serve the King better than
by making themselves Masters in Ireland, and then declaring for the King
against his other rebellious Subjects.

These things took universally with the whole Nation; and the Conspiracy was
cemented by many Oaths and Sacraments, and in conclusion all things were found
to be so ripe that the day was set in which they should every where break out;
and the Castle of Dublin being then as well stored with a great Magazine, which
the Earl of Strafford had laid up for the Army, that he intended to have
carried into Scotland, had not the pacification prevented it, as it was weakly
kept by a few careless Warders; who might have been easily surprised: it was
resolved that they should seize on it, which would have furnished them with
Arms and Ammunition, and have put the Metropolis, and very probably the whole
Island in their hands. But, though this was so well laid, that the execution
could not have mist, in all humane appearance; and though it was kept so
secret, that there was not the least suspicion of any design on foot, till the
Night before, and then one that was among the chief of the managers of it, out
of kindness to an Irishman, that was become a Protestant, communicated the
Project to him: The other went and discovered it to the Lords Justices; and by
this means not only the Castle of Dublin was preserved, but in effect Ireland
was saved. For in Dublin there was both a shelter for such as were stripped and
turned out of all they had, to fly to, and a place of rendezvous, where they
that escaped before the storm had reached to them, met to consult about their
preservation. But though Dublin was thus secured, the rest of the English and
Scotch in Ireland, particularly in Vlster, fell into the hands of those
merciless Men, who reckoned it no small piece of mercy, when they stripped people
naked, and let them go with their lives. But the vast numbers that were
butchered by them, which one of their own Writers in a Discourse that he
printed some years after, in order to the animating them to go on, boasts to
have exceeded two hundred thousand, and the barbarous cruelties they used in
murdering them, are things of so dreadful a nature, that I cannot easily go on
with so dismal a Narrative, but must leave it to the Historians. I shall say no
more of it than what concerns our Bishop: It may be easily imagined how much he
was struck with that fearful storm, that was breaking on every hand of him,
though it did not yet break in upon himself. There seemed to be a secret guard
set about his House: for though there was nothing but Fire, Blood and
Desolation round about him; yet the Irish were so restrained, as by some hidden
power, that they did him no harm for many Weeks: His House was in no condition
to make any resistance, so that it was not any apprehension of the opposition
that might be made them, that bound them up. Great numbers of his Neighbors
had also fled to him for shelter: He received all that came, and shared every
thing he had so with them, that all things were common among them; and now that
they had nothing to expect from Men, he invited them all to turn with him to
God, and to prepare for that death, which they had reason to look for every
day; so that they spent their time in Prayers and Fasting, which last was now
like to be imposed on them by necessity. The Rebels expressed their esteem for
him in such a manner that he had reason to ascribe it wholly to that overruling
power, that stills the raging of the Seas, and the tumult of the people: they
seemed to be overcome with his exemplary conversation among them, and with the
tenderness and charity that he had upon all occasions expressed for them, and
they often said, He should be the last Englishman that should be put out of
Ireland. He was the only Englishman in the whole County of Cavan that was
suffered to live in his own House without disturbance; not only his House, and
all the out-Buildings, but the Church and Churchyard were full of people; and
many that a few days before lived in great ease and much plenty, were now glad
of a heap of Straw or Hay to lie upon, and of some boiled Wheat to support
Nature: and were every day expecting when those Swords, that had according to
the Prophetic Phrase, drunk up so much Blood, should likewise be satiated with
theirs. They did now eat the Bread of Sorrow, and mingled their Cups with their
Tears. The Bishop continued to encourage them to trust in God, and in order to
that he preached to them the first Lords Day after this terrible calamity had
brought them about him, on the Third Psalm, which was penned by David when
there was a general insurrection of the people against him under his unnatural
Son Absalom; and he applied it all to their condition. He had a doleful
Assembly before him, an Auditory all melting in Tears: It requires a Soul of an
equal elevation to his, to imagine how he raised up their Spirits, when he
spoke to these Words, But thou, O Lord, art a Shield for me, my glory, and the
lifter up of my Head. I laid me down and slept: I awaked, for the Lord
sustained me. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of the people, that have
set themselves against me, round about. And to the conclusion of the Psalm,
Salvation belongs unto the Lord: thy blessing is upon thy people. The next
Lords day, hearing of the Scoffings, as well as the Cruelty, of the Irish, he
preached on these Words in Micah, Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I
fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth
to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy
shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord
thy God. By these means, and through the blessing of God upon them, they
encouraged themselves in God, and were prepared for the worst that their
enemies could do to them.

The Irish themselves were at a stand; The miscarriage of the design on Dublin
Castle was a sad disappointment: they were unarmed, they had no Treasure, no
Fleet, nor foreign support; and though there were some good Officers among
them, yet they found the Soldiers to be as cowardly as the English Inhabitants
felt them to be cruel: For as those two Characters are observed generally to
meet in the same person; so it was very visible upon this occasion, since a
very small Body of good Men, could have gone over the whole Kingdom, and have
reduced it in fewer Months than it cost Years. Their chief hope was, the only
thing in which they were not disappointed, That the Disputes between the King
and the Parliament of England, would make Supplies come over so slow, that they
might thereby gain much time; and in conclusion they might hope for a more
favorable conjuncture. Those of the County of Cavan seemed to see their
error, and apprehend their danger: so they came to the Bishop, as the fittest
Man to interpose for them; he was willing to oblige those on the one hand, at
whose mercy he was, and on the other hand to bring them to such a submission,
as might at least procure some breathing time to the poor English, and to those
few Houses that stood out, but were falling within doors under an Enemy, that
was more irresistible than the Irish: For they were much straightened, their
Provisions failing them. The Petition, that they signed and sent up to the
Lords Justices and the Council, was too well penned to come from those that set
their hands to it. It was drawn by the Bishop, who put their matter in his own
Words; therefore I shall insert it here, though it gives the best colors to
their Rebellion of any of all their Papers that I ever saw.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Justices and Council, The humble
Remonstrance of the Gentry and Commonalty of the County of Cavan, of their
Grievances common with other parts of this Kingdom of Ireland.
WHereas we, his Majesty's loyal Subjects of his Highness Kingdom of Ireland,
have of long time groaned under many grievous pressures, occasioned by the
rigorous Government of such placed over us, as respected more the advancement
of their own private Fortunes, than the Honor of His Majesty, or the welfare
of us his Subjects; whereof we in humble manner declared our selves to His
Highness by our Agents sent from the Parliament, the representative body of
this Kingdom: Notwithstanding which, we find our selves of late threatened with
far greater and more grievous Vexations, either with captivity of our
Consciences, our losing of our lawful Liberties, or utter expulsion from our
Native Seats, without any just Ground given on our parts, to alter his
Majesty's goodness so long continued unto us; of all which we find great cause
of fears in the proceeding of our Neighbor Nations, and do see it already
attempted upon by certain Petitioners for the like course to be taken in this
Kingdom, for the effecting thereof, in a compulsory way, so as Rumors have
caused fears of Invasion from other parts, to the dissolving the Bond of mutual
agreement, which hitherto has been held inviolable between the several
Subjects of this Kingdom; and whereby all other his Majesty's Dominions have
been linkt in one. For the preventing therefore of such evils growing upon us
in this Kingdom; we have, for the preservation of his Majesty's Honor, and our
own Liberties, thought fit to take into our Hands, for his Highnesses use and
Service, such Forts, and other places of Strength as coming into the possession
of others might prove disadvantagious, and tend to the utter undoing the
Kingdom. And we do hereby declare, That herein we harbor not the least thought
of disloyalty toward his Majesty, or purpose any hurt to any of his Highnesses
Subjects in their Possession, Goods or Liberty: only we desire that your
Lordships will be pleased to make remonstrance to his Majesty, for us, of all
our Grievances, and just Fears, that they may be removed, and such a course
settled by the advice of the Parliament of Ireland, whereby the Liberty of our
Consciences may be secured unto us, and we eased of other Burdens in Civil
Government. As for the mischiefs and inconveniences that have already happened
through the disorder of the common sort of people, against the English
Inhabitants, or any other; we with the Noblemen, and Gentlemen, and such others
of the several Counties of this Kingdom, are most willing and ready to use our
and their best endeavors in causing restitution and satisfaction to be made as
in part we have already done.

An answer hereunto is most humbly desired, with such present expedition as may
by your Lordships be thought most convenient for avoiding the inconvenience of
the barbarousness and uncivility of the Commonalty, who have committed many
outrages without any order, consenting, or privity of ours. All which we leave
to your Lordships most grave Wisdom.

And we shall humbly pray, etc.


But this came to nothing: while these things were in agitation, the titular
Bishop of Kilmore came to Cavan; his name was Swiney, he was like his name, for
he often wallowed in his own Vomit. He had a Brother, whom the Bishop had
converted, and had entertained him in his House, till he found out a way of
subsistence for him. He pretended that he came only to protect the Bishop, so
he desired to be admitted to lodge in his House, and assured him that he would
preserve him. But the Bishop hearing of this, writ the following Letter in
Latin to him; which will be found at the end of this Book, and is indeed a
style fit for one of the most eloquent of the Roman Authors. See at the end
Numb. 4.
Here I shall give a Translation of it in English.

Reverend Brother,
I Am sensible of your civility in offering to protect me by your presence in
the midst of this tumult; and upon the like occasion I would not be wanting to
do the like charitable office to you: but there are many things that hinder me
from making use of the favor you now offer me. My House is strait, and there
is a great number of miserable people of all Ranks, Ages, and of both Sexes,
that have fled hither as to a Sanctuary; besides that some of them are sick,
among whom my own Son is one. But that which is beyond all the rest, is the
difference of our way of worship: I do not say of our Religion, for I have ever
thought, and have published it in my Writings, that we have one common
Christian Religion. Under our present miseries we comfort our selves with the
reading of the Holy Scriptures, with daily Prayers, which we offer up to God in
our vulgar Tongue, and with the singing of Psalms; and since we find so little
truth among Men, we rely on the truth of God, and on his assistance. These
things would offend your company, if not your self; nor could others be
hindered, who would pretend that they came to see you, if you were among us;
and under that color those murderers would break in upon us, who after they
have robbed us of all that belongs to us, would in conclusion think they did
God good service by our slaughter. For my own part, I am resolved to trust to
the Divine Protection. To a Christian, and a Bishop, that is now almost
seventy, no death for the cause of Christ can be bitter: on the contrary,
nothing is more desirable. And though I ask nothing for my self alone, yet if
you will require the people under an Anathema, not to do any other acts of
violence to those whom they have so often beaten, spoiled and stripped, it will be
both acceptable to God, honorable to your self, and happy to the people, if
they obey you: But if not, consider that God will remember all that is now
done. To whom, Reverend Brother, I do heartily commend you.

Yours in Christ, Will. Kilmore.
November 2. 1641. Endorsed thus, To my Reverend and Loving Brother, D. Swiney.




This Letter commends it self so much, that I need say nothing but wish my
Reader to see where he can find such another, writ on such an occasion, with so
much Spirit, as well as Piety and Discretion: It was the last he ever writ, and
was indeed a conclusion well becoming such a Pen. It had at that time some
effect, for the Bishop gave him no further disturbance till about five Weeks
after this, so that from the 23. of October, which was the dismal day in which
the Rebellion broke out, till the 18. of December following, he, together with
all that were within his Walls, enjoyed such quiet, that if it was not in all
Points a miracle, it was not far from one; and it seemed to be an
accomplishment of those Words, A thousand shall fall on thy side, and ten
thousand at thy Right Hand; but it shall not come nigh thee; there shall no
evil befall thee; for he shall give his Angels charge over thee. But to the
former Letter I shall add the last Paper of Spiritual advice and direction that
ever the Bishop writ; which he did at the desire of one Mrs Dillan, that was a
zealous and devout Protestant, but had been fatally deluded in her widowhood by
Mr. Dillan Son to the Earl of Roscommon, taking him to be a Protestant, and had
married him, but enjoyed her self very little after that: for though he used no
violence to her, or her Children by her former Husband, in the point of
Religion; yet he bred up his Children by her in his own Superstition, and he
was now engaged in the Rebellion. So that she had at this time a vast addition
to her former sorrows upon her; and therefore desired that the Bishop, whose
Neighbor and constant Hearer she had been, would send her such Instructions in
this sad calamity, as might both direct and support her. Upon which he writ the
following Paper.

YOU desire, as I am informed (dear Sister in Christ Jesus) that I would send
you some short Memorial, to put you in mind how to carry your self in this
sorrowful time. I will do it willingly; the more, because with one and the same
labor, I shall both satisfy you, and recollect my own thoughts also, to the
like performance of mine own duty, and bethinking my self how I might best
accomplish it, there came to my mind that short Rule of our Life, which the
Apostle mentions in his Epistle to Titus, and whereof you have been a diligent
hearer in the School of Grace, where he reduces the whole practice of
Christianity unto three Heads, of living Soberly, justly, and Godly; This last
directing our carriage toward God, the middle most toward our Neighbor, and
the foremost toward our Selves Now since this is a direction for our whole
Life, it seems to me that we have no more to do at any time, but to conn this
Lesson more perfectly, with some particular application of such parts of it, as
are most suitable to the present occasions. And as to Sobriety first, (under
which the Virtues of Humility, Modesty, Temperance, Chastity, and Contentedness
are contained) since this is a time, wherein, as the Prophet says, The Lord of
Hosts calls to weeping and mourning, and pulling off the Hair, and girding
with Sackcloth, you shall, by my advice, conform your self to those, that by
the Hand of God suffer such things. Let your apparel and Dress be mournful, as
I doubt not but that your Mind is; your Diet sparing and course, rather than
full and liberal; frame your self to the indifferency, whereof the Apostle
speaks, In whatsoever state you shall be, therewith to be content; to be
full, and to be hungry; to abound and to want. Remember now that which is the
Lot of others, you know not how soon it may be your own. Learn to despise, and
defy, the vain and falsely called wealth of this World, whereof you now see, we
have so casual and uncertain a possession.

This for Sobriety, the first part of the Lesson pertaining to your self.

Now for Justice, which respects others (and contains the Virtues of Honor
to Superiors, discreet and equal government of Inferiors, peaceableness to all,
Meekness, Mercy, just dealing in matters of getting and spending, Gratitude,
Liberality, just Speech and desires) God's Judgments being in the Earth, the
Inhabitants of the World should learn Righteousness, as the Prophet speaks:
Call to mind therefore and bethink you, if in any of these you have failed, and
turn your Feet to God's Testimonies; certainly these times are such, wherein
you may be afflicted, and say with the Psalmist, Horror has taken hold of me,
and Rivers of Tears run down mine Eyes, because they keep not thy Laws.
Rebelling against Superiors, Misleading, not only by Example, but by
Compulsion, Inferiors, laying their Hand to them, that were at peace with them,
unjustly spoiling and unthankfully requiting, those that had showed them
kindness, no Faith nor Truth in their Promises; Judge by the way, of the School
that teaches Christ thus; are these his doings? as for those that suffer, I am
well assured, I shall not need to inform you, or stir you up to mercy and
compassion. That which is done in this kind, is done to Christ himself, and
shall be put upon account in your reckoning, and rewarded accordingly at his
glorious appearance.

The last and principal part of our Lesson remains, which teaches how to
behave our selves Godly, or religiously; (to this belong, First, the Duties of
Gods inward Worship, as Fear, Love, and Faith in God; then outward, as
Invocation, the holy use of his Word and Sacraments, Name and Sabbaths). The
Apostle makes it the whole End and Work for which we were set in this World, to
seek the Lord; yet in public affliction, we are specially invited thereto, as
it is written of Iehoshaphat, when a great multitude came to invade him, He set
his Face to seek the Lord, and called the people to a solemn fast: So the
Church professes in the Prophet Isaiah, In the way of thy Judgments Lord we
have waited for thee, the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the
remembrance of thee. With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, yea with my
Spirit within me will I seek thee early. In this public Calamity therefore it
is our duty, to turn to him that smites us: and to humble our selves under his
mighty Hand, to conceive a reverend and Religious fear toward him, that only,
by turning away his countenance, can thus trouble us, against that of Man,
which can do no more but kill the Body.

Again, to renew our love to our heavenly Father, that now offers himself to
us, as to Children, and to give a proof of that Love that we bear to our
Savior, in the keeping of his Sayings, hating in comparison of him, and
competition with him, Father, Mother, Children, Goods, and Life it self; which
is the condition, and proof of his Disciples; and above all to receive, and to
reinforce our Faith and Affiance, which is now brought unto the trial of the
fiery Furnace, and of the Lions Den; O that it might be found to our honor,
praise, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. In the mean space, even
now, let us be partakers of Christ's Sufferings, and hear him from Heaven
encouraging us, Be thou faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life.

Touching Prayer, we have this gracious invitation, Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee; the example of all Gods Saints, and of our
Savior in his agony; to this belong the humble confession of our Sins, with
earnest request of Pardon; the complaint of our Misery, and danger, with
request of succor and protection; we have besides the intercession of our
Advocate, with the Father, the cry of the innocent Blood, that has been
cruelly shed, and the Lords own interesting himself in the cause, so as we may
say with the Psalmist, Arise, O God: plead thine own cause, remember how the
foolish Man, (yea, the Man of Sin) reproacheth thee daily. Forget not the voice
of thine Enemies; the tumult of those that rise against thee, increases
continually. That Psalm, and many others, as the 6, 13, 35, 43, 71, 74, 79, 80,
88, 92, 94, 102, 115, 123, 130, 140, 142. do give Precedents of Prayers in such
times as these; and the Prayer of Daniel, and Ezra 9. of Asa and Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 14. and 26.12. The Stories of David's flight before Absalom, and
Iehoshaphat's behavior when the Enemies came against him, of Hezekiah's, in
Sennacherib's Invasion, Isa. 37. and the whole book of Esther, are fit
Scriptures now to be read, that through the patience and comfort of them we
might have hope.

Now because we know not how soon we may be called to sanctify God's name, by
making profession thereof, you may perhaps desire to know what to say in that
day. You may openly profess your not doubting of any Article of the Catholic
Faith, shortly laid down in the Creed, or more largely laid down in the Holy
Scriptures, but that you consent not to certain Opinions, which are no points
of Faith, which have been brought into common belief, without warrant of
Scriptures, or pure Antiquity, as Namely, That it is of necessity to Salvation
to be under the Pope. That the Scriptures ought not to be read of the common
people. That the Doctrine of Holy Scripture is not sufficient to Salvation.
That the Service of God ought to be in a Language not understood of the people.
That the Communion should not be adminstred to them in both kinds. That the
Bread in the Lord's Supper, is transubstantiated into his Body. That he is
there sacrificed for the quick and the dead. That there is any Purgatory
besides Christ's Blood. That our good Words can merit Heaven. That the Saints
hear our Prayers, and know our Hearts. That Images are to be worshipped. That
the Pope is Infallible, and can command Angels. That we ought to pray to the
Dead, and for the Dead.


In all these notwithstanding, you may profess your teachableness, if by sound
Reasons out of God's Word, you shall be convinced of the truth of them: And
because we know not how far it will please God to call us to make resistance
against sin, whether unto Blood it self, or no; it shall be Wisdom for us to
prepare our selves to the last care of a godly life, which is to dye Godly.
This the Apostle Paul calls, Sleeping in Jesus, implying thereby our Faith in
him, our being found in his Work, and our committing our Souls into his Hands
with peace; such a sweet and Heavenly Sleep was that of S. Stephen, whose last
Words for himself were, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, and for his Tormentors,
Lord lay not this sin to their charge; wherewith I will end this Writing, and
wish to end my life, when the will of God shall be, to whose gracious
protection (dear Sister) I do heartily commit you.

November 23. 1641.

These Advices show in what temper that holy Man was in this his extremity.
They had a very good effect on the Lady; for as by reading them over very
often, she got to be able to say them all without Book, so she did that which
was much more, she lodged them in her heart, as well as in her memory. While
this good Man was now every day waiting f^r his Crown, the Rebels sent to him,
desiring him to dismiss the company that was about him; but he refused to obey
their cruel order, and he resolved to live and dye with them; and would much
more willingly have offered himself to have dyed for them, than have accepted
of any favor for himself, from which they should be shut out. And when they
sent him word, That though they loved and honored him beyond all the English
that ever came into Ireland, because he had never done wrong to any, but good
to many, yet they had received orders from the Council of State at Kilkenny,
that had assumed the government of the Rebels, that if he would not put away
the people, that had gathered about him, they should take him from them; he
said no more, but in the Words of David and S. Paul, Here I am, the Lord do
unto me as seems good to him, the will of the Lord be done: So on the
eighteenth of December they came and seized on him, and on all that belonged to
him, and carried him, and his two Sons, and Mr. Clogy prisoners to the Castle
of Lochwater, the only place of strength in the whole County. It was a little
Tower in the midst of a Lake, about a Musket shot from any Shore: And though
there had b^^n a little Island about it anciently, yet the Water had so gained
on it, that there was not a foot of Ground above Water, but only the Tower it
self. They suffered the Prisoners to carry nothing with them; for the Titular
Bishop took possession of all that belonged to the Bishop, and said Mass the
next Lords day in the Church. They set the Bishop on Horseback, and made the
other Prisoners go on foot by him: And thus he was lodged in this Castle, that
was a most miserable dwelling. The Castle had been in the hands of one Mr.
Cullum, who, as he had the keeping of the Fort trusted to him, so he had a good
allowance for a Magazine to be laid up in it, for the defense of the Country:
But he had not a pound of Powder, nor one fixed Musket in it, and he fell under
the just punishment of the neglect of his trust, for he was taken the first day
of the Rebellion, and was himself made a prisoner here. All but the Bishop were
at first clapped into Irons, for the Irish that were perpetually drunk, were
afraid lest they should seize both on them and on the Castle. Yet it pleased
God so far to abate their fury, that they took off their Irons, and gave them
no disturbance in the Worship of God, which was now all the comfort that was
left them. The House was extremely open to the weather, and ruinous: and as the
place was bare and exposed, so that Winter was very severe; which was a great
addition to the misery of those that the Rebels had stripped naked, leaving to
many not so much as a Garment to cover their nakedness. But it pleased God to
bring another Prisoner to the same Dungeon, that was of great use to them, one
Richard Castledine, who had come over a poor Carpenter to Ireland with nothing
but his Tools on his back, and was first employed by one Sir Richard Waldron in
the carpentry work of a Castle, that he was building in the Parish of Cavan:
But Sir Richard wasting his Estate before he had finished his House, and
afterward leaving Ireland, God had so blessed the industry of this Castledine,
during Thirty years labor, that he bought this Estate, and having only
Daughters, he married one of them, out of gratitude, to Sir Richard's youngest
Son, to whom he intended to have given the Estate that was his Fathers: He was
a Man of great virtue, and abounded in good Works, as well as in exemplary
Piety: he was so good a Husband that the Irish believed he was very rich; so
they preserved him, hoping to draw a great deal of Money from him: He being
brought to this miserable Prison, got some Tools and old Boards, and fitted
them up as well as was possible, to keep out the Weather. The Keepers of the
Prison brought their Prisoners abundance of Provision, but left them to dress
it for themselves; which they that knew little what belonged to Cookery were
glad to do in such a manner as might preserve their lives; and were all of them
much supported in their Spirits. They did not suffer as evil doers, and they
were not ashamed of the Cross of Christ; but rejoiced in God in the midst of
all their afflictions; and the old Bishop took joyfully the spoiling of his
Goods, and the restraint of his person, comforting himself in this, That these
light afflictions would quickly work for him a more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. The day after his imprisonment, being the Lord's day, he
preached to his little flock on the Epistle for the day, which set before them
the pattern of the humility and sufferings of Christ; and on Christmas day he
preached on Gal. 4.4, 5. and administered the Sacrament to the small
Congregation about him; their Keepers having been so charitable as to furnish
them with Bread and Wine. And on the 26 th. of December Mr. William Bedell, the
Bishop's eldest Son, preached on S. Stephen's last Words, which afforded proper
matter for their meditation, who were every day in expectation when they should
be put to give such a testimony of their Faith, as that first Martyr had done:
And on the second of January, which was the last Sunday of their imprisonment,
Mr. Clogy preached on S. Luke 2.32, 33, 34. During all their religious
exercises, their keepers never gave them any disturbance; and indeed they
carried so gently toward them, that their natures seemed to be so much
changed, that it looked like a second stopping the mouths of Lions. They often
told the Bishop, that they had no personal quarrel to him, and no other cause
to be so severe to him, but because he was an Englishman.

But while he was in this dismal Prison, some of the Scots of that County, that
had retired to two Houses, that were strong enough to resist any thing but
Cannon, and were commanded by Sir James Craig, Sir Francis Hamilton, and Sir
Arthur Forker, now Lord Grenard, finding themselves like to suffer more by
hunger, than by the Siege that was laid to them, made so resolute a Sally upon
the Ir^sh, that they killed several, took some Prisoners, and dispersed the
rest, so that many Months passed before they offered to besiege them any more.
Among their Prisoners four were Men of considerable interest; so they treated
an exchange of them for the Bishop, with his two Sons and Mr. Clogy; which was
concluded, and the Prisoners were delivered on both sides on the 7 th. of
January: but though the Irish promised to suffer the Bishop with the other
three to go safe to Dublin, yet they would not let them go out of the Country,
but intended to make further advantage by having them still among them; and so
they were suffered to go to the House of an Irish Minister, Denis O Shereden,
to whom some respect was showed, by reason of his extraction, though he had
forsaken their Religion, and had married an English Woman: he continued firm in
his Religion, and relieved many in their extremity. Here the Bishop spent the
few remaining days of his Pilgrimage, having his latter end so full in view,
that he seemed dead to the World and every thing in it, and to be hasting for
the coming of the Day of God. During the last Sabbaths of his life, though
there were three Ministers present, he read all the Prayers and Lessons
himself, and likewise preached on all those days. On the 9 th. of January he
preached on the whole 44 th. Psalm, being the first of the Psalms appointed for
that day, and very suitable to the miseries the English were then in, who were
killed all day long, as Sheep appointed for Meat. Next Sabbath, which was the
16 th. he preached on the 79. Psalm, the first Psalm for the day, which runs
much on the like Argument, when the Temple was defiled, and Jerusalem was laid
on heaps, and the dead Bodies of God's servants were given to be meat to the
Fouls of Heaven, and their Flesh to the Beasts of the Earth, and their blood
was shed like Water, and there was none to bury them. Their condition being
so like one another, it was very proper to put up that Prayer, O remember not
against us, former iniquities: Let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us, for
we are brought very low. Together with the other. Let the sighing of the
Prisoner come before thee, according to the greatness of thy power, preserve
thou those that are appointed to dye. On the 23 d. he preached on the last ten
Verses of the 71. Psalm, observing the great fitness that was in them to
express his present condition, especially in these Words, O God thou have
taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works: now
also when I am old, and gray headed, forsake me not. And on the 30 th. which
was the last Lord's day in which he had strength enough to preach, he preached
on the 144. Psalm, the first appointed for that day, and when he came to the
Words in the seventh Verse, which are also repeated in the eleventh Verse, Send
thine hand from above, rid me and deliver me out of great Waters, from the hand
of strange Children, whose mouth speaks vanity, and whose right hand is a
right hand of falsehood. He repeated them again and again, with so much zeal and
affection, that it appeared how much he was hasting to the day of God, and that
his Heart was crying out, Come Lord Jesus come quickly, how long, how long? and
he dwelt so long upon them, with so many sighs, that all the little assembly
about him melted into Tears, and looked on this as a presage of his approaching
dissolution. And it proved too true, for the day after, he sickned; which on
the second day after appeared to be an Ague, and on the fourth day he
apprehending his speedy change, called for his Sons, and his Sons Wives, and
spoke to them at several times, as near in these Words as their memories could
serve them to write them down soon after.

I am going the way of all flesh, I am now ready to be offered up, and the time
of my departure is at hand: knowing therefore that shortly I must put off this
Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me, I know also that if
this my earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, I have a building of
God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens, a fair Mansion in
the New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God. Therefore to me
to live is Christ, and to dye is gain; which increases my desire, even now to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better, than to continue here in
all the transitory, vain, and false pleasures of this world, of which I have
seen an end. Hearken therefore unto the last Words of your dying Father; I am
no more in this World, but ye are in the World; I ascend to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God, through the all-sufficient merits of Jesus
Christ my Redeemer; who ever lives to make intercession for me, who is a
propitiation for all my sins, and washed me from them all in his own Blood who
is worthy to receive Glory and Honor, and Power, who has created all things,
and for whose pleasure they are and were created.

My witness is in Heaven, and my record on high, That I have endeavored to
glorify God on Earth, and in the Ministry of the Gospel of his dear Son, which
was committed to my trust; I have finished the Work, which he gave me to do, as
a faithful Ambassador of Christ, and Steward of the mysteries of God. I have
preached Righteousness in the great Congregation: lo I have not refrained my
Lips, O Lord, thou know. I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I
have declared thy faithfulness, and thy Salvation; I have not concealed thy
loving kindness, and thy truth from the great Congregation of mankind. He is
near that justifies me, That I have not concealed the Words of the holy one;
but the Words that he gave to me, I have given to you, and ye have received
them. I had a desire and resolution to walk before God (in every station of my
pilgrimage, from my youth up to this day) in truth and with an upright Heart,
and to do that which was upright in his Eyes, to the utmost of my power; and
what things were gain to me formerly, these things I count now loss for Christ;
yea doubtless, and I account all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and I account them but Dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in
him, not having my own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith; that I
may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable unto his Death, I press therefore toward
the mark, for the price of the high Calling of God in Jesus Christ.

Let nothing separate you from the love of Christ, neither tribulation nor
distress, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor Sword;
though (as ye hear and see) for his sake we are killed all the day long, we are
counted as Sheep for the slaughter: Yet in all these things we are more than
conquerers, through him that loved us: For I am persuaded, That neither Death,
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any Creature shall be able to
separate me from the love of God in Christ Jesu my Lord. Therefore love not the
World, nor the things of the World; but prepare daily and hourly for death,
(that now besieges us on every side) and be faithful unto death; that we may
meet together joyfully on the Right Hand of Christ at the last day, and follow
the Lamb wheresoever he goes, with all those that are clothed with white
Robes, in sign of innocence, and Palms in their Hands in sign of Victory; which
came out of great tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white
in the Blood of the Lamb. They shall hunger no more, nor thirst, neither shall
the Sun light on them, or any heat; for the Lamb, that is in the midst of the
Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of Waters,
and shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes.

Choose rather with Moses to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; which will be bitterness in the latter
end. Look therefore for sufferings, and to be daily made partakers of the
sufferings of Christ, to fill up that which is behind of the affliction of
Christ in your Flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is the Church. What can you
look for, but one woe after another, while the Man of sin is thus suffered to
rage, and to make havoc of God's people at his pleasure, while Men are divided
about trifles, that ought to have been more vigilant over us, and careful of
those, whose Blood is precious in God's sight, though now shed every where like
Water. If ye suffer for righteousness, happy are ye; be not afraid of their
terror, neither be ye troubled; and be in nothing terrified by your
adversaries; which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of
salvation, and that of God. For to you is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Rejoice therefore in
as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his Glory shall
be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. And if ye be reproached
for the name of Christ, happy are ye; the Spirit of glory, and of Christ
rests on you. on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is
glorified.

God will surely visit you in due time, and return your captivity as the Rivers
of the South, and bring you back again into your possession in this Land:
though now for a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through manifold
temptations; yet ye shall reap in joy, though now ye sow in Tears: all our
losses shall be recompensed with abundant advantages, for my God will supply
all your need, according to his riches in glory by Jesus Christ, who is able to
do exceeding abundantly for us, above all that we are able to ask or think.

After that he blessed his Children, and those that stood about him, in an
audible Voice, in these Words. God of his infinite mercy bless you all, and
present you holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, that we may
meet together at the Right Hand of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, Amen. To which he added these Words, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished the course of my Ministry and life
together. Though grievous Wolves have entered in among us, not sparing the
Flock; yet I trust the great Shepherd of his Flock will save and deliver them
out of all places, where they have been scattered in this cloudy and dark day;
that they shall be no more a prey to the Heathen, neither shall the Beasts of
the Land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them
afraid. O Lord, I have waited for thy Salvation. And after a little interval,
he said, I have kept the Faith once given to the Saints; for the which cause I
have also suffered these things; but I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him against that day. After this time he spoke little; for as his
sickness increased, his Speech failed, and he slumbered out most of the time,
only between hands it appeared that he was cheerfully waiting for his change;
which at last came about Midnight on the 7 th. of February, that he fell asleep
in the Lord, and entered into his rest, and obtained his Crown, which in some
sort was a Crown of Martyrdom; for no doubt the sad weight of sorrow, that lay
upon his Mind, and his ill usage in his Imprisonment, had much hastened his
death: And he suffered more in his mind by what he had lived to hear and see
these last fifteen Weeks of his Life, than he could have done, if he had fallen
by the Sword, among the first of those that felt the rage of the Irish. His
Friends went about his Burying; and since that could not be obtained, but by
the new intruding Bishop's leave, Mr. Clogy and Mr. Shereden went to ask it,
and Mr. Dillon was prevailed with by his Wife, to go and second their desire.
They found the Bishop lying in his own Vomit, and saw a sad change in that
House, which was before a House of Prayer, and of Good Works; but was now a Den
of Thieves, and a Nest of uncleanness. The Bishop, when he was awakened out of
his Drunkenness, excepted a little to it, and said, The Churchyard was holy
Ground, and was no more to be defiled with Heretick's Bodies; yet he consented
to it at last. So on the 9 th. of February he was buried according to the
direction himself had given, next his Wife's Coffin. The Irish did him unusual
honors at his Burial, for the chief of the Rebels gathered their Forces
together, and with them accompanied his Body from Mr. Shereden's House to the
Churchyard of Kilmore, in great solemnity, and they desired Mr. Clogy to bury
him according to the Office prescribed by the Church; but though the Gentlemen
were so civil as to offer it, yet it was not thought advisable to provoke the
Rabble so much, as perhaps that might have done; so it was past over. But the
Irish discharged a Volley of Shot at his Interment, and cried out in Latin,
Requiescat in pace ultimus Anglorum, May the last of the English rest in peace:
for they had often said, That as they esteemed him the best of the English
Bishops, so he should be the last that should be left among them.

Thus lived and dyed this excellent Bishop; in whom so many of the greatest
Characters of a Primitive and Apostolical Bishop did show themselves so
eminently, that it seemed fit that he should still speak to the World, though
dead, both for convincing the unjust enemies of that venerable Order, and for
the instruction of those that succeed him in it; since great Patterns give the
easiest notions of eminent Virtues, and teach in a way that has much more
authority with it than all speculative Discourses can possibly have. And as the
Lives of the Primitive Christians were a speaking Apology for their Religion,
as well as a direction to those that grew up; so it is to be hoped that the
solemn though silent language of so bright an Example will have the desired
effect both ways: And then my Author will have a noble reward for his Labors.
To this I shall add a little of his Character.

He was a tall and graceful person; there was something in his looks and
carriage that discovered what was within, and created a veneration for him. He
had an unaffected Gravity in his Deportment, and decent Simplicity in his Dress
and Apparel. He had a long and broad Beard; for my Author never saw a Razor
pass upon his Face. His gray Hairs were a Crown to him, both for Beauty and
Honor. His Strength continued firm to the last; so that the Week before his
last sickness, he walked about as vigorously and nimbly as any of the Company,
and leapt over a broad Ditch; so that his Sons were amazed at it, and could
scarce follow him. His Eyes continued so good, that he never used Spectacles,
nor did he suffer any decay in any of his natural Powers, only by a fall in his
Childhood he had contracted a deafness in his left Ear. He had great Strength
and Health of Body, except that a few years before his death, he had some
severe Fits of the Stone, that his sedentary course of life seemed to have
brought on him, which he bore with wonderful patience. The best Remedy that he
found for it was to dig in his Garden till he had very much heated himself, by
which he found a mitigation of his Pain. He took much pleasure in a Garden, and
having brought over some curious Instruments out of Italy, for Racemation,
Engrafting, and Inoculating, he was a great Master in the use of them.

His Judgment and Memory, as they were very extraordinary, so they remained
with him to the last. He always preached without Notes, but often writ down
his Meditations after he had preached them. He did not affect to show any other
learning in his Sermons, but what was proper for opening his Text, and clearing
the difficulties in it; which he did by comparing the Originals with the most
ancient Versions. His Style was clear and full, but plain and simple; for he
abhorred all affectations of pompous Rhetoric in Sermons, as contrary to the
simplicity of Christ. His Sermons did all drive at the great design of infusing
in the Hearts of his Hearers right apprehensions and warm thoughts of the great
things of the Christian Religion; which he did with so much the more authority,
because it appeared that he was much moved himself with those things that he
delivered to others. He was always at work in his Study, when the affairs of
his Function did not lead him out of it. In which his chief employment was the
study of the Text of the Scripture. He read the Hebrew and the Septuagint so
much, that they were as familiar to him as the English Translation. He read
every Morning the Psalms appointed by the Common Prayer for the day in Hebrew;
or if his Son, or any other that was skilled in the Hebrew, was present, he
read one Verse out of the Hebrew, turning it into Latin, and the other read the
next, and so by turns till they went through them. He had gathered a vast heap
of critical Expositions of Scripture. All this, with his other Manuscripts, of
which there was a great Trunk full, fell into the Hands of the Irish. He had
writ very learned Paraphrases and Sermons on all those parts of Scripture that
were prescribed to be read in the second Service, but all these are lost. His
great Hebrew Manuscript was happily rescued out of the hands of those devourers
of all sacred Things, and is to this day preserved in the Library of Emmanuel
College: for an Irishman, whom he had converted, went among his Country Men
and brought out that and a few other Books to him.

Every day after Dinner and Supper, there was a Chapter of the Bible read at
his Table, whosoever were present, Protestants or Papists, and Bibles were laid
down before every one of the Company, and before himself either the Hebrew or
Greek, and in his last years the Irish Translation was laid, and he usually
explained the difficulties that occurred. He writ many Books of Controversy;
which was chiefly occasioned by the engagements that lay on him, to labor much
in the conversion of persons of the Roman Communion; and the knowledge he had
of that Church, and their way of Worship, by what he had seen and observed
while he was at Venice, raised in him a great zeal against their corruptions.
He not only looked on that Church as Idolatrous, but as the Antichristian
Babylon; concerning which S. John saw all those Visions in the Revelation: And
of this the Sermon, out of which I have made some extracts, gives Evidence. He
writ a large Treatise in answer to those two Questions, in which the
Missionaries of that Communion triumph so much, Where was our Religion before
Luther, and what became of our Ancestors that dyed in Popery? Archbishop Usher
pressed him to have printed it, and he had resolved to do it, but that, with all
his other Works, was swallowed up in the Rebellion. He kept a great
correspondence, not only with the Divines of England, but with many others over
Europe; for he writ both Latin and Italian very elegantly. He was very free in
his conversation, but talked seldom of indifferent matters, he expressed a
great modesty of Spirit, and a moderation of temper in every thing he spoke,
and his Discourse still turned to somewhat that made his company useful and
instructing. He spoke his own thoughts very plainly, and as he bore well with
the freedom of others, so he took all the discreet liberty that became a Man of
his Age and station, and did not stick to tell even the Learned and Worthy
Primate Usher, such things as he thought were blameworthy in him, and with the
same sincerity he showed him some critical mistakes that he met with in some of
his Works. They were very few, and not of any great importance; but they did
not agree with the Primates exactness in other things, and so he laid them
before him; which the other took from him with that kindness and humility that
was natural to him. His Habit was decent and grave; he wore no Silk, but plain
Stuffs; the furniture of his House was not pompous nor superfluous, but
necessary for common use, and proper. His Table was well covered, according to
the plenty that was in the Country, but there was no luxury in it. Great resort
was made to him, and he observed a true hospitality in Housekeeping. Many poor
Irish families about him were maintained out of his Kitchen: And in the
Christmas time, he had the Poor always eating with him at his own Table; and
he brought himself to endure both the sight of their Rags, and their rudeness:
He was not forward to speak, and he expressed himself in very few Words in
public companies. At public Tables he usually sat silent. Once at the Earl of
Strafford's Table, one observed, That while they were all talking, he said
nothing. So the Primate answered, Broach him, and you will find good liquor in
him; Upon which that person proposed a question in Divinity to him, and in
answering it the Bishop showed both his own sufficiency so well, and pusled the
other so much, that all at Table, except the Bishop himself, fell a laughing at
the other. The greatness of his mind, and the undauntedness of his Spirit on
all occasions has appeared very evidently in many of the passages of his life;
but though that height of mind is often accompanied with a great mixture of
Pride, nothing of that appeared in the Bishop. He carried himself toward all
people with such a gaining humility, that he got into their Hearts: He lived
with his Clergy as if they had been his Brethren: When he went his Visitations,
he would not accept of the Invitations that were made him by the great Men of
the Country, but would needs eat with his Brethren in such poor Inns, and of
such course fare, as the places afforded. A person of Quality, that had
prepared an entertainment for him during his Visitation, took his refusing it
so ill, that whereas the Bishop promised to come and see him after Dinner; as
soon as he came near his Gate, which was standing open, it was presently shut,
on design to affront him, and he was kept half an hour knocking at it: the
affront was visible, and when some would have had him go away, he would not do
it, but said, They will hear e're long. At last the Master came out, and
received him with many shows of civility, but he made a very short visit, and
though the rudeness he met with prevailed not on him, either to resent it, or
to go away upon it, yet it appeared that he understood it well enough. He
avoided all affectations of state or greatness in his carriage: He went about
always on foot, when he was at Dublin, one Servant only attending on him,
except on public occasions, that obliged him to ride in Procession among his
Brethren. He never kept a Coach: for his strength continued so entire that he
was always able to ride on Horseback: He avoided the affectations of humility
as well as of Pride; the former flowing often from the greater pride of the
two, and amidst all those extraordinary Talents, with which God had blessed him,
it never appeared that he overvalued himself, nor despised others; that he
assumed to himself a Dictatorship, or was impatient of contradiction. He took
an ingenious device to put him in mind both of his Obligations to purity and
humility: It was a flaming Crucible with this Motto in Hebrew, Take from me all
my Tin. The Word in Hebrew that signifies Tin, was Bedil. This imported that he
thought that every thing in himself was but base alloy, and therefore he prayed
that God would cleanse him from it. His great humility made the secreter parts
of his goodness, as to his private walking with God, less known, except as they
appeared in that best and surest indication of it, which his life and
conversation gave; yet if the Rebels had not destroyed all his Papers, there
would have been found among them great discoveries of this; for he kept a daily
Journal for many years; but of what sort it was, how full, and how particular,
is only known to God; since no Man ever saw it, unless some of the Rebels
found it. Though it is not probable that they would have taken the pains to
examine his Papers, it being more likely that they destroyed them all in a
heap. He never thought of changing his See, or of rising up to a more
advantageous Bishopric, but considered himself as under a tie to his See, that
could not be easily dissolved. So that when the translating him to a Bishopric
in England, was proposed to him, he refused it, and said he should be as
troublesome a Bishop in England, as he had been in Ireland.

It appeared he had a true and generous notion of Religion, and that he did not
look upon it so much as a System of Opinions, or a set of Forms, as a Divine
Discipline that reforms the Heart and Life; and therefore when some Men were
valued upon their zeal for some lesser matters, he had those Words of S.
Augustine's often in his Mouth, It is not Leaves but Fruit that I seek. This
was the true principle of his great zeal against Popery: It was not the
peevishness of a party, the sourness of a speculative Man, nor the concern of
an interested person, that wrought on him: But he considered the corruptions of
that Church, as an effectual course for enervating the true design of
Christianity; and this he not only gathered from Speculation, but from what he
saw and knew during his long abode in Italy. His Devotion in his Closet was
only known to him, who commanded him to pray in secret. In his Family he prayed
always thrice a day, in a set Form, though he did not read it: This he did in
the Morning, and before Dinner, and after Supper: And he never turned over this
duty, or the short Devotions before and after Meat, on his Chaplain, but was
always his own Chaplain. He looked upon the Obligation of observing the Sabbath
as moral and perpetual, and considered it as so great an Engine for carrying on
the true ends of Religion, that as he would never go into the liberties that
many practiced on that day; so he was exemplary in his own exact observation of
it; Preaching always twice, and Catechizing once; and besides that, he used to
go over the Sermons again in his Family, and sing Psalms, and concluded all
with Prayer.

As for his Domestic concerns, he married one of the Family of the L'
Estranges, that had been before married to the Recorder of S. Edmondsbury: she
proved to be in all respects a very fit Wife for him; she was exemplary for her
life, humble and modest in her Habit and behavior, and was singular in many
excellent qualities, particularly in a very extraordinary reverence that she
paid him: She bore him four Children, three Sons and a Daughter, but one of
the Sons and the Daughter dyed young, so none survived but William and Ambrose.
The just reputation his Wife was in for her Piety and Virtue, made him choose
that for the Text of her Funeral Sermon, A good name is better than Ointment.
She dyed of a Lethargy three years before the Rebellion broke out; and he
himself preached her Funeral Sermon, with such a mixture both of tenderness and
moderation, that it touched the whole Congregation so much, that there were
very few dry Eyes in the Church, all the while. He did not like the burying in
the Church; For, as he observed there was much both of Superstition and Pride
in it, so he believed it was a great annoyance to the Living, when there was so
much of the steam of dead Bodies rising about them; he was likewise much
offended at the rudeness which the crowding the dead Bodies in a small parcel
of Ground, occasioned; for the Bodies already laid there, and not yet quite
rotten, were often raised and mangled; so that he made a Canon in his Synod
against burying in Churches, and as he often wished that Burying-Places were
removed out of all Towns, so he did choose the most remote and least frequented
place of the Churchyard of Kilmore for his Wife, and by his Will he ordered
that He should be laid next her with this bare Inscription, Depositum Gulielmi
quondam Episcopi Kilmorensis. Depositum cannot bear an English Translation, it
signifying somewhat given to another in Trust, so he considered his Burial as a
trust left in the Earth till the time that it shall be called on to give up its
dead.

The modesty of that Inscription adds to his Merit, which those who knew him
well, believe exceeds even all that this his zealous and worthy Friend does
through my hands convey to the World, for his memory; which will outlive the
Marble or the Brass, and will make him ever to be reckoned one of the speaking
and lasting Glories, not only of the Episcopal Order, but of the Age in which
he lived; and of the two Nations, England and Ireland, between whom he was so
equally divided, that it is hard to tell which of them has the greatest share
in him. Nor must his Honor stop here, he was a living Apology, both for the
Reformed Religion, and the Christian Doctrine: And both he that collected these
Memorials of him, and he that copies them out, and publishes them, will think
their Labors very happily employed, if the reading them produces any of those
good effects that are intended by them.

As for his two Sons, he was satisfied to provide for them in so modest a way,
as showed that he neither aspired to high things on their behalf, nor did he
consider the Revenue of the Church as a property of his own, out of which he
might raise a great Estate for them. He provided his eldest Son with a Benefice
of Eighty Pound a Year, in which he labored with that fidelity that became the
Son of such a Father; and his second Son, not being a Man of Letters, had a
little Estate of 60 l. a year given him by the Bishop; which was the only
Purchase that I hear he made; and I am informed, that he gave nothing to his
eldest Son but that Benefice, which he so well deserved. So little advantage
did he give to the enemies of the Church; either to those of the Church of
Rome, against the marriage of the Clergy, or to the dividers among our selves,
against the Revenues of the Church: The one sort objecting that a married state
made the Clergy covetous, in order to the raising their Families, and the
others pretending that the Revenues of the Church being converted by Clergymen
into Temporal Estates for their Children, it was no Sacrilege to invade that
which was generally no less abused by Churchmen, than it could be by Laymen;
since these Revenues are trusted to the Clergy as Depositaries, and not given
to them as Proprietors.

May the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, so inspire all that are the
Overseers of that Flock, which he purchased with his own Blood, that in
imitation of all those glorious patterns that are in Church History, and of
this in the last Age, that is inferior to very few that any former Age
produced, they may watch over the Flock of Christ, and so feed and govern them,
that the Mouths of all Adversaries may be stopped, that this Apostolical Order
recovering its Primitive spirit and vigor; it may be received and obeyed with
that same submission and esteem, that was paid to it in former times: and that
all differences about lesser matters being laid down, Peace and Truth may again
flourish, and the true ends of Religion and Church Government may be advanced,
and that instead of biting, devouring and consuming one another, as we do, we
may all build up one another in our most holy Faith.

Some Papers related to in the former History.
Guilielmus Providentia Divina, Kilmorensis Episcopus, dilecto in Christo, A.
B. Fratri and Synpresbytero salutem.
AD Vicariam perpetuam Ecclesiae Parochialis de C. nostrae Kilmorensis
Dioecesios jam legitime vacantem, See p. 77.
and ad nostram* collationem pleno jure spectantem, praestito per te prius
juramento de agnoscenda and defendenda Regiae Majestatis suprema potestate in
omnibus causis tam Ecclesiasticis quam Civilibus, intra ditiones suas, deque
Anglicano ordine, habitu and Lingua pro Viribus in dictam Parochiam
introducendis, juxt a formam Statutorum hujus Regni; necnon de perpetua and
personali Residentia tua in Vicaria praedicta, quodque nullum aliud Beneficium
Ecclesiasticum una cum ^a retinebis: deque Canonica obedientia nobis ac
Successoribus nostris Episcopis Kilmorens. praestanda, te admittimus,
instituimus, and canonice investimus: Curamque Animarum Parochionarum, ibidem
commorantium, tibi committimus, per Praesentes. Obtestantes in Domino, and pro
obedientia qua summo Pastori teneris injungentes: ut ejus Gregem quem suo
sanguine acquisivit, tibi commissum, diligenter pascas, and in Fide Catholica
instituas, officia divina Lingua a populo intellecta, peragas; exemplar ante
omnia teipsum praebeas fidelibus in bonis operibus, ut erubescant Adversarii,
nihil habentes quod in te reprehendant. Mandantes insuper dilecto Fratri,
Thomae Archidiacono Kilmorensi, ut te in realem and actualem possessionem
dictae Vicariae de C. inducat, cum effectu, in quorum omnium fidem and
Testimonium Sigillum nostrum Episcopale Praesentibus apposuimus.

Datum septimo die Maii, anno Salutis, 1640. Guiliel. Kilmorensis.

Decreta primae Synodi Kilmorensis. In nomine Domini Dei and Salvatoris nostri
Jesu Christi.
REgnante in perpetuum, See p. 79.
ac gubernante Ecclesiam suam, eodem Domino nostro Jesus Christo, annoque
imperii, serenissimi Principis ac domini Caroli, Dei gratia, magnae Britanniae
and Hiberniae Regis, decimo quarto, cum ad Ecclesiam Cathedralem Kilmorensem,
monitu Guilielmi Episcopi convenisset Capitulum totius Dioecesios, ad Synodum
Dioecesianam celebrandam, post fusas ad Deum Preces pro publica Pace, Regisque,
and Familiae Regiae incolumitate, and peracta sacra Synaxi, verba fecit
Episcopus de ejusmodi Synodorum Antiquitate, necessitate and Authoritate, and
cum venisset in consultationem, quibus rationibus, and fidei sinceritas, and
morum sanctitas, and decor Domus Dei, and Ministrorum libertas conservari
posset, nihil conducibilius visum est, quam ut ea quae a Patribus been ac
prudenter Antiquitus instituta sunt, quasi postliminii jure revocarentur, atque
tractatu inter nos habito, ad extremum, in haec capitula unanimiter consensum
est.

I. Synodum Dioecesanam sive Capitulum quotannis tertia and quarta feria
secundae hebdomadae Mensis Septembris in Ecclesia Kilmorensi tenendam, eum diem
huic conventui statum, and solennem fore sine allo mandato; si res poscat in
caeteris ordinationum temporibus Presbyterium contrahi, Episcopi mandatum
expectandum.

II. In Episcopi absentia aut morbo, Vicarius ejus si Presbyter fuerit,
presidebit, alioqui Archidiaconus qui de jure Vicarius est Episcopi.

III. Vicarius Episcopi in posterum nullus constituatur aut confirmetur qui
laicus est, nec quisquam prorsus nisi durante duntaxat beneplacito.

IV. Vt Archidiaconus de triennio in triennium Dioecesin personaliter visitet,
singularum Ecclesiarum, Aediumque mansionalium sarta tecta tueatur, libros and
ornamenta in indiculo descriptos habeat, defectus omnes supplendos curet;
Episcopalis procurationis dimidium habeat, ea condition ut Episcopus illo Anno
non visitet.

V. Vt secundum pristinam and antiquam hujus Dioecesios Kilmorensis
constitutionem in tribus ejus regionibus, tres Decani sint, ab ipsis Ministris
ejusdem Decanatus eligendi, qui vitam and mores cleri jugi circumspectione
custodiant, and ad Episcopum referant, ejusque mandata accipiant, and quoties
opus erit per apparitorem Decanatus ad Compresbyteros suos transmittant.

VI. In quovis Decanatu, in oppido ejus principali, conventus, sive Capitulum
sit Ministrorum quolibet saltem Mense, ubi lectis plene publicis precibus,
concionentur per vices sine longis precibus and prooemiis.

VII. Advocationes Ecclesiarum nondum vacantium quae ad collationem Episcopi
spectant, nemini conferantur aut confirmentur.

VIII. Possessiones Ecclesiae non alienentur aut locentur contra Regni jura,
nempe terrarum Mensalium nulla sit locatio, nisi quoad Episcopus in Sede aut
vita supersit, caeterarum in plures annos, quam leges sinunt, aut prioribus
locationibus, triennio minus nondum expletis.

IX. Vt Corpora defunctorum deinceps in Ecclesiis non humentur, sed nec intra
quintum pedem a pariete extrorsum.

X. Vt mulieres in Sacrario non sedeant, sed infra Cancellos, and quidem a
viris.

XI. Vt Sacrarium in consistorium non convertatur, aut sacra Mensa Notariis aut
Scribis sit pro pluteo.

XII. Ne in funeribus mulieres luctum aut ullulatum facient.

XIII. Vt Ossa defunctorum in Coemeteriis non coacerventur, sed tradantur
sepulturae.

XIV. Vt matricula sit, in quam referantur nomina eorum qui ad sacros ordines
admissi sunt, aut instituti, aut admissi ad Beneficia, sive ad curam Animarum
coaptati; clericorum item Parochialium and Ludimagistrorum, neque deinceps ad
literas testimoniales in visitationibus exhibendas adigatur.

XV. Ne quis Minister Oblationes ad Funera, Baptismum, Eucharistiam, Nuptias,
post puerperium; aut portionem Canonicam cuiquam locet.

XVI. Ne quis ejusmodi oblata acerbe exigat, praesertim a pauperibus.

XVII. Vt fas sit Ministro a sacra Coena repellere eos qui se ingerant ad
Synaxin, neque nomina sua pridie Parocho significarunt.

XVIII. Vt pueri saltem a septimo aetatis Anno, donec confirmentur per manuum
impositionem, stent inter Catechumenos, factoque Catalogo, singulis dominicis
certus eorum numerus sistatur in Ecclesia examinandus.

XIX. Si quis Minister quenquam ex fratribus suis alibi accusaverit priusquam
Episcopo denunciet, ab ejus consortio caeteri omnes abstinebunt.

XX. Clerici comam ne nutriant, and habitu Clericali prout Synodo Dubliniensi
institutum est, incedant.

XXI. O Economi Parochiarum provideant ne in Ecclesia tempore cultus divini
pueruli discursent, utque canes arceantur, constitutis Ostiariis, vel mulcta
imposita, si quis semel atque iterum admonitus canem secum in Ecclesiam
introduxerit.

Vt nulla Excommunicationis sententia feratur ab uno solo Ministro, sed ab
Episcopo, assistentibus quotquot in Capitulo fuerint praesentes.

Haec Decreta Synodalia, quoniam ex usu hujus Dioecesios futura credimus, and
ipsi observabimus, and quantum in nobis est ab aliis observanda curabimus,
adeoque Manus suae quisque subscriptione corroboremus.

September. 19. 1638.
Recusatio 24. Articulorum Episcopi Kilmorensis.
COram vobis venerabilibus Viris Georgio Riv. Legum Doctore, and Guilielmo
Hilton Artium Magistro, Reverendissimi in Christo Patris Iacobi providentia
divina Armachani Archiepiscopi, totius Hiberniae Primatis, nec non Iudicis,
Praesidis, sive Commissarii Curiae Regiae Praerogativae pro causis
Ecclesiasticis, and ad facultates in and per totum regnum Hiberniae, Regia
authoritate legitime constituti, substitutis sive surrogatis, ut vulgo
creditur, Ego Guilielmus Kilmorensis Episcopus cum debita vobis reverentia
propono, Quod licet ante hoc exceptionem quandam declinatoriam jurisdictionis
vestrae in quadam praetensa causa duplicis querelae mota a Guilielmo Bailey
clerico Dioecesios Kilmorensis justis de causis interposuerim, ac nominatim
propter incompetentiam fori, per absentiam Reverendissimi Praesidis, and
suspicionem animi vestri in me iniqui, quas etiam coram eodem reverendissimo
Praeside, aliisve aequis arbitris probandas in me recepi, ac licet etiam pro
part mea, venerabilem virum Edwardum Parry sacrae Theologiae Professorem
elegerim ac nominaverim: Vos tamen dictae recusationi meae non modo defer
recusastis, sed novis insuper and pluribus indiciis animum vestrum mihi
infensum prodidistis; ea propter ego Episcopus antedictus animo non prorogandi,
sed expressius and particularius contra jurisdictionem and personas vestras
excipiendo, dico and allego.

I. Inprimis quod praetensa querela dicti Guilielmi Bailey oritur ex sententia
quadam in causa correctionis ex officio meo Episcopali, and jussa illustrissimi
Proregis, in qua si modum excesserim, legitima appellatio erat ad Synodum
Provinciae, vel Consistorium Archiepiscopale.

II. Quod dictus Bailey a Sententia praedicta judicialiter and viva voce
appellavit, unde servato ordine jurisdictionum ex decreto nuperi Synodi
Dublinensis causae cognitio, omisso intermedio Archiepiscopali Consistorio,
devolvi non potest ad hanc Curiam.

III. Quod firmamentum defensionis dicti Bailey nititur facultate quadam ab hac
Curia concessa; cum vero nemo sit idoneus judex in propria causa, satis
inverecunde vos hic inquiritis.

IV. Quod regiae Majestati cognitio abusivarum facultatum in ipsa lege
reservatur expressis verbis, ut hoc forum vestrum, a quo ejusmodi facultates
emanant, huic rei incompetens sit.

V. Quod sub nomine Reverendissimi Primatis Armachani delitescentes tenorem
Commissionis vestrae non inseritis citationibus vestris, ut nesciatur nedum
quod, aut quatenus vobis commissum sit, sed an omnino ab ipso surrogati.

VI. Quod jurisdictione vestra non fundata, illud satis scitur, homines vere
Laicos in Episcopos ex executione Episcopalis officii nullam habere potestatene.

VII. Quod litem vestram facitis, dum in citatione vestra, narratis a me gesta
in praejudicum jurisdictionis Curiae Regiae praerogativae, and ad facultates
cedere, ejusque contemptum, ex quo constat (fatente actore) hanc causam ad
commodum and honorem vestrum spectare.

VIII. Quod ut quoquo modo processum vestrum defendatis, fingitis causam esse
duplicis querelae, cum nulla sit hic mutua petitio aut reconventio aut querela,
nisi simplex tantum.

IX. Quod nimium favorem and propensitatem ad partem dicti Guilielmi Bailey
ostendatis, cum probum virum and disertum appellatis causa nondum discussa; cum
accusatorem Episcopi sui, Canones Ecclesiastici, nec laudandum, nec facile
audiendum, and nisi causam probaverit, infamem haberi volunt.

X. Quod causa nondum audita in ea pronunciastis, dum dictum Bailey, Vicarium de
Dyne appellatis, qua tamen Vicaria se a me spoliatum conqueritur.

XI. Quod vetus mihi litigium est vobiscum super institutionibus (quas haec
Curia usurpavit,) ex quo in admissione Nicolai Prenard ad Vicariam de
Kildromferton, protestationem interposui, quam tu Guilielme Hilton indigne
tulisti, eaque non obstante, and illum, and multos alios instituisti,
reclamantibus Episcopis, quo nomine ergo, iniqui estis, non mihi tantum, sed
aeque omnibus.

XII. Quod cum nuper de prima Citatione vestra conquestus essem apud
illustrissimum Praesidem in qua Majestas laesa videbatur, vos ea de causa, haud
dissimulanter iratos habui.

XIII. Quod comparentem ex ea Citatione, ad Tribunal vestrum, expectare and per
sesquihoram inambulare, tanquam ex infima plebecula coegistis.

XIV. Quod cum proximo die juridico a vobis dimissus essem sub hac formula,
quod me non moraremini, quod nihil habuistis mihi objiciendum, t^ tamen
Guilielme Hilton post paulo dixisti futurum ut denuo citarer, ex quo
consiliorum communicationem cum dicto Guilielmo Bailey prodidisti.

XV. Quod cum secunda Citatio minus succederet, perperam facta, sub nomine
Episcopi Lismorensis, tu idem Guilielme Hilton actorem admonuisti, ut de
integro inciperet.

XVI. Quod cum tertio citatus Recusationem quandam jurisdictionis vestrae,
opposuiss^m propter incompetentiam and suspicionem, quarum causas paratus eram
coram arbitris ostendere, vos jam non admisistis ut oportuit, sed in proximum
diem juridicum super ea deliberastis.

XVII. Quod quarto citatum ad audiendum voluntatem vestram super recusatione
praedicta cum cerneretis ad Tribunal vestrum appropinquantem, surrexistis
illico, and quanquam nec Auditorio egressi eratis, nec Praeco populum missum
fecisset, nec hora effluxerat, renuistis me Episcopum antedictum comparentem
audire, ut haberetis aliquem colorem me contumacem pronunciandi.

XVIII. Quod cum proximo die juridico comparuissem, and contumaciam mihi falso
impositam purgassem, and iterata praedicta Recusatione and arbitrum probationis
pro part mea reverendum Virum Edwardum Parry sacrae Theologiae Professorem
nominassem, vos haec admittere recusastis, sed me ad libellum accipiendum and
Procuratorem constituendum adigere voluistis.

XIX. Quod in Acta Curiae referri curastis, me non comparuisse, and in iisdem
narratis tamen, me praesentem admonitum fuisse de comparendo de die in diem
usque ad finem litis, in altero imperite, in altero inepte, in utroque (salva
reverentia vobis debita) injuste.

XX. Quod Sigillum officii curiae* Regiae Praerogativae, and ad facultates,
dispensationibus circa Pluralitatem Beneficiorum and Residentiam temerarie
profusis, and interdum legi divinae repugnantibus apponitis.

XXI. Quod Episcoporum jurisdictionem and ordinariam and excitatam a supremo
Magistratu impedire, ipsos ad Tribunal vestrum protrahere, vexare and
vilipendere non veremini.

XXII. Quod eorum jura Episcopalia in institutionibus notorie usurpastis.

XXIII. Quod rescripta conceditis, in quibus multa, quoad sensum inepta, quoad
verba incongrua continentur, quibus ideo de jure nulla fides adhibenda sit;
cujusmodi sunt quae sub sigillo vestro in hac causa emanarunt.

XXIV. Quod nuper in hac eadem causa, sigillum vestrum literis, in quibus Regia
Majestas laesa fuerit, apponebatur minus discrete, ne quid gravius dicam, judex
tamen indiscretus quoad recusationem iniquo aequiparatur. -- Has ob causas,
quas omnes aut earum plurimas ego Episcopus antedictus coram aequis arbitris
verificare paratus sum (adeoque reverendum virum Edwardum Parry, S. Theologiae
Doctorem, ex part mea nomino) vestrum Tribunal, absente reverendo Praeside,
vestrasque personas, tanquam mihi merito in hac causa suspectas, declino and
recuso ad quemcunque juris effectum.

Dublin. anno Domini 1638.
Reverendo in Christo Fratri Eugenio Guilielmus Ecclesiae Kilmorensis Minister
S. P.
Benign tu quidem (reverende Frater) qui tua praesentia te mihi offers in hoc
tumultu praesidio fore. Nec ego in re simili impar tibi in hoc charitatis
officio deprehenderer. Sed quo minus hoc tuo beneficio utar in praesentia,
multis impedior. In primis loci angustiis, tum calamitosorum omnis ordinis,
sexus, aetatis, numero; qui huc tanquam ad Asylum co^fugiunt. Accedit quorundam
and inter hos Filii mei invaletudo. Quod caput est, non Religionis inter nos
(unica nempe ea est and communis Christiana, quod ego semper and ^ensi and
scriptis professus sum) sed cultus disparitas: nos nempe in ejusmodi miseriis,
lectione sacrarum Scripturarum, precibus assiduis Lingu^ Vernacula ad Deum
fusis, nos ipsos solamur; and quando in humanis tam parum Fidei est, Fidem and
Opem Divinam imploram^s. Ea res si non te, at comites tuos offenderet, nec
prohiberi possent, qui te hic commorantem visitare se velle dicerent: Quo
praetextu circumcelliones isti irrumperent, qui cum caetera omnia nostra
deripuerunt, ad extremum, se nece nostra cultum Deo gratum exhibituros
opinantur. Mihi igitur certum est in divino praesidio acquiescere, Christiano
homini and quidem Episcopo jam pene Septuagenario, Christi causa, nulla mors
acerba esse potest, nulla non oppetenda. Interea si quid tibi visum fuerit
interdicere apud populum sub Anat^emate; ne deinceps, concussis, spoliatis,
toties exutis vim adferant, (mihi nempe soli nihil posc^) rem facies Deo
gratam, tibi honorificam, populo isti (si tibi obtemperaverit) salutarem; sin
minus, at sperate Deum memorem. Cui te, reverende Frater, ex animo commendo.

Tuus in Christo, G. Kilmorensis.
Nov. 11. 1641.
An Advertisement concerning a Character given by Sir Henry Wotton of F. Paul
the Author of the History of the Council of Trent.
SInce there was so particular a mention made of Father Paul in the former
Life, I thought it would not be unacceptable to the Reader to see a Character
that was given of him by Sir Henry Wotton, in a Letter that he writ from Venice
to the Famous and Learned Dr. Collings, the Kings Professor of Divinity in
Cambridge, which is not printed in his Remains: And therefore I hoped it would
be received with the entertainment that is due to every thing that comes from
such a Hand, and is writ on such a Subject. And we may better depend on
Characters that are given in private Letters to Friends, than in more studied
Elogies, where the heat either of friendship or Eloquence is apt to carry a Man
too far; but Letters that pass among Friends, are colder and more careless
things, and therefore they ought to be the less suspected.

SIR,
THough my Feet cannot perform that Counsel which I remember from some
Translation in Siracides, Teras limen sensati viri; yet I should at least have
often visited you with my poor Lines: But on the other side, while I durst not
trust mine own conceit in the power of my present infirmity, and therefore have
seldom written to any; I find my self in the mean time overcharged with diverse
Letters from you of singular kindness, and one of them accompanied with a
dainty peaceful piece: which truly I had not seen before, so as besides the
weight of the Subject, it was welcome, even for the Grace of newness. Yet let
me tell you, I could not but somewhat wonder to find our Spiritual Seneca (you
know whom I mean) among these Reconcilers, having read a former Treatise of his
(if my memory fail me not) of a contrary complexion. Howsoever, let him now
have his due praise with the rest, for showing his Christian Wisdom and
Charity. But I fear, as it was anciently said of a Roman General, That Bellum
sese alit, so it will prove, though in somewhat a different sense, likewise as
true of this Church-warfare, That the very pleasure of contending will foment
Contention till the end of all flesh. But let me leave that Sacred Business to
our well-meaning Fathers.

And now, Sir, having a fit Messenger, and being not long after the time when
love tokens use to pass between Friends, let me be bold to send you for a
New-Years-Gift, a certain Memorial not altogether unworthy of some
entertainment under your Roof, namely a true Picture of Padre Paulo the
Servite, which was first taken by a Painter, whom I sent unto him from my
House, then neighboring this Monastery. I have newly added thereunto a Title
of mine own conception, Council. Trident. evisc^rator.
and had sent the Frame withal if it were portable, which is but of plain Deal
colored black like the Habit of his Order. You have a luminous Parlor, which I
have good cause to remember, not only by delicate Fare, and Freedom (the
Prince of Dishes) but above all your own learned Discourse; for to dine with
you is to dine with many good Authors. In that Room, I beseech you to allow it
a favorable place for my sake.

And that you may have somewhat to tell of him more than a bare Image, if any
shall ask, as in the Table of Cebes; I am desirous to characterize a little
unto you such part of his Nature, Customs and Abilities, as I had occasion to
know by sight or enquiry. He was one of the humblest things that could be seen
within the bounds of Humanity; the very Pattern of that Precept, Quanto
doctior, tanto submissior; and enough alone to demonstrate that Knowledge well
digested non inflat; excellent in Positive, excellent in Scholastical and
Polemical Divinity; a rare Mathematician, even in the most abstruse parts
thereof, as in Algebra and the Theoricks; and yet withal so expert in the
History of Plants, as if he had never perused any book but Nature: Lastly, A
great Canonist, which was the Title of his ordinary Service with the State: And
certainly in the time of the Popes Interdict, they had their principal Light
from him. When he was either reading or writing alone, his manner was to sit
fenced with a Castle of Paper about his Chair, and over Head; for he was of our
Lord of S. Alban's Opinion, That all Air is praedatory, and especially hurtful,
when the Spirits are most employed. You will find a Scar in his Face, that was
from a Roman Assassinate that would have killed him, as he was turned to the
Wall near his Covent; and if there were not a greater Providence about us, it
might often have been easily done, especially upon such a weakly and wearish
Body. He was of a quiet and settled temper, which made him prompt in his
counsels, and answers, and the same in Consultations which Themistocles was in
Action, as will appear unto you in a Passage between him and the Prince of
Conde; The said Prince in a voluntary journey toward Rome came to Venice, where
to give some vent to his own humors, he would often divest himself of his
greatness, and after other less laudable curiosities, not long before his
departure, a desire took him to visit the famous obscure Servite, to whose
Cloister coming twice he was the first time denied to be within; at the second
it was intimated, That by reason of his daily admission to their deliberatives
in the place he could not receive the visit of so illustrious a personage,
without leave from the Senate, which he would seek to procure. This set a great
edge on the Prince, when he saw he should confer with one participant of more
than Monkish Speculations: So after leave gotten, he came the third time, and
there besides other voluntary discourse (which it were a tyranny over you to
repeat) he assailed with a question, enough to have troubled any Man but
himself, and him too, if a precedent accident had not eased him. The question
was this: He desired to be told by him before his going away, who was the true
unmasked Author of the late Tridentine History. You must know, that but newly
advertisement was come from Rome, That the Archbishop of Spalato being there
arrived from England, in an interview between him and the Cardinal Ludovisio,
Nephew to Gregory XV. the said Cardinal after a complemental welcoming of him
into the Lap of the Church, told him by order from the Pope, That his Holiness
would expect from him some Recantation in Print, as an antidote against certain
Books and Pamphlets, which he had published whilst he stood in revolt, namely
his first Manifesto: Item, Two Sermons preached at the Italian Church in
London. Again, a little Treatise entitled, Scogli. And lastly, His great
Volumes about Church Regiment and Controversies: These were all named; for as
touching the Tridentine History, his Holiness, says the Cardinal, will not
press you to any disavowment thereof, though you have an Epistle before the
Original Edition, because we know well enough that Friar Paulo is the Father of
that Brat. Upon this last Piece of the aforesaid Advertisement the good Father
came fairly off; for on a sudden, laying all together, that to disavow the Work
was an untruth, to assume it a danger, and to say nothing, an Incivility; he
took a middle Evasion, telling the Prince, That he understood he was going to
Rome, where he might learn at ease who was the Author of that Work, as they
were freshly intelligenced from thence. Thus without any mercy of your time, I
have been led along from one thing to another, while I have taken pleasure to
remember that Man whom God appointed and furnished for a proper Instrument to
anatomize that Pack of reverend Cheaters. Among whom, I speak of the greater
part, Exceptis senioribus, Religion was shuffled like a Pair of Cards, and the
Dice so many Years were set upon us.

And so wishing you very heartily many good years, I will let you breath, till
you have opened these enclosed.


ERRATA.
Page 79. Margent, for 1. read 2. p. 105. l. 29. after Correction del.. p. 115.
l. 13. for Understanding r. an undertaking. p. 122. l. 16. after Oath r. not,
l. ult. for Baily's Clerk r. Baily. p. 129. l. 18. for 1630 r. 1638. p. 132. l.
18. before as r. such. p. 142. l. 12. for those Articles r. these Articles. p.
150. l. 15. for there r. their. p. 206. l. 10. after carried r. themselves, l.
25. for Forker r. Forbes.

THE COPIES OF CERTAIN LETTERS Which have passed between SPAIN and ENGLAND In
matter of RELIGION, CONCERNING The general Motives to the ROMAN OBEDIENCE,
BETWEEN Mr. James Waddesworth, a late Pensioner of the holy Inquisition in
Sevil, and W. Bedell, a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXV.

To the most HIGH and EXCELLENT PRINCE, Prince CHARLES.
I Should labor much in my excuse, even to my own Judgment, of the highest
boldness, in daring to present these Papers to your Highness, if there were not
some relieving Circumstances, that give me hope, it shall not be disagreeable
to your higher Goodness. There is nothing can see the light, which has the
name of Spain in it, which seems not now properly yours, ever since it pleased
you to honor that Country with your presence. And those very Motives to the
Roman obedience, which had been represented unto you there, in case you had
given way to the propounding them, are in these Letters charitably and calmly
examined; Between a couple of Friends, bred in the same College (that of the
foundation of Sir Walter Mildway of blessed Memory, whom with Honor and
Thankfulness I name) chosen his Scholars at the same Election, lodged in the
same Chamber, after Ministers in the same Diocese. And that they might be
matchable abroad as well as at home, Attendants in the same rank as Chaplains,
on two honorable Ambassadors of the Majesty of the King your Father in
Foreign parts; the one in Italy, the other in Spain. Where, one of them having
changed his Profession, and received a Pension out of the Holy Inquisition
House, and drawn his Wife and Children thither, was lately often in the Eyes of
your Highness: Very joyful I suppose to see you there, not more I am sure, than
the other was solicitous to miss you here. These passages between us I have
hitherto forborne to divulge, out of the hope of further answer from Mr.
Waddesworth, according to his Promise; though since the receipt of my last
(being silent to my self) he excused him in sundry his Letters to others by his
lack of Health. Nor should I have changed my resolution, but that I understand
that presently after your Highnesses departure from Spain, he departed this
Life. Which News, though it grieve me as it ought in respect of the loss of my
Friend, yet it somewhat contenteth me, not to have been lacking in my
endeavor, to the undeceiving a well-meaning man touching the state of our
differences in Religion; nor as I hope to have scandalized him in the manner of
handling them. And conceiving these Copies may be of some public use, the more
being lifted up above their own meanness by so high Patronage, I have
adventured to prefix your Highnesses name before them. Humbly beseeching the
same, that if these Reasons be too weak to bear up the presumption of this
Dedication, it may be charged upon the strong desire some way to express the
unspeakable joy for your Highnesses happy return into England, of one amongst
many thousands,

Of your Highnesses most humble and devoted Servants, W. Bedell.

THE CONTENTS.
1. A Letter of Mr. Waddesworth, containing his Motives to the Roman Obedience.
Dated at Sevil in Spain, April 1. 1615. printed as all the rest out of his own
Handwriting. p. 265. 2. Another Letter from him requiring answer to the
former, from Madrid in Spain, April 14. 1619. p. 282. 3. The Answer to the last
Letter, Dated Aug. 5. 1619. p. 284. 4. A Letter from Mr. Waddesworth upon the
receipt of the former. From Madrid, dated October. 28. 1619. received May 23.
1620. p. 291. 5. The Answer to the last Letter, June 15. 1620. p. 294. 6. A
Letter from Mr. Waddesworth, from Madrid, June 8. 1620. p. 298 7. A Letter of
Mr. Dr. Halls sent to Mr. Waddesworth, and returned into England with his
Marginal Notes. p. 300. 8. A Letter returning it enclosed to Mr. Dr. Hall, p.
304. 9. A Letter sent to Mr. Waddesworth, together with the Examination of his
Motives, October. 22. 1620. p. 307. 10. The Examination of the Motives in the
first Letter, p. 308.
The Heads of the Motives reduced unto twelve Chapters, answering unto the like
Figures in the Margent of the first of Mr. Waddesworth's Letters.
OF the Preamble. The titles Catholic, Papist, Traitor, Idolater. The
uniformity of Faith in Protestant Religion. p. 311. Chap. I.
Of the contrariety of Sects pretended to be amongst Reformers. Their
differences, how matters of Faith. Of each pretending Scripture, and the Holy
Ghost, p. 319. Chap. II.
Of the want of a humane, external, infallible Judge and Interpreter. The
Objections answered. First, That Scriptures are often matter of Controversy.
Secondly, That they are the Law and Rule. Thirdly, That Princes are no Judges.
Fourthly, Nor a whole Council of Reformers. The Pope's being the Judge and
Interpreter overthrown by Reasons; And by his palpable miss-in^erpreting the
Scriptures in his Decretals. The style of his Court. His Breves about the Oath
of Allegiance, Chap. III.
p. 328. Of the state of the Church of England, and whether it may be
reconciled with Rome. Whether the Pope be Antichrist, PAULO V. VICE-DEO, OUR
LORD GOD THE POPE: The Relation de moderandis titulis, with the issue of it.
Chap. IV.
p. 358. Of the safeness to join to the Roman being confessed a true Church by
her Opposites. Mr. P. Wotton's perversion, printed at Venice. The Badge of
Christ's Sheep. Chap. V.
p. 372. Of fraud and corruption in alleging Councils, Fathers and Doctors.
The falsifications imputed to Morney, Bishop Jewel, Mr. Fox, Tyndals Testament:
Parsons four Falsehoods in seven Lines. A taste of the Forgeries of the Papacy.
In the ancient Popes Epistles, Constantines Donation, Gratian; The Schoolmen
and Breviaries by the complaint of the Venetian Divines. The Fathers not
untoucht. Nor the Hebrew Text. Chap. VI.
p. 384. Of the Armies of evident Witnesses for the Romanists. Whence it seems
so to the unexpert Soldier. The Censure of the Centurists touching the
Doctrine of the Ancients. Danaeus of S. Augustines opinion touching Purgatory.
An instance or two of Imposture in wresting Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine,
Chap. VII.
p. 409. Of the Invisibility of the Church said to be an Evasion of
Protestants. The Promises made to the Church, and her glorious Titles, how they
are verified out of S. Augustine; falsely applied to the whole Visible Church,
or Representative, or the Pope, p. 422. Chap. VIII.
Of lack of Uniformity in matters of Faith in all Ages and Places. What matters
of Faith the Church holds uniformly; and so the Protestants. Of Wickliff and
Hus, etc. whether they were Martyrs, p. 426. Chap. IX.
Of the original of Reformation in Luther, Calvin, Scotland, England. Whether
King Henry the Eighth were a good Head of the Church. Of the Reformers in
France and Holland. The original, growth and supporting of the Popes Monarchy
considered, p. 429. Chap. X.
Of lack of Succession, Bishops, true Ordinations, Orders, Priesthood. The
fabulous Ordination at the Nags-Head examined. The Statute 8 Elizabeth. Bonners
slighting the first Parliament, and Dr. Bancrofts answer to Mr. Alablaster. The
Form of Priesthood enquired of. p. 453. Chap. XI.
Of the Conclusion. Master Waddesworth's Agonies and Protestation. The
Protestation and Resolution of the Author and conceit of Mr. Waddesworth, and
his account, Chap. XII.
p. 481.
THE COPIES OF Certain LETTERS Which have passed between SPAIN and ENGLAND In
matter of RELIGION.
Salutem in Crucifixo. To the Worshipful, my good Friend Mr. William Bedell,
etc.
Mr. Bedell,
MY very loving Friend: After the old plain fashion, I salute you heartily,
without any new fine complements or affected Phrases. And by my inquiry,
understanding of this Bearer, that after your being at Venice, you had passed
to Constantinople, and were returned to S. Edmundsbury, in safety, and with
health, I was exceeding glad thereof; for I wish you well as to my self: and he
telling me further, that to morrow, God willing, he was to depart from hence to
imbark for England, and offering me to deliver my Letters, if I would write
unto you, I could not omit by these hasty scribled lines to signify unto you
the continuance of my sincere love, never to be blotted out of my breast (if
you kill it not with unkindness, like Mr. Joseph Hall) neither by distance of
place, nor success of time, nor difference of Religion. For (contrary to the
slanders raised against all, because of the offenses committed by some) we are
not taught by our Catholic Religion, either to diminish our natural obligation
to our native Country, or to alter our moral affection to our former friends.

And although for my change becoming Catholic, I did expect of some Revilers
to be termed rather than proved an Apostata, yet I never looked for such terms
from Mr. Hall, whom I esteemed either my Friend, or a modester Man; whose
flanting Epistle I have not answered, because I would not foil my Hands with a
poetical Railer, more full with froth of Words than substance of Matter, and of
whom according to his beginning, I could not expect any sound Arguments but
vain Flourishes, and so much, I pray, let him know from me, if you please.

Unto your self, my good Friend, who do understand better than Mr. Hall, what
the Doctors in Schools do account Apostasy, and how it is more and worse than
Heresy, I do refer both him and my self, whether I might not more probably
call him Heretic, than he term me at the first dash Apostata: But I would
abstain from such biting Satyrs. And if he, or any other, will needs fasten
upon me such bitter terms, let them first prove that, In all points of Faith I
have fallen totally from Christian Religion, as did Julian the Apostata: For so
is Apostasy described and differenced from Heresy. Apostasia est error,
hominis baptizati, contrarius Fidei Catholiae ex toto: and Haeresis est error
pertinax, hominis baptizati, contrarius Fidei Catholicae ex part. So that he
should have showed, first, my errors in matters of Faith; not any error in
other Questions, but in decreed matters of Faith (as Protestants use to say)
necessary to Salvation. Secondly, That such errors were maintained with
obstinate pertinacy; and pertinacy is, where such errors are defended against
the consent and determination of the Catholic Church; and also knowing that
the whole Church teaches the contrary to such opinions, yet will persist in
them: And yet further, if there be any doubt, he must manifest unto me which is
the Catholic Church. Thirdly, to make it full Apostasy, he should have
convinced me to have swarved and backslidden (as you know the Greek Word
signifies) like Julian renouncing his Baptism, and forsaken totally all
Christian Religion: a horrible imputation, though false, nor so easily proved
as declaimed: But I thank God daily that I am become Catholic, as all our
Ancestors were till of late years, and as the most of Christendom still be at
this present day, with whom I had rather be miscalled a Papist, a Traitor, an
Apostata, or Idolater, or what he will, than to remain a Protestant with him
still. For in Protestant Religion I could never find Uniformity of a settled
Faith, and so no quietness of Conscience, especially for three or four years
before my coming away, although by reading, studying, praying, and conferring,
I did most carefully and diligently labor to find it among them.

Lutherans, Zwinglians, Calvinists, ^rotestants, Puritans, Cartwrightists, and
Brownists, some of them damning each other; many of them avouching their
Positions to be matters of Faith (for if they made them but School Questions of
Opinion only, they should not so much have disquieted me) and all these being
so contrary, yet every one pretending Scriptures, and arrogating certain humane
external Judge, so infallibly to interpret Scriptures, and by them and by the
assistance of the Holy Ghost so undoubtedly to define questions of Faith, that
I could assure my self and my Soul, This Judge is infallible; and to him thou
ought in Conscience to obey and yield thy understanding in all his
determinations of Faith, for he cannot err in those Points. And note that I
speak now of an external, humane, infallible Judge. For I know the Holy Ghost
is the Divine internal and principal Judge; and the Scriptures be the Law or
Rule, by which that humane external Judge must proceed. But the Holy Scriptures
being often the Matter of Controversy, and sometime questioned which be
Scriptures, and which be not, they alone of themselves cannot be Judges: And
for the Holy Ghost likewise every one pretending him to be his Patron, how
should I certainly know by whom he speaks, or not? For to Men we must go to
learn, and not to Angels, nor to God himself immediately. The Head of your
Church was the Queen (an excellent notable Prince) but a Woman, not to speak,
much less to be Judge in the Church; and since a learned King, like King Henry
the Eighth, who was the first temporal Prince that ever made himself Ex Regio
jure Head of the Church in Spiritual matters, a new strange Doctrine, and
therefore justly condemned by Calvin for monstrous. But suppose he were such a
Head, yet you all confess that he may err in matters of Faith. And so you
acknowledge may your Archbishops and Bishops, and your whole Clergy in their
Convocation-House, even making Articles and Decrees: yea, though a Council of
all your Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants, etc. of Germany, France, England,
etc. were all joined together, and should agree all (which they never will do)
to compound and determine the differences among themselves, yet by the ordinary
Doctrine of most Protestants they might in such a Council err, and it were
possible in their Decrees to be deceived. But if they may err, how should I
know and be sure when and wherein they did, or did not err? for though on the
one side, Aposse ad esse non valet semper consequentia, yet aliquan^o valet,
and on the other side, frustra dicitur potentia, quae nunquam ducitur in actum.
So that if neither in general nor in particular, in public nor private, in
Head nor Members, jointly nor severally, you have no visible, external, humane,
infallible Judge, who cannot err, and to whom I might have recourse for
decision of doubts in matters of Faith, I pray let Mr. Hall tell me, Where
should I have fixed my foot? for God is my Witness, my Soul was like Noah's
Dove, a long time hovering and desirous to discover Land, but seeing nothing
but moveable and troublesome deceivable Water, I could find no quiet center for
my Conscience, nor any firm Foundation for my Faith in Protestant Religion.
Wherefore hearing a sound of Harmony and Consent, That the Catholic Church
could not err, and that only in the Catholic Church, as in Noah's Ark, was
infallibility, and possibility of salvation; I was so occasioned, and I think
had important reason, like Noah's Dove, to seek out, and to enter into this Ark
of Noah. Hereupon I was Whether the Church of England were the true Church, or
not? For by consent of all, the true Church cannot err; but the Church of
England, Head and Members, King, Clergy, and People, as before is said, yea a
whole Council of Protestants by their own grant may err, ergo, no true Church.
If no true Church, no salvation in it; therefore come out of it: but that I was
loath to do* Rather I labored mightily to defend it, both against the Puritans,
and against the Catholics: But the best Arguments I could use against the
Puritans from the Authority of the Church, and of the ancient Doctors
interpreting Scriptures against them, when they could not answer them, they
would reject them for Popish, and fly to their own arrogant spirit, by which
forsooth they must control others. This I found on the one side most absurd,
and to breed an Anarchy of confusion: and yet when I came to answer the
Catholic Arguments on the other side against Protestants, urging the like
Authority and Uniformity of the Church, I perceived the most Protestants did
frame evasions, in effect like those of the Puritans, inclining to their
private Spirit, and other uncertainties.

Next therefore I applied my self to follow their Opinion, who would make the
Church of England and the Church of Rome still to be all one in essental
Points, and the differences to be accidential; confessing the Church of Rome to
be a true Church, though sick, or corrupted, and the Protestants to be derived
from it and reformed: and to this end I labored much to reconcile most of our
particular controversies: But in truth, I found such contrarieties, not only
between Catholics and Protestants, but even among Protestants themselves, that
I could never settle my self fully in this Opinion of some reconciliation,
which I know many great Scholars in England did favor. For considering so many
opposite great Points, for which they did excommunicate and put to death each
other, and making the Pope to be Antichrist, proper or improper, it could never
sink into my Brain how these two could be descendent or Members sound nor
unsound The Church of Rome to be a true Church, though peradventure faulty in
some things: And contrarily, not only the Catholics, but also the Puritans,
Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. did all deny the Church of England to be a true
Church: therefore it would be more safe and secure to become a Roman Catholic,
who have a true Church by consent of both parties, than to remain a Protestant,
who do alone plead their own cause, having all the other against them: For the
testimony of our selves, and our contraries also, is much more sufficient, and
more certain than to justify especially those about the Church, which is cardo
negotii (and herein because the Bearer stays now a day or two longer, I will
enlarge my self more than I purposed) and so I would needs peruse the Original
quotations and Texts of the Councils, Fathers, and Doctors, in the Authors
themselves, which were alleged on both parts, to see if they were truly cited,
and according to the meaning of the Authors: a labor of much labor, and of
travel sometime to find the Books, wherein I found much fraud committed by the
Protestants; and had far greater and better armies of evident Witnesses on
their sides, much more than the Protestants; in so much that the Centurists are
fain often to censure and reject the plain testimonies of those Ancients, as if
their new censure were sufficient to disauthorize the others ancient sentences.
And so I remember Danaeus in Commentariis super D. Augustine. Enchirid. ad
Laurentium. Where S. Augustine plainly avoucheth Purgatory: He rejects S.
Augustines Opinion, saying, hic est naevus Augustini: But I had rather follow
S. Augustine's Opinion, than his Censure; for who are they to control the
Fathers?

There are indeed some few places in Authors, which prima facie seem to favor
Protestants, as many Heretics allege some Texts of Scriptures, whose sound of
Words seem to make for their Opinions: But being well examined and interpreted,
according to the Analogy of faith, and according to many other places of the
same Authors, where they do more fully explain their Opinions; so they appear
to be wrested, and from the purpose.

In fine, I found my self evidently convinced, both by many Authorities, and by
many Arguments, which now I do not remember all, nor can here repeat those
which I do remember: But only some few Arguments I will relate unto you which
prevailed most with me, besides those aforementioned.

Invisibility of their Church: For though sometime it may be diminished and
obscured, yet the Catholic Church must ever be visible, set on a Hill, and not
as Light hid under a Bushel; for how should it enlighten and teach her
Children, if invisible, or how should Strangers, and Pagans, and others, be
converted unto her? or where should any find the Sacraments, if invisible?

Uniformity and Concord in all matters of Faith, though not in all matters of
Ceremony or Government: But the Protestants Church has not in all Ages, nor in
all places such uniform concord, no not in one Age, as is manifest to all the
World, and as Father Parsons proved against Fox's Martyrs, Wickliffe, Husse,
and the rest: Ergo the Protestants Church, not the true Church.

Again, by that saying, Haereses ad originem; and so considering Luther's first
rancor against the Dominicans, his disobedience and contempt of his former
Superiors, his vow-breaking, and violent courses, even causing rebellion
against the Emperor, whom he reviles, and other Princes most shamefully;
surely such arrogant disobedience, Schism, and Rebellions, had no warrant nor
vocation of God to plant his Church, but of the Devil to begin a Schism and a
Sect. So likewise for Calvin, to say nothing of all that D. Bolsecus brings
against him; I do urge only what Mr. Hooker, Dr. Bancroft, and Saravia do prove
aganst him, for his unquietness and ambition, revolving the Commonwealth, and
so unjustly expelling and depriving the Bishop of Geneva, and other temporal
Lords of their due obedience, and ancient inheritance. Moreover, I refer you to
the stirs, broils, sedition, and murders which Knox and the Geneva-Gospellers
caused in Scotland against their lawful Governors, against their Queen, and
against our King, even in his Mothers Belly. Nor will I insist upon the
passions which first moved King Henry violently to divorce himself from his
lawful Wife, to fall out with the Pope his Friend, to marry the Lady Anne
Bullen, and soon after to behead her; to disinherit Queen Mary; and enable
Queen Elizabeth, and presently to disinherit Queen Elizabeth, and to restore
Queen Mary; to hang up Catholics for Traitors, and to burn Protestants for
Heretics, to destroy Monasteries, and to pill Churches: Were these fit
beginnings for the Gospel of Christ? I pray was this Man a good Head of Gods
Church? for my part, I beseech our Lord bless me from being a Member of such a
Head, or such a Church. I come to France and Holland, where you know by the
Hugonots and Geuses all Calvinists, what Civil Wars they have raised, how much
Blood they have shed, what Rebellion, Rapine, and Desolations they have
occasioned principally for their new Religion, founded in Blood like Draco's
Laws: But I would gladly know whether you can approve such bloody broils for
Religion, or no? I know Protestants de facto, do justify the Civil Wars of
France and Holland for good against their Kings; but I could never understand
of them quo jure: If the Hollanders be Rebels (as they are) why did we support
them? if they be no Rebels because they fight for the pretended liberty of
their ancient Privileges, and for their new Religion; we see it is an easy
matter to pretend Liberties, and also why may not others as well revolt for
their old Religion? Or I beseech you, why is that accounted Treason against the
State in Catholics, which is called Reason of State in Protestants? I reduce
this Argument to few Words, That Church which is founded and begun in Malice,
Disobedience, Passion, Blood and Rebellion, cannot be the true Church: but it
is evident to the World, That the Protestant Churches in Germany, France,
Holland, Geneva, etc. were so founded, and in Geneva and Holland are still
continued in Rebellion: ergo, They are not true Churches.

Furthermore, where is not Succession both ergo, no true Church. I prove the
minor: where is no consecration nor ordination of Bishops and Priests,
according to the due Form and right intention required necessarily by the
Church and ancient Councils, there is no succession of true Pastors: But among
Protestants the said due Form and right intention are not observed, ergo, no
succession of true Pastors. The said due Form and right intention are not
observed among Protestants in France, Holland, nor Germany, where they have no
Bishops, and where Laymen do intermeddle in the making of their Ministers. And
for England, whereas the Councils require the Ordines minores of Subdeacon and
the rest, to go before Priesthood; your Ministers are made per saltum without
ever being Subdeacons. And whereas the Councils require three Bishops to assist
at the consecration of a Bishop, it is certain that at the Nags-Head in
Cheapside, where consecration of your first Bishops was attempted, but not
effected, (whereabout I remember the controversy you had with one) there was
but one Bishop, and I am sure there was such a matter: And although I know and
have seen the Records themselves, that afterward there was a consecration of
Dr. Parker at Lambeth, and three Bishops named, viz. Miles Coverdal of Exceter,
one Hodgeskin Suffragan of Bedford, and another whose name I have forgotten,
yet it is very doubtful that Coverdal being made Bishop of Exceter in King
Edward's time (when all Councils and Church-Canons were little observed) he was
never himself Canonically consecrated; and so if he were no Canonical Bishop,
he could not make another Canonical: And the third unnamed, as I remember (but
am not sure) was only a Bishop elect, and not consecrated, and so was not
sufficient. But hereof I am sure, that they did consecrate Parker by virtue of
a Breve from the Queen, as Head of the Church, Who indeed being no true Head,
and a Woman, I cannot see how they could make a true Consecration grounded on
her Authority. Furthermore, making your Ministers, you keep not the right
intention; for neither do the Orderer nor the Ordered give nor receive the
Orders as a Sacrament; nor with any intention of Sacrificing. Also they want
the Matter and Form with which according to the Councils and Canons of the
Church holy Orders should be given; namely for the Matter, Priesthood is given
by the delivery of the Patena with Bread, and of the Chalice with Wine:
Deaconship by the delivery of the Book of the Gospels; and Subdeaconship by the
delivery of the Patena alone, and of the Chalice empty. And in the substantial
form of Priesthood you do fail most of all, which Form consists in these Words,
Accipe potestatem offerendi Sacrificium in Ecclesia pro Vivis and Mortuis,
which are neither said nor done by you, and therefore well may you be called
Ministers, as also Laymen are, but you are no Priests. Wherefore I conclude,
wanting Subdeaconship, wanting undoubted Canonical Bishops, wanting right
intention, wanting Matter and due Form, and deriving even that you seem to have
from a Woman the Head of your Church, therefore you have no true Pastors, and
consequently no true Church. And so to conclude, That the Church of England was
not the true Church, but that the Church of Rome was and is the only true
Church, because it alone is Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic, having
Succession, Unity, and Visibility, in all Ages, and Places; yet what Agonies I
passed with my Will, here I will over-pass. Only I cannot pretermit to tell
you, That at last having also mastered and subdued my will to relent unto my
understanding, by means of Prayer, and by God Almighty's Grace principally, I
came to break through many tentations and impediments, and from a troubled
unquiet Heart, to a fixed and peaceable tranquillity of Mind, for which I do
most humbly thank our sweet Lord and Savior Jesus, before whom with all
reverence I do avouch and swear unto you, as I shall answer it in the dreadful
Day of Judgment, when all Hearts shall be discovered, That I forsook Protestant
Religion for very fear of Damnation; and became a Catholic with good hope of
Salvation; and that in this hope I do continue and increase daily: And that I
would not for all the World become a Protestant again. And for this which here
I have written unto you in great have, I know there be many Replies and
Rejoynders wherewith I could never be satisfied; nor do I desire any further
Disputation about them, but rather to spend the rest of my life in Devotion;
yet in part to give you, my dear good Friend, some account of my sel^, having
now so good an occasion, and fit a Messenger, and by you if you please to
render a reason of my Faith to Mr. Hall, who in his said printed Epistle, in
one place desires to know the Motives thereof, I have thus plainly made
relation of some Points among many. Whereunto if Mr. Hall will make any Reply,
I do desire it may be directly, and fully to the Points, and in friendly Terms,
upon which condition I do pardon what is past: and of you I know I need not
require any such circumstances. And so most seriously entreating and praying to
our gracious Lord to direct and keep us all and ever in his holy Truth, I
commend you unto his heavenly Grace, and my self unto your friendly love.

Your very affectionate, and true loving Friend, James Waddesworth.
Sevil in Spain, April 1. 1615.
To the Worshipful his respected Friend, Mr. William Bedell, at his House in S.
Edmundsbury, or at Horinger, be there delivered in Suffolk.
Kind Mr. Bedel,
MIne old acquaintance and Friend, having heard of your health and worldly
welfare, by this Bearer Mr. Austen your Neighbor, and by him having
opportunity to salute you with these few Lines, I could not omit; though some
few years since I wrote you by one who since told me certainly he delivered my
Letters, and that you promised answer, and so you are in my debt, which I do
not claim nor urge so much, as I do that in truth and before our Lord I speak
it, you do owe me love in all mutual amity, for the hearty affectionate love
which I have and ever did bear unto you with all sincerity. For though I love
not your Religion (wherein I could never find solid Truth, nor firm hope of
Salvation, as dow I do being a Catholic, and our Lord is my Witness, who shall
be my Judge) yet indeed I do love your person, and your ingenuous, honest,
good, moral condition, which ever I observed in you: nor do I desire to have
altercations with Mr. Joseph Hall (especially if he should proceed as
Satyrically as he has begun with me) nor with any other Man, and much less
would I have any debate with your self, whom I do esteem and affect as before I
have written: nor would I spend the rest of my life (which I take to be short,
for my Lungs are decaying) in any Questions, but rather in Devotion, wherein I
do much more desire to be hot and fervorous, than in Disputations, beseeching
our Lord to forgive my coldness, yea my neglect therein, and to pardon and free
me from all sin, and to guide and keep you in all happiness, even as I wish for
my own Soul, through the Redemption of our sweet Savior, and by the
intercession of his holy Mother, and all Saints, Amen.

Written in have from Madrid, April 14. 1619. Your assured true Friend, James
Waddesworth.
Received, June 4. 1619.
To the Worshipful my very good Friend, Mr. James Waddesworth at Madrid,
deliver this.
Salutem in Christo Jesu.
THe late receipt of your Letters (good Master Waddesworth) did diversely affect
me with joy and shame; and I know not with whether most. I was glad to hear of
you, and your prosperous state, much more to receive a kind Letter from you:
Ashamed therein to be called upon for debt; who have ever endeavored to live
by that Rule of the Apostle, Owe nothing to any Man. Yet not so much for that
which you most urge the debt of love, since by that Text it appears, that it can
never be so discharged, as there should not be more behind to pay. And your
self who challenge this of me, do owe me as much or well more. For let me tell
you, I have the advantage of you herein by my Profession, for where your love
is to me as to a Man, or to an honest Man, nor can by your present persuasion
go any further, I can and do love you as my dear Brother, and fellow Member in
the mystical body of our Lord Jesus Christ. And from this ground (to his
knowledge I do appeal) I do heartily pray for you, and bear with you, and as
the Apostle enjoins, Romans 15.7. receive you with a true brotherly affection. I
am not therefore ashamed of this debt, but do rejoice as much in the owing of
it, as in the payment. But my shame grows from the being behind with you in the
office of writing. Wherein yet hear my honest and true excuse. Neither will I
go about to set off one debt with another. For you may remember, how at our
parting you promised to write to me touching the state of Religion there, which
if we shall make out a perfect reckoning, I account to be a good debt still.
But this I say, when your Letters of the first of April, 1615. came to my
Hands, I purposed to return answer by the same Bearer, who as he told me, was
to return about the Midsummer following. But I had a sudden and extraordinary
journey which came between, and kept me from home till after the Commencement,
so as that opportunity was lost. Besides, upon the reading of your Letters, I
perceived your intention was to have them imparted to Dr. Hall, expecting in a
sort some reply from him. To him therefore did I send them. After some Months I
received this answer, which though I had once purposed to conceal, as not
willing to be the mean of any exasperation between you, yet now hoping of your
wisdom and patience, I send you enclosed, that it may be some evidence of my
true excuse. Upon the receipt of it, I began to frame an answer to the Points
of your Letter, according to your desire, full and in friendly terms. I had
well-nigh finished it, when I was presented to this Benefice, and thereby
entered into a world of distractions. These, together with the labor of
writing it over, and uncertainty of safe conveying my Letters to you, did make
me procrastinate my payment, till now to my shame you should need to demand it.
And that I may by the more shaming my self obtain a more easy penance from
you; I confess to you, I was sometime half in mind, (having especially
differred it so long) to suppress it altogether. First out of mine own natural
disposition, who have ever abhorred contention: and whereas in matters of
Religion there ought to be the fairest Wars, I could never yet meet with any of
that side of so patient a mind, but by opposition he would be unsettled. For
your self, though I knew your former moderate temper, and (as I remember I
wrote to Dr. Hall) believed you in that which you protest, that out of
Conscience you were such as you profess; yet methought I perceived by your
quick manner to him, and some passages in the conclusion of your Letter, you
were rather desirous to enjoy the quiet possession of your own opinion, than
come to any further disputation whose is the right. And in truth the time of
that trial had been proper, before your departure: nor you had too far engaged
your self, and were to justify by your constancy, the wisdom of your change.
Besides; since the sum of the error of that side, as I have ever conceived
it, is believing rather too much, than failing in any point necessary to
salvation, that notable place of the Apostle, Romans 14.1. came to my mind,
especially after that I had once occasion to preach of it, where he forbids
controversies of disputations with those that are infirm in Faith. Who art thou
(says he) that judge another Man's Servant? he stands or falls to his
own Master. Why should I grieve you, and perhaps make my Friend mine Enemy (as
Saint Paul the Galatians) by saying the truth. The World is full enough of
contentious Writings, which as by your Letter appears you had seen ere ye
resolved. If those had not satisfied you, what could I hope to add to them?
These things moved me; but as you say, they did not yet satisfy me. For all
Men are interested in the defense of truth, how much more he that is called to
be a Preacher of it? All Christians are admonished by S. Jude, To fight for the
Faith once given to the Saints; how much more those that are leaders in this
warfare: How could I say I loved our Lord Jesus Christ, if his honor being
questioned I should be silent? How could I approve to mine own Soul, that I
loved you, if I suffered you to enjoy your own error, suppose not damnable?
Besides that, you and perhaps others also might be confirmed in it, perhaps
interpreting my silence for a confession that your Motives were unanswerable.
But therein I was not only resolved my self to the contrary, but thought it so
easy to resolve any indifferent mind, as methought it was more shame not to
have done it at the first, than praise to do it at the last. As for the success
of my endeavor, I was to leave it to God. Many and secret are the ways of his
Providence, which serves it self sometimes even of errors, to the safer
conduct of us to our final happiness. Some I had known, and heard of more, who
being at first carried away with the shows of Unity, Order, Succession,
Infallibility, when they found them empty of Truth, and the Cloaks of Pride,
Ambition, Covetousness, joined with an Obstinacy to defend all Corruptions how
palpable soever, by finding the difference of these Hulls from their Fathers
Table, had with the Prodigal-Son returned home again. To conclude, I accounted
my self still in debt, and was I confess to you unwilling to dye in it; and
sometimes vowed to God, in the midst of my troubles, if I might once see an end
of them, to endeavor to discharge it. And now having by his mercy not only
attained that, but a new occasion presented me presently thereupon, by your
calling for satisfaction to pay it, and means offered me to send it safely: I
take this motion to proceed from God, and do humbly desire his Majesty to turn
it to good. It remains therefore, good Mr. Waddesworth, that I do entreat your
pardon of that slackness that is past, and gentleness to take it as I shall be
able to pay it. My employments both ordinary and extraordinary are many: The
bulk of it is too great to convey in one Letter, consisting of sundry Sheets of
Paper; and at this present there lies an extraordinary task upon me, so as I
cannot presently write it out. I do therefore no more now but acknowledge the
debt, and promise speedy payment. Unless I shall add this also, that I do
undertake to pay interest for the forbearance; and according as I shall
understand by Mr. Austen shall be fittest and safest, to send it in parts, or
all at once. To the conclusion of your last Letter, wherein you profess your
desire to spend the rest of your life rather in the heat of Devotion, than of
Disputation, desiring pardon of coldness that way, and of all other your sins,
and that it would please God to guide and keep me in all happiness as your
self, through the redemption of our sweet Savior, and by the intercession of
his holy mother and all Saints. I do most thankfully and willingly subscribe
Amen: Returning unto you from my heart your own best wishes. Neither is it my
purpose to call into question the solidity of truth, or firmness of the hope of
Salvation, which you find in your present way. This only I say. Even for us
also has Christ dyed, and for our Redemption ha^h he shed his Blood. Sinners
indeed we are, but of his Flock, and among his p^or Sheep are we numbered.
Et pro nobis Christus mortuus est, and pro nostra Redemptione Sanguinem suum
fudit. Peccatores quidem, sed de ipsius grege sumus, and inter ejus oviculas
numeramur: This is my Tenet. And if the Doctrine of the Holy Bible do contain
solid truth, and believing in the name of the Son of God do give firm hope of
salvation, according to Gods own Record, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. we are persuaded
we have both. I will add this more; We know that we are translated from Death
to Life, because we love our Brethren. With this Oil in our Lamps, which we
desire may be always in store in our Vessels also our hearts, we attend the
coming of the Bridegroom; and say cheerfully, even so come, Lord Jesus.
Etiam veni Domine Jesu. To whose gracious protection I do most heartily commit
you, and do rest

Your assured Friend, and loving Brother, W. Bedell.
Horningesherth, August 5. 1619.
To the Worshipful Mr. William Bedell at Horningesherth near S. Edmundsbury in
Suffolk, these.
Salutem in Crucifixo.
Worthy Sir,
I Was exceeding glad to perceive by your kind, modest, and discreet Letters of
the fifth of August last, that you are still permanent in your own good nature,
and constant in your love to me: not like Mr. Joseph Hall, neither bitterly
reviling, nor flourishing impertinently. Unto whom I pray you return his
scoffing railing Letter, with these few marginal Notes. I pray God forgive him,
and make him a more humbler and meeker Man. And I for my part do freely pardon
all his foul terms against me. And though in gratitude and justice I am bound,
and so do love and respect you more than him, for your greater courtesy to me,
and for your better value in your self; yet even him I can and do and am bound
to love not only as an Enemy, or a Creature of God, or as I do you for an
honest, moral, good, discreet Man, but even further and beyond that which you
seem to understand that we cannot by our Doctrine proceed in love: viz. As Men
having Souls, for whom our Savior has dyed; and so as possible members though
indeed not actual branches of his mystical Body: Yea for such as may come to be
ingrafted and bear Fruit in him, when we may be withered, cut off, or fallen
away. As for your serious Apology and excuse for not answering my first Letters
all this while, I do easily admit it, and assure my self that all the
circumstances, impediments, and occasions were such, as you affirm: nor did I
expect, nor urge, in my first nor second Letters, any answer about
Controversies in Religion (for I ever said we could say nothing of substance
which before had not been said) but only gave you by Mr. Hall's occasion some
few reasons of my Faith, wherein still I protest I had rather be devout than be
troubled to dispute, not for fear or doubt, but because I am so fully resolved
in my self, and do think it a very superfluous labor, toties and melius ab
aliis actum agere. So that I desired rather answer of courtesy than of
Controversy, which now by Mr. Astons means I received, and do much esteem it,
and heartily thank you for it. Nevertheless, when your Reply unto my plain and
few reasons come, I will for your sake both read them over, and according to my
little health, less leisure, and my poor ability (which is least of all) return
you some such short Rejoinder as it shall please almighty God to enable me,
being glad to perceive by your last that you do subscribe to our intercession
by our blessed Lady, and other holy Saints; which also I hope and wish you
would fully extend to our invocation of Saints as Intercessors, not as
Redeemers, for that were Blasphemy indeed and Idolatry; from which our sweet
Savior deliver us, and ever keep you, my good dear Friend, as I desire.

Madrid, in haste, October. 26. 1619. James Waddesworth.

To the Worshipful my very good Friend, Mr. James Waddesworth, at Madrid,
deliver this.
Salutem in Christo Jesu.
YOur Letters of the 26 of October, (beloved Master Waddesworth) were long upon
the way, and came not to my hands till the 23 of May. In them I received your
courteous acceptance of my excuse for my former silence, and censure of Dr.
Hall's Letter with the profession of your love to me and him, further than I
accounted you could by your Doctrine proceed, viz. as redeemed by Christ, and
possible Members of his mystical Body. Truly Sir, I will not change Words with
you hereabouts, but I account still to be an honest Man, restrains from that,
to be redeemed by our Savior, since that is as large as humane Nature, this is
given to fewer, of whom a Man may say as our Lord does of one in the Gospel,
that they are not far from the Kingdom of God. Howsoever, I have still my
intention that we out of our Profession may love you better than you can us:
since it is more to be an actual, than a possible member of Christ; and the
Communion of Saints is a straiter Bond, than Redemption by Christ, and
possibility of being ingrafted and bearing Fruit in his mystical Body. And I
would to Christ that of all other Controversies this were the vehementest
between us, which should love each other most. Wherein although I would strive
and do my best to have the better, yet see how equally I would contend. For
both I would acknowledge freely, my self far short of that which I may by my
Profession do in this kind, and persuade my self better of your secret
affection to us, than you may by your Profession express. I will not easily
believe that you can find in your Heart to count that Man a Dog, and out of
the Church, and in state of damnation, that steadfastly believes in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by him in the Blessed Trinity; that confesses all the
Doctrine of Holy Scriptures, the sum whereof is in the Creed; that lastly,
with a charitable affection embraces all that hold this Faith, throughout the
World, yea even those that hate and persecute him to the death. Wherein I
forbear for the present to enlarge, because I speak more of it in my answer to
your first Letters; which Mr. Aston gives me hope that himself ere long will
consign into your hands. Now by his direction, I send you only advice of the
receipt of your last, with hearty thanks for them, desirous not to run further
in arrearages with you in this office of writing. This one thing I add, that
where you write You are glad I do subscribe to your intercession by the Saints,
wishing me fully to extend it to invocation of Saints as Intercessors, though
not as Redeemers; I should be very glad if I could as well content you in all
other Points as that one: coming thus prepared in all controversies with you,
and all Men, to yield whatsoever I may, saving the truth. But as I conceive it,
there is great odds between these two. To desire God to grant us this or that
good thing by the intercession of the Saints; and, To use invocation of
themselves. The one supposes only that the Saints in glory generally knowing
the warfare of those on Earth, are careful for them, and omit not this act of
neverfailing charity to pray for them. These prayers it hopes, and desires of
God may be helpful to us, by the only merit of our Lord Jesus Christ; in the
same sort as those of the Saints wheresoever on Earth; as 2 Cor. 1.10.11.
Ephesians. 6.1. Philem. v.22. The other, that the Saints departed know our wants,
and states in particular, and hear our Prayers, and by consequent know our
Hearts: which is flatly contrary to the Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 6.30. Esaias 63.16.
To omit now that you do not only desire them to pray for you, but ask at their
hands Grace and Glory, trust in them, vow to them, swear by them, offer and
receive the Sacrifice of the New Testament to their honor and glory, and
desire it may be accepted by their Patronage. Wherefore as I am glad, to
perceive that you do reverse those blasphemies indeed, Salva me, Salvatrix;
Redime me, Redemptrix; and will not subscribe to those Words of Bellarmine, non
erit absurdum si sancti viri Redemptores nostri aliquo modo, id est secundum
aliquid, non simpliciter, and largo modo, non in rigore verborum esse dicantur:
And again, cur inepte dicantur Sancti viri aliquo modo passionibus suis delicta
nostra posse redimere? so I hope and wish you would do the like for calling
upon them, and presenting their Merits unto God; and as ye may more safely and
sweetly speak unto our Jesus, who is our Advocate with the Father, entered into
the Holy of Holies, to appear before God for us. To his gracious protection I
commit you, and do rest

Your assured Friend, and loving Brother, W. Bedell.
Horningshearth, June 15. 1620.
To the Worshipful his much respected Friend, Mr. William Bedell, at
Horningshearth by S. Edmundsbury in Suffolk, these.
My very good Friend,
MR. Bedell, my last unto you was by a Gentleman who went from hence about six
Months since; but I have understood he fell sick at Paris, by the way, and so
was first hindered there in his Journey, and afterward again at Brussels fell
to a relapse, which detained him so long, that although now very lately I hear
he is recovered and gone forward into England, yet in so long delays and so
often sicknesses, I know not whether he have lost or forgotten my former
Letters: Wherefore out of this consideration, and by the opportunity of this
Bringer, and by the true hearty affection which I bear you, being desirous to
signify unto you the continuance of my sincere love, I could not pretermit
this so good an occasion, though hereby I have nothing else to say nor entreat,
but if we have Wars, yet our dissension may be rather in the matter and cases,
than betwixt our persons, as discreet Lawyers use to plead vehemently each for
his Clients Justice, and yet remain betwixt themselves without breach of amity,
and abstaining from opprobrious injury; wherein I have great confidence that
you will proceed both more moderately in all the circumstance, and to better
purpose in the substance than Mr. Joseph Hall, unto whose Letter directed to
you, and by you sent unto me, I wrote certain Marginal Notes only, and so
returned the same by the above named Gentleman, whereof also (if it return to
your Hands) I would entreat you to send me a Copy both of his Text and my
Gloss, for then being in haste I remained with neither. Our Lord keep you, and
guide us all to his truth, and to Heaven.

James Waddesworth.
Madrid June 8. 1620.
The Letter of Mr. Dr. Hall, mentioned in the former with Mr. Waddesworth's
Marginal Notes.
Good Master Bedell,
WHat a sorry crabb has Mr. Waddesworth at last sent us from Sevil? I pity the
I pray see within how short a compass he proves himself a Poetical Railer by
his Epithets, not only against me, but reviling a whole Nation, and the
Religion of the best part of all Christendom.
impotent malice of the Man; sure that hot Region, and I pray see within how
short a compass he proves himself a Poetical Railer by his Epithets, not only
against me, but reviling a whole Nation, and the Religion of the best part of
all Christendom.
sulphurous Religion are guilty of this his choler. For ought I see he is not
only turned Papist but Spaniard too. Ibi vivitur ambitiosa paupertate: The
great Man would not foil his Fingers (for that is his Word) with such an
Adversary as my self; he should have found this conflict his foiling indeed;
but he scorns the match; and what wonder, if he that has all this while This
mock if it were true, yet would I rejoice in it, not only to ^it on his Stairs,
but to make clean his shoes.
sat on Father Creswel 's Stairs, scorn the unworthiness of him whom an English
University scorned not to set in the Chair of Divinity? But whence is this my
contempt? I see but two Vices to clear my self of; Poetry and I termed him a
poetical Railer, not accusing nor honoring him for a Poet; but taxing him for
railing poetically, using the word as sometimes it is in the worst sense, when
it is abused: neither condemning Poetry, nor app^oving him for a Poet, but a
poetical Railer: As he does himself by that Epistle, and by this bitter Letter.
Railing; of the latter you shall acquit me if you will but read that my poor
Epistle which he sleights thus: Let your Eyes judge whether ever any thing
could be written more mildly, more modestly, more lovingly. Of the former I
must acquit my self; Cujus unum est sed magnum vitium Poesis: What were I the
worse if I were still a lover of those studies? If he could have had leisure to
tend upon any thing besides that Fathers Pacquets, he might have seen most of
the renowned and holy Fathers of the Church eminent in that Profession for
which I am scorned; amongst many others Tertullian, Lactantius, Nazianzen,
Prudentius, Fulgentius, Apollinarius, Nonnus, Hilarious, Prosper, and now in the
upshot I willingly pardon all his poetical railing and false Epithetes, for
that one true word acknowledging S. Bernard to be devout.
devout Bernard, and why should their honor be my disgrace? But the truth is,
these were the recreations of my Minority; nunc oblita mihi. And if Poetry were
of the deadly sins of their Casuists, I could smart for it in my (...): is this
a fit scandal to rake up from so far? What my proficiency has been in serious
studies, if the University and Church has pleased to testify: What need I
stand at the mercy of Pardon for S. Bernards sake.
a fugitive. But if any of A brave Man at arms, etc.
his Masters should undertake me in the cause of God, he should find I had
studied Prose. As for these vain flourishes of mine, if he had not taken a veny
in them, and found it smart, he had not struck again so Pardon for S. Bernards
sake.
churlishly? Was it my Letter that is accused of Poetry? there is neither
Number nor Rhyme, I would there were not.
nor fiction in it: Would the great Schoolman have had me to have packt up a
Letter of Syllogisms? which of the Fathers (whose high steps I have desired to
tread in) have given that example? what were to be expected of a Monitory
Epistle which intended only the occasion if he had pleased of a future
Discourse? We Islanders Satis pro imperio.
list not learn to write Letters from beyond the Pyrenees. Howsoever, I am not
sorry that his scorn has cast him upon an Adversary more able to convince him;
I am allowed only a looker on; therefore I will neither ward nor strike; his
hands are too full of you: my only wish is, That you could beat him sound
again; whereof I fear there is little hope. There was never Adversary that gave
more advantage: He might have served in these Coleworts nearer home. I profess
I do heartily This appears by your railing on him, as he that justified himself
from swearing, by loud swearing, By God he did not swear.
pity him; and so if it please you let him know from me. What Apostasy (which
is the only hard word I can be charged with) I This were to prove one absurdity
by a greater, and to undertake that some one Text of Scripture is false or
forged, because all the whole Bible is so: Or having called one a Jew or
Bastard, etc. to make him amends by telling him all his kindred were such. But
that Book and Chapter is indeed pitifully professed: And by it and by
insinuating here an offense of too much charity, may be easily perceived the
substance of your proficiency in Divinity.
impute to the Roman Church, I have professed to the World in the first Chapter
of my Roma irreconciliabilis: if I offend not in too much charity, there is no
fear: say what you will for me, I have done, and will only pray for him that
answers me with contempt: farewell, and commend me to Mr. Sotheby, and your
other loving and Reverend Society; and know me ever,

Your truly loving Friend and fellow Labourer, Jos. Hall.
Waltam. Ian. 10. 1615. Good Mr. Bedell, this Letter has lain thus long by me
for want of carriage. I now hear you are settled at Horningsherth, whereof I
wish you much joy. I am appointed to attend the Ambassador into France,
whither I pray you follow me with your Prayers.

May 15.


To my Reverend and worthy Friend, Mr. Dr. Hall, at Waltam, deliver this.
Salutem in Christo.
Good Mr. Dr.
THis Letter of yours, since my receipt of it, has been a Traveller, further
than you or I; which being some Months since returned into England, I return to
you, that it may relate what entertainment it has found in Foreign parts. It
is now a Year and more that I received a Letter from Mr. Waddesworth,
challenging an old debt of me, an answer to his Letters, which occasioned this
of yours. I wrote back, and among other things enclosed this your Letter, which
he has censured as you see. His answer by reason of the sickness of the
Gentleman that brought it, first at Paris, and after at Brussels, came not to
me till the latter end of May, and now lately another I received from him,
wherein he desires a Copy both of your Text and his Gloss, as he calls it, as
having reserved none for have. I have not yet sent him my Answer to his Motives
which has long lain by me for lack of leisure to copy it out, and means safely
to convey it, being well toward a quire of Paper. My ancient fault,
tediousness. But the Gentleman that brought me his former Letter, has
undertaken ere long to consign it into his Hands. Therein I endeavor to use
him with the best respect I can devise, only oppugning the Papacy and Court of
Rome. Now, Sir, that which I would entreat of you, is this: You know the
Precept of the Apostle touching them that are fallen, lend me your Hand to set
him in joint again. And be pleased not only not to reflect upon the weakness of
his Gloss, but not so much as upon the strength of his Stomach: Though that be
also weakness, as S. Augustine well calls it, The weakness of a stout Heart. 1
Cor. 4.13.
infirmitas animositatis. Write a Letter to him in the Character (...). Which
shall either go with mine, or be sent shortly after. Who can tell what God may
work? Surely, at least we shall heap Coals of Fire upon his Head. Although if
all be true that I hear, it is not to be despaired but he may be delivered out
of the snare of error, the rather, because he has not that reward or
contentment which he expected. He lives now at Madrid with the Persian
Ambassador Sir Robert Sherley, and has good maintenance from him, being as
his Steward, or Agent. The kind usage of his ancient Friends, may perhaps bring
him in love with his Country again, etc. This for that business. Now, etc.

October 2. 1620.
To the Worshipful my very good Friend, Mr. James Waddesworth at Madrid,
deliver this.
Salutem in Christo Jesu.
Sir,
I Received by Mr. Fiston your Letters of the eighth of June, and as I hope ere
this time you understand, the former which I mention in them: To which I wrote
in answer, and delivered the same to Mr. Aston the fifteenth of the same Month.
Doctor Hall's Letter with your Marginal Notes which in your last you require, I
send you herein enclosed. Though if I may persuade or entreat you both, neither
should the Text nor Gloss make you multiply any more words thereabout. Upon the
receipt of your Letter I spoke with Mr. Aston, who told me, That he held his
resolution for Spain, whereupon I resolved also to send by him mine answer to
your first: as thinking it better to do it more safely, though a little later,
than sooner, with less safety. And here, Sir, at length you have it. Wherein as
to my moderation for the manner, I hope you shall perceive that setting aside
our difference in Opinion, I am the same to you that I was when we were either
Scholars together in Emmanuel College, or Ministers in Suffolk. For the
substance, I do endeavor still to write to the purpose, omitting nothing
material in your Letters. If sometimes I seem overlong, and perhaps to digress
somewhat from the principal Point more than was necessary, I hope you will
pardon it, since you required a full Answer, and the delay it self had need to
bring you some interest for the forbearance. And because you mention the
vehemence of discreet Lawyers (although methinks we are rather the Clients
themselves, that contend, since our Faith is our own and our best Freehold) let
me entreat of you this ingenuity (which I protest in the sight of God I bring
my self.) Let us not make head against evident Reason, for our own credit, or
fashion, and factions sake, as Lawyers sometimes are wont. Neither let us think
we lose the Victory, when Truth overcomes. We shall have part of it rather, and
the better part, since error, the common enemy to us both, is to us more
dangerous. For Truth is secure and impregnable; we, if our Error be not
conquered, must remain Servants to corruption. It is the first Praise, says S.
Augustine, to hold the true Opinion, the next to forsake the false. And surely
that is no hard mastery to do, when both are set before us, if we will not be
either retchless or obstinate. From both which our Lord of his mercy evermore
help us, and bring us to his everlasting Kingdom. Amen.

Your very loving Brother, W. Bedell.
Horningshearth, October. 22. 1620.
THE COPIES OF Certain Letters, etc. Salutem in Christo Jesus.
CHAP. I. Of the Preamble. The Titles Catholic, Papist, Traitor, Idolater.
SIR,
I Do first return you hearty thanks, for the truth and constancy of your love,
and those best effects of it, your wishing me as well as to your self, and
rejoicing in my safe return out of Italy. For indeed further I was not: though
reported to have been both at Constantinople and Jerusalem, by reason of the
nearness of my name to one Mr. William Bidulph, the Minister of our Merchants
at Aleppo, who visited both those places.

I thank you also, that your ancient love toward me, has (to use that Word of
the Apostle) now flourished again, in that after so many Years you have found
opportunity to accomplish your promise of writing to me: though not as ye
undertook of the state of Religion there yet, which I confess I no less
desired, the Motives of the forsaking that you had professed here. Whereof
since it has pleased you, as ye write, now to give me an account, and by me to
Mr. Dr. Hall, with some expectation also as it appears of reply from one of us,
I will use the liberty which you give me, and as directly as I can for the
matter, and in Christian terms for the manner, show you mine opinion of them,
wherein I shall endeavor to observe that Precept of the Apostle; (...),
whether it be to be interpreted, loving sincerely, or seeking truth lovingly.
Neither soothing untruth for the dearness of your person, nor breaking charity
for diversity of Opinion. With this entrance, my loving Friend, and if you
refuse not that old Catholic name, my dear Brother, I come to your Letter.
Wherein, though I might well let pass that part which concerns your quarrel
with Mr. Dr. Hall, with aetatem habet; yet thus much out of the common
presumption of charity, which thinks not evil, give me leave to say for him, I
am verily persuaded he never meant to charge you with Apostasy in so horrible
a sense as you count, viz. A total falling from Christian Religion, like that
of Julian, an obstinate pertinacy in denying the Principles of the Faith
necessary to salvation, or a renouncing your Baptism. The term Apostasy, as
you know, does not always sound so hainously. A Monk forsaking his Order, or a
Clerk his Habit, is in the Decretals styled an Apostata. Granatensis says not
untruly, That every deadly sin is a kind of Apostasy. The Apostle S. Paul
speaking of Antichrists time, says, There must come an Apostasy before
Christ's second coming: and how this shall be he shows elsewhere. Men shall give
heed to spirits of Error, and Doctrines of Devils, and such as speak falsehood
in hypocrisy. Whereby it seems that Antichrist himself shall not professedly
renounce Christ and his Baptism. His Kingdom is a mystery of iniquity; a revolt
therefore, not from the outward profession, but inward sincerity and power of
the Gospel. This kind of Apostasy might be that which Mr. Hall was sorry to
find in you, whom he thought fallen from the Truth, though not in the
Principles of Christian Doctrine, yet in sundry Conclusions which the reformed
Churches truly out of them maintain. He remembered our common education in the
same College, our common Oath against Popery, our common Calling to the same
sacred Function of the Ministry; he could not imagine upon what reasons you
should reverse these beginnings. And certainly, how weighty and sufficient
soever they be, we are not taught by our Catholic Religion to revenge our
selves, and render reproach for reproach with personal terms; much less to
debase and avile the excellent Gifts of God, as is Poesy, the honor of David
and Solomon, by the Testimony of the Holy Ghost himself. These courses are
forbidden us when we are railed upon, and calumniated; how much more when as S.
Peter speaks, We are beaten for our faults; as it falls out in your case, if
these Motives of yours be weak and insufficient; which we shall anon consider.

You say, you are become Catholic. Were you not then so before? The Creed
whereinto you were baptized, is it not the Catholic Faith? The conclusion
certes of Athanasius's Creed, which is but a declaration thereof, This is the
Catholic Faith.
says, Haec est Fides Catholica. Or is not he a Catholic that holds the
Catholic Faith? That which was once answered, touching the present Church of
England, to one in a Stationers Shop in Venice, that would needs know what was
the difference betwixt us and the Catholics. It was told him none: for we
accounted our selves good Catholics. When he unwilling to be put off in his
answer, for lack of due form in his Question, pressed to know what was the
difference betwixt us and them there. He was answered, This; That we believed
the Catholic Faith contained in the Creed, but did not believe the Thirteenth
Article which the Pope had put to it. When he knew not of any such Article; the
Extravagance of Pope Boniface was brought, where he defines it to be altogether
of necessity to salva^^on, to every humane creature to be under the Bishop of
Rome. This thirteenth Article, of the thirteenth Apostle, good Mr. Waddesworth,
it seems you have learned; and so are become, as some now speak and write
Catholic Roman. That is in true interpretation Vniversal-particular; which
because they cannot be equalled, the one restraining and cutting off from the
other, take heed that by straitning your Faith to Rome, you have not altered
it, and by becoming Roman, left off to be Catholic.

Thus, if you say, our Ancestors were all till of late Years. Excuse me, Sir,
whether you call our Ancestors the first Christian Inhabitants of this Isle, or
the ancient Christians of the Primitive Church; neither those, nor these were
Roman Catholics; Namely, the Fathers of the African Council, and amongst these
S. Augustine: And therefore by Pope Boniface his Sentence, be undoubtedly
damned, for taking upon them, by the Devil's instinct (if we believe another
Bonifac. 2. Epist. ad Eulalium.
Pope Boniface) to wax proud against the Church of Rome. Such Catholics, if ye
mean the most of Christendom be at this Day; beware of putting your self upon
that Issue. Believe me, either you must frame a new Cosmography, yea, a new
World, or else you are gone if it come to most Voices in Christendom. Touching
the Names of Papist, Traitor, Idolater. The first is no mis-calling you, as
comprizing the very Character that differenceth you from all other Catholics.
Neither by our Rhemists advice should you be ashamed of it, since to be a
Papist, by their Interpretation is nothing else, Annotat. in Acts 11.26.
but to be a Christian Man, a Child of the Church, and subject to Christ's
Vicar. The wise State of Venice have a little different notion of their
Papalines, excluding from sundry their consultations under that name, such of
the Nobility as are obliged to the Pope by Ecclesiastical promotions. True it
is that they apply it also to Papalines in faction, such as are superstitiously
devoted to the maintaining of all the Popes usurped Authority; in which sense I
hope you are no Papist.

A Traitor, I am assured, Mr. Dr. Hall will never call you, unless he know that
you have drunk so deep of the Cup of error, as to believe the Pope may depose
your Prince; that you are not bound to obey him being so deposed; that in that
case it is lawful, yea, meritorious to kill him; that they are Martyrs that are
executed for plotting to blow him up with Gunpowder, though undeposed; hoping
it would be no less agreeable to his Holiness, than (that which he desired) to
have kept him from coming to the Crown at first. If you be thus perfectly a
Papist, not only we here in England, but I believe his Catholic Majesty, under
whose obedience now ye live, whenever he should be that Prince, would account
you a Traitor, and punish you accordingly. I hope you are far from these furies.

For Idolatry, if to give divine honor to Creatures, deserve that name,
consider how you can defend or excuse those Prayers to the Blessed Virgin, Tu
nos ab Host protege, and hora Mortis suscipe. And to the Cross, Auge piis
justitiam, reisque dona veniam: I omit to speak of the Popes Omnipotency. I
hope also you keep your self from this Idolatry.

In Protestant Religion, you say, you could never find Uniformity of a settled
Faith. How so? when you had that same De veland. Virg. c. 1.
One only immovable and unreformable Rule of Faith, as Tertullian calls it,
every Lords Day recited in your hearing, if not by your Mouth: I mean the
Creed, of which Irenaeus Lib. 1. c. 3.
says, that he which is able to say much of the Faith, exceeds it not, nor he
that less, diminishes; which Epist ad Dardanum.
S. Augustine calls the Rule common to great and small; which might well enough
have settled and quitted your Conscience, whilst you labored to find the
truth in all doubtful Questions. Whereto how carefully and diligently you used
the means of reading, studying, and praying for Three or Four Years, God and
your Conscience best know. For conferring, I cannot yield you any testimony,
notwithstanding our familiarity, and that we were not many Miles asunder, and
you were also privy, that I had to do in these Controversies, with some of that
side, and saw some sample of the Work. I come now to your Motives.

CHAP. II. Of the contrariety of Sects pretended to be amongst Reformers.
IN the front whereof is the common exception, to our contrariety of Sects and
opinions, etc. First, what are all these to the Church of England, which
follows none but Christ? Then, if it be a fault of the Reformed Churches,
that there is strife and division amongst them, as who will justify it; yet
let it find pardon, if not for Corinth's sake, 1 Cor. 3 3. Socrat. l. 4. c. 27.
and the Primitive Churches what time Themistius was fain to excuse it with an
Oration to Valens the Emperor, yet even for Romes: Where also you cannot but
know, that in very many and most important Points, Divines hold one thing, and
Canonists another; The French, and lately also the Venetian Divines, resist to
his Face, him, that others say no Man may be so hardy as to ask, Domine, cur
ita facis? though he should draw with him innumerable Souls to Hell. Your
Spanish Prelates and Divines would never acknowledge in the Council of Trent
(the Mysteries whereof are come out at last) That Episcopal Authority was
derived from him, nor consent to that circumventing Clause, Proponentibus
Legatis, etc. And were strong that Residence is, de Iure Divino; howsoever they
were overruled by the Italian Faction: Whether they have yet changed their
minds, you can better tell than I. The old Faction of the Thomists and Scotists
is yet a foot, as I perceive by Rada his Controversies. In the beginning
whereof the Censor of the Book has this Sentence. Qua propter audiendi
nullatenus sunt, qui has Theologicas contentiones e medio omnino explodendas
arbitrantur. There is another lately risen between the Dominicans and the
Jesuits; both in as great matters, and pursued with as great vehemence, as
those of the Reformed Churches, excepting only a few fiery Spirits of Saxony.
But in the Church of England, as Reformation was not brought in by any one Man,
but by the joint consent of the whole, so it is yet continued. Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Calvinists, are not known among us, save by hearsay. Whereof it is
some sign, That your self do not know them well, as it seems, when you
distinguish them from Protestants. A name first given to the Princes and free
Cities of Germany, that sought Reformation in the Diet at Spire, Anno 1529. and
from them passed to us and other Countries where it was effected. Who are then
Protestants, if the Lutherans and Zuinglians be not? For of both these there
were in that Diet; the Helvetians and parts adjoining of Germany, having been
reformed at home, first by the preaching of Zuinglius; the Saxons, and the
remnant of Luther. Who much about one time, and without any correspondence,
began to oppose the Popes Indulgences, and differed not for ought that ever I
could yet understand, save in the manner of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist.
Yea, in that also taught uniformly, That the Body and Blood of our Savior are
present; not to the Elements, but to the Receiver, in the use, and without
Transubstantiation. As for those whom you call Calvinists; and the rest
Puritans, Cartwrightists, and Brownists, tell me in good sooth, Mr.
Waddesworth* how do they differ from the Reformed Churches in Helvetia, or the
Church of England, save in the matter of Government only? See then all this
contrariety of Sects meetly well reconciled. For Puritans, Cartwrightists, and
Brownists, are in substance of Doctrine all one with Calvinists, and these with
Zuinglians, who were of the first Protestants, and differ little or nothing
from those whom ye call Lutherans. Whereof this may be a sensible proof, that
commonly their Adversaries, and your self after, call them by the same name,
The Protestant Churches in Germany, France, Holland, and Geneva. And Pope Leo
the Tenth in his Condemnatory Bull; and likewise Charles the Fifth in his
Imperial Edict, do reflect wholly upon Luther and his Followers, without any
mention of the other at all. To conclude this matter; as it is undoubtedly a
sign of a good mind to dislike contention, and diversities of Opinions, and it
may have pardon to apprehend sometime more than there is indeed; like to the
melancholic old Man in the Comedy, whose suspicion makes him to multiply on
this manner. Qui mihi intromisisti in aedes quingentos coquos, so to muster up
empty names, without any real difference, as Puritans, Cartwrightists,
Brownists; to make differences in a few Opinions about Government or
Sacraments, Sects and Contrarieties, has not the character of ingenuous and
sincere dealing, which from you Mr. Waddesworth I did and do expect.

But some of these damn each other, avouching their Positions to be matters of
Faith, not School Questions of Opinion only. Here indeed there is fault on all
sides in this Age, that we cannot be content with the bounds which the ancient
Church has set, but every private Opinion must be straightways an Article of
Faith. Every decision of a Pope, every Decree of a Council. And then as Men are
easily enamoured of their own conceits, and as Gerson wisely applies that of
the Poet, Qui amant, sibi somnia fingunt; as if the very marrow of Religion
consisted in those Points, those that think otherwise are Heretics, and in
state of Damnation. The Roman Faction goes further, to Fire and Faggot, and all
exquisite Torments, as if those things that make against the Papacy, were more
severely to be punished than the Blasphemies of the Jews, or Mahometism it
self. I do not excuse the Reformers of this bitterness, wherein after your
departure out of England, my nameless Adversary that undertook Mr. Alablasters
quarrel, giving me over in three of his demands, ran riot in the first, about
this point of opposition among our selves, and raked together all the vehement
speeches of Luther, and some of his Followers, against those whom they call the
Sacramentaries. Why, who will undertake to defend Luthers Speeches, or all that
falls from contentious Pens? But even out of those Testimonies, which himself
brings for the worst that he could on the contrary part; it appears this
eagerness is not mutual. And in truth, both we in England, and the Helvetians,
and French, do maintain a brotherly affection toward them of Saxony, how
spitefully soever some of them write of us. And even of those whom he calls
Lutherans, as I perceived while I was at Norimberg, the moderater sort are
alike affected toward us. But as touching the avouching our Opinions to be
matters of Faith (which Exception is common to you with him) that which I
should have answered him, if I had found in him any thing but spite and scorn,
I will say now to you, Verily in some sort even the least conclusions in
Divinity are matters of Faith. For both Faith has to do with them, and they
are fetched by Discourse, from the first Principles holden by Faith, whence our
whole Religion is called by S. Jude The Faith once delivered to the Saints. And
the least error in them, by consequence overthrows the same Principles whence
they are deduced. That makes some, to move attention in their Readers to say,
The questions are not about small matters, but of the principal Articles of
Religion, even about the Foundation. As Curaeus whom he cites, says, the
question is of two Articles of Faith. First, of that which teaches that in
Christ two natures are united. Secondly, of the Article, He ascended into
Heaven. Why, do not both sides agree to these? Yes. But one side fetches
Arguments against ubiquitie from these places, and thereupon says, the
question is about these Articles; perhaps also charge the other to deny them.
He cites Pappus Writing thus, Agitur inter nos de Omnipotentia Dei, etc. The
controversy betwixt us, is about the Omnipotency of God. The personal Union of
the two natures in Christ. The communication of Properties. The glorious body
of our Savior, etc. Lo again, every place of Argument or defense is made the
matter of Controversy. Out of these and such like Confessions on either side,
my nameless Adversary will needs enforce, with great pomp and triumph; What
think ye? That such sanctified Men (this is his scoffing Language) go not
together by the Ears for Moonshine in the Water. Again, That all those
Myrmidonian Fights and bloody Encounters be not de lana Caprina aut de umbra
Asini. -- Why, who said they were? I will set down here my Words, that you may
judge of the Conscience of this Man, and have withal the substance of my Answer
to this Objection. And what if some outrageous Spirits on each side,
transported with passion in their oppositions, have used most bitter and
unbeseeming speeches to their Adversaries, and sometimes have showed each other
small humanity; are you so simple as not to discern between the choler of some
few opinionate Men, and the consequence of their Opinions? Have you forgotten
S. Hierome and Ruffinus deadly fo-hood, which was rung over the World? or
Epiphanius and Chrysostomes, or Victors and the Greek Bishops? which proceeded
so far about a trifle, that he excommunicated them; which is little less I
think than to condemn to the Pit of Hell. And yet if I should put it to your
judgment, I am persuaded you would grant they held all truth necessary to
salvation. For you must remember Pope Boniface had not yet coined the new
Article of the Faith, that I mentioned before. What shall I speak of S. Paul
and Barnabas, which grew to such bitterness, and that about a very little
question of convenience, that though they were sent out together by the Holy
Ghost, they brake off company. These be humane passions, which wisdom would we
should pity, when they grow to such extremities, upon so small cause; rather
than from their outrage to gather there is just cause to increase. Do we not
see that even natural Brethren do sometimes defy one another, and use each
other with less respect than strangers? Now from hence would you conclude they
be not Brethren; and hearten them on, and say to the one, that since his half
Brother is not so near to him, as he with whom he is thus at odds, he must fall
out worse with him. You should well so deserve the hate of God, for a makebate
between brethren. These were all my Words set down in answer to his objecting
our own contentions, and condemning each other, to prove that therefore we
could not hold continuity with the ancient Church of England, from which we
dissented much more. I held as you may perceive, that neither amongst our
selves, nor from our predecessors we disagree in any truth necessary to
salvation. He makes me to say, our dissentions are about Moonshine, and de
umbra asini, and de lana caprina, and trifles, and matters of no consequence.
To return to you, good Mr. Waddesworth, let Men avouch as confidently as they
will touching their own Positions, Est de Fide. Nihil certius apud Catholicos,
and of their contraries cry out, They are Heretics, renew ancient Heresies,
race the Foundation, deny the Articles of the Creed, Gods Omnipotency, etc. all
because themselves by Discourse, can (as they think) fasten such things upon
them: A sober Christian must not give heed to all that is said in this kind.
These things must be examined with right judgment, and ever with much charity
and patience, remembering that our selves know in part, and prophecy in part.
In a Word, this should not have so much disquieted you.

Nor yet that which you add, That every one pretends Scripture. Best of all,
says S. Chrysostom, Hom 23. in Act.
For if we should say we believe humane reasons, thou might with good reason
be troubled, but when as we receive the Scriptures, and they be simple and
true, it will be an easy thing for thee to judge, etc. And to what purpose
indeed serves the faculty of Reason perfected and polished with learning?
wherefore the supernatural light of Faith? wherefore the gift of God in us
Ministers conferred by the imposition of Hands? but to try which side handles
the Word of God deceitfully, which sincerely. But here again, Each side
arrogates the Holy Ghost in his favor. What then? If we our selves have the
anointing, we shall be able as we are bidden to try the Spirits, 1 John 2.20,
27. and 4.1.
whether they be of God or no? For we will not believe them, because they say
they have the Spirit, or cannot be deceived, but because their Doctrine is
consonant to the Principles of Heavenly Truth, which by the Writings inspired
by himself, the Holy Ghost has graven in our Hearts. Which Writings are well
acknowledged by you, to be the Law and Rule according whereunto, in judgment of
Religion we must proceed.

CHAP. III. Of the want of an Humane, External, Infallible Judge and
Interpreter.
AS to that you say, did above all trouble you, the want of a certain, humane
external, infallible Judge to interpret Scripture, and define Questions of
Faith without error. What if you found not an external humane Judge, if you had
an internal divine one? And having an infallible Rule by which your humane
Judge should proceed, why should you trust another Man's applying it, rather
than your own, in a matter concerning your own salvation? But if God have left
us no such external Judge, if Antiquity knew none, if Religion need none, it
was no just motive to leave us, that you could find none, amongst all those
Sects which you mention, and how much less if you have not a whit amended your
self where you are; which we shall consider by and by.

I say then first, That to make this your motive of any moment, it must be
showed, that God has appointed such a Judge in his Church. Let that appear out
of some passage of Holy Scripture. For your conceit or desire that such a Judge
there should be, to whom you might in Conscience obey, and yield your self,
because he could not err, does not prove it. You would know the truth, only by
the Authority, and sole pronouncing of the Judges Mouth. A short and easy way,
which to most Men is plausible, because it spares the pains of Study and
Discourse. To such especially, as either out of weakness dare not trust their
own Judgment, or account it shall have the merit of humility, to be led by
their Teachers, But what now if God will have you call no Man your Father upon
Earth? If he will send you to his Word? and after you have received the Faith
by the Churches Testimony out of the easy and plain places thereof, bid you
Search the Scriptures, to find the Truth in the remnant, and pick it out by
your own industry. Luke 16.
The rich Man being in Hell Torments (in whose Words I doubt not but our
Savior does impersonate and represent the conceits of many Men living in this
World) presumes that if one were sent from the Dead, his Kinsmen would hearken
to him, but he is remitted to Moses and the Prophets. The Jews as I perceived
by Speech with some of them at Venice, make it one of their Motives, that our
Lord Jesus is not the Christ. He should not, say they, have come in such a
fashion, to leave his own Nation in doubt and suspense; and scandalize so many
thousands; but so as all Men might know him to be what he was. Miserable Men!
that will give Laws to God. Of which fault be you aware also (good Mr.
Waddesworth) and be content to take, not to prescribe the means by which you
will be brought unto the knowledge of the Truth: To use what he has given, not
to conjecture and divine what he must give.

But God fails not his Church in such means as be necessary. Let us therefore
consider the necessity of this Judge. Where I beseech you consider (for I am
sure you cannot but know it) that all things necessary to salvation are
evidently set down in Holy Scripture? This both the Scriptures themselves do
teach, and the Fathers avouch, namely S. Augustine and S. Chrysostom, and
others. I forbear to set down their Words, or further to confirm this Lemma,
which I proved at large against another Adversary, and shall at all times make
good if it be questioned. Besides these Points, there are a great many other
though not of such necessity, yet evidently laid down also in the same
Scriptures, by occasion of them. Many by just Discourse may be cleared from
these, and the former. If any thing yet remain in suspense, and unknown, yea or
if you will, erred in, so it be not wilfully and obstinately, yet shall it be
ever without peril of damnation to him that receives what the Holy Ghost has
plainly delivered. What necessity then of your imaginary Judge? Yes: for Unity
is a goodly thing, not only in matters necessary, but universally in all.
Controversies must not be endless. But how comes it to pass then that your
Judge whosoever he be, does not all this while decide the Question touching the
conception of the Blessed Virgin, that is between the Dominicans and
Franciscans, nor that between the Dominicans and Jesuits touching Grace and
Free Will, and all other the Points that are controverted in the Schools; to
spare contention and time (a precious Commodity among wise Men) and give this
honor to Divinity alone, that in it all doubts should be reduced to
certainties? Or if it seem no wisdom to be hasty in deciding such Questions;
wherein Witty and Learned Men are engaged, lest in stead of changing their
Opinions, they should fall to challenge not only the infallibility, but which
were more dangerous the Authority of their Judge: If it be thought better to
leave scope to Opinions, opposition it self profitably serving to the boulting
out of the Truth. If Unity in all things be as it seems despaired of, by this
your Gellius himself; why are we not content with Unity in things necessary to
Salvation, Cic. 1. de Legibus.
expressly set down in Holy Scripture: And anciently thought to suffice,
reserving Infallibility as an honor proper to God speaking there? Why should
it not be thought to suffice, that every Man having embraced that necessary
Truth, which is the Rule of our Faith, thereby try the Spirits whether they be
of God or no. If he meet with any that has not that Doctrine, receive him not
to House, nor salute him. If consenting to that, but otherwise infirm or
erring, yet charitably bear with him. This for every private Man. As for the
public order, and peace of the Church, God has given Pastors and Teachers,
that we should not be carried about with every wind of Doctrine, and amongst
them appointed Bishops, Ephesians. 4.
to command that Men teach no other or foreign Doctrine, which was the end of
Timothy his leaving at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.3. Then, Acts 15.6.
the Apostles themselves by their example, have commended to the Church the
wholesome use of Synods, to determine of such controversies as cannot by the
former means be composed; but still by the Holy Scriptures, the Law or Rule, as
you say well, by which all these Judges must proceed. Which if they do not,
then may they be deceived themselves, and deceive others as experience has
showed, yet never be able to extinguish the truth.

To come to Antiquity. There is not any one thing belonging to Christian
Religion, if we consider well, of more importance, than how the purity of the
whole may be maintained. The Ancients that write of the rest of Christian
Doctrine, is it not a miracle, had they known any such infallible Judge, in
whose Oracle the security of all, with the perpetual tranquillity of the Church
is contained, they should say nothing of him? There was never any Age wherein
there have not been Heresies, and Sects: to which of them was it ever objected
that they had no infallible Judge? How soon would they have sought to amend
that defect, if it had been a current Doctrine in those times, that the true
Church cannot be without such an Officer? The Fathers that dealt with them, why
did they not lay aside all disputing, and appeal them only to this Bar? Unless
perhaps that were the let which Cardinal Bellarmine tells the Venetians,
Risposta ad una lettera, etc.
hindered S. Paul from appealing to S. Peter, Lest they should have made their
Adversaries to laugh at them for their labor. Well: howsoever the Cardinal
has found out a merry reason for S. Paul's appealing to Caesar's Judgment, not
Peter's, lest he should expose himself to the laughter of Pagans: what shall we
say when the Fathers write professedly to instruct Catholic Men, Tertull. de
Praescript. etc.
of the forepleadings and advantages to be used against Heretics, even without
descending to trial by Scriptures? Vincent. Lyrinens.
or of some certain general and ordinary way to discern the Truth of the
Catholic Faith from the profane novelties of Heresies? Had they known of this
infallible Judge, should we not have heard of him in this so proper a place,
and as it were in a cause belonging to his own Court. Nay does not the writing
it self of such Books show, that this matter was wholly unknown to Antiquity?
For had the Church been in possession of so easy and sure a course to discover
and discard heresies, they should not have needded to task themselves to find
out any other. But the truth is, infallibility is, and ever has been accounted
proper to Christ's judgment. And as has been said, all necessary Truth to
Salvation he has delivered us in his Word. That Word, himself tells us, shall
judge at the last day. Yea, in all true decisions of Faith, that word even now
judges. Christ judges, the Apostle sits Judge. Christ speaks in the Apostle.
Thus Antiquity.

Neither are they moved a whit with that Objection: That the Scriptures are
often the matter of Controversies. For in that case the remedy was easy which
S. Augustine shows to have recourse to the plain places, Lib. de unitate
Eccles. c. 5. and 19.
and manifest such as should need no interpreter: for such there be, by which
the other may be cleared. The same may be said, if sometimes it be questioned,
Which be Scriptures, which not. I think it was never heard of, in the Church,
that there was an external infallible Judge, who could determine that question.
Arguments may be brought from the consent or dissent with other Scriptures,
from the attestation of Antiquity, and inherent signs of Divine Authority, or
humane infirmity: but if the Auditor or Adversary yield not to these, such
parts of necessity must needs be laid aside. If all Scripture be denied (which
is as it were exceptio in judicem ante litis contestationem) Faith has no
place, only reason remains. To which I think it will scarce seem reasonable, if
you should say, Though all Men are liars, yet this Judge is infallible; and to
him thou ought in conscience to obey and yield thy understanding in all his
Determinations, for he cannot err. No not if all Men in the World should say
it. Unless you first set down there is a God, and stablish the authority of the
Books of Holy Scripture, as his voice, and thence show if you can, the warrant
of this privilege.

Where you affirm, The Scriptures to be the Law and the Rule, but alone of
themselves cannot be Judges; If you mean, without being produced, applied, and
heard; you say truth. Yet Nicodemus spoke not amiss; when he demanded, Joh.
1.51.
Does our Law judge any Man, unless it hear him first? he meant the same which
S. Paul, when he said of the High Priest, thou sit to judge me according to
the Law: and so do we when we say the same. Neither do we send you to Angels,
or God himself immediately, but speaking by his Spirit in the Scriptures, and
(as I have right now said) alleged, and by discourse applied to the matters in
question. As for Princes, since it pleased you to make an excursion to them, if
we should make them infallible Judges, or give them Authority to decree in
Religion as they list, as Gardener did to King Henry the Eight, it might well
be condemned for monstrous, as it was by Calvin. As for the purpose, Licere
Regi interdicere populo usum calicis in Coena. Quare? Potestas n. summa est
penes Regem, quoth Gardener. This was to make the King as absolute a Tyrant in
the Church, as the Pope claimed to be. But, that Princes which obey the truth,
have commandment from God, to command good things, and forbid evil, not only in
matters pertaining to humane society, but also the Religion of God, This is no
new strange Doctrine, Instit. l. 4. c. 20.
but Calvin's, and ours, and S. Augustines, August. contr. Crescon. l. 3. c. 51.
in so many words. And this is all the Headship of the Church we give to Kings.
Whereof a Queen is as well capable as a King, since it is an act of Authority,
not Ecclesiastical Ministry; proceeding from eminency of power, not of
knowledge, or holiness. Wherein not only a learned King, as ours is; but a good
old Woman (as Queen Elizabeth, besides her Princely dignity was) may excel, as
your selves confess, your infallible Judge himself. But in power he says, he
is above all: which not to examine for the present, in this Power Princes are
above all their Subjects I trow; and S. Augustine says plainly, to command and
forbid, even in the Religion of God, still according to Gods Word, which is the
touchstone of Good and Evil. Neither was King Henry the Eight, the first Prince
that exercised this power, witness David and Solomon, and the rest of the Kings
of Judah before Christ. And since that Kings were Christians, The affairs of
the Church have depended upon them, Prooemiol. 5.
and the greatest Synods have been by their Decree, as Socrates expressly says.
Nor did King Henry claim any new thing in this Land, but restored to the Crown
the ancient right thereof, which sundry his Predecessors had exercised, as our
Historians and Lawyers with one consent affirm.

The rest of your induction of Archbishops, Bishops, and whole Clergy in their
Convocation-House, and a Council of all Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants,
etc. is but a needless pomp of words, striving to win by a form of discourse,
that which gladly shall be yielded at the first demand. They might all err, if
they were as many as the Sand on the Sea Shore, if they did not rightly apply
the Rule of Holy Scriptures, by which as you acknowledge the external Judge,
which you seek, must proceed. As to your demand therefore, how you should be
sure when, and wherein they did, and did not err; where you should have fixed
your foot? to forbear to skirmish with your confirmation ( That though, a posse
ad esse non valet semper consequentia, yet aliquando valet: and, frustra
dicitur potentia quae nunquam ducitur in actum.) To the former whereof I might
tell you, that without question, nunquam valet: And to the second, that I can
very well allow, that errandi potentia, among Protestants be ever frustra. This
I say freely, That if you come with this resolution to learn nothing by
discourse, or evidence of Scripture, but only by the mere pronouncing of a
humane external Judge's Mouth, to whom you would yield your understanding in
all his determinations: If, as the Jesuits teach their Scholars, you will
wholly deny your own judgment, Regula 1. and 13.
and resolve, that if this Judge shall say, that is black, which appears to
your Eyes white, you will say it is black too; you have posed all the
Protestants; they cannot tell how to teach you infallibly. Withal I must tell
you thus much, that this preparation of mind in a Scholar, as you are, in a
Minister, yea in a Christian, that had but learned his Creed, much more that
had from a Child known the Holy Scriptures, that are able to make us wise to
salvation, 1 Timothy 3.15.
through the Faith that is in Christ Jesus, were too great weakness, and, to
use the Apostles Phrase, 1 Cor. 14.20.
childishness of understanding.

But at length you heard a sound of Harmony and Consent, that in the Catholic
Church, as in Noah 's Ark, was infallibility, and possibility of salvation;
which occasioned you to seek out, and to enter into this Ark of Noah. The sound
of Consent and Infallibility is most pleasing and harmonious, and undoubtedly
ever and only to be found in the Catholic Church, to wit, in the Rule of
Faith, and in the Holy Scriptures, and such necessary Doctrine as perfectly
concordeth with the same. But as in Song many discords do pass in smaller
Notes, without offense of the Ears, so should they in smaller matters of
Opinion in the Church, without the offense of judicious and charitable minds.
Which yet I speak not to justify them; nay, I am verily of the mind, That this
is the thing that has marred the Church Music in both kinds, that too much
liberty is taken in descant to depart from the Ground, and as one says, notae
nimium denigrantur. The fault of the Italians: though they think themselves the
only Songsters in the World. But to return to you, tell me, I beseech you (good
Mr. Waddesworth) was this the Harmony that transported you. The Pope himself
says, I cannot err, and to me thou ought to have recourse for decision of
doubts in matters of Faith. And whereas this is not only denied by Protestants,
but has been ever by the French, and anciently I am sure by the Spanish,
lately by some Italian Divines also, unless he use due means to find the truth;
yea, whereas it is the issue of all the Controversies of this age; in this
snare you fastened your Foot, This was the Center that settled your Conscience,
this the solid and firm foundation of your Faith. What? and did it not move
you, that some limit this infallibility of the Pope thus, If he enter
Canonically, if he proceed advisedly, and maturely, using that diligence that
is fit to find out the Truth; that is (as you said before) proceeding by the
Rule, the Scriptures? Albeit to the Fathers of the African Council it seemed
incredible (as they write in their Synodal Epistle to P. Coelestine standing
for Appeals to himself) that God can inspire the right in trial to one, denying
it to many Bishops in a Council. Tell us then, who made you secure of these
things? or did you in truth, never so much as make question of them, but
hearing this harmonious sound, The Pope is the Infallible Judge, you trusted
the new Masters of that side, Gregory de Valentia, and Bellarmine, Analysi
Fidei Cathol. par. 8.
that whether the Pope in defining do use diligence or no, if he do define, he
shall define infallibly. Alas Sir! if this were the rest you found for the
soale of your Foot, instead of moveable Water, you fell upon mire and puddle;
Or rather like to another Dove mentioned in Scripture, columba seducta non
habens Cor, Oseae 2.11.
by the most chaffy shrap that ever was set before the Eyes of winged Fowl,
were brought to the door-fal. Excuse my grief, mixed I confess with some
indignation, but more love to you, though I thus write. Many things there be in
Popery inconvenient, and to my conceit weakly and ungroundedly affirmed, to say
no more; but this is so absurd and palpable a flattery, as to omit to speak of
you, for my part I cannot be persuaded that Paulus the Fifth believes it
himself. For consider, I pray, what needed anciently the Christian Emperors,
and sometimes at the request of the Bishops of Rome themselves, to have
gathered together so many Bishops from so diverse parts of the World to
celebrate Councils, if it had been known and believed then, that one Man's
Sentence might have cleared all controversies, and put all Heresies to silence?
How durst sundry holy, and learned Men have rejected his decisions, whether
right or wrong is not now the question, unchristianly out of doubt on their
parts, if he had been then holden the infallible Oracle of our Religion? As
when Polycrates, with the Bishops of Asia, and Irenaeus also yielded not to
Victor, excommunicating the Eastern Churches about the celebration of Easter,
when S. Cyprian, with the first Council of Carthage of eighty six Bishops had
Decreed, That such as were baptized by Heretics, should be rebaptized, and
certified Stephanus of this Decree, and he opposed it, and would have nothing
innovated, would Cyprian after that have resisted and confuted Stephanus his
Letter, had he known him for infallible? And how does he confute him? Epistola
ad Pompeium.
as erring, writing impertinently, contrary to himself. Yea, let it be
observed, that he does not only not account Stephanus infallible, but not so
much as a Judge over any Bishop. See the Vote of Cyprian, and note those Words.
Neque enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit, aut
tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adigit, quando
habeat omnis Episcopus pro licentia libertatis and potestatis suae, arbitrium
proprium, tanquam judicari ab alio non possit cum nec ipse possit alterum
judicare. Sed exspectemus universi judicium Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui
unus and solus habet potestatem and praeponendi in Ecclesiae suae gubernatione,
and de actu nostro judicandi. A passage worthy to be noted also, for the
clearing of the independence of Episcopal Authority from the Pope, which I now
let pass. Neither was S. Cyprian herein alone: Firmilianus, and the Eastern
Bishops, resisted Stephanus no less, as appears by his Epistle, which in the
Roman Edition of Manutius, set forth by the command of Pius the Fourth, with
the survey of four Cardinals, whereof one is now a Saint, with exquisite
diligence; is wholly left out. And Pamelius says he thinks purposely, for
himself is of the mind that it had been better it had never come forth. But to
return to our purpose. The Fathers of the Council of Africa, and S. Augustine
amongst them, resist three Popes succeeding each other, Zosimus, Boniface, and
Coelestinus, about appeals to Rome; shall we think they would ever have done
it, if they had known or imagined them to be the supreme and infallible Judges
in the Church? I let pass the Schism between the Greek and the Latin Church,
which had not happened, if this Doctrine had been anciently received. Nay, it
is very plain in Story, that the Bishop of Rome's lifting up himself to be
universal Bishop chiefly caused it. To conclude, neither Liberius, nor
Honorius, to omit many other Bishops of Rome, had ever been taxed of heresy,
if this had anciently been current, that the Pope is infallible. I will not
stand now to examine the shameful defense that Bellarmine makes for the latter
of these, bearing down Fathers, Councils, Stories, Popes themselves, as all
falsified or deceived herein. Wherein because he is learnedly refuted by Dr.
Raynolds, I insist not upon it. This I press, That all those Writers and
Councils, and amongst them Pope Leo the Second accursing Honorius, did not then
hold, that which by Pighius and the Jesuits is undertaken, that the Pope is
infallible. Even the Council of Basil, deposing Eugenius (for obstinately
resisting this Truth of the Catholic Faith, That the Council is above the
Pope) as an Heretic, does show the sense of Christendom even in these latter
times, how corrupt soever, both in Rule and Practice.

And because you make this infallible Judge to be also an infallible
Interpreter of Holy Scripture, how happens it that Damasus Bishop of Rome
consults with Hierome about the meaning of sundry Texts of Scripture, when it
seems himself might have taken his Pen, and set him down quickly, that which
should have taught both him and the whole Church, not only without danger but
even possibility of error? Sure we are little beholding to the diligence of our
Ancestors, that have not more carefully registered the Comentaries (or because
they have had for sundry Ages small time to write just Commentaries) the
Expositions which in their Sermons, or otherwise the Bishops of Rome have made
of Holy Scripture. A work which if this Doctrine were true, were more worth
than all the Fathers; and would justify that blasphemy of the Canon Law, where
by a shameful corruption of S. Augustine, C. in Canonicis, did. 19.
the Decretals of Popes are enrolled amongst the Canonical Scriptures. I am
already too long in so plain a matter: Yet one proof more which is of all most
sensible. Being admonished by this your conceit of an infallible Interpreter, I
chanced to turn over the Popes Decretals, and observed the interpretation of
Scriptures. What shall I say? I find them so lewd, and clean beside the
purpose, yea oftentimes so childish and ridiculous, both in giving the sense,
and in the application, that I protest to you in the presence of God, nothing
does more loath me of Popery, than the handling of Holy Scripture by your
infallible Interpreter alone. Consider a few of the particulars, and especially
such as concern the Popes own Authority. To justify his exacting an Oath of
Fealty of an Archbishop, Signifi^asti de electione. Joh. 21*15.
to whom he grants the Pall, is brought our Lord Jesus Christ, who committing
the care of his Sheep to Peter, did put too a condition, saying, Si diligis me,
pasce oves meas. Christ said, If thou love me, feed my Sheep* Why may not the
Pope say, If you will swear me fealty, you shall have the Pall. But first he
corrupts the Text: Christ said not, If thou love me: Then, Christ puts not
Peter's love as a condition of Feeding, but feeding as a proof and effect of his
love. And if the feeding of Christ's sheep were sought, love to him and them
might suffice to be professed, or if he would needs have more than Christ
required, to be sworn. What is this to the Oath of Fealty? Straight after to
the Objection, that all Oaths are prohibited by Christ, nor any such thing can
be found appointed by the Apostles after the Lord, or in the Councils, he urges
the Words following in the Text, Swear not at all; Matt. 5.34.
quod amplius est, a malo est, that is, says he, Evil compels us by Christ's
permission to exact more. Is it not evil to go from the Popes obedience? to
condemn Bishops without his privity? to translate Bishops by the Kings
commandment? See the place, and tell me of your Interpreters Infallibility.
Treating of the Translation of Bishops, or such as are elected unto other Sees,
he says: That since the spiritual Band is stronger than the carnal, Inte^
corpor. De translat. Episcopi, Matthew. 19.26.
it cannot be doubted but Almighty God has reserved the dissolution of the
spiritual Marriage that is betwixt a Bishop and his Church, to his own judgment
alone; charging that whom God has joined, man sever not. For it is not by
humane but r^ther divine power that spiritual marriage is dissolved, when as by
translation or cession by the authority of the Bishop of Rome (whom it is plain
to be the Vicar of Jesus Christ) a Bishop is removed from his Church. An
admirable interpretation of the Text, Quos Deus conjunxit! by which the Pope
not only challenges that which is proper to Gods judgment only, as he says,
viz. to dissolve the Bond of spiritual Wedlock; but because that is the
stronger, of carnal it seems also; when it shall please him.

The anointing of a Prince since Christ's coming is translated from the Head to
the Shoulder, De sacra unctione. Esaias 9.6 1 Samuel 9.24.
by which Principality is fitly designed, according to that which is read,
Factus est principatus super humerum ejus; for signifying also whereof, Samuel
caused the shoulder to be set before Saul. Who should ever have understood
these Texts, if your infallible Interpreter had not declared them? But this is
nothing yet to the exposition of those Texts, which the Pope interprets in his
answer to the Emperor of Constantinople, Solicitae. De majoritate. 1 Pet. 2.13.
as Subditi estote omni humanae Creaturae propter Deum, etc. He tells him that
S. Peter wrote that to his own Subjects, to provoke them to the merit of
humility. For if he had meant thereby to lay the yoke of subjection upon
Priests, it would follow that every Servant were to rule over them, since it is
said, Omni humanae creaturae. After, It is not barely set down, Regi
praecellenti, but there is put between, perhaps not without cause, tanquam: And
that which follows, ad vindictam malefactorum, laudem vero bonorum, is not to
be understood that the King or Emperor v. 1^.
has received the power of the Sword upon good and evil Men, save only those
who using the sword are committed to his jurisdiction according to that which
the Truth says, They which take the Sword shall perish with the Sword. Matthew.
26.52.
For no Man ought or can judge another Servant, since the Servant according to
the Apostle stands or falls to his own Lord. For the love of God consider
this Interpretation, and compare it with S. Chrysostom upon Romans 13. Nay do
but read the Text attentively, and judge of the infallibility of your
interpreter. Straight after he tells the Emperor, That he might have understood
the prerogative of Priesthood out of that which was said, not of every Man but
of God, not to the King but to the Priest, not to one descending of the Royal
Stock, but of the Priestly Lineage of the Priests, to wit, which were in
Anathot. Jer. 1.10.
Behold I have set thee over Nations and Kingdoms, to pull up, and destroy, to
build and to plant. See the Prerogative of the Priesthood out of Ieremies
calling to be a Prophet. O if he had been high Priest! This had been a Text for
the nonce. Exodus 22.28.
But he goes on. It is said in Gods Law also, Thou shall not rail on the Gods,
nor curse the Prince of thy people. Genesis 1.16.
Diis non detrahes, and Principem populi tui non maledices. Which setting
Priests before Kings, calls them Gods, and the other, Princes. Compare this
exposition with David's and Paul's, Psalm. 82. and Acts 23.5. and ye shall see
how the Interpreter has hit the mark. Again, you ought to have known, quod
fecit Deus duo magna luminaria, etc. See the Exposition, and the difference
between the Pope and Kings, both in the Text and Gloss. Now although the
Gloss-Writer were no excellent Calculator, yet out of Clavius the account may
be cleared: who tells us the Sun exceeds the Moon 6539. times and a Fifth. Joh.
21.16.
I let pass the collection out of Pasce oves meas, that he belongs not to
Christ's Fold, that does not acknowledge Peter and his Successors his Masters
and Pastors: Matthew. 16.19.
out of Quodcunque ligaveris, that nothing is excepted. Indeed the Pope excepts
nothing, but loses Vows, Contracts, Oaths, the Bond of Allegiance and Fealty
between Subjects and their Princes: The Commandment of Christ, Drink ye all of
this, etc. But our Lord expounds himself, John 20. Whose sins ye remit, they
are remitted, etc.

Ex ore sedentis in Throno procedebat gladius bis acutus. 3 Ex ore. De his quae
f^unt, Tit. 11.
This is, says the Pope, the Sword of Solomon, which cuts on both sides,
giving every Man his own. We then who albeit unworthy hold the place of the
true Solomon, by the favor of God, do wisely exercise this Sword, when such
causes as in our audience are lawfully canvassed, we do with Justice determine.
This interpretation first corrupts the Text, for it has not, out of the Mouth
of him that sat on the Throne, but that sat on the Horse; next, it perverts
it, for it is not the Sword of Justice but of Christ's Word, which is more
piercing than any two-Edged Sword that issues out of his Mouth. Heb 4* 12.4
Per venerabi^em. Qui ^ilii sint legitimi. Deuteronomy. 17.8.
As for that of Justice, he never assumed it, but renounced it rather, when he
said. Man, who made me a divider to you? Luke 12.14. To prove that in other
Regions besides the patrimony of the Church, the Pope does casually exercise
temporal Jurisdiction, it is said in Deuteronomy, Si difficile sit and
ambiguum, etc. And because Deuteronomy is by interpretation the second Law,
Surely by the force of the Word it is proved, that what is there decreed should
be observed in the New Testament. For the place which the Lord did choose is
known to ^e the Apostolic See. For when as Peter fleeing went out of the City,
the Lord minding to call him back to the place he had chosen, being asked of
him, Lord whither go thou? answered, I go to Rome to be crucified again, The
Priests of the Tribe of Levi are the Popes coadjutors. The high Priest or
Judge, he to whom the Lord said in Peter, Quodcunque ligaveris, etc. His Vicar
who is a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, appointed by God the
Judge of quick and dead. He that contemns the Popes Sentence is to be
excommunicated, for that is the meaning of being commanded to be put to death.
Does not this well follow out of the word Deuteronomy? And Rome is the place
that Christ did choose, because he went, he said, to be crucified there. Only
there is a scruple of the High Priest, for as much as he that is High Priest
after Melchisedeck's Order, (...), has a Priesthood that passes not into
another, Heb. 7. He adds there, that Paul that he might declare the fullness of
power, writing to the Corinthians says: 1 Cor. ^.3.
Know ye not that ye shall judge the Angels? how much more the things of the
World? Is this then the Popes plenitude of Power, to judge secular things? or
was Corinth the Apostolic See, and so many Popes there even of the meanest of
the Church? What shall we say to that Exposition of the famous Text, Matthew.
16.18. Cap. fundamenta de Elect. in 6.
Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: The Lord (he
says) taking Peter into the fellowship of the undivided Unity, would have him
to be called that, which he was himself, that the building of the eternal
Temple might by the marvelous gift of God consist in Peter' s firmness. What is
this undivided Unity? Not of the Trinity, I trow, or natures in Christ. What
then? his Office? of which he said a little before out of the Apostle, that no
Man can lay any other foundation but Jesus Christ. Yes: that from Peter as a
certain head he should as it were pour abroad his gifts into his whole body.
That the Church might stand upon Peter 's firmness. This Foundation S. Paul
knew not, when he blamed I am of Cephas. Peter's infirmity cannot bear up the
weight of such a building, much less (which we must remember the Romanists
understand by this Iargon) the Popes his Successors.

Such another interpretation is that of Pope Boniface, Joh. 10.16, Extra unum
Testam.
that makes Vnum Ovile and unus Pastor, the Church and the Pope. But it is
plain our Savior alludes to the Prophecies, Ezekiel 34.23. and 37.24. where the
Lord calls that one Pastor his servant David. What blasphemy is this, thus to
usurp Christ's Royalties? What Father, what Council, what Catholic man ever
interpreted this Text on this manner? By which the Pope while he seeks the name
of the Shepherd, shuts himself out of Christ's ^old?

Cant. 4.9. C. quoniam. De immunitate.
Yea the same Pope calls the Church his Spouse also, and so other Popes since.
S. John the Baptist tells them, that he that has the Bride is the Bridegroom.
S. Paul prepared her to one Husband Christ. If she be the Popes Spouse with her
will, she is a Harlot: if against her will, he is a Ravisher, and our Lord
Jesus Christ will deliver her out of his lewd imbracements, crying out of the
violence which she suffers, as it is to he hoped shortly.

That in the Churches power are two Swords, the spiritual and temporal, we are
taught by the Words of the Gospel, says the same Boniface. For when the
Apostles said, Behold, there be two swords here (to wit in the Church) when the
Apostles spoke thus, the Lord answered not that it was too much, Luke 22.38
but enough. Certainly, he that denies the temporal Sword to be in Peter' s
power, does ill observe the Speech which our Lord utters, Put up thy Sword into
thy sheath. No doubt an infallible Interpretation; by which it should appear
that both the Swords that were in our Saviors company, hung by S. Peter's
side, or else that some other had the spiritual, leaving none to S. Peter, but
that which he might not use. The Exposition is S Bernards, you will say. But in
an Epistle paraenetical to the Pope himself; S. Bernard might have leave to use
allusions, and after his manner to be liberal of all that the Sea of Rome
challenged, that he might have the more Authority to reform the abuses of it.
As to grant Peter the temporal Sword, but so, as he must not use it Quid tu
gladium denuo usurpare tents, quem semel jussus es ponere in vaginam? and he
shows how these two Swords be the Churches. The one to be drawn out for the
Church, the other also by the Church. This by the Priests, that by the
Soldiers hand, but at the beck of the Priest, and bidding of the Emperor. But
the Pope in a Decretal Epistle, pretending to teach the World, in a Point as he
pronounces, necessary to Salvation, with such an Interpretation as this; argues
little reverence to the Word of God, and a very mean Opinion of the Judgments
and Consciences of Christen Men, if they could not discern this to be a
Strangers Voice, not Christ's. Besides that, he changes S. Bernards Words, and
clean perverts his meaning. For exerendus, he puts in exercendus. For ille
Sacerdotis, is militis manu, sed sane ad nutum Sacerdotis and jussum
Imperatoris. Pope Boniface thinking jussum too absolute in the Emperor, makes
him to be the executioner, and joins him with the Soldier, on this manner.
Ille Sacerdotum, is manu Regum and Militum sed ad nutum and patientiam
Sacerdotis. S. Bernard makes the executive power to be in the Soldier, the
directive in the Priest, the commanding in the Emperor. Pope Boniface makes the
Kings and Soldiers to have only the executive, the directive and permissive to
be in the Priest. Yea sword, he says, must be under Sword. For where the
Apostle says, There is no power but of God, quae autem sunt, Romans 13.1.
a Deo ordinati sunt; more fully in the original Text, the powers that are, are
ordained, that is, appointed of God: The Interpreter here dreams of order and
subordination, and cites a saying of Dionysius, that the lowest things are
reduced to the highest by the middlemost; a conceit that makes nothing to the
purpose of the Apostle in that place.

He proceeds and tells us, that of the Church and Power Ecclesiastical, is
verified the Prophecy of Jeremy. Jer. 1.10.
Behold I have set thee this day over Kings and Kingdoms, etc. Tell me, good
Mr. Waddesworth, what is to pervert the Scriptures, if this be not, to apply to
the power Ecclesiastical, that which is spoken of the Word and Calling
Prophetical? Yet more, The Earthly Power, if it swerve out of the way shall be
judged of the power Spiritual, but if the Spiritual, that is lesser; of that
which is superior to it. But if the highest, it may be judged of God only, not
of Man, the Apostle witnessing the Spiritual Man judges all things, 1 Cor.
2.15.
but himself is judged of none. We are come at length, as it were to the
Fountains of Nilus, to the Original of the Infallibility of your Judge; and if
he have here rightly interpreted S. Paul, we learn that no earthly power, no
Magistrate is a spiritual Man, unless he be one of the Popes spiritualty. For
these be S. Paul's spiritual Men, that judge all things. Yet this must receive
limitation. For no Man may judge the Pope, the Supreme Spiritual Man, for of
him it seems S. Paul meant it, his authority he says is not humane, but
divine, by the divine Mouth given to Peter, and his Successors, when the Lord
said to him, Quodcunque ligaveris.

For conclusion, Whosoever resists this power thus ordered of God, Romans 12.2.
resists the Ordinance of God, unless as Manichaeus, he feign two beginnings:
which (says he) we judge to be false and heretical, since by Moses record, not
in the beginnings, Genesis 1.1.
but in the beginning God created Heaven and Earth. Who would not acknowledge
the divine Authority and Infallibility of your Interpreter, both in confirming
his purpose, and convincing heresies from so high a beginning, as this first
sentence of Holy Writ? What rests now, but after so many testimonies he infer,
Furthermore, to be under the Bishop of Rome we declare, say, define, and
pronounce that to every humane creature it is altogether of necessity of
salvation. Thus says your infallible Judge and Interpreter of Scripture, the
center of your Conscience, and foundation of your Faith, not as a private
Doctor, but as Pope, in his own Law, intending to inform and bind the Church,
and that in matters with him of the greatest importance that may be, touching
his own Authority, and, as he pretends, absolutely necessary to Salvation, to
all the Sons of Adam.

I might heap up many more, but these may suffice for a sample. You may (and so
do by your self, I beseech you) observe these kind of Interpretations in other
Points also, and in other the Decretals and Breves of Popes; which, as I hear,
are lately come forth in great Volumes. You shall find many Mysteries in your
Faith, Romans 8.8.
that perhaps you know not of, as Syricius Epist. 4. and Innocent. Ep. 2.
That you cannot please God because you are married: for so is that place of
the Apostle interpreted, qui in carne vivunt, Deo placere non possunt. That not
only the Wine in the Chalice, but the Water also is transubstantiated first
into Wine, then into Christ's blood. That it was Joh. 19.34. C. Inter cunctas.
not watery moisture, but the true element of Water which issued out of Christ's
side. You shall find Romans 10.10.
confession of sins to the Priest, proved by the Text, Cord creditur ad
justitiam, ore autem fit confessio ad salutem. Matt. 13.8.
That the good Ground, that received the Seed in the Gospel, is the Religion of
the Friars Minors. Jam. 1.27.
That this is that pure and immaculate Religion with God and the Father, which
descending from the Father of Lights, delivered, exemplariter and verbaliter,
by the Son, to his Apostles, and then inspired by the Holy Ghost, into S.
Francis and his Followers, contains in it self the Testimony of the Trinity.
This is that which as S. Paul witnesses, no Man must be troublesome unto,
which Christ has confirmed with the prints of his Passion. The Text is, Gal.
6.17
de caetero nemo mihi molestus sit, ego n. stigmata Domini Jesus in corpore meo
porto. It is marvel, if S. Paul were not of the Order of S. Francis. That when
Christ said, Matthew. 28.20. Lo I am with you, etc. Clem. 3. de Reliq. Tract. in
Ioh. 50.
Ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus dicbus, he meant it of remaining and being with
them even by his bodily presence. S. Augustine upon the same Text denies this,
and says, that according to the presence of his Body he is ascended into
Heaven, and is not here. That C. Martinus de cognat. spirit. 4. Mat. 19.5.
the Father of the Child Christened, and his Godfathers Wife may not marry,
because, according to the Lords Word, the Husband and the Wife, are made one
flesh by marriage. That C. non debet de consang. 6 Cor. 7.4.
the number of Four, does well agree to the degrees prohibited in corporal
marriage, of which the Apostle says, The Man has not the power of his own
body, but the Woman; nor the Woman power of her body but the Man, because there
are four humors in the body, which consist of the four Elements. For
Conclusion, you shall find it by a commodious interpretation concluded,
contrary to many Texts of Scripture, out of Scripture it self, that Cum ex. De
haereticis 5. Heb. 12.20 Exo. 19.13 Ecclus. 3.22. Romans 12.3.
no simple and unlearned Man presume to reach to the subtlety of the Scripture,
because, well it was enacted in the law of God, that the Beast which should
touch the Mountain, should be stoned. For it is written, Seek not things higher
than thy self. For which cause the Apostle says, Be not more wise than it
behooves, but be wise to sobriety.

One thing more also you shall find, that now adays this spiritual Man and sole
infallible Interpreter of Scripture, seldom interprets Scripture, or uses it in
his Decretals and Breves, Nay the style of his Court has no manner of smack or
savor of it. A long compass of a Sentence, intricate to understand, yea, even
to remember to the end, full of swelling Words of Vanity, with I know not how
many ampliations and alternatives, after the fashion of Lawyers in Civil
Courts, not of sober Divines, much less of the Spirit of God in his Word. Some
Man would perhaps think this proceeds from an affectation of greatness, and the
desire of retaining Authority, which seems to be embased by alleging reason,
or Scripture, and interpreting Texts. For my part, I account it comes as much
from necessity. For it is notorious, That neither the Popes themselves, nor
those of the Court, the Secretaries and Dataries, which pen their Bulls and
Breves, have any use or exercise in Holy Scripture, or soundness in the
knowledge of Divinity, or skill in the Original Tongues, wherein Gods Word is
written; all which are necessary to an able Interpreter. And therefore it is a
wise reservedness in them, not to intermeddle with that wherein they might
easily fault; especially in a learned Age, and wherein so many watchful Eyes
are continually upon them. And to this very poverty and cautelousness I do
impute it, That the present Pope in his Breves about the Oath of Allegiance,
uses not a Word of Scripture: But tells his Faction, that they cannot without
most evident and grievous injury of Gods honor take the Oath, the tenor
whereof he sets down Word for Word; and that done adds, Quae cum ita sint, etc.
Which things (says he) since they be so, it must needs be clear unto you out
of the Words themselves, that such an Oath cannot be taken with the safety of
the Catholic Faith, and of your Souls, since it contains many things which
are apparently contrary to Faith and salvation. He instances in no one thing,
brings neither Scripture nor Reason, but a Quae cum ita sint, without any
premises. Which loose and undergrounded Proceeding, when as it is, occasioned
the Archpriest here, and many other of that side, to think these Letters
forged, or gotten by surreption; he sends another of the same tenor, with this
further Reason. Haec autem est mora pura, integraque voluntas nostra. This is
now to be more than an Interpreter, even to be a Lord over the Faith of his
Followers, to make his Will a Reason. What would you have him do? to allege a
better he could not, a weak and unsufficient one he was ashamed, he thought it
best to resolve the matter into his sole Authority. Whereby he has proved
himself a fallible both Judge and Interpreter, yea a false witness against God
and the Truth; commanding by the Apostle Christian Men to be subject, and to
give every Man their dues, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor; and much
more (if there be any difference) Allegiance to whom Allegiance.

CHAP. IV. Of the state of the Church of England, and whether it may be
reconciled with Rome.
BUt of your Interpreters Infallibility enough. Your next doubt, Whether the
Church of England were of the true Church or no, was resolved with a
Paralogism, partly by reason of equiv^^^tion, and diverse acception of the
terms, The Church, and to err, partly by composition and division in the
connection of these by those Verbs [ can or may.] Let us examine the several
parts of your Syllogism.

The Proposition. The true Church cannot ^rr, is confirmed by the consent of
all. Excuse me, Sir, if I withhold my consent, without some Declaration and
Limitation. I say first, it must be declared whether you mean the Catholic
Church, or a true part of the Catholic Church. For there is not the like
reason of these to error. Against the Catholic Church, Matthew. 16. Rev. 2.5.
Hell Gates shall not prevail; against particular, when Christ does remove the
Candlestick out of his place, they do. Witness the Churches of Africa,
sometimes most Catholic. And thus it seems you must take this term, since your
doubt was, Whether the Church of England be of the true Church or no. Besides,
I must desire to know, what manner of Errors you mean; whether even the least,
or only deadly, and such as bar from salvation, which the Apostle calls (...),
heresies of perdition, 2 Pet. 2.1. Take now your own choice; for if you speak
of every error, the Proposition is false, even of the Catholic Church, much
more of any particular Church. Yea, I add further, not only of the Catholic
Church by denomination from the greatest part, or by representation, as the
Pastors or Prelates thereof met in a Council, which is still the mixed Church,
but even that which is Christ's true body, whereof he is the Savior, and which
shall be with him for ever. As for deadly and damnable errors, this true and
properly called Church, both in the whole and every part of the mixed Church, is
yet privileged from them finally: 1 Pet. 1.5. Mat. 24.24.
For it is kept by the power of God to salvation, it is not possible the Elect
should thus be seduced. Truth it is, That by such errors particular visible
Assemblies, universally and obstinately defending them, become falsely called
Churches, from which we are to separate our selves. Example in the Synagogue,
and in Churches of the Arians.

Now let us see your Assumption. But the Church of England, Head, and Members,
King, Clergy, and People, yea, a whole Council of Protestants may err by your
own grant. I answer, The Church of England, that is the Elect in the Church of
England, which only are truly called the Church, can never deadly err. This no
Protestant will grant ye. The mixed Church of England, Head, Members, King,
Clergy, and the residue of the people, and a whole Council of Protestants, may
err damnably, and therefore much more fall into lesser errors. This they grant.
And if they shall so err obstinately, they shall deservedly lose the name of a
tr^e Church. But they deny they do thus err; yea they deny that they err de
facto, at all.

What follows in Conclusion? Ergo, No true Church. This shortness in
suppressing the Verb, would make a Man think you meant to cover the fault of
your Discourse. And indeed you might by that means easily beguile another, but
I cannot be persuaded you would willingly beguile your self. Sure you were
beguiled, if you meant it thus. Ergo, it is no true Church. See your Argument
in the like: A faithful Witness cannot lie; But Socrates or Aristides may lie
by his own grant. Ergo, no faithful Witness. He that stands upright cannot
fall: But you Mr. Waddesworth by your own grant may fall: Ergo, stand not
upright. Perhaps your meaning was, Ergo, it may become no ^rue Church, to wit,
when it shall so err damnably. But then it follows not, There is now no
salvation in it, and therefore come out of it now. When you show that, I shall
account ^ou have done wisely to go out of it. Show ^^at in any one Point, and
take me with ^ou* In the mean while, for my part, I shall sooner trust that
Chapman that shall say to me, Lo here is a perfect Yard, I will measure as
truly as I can, and when I have done, take the Yard and measure it your self;
than him that shall say, here is thus much, ye shall not need to measure it,
but take it on my Word: Yea though one of his Apprentices should stand by and
say, he could not deceive me though he would; as Benedictus a Benedictis tells
the present Pope, Volens nolens errare non pot^s.

Where you relate, your endeavor to defend the Church of England, and tell of
the Puritans rejecting those Arguments you could use from the Authority of the
Church, and of the ancient ^octors interpreting Scriptures against them, flying
to their own arrogant Spirit: I cannot excuse them for the former, nor
subscribe to your accusation in the latter. Perhaps you have met with some more
fanatical Brownists or Anabaptists, whom here you call Puritans. But these that
are commonly so called, which differ from the Church of England about Church
Government and Ceremonies only, give indeed too little to the Authority of Men,
how holy, learned, or ancient soever. Which is their fault, and their great
fault, especially in matters of this nature; yet they fly not to their own
Spirit as you charge them.

That which you add, That you perceived the most Protestants did frame the like
evasions when you came to answer the Arguments against them on the other side;
When you shall show this in particulars, I shall believe it. In the mean while,
I believe you thought so; for commonly mediocrities are aggravated with the
hatred, and slandered with the names of both extremes. But in the question
between the Popish faction and us, you might easily have discerned why the
Argument from bare Authority, is not of such validity. For Ceremonies and
matters of order may be ordered by wise Men, and are not the worse, but the
better if they be ancient, yea if they be common to us with Rome, which
Puritans will by no means allow. In Doctrine, if holy Men, yea if an Angel from
Heaven shall innovate any thing, we are not to admit it. Now the Controversies
between the Romanists and us, are most about Doctrine, and they exceed as much
in extolling the authority of the Ancients in their private Opinions and
incommodious and strained speeches, as the Puritans in depressing them. We hold
the mean, and give as much to the Authority and Testimonies of the Fathers, as
may stand with the truth of Holy Scriptures, and as themselves defer to the
writing of others, or require to be given to their own.

Next you tell, of your following their Opinion who would make the Church of
England, and the Church of Rome still to be all one in Essential Points, and
the differences to be accidental. Confessing the Church of Rome to be a true
Church, though sick, or corrupted, and the Protestants to be derived from it,
and reformed. This Opinion is not only as you write, favored of many great
Scholars in England, but is the common Opinion of all the best Divines of the
reformed Churches that are or have been in the World, as I showed in part of
another Work, which as I remember you had a sight of. Wherein yet I fear you
mistake the term, accidental, which does not import that our differences are
but slight and of small consideration, but that all those Opinions and Abuses
which we reform and cut off, are not of the Faith, but superfluous and foreign,
yea hurtful and noisome to it, as the Weeds are to the Corn, which overgrow and
choke it. And to follow this similitude, the state of the Church under the
Roman obedience, and that part which is reformed, is like a Field overgrown all
with Weeds, Thistles, Tares, Cockle: Some part whereof is weeded and cleansed,
some part remains as it was before; which makes such a difference to the view,
as if it were not the same corn. But being better considered, it will be found
all the difference is, from the Weeds, which remain there, and here are taken
away. Yet neither here perfectly, nor all where alike, but according to the
industry of our Weeders, or conveniencie of the Work, with care of the safety
of the good Corn. By this Parable, you may see what is to be hoped of your
labor to reconcile most of our particular Controversies. For although I doubt
not but in some it may be performed, where the difference is rather verbal than
real; and in the manner of teaching, rather than in the substance of Doctrine.
And if moderate Men had the matter in handling, the flame of contention in a
great many more might be trodden down and slaked, suppose the sparks not all
extinct; yet in some other, it is as possible to make the Weed and Corn
Friends, as your and our Opinions; where there is none other remedy but that of
our Savior, Every Plant that my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted out. Neither does this impossibility arise more out of the nature of the
things, than the affection of the persons. For the Pope and the Court of Rome,
which are those that domineer on that side, do no less out of the fear of their
own ruin, deadly detest all reformation, than the Reformed, out of their
present view and former feeling, the tyranny of the Papacy, which they see does
Excommunicate, and put to cruel Death all that are of this way. And which is a
prodigious thing, where they tolerate the blasphemous and professed enemies of
Christ, even with allowance of the public exercise of their Religion, there do
they burn Men professing Christ's Religion, according to the ancient and common
Rule thereof, with that uprightness of Conscience, that if they had as many
Lives as there be Articles thereof, they would give them all rather than
renounce any of them.

As for the Protestants making the Pope Antichrist, I know it is a point, that
inrageth much at Rome. But if the Apostle S. Paul, if S. John in the
Revelation, describe Antichrist so, as they that do but look upon the Pope
well, must be forced to say as the people did of the blind Man in the Gospel,
some, this is he; others, he is very like him; if himself and his flatterers
do, and speak such things, as if all others should hold their peace, do in a
sort proclaim, I am he; what can the Protestants do with the matter? I will
take the liberty here to relate to you, what I saw while I was in Venice, the
rather because it is not impertinent to our present purpose. And though perhaps
y^u may have heard somewhat of it, yet the particulars are I suppose unknown in
those parts. And yet it does more import they were known there than otherwhere,
being occasioned by a subject of the Crown, though of a name and Family whereto
it is not much beholding.

In the Year 1608. F. Thomas Maria Carafa, of the Order of the Friars
Preachers, Reader of Philosophy in Naples, printed a thousand Theses to be
disputed thrice; once at Rome, in the Church of S. Mary super Minervam, twice
in S. Dominicks at Naples. Of these, five hundred were in Logic, Natural
Philosophy, Metaphysick, and Mathematics; five hundred more in Divinity,
amongst which that was one. Solus Petrus and successores in totam Ecclesiam
illimitatam jurisdictionem habent. These were all included in the form of a
Tower, and dedicated with an Epistle to the present Pope Paulus the Fifth, to
whose Arms alluding, he says, Idem Draco biceps qui utrumque polum amplexus
imperio ad Ecclesiae pomoerium tanquam ad amoenissimos Hesperidum hortos
pervigil excubat, nullius Herculis vim metuens, turris etiam mea sit custos. On
the top of this Tower, was this Representation curiously and largely cut. An
Altar, with two Columns, and their Ornaments, according to the Rules of
Architecture. In the midst for the Altar-piece was the Popes Picture, very
lively portrayed to the Breast. Over his Head was the Word, Vultu portendebat
imperium. Above on the top of the Front, in ^hree compartiments his Arms thus.
On the one side the spread Eagle alone, the Word, Ipse mihi fert tela pater. On
the other a Dragon, and by it, Meliora servo. In the midst both together in one
Scutcheon with the cross Keys and triple Crown in the Crest. On either side of
these Columns were depending Crowns and Scepters, whereof six were on the
Right Hand after the Christian fashion. The Imperial above, other underneath,
and lowest the Corno of the Duke of Venice, so they call a certain Cap the
Prince uses to wear being of Gold Embroidery, and somewhat resembling a Horn.
There were also Turkish Turbans, and Diadems of diverse fashions, as many on the
left side. By these on either side of the Columns, were two of the four parts
of the World. Europe and Africa, on the one, Asia and America on the other, in
the Habit of Ladies, sitting upon their proper Beasts couchant, each offering
unto him that was above the Altar of their Commodities, Corn, Fruits, Incense,
etc. On the base of the Column on the Christian and European side, was the
Word, Et erunt Reges nutritii tui. On the other, Vultu in terram demisso
pulverem pedum tuorum lingent, Esai. 49. Agreeable whereto there was made
flying over their Heads two Angels, on each side one with these Sentences in
their Hands. That over Europe and Africa: Gens and Regnum quod non s^rvierit
illi, in Gladio and in Fame, and in peste visitabo super gentem illam, ait
Dominus, Hier. 27. That over Asia and America: Et dedit ei Dominus potestatem
and regnum, and omnes populi ipsi servient: potestas ejus potestas aeterna quae
non auferetur, and Regnum ejus quod non corrumpetur, Dan. 7. Now just
underneath the Picture of the Pope, on the foreside of the Altar, was this
Inscription, PAVLO V. VICE-DEO CHRISTIANAE REIP. MONARCHAE INVICTISSIMO ET
PONTIFICIAE OMNIPOTENTIAE. CONSERVATORI ACERRIMO. The Copies of these Theses
were sent as Novels from Rome, and did the more amuse Men at Venice, because of
the Controversy that State had with the Pope a little before, and their seeing
their Dukes Corno hanged up among his Trophies, under all other Princes Crowns.
But most of all, the new Title, Vice-Deo, and the addition of Omnipotency gave
matter of wonder. The next day it was noised about the City, that this was the
Picture of Antichrist; for that the Inscription PAV5L50O V5. V5I1C100E-D500EO,
contained exactly in the numeral Letters the number of the Beast in the
Revelation 666. What anger and shame this was to the Popish Faction, I leave it
to you to esteem. But whom could they blame, but themselves, who had suffered
so presumptuous and shameless a flattery to come forth, with public
approbation, annexing also so blasphemous an Inscription, as unawares to them
by the providence of God, should so plainly characterize Antichrist? But to
heal up this matter again, not long after we had fresh news went about, That
Antichrist was born in Babylon, had done many miracles, was coming toward
Christendom with an Army. We had an Epistle stamped at Venice, pretended to be
written at Rome, An. 1592 by the Rever. D. Valentinus Granarensis, touching the
birth of Antichrist his stock, progeny, Country, Habitation, Power, Marvels,
Life, and Death, out of the Holy Scriptures, and Fathers, printed Cum
Privilegio. And as for the Title Vice-Deus, as if they would have it in despite
of all Men: One Benedictus a Benedictis a Subject of the Venetian State,
setting out a Book against Doctor Whitak^rs Position, de Antichristo, at
Bologna (for at Venice it was not suffered to be printed) revives it with
advantage. He dedicates it thus, Paulo Quinto Pontifici Vniversalis Ecclesiae
Oecumenico, summo totius Orbis Episcopo atque Monarchae and supremo Vice-Deo.
These Titles he heaps upon the Pope again, and again, and that you may judge of
his Wit by one place in the conclusion, exhorting Dr. Whitaker to repentance;
he tells him, That by his example, his King, and with the same King James the
First, many Englishmen convertentur ad Dominum Deum, and ipsius loco ad
Vice-Deum confugient. And p. 135. he says of Gregory the Great. Totum mundum
quasi Monarcha ac Vice-Deus optime and irreprehensibiliter rexit, etc. He might
have learned of him, that his other Title Oecumenicus Pontifex, is the very
name of Antichrist, the name of blasphemy, by which he doubts not to presage,
that Antichrist was near, and an Army of Priests ready to attend him. In this,
if ever in any thing, it seems your Judge was infallible.

It will be said here, it is not in the Popes power what his followers will say
of him, he styles himself the Servant of Gods Servants. If the Canonists will
call him, Apologia pro Garneto, c. 5.
Our Lord God the Pope, first, it may be denied. Secondly, it may be laid to
the oversight of the Writers or Printers. Thirdly, if it be showed to be left
standing still in the Gloss of the Canon Law, by them that were appointed to
over-see and correct it, what marvel if one word escaped them, through
negligence, or weariness, or much business? And yet if they thought the sense
of the word not so usual indeed in the ordinary talk of Christians, but not
differing from the custom of Scripture was to be allowed to an ancient Writer,
the matter deserves not such outcrys. But the Pope, such is his modesty, never
usurped this Title full of arrogance, never heard it with patient ears. To
this, let it first be considered, that the Censors of such things as come to
the Press, are not to be imagined such Babes, as not to know what will please
or displease his Holiness. Especially in writings dedicated to himself, a man
may be sure they will allow nothing the second time, and after some exception
and scandal taken at it, but what shall be justified. How much more in the
Popes own Town of Bologna, and when his Chaplain could not be allowed to print
it at home. But to let all these go; we may have a more sensible proof how the
Pope tastes these Titles. That which he rewards he approves: Benedictus was
shortly after made for his pains Bishop of Caorli. How worthily he deserved it
you shall judge by his book; which at my request vouchsafe to read over, and if
there be any merit, you shall sure get great meed of patience in so doing. That
you may not doubt of the Popes judgment concerning these Titles, you shall
further know, that the matter being come to the knowledge of the Protestants in
France, and England, made them talk and write of it broadly, namely, the Lord
of Plessis, in his Mysterium iniquitatis, and the Bishop of Chichester in his
Tortura Torti. This gave occasion to the Cardinal Gieure, to relate in the
Officio Santo at Rome of the scandal taken hereat, and to make a motion, De
moderandis titulis. It was on foot sundry months. At last the Pope revoking it
to himself, blamed those that had spoken against these Titles, and said, they
were no whit greater than the authority of S. Peter 's Successor did bear. To
return thither whence I have a little digressed. In the question whether the
Pope be the Antichrist or no, for my part, I despair of all reconciliation. For
neither does there appear any inclination at all in the Pope to reform any
thing in Doctrine or Government, nay, he encroacheth daily more and more upon
all degrees even among his own subjects, and resolves to carry all before him
at the breast, with his Monarchy and infallibility. On the other side, the
Reformers partly emboldned with success, partly enforced by necessity, chiefly
tied with band of conscience, and persuasion of truth, are not like to retract
what they have affirmed in this behalf, and whatsoever their differences be in
other things, in this point they have a mavelous unity amongst them. Those in
France having been molested for calling the Pope Antichrist, have been
occasioned (as I have heard) some few years since to take it into their
Confession, thereby to justify themselves according to the Edicts of
Pacification giving them liberty to profess their Religion. In England as you
know it is no part of the Doctrine of our Church, yet a commonly received
opinion. Howbeit this is so far from hindering, that the reformed Churches and
those which heretofore were, or at this present are under the Popes obedience
be one Church, that is, all members of the Catholic; that the Protestants
without this cannot make good the other. For Antichrist must sit in the Temple
of God, and that is in the Church, as Chrysostom and Theophylact interpret it,
and Gods people could not be commanded to go out of Babel, if he had none there.

CHAP. V. Of the safeness to join to the Roman, being confessed a true Church
by her opposites.
BUt you concluded hence, that seeing many of the best learned Protestants did
grant the Church of Rome to be a true Church, though faulty in some things; and
contrarily not only the Romanists, but Puritans, Anabaptists, and Brownists
deny the Church of England to be so, therefore it would be more safe and secure
to become a Roman Catholic, etc. This Discourse has a pretty show at the
first blush, and perhaps was used to you since your coming into Spain, as it
was to some there before. At my coming to Venice I fell upon certain Letters
and Reports, set forth as it was told me by F. Possevine, and not unlike by his
mindfulness, to take all occasions to advance the credit of his Society.
Amongst them there is one said to be a true Relation of the manner how M.
Pickering Wotton was converted to the Catholic Roman Faith, indicted as it is
said, and subscribed by himself before his death. In which by a certain Father
of the Company of Jesus an Englishman by Nation, the like Discourse was used,
as it is said, to him: That he should consider well, that he and other
Protestants did not deny that the Catholics might be saved in their Faith,
whereas all the Catholics that either lived at the present, or ever were, hold
it as a most certain Article of Faith, That the Protestants and other Heretics
cannot be saved out of the Catholic Church; therefore if he should become a
Catholic, he should enter into that way which was safe, by the consent of both
parts. This consideration he says moved him not much then. But after praying
to God, as he was also advised by that Father, to direct him into the right way
if he were out of it, suddenly he saw a certain Light very clearly before his
Eyes in form of a Cross. Whereupon incontinently there was offered unto him
such a heap of Reasons and Arguments by which was showed that the Catholic
Faith is the only way of Salvation, and that of the Protestants on the contrary
most absurd and abominable, that most evidently he was convinced, without any
the least doubt. And these reasons which then offered themselves to him, were
for the most part such as he did not remember that he had ever heard them in
all his life. Thereupon with unspeakable joy he called back the Father, told
him what had happened, prayed him to hear his confession, and he examining him
upon all the Heads of the Catholic Religion, which he most firmly and entirely
believed, heard his confession, etc. But this Narration deserves little credit.
First creating Mr. Wotton for the greater glory of their triumph a Baron;
unless the Fathers in Spain, or Possevine in Italy have a faculty to create
Barons. Next it is a very improbable thing that Mr. Wotton dying of a Calenture
should have so good a memory, as to indite so exact and artificial a Narration,
with such formality, and enforcements in fit places, as any Reader of
understanding must needs perceive, came out of a diligent Forge, and needed
more hammering and fileing than so. But that of all other is most Legend-like,
that howsoever this motive of yours is used, yet it is not made the effectual
inducement, but a heap of reasons in the twinkling of an Eye, and causing him
not only to believe in the gross, but to be able to give account of all the
Heads of the Catholic Religion (that is all the points of controversy at this
day, between the Romanists and the reformed Churches) in a fit of an Ague, in
the twinkling of an eye? Excuse me: This is beyond the blind Beggar that
recovered his sight at S. Albans, that could tell the names of all colors as
soon as he saw them. What then? Was not Mr. Wotton reconciled? and saw he not a
light in form of a cross? Yes: And this your motive was used to him also, and
perhaps moved him more than all the heap of Reasons besides. But shall I tell
you here what I have heard from the mouth of one that was himself then in
Spain, that both could know the truth of this matter, and had no reason to tell
me a lie, since what he said, came freely from himself, without fear, or hope,
or almost enquiry? The Gentleman being sick, and weak in his Brain, the Father
that Possevine tells of, brought under his Gown a Picture, and upon a sudden
presented it before him: This might be the light in form of a Cross (perhaps a
very Image of Christ crucified) which together with the lightness of his fancy,
occasioned that your Motive, though it self also very light, might carry him:
as a little weight is able to sway much, where the Beam it self is false. If
this be true (as I take the living God to record, I feign nothing, but do
relate what has been told me) as on the one side I doubt not, but God in his
mercy did interpret of the Gentleman's Religion, according to his right judgment
and persuasion in his health, and not according to the erroneous apprehensions
of his fancy in his sickness (which even in his best health was ever very
strong in his sleep) as some that have conversed with him have told me: So on
the other side, they shall bear their judgment whatsoever they were, that would
with so cruel a craftiness take advantage of his infirmity, and make his story
after a stale to draw on others. As for the heap of Arguments to convince the
Protestants Faith to be absurd (that must be by the way the Articles of the
Creed) Possevine's Catholic Hyperboles are well enough known in Venice, and he
has been there told to his Head, Auvertimento al P. Ant. Possevino, p. 7. and
14.
That if in things past, whereof he might have been informed, he proves a most
lying Historian, it might more easily fall out, that he should prove a most
false and ridiculous Prophet in things to come.

And in truth he has proved so hitherto Wherefore, I reckon these garnishments
of Mr. Wotton's perversion, to be like the rest of his News touching the
Conquest of Moscovia by Demetrius that Impostor, whom he bo^^teth in a manner
to have been the Scholar of his Society. Where he tells the World that the Army
cried out often: God and the Prayers of our Fathers (the Jesuits) have subdued
the Hearts of our enemies, and inclined them under our noble Prince Demetrius.
That Demetrius turning to the Priests of the company of Jesus, was heard to say
[Lo that which you foretold me, O Fathers, in the time of that sorrowful flig^^
of ours, is now come to pass, to wit, that as the Lord God had afflicted me
much, so on the contrary he would much comfort me, and that therefore I should
not doubt of a full victory.] These Words Possevine stamps in his former
Relation in Capital Letters. But when this bold enterprise was overthrown, and
this suborned fugitive slain, and shamefully dragged up and down the Streets of
Mosco, then lo the reports were, That a light was seen over his body in the
night time, etc. Let them that walk in darkness follow such Lights as these be*
We are no children of the Night, nor of darkness. Leaving therefore those
unheard of Arguments, which Possevine has not only cunningly drawn a veil
over, that we may not see them, but exempted by privilege of a miracle that we
may not try them, this which he has showed us, let us bring it a little to the
clear daylight.

And even at the first view it is apparent, that this Argument is merely
foreign; not drawn from any thing, a part rei, as what the true Church is,
what it teaches, or such ^^ke, but from opinion and testimony. What Men say of
that of Rome, and of the reformed Churches, etc. Now Opinions are no certain
grounds of Truth, no not in natural and civil matters, much less in Religion.
So this Argument at the most is but Topical and probable. Let us see the parts
of it. And first that ground: The testimony of our selves and of our contraries
is much more sufficient and certain than to justify our selves alone. Surely
neither the one nor the other is sufficient, or certain. It is true, that if
other proof fail, and we will follow conjectures, he is in probability an
honester Man, that others beside himself say well of, than he that alone
testifies of himself. And yet according to truth, this latter may be a right
honest Man, and dwell, as we say, by ill neighbors, or where he is not known,
or requires not the testimony of other Men: Whereas the other being indeed a
knave, is either cunning to conceal it, or has suborned other like himself to
say for him, or dwells by honest Men that judge and say the best. And in this
very kind, our Savior attributes so little to testimony, Luke 6.26.
as he pronounces a woe to them that all Men speak well of. So in our case it
is more probable, I grant, if there were no other Argument to clear it, but
Opinion, and most Voices, that you have the true Church, and are in the way of
salvation, than we, because we give you a better testimony than you do us. But
it is possible we are both deceived in our Opinions, each of other; we through
too much charity, and you and others through ignorance or malice. Herein
undoubtedly we have the advantage of you and the rest, and do take that course
which is more safe and sure to avoid sin, that if we do fail of the truth, yet
we be deceived with the error of Love, which, as the Apostle says, hops all
things, and is not puffed up. We avoid at the least that gulf of rash
judgment, which, me thinks, if the case be not too too clear, we should all
fear, Matt 7.6. Romans 2.1.
With what judgment you judge, you shall be judged. Thou that judge another,
condemnest thy self

But that you may a little better consider the weakness of this discourse, if
the testimony of our selves and our contraries were sufficient and certain to
make truth, and ever more safe and secure to follow that side which has that
testimony, it had been better to have become a Jewish Pro^elyte, in the
Apostles times than a Christian: For the Christians acknowledged the Jews to be
the people of God, heirs of the promises, and of Christ, and styled them
Brethren, notwithstanding their zeal to the Ceremonies, and Traditions of their
Fathers, excused their ignorance, bare with them, labored to give them content
in all things. Whereas they to the contrary called those that professed Christ,
Heretics and Sectaries, accursed them, drew them out of their Synagogues,
scourged them, cast them in Prison, compelled them to blaspheme: As you do now
Protestants to abjure, though in other cruelties I confess you go far beyond
them. By like reason a Pagan in S. Augustine's time, should rather have made
himself a Christian among the Donatists, than with the Catholics. For the
Catholics granted the Donatists Baptism to be true, accounted them Brethren.
The Donatists to the contrary renounced their Brotherhood and Baptism both,
rebaptized such as fell to their side, used these forms to their Friends, Save
thy Soul, Aug. Epist. 48. and in Psalm. 39. De Baptism^ l. 2. c. 7.
become a Christian: like to those used by your Reconcilers at this day.

Lastly consider, if this ground of the testimony of our contraries for our
part, and their lack of ours, for theirs, be sure; you have justified the cause
of the Protestants in the main Question, Which is the better Religion. For
whatsoever a Protestant holds, as of Faith, you cannot deny to be good and
Catholic, nor any Christian Man else. For he binds him to his Creed, to the
Holy Scriptures, and goes no further: And in these he has your testimony for
him. But he denies many things which you believe, and accounts them foreign,
yea repugnant to Faith, as the Popes infallibility, Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints. In all these you speak
only for your selves, in some of these you have not us only, but all other
Christians your opposites, to say nothing of the Jews and Turks, whom I might
as well chock you withal, as you do the Protestants with Anabaptists. So by
this reason our Profession is more safe and secure, and questionless is more
Catholic than yours. Neither have we in this discourse the Argument only as
you see very appliable and favorable to us, but (which I would entreat you by
the way to observe) the conclusion it self often granted by moderate and sober
Men of your own side, Abu^ensis, B^llarmine, Faber, Erasmus, Cassander,
R^fmei^er, A^eas Syl^ius.
viz. That our course is in sundry things more safe than yours. As in making no
Image of God. In trusting only in the merits of Christ. In worshipping none but
the Trinity. In directing our Prayers to our Lord Jesus Christ alone. In
allowing Ministers to marry. In diverse other Points also many of your side say
the same with the Protestants, and defend us from the imputations which others
of you lay upon us, as is showed in the Catholic Apology, by the reverend
Bishop of Chester.

This to the proposition. Let us come to the Assumption, where you mince too
much the Protestants Opinion touching the Church of Rome, when you make them
say, It is peradventure faulty in some things: Nay without peradventure, they
say, It is corrupt in Doctrine, superstitious and Idolatrous in Religion,
tyrannical in government, defiled in manners, from the crown of the Head to the
soal of the Foot no soundness in it, as the Prophet says of another like it;
yet the vital parts not perished, Isai 1.6. D Ray^olds These. 5.
ready to dye, yet not dead. A true Church though neither the Catholic Church,
nor yet a sound member of the same. That also is false in the assumption, that
the Puritans deny the Church of England to be a true Church. Unless the
Puritans and Brownists be with you all one, which you have made diverse Sects
above, and then are you to blame as to multiply names (whereof I have told you)
before, so now again to consound them.

What is now the Conclusion? It would be more safe and secure to become a Roman
Catholic. But the Proposition will not infer thus much simply, but only in
this respect. For Topical arguments (as you know) hold only caeteris paribus.
We must then inquire if there be no other intrinsical arguments by which it may
be discerned, whether cause be the better, whether pretense to the Church and
Truth, more just, more evident. Whether it may be warranted to return to Babel,
because God has some people there, when as he commands those that are there to
come out of it. How safe it may be willingly to join with that part of the
Church, which is more corrupt in Doctrine and Manners, when we may continue
with that which is reformed. These points were to have been scanned, ere you
concluded and executed as you did.

And such Arguments there want not. Christ our Lord has given us amongst
others, two infallible Notes to know his Church. Joh. 10.27. c 13.35.
My Sheep, says he, hear my Voice: And again, By this shall all Men know that
you are my Disciples, if you love one another. What shall we stand upon
conjectural Arguments from that which men say? We are partial to our selves,
malignant to our opposites. Let Christ be heard who be his, who not. And for
the hearing of his Voice, O that it might be the issue! But I see you decline
it, Therefore I leave it also for the present. That other is that which now I
stand upon: the Badge of Christ's Sheep. Not a likelihood, but a certain token,
whereby every Man may know them. By this, says he, shall all Men know that ye
are my Disciples, if ye have charity one toward another. Thanks be to God:
This mark of our Savior is in us, which you with our Schismatics, and other
enemies want. As Solomon found the true Mother by her natural affection, that
chose rather to yield to her adversaries plea, claiming her Child, than endure
it should be cut in pieces; so may it soon be found at this day, whether is the
right Mother. Ours that says, give her the living Child, and kill him not; or
yours, that if she may not have it, is content it be killed, rather than want
of her will. Alas, says ours, even of those that leave her, these be my
Children, I have born them to Christ in Baptism, I have nourished them as I
could with mine own Breasts his Testaments. I would have brought them up to
Man's estate, as their free Birth and Parentage deserves. Whether it be their
lightness or discontent, or her enticing words and gay shows they leave me,
they have found a better Mother. Let them live yet, though in bondage. I shall
have patience; I permit the care of them to their Father; I beseech him to keep
them that they do none evil; if they make their peace with him, I am satisfied,
they have not hurt me at all. Nay but, says yours, I sit alone as Queen and
Mistress of Christ's Family; Rev. 18.7.
he that has not me for his Mother, cannot have God for his Father. Mine
therefore are these, either born or adopted: And if they will not be mine, they
shall be none. So without expecting Christ's Sentence, she cuts in pieces with
the Temporal Sword, hangs, burns, draws those that she perceives inclined to
leave her, or have left her already. So she kills with the Spiritual Sword,
those that subject not to her, yea thousands of Souls that not only have no
means so to do, but many which never so much as have heard whether there be a
Pope of Rome or no. Let our Solomon be Judge between them: Yea, judge you (Mr.
Waddesworth) more seriously and maturely, not by guesses, but by the very mark
of Christ, which wanting your selves, you have unawares discovered in us, judge
I say without passion, and partiality, according to Christ's Word; which is his
Flock, which is his Church.

CHAP. VI. Of Fraud and Corruption in alleging Councils, Fathers and Doctors.
YOur next Motive was, That in examining the Questions, especially about the
Church, where you labored to peruse the Original Quotations and Texts of the
Councils, Fathers and Doctors, you found, as you say, much fraud committed by
the Protestants. This imputation of Fraud is very usual and common to both
sides; and verily I believe some on both sides are faulty. For whether out of
humane infirmity, mistaking the meaning of Authors, or slips of memory, trust
of other Men's Quotations, who tie not themselves to the Words, but give the
sense they conceive; how easily may testimonies be alleged clean besides the
Authors minds? He that has strongly conceited any thing, finds it in all
that ever he reads, or falls upon. Too much heat in contention, and desire
of Victory, blinds the Judgment, and makes a Man heedlesly lay hold upon any
thing, that he thinks may serve his turn. As we see sometimes in the Writings
of the Fathers, which had to deal with ancient Heretics, alleging the
Scriptures themselves besides the purpose. Sometimes have and desire of
contracting makes one cut off some words, and explain and press those that make
for him; and perhaps leave out something material: Presently the other side
cries out clipping, forgery, falsification, and what not? But although all this
may be called fraud in respect of the Reader, who is by this means deceived in
his Evidence, and therefore if he be not aware may pronounce amiss, yet is it
nothing to that kind, when with an evil Conscience and of set purpose Falsehood
is set forth, and Truth out-faced. Wherein I cannot tell what you have found. I
could have desired, and do yet if your leisure may serve, you would show the
particulars. I do profess here to you, that I have seen and even felt with my
Fingers such dealing in the Romish Faction, as I cannot resolve whether I
should account them more shameful Slanderers, and false Accusers of others, of
fraudulent handling; or bold and shameless in the practicing of it themselves.
When the Lord of Plessis his book of the Sacrament came out, how was it
calumniated in this kind, with falsification? Du Puy in a public Chartel
offered, that of 306 passages in the Preface, he would show as clear as the Sun
at noon day, 283 were falsified, corrupted, and mangled, and the rest of no
importance. The Bishop of Eureux, after Cardinal, undertook to show in the Book
it self five hundred enormous falsities by tale, and without hyperbole. The
matter was brought to a trial before the King of France, and nine places
examined of this number. And, as was beforehand promised the Popes Nuncio, the
business should be so carried that the advantage should remain on the part of
the Church of Rome, and the Pope receive contentment, and in these very Words,
The lie should rest with the Heretics. Morney was born down. The Kings Letters
to the Duke of Espernon of this Victory, were blown over France, sent to Rome,
printed with a Discourse thereabout, set forth at Antwerp, and translated into
English, with some alteration and Turkesing by F. Parsons. Wherein he says, A
French Jesuit, Fronto Ducaeus, discovered in it at last a thousand falsehoods
for his part. He accused Bishop Jewel, and Mr. Fox, of the like crime; he says
that in two only leaves of his Book, a certain learned Scholar did discover
thirty wilful and voluntary corruptions and falsifications that cannot be
excused, and himself besides these thirty, noted so many other plain falsehoods
and manifest wilful lies, as might well double the former number. And by
Arithmetic he multiplies this Number with the Number of the Leaves, the number
he says will rise to thirty thousand, by which John Fox his Book will as much
exceed John Sleidans Story in number of lies (in which were found only eleven
thousand) as it does in bulk and bigness. This manner of writing of these Men,
brings to my mind that which Sir Thomas More writes of Tyndals New Testament,
wherein he says, Dialog. l. 3. c. 8.
Were founden and noted wrong and falsely translated above a thousand Texts by
tale. The Language is like, and the cause is the same. Men were loath these
Books should be read. The substance of them was such as could not be
controlled; The next remedy was to forestal the Readers minds with a prejudice
of falsification, that so they might not regard them, but cast them out of
their Hands of their own accord. The Vulgar sort would be brought out of
conceit at the first hearing, with vehement accusation. Even wise Men would
suppose, though there should not be any thing near so many wilful faults, yet
surely there must needs be a very great number, and that could not happen but
with a very bad meaning; this admitted, who would vouchsafe them the reading?
And in truth among those that favor the reformed part, I have met with some
that out of this buz of falsification in the Lord of Plessis Book, cared not
for reading it; whereby may be thought in what account it should be with all
those who esteem all F. Parsons Libels to be Oracles. But shortly: Since neither
the Cardinal Perone, nor F. Parsons have had the means, or will, to decypher
those hundreds and thousands of falsifications in Sleidan, Bishop Jewel, Mr.
Fox, or Plessis, in these so many years, as have run since they wrote; and as
for the last, he has set forth the Book again, with all the Authorities at
large in the Margent, in the Authors own Words, and has answered all those
that bayed at it, till they are silent: what remains but that we count this
multiplying of F. Parsons, may be joined with Aequivocation, to make up the art
of Falsehood; wherein he and his Faction may justly claim to be the worthiest
Professors in the World. But without any multiplication or other Arithmetic,
in the fifth page of that Relation of his in the seven first Lines are four
notorious, I will not say, lies, or falsifications, but falsehoods by tale. The
First: That the trial being begun upon the first place, that was found false.
The French Discourse printed at Antwerp, Cum privilegio, and approbation of the
Visitor of Books, says: And as to the said first Article, nothing was judged
thereabout by the said Commissioners, nor pronounced by my said Lord the
Chancellor, and the King said that it should be remitted to another time to
deliberate thereabout. The Second: He (that is Plessis) would have passed to
the second, but the Bishop refused so to do, except the Ministers and
Protestants there present would first subscribe and testify that this first
place was falsified. He said in the page before, that Plessis appeared at last
with some four or five Ministers on his side. There were no Ministers appeared
with him on his side. No Protestants, no creature did subscribe, or was
required so to do. The third: Which at length they did, viz. subscribe, this
place was falsified. An utter untruth. Whereof there is not a Word in the said
printed Narration. The fourth: As well in this as in all the rest. There was no
subscription, as I said, at all. The Commissioners were all of the Roman
profession, saving Casaubon; and he no Minister. They never pronounced, much
less subscribed that any of those places examined were falsified. Of the first
place of Scotus they pronounced nothing. Of the second, of Durand, That the
opposition of Durand was alleged for the resolution. And this they would have
remitted also as the former to another time, save that the Bishop insisted,
saying, it was in vain to dispute if they would not judge; Addressing his
Speech diverse times to the King, to the intent he should signify his pleasure
to the Commissioners; and then his Majesty drawing near to them, they gave
their Opinions upon that Article as before. This was that which F. Parsons
stumbled at when he wrote, The Ministers and Protestants there present
subscribed and testified, that it was falsified, and so all the rest. For being
overjoyed with this News which he did not well understand (to think the
charitablest of him) he thought the Commissioners had been part at least
Protestants, and Ministers: And had subscribed, whereas they pronounced their
Sentence viva voce, by the Mouth of the Chancellor, never using the term
falsification; yea in some of the rest they acquitted the Lord of Plessis, as
in the passage of P. Crinitus, though they said Crinitus was deceived. In that
of Bernard, that it had been good to distinguish the two passages of S. Bernard
out of the same Book with an and caetera. Not to stand now upon that, that in
the rest of the places he has a reasonable and just defense with indifferent
Men, for the omissions he was charged with in Chrysostom, Hierome, Bernard,
and Theodoret: And in that of Cyril, the King himself said aloud, tha both
sides had reason. But F. Parsons not having, as it appears, received perfect
information of the particularities of this affair, was so hasty to write
according to the partial intelligence he received at Rome, that he faults
himself in the same kind, that he imputes to another. And if he should meet
with some severe Adversary, that would multiply his falsehoods by his leaves and
lines, as he deals with Mr. Fox, and then extend by proportion his Pamphlet
to the bigness of Mr. Fox his Book of Martyrs, he would find, that he provides
very ill for himself that is too rigorous and censorious to other Men.

But I leave him, and come to the fidelity of the Popish Faction, whereof I
shall desire you to take a taste in one of the questions which you name about
the Church, even that which is indeed cardo negotii, as you say, the
controversy of the Popes authority. For the establishing whereof: First, the
Epistles of the ancient Bishops of Rome, for the space of about three hundred
years after Christ are counterfeited. The Barbarous not Latin but lead of the
style, and the likeness of them all one to another, the deep silence of
Antiquity concerning them; the Scriptures alleged after Hierom's translation,
do convince them of Falsehood, and by whose practice and procurement we cannot
doubt, if we ask but as Cassius was wont, cui bono? For at every bout the
Authority of the Pope, and privileges of the Roman See are extolled and
magnified.

Next, the Donation of Constantine is a senseless forgery; Did. 96. c.
Constantinus.
and so blazed by some of the learnedest of the Roman Church. Read it
advisedly, either in Gratian, or in the Decrees of Sylvester, with the
Confession, and Legend of Constantines baptism, and say out of your own
judgment if ever any thing can be more fraudulent, more sottish. And because I
have mentioned Gratian, his whole compilation is full of falsification, and
corruption of Antiquity: take an example or two in the matter we have in hand.
The Milevitane, Council. Milev. c. 72.
and after the African Councils under pain of excommunication prohibit Appeals
beyond the Seas. Which Canons were made purposely to meet with the usurpations
of the Bishops of Rome, Council. Afric. c. 12.
of which I have spoken somewhat before. c. (...). qu. 9.6.
Now in the citing this Canon, Gratian adds this goodly explication; nisi forte
Romanam sedem appellaverint; thus excepting that abuse which these Councils
directly sought to prohibit. Again, S. Augustine to inform a Christian man
what Scriptures he should hold for Canonical, De Doctrina. Chr. l. 2.
bids him follow the Authority of the greater part of the Catholic Church,
amongst which are those, quae Apostolicas seeds habere, and Epistolas accipere
meruerunt, which had the honor to have the Apostles sit in them, and to
receive Epistles from them. Gratian fits it thus, inter quas (Scripturas) sanc
illae sunt quas Apostoli^^ seeds habere, and ab ea alii meruerunt accipere
Epistolas: And accordingly, the title of that Canon is; Inter Canonicas, The
Decretal Epistles are numbered amongst the Canonical Scriptures. True it is,
that in the end of the next Canon, Gratian adds a good limitation, and worth
the remembering, that this must be understood of such Decrees, in which there is
nothing found contrary to the Decrees of the Fathers foregoing, nor the
Precepts of the Gospel. Belike even in Gratian's time it was not holden
impossible, That in the Sanctions and Decretals of Popes, something might be
decreed contrary to the Gospel, which may be added to your Judges
Infallibility, which has been touched before.

But these be old tricks of the Champions of the Papacy. At this day perhaps it
is better: Yes, and that shall ye ununderstand by the Words of the Children of
the Church of Rome themselves, the Venetians. But first ye are to know, that
among certain Propositions set forth in defense of that State, there was one,
the fourth in number of eight, That the Authority promised by our Savior
Christ to S. Peter under the metaphor of the Keys is merely Spiritual. For
confirmation whereof after other proof was said, That the Authority of the
highest Bishop is over Sin and over Souls only; according to the words of that
Prayer of the Church about S. Peter -- qui B. Petro animas ligandi atque
solvendi Pontificium tradidisti. Cardinal Bellarmine undertook to answer these
Propositions, and coming to this place he says; That peradventure Gods
providence to take away such deceipts, whereby the Author of these Propositions
would deceive the simple, with the words of the holy Church misunderstood,
inspired into the Reformers of the Breviary that they should take out of that
Prayer the word (animas) as anciently it was not there, nor ought to be;
because that Prayer was formed out of the words of the Gospel, Quodcunque
ligaveris, and quodcunque solveris. Now mark the Rejoinder that is made to him
by Johannes Marsilius, who numbering up his errors in the defense of every
Proposition, roundly tells him? Erra XIV. perch dice, etc. He errs in the
fourteenth place, for that he says, That those which have taken out of the
Breviary the word (animas) were inspired by the Holy Ghost. I know not whether
the Holy Ghost be the Author of Discord. This I know well, that one of his
Gifts and of his Fruits is Peace. Those which made that Prayer had this
intention, to explain the Words Quodcunque ligaveris, with the Word (animas) by
that Text which explaineth them, quorum remiseritis peccata; sins being in the
Soul and not in the body, left any should believe that the Pope were Dominus in
temporalibus and spiritualibus, of Goods, of Bodies, and of Souls, and that he
might loose and bind every thing, as it seems the L. Cardinal believes. And
they explained them with the Word animas, by which explication a remedy is put
unto all those discords which may arise between the Pope and Princes de meo and
tuo. Whereas those which have lately taken it away out of the Breviary, have
anew stirred up occasion of discords and contentions. Besides that it is a
thing known of all Men, that in the Books of the Councils, of the Canons, of
other Doctors, in a word, even in the very Breviaries and Missals there have
been and are taken away those things which are in favor of Princes of the
Laity, to see if at length there might be established the opinion de illimitata
Potestate Pontificis in temporalibus. So as he that compares together the Books
printed in the year 30. in 50. and those at this day, as well of the Councils
as others, evidently perceives the vintage, that marvail it is, that we post
vindemiam, have found some few Clusters for the defense of our gracious Prince.
This is a means if it go on further, to make all writings to lose their credit,
and to ruin the Church of God. Be it spoken by the occasion that the Lord
Cardinal has given me thereof, and for charities sake, and for the desire that
these writings be no more touched; which be also said with all humility and
reverence.

He errs in the fifteenth place, for that he says that in the ancient
Breviaries there was not the word animas. And I have seen Breviaries written
with pen above 200 years ago, and printed above an hundred; in them is the word
animas, and if it were not, yet ought it to be put in, to take away the
occasions of discords.

Thus he there; As for the Prayer corrected, or corrupted rather; if you look
the old Breviaries, yea even that set forth by Pius the Fifth, printed by
Plantine, with the Privilege of the Pope, and his Catholic Majesty, Ex
decret. 8. Council. Trid.
Anno 77. upon the nine and twentieth of June, ye shall find it to run thus.
Deus qui B. Petro Apostolo tuo collatis clavibus regni Coelestis animas ligandi
atque solvendi Pontificium tradidisti, concede ut intercessionis ejus auxilio
peccatorum nostrorum nexibus liberemur. Per Dominum --. Now in the late
correction, Animas is left out, and we understand the Reason.

In the end of the same Book there is an Advertisement to the Reader, the
beginning whereof I will not stick to set down verbatim; it is this. Because in
this Defense I have often said, that Authors are made to recant, and that out
of their Books many things are taken away sincerely said in favor of the power
of Temporal Princes, to establish by these means the Opinion, De suprema
authoritate Papae in temporalibus: I have thought good to advise the Reader,
that the quotations by me brought, are taken, ad verbum, out of those Books
which are incorrupt, and contain the opinion of the Authors sincerely. And that
the more ancient the Copies be, and further from these our times, so much the
better they be. And in particular I desire that he be advertised, that the Cap.
Novit de judiciis, printed in Rome the year* 1575. by Joseph de Angelis, with
license of Superiors, is the text which was followed by the Author of the
eight Positions, and by me; which contains sincerely the opinion of Navarrus,
and of the Parisians. Which in the Books printed since, is changed in such
manner as it is no more the same, but is become the contrary, to wit that of
Cajetane, etc.

Tell me, good Mr. Waddesworth, in the sight of God, what is fraud, if this be
not. And thus not only the Authors of this Age any way inclining to
reformation, as Erasmus, Rhenanus, Cassander, Ferus; but, Vives, Faber,
Cajetane, Pol. Virgil, Guicciardine, Petrarch, Dante, yea Authors of six or
seven hundred years old, are set to School to learn the Roman Language, and
agree with the Trent Faith. For it is not the Authority and Monarchy of the
Pope alone that is sought, though that be Summa summarum, whereunto all comes
at last, but no voice must be heard dissenting from that which he teaches.
Therefore it is, that Bertramus Presbyter is appointed by your Spanish Index
printed at Madrid, to be wholly abolished. The former had catechized him to say
instead of visibiliter, invisibiliter, with many other pretty explications, as
where he says, the Elements in the Lords Supper, Secundum creaturarum
substantiam, quod prius fuerant, ante consecrationem hoc and post consistant,
the explication is, secundum externas species Sacramenti. But the surest way
was to take him clean away: And so indeed in the Bibliotheca Patrum he is, and
that purposely, as Marguerinus de la Bigne confesses in his Preface.

The Ancient Fathers are perhaps free. For the Council of Trent appointed, that
in the writings of the ancient Catholics nothing should be changed, save
whereby the fraud of Heretics, a manifest error is crept in. But who shall be
the Judge of that? the Inquisitors and Censors themselves. For my part, I
cannot say that I have spent many hours in the trial of this point, nor have I
had ancient Copies thereto requisite. But I will entreat you to consider with
me one example, or rather two or three in one Father, and in the matter that I
named, whereby you may guess at the rest. In S. Cyprian's Works imprinted at
Rome, by P. Manutius, sent for to Venice by Pius the Fourth, to set forth the
Fathers, as himself says, most perfectly cleansed from all spots, the Epistle
of Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea, beginning, Accepimus per Rogatianum, is
wholly left out; and Pamelius thinks purposely, and adds, perhaps it had been
more wisdom it had been never set out at all. S Cyprian was not of that mind,
who translated it into Latin, as the style it self witnesses, and Pamelius also
is enforced to confess. The matter is, it too quick and vehement against
Stephanus Bishop of Rome. He says he is moved with just indignation, at the
manifest folly of Stephanus, that boasting so much of the place of his
Bishopric, and that he has the succession of Peter, upon whom the foundations
of the Church were set, brings in many other Rocks, etc. He says he has
stirred up contentions and discords throughout the Churches of the whole World.
Bids him not deceive himself, he has made himself a Schismatic, by separating
himself from the Communion of the Ecclesiastical Unity, for while he thinks he
can separate all from his Communion, he has separated himself only from all.
He taxes him for calling S. Cyprian a false Christ, a false Apostle, and a
deceitful workman, which being privy to himself that these were his own due,
preventingly he objected to another! No marvel if this gear could not pass the
Press at Rome.

In S. Cyprians Epistle, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, these Words, and Primatus Petro
datur, etc. and after, Vnam Cathedram constituit: and again, Et Cathedra una,
are foisted into the Text in that Roman edition. In that of Pamelius also
besides these, another clause is added, forsooth, out of Gratian, and a Copy of
the Cambron Abbey [ Qui Cathedram Petri super quam fundata est Ecclesia
deserit.] These patches being all left out, the sense is nevertheless complete
and perfect: And for the last, which speaks most for the Popes Chair, the
Supervisors themselves of the Canon Law, by the commandment of Gregory the
Thirteenth, acknowledge, that in eight Copies of Cyprian entire, in the
Vaticane Library this Sentence is not found: But besides these there is one
wherein his opuscula alone are contained, and another at S. Saviors in
Bologna, in which it is found. But what account they make of it appears by
this, that supplying the whole sentence in another place of Gratian, they leave
it out. Wherein as their Conscience is to be commended, and Manutius his
modesty, or theirs who surveyed that Edition, that would not follow one Copy
against eight; so is Pamelius's boldness to be corrected, that out of one, and
that not fully agreeing with Gratian, neither shames not (as himself says,
veriti non sumus) to farce in this reading into the Text, against all the rest
Printed and Manuscript, which he used above twenty in number, as he sets them
down in a Catalogue in the beginning of his Edition. It is now little more than
two hundred years ago, that Friar Thomas of Walden wrote against Witcleff. He
in the second Book of his first Tome, the first Article, and second Chapter,
cites this very place of Cyprian, and cites it to fortify Witcleff's assertion
of his own mind. For having recited Witcleff's Words, he concludes them thus;
Haec ibi, and then proceeds: Addamus and nos quod Cyprianus dicit, omnes
Apostolos pares fuisse and potestate and honor. Addamus quod Hieronymus dicit,
super omnes Apostolos ex aequo fortitudo solidatur Ecclesiae, etc. Yet neither
in that Chapter, nor in that whole discourse does he once mention these Words,
now conveyed into Cyprian, nor any where else that I can find in all his Work,
though he cite this Tractate often under the name of Liber contra Haereticos
and Schismaticos. How fit had it been to answer the objection out of Cyprian by
Cyprian, if he had not found that Gratian after his manner had been too bold or
negligent in this passage. The same Author in his third Tome De
Sacramentalibus, Doct. 10. cites a long place out of this same Treatise
beginning at those words. An esse sibi cum Christo videtur qui adversum
Sacerdotem Christi facit, etc. Again, Cap. 81. two places; one immediately
before the Sentences charged with those former words, another after. The one
beginning, Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum, Ego tibi dico quia ^tu es Petrus, etc.
The other, Vnitatem tenere firmiter and vendicare debemus, etc. Certainly
unless Waldensis meant by faint-pleading to betray the cause he undertook, he
would never have omitted so pregnant passages as these be, for Peter's Primacy,
and the Popes Chair, had they been extant in Cyprian's Work when he wrote. But
we cannot doubt of his good affection to the Sea of Rome, either for his orders
sake, or his dedicating that Work to Pope Martine the Fifth, or his approbation
of the two first Tomes, which he says, he caused to be seen and examined, per
sollennes viros, and testifies of to be commended of all, encouraging him to
write the Third. It remains therefore that Cyprian has received this
garnishment since Walden's time. And here with this occasion of his silence
about those things which are thrust into Cyprian, I will, though besides my
purpose, use his Testimony about a certain sentence of the Author of the
imperfect work upon Matthew, ascribed to Saint Chrysostom, which the Romish
faction will needs race out. It is in the eleventh Homily, about the middle.
The words are these, Si enim vasa sanctificata ad privatos usus transfer
peccatum est and periculum, sicut docet Balthazar qui bibens in calicibus
sacris, de regno depositus est and de vita. Si ergo haec vasa ad privatos usus
transfer sic periculum est [in quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed
mysterium corporis ejus continetur] quanto magis vasa corporis nostri, quae
sibi Deus ad habitaculum praeparavit, non debemus locum dare Diabolo agendi in
iis quae vult. In this sentence the words that I have enclosed from the rest
are inserted, De Sacram. Euch. l. 2. c. 32.
says Bellarmine, by some Scholar of Berengarius, for they are not in all
Copies. No marvel. That is more marvel that they are in any, since the
Canonizing of Transubstantiation. But in Walden's time, and before, the words
were thus read; for in his third Tome, Cap. 30. they are thus cited, save that
by the error of the print ministerium is put for mysterium, and he adds there,
Hanc tanti viri sententiam cum magistrum suum Witcleff vident libro de sermon
Domini in monte Cap. 37. assumere tanquam sacram, qualiter praedones Lollardi
audent, etc. But says Bellarmine, These words make not to the matter in hand,
for the Author of the Homily spoke of the holy vessels of Solomon's Temple,
which Balthazar profaned; and in those vessels, neither was the Lords true
body, nor yet the mystery thereof. Well, if they be not to the purpose, if they
speak of the vessels of Solomon's Temple, let them stand in the Text still. What
need ye purge them out of the newer editions at Antwerp, and Paris? Belike
Father John Matthews saw further into this matter than Bellarmine, for he casts
out this sentence with the dregs of the Arians, although there be no Arianism
in it that I can perceive. The truth is, the Author speaks of the Vessels used
in the Lords Supper in his own time. For those words, sicut docet Balthazar,
etc. are brought in by the way, for a confirmation from a like example, the
sense hanging in the mean while, which is resumed again when he goes on, Si
ergo haec vasa, as any indifferent Reader may perceive. Yea, take away these
words, and the sinews of the sentence are cut, for the force of the argument
lies in the comparison of the profaning of the holy Vessels, and of our
bodies; That is a sin, yet Christ's body is not contained in them, but the
mystery thereof: but God himself dwells in these.

These examples, to omit some other, do make me think, that howsoever the
corrupting of the texts of the Fathers, is not now perhaps so usual, as of
other Writers, and good reason why, they know that many look narrowly to their
fingers, neither is there any place almost, that is of special pith, that has
not been observed and urged in the handling of the controversies of this age,
by some or other; yet where there is any color of differing Copies, or any
advantage to be taken that way, it is not slipped. And who knows not, that
sometimes the change of a Letter, yea, of a Point or Accent, makes the whole
sentence of another meaning? De verbis Domini, Sermon. 15. c. 11.
As for example, that of Saint Augustine, Qui fecit te fine te, non justificat
te ^ine te. Read it interrogatively, and it is as strong for Soto and the
Dominicans, as if it be read assertively, for Catharine and the Jesuits.

And in very deed when I consider the eagerness of these men, to win their
purposes, and their fearful boldness with the holy Word of God, I know not how
a man should look for conscience or respect at their hands in the writings of
men. For to omit that the Trent-Fathers have canonized the Vulgar Latin
Edition, which so many times departs from the original inspired by the holy
Ghost, adding, detracting, changing, often to a diverse, sometimes to a
contrary sense. To let pass also how Sixtus V. and Clemens VIII. do tyrannize
over and delude the Faith of their followers, about that Edition, binding them
unto two diverse Copies, and sometimes flat contradictory; and so, as the form
of each must be inviolably observed, without the least particle of the Text
added, changed or detracted. The former, derogating all Faith and authority
from whatsoever Bibles hand-written, or printed, of the Vulgar edition, which
did not agree with that which he set forth ad verbum and ad literam. The
latter, telling, that when the same Pope endeavored to set it out, he
perceived not a few things to have crept into the holy Bible, through the fault
of the Pres^, and that it needed a second care; whereupon upon he decreed to
bring the whole work again to the Anvile, had he not been prevented by death;
so derogating all Faith from the former. Whereas the truth is, Sixtus did not
only endeavor to set out his Bible, but prefixed his Bull before it ad
perpetuam rei memoriam, and sent one of the Copies to the State of Venice (as I
heard at my being there) howsoever since it was cunningly recovered again, set
it to sale publicly, and says in his Bull, that he corrected the faults of
the Press with his own hand, and (which most of all convinces Pope Clement's
Preface of falsehood) the difference of these Editions is not in fault of the
prints, but in that the one follows the old erroneous reading, the latter the
reading of other Manuscripts according with the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek, or the
Latin edition of the Catholic Kings Bible, observed by the industry of the
Divines of Lovaine. But to forbear to urge this contradiction in the very
foundation of belief, which some man peradventure would press so far, as to
infer, that the Romanists have no faith (for he that believes contradictories,
believes nothing.) What shall we say of that impiety, to corrupt the original
Text according to the vulgar Latin? See an example hereof in the first promise
of the Gospel, Genesis 3. where the Serpent is threatened, that the seed of the
Woman shall crush his head. The vulgar Edition leaving here the Hebrew, the
Seventy, and Saint Hierome himself, as appears by his questions upon Genesis,
translates Ipsa, She shall bruise thy head. So it stands now in the authentical
Scripture of the Church of Rome, and herein Sixtus and Clemens are of accord.
The Divines of Lovaine observe, that two Manuscript Copies have Ipse. That the
Hebrew, Chaldee, and Greek, have it so likewise. Why then did not either Sixtus
or Clemens, or they themselves having Copies for it, correct it, and make it so
in the authentical Text? I will tell you by color of this corruption, the
Devil envying Christ's glory, like an obstinate enemy rather yielding himself to
any than his true Conqueror, has given this honor to the Virgin Mary. To her
it is attributed in that work which I think to be the most ungodly and
blasphemous that ever saw the Sun, The Ladies Psalter, wherein that which is
spoken of God by the Spirit of God is writhed to her. In the 51. Psalm, Quid
gloriaris in malitia, o malign Serpens, ande. Why boastest thou in malice, o
thou malignant Serpent and infernal Dragon? Submit thy head to the Woman, by
whose valor thou shall be drowned in the deep. Crush him, o Lady, with the
foot of thy valor, arise and scatter his malice, etc. And in the 52. speaking
to the same Serpent. Noli extolli, etc. Be not lifted up for the fall of the
Woman, for a Woman shall crush thy head, etc So that in that Anthem; Haec est
mulier virtutis quae contrivit caput Serpentis. Yea which I write with gief and
shame, to her does good Bernard apply it, Hom. 2. Super Missus est, and which
is more strange, expounds it, not of her bearing our Savior, but Ipsa
proculdubio, etc. She doubtless crushed that poisonfull head, which brought to
naught all manner of suggestion of that wicked one, both of temptation of the
flesh, and of pride of mind. To her does the learned and devout Chancellor of
Paris apply it. Sermon. de Nativitate Mar. Virgini^.
Has pestes universas dicimus membra Serpentis antiqui, cujus caput ipsa virgo
contrivit. And what marvel in those times, when the plain Text of the Scripture
ran so in the feminine gender, of a woman, and few or none had any skill of the
Greek or Hebrew? Who should that SHE be, but she that is blessed among women?
Now although that thanks be to God, it is known that this is a corrupt place,
out of the Fountains, yea out of the Rivers also, the testimonies of the
Fathers, referring this to Christ, as Irenaeus, Iustine, Cyprian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Hierome, yea Pope Leo himself, yet because no error of the Church
of Rome may be acknowledged, how palpable soever; they have cast how to shadow
this corruption, and set some color upon it, that howsoever this reading
cannot be true, yet it may be made like to truth. Lo in the Interlinear-Bible
set forth by the authority of King Philip the father of his Majesty that now
Reigns with you, the Hebrew Text is reformed according to the Latin, See D.
Reinolds Conf. with Heart. c. 6. 2.
IPSA. There was some opportunity hereunto, by reason that the Letters of the
Text without pricks would bear both readings. For (...) may be read (...) hu,
or (...) hiu. And this self-same word for the Letters the base of reading, is
so pointed in this Chapter, verse 19. and applied to Eve She is the mother of
all living. And so elsewhere, as Genesis 28.1. and 21. Hereunto perhaps was added,
that the pricks are a late invention of the Rabbines, as many think, and no
part of the Hebrew Text. And that not only Leo Castro, and such as accuse the
present Hebrew Copies as fa^sified, but those that defend them also, do many of
them confess. Hereupon it was resolved, as it seems, to point this place (...)
hiu. For it was not by mistaking, but purposely done, Franciscus Lucas in his
Annotations upon the place does assure us; and says it was Guido Fabricius his
deed. And indeed other things there be in that work, which savor not of the
learning and integrity of Arias Montanus, as for example, the Etymology of
Missa from the word (...) But as Boldness is not always as provident, as
Ignorance or Malice is bold, these Correctors marked not, that the gender of
the Verb, and the affix of the Noun following, are both Masculine. So although
the Orthographie would be framed to consent, yet the Syntax does cry out
against this Sacrilege. And yet our Rhemists, as I am informed, in their
lately set-forth Bible, with a long note upon this place, defend the applying
of this Text to the blessed Virgin, and the old reading Ipsa. What should a man
say? Necessity makes men desperate, and as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.13.
Evil men and deceivers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

These be frauds indeed, in the strictest sense, wilfully corrupting the Texts
of good Authors, wilfully maintaining them so corrupted; not abstaining from
the holy Scriptures themselves. For as to that other kind, depraving the sense,
retaining the words; it were endless to cite examples. Bellarmine alone, as I
believe, passes any two Protestants that ever set pen to paper, perhaps all of
them put together.

CHAP. VII. Of the Armies of evident Witnesses for the Romanists.
WHere you add, That you found the Catholics had far greater and better Armies
of evident Witnesses than the Protestants, it might perhaps seem so to you, as
your mind was prepared, when you had met with such cunning Muster-Masters as
the Romanists are: Who sometimes bring into the Field to make their number seem
more, after the old stratagem of War, a sort of Pages and Lackies, unworthy to
hold any rank in the Host of God, under the names of the Fathers. Sometimes to
confirm their part, give out a Voice confidently, that all the Forces which
they see aloof in the Field are on their side, whereas when it comes to the
Battle they shall find that they will turn their Arms against them. Sometimes
they change the Quarrel it self; in which case how easy is it to bring Armies,
as you say, into the Field, to fight against Nobody and evident Witnesses, to
prove that which no Man denies? For the purpose, that the Bishop of Rome has
had a primacy of Honor and Authority; when as the question is about a
Monarchy, and infallible Judgment, an uncontrolable Jurisdiction. Herein if you
please, see how Bellarmine alleges the Fathers, Greek and Latin, in the 15.
and 16. Chapters of his First Book, de Summo Pontifice. So for proof of the
verity of Christ's Body and Blood in the Lords Supper, he spends a whole Book
only in citing the Testimonies of the Fathers. To what purpose? When the
question is not of the truth of the Presence, but of the manner; whether it be
to the Teeth and Belly, or Soul and Faith of the Receiver. Sometimes they will
bear down the unexpert Soldier their Reader, that he sees the Fathers fight
for them; as Pighius and Bellarmine come in often with their Vides in the end
and application of a Testimony. Whereby it comes to pass that the Scholar if he
be of a pliable disposition, or loath to be counted dim-sighted, yields himself
to his Teacher, and sees in the Fathers that which they never dreamed of. But
surely, Sir, had you given that honor to the Holy Scriptures, which of the
Jews was given to them, and our Lord Jesus Christ allows it in them; and then
employed as much travel in the searching and looking into them, as you profess
to have done in the perusing the Councils and Fathers, perhaps God had opened
your Eyes, as those of Elisha his Servant, to have seen, that there are more on
our side than against us, Horses indeed and Chariots of Fire, able to put to
flight and scatter never so great Armies of humane Authorities and Opinions.
But this place of the Scriptures has no place amongst all your Motives.

As touching that which you say of the Centurists often censuring and rejecting
the plain Testimonies of the Ancients. It is true, that in the title De
Doctrina, they note apart, The singular and incommodious Opinions, the Stubble
and Errors of the Doctors. Wherein to tell you my fancy, If they commit any
fault, it is, That they are too rigid and strict, referring into this
Catalogue, every improper and excessive Speech, which being severed from the
rest of the discourse, may often seem absurd: As it may also seem strange that
our Savior should teach a Man to hate his Father and Mother, or pull out his
Eyes, or give him his Cloak that has bereaved him of his Coat. Whereas these
and the like have in the place where they stand, admirable force and grace,
being taken with an equal and commodious Interpretation. But it is as clear as
the Noon day, that sundry such errors and singular Opinions there be in the
Fathers, as cannot be justified. They speak not always to your own Minds, not
only prima facie, and in sound of Words, but being never so well examined and
salved. Witness Sixtus Senensis in the fifth and sixth Books of his
Bibliotheca. Witness Pamelius Medina (though blamed for confessing so much by
Bellarmine); yea witness Bellarmine himself. Wherefore if the bare Authority of
the Fathers must bind us, undergo the same Law ye give; if, as your Belgic
Index confesses, you bear in them with many errors, extenuate them, excuse
them, by devising some shift, often deny them, and give them a commodious
sense, when they are opposed in Disputations, give the liberty ye take. Or if
(as we think) these be base courses and unbeseeming the ingenuity of true
Christian minds, acknowledge this honor as proper to the Scriptures, to be
without controversy received, examine by the true Touchstone of Divine
Authority all humane Writings, how holy soever their Authors have been. Try all
things, as the Apostle commands, hold fast that which is good.

Your instance in Danaeus his Commentaries, super D. Aug. Enchiridon ad
Laurentium, was not all the best chosen. For neither does S. Augustine in that
Book treating professedly of Purgatory, avouch it plainly, or yet obscurely.
Nor does Danaeus reject his Opinion with those Words, Hic est naevus Augustini,
or the like. The Heads of S. Augustines* Discourse are these. I. That whereas
some thought that such as are baptized and hold the Faith of Christ, though
they live and dye never so wickedly, shall be saved, and punished with a long
but not eternal fire, he thinks them to be deceived, out of a certain humane
pity; for this Opinion is flatly contrary to other Scriptures. II. He
interprets the place of S. Paul, touching the trying of every Man's Work by
fire, of the fire of tribulation, through which as well he that builds Gold and
Silver, that is, minds the things of God, as he that builds Hay and Stubble,
that is, too much minds the things of this life, must pass. III. He says, that
it is not incredible, that some such thing is done after this life also; and
whether it be so or not, may be enquired of. IV. But whether it be found or no,
that some faithful people, according as they have more or less, loved these
perishing things, are later or sooner saved; yet not such as of whom it is
said, that they shall not possess the Kingdom of God, unless repenting as they
ought, they obtain forgiveness; as for the purpose, be fruitful in Alms; which
yet will not serve to purchase a license to commit sin. V. That the daily and
lighter sins, without which we are never in this life, are blotted out by the
Lords Prayer. And so the greater also, if a Man leave them, and forgive others
his Enemies; which is a worthy kind of alms: But the best of all is a sinners
amending of his life. Lo how plainly S. Augustine avoucheth Purgatory, of which
he doubts whether any such thing can be found or no: Expounds that Scripture
that seems most strong for it, all otherwise, and so as it cannot agree
thereunto. If it be found, is sure it will not serve for greater sins. And for
lesser defects, yea the greatest, shows another a surer Remedy, which in truth
makes Purgatory superfluous. In this Doctrine, Danaeus is so far from
controuling S. Augustine, that he applauds him; and says, That declaring his
own Opinion of Purgatory, he pronounces plainly, that the whole defining of
this matter is uncertain, doubtful, and rash; which since that Augustine wrote
being now an old Man, certainly it cannot be doubted but that he did altogether
reject Purgatory: Yea and he shows this fire it self to be unprofitable. Thus
Danaeus there. But the censure that was in your mind, I believe, is that upon
another passage of S. Augustine in the same Book, where he treats, whether the
Souls of the Dead are eased by the Piety of their Friends that are living. And
thus he determines it. That when the Sacrifices either of the Altar, or of
whatsoever Alms are offered for all such as are deceased after Baptism, for
such as are very good folk, they are Thanksgivings; for such as are not very
evil, they are Propitiations: For those that are very evil, though they be no
helps to the Dead, yet they are Consolations, such as they be, to the Living.
And to such as they are profitable unto, it is either that they may have full
remission, or that their very damnation may be more tolerable. Upon this
Chapter thus says Danaeus. Hoc totum caput continet (...) Augustini, and after
he adds, Itaque hic foenum and stipulam aedificat vir pius and magnus. But you,
ye say, had rather follow S. Augustine 's Opinion than his Censure. Perhaps as
one says, rather err with Plato than hold the truth with others. If that be
your resolution, what should we use any more Words? Believe then if you please,
that the Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice in the Lords Supper, or the
Oblations of the faithful, are to be made for all that decease after Baptism,
in the attempting of whatsoever sin they dye, yea suppose in final impenitence
of any deadly crime. That such as be damned may thereby have their damnation
made more tolerable. Believe that without any impropriety of Speech, the same
form of Words may be a thanksgiving for one, and an appeasing of Gods wrath for
another. Believe also (if you can beieve what you will) that S. Tecla delivered
the Soul of Falconilla out of Hell, and S. Gregory the Soul of Trajan, and that
as may seem saying Mass for him, since he was forbidden thenceforth to offer any
Host for any wicked Man. Believe that Macarius continually praying for the
Dead, and very desirous to know whether his Prayers did them any good, had
answer by miracle from the Scull of a dead Man an Idolater, that by chance was
tumbled in the way. O Macarius when thou offerest Prayers for the Dead, we feel
some ease for the time. Believe that on Easter even all the damned Spirits in
Hell keep Holy day, and are free from their torments. S. Augustine, such is his
modesty, will give you leave to believe this, as well as Purgatory, if you
please, as he is not unwilling to give as large scope to other Men's Opinions as
may be, so they reverse not the plain and certain grounds of Holy Scripture. In
all these you may if you please follow Authors also; as S. Damascene, Paladius,
Prudentius, Sigebert, and others. But give the same liberty to others that ye
take. Compel no Man to follow your Opinion, if he had rather follow Danaeus's
Reasons. For my self, I would sooner with S. Augustine himself, whose words
touching S. Cyprian, Danaeus here borrowed, confess this to be, naevum
candidissimi pectoris coopertum ubere Charitatis, than be bound to justify his
conceit touching the commemoration of the Dead in the Lords Supper. And as he
says of S. Cyprian, so would I add* Ego hujus libri Authoritate non teneor,
quia literas Augustini non ut Canonicas habeo, sed eas ex Canonicis considero;
and quod in iis divinarum Scripturarum authoritati congruit cum laud ejus,
accipio, quod non congruit cum pace ejus, respuo. Which Words I do the rather
set down, that they may be Luthers justification also against F. Parsons,
Relat. p. 21.
who thinks he has laid sore to his charge when he cites very solemnly his
Epistle ad Equitem Germ. Anno Domini 1521. where he says, He was tied by the
authority of no Father, though never so holy, if he were not approved by the
judgment of Holy Scripture. Surely this is not to deny and contemn, as he calls
it, or as you to control the Fathers, to account them subject to humane
infirmities, which themselves acknowledge. But the contrary is to boast against
the Truth, to seek to forejudge it with their mistakings, which needs not so
much as require their Testimonies.

I will forbear to multiply words about that, whether the testimonies of
Antiquity which favor the Protestants be many or few: whether they do indeed
so, or only seem, prima facie; whether they be wrested, or to the purpose;
whether all this may not by juster reason be affirmed of the passages cited by
the Romanists out of Antiquity, setting aside matters of ceremony, and
government (which your self confess by and by may be diverse, without impeaching
unity in Faith) and opinions, ever to be subjected to the trial of Scriptures,
by their own free consent and desire. Judge by an instance or two, that this
matter may not be a mere skirmish of generalities. Tertullian in his latter
times, whether as Saint Hierome writes through the envy and reproach of the
Roman Clergy, or out of the too much admiring chastity and fasting, became a
Montanist, and wrote a Book de Pudicitia, blaming the reconciling of Adulterers
and Fornicators. In the very entrance almost thereof, he has these words.
Audio etiam edictum esse propositum, and quidem peremptorium. Pontifex scil.
Maximus Episcopus Episcoporum dicit, Ego and moechiae and fornicationis delicta
poenitentia functis dimitto. Pamelius in his note upon this place, writes thus,
Been habet, and annotatu dignum quod etiam jam in haerest constitutus, and
adversus Ecclesiam scribens, Pontificem Romanum Episcopum Episcoporum nuncupet;
and infra Cap. 13. bonum Pastorem, and benedictum Papam, and Cap. 21.
Apostolicum. Thus Pamelius; and presently lanches forth into the Privileges of
the Sea of Rome, and brings a number of testimonies for that forgery of
Constantines donation. The like note he has in the life of Tertullian, where
he makes the Pope thus set forth the former Edict to have been Zephyrinus's;
quem, says he, Pontificem Maximum etiam jam haereticus Episcopum Episcoporum
appellat. Baronius also makes no small account of this place, and says, The
title of the Pope is here to be noted. And indeed, prima facie (as you say)
they have reason. But he that shall well examine the whole web of Tertullians
discourse, shall find that he speaks by a most bitter and scornful Ironie, as
Elias does of Baal, when he says, he is a God. The word scilicet might have
taught them thus much. Yea, the title Pontifex Maximus, which in those days,
and almost two ages after, was a Pagan term, never attributed to a Christian
Bishop, first laid down by Gratian the Emperor, as Baronius also notes, in the
year of our Lord 383. because it savoured of Heathenish superstition, though it
had been, as a title of Royalty used by the former Christian Emperors, till
that time. This title, I say, might have made them perceive Tertullians
meaning; unless the immoderate desire of exalting the Papacy did so blind their
eyes, that seeing, they saw, and yet perceived not. In the same character,
though with more mildness and moderation, is the same title for the other part
of it, used by Saint Cyprian, in his Vote in the Council of Carthage. Neque n.
quisquam nostrum se esse Episcopum Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico
terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem Collegas suos adigit. Bellarmine says, he
speaks here of those Bishops that were in the Council of Carthage; and that the
Bishop of Rome is not included in that sentence, who is indeed Bishop of
Bishops. What! and does he tyrannously enforce his Colleagues to obedience
also? For it is plain that Cyprian joins these together, the one as the
presumptuous title, the other as the injurious act answering thereto, which he
calls plain tyranny. And as plain it is out of Firmilianus's Epistle, which I
vouched before, that Stephanus Bishop of Rome heard ill for his arrogance and
presuming upon the place of his Bishopric, Peter's Chair, to sever himself from
so many Churches, and break the bond of peace, now with the Churches of the
East in Asia, now of the South in Africa. And he was in as ill conceit with
Cyprian for his breaking good order, and communicating with Basilides and
Martialis justly deprived in Spain; as Saint Cyprian was with him, when he
styled him, a false Christ, and a false Apostle. But that holy Martyr was of a
more patient and calm spirit, than to be moved with such reproaches; nay, he
took occasion, as it should seem, thereby to write of patience. From this
mildness it was, that he so closely taxed the presumption of him, that made
himself Bishop of Bishops, and by terror (which what it was, Firmilianus's
Epistle shows, threatening Excommunication) would compel his Colleagues to his
own opinion. None of us, says he, does thus. As the Apostle, we preach not our
selves; we commend not our selves; We are not as many, that adulterate the Word
of God, etc. Bellarmine takes the first kindly. No marvel, says he, for this
is the Bishop of Rome's due. But they go together, he must be content to take
both, or leave both.

Such another place there is in Saint Augustine Epist. 86. the words are,
Petrus etiam inquit Apostolorum Caput, coeli janitor, and Ecclesiae
fundamentum. Where in the Margent, the Divines of Lovaine, the overseers of
Plantines edition, set this note, Petrus Ecclesiae fundamentum. Why might they
not? The words ye will say of the Text. But these words of the text be not
Saint Augustines, whose opinion is well enough known, That it is Christ
confessed by Peter, that is the foundation of the Church; but they are the
words of an undiscreet railer U^bici cujusdum.
of the City of Rome, against whom Saint Augustine in all that Epistle most
vehemently inveighs. This arrogant Author endeavors so to defend the Roman
custom of fasting on the Saturday, as he reproaches all other Churches that
used otherwise. And that we may see with what Spirit he was led, he brings the
same text that is brought in Pope Siricius, and Innocentius's Epistles, against
the marriage of Clergymen, Qui in carne sunt Deo placere non possunt, and many
other Scriptures wrested, and far from the purpose; at last comes the authority
of Peter, and his tradition very Pope-like alleged, Peter, he says, the head
of the Apostles, porter of heaven, and foundation of the Church, having
overcome Simon the Sorcerer, who was a figure of the Devil, not to be overcome
but by fasting, thus taught the Romans, whose faith is famous in the whole
world. I remit you to Saint Augustine's answer to this tradition. This I note,
that where your Censors do raze out of the Margents of former editions, such
notes as do express the very opinions of the Ancients, and in their own words,
here they can allow and authorize such marginal notes, as are directly contrary
to their meaning. Yea, which are earnestly oppugned by them; when they seem to
make for the authority of the Pope. Good sir, examine well this dealing, and
judge if this be not wresting the Fathers, and applying them clean from their
purpose.

In fine, you found your self, you say, evidently convinced. Persuaded, I
believe, rather than convinced. Else if the force and evidence of the
Arguments, and not the pliableness of your mind were the cause of your
yielding, methinks they should work like effect in others, no less seriously
seeking for truth, and setting all worldly respects aside, earnestly minding
their own salvation, than your self. Which I well know they do not, neither
those which hitherto have been examined, nor those which yet remain to be
considered in the rereward.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Invisibility of the Church, said to be an evasion of
Protestants.
THE first whereof is, the dislike of the Protestants evasion, as you call it,
by the invisibility of their Church. Give me leave here to tell you plainly, ye
seem to me not to understand the Protestants doctrine in this point. Else ye
would have spared all that, The Catholic Church must ever be visible, as a
City set on a hill, otherwise how should she teach her children, convert
Pagans, dispense Sacraments? All this is yielded with both hands. The
Congregations of which the Catholic Church does consist are visible. But the
promise made to this Church, of victory against the gates of Hell, the titles,
of the house of God, the base and pillar of Truth, (an allusion, as I take it,
to the bases and pillars that held up the veil or curtains in the Tabernacle)
the body of Christ, his Dove, his undefiled, are not verified of this Church in
the whole visible bulk of it, but in those that are called according to Gods
purpose, given to Christ, and kept by him to be raised up to life at the last
day. This doctrine is Saint Augustine's in many places, which it would be too
tedious to set down at large. In his third book, De doctrina Christiana, among
the rules of Tychonius, there is one which he corrects a little for the terms,
De Domini corpore bipartito; which he says, ought not to have been called so,
for in truth that is not the Lords body, which shall not be with him for ever,
but he should have said of the Lords true body and mixed, or true and feigned,
or some such thing. Because not only for ever, but even now, hypocrites are not
to be said to be with him, though they seem to be in his Church. Consider those
resemblances taken out of the holy Scripture, wherein that godly Father is
frequent, of chaff and wheat in the Lords floor, of good and bad fishes in the
net, of spots and light in the Moon. Of the Church carnal and spiritual, of the
wicked multitudes of the Church, yet not to be accounted in the Church. Of the
Lilly and the Thorns; those that are marked which mourn for the sins of Gods
people, and the rest which perish, which yet bear his Sacraments. Consider the
last Chapter of the book, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, and that large Treatise which
he has of that matter, Epist. 48. The place is long, which deserves to be
read, for the objection of the Universality of Arianisme (like to that of
Papisme in these last ages) which Saint Augustine answers in the fifth book, De
Baptismo contra Donatistas cap. 27. That number of the just, who are called
according to Gods purpose, of whom it is said, The Lord knows who are his, is
the enclosed garden, the sealed fountain, the well of living waters, the
orchard with Apples, etc. The like he has. l. 5. c. 3. and 23. he concludes,
that because such are built upon the Rock, as hear the Word of God and do it,
and the rest upon the sand: now the Church is built upon the Rock, all
therefore that hear the Word of God and do it not, are out of question without
the Church. In the seventh book, cap. 51. Quibus omnibus consideratis. -- Read
and mark the whole Chapter. Out of these and many more like places, which I
forbear to mention, it appears, that albeit the true Catholic Church is such
as cannot be hid, yet considering that it consists of two sorts of people, the
one, which is the greater part, who do not indeed properly belong to it: the
other, the fewer, truly and properly so called, to whom all the glorious
things spoken of the Church do agree. The face therefore of the mixed Church may
be overrun with scandals, De Unitate Eccl. c. 24. Evarrat. in Psalm. 103. Conc.
1.
as in all times almost. The greatest number may sometime be Idolaters, as in
the Kingdom of Israel under Achab. The principallest in authority may be false
teachers, as the Priests and Prophets in Ieremies time: the sons of pestilence
may sit in Moses Chair, as they did in Christ's time. Yet still the Church is
the ground and pillar of Truth in the Elect: Ipsa est praedestinata columna and
firmamentum veritatis. The Sheep hear not Seducers, John 10.8. to wit, finally,
and in any damnable point. Thus was it before Christ, thus since, thus in the
Church of England, before, yea, and since it was reformed. Thus in that of Rome
it self at this day. There is a distinction of Thomas, of those that be in the
Church, which rightly interpreted agrees fully herewith. There are some, De
Ecclesia numero tantum. Some, numero and merito. The former are such as have
only fidem informem, the latter formatam. Now though the persons of such, as be
in the Church be visible, yet the Faith and Charity of men we see not, and to
argue from the privileges of the Church, numero and merito, to the Church,
numero tantum, is a perpetual, but a palpable paralogisme of the Romish
faction: which is grosser yet, when they argue to the Church representative;
and grossest of all, when one man is made the Church, and he (as themselves
grant may fall out) a Devil incarnate.

CHAP. IX. Of lack of Uniformity in matters of Faith, in all Ages and Places.
ANd this self same Paralogism you were beguiled with, in the next Point of
Uniformity and Concord in matters of Faith. The true Church, ye say, ever holds
such Uniformity. It is utterly false in the Visible and mixed Church, both
before Christ and since. It is false in the Church of Rome it self; whose
newcoined Faith, patched to the Creed, by Pius the Fourth, came in piecemeal
out of private Opinions and corrupt usages, nor ever was in any Age uniformly
holden, or taught as matter of Faith, even in it, as it is at this day. So by
your own Discourse it should be no true Church. And taking matters of Faith, so
largely as it seems you do in opposition to such things as be Ceremonies or of
Government; it is untrue also of the Church of the Elect, or properly so
called. For though the Faith in the Principles thereof be ever the same, yet
many Conclusions of Faith have sometimes lain unsearched out, and like some
parts of the World unknown, till by the industry of Gods Servants, occasioned
also by the importunity and opposition of Heretics, they were discovered.
Sundry common errors also there have been, which in succeeding Ages have been
cleared and reformed: as, the Chiliasts: That Angels have Bodies: That Children
after they be baptized are to be communicated: That Heretics are to be
rebaptized.

To the Assumption. First, The Protestants challenge not to themselves any
Church as their own; which I must advertise you of here, because formerly also
you do use this Phrase. The Church is Christ's, both the visible and invisible.
Next, taking matters of Faith for foundations or Articles of Faith necessary to
Salvation, the Church of Christ has in all Ages had Uniform concord with the
Protestants at this day in such matters, as appears by the Common Rule of
Faith the Creed; and so has also the Church under the Popes tyranny. As to the
Trent Additions they are foreign to the Faith, as neither Principles nor
Conclusions thereof: Neither can your selves show uniform consent and concord
in them (and namely, in the 11. of them) in any one Age, especially as matters
of Salvation, as now they are canonized. How much less can ye show it in all
other conclusions of Faith; whereabout there have been among you, as are now
among us, and ever will be differences of Opinions, without any prejudice for
all that unto the unity of the Faith of the Church, and title to the name of
it. As for Wicliff, Hus, and the rest, if they have any of them born record to
the Truth, and resisted any innovation of corrupt Teachers in their times, even
to Blood, they are justly to be termed Martyrs, yea albeit they saw not all
corruptions, but in some were themselves carried away with the stream of error.
Else, if because they erred in some things, they be no Martyrs, or because we
dissent from them in some things, we are not of the same Church, both you and
we must quit all claim to S. Cyprian, Justin Martyr, and many more whom we
count our Ancients, and Predecessors, and bereave them also of the honor of
Martyrdom, which so long they have enjoyed: You see, I hope, by this time the
weakness of your Argument.

CHAP. X. Of the Original of Reformation in Luther, Calvin; Scotland, England,
etc.
IN your next Motive taken from the Original of Reformation, before I come to
answer your Argument shortly coucht in form, I must endeavor to reform your
judgment in sundry points of Story, wherein partly you are misled and abused
by Parsons and others of that Spirit, partly you have mistaken some
particulars, and out of a false imagination framed a like discourse. First for
Luther, it was not his rancor against the Dominicans that stirred him up
against the Pope, but the shameful merchandise of Indulgences, set to sale in
Germany, to the advantage of Magdalen, sister to Pope Leo the Tenth. Believe
herein if not Sleidan yet Guicciardine l. 13. And of all that mention those
affairs, it is acknowledged, that at the first, and for a good time he showed
all obedience, and reverence to the Pope. The new History of the Council of
Trent, written by an Italian a Subject and part of the Church of Rome, as
should appear by the Epistle Dedicatory of the Reverend and learned Archbishop
of Spalato, prefixed to his Majesty, speaks thus of the matter. Page 6.
Questo diede occasion, etc. This gave occasion to Martin, to pass from
Indulgences to the Authority of the Pope, which being by others proclaimed for
the highest in the Church, by him was made subject to a General Council
lawfully celebrated. Whereof he said that there was need in that instant, and
urgent necessity. And as the heat of disputation continued, by how much the
more the Popes power was by others exalted, so much the more was it by him
abased, yet so as Martin contained himself within the terms of speaking
modestly of the person of Leo, and saving sometimes his judgment. Page 7.
Again, after his departure from the presence of Cardinal Cajetan at Augusta,
he says, He wrote a Letter to the Cardinal, confessing that he had been too
vehement, and excusing himself by the importunity of the Pardoners, and of
those that had written against him, promising to use more modesty in time to
come, to satisfy the Pope, and not to speak any more of Indulgences, provided
that his Adversaries would do the like. This was Luthers manner at the first,
till the Bull of Pope Leo came out, dated the ninth of November, 1518. Wherein
he declared the validity of Indulgences, and that he as Peter's Successor and
Christ's Vicar had power to grant them for the quick and dead; that this is the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the Mother and Mistress of all Christians, and
ought to be received of all that would be in the Communion of the Church. From
this time forward Luther began to change his style, Page 8.
And (says he) as before he had for the most part reserved the Person and
Judgment of the Pope, so after this Bull he resolved to refuse it, and
thereupon put forth an Appeal to the Council, etc. You see then how
submissively Luther at first carried himself. But extreme tyranny overcomes
often a well prepared patience.

Touching his causing Rebellion also against the Emperor, ye are misinformed:
His advice was asked about the Association of the Protestants at Smalcald, he
said plainly, Sleidan, l. 8
He could not see how it could be lawful, further than for their own defense.
Ioh. Bodin, in his second Book de Repub. cap. 5. has these Words. We read also
that the Protestant Princes of Almain before they took Arms against the
Emperor, demanded of Martin Luther if it were Lawful. He answered freely that
it was not lawful, whatsoever tyranny, or impiety were pretended. He was not
believed; so the end thereof was miserable, and drew after it the ruin of
great and illustrious Houses of Germany. As for the war in Germany it began not
till after Luthers death, neither was it a rebellion of the Protestants; the
truth is, they stood for their Lives. The Emperor with the help of the Popes
both Money and Arms, intended to root them out; and although at the first the
Emperor did not avow his raising Arms against them to be for Religion, yet the
Pope in his Jubilee published upon this occasion, did not let to declare to
the World, that himself and Caesar had concluded a League to reduce the
Heretics by force of Arms to the obedience of the Church, and therefore all
should pray for the good success of the War.

That Luther ever reviled the Emperor, I did never till now hear or read, and
therefore would desire to know what Authors you have for it. Touching other
Princes, namely King Henry the Eighth; I will not defend him, who condemned
himself thereof. It is true that he was a Man of a bold and high Stomach, and
specially fitted thereby through the Providence of God, to work upon the heavy
and dull disposition of the Almains, and in so general a Lethargy, as the World
then was in, he carried himself (as fell out sometimes) very boisterously. But
Arrogance, Schism, Rebellion, were as far from him, as the intention it self to
plant a Church.

As to his Vow-breaking lastly, if that Vow were foolishly made and sinfully
kept, it was justly broken: Perhaps also charitably, if he would by his own
example reform such, as lived in Whoredom, and other Uncleanness, and induce
them to use the Remedy that God has appointed for the avoiding of them, to
wit, honorable Marriage. All this matter touching Luther, unless I be
deceived, you have taken from Mr. Harding; that at least touching his rancor
against the Dominicans, for it is his very Phrase. But Mr. Harding both in
this, and many things else discovers his passion, and lack of true
information in this affair. When with one Breath he affirms, that, first, it
was a Pardon of a Croisade against the Turks which was preached: Whereas it was
an Indulgence to those that should put their helping hands for the building of
S. Peter's Church at Rome, as the Articles of this Pardon printed in English,
one of the Copies whereof I have my self, do show. Secondly, next he says, the
preaching hereof was granted to Friar John Tetzet. It was Friar John Thecel, or
Tecel. Thirdly, he says, The Elector of Mentz Albert, granted this to Thecel
and the Dominicans, whereby Luther was bereft of the gain be expected. The
truth is, it was Aremboldus a Bishop living at the Court of Rome, whom (having
before been a Merchant of Genoa) Magdalen the Popes Sister put in trust with
this Merchandise, that appointed the Dominicans to be the Retailers of these
Pardons. The Archbishop of Mentz had nothing to do with it, otherwise than to
allow and suffer it, which occasioned Luther to write to him, as to the Bishop
of Brandenburgh, and to Leo himself, to repress the impudence of the Pardoners.
And Luther ^aith further in one place, that the Archbishop undertook to give
countenance to this business, with that condition, that the half of the prey
should go to the Pope, and himself might have the other half to pay for his
Pall. By these Errors heaped together it may appear what credit it is like Mr.
Hardings Tale be worthy of, touching the remnant, that of rancor and malice
against the Dominicans, and because he was bereaved of that sweet Morsel, which
in hope he had almost swallowed down, Luther made this stir. A hard thing
methinks it is, for any that lived at that day to set down what was in Luthers
Heart, what were his hopes, his desires, rancor, and spleen; much more for Mr.
Harding, most of all for you and me. When the actions of Men have an appearance
of good, Charity would hope the best, Piety would reserve the judgment of the
intention to God.

Let us come to Calvin, touching whom I marvel not much that you say nothing of
all that which Bolseck brings against him, who being by his means chased out of
Geneva, discovers as I remember in the very entrance, that he was requested
by some of his good Masters to write against him. I once saw the book while I
lived in Cambridge; it has no show of probability that Calvin would go about
to work a miracle to confirm his Doctrine, who teaches that Miracles are no
sure and sufficient proof of Doctrine. I marvel rather that even in reading Dr.
Ban^roft, Mr. Hooker, and Saravia, all Opposites to Calvin in the question of
Church Discipline, and therefore not all the fittest to testify of him or his
actions, all late Writers, and Strangers to the Estate and Affairs of Geneva:
of whom therefore, besides their bare Word, sufficient proof were to be
required of what they say, you not only receive whatsoever they bring, but more
than they bring. You say, they prove what never came in their minds; and which
is not only utterly untrue, but even unpossible. As that Calvin by his
unquietness and ambition revolved the State of Geneva, so unjustly expelling
and depriving the Bishop of Geneva, and other Temporal Lords, of their due
obedience and ancient inheritance. When as the Bishop and Clergy of Geneva,
upon the throwing down Images there by popular tumult, departed in an anger,
seven years ere ever Calvin set Foot within the Gates of that City. A thing not
only clear in Story, by the Writers of that time, and since, Sleidan, Bodine,
Calvin's Epistles, and Life, but set down by those whom ye cite. Mr. Hooker in
his Preface speaking of Calvin. He fell at length upon Geneva, which City the
Bishop and Clergy thereof, had a little before, as some do affirm, forsaken,
being of likelihood frighted with the peoples sudden attempt for the
abolishment of Popish Religion. And a little after, At the coming of Calvin
thither, the form of their Regiment was popular, as it continues at this day,
etc. Dr. Bancroft. The same year that Geneva was assaulted, ( viz. by the Duke
of Savoy, and the Bishop, as he had said before, page 13,) which was Anno 1536.
Mr. Calvin came thither. If Calvin at his coming found the Form of the
Government Popular; If he came thither the same Year that the Bishop made war
upon Geneva to recover his Authority, being indeed either affrighted, or having
forsaken the Town before, how could Calvin expel him? And in truth Bodine in
his second Book, De Repub. Chap. 6. affirms, That the same Year Genoa was
established in a State Aristocratical, which was, he says, Anno 1528. Geneva
was changed from a Monarchy Pontifical, into an Estate Popular, governed
Aristocratically, although that long before the Town pretended to be free,
against the Earl and against the Bishop, etc. What Saravia has written
touching this point I cannot tell, as not having his Book. But in Beza his
answer to him, there is no touch upon any such thing. He joins with his
complaint, of the sacrilegious usurping Ecclesiastical goods, in answer to his
Proeme. He dissents in that Saravia accounts the Seniors of the reformed
Churches like to that kind which Saint Ambrose speaks of, brought in out of
wisdom only, to rule the disorderly. Beza says, they were not introducti, but
reducti, Cap. 12. For the rest in all that answer there is nothing of Calvin,
or any such revolving of the state as you accuse him of. Which makes me think,
that herein your memory deceived you. It may be that in your younger time,
falling upon these Authors, by occasion of the question of Discipline, which
was then much tossed, ere ever your judgment were ripened, you formed in your
mind a false impression of that which they say of Calvin. You conceited them
out of your zeal in the cause, to say more than they do, and thus possible
unawares received the seeds of dislike of the doctrine of Calvin, as well as
his discipline, which have since taken root in you. But you shall do well to
remember, the difference you put a little before of these two. Christian
doctrine is uniform and ever the same; government is changeable in many
circumstances, according to the exigence of times and persons. And even the
same men that write somewhat eagerly against Master Calvin, yet give him the
praise of wisdom, to see what for that time and state was necessary. Master
Hooker says of him, That he thinks him incomparably the wisest man that ever
the French Church did enjoy since the hour it enjoyed him: and of his platform
of discipline, after he has laid down the sum of it; This device I see not
how the wisest at that time living could have bettered, if we duly consider
what the present state of Geneva did then require. But be it (and for my part I
think no less) that herein he was mistaken, to account this to be the true form
of Church policy, by which all other Churches, and at all times ought to be
governed; let his error rest with him, yea let him answer it unto his Judge;
but to accuse him of ambition, and sedition, and that falsely, and from thence
to set that brand upon the Reformation, whereof he was a worthy instrument
(though not the first either there, or any where else) as if it could not be
from God, being so founded; for my part I am afraid you can never be able to
answer it, at the same Bar; no, nor even that of your own Conscience, or of
reasonable and equal men.

For the stirrs, broils, seditions, and murders in Scotland, which you impute
to Knox and the Geneva- Gospellers, they might be occasioned perhaps by the
Reformers there, as the broils which our Lord Jesus Christ says he came to set
in the world by the Gospel. Possible also, that good men out of inconsiderate
zeal, should do some things rashly: And like enough the multitude which
followed them, as being fore prepared with just hatred of the tyranny of their
Prelates, and provoked by the opposition of the adverse Faction, and emboldened
by success, ran a great deal further than either wise Men could foresee, or
tell how to restrain them. Which was applauded and fomented by some politic
Men, who took advantage of those motions to their own ends. And as it happens
in natural Bodies, that all ill humors run to the part affected, so in civil,
all discontented people when there is any Sorance run to one or other side; and
under the show of common Griefs, pursue their own. Of all which distempers,
there is no reason to lay the blame upon the seekers of Reformation, more than
upon the Physicians, of such accidents as happen to the corrupted Bodies which
they have in Cure. The particulars of those affairs are as I believe alike
unknown to us both, and since you name none, I can answer to none. For as for
the pursuing our King even before his birth, that which his Majesty speaks of
some Puritans, is over-boldly by you referred to Master Knox and the Ministers,
that were Authors of Reformation in Scotland. Briefly, consider and survey your
own thoughts, and see if you have not come by these degrees: First, from the
inconsiderate courses of some to plant the pretended Discipline in Scotland, to
conceive amiss of the Doctrine also. Then to draw to the increasing of your ill
conceit thereof, what you find reported of any of the Puritans, a Faction no
less opposed by his Majesty in Scotland than with us in England. So when we
speak of Religion (though that indeed be all one) you divide us into Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Calvinists, Protestants, Brownists, Puritans and Cartwrightists,
whenever any disorder of all this number can be accused, then lo are we all
one, and the fault of any Faction is the slander of all, yea of the Gospel it
self, and of Reformation. Judge now uprightly if this be indifferent dealing.

From Scotland you come to England. Where because you could find nothing done
by popular tumult, nothing but by the whole State in Parliament, and Clergy in
Convocation, you fall upon King Henry's Passions, you will not insist upon them
you say; and yet you do, as long as upon any one member of your induction;
though it matters little whether you do or no, since Father Parsons will needs
aver that he lived and dyed of your Religion. Here first you mention, his
violent divorceing himself from his lawful Wife. We will not now debate the
Question, How his Brothers Wise could be his lawful Wife? You must now say so.
Whatsoever the Scriptures, Councils, almost all Universities of Christendom
determined: Yet methinks it should move you that Pope Clement himself had
consigned to Cardinal Campegius a Breve formed to sentence for the King, in as
ample manner as could be, howsoever upon the success of the Emperors affairs
in Italy, and his own occasions, he sent a special Messenger to him to burn it.
But what violence was this that you speak of? The matter was orderly and
judiciously by the Archbishop of Canterbury with the assistance of the
learnedest of the Clergy according to the ancient Canons of the Church, and
Laws of the Realm, heard and determined. That indeed is more to be marvelled
at, What moved him to fall out with the Pope his Friend, in whose quarrel he
had so far engaged himself, as to write against Luther, of whom also he was so
rudely handled as you mention before; having received also for some part of
recompense, the title of The Defender of the Faith, having been so chargeably
thankful to the Pope for it. All these things considered, it must be said, this
unkindness and slippery dealing of Clement with him was from the Lord, that he
might have an occasion against the Pope, and that it might appear that it was
not Humane Counsel, but Divine Providence that brought about the banishment of
the Popes Tyranny from among us. His marriage with the Lady Anne Bullen, her
death, and the rest which you mention of the abling or disabling her Issue to
inherit the Crown, I see not what it makes to our purpose. The suppression of
the Monasteries, was not his sole Act, but of the whole State, with the consent
also of the Clergy, and taken out of Cardinal Wolsey his example, yea, founded
upon the Popes Authority granted to him, To dissolve the smaller Houses of
Religion, on pretense to defray the charges of his sumptuous Buildings at
Oxford and Ipswich, wherein if it pity you (as I confess it has sometimes me)
that such goodly Buildings are defaced and ruined, we must remember what God
did to Shiloh, Jer. 7.12. Matt. 3.10.
yea to Jerusalem it self, and his Temple there. And that Oracle, Every tree
that bears not good fruit shall be cut down, and cast into the fire.

You demand, If this Man, King Henry, were a good Head of Gods Church? What if
I should demand the same touching Alexander the Sixth, Julius the Second, Leo
the Tenth, or twenty more of the Catalogue of Popes, in respect of whom King
Henry might be canonized for a Saint? But there is a Story in Tullies Offices
of one Lucatius, that laid a Wager that he was ( bonus vir) a good Man; and
would be judged by one Fimbria, a Man of Consular Dignity. He, when he
understood the case, said, He would never judge that matter, lest either he
should diminish the reputation of a Man well esteemed of, or set down that any
Man was a good Man; which he accounted to consist in an innumerable sort of
Excellencies and Praises. That which he said of a good Man, with much more
reason may I say of a good King, one of whose highest excellencies is to be a
good Head of the Church. And therefore it is a Question which I will never take
upon me to answer, Whether King Henry were such or no? unless you will
beforehand interpret this Word as favorably, Lib. 16.
as Guicciardine does tell us Men are wont to do in the censuring your heads of
the Church. For Popes, he says, now adays are praised for their goodness,
when they exceed not the wickedness of other men. After this description of a
good head of the Church, or if ye will that of Cominaeus, which says he, is to
be counted a good King, whose virtues exceed his vices. I will not doubt to say
King Henry may be enrolled among the number of good Kings. In special, for his
executing that highest duty of a good King, the employing his Authority in his
Kingdom, to command good things, and forbid evil, not only concerning the civil
Estate of Men, but the Religion also of God. Witness his authorizing the
Scriptures to be had and read in Churches in our Vulgar Tongue, enjoining the
Lords Prayer, the Creed, and ten Commandments to be taught the people in
English, abolishing superfluous Holy Days, pulling down those juggling Idols,
whereby the people were seduced, namely, the Rood of Grace, whose Eyes and Lips
were moved with wires, openly showed at Paul's Cross, and pulled asunder by the
people. Above all, the abolishing of the Popes Tyranny, and Merchandise of
Indulgences, and such like Chafer out of England. Which Acts of his whosoever
shall unpartially consider of, may well esteem him a better Head to the Church
of England, than any Pope these thousand years.

In the last place you come to the Hugenots and Geuses of France and Holland.
You lay to their Charge, the raising of Civil Wars, shedding of Blood,
occasioning Rebellion, Rapine, Desolations, principally for their new Religion.
In the latter part you write, I confess, somewhat reservedly, when you say,
occasioning, not causing, and principally, not only and wholly, for Religion.
But the Words going before, and the exigence of your Argument require, that
your meaning should be, they were the causers of these disorders. You bring to
my mind a Story, whether of the same Fimbria that I mentioned before, or
another, which having caused Quintus Scavola to be stabbed (as Father Paulo
was, while I was at Venice) after he understood that he escaped with his life,
brought his Action against him, for not having received the Weapon wholly into
his Body. These poor people having endured such barbarous Cruelties, Massacres
and Martyrdoms, as scarce the like can be showed in all Stories, are now
accused by you as the Authors of all they suffered. No, no, Mr. Waddesworth,
they be the Laws of the Roman Religion, that are written in Blood. It is the
bloody Inquisition, and the perfidious violating of the Edicts of Pacification,
that have set France and Flanders in combustion. An evident Argument whereof
may be, for Flanders, that those Genses that you mention, were not all
Calvinists (as you are misinformed) the chief of them were Roman Catholics;
as namely, Count Egmond, and Horn, who lost their Heads for standing, and yet
only by Petition, against the new Impositions and the Inquisition, which was
sought to be brought in upon those Countries. The which when the Viceroy of
Naples, D. Petro de Toledo would have once brought in there also, An. 1547
the people would by no means abide, but rose up in Arms to the number of fifty
thousand, which sedition could not be appeased, but by delivering them of that
fear. The like resistance, though more quietly carried, 1563.
was made when the same Inquisition should have been put upon Millaine, sixteen
years after. Yet these people were neither Geuses nor Calvinists. Another great
means to alienate the Minds of the people of the Low Countries from the
obedience of the Catholic Majesty, has been the severity of his Deputies
there, one of which leaving the Government after he had in a few years put to
death 18000.
8000 persons, it is reported to have been said, The Country was lost with too
much lenity. This Speech Meursius concludes his Belgic History withal. And as
for France, the first broils there, were not for Religion, but for preferring
the House of Guise, and disgracing the Princes of the Blood. True it is that
each side advantaged themselves by the color of Religion, and under pretense
of zeal to the Roman, the Guisians murdered the Protestants (being in the
exercise of their Religion assembled together) against the Kings Edict, against
all Laws and common Humanity. And tell me in good sooth, Mr. Waddesworth, do
you approve such barbarous Cruelty? Do you allow the Butchery at Paris?

Do you think Subjects are bound to give their Throats to be cut by their
fellow Subjects, or to [offer them, without either humble Remonstrance or
flight, to] their Princes at their mee^ wills againsts their own Laws and
Edicts? You would know, quo jure, the Protestants Wars in France and Holland
are justified, [I interpose not my own Judgment, not being thoroughly acquainted
with the Laws and Customs of those Countries, but I tell you what both they,
and the Papists also, both in France and Italy, have in such Cases alleged.]
First, the Law of Nature, which, [they say,] not only allows, but inclines
and enforces every living thing, to defend it self from violence. Secondly,
that of Nations, which permits those that are in the protection of others,
to whom they owe no more but an honorable acknowledgment, in case they go
about to make themselves absolute Sovereigns, and usurp their Liberty, to
resist and stand for the same. And if a lawful Prince (which is not yet Lord of
his Subjects Lives and Goods) shall attempt to despoil them of the same, under
color of reducing them to his own Religion after all humble Remonstrances they
may, [they say,] stand upon their own guard, and being assailed, repel Force
with Force, as did the Macchabees under Antiochus. In which case,
notwithstanding the person of the Prince himself, ought always to be sacred and
inviolable, as was Saul's to David. Lastly, if the enraged Minister of a lawful
Prince, will abuse his Authority against the fundamental Laws of the Country,
[they say,] it is no rebellion to defend themselves against Force, reserving
still their Obedience to their Sovereign inviolate. These are the Rules of
which the Protestants that have born Arms in France and Flanders, and the
Papists also both there and elsewhere, as in Naples, that have stood for the
defense of their Liberties, have served themselves. How truly I esteem it hard
for you and me to determine, unless we were more thoroughly acquainted with the
Laws and Customs of those Countries, This Passage above, is to be considered
as a Relation, not as the Authors Opinion: But yet for fear of taking it by the
wrong Handle, the Reader is desired to take notice; That a Subject's resisting
his Prince in any cause whatsoever, is Unlawful, and Impious.
than I for my part am.

For the Low Countries, the World knows that the Dukes of Burgundy were not
Kings or absolute Lords of them, which are holden partly of the Crown of
France, and partly of the Empire. And of Holland in particular they were but
Earls. And whether that Title carries with it such a Sovereignty, as to be able
to give new Laws, without their consents, to impose Tributes, to bring in
Garrisons of Strangers, to build Forts, to assubject their Honors and Lives to
the dangerous trial of a new Court, proceeding without form or figure of
Justice, any reasonable Man may well doubt; themselves do utterly deny it.

Yet you say boldly they are Rebels, and ask why we did support them? It seems
to some, that his Catholic Majesty does absolve them in the Treaty of the
Truce, An. 1608. of all imputation of Rebellion. And if they were Rebels,
especially for Heresy, why did the most Christian King support them? As for
Queen Elizabeth, if she were alive, she would answer your question with
another. Why did Spain concur in Practice, and promise Aid to that detestable
Conspiracy that was plotted against her by Pius V. as you may see at large in
his Life, written by Girolamo Catena? It is, you say, an easy matter to
pretend Privileges. But it is no hard matter to discern pretended Privileges
from true, and Treason from Reason of State, and old Corruptions from old
Religion. But to take Arms to change the Laws by the whole Estate established,
is Treason, whatsoever the cause or color be: and therefore it was Treason in
the Rebels of Lincolnshire and Yorkshire in King Henry's days, and in the
Earls of the North in Queen Elizabeth's, though they pretended their old
Religion: and the same must be said of all Assassinates attempted against the
Persons of Princes, as Parryes, Somervilles, Squires, against Queen Elizabeth,
and the late Powder Plot, the eternal Shame of Popery, against King James.

To your Argument therefore in form, admitting that it is no true Church, which
is founded and begun in Malice, Disobedience, Passion, Blood, and Rebellion,
no, nor yet a true Reformation of a Church (for in truth the Protestants
pretend not to have founded any.) The Assumption is denied in every part of it.
And here I must needs say you have not done unwisely to leave out the Church of
England, as against which you had no pretense, all things having been carried
orderly, and by public Counsel. But you have wronged those which you name, and
either lightly believed, or unjustly surmised your self, touching Luther,
Calvin, Knox, the French, and the Hollanders, when you make them the raisers of
Rebellion and shedders of Blood. Whose Blood has been shed like Water in all
parts of those Countries, against all Laws of God and Man, against the Edicts,
and public Faith, till necessity [as they plead] enforced them to stand for
their Lives. Yet you presume that all this is evident to the World, whereas it
is so false and improbable, yea, in some parts impossible, as I wonder how your
heart could assure your hand to write it.

Give me here leave to set down, by occasion of this your motive, that which I
profess next to the evidence of those Corruptions which the Court and Faction
of Rome maintains, has long moved my self. And thus I would enlarge your
Proposition. That Monarchy (as now without lisping it calls it self) which was
founded, supported, enlarged, and is yet maintained by Pride, Ambition,
Rebellion, Treason, murdering of Princes, Wars, dispensing with Perjury, and
incestuous Marriages, Spoils and Robbery of Churches and Kingdoms, worldly
Policy, Force and Falsehood, Forgery, Lying, and Hypocrisy, is not the Church
of Christ, and his Kingdom, but the Tyranny of Antichrist. The Papacy falsely
calling it self the Church of Rome is such. Ergo. The Assumption shall be
proved in every part of it, and in truth is already by the learned and truly
noble Lord of Plessis in his Mysterium iniquitatis. But his Book I suppose you
cannot view, and it would require a just volume to show it, though but shortly.
It shall be therefore, if you will, the task of another time And yet, because I
do not love to leave things wholly at random, consider a few Instances in some
of these. Pope Boniface III. obtained that proud and ambitious Title of
Ecumenical, so much detested by S. Gregory* Pope Constantine and Gregory II.
revolted Italy from the Greek Emperors Obedience, forbidding to pay Tribute or
obey them. Pope Zachary animated Pipine High Steward of France, to depose
Chilperick his Lord, and dispensed with the Oaths of his Subjects. Pope Stephen
II. most treacherously and unjustly persuaded the same Pipine not to restore
the Exarchate of Ravenna to the Emperor, after he had recovered it from
Astulfus King of Lombards, but to give it to him. Pope Nicholas II. and Gregory
VI. parted the prey with the Normans in Calabria, and Apulia, creating them
Dukes thereof, Henry IV.
to hold the Emperor of Constantinople's Country in Vassalage of them. This
latter also was the first, as all Historians accord, that ever attempted to
depose the Emperor, against whom he most impiously stirred up his own Children,
which most lamentably brought him to his end. Pope Paschal II. would not suffer
(for the full accomplishment of this Tragedy) his Son to bury him. Pope Adrian
IV. demanded Homage of the Emperor Frederick. Alexander III. trod on his neck.
Celestine III. crowned Henry VI. with his Feet. Innocent IV. stirred up
Frederick II. his own Servants to poison him, practiced with the Sultan of
Egypt to break with him. This is that Innocent, of whose Extortions Matthew
Paris relates so much in our Story; whom the learned, zealous, and Holy Bishop
of Lincoln, on his Deathbed, proved to be Antichrist, and in a Vision stroke
so with his Crosier-staff that he died. Boniface VIII. challenged both Swords,
pretended to be superior to the King of France in Temporal things also. Clement
V. would in the vacancy of the Empire, that all the Cities and Countries
thereof, should be under his disposition, made the Duke of Venice, Dandalus,
couch under his Table with a Chain on his neck like a Dog, e're he would grant
Peace to the Venetians. This Clement V. commanded the Angels to carry their
Souls to Heaven, that should take the Cross to fight for the Holy Land.

What shall I say more? I am weary with writing thus much, and yet in all this,
I do not insist upon private and personal Faults, Blasphemies, Perjuries,
Necromancies, Murders, barbarous Cruelties, even upon one another, alive and
dead, nor on Whoredoms, Incests, Sodomies, open Pillages, besides the perpetual
Abuse of the Censures of the Church. I insist not upon these, more than you did
upon King Henry's Passions. I tell you not of him that called the Gospel a
Fable, or another that instituted his Agnus Dei's, to strangle Sin like
Christ's Blood. Of him that dispensed with one to marry his own Sister (for the
Uncle to marry with the Niece, or a Woman to marry two Brothers, a Man two
Sisters by Dispensation, is no rare thing at this day.) The Faculty to use
Sodomy, the Story of Pope Joan, are almost incredible, and yet they have
Authors of better Credit than Bolseck. It may be said that John XXII. called a
Devil incarnate, that Alexander VI. the Poisoner of his Cardinals, the
Adulterer of his Son-in-laws Bed, incestuous Defiler of his own Daughter, and
Rival in that villainy to his Son, sinned as Men, which empeacheth not the
Credit of their Office. That Paulus V. Vice-deus takes too much upon him, when
he will be Pope-almighty; but the Chair is without Error. Wherein, not to
insist for the present, but admitting it as true, that wickedness of men's
Persons does not impeach the Holiness of their Functions, which they have
received of God, nor make Gods Ordinances, as his Word and Sacraments, of none
effect. But tell me for Gods love, Master Waddesworth, is it likely that this
Monarchy thus sought, thus gotten, thus kept, thus exercised, is of God? Are
these men, that wholly forsaking the feeding of the Flock of God, dream of
nothing now but Crowns and Scepters, serve to the Church to no use in the
World, unless it be to break the ancient Canons, and oppress with their Power,
all that shall but utter a free word against their Ambition and Tyranny; are
they, I will not say with you, good Heads of Gods Church, but Members of it,
and not rather Limbs of Satan? Consider those Texts: My Kingdom is not of this
World, Vos autem non sic. Consider the Charge which S. Peter gives to his
fellow Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4. Now I beseech our Lord deliver his Church
from this Tyranny, and bless you from being a Member of such a Head.

CHAP. XI. Of lack of Succession, Bishops, true Ordinations, Orders, Priesthood.
I Come now to your Motive from Succession. Where I marvel first, that leaving
the Succession of Doctrine, which is far more proper and intrinsecal to the
Churches being, you stand upon that of Persons and Offices. Yea, and about them
too, immediately pass from that which is of Essence, to the external
Formalities in Consecration and Ordination, according to the ancient Councils.
Have you forgotten what you said right now, that matters of Ceremony and
Government are changeable? Yea, but in France, Holland, and Germany, they have
no Bishops. First, what if I should defend they have? because a Bishop and a
Presbyter are all one, as S. Ierom maintains, and proves out of Holy Scripture,
and the use of Antiquity. Of which Judgment, as Medina confesses, are sundry
of the ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin; S. Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophylact: which point I
have largely treated of in another place, against him that undertook Master
Alablaster's Quarrel. Besides, those Churches in Germany have those whom they
call Superintendents, and general Superintendents, Cap. 8.
as out of Doctor Bancroft by the Testimony of Zanchius, and sundry German
Divines, you might perceive. Yea, and where these are not, as in Geneva, and
the French Churches, yet there are, says Zanchius, usually certain chief Men,
that do in a manner bear all the sway, as if order it self and necessity led
them to this course. And what are these but Bishops indeed, unless we shall
wrangle about names, which for reason of State, those Churches were to abstain
from. As for that you say Laymen intermeddle there with the making of their
Ministers, if you mean the election of them, they have reason; for anciently
the People had always a right therein, as S. Cyprian writes to the Churches of
Leon and Astorga there in Spain, Plebs ipsa maxim habet potestatem vel
eligendi dignos Sacerdotes vel indignos recusandi; and in sundry places of
Italy this usage does continue to this day. If ye mean it in Ordination, ye are
deceived, and wrong these Churches, as Bellarmine himself will teach you, lib.
De Clericis, cap. 3. For amongst the Lutherans and Calvinists also, says he,
which have taken away almost all Ecclesiastical Rites, they only lay on hands,
and make Pastors and Ministers, who though they be not Pastors and Bishops
indeed, would be so accounted and called.

In England you miss first the lesser orders, and say, we are made Ministers
per saltum, as if all that are made Priests among you were Psalmists, Sextons,
Readers, Exorcists, Torch-bearers, Subdeacons, and Deacons before. Remember, I
pray, what the Master of the Sentences says of Deaconship and Priesthood. Hos
solos primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his solis praeceptum Apostoli
habemus. He means in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. Again, Subdiaconos vero
and Acol^thos proc^donte tempore Ecclesia sibi constituit. What? and were the
Primitive and Apostolic Churches no true Churches? or need we to be ashamed to
be like them? Besides, those Councils that ye speak of, it should seem were of
no great either Antiquity or Authority, when not only Presbyters, without
pas^^^g through any order* but Bishops, wi^^^ut being so much as baptized, were
ordained. As Nectarius of Constantinople, Synesius of Cyrene, Ambrose of
Millaine, Constantine II. of Rome it self. This therefore is a very slight
Exception.

Your next is well worse, touching the Ordination at the Nags-head, where the
Consecration of our first Bishops, as you say, was attempted, but not effected.
It is certain, you say, and you are sure there was such a matter, although you
know, and have seen the Records themselves, that afterward there was a
Consecration of Doctor Parker at Lambeth. Alas, Master Waddesworth, if you be
resolved to believe Lies, not only against public Acts, and your own eye
sight, but against all Probability, who can help it? I had well hoped to have
found that Ingenuity in you, that I might have used your Testimony unto others
of that side, touching the Vanity of this Fable, as having showed you the Copy
of the Record of Doctor Parker's Consecration, which I had procured to be
transcribed out of the Acts, which your self also at your return from London,
told me you saw in a Black Book. Now I perceive by your perplexed Writing, and
enterlining in this part of your Letter, you would fain discharge your
Conscience, and yet uphold this Lie, perhaps, as loath to offend that side where
you now are: and therefore you have devised this Temper, that the one was
attempted, the other effected. But it ^ill not be. For first of all, if that at
the (...) head were but attempted, what is that to the purpose of our
Ordinations, which are not derived from it, but from the other, which as you
say, was effected at Lambeth? And are you sure there was such a Matter? How are
you sure? Were you present there in Person, or have you heard it of those that
were present? Neither of both I suppose: but if it were so, that some body
pretending to have been there present, told you so much, how are you sure that
he lied not in saying so; much more when you have it but at the third, or
fourth hand, perhaps the thirtieth or fortieth? But consider a little, is it
probable that men of that sort, in an action of that Importance, and at the
beginning of the Queens Reign, when especially it concerned both them and her
to provide, that all things should be done with Reputation, would be so hasty
and heedless, as to take a Tavern for a Church? Why might they not have gone to
the next Church as well? They thought to make the old Catholic Bishop drunken.
Thus the Wisbich and Framyngham Priests were wont to tell the tale. Is it
likely that they would not forethink that possible this good old Man would not
drink so freely as to be drunken, and if he were, yet would not be in the
humor to do as they would have him? For who can make any Foundation upon what
another would do in his Cups? What a scorn would this be to them? Men are not
always so provident in their Actions. True, but such men are not to be imagined
so Sottish, as to attempt so solemn an Action, and joined commonly with some
great Feast, and as you observed well out of the Acts, with the Queens Mandate
for the Action to be done, and hang all upon a drunken fit of an old man.
Besides, how comes it to pass that we could never understand the names of the
old Bishop, or of those whom he should have consecrated, or which consecrated
themselves, when he refused to do it. For so do your men give it out; howsoever
you say, it was not there effected. And in all the space of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, wherein so many set themselves against the Reformation by her
established, is it possible we should never have heard word of it, of all the
English on that side the Seas, if it had been any other than a flying Tale?
After forty five years, there is found at last an Irish Jesuit that dares put
it in print, Christophorus a Sacro bosco Dubliniensis.
to prove by it as now you do, that the Parliamentary Pastors lack holy Orders.
But he relates sundry Particulars, and brings his Proofs. For the purpose, this
ordainer or consecrater, he says, was Laudasensis Episcopus homo senex and
simplex. His name? Nay, that ye must pardon him. But of what City or Diocese
was he Bishop? For we have none of that Title. Here I thought once, that by
error it had been put for Landaffensis of Landaffe in Wales, save that three
times in that Narration it is written Laudasensis; which notwithstanding, I
continued to be of the same mind, because I found Bishop Bonners name twice
alike false written Bomerus. But lo in the Margent a direction to the Book, De
Schismate fol. 166. where he says this matter is touched, and it is directly
affirmed, that they performed the Office of Bishops, without any Episcopal
Consecration. Again, that great labor was used without an Irish Archbishop in
Prison at London to ordain them, but he could by no means be brought thereto.
So it seems we must pass out of Wales into Ireland, to find the Sea of this
Bishop or Archbishop. But I believe we may sail from thence to Virginia to seek
him; for in Ireland we shall not find him. Let us come to those that he should
have ordained, what were their names? Candidati, if that will content you, more
you get not. Why they might have been remembered as well as the Nags-Head, as
well as Bonners name, and his See, and that he was Dean of the Bishops, he
means of the Archbishopric, sede vacant, and that he sent his Chaplain (his
name also is unknown) to forbid the Ordination. At least their Sees. To cut the
matter short. Quid plura? Scoraeus Monachus post Herefordensis pseudo-episcopus
caeteris, ex caeteris, quidam Scoraeo manus imponunt: fiuntque sine patre
filii, and pater a filiis procreatur, res seculis omnibus inaudita. Here is at
length some certainty; Some truth mingled among, to give the better grace, and
to be as it were the Vehiculum of a lie. For John Scory, in King Edward his
times, Bishop of Chichester, and after of Hereford, was one of those that
ordained Doctor Parker, and preached at his Ordination, But that was the
Ordination effected as you call it: We are now in that which was not effected,
but attempted only. And here we seek again, who were these quidams that laid
Hands on Scory? We may go look them with Laudasensis the Archbishop of Ireland.
Well; hear the proofs. Master Thomas Neal, Hebrew Reader of Oxford, which was
present, told thus much to the ancient Confessors, they to F. Halywood. This
proof by Tradition, as you know, is of little credit with Protestants, and no
marvel: For experience shows that reports suffer strange alterations in the
carriage, even when the Reporters are interested. Irenaeus relates from the
ancient Confessors, Lib. 2. c. 29.
which had seen John the Disciple, and the other Apostles of the Lord, and
heard it from them, That Christ our Savior was between forty and fifty years
of Age before his Passion. I do not think you are sure it was so. For my part,
I had rather believe Irenaeus and those Ancients he mentions, and the Apostles;
than Father Halywood and his Confessors, and Master Neal. But possible it is,
Mr. Neale said, he was present at Matthew Parkers Ordination by John Scory.
These Confessors being before impressed, as you are, with the buz of the
Ordination at the Nags-head made up that Tale; and put it upon him for their
Author. Perhaps Mr. Neal did esteem John Scory to be no Bishop, and so was
scandalized though causelessly, at that action. Perhaps Mr. Neale never said any
such Word at all. To help to make good this matter, he says, It was after
enacted in Parliament, That these Parliamentary Bishops should be holden for
lawful. I looked for something of the Nags-Head Bishops, and the Legend of
their Ordination. But the lawfulness that the Parliament provides for, is
(according to the Authority the Parliament has) civil, that is, according to
the Laws of the Land. The Parliament never intended to justify any thing as
lawful, jure divino, which was not so; as by the Preamble it self of the
Statute may appear. In which it is said, 8 Eliz c. 1.
That diverse questions had grown upon the making and consecrating of
Archbishops and Bishops, within this Realm, whether the same were, and b^ duly
and orderly done according to the Law or not, etc. And shortly to cut off
Father Halywoods surmises, the case was this, as may be gathered by the body of
the Statute. Whereas in the five and twentieth of Henry the Eighth, an Act was
made for the Electing and Consecrating of Bishops within this Realm; And
another in the third of Edward the Sixth, For the Ordering and consecrating of
them, and all other Ecclesiastical Ministers, according to such form as by six
Prelates, and six other learned Men in Gods Law to be appointed by the King
should be devised, and set forth, under the great Seal of England: Which Form
in the fifth of the same Kings reign, was annexed to the Book of Common Prayer,
then explained and perfected; and both confirmed by the Authority of
Parliament. All these Acts were 1 Mariae, and 1 and 2 Philippi and Mariae
repealed; together with another Statute of 35. Henry 8. touching the Style of
Supreme Head to be used in all Letters Patents and Commissions, etc. These Acts
of repeal in the 1 Elizabeth were again repealed, and the Act of 25. Hen. 8.
revived specially. That of 3 Edw. 6. only concerning the Book of Common Prayer,
etc. without any particular mention of the Book or form of Ordering Ministers
and Bishops. Hence grew one doubt, whether Ordinations and Consecrations
according to that Form were good in Law or no. Another was, Queen Elizabeth in
her Letters Patents touching such Consecrations, Ordinations had not used as
may seem, besides other general Words importing the highest Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical, the title of Supreme Head, as King Henry and King Edward in
their like Letters Patents were wont to do: And that notwithstanding the Act of
35 Hen. 8. after the repeal of the former repeal might seem (though never
specially) revived. This as I guess was another exception, to those that by
virtue of those Patents were consecrated. Whereupon the Parliament declares,
First, That the Book of Common Prayer, and such Order and Form for consecrating
of Archbishops and Bishops, etc. as was set forth in the time of King Edward
the Sixth, and added thereto and authorized by Parliament, shall stand in force
and be observed. Secondly, That all Acts done by any person about any
Consecration, Confirmation, or investing of any elect to the Office or Dignity
of Archbishop or Bishop, by virtue of the Queens Letters Patents or Commission,
since the beginning of her Reign be good. Thirdly, That all that have been
Ordered or Consecrated Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, etc. after the said Form
and Order, be rightly made, ordered and consecrated, any Statute, Law, Canon,
or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding. The^e were the Reasons of that
Act; which as you see does not make good the Nags-head-Ordination as F.
Halywood pretends, unless the same were according to the Form in Edward the
Sixth's days. His next proof is, That Bonner Bishop of London while he lived,
always set light by the Statutes of the Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth,
alleging that there wanted Bishops, without whose consent by the Laws of the
Realm there can no firm Statute be made. That Bonne^ despised and set not a
Straw by the Acts of Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's time, I hold it not
impossible, and yet there is no other proof thereof, but his bare Word, and the
ancient Confessors tradition, of which we heard before. Admitting this for
certain, there might be other reasons thereof, besides the Ordination at the
Nags-head. The stiffness of that Man was no less in King Edwards time than
Queen Elizabeth's. And indeed the want also of Bishops might be the cause, why
he little regarded the Acts of her first Parliament. For both much about the
time of Queen Maryes death, dyed also Cardinal Poole, and sundry other Bishops:
And of the rest some for their contemptuous behavior in denying to perform
their duty in the Coronation of the Queen were committed to Prison, others
absented themselves willingly. So as it is commonly reported to this day, there
was none or very few there. For as for Doctor Parker and the rest, they were
not ordained till December, 1559. the Parliament was dissolved in the May
before. So not to stand now to refute Bonners conceit, that according to our
Laws there could be no Statutes made in Parliament without Bishops (wherein our
Parliament Men will rectify his Judgment) F. Halywood was in this report twice
deceived, or would deceive his Reader. First, that he would make that exception
which Bonner laid against the First Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's time, to be
true of all the rest. Then, that he accounts Bishop Bonner to have excepted
against this Parliament, because the Bishops there were no Bishops as not
canonically ordained: Where it was, because there was no Bishops true or false
there at all. His last proof is. That Dr. Bancroft being demanded of Mr.
Alablaster, whence their first Bishops received their Orders? answered, That he
hoped a Bishop might be ordained of a Presbyter in time of necessity. Silently
granting, That they were not ordained by any Bishop: And therefore, says he,
the Parliamentary Bishops are without order Episcopal, and their Ministers also
no Priests. For Priests are not made but of Bishops; whence Hierome, Quid
facit, etc. What does a Bishop, saving Ordination, which a Presbyter does not?
I have not the means to demand of D. Alablaster, whether this be true or not.
Nor yet whether this be all the answer he had of Dr. Bancroft* That I affirm,
that if it were, yet it follows not that D. Bancroft silently granted they had
no Orders of Bishops. Unless he that in a false Discourse, where both
Propositions be untrue, denies the Major, does silently grant the Minor. Rather
he jested at the futility of this Argument, which admitting all this lying
Legend of the Nags-head, and more too; suppose no Ordination by any Bishops had
been ever effected, notwithstanding shows no sufficient reason why there might
not be a true consecration, and true Ministers made, and consequently a true
Church in England. For indeed necessity dispenses with Gods own positive Laws,
as our Savior shows in the Gospel; Mark 2.25.
much more then with Man's: And such by Hieroms Opinion are the Laws of the
Church, touching the difference of Bishops and Presbyters, and consequently
touching their Ordination by Bishops only. Whereof I have treated more at large
in another place, for the justification of other reformed Churches, albeit the
Church of England needs it not. To confirm this Argument, it pleases F.
Halywood to add, That King Edward the Sixth took away the Catholic Rite of
Ordaining, and instead of it, substituted a few Calvinistical Prayers. Whom
Queen Elizabeth followed, etc. And this is in effect the same thing which you
say, when you add, That Coverdale being made Bishop of Exceter in King Edward
's time, when all Councils and Church Canons were little observed, it is very
doubtful he was never himself canonically consecrated, and so if he were no
canonical Bishop, he could not make another Canonical. To F. Halywood I would
answer, That King Edward took not away the Catholic Rite of Ordaining, but
purged it from a number of idle and superstitious Rites prescribed by the
Popish Pontifical. And the Prayers which he scoffs at if they were
Calvinistical, sure it was by Prophecy, for Calvin never saw them till Queen
Mary's time; when by certain of our English Exiles, the Book of Common Prayer
was translated and showed him; if he saw them then. Some of them, as the
Litany, and the Hymn Veni Creator, etc. I hope were none of Calvin's devising.
To you, if you name what Councils and Church Canons you mean, and make any
certain exception, either against Bishop Coverdale, or any of the rest as not
Canonical Bishops, I will endeavor to satisfy you. Mean while remember I
beseech you, That both Law, and Reason, and Religion should induce you in
doubtful things to follow the most favorable sentence, and not rashly out of
light surmises to pronounce against a public and solemn Ordination, against
the Orders conferred successively from it, against a whole Church. Wherein I
cannot but commend Doctor Carriers modesty, whose Words are these. Page 7.
I will not determine against the succession of the Clergy in England, because
it is to me very doubtful. And the discretion of Cudsemius the Jesuit, De
desperata Calvini causa, c. 11.
which denies the English Nation to be Heretics, because they remain in a
perpetual succession of Bishops. And to take away all doubt from you, that some
of these Ordainers were only Bishops elect, and unconsecrated; besides Miles
Coverdale, in King Edward's time Bishop of Exceter, cast in Prison by Queen
Mary, and released and sent over Sea to the King of Denmark, know that William
Barlow was another; in King Edward's days Bishop of Bath and Wells, in Queen
Mary's beyond the Seas in the company of the Duchess of Suffolk and Mr. Bertie
her Husband; at the time of Dr. Parker's Ordination Elect of Chichester. A
third was John Scory, in King Edward's time Bishop of Chichester, and at the
time of the said Ordination Elect of Hereford. A fourth was John Hodgeskin,
Suffragan of Bedford. And these four, if they were all ordained according to
the Form ratified in King Edward's days, were presented by two Bishops at least
to the Archbishop, and of him and them received Imposition of Hands, as in the
said Form is appointed

One Scruple yet remains which you have, in That these Men did consecrate
Doctor Parker, by virtue of a Breve from the Queen as Head of the Church, who
being no true Head, and a Woman, you see not how they could make a true
Consecration grounded on her Authority. But to clear you in this also, you must
understand the Queens Mandate served not to give Power to ordain (which those
Bishops had before intrinsecally annexed to their Office) but Leave and Warrant
to apply that Power to the person named in that Mandate. A thing, unless I have
been deceived by Reports, used in other Countries, yea in the Kingdoms of his
Catholic Majesty himself. Sure I am by the Christian Emperors in the Primitive
Church, as you may see in the Ecclesiastical Histories, and namely in the
Ordination of Nectarius, that I spoke of before. Yea, which is more, in the
Consecration of the Bishops of Rome, as of Leo the Eighth, whose Decree, with
the Synod at Rome touching this matter, is set down by Gratian, Did. 63. c.
23. taken from the example of Hadrian, and another Council, which gave to
Charles the Great, Ius and potestatem eligendi Pontif^cem, and ordinandi
Apostolicam Sedem, as you may see in the Chapter next before. See the same
Did. c. 16, C. L^^^is.
and 17, and 18. and you shall find, that when one was chosen Bishop of Reate,
within the Popes own Province, ^ Re^tina.
by the Clergy and people, and sent to him by Guido the Count to be
consecrated, the Pope durst not do it till the Emperors License were obtained.
Y^^, that he writes to the Emperor for Colonus, C. Nobis.
That receiving his License he might consecrate him either there, or in the
Church of Tusculum, which accordingly upon the Emperors bidding he performed.

Yet another Exception you take, to the making our Ministers, That we keep not
the right intention. First, Because we neither give nor take Orders as a
Sacrament. By that Reason we should have no true Marriages amongst us neither,
because we count not Matrimony a Sacrament. This Controversy depends upon the
definition of a Sacrament, which if it be put to be a sign of a holy thing,
these be both so, and a many more than seven. If a Seal of the New Testament,
so are there but those two, which we properly call Sacraments, Baptism and the
Lords Supper. Lib. 4. did. 12.
In which last, as to the intention of Sacrificing, surely, if ye allow the
Doctrine of the Master of the Sentences, That it is called a Sacrifice and
Oblation, which is offered and consecrated by the Priest, because it is a
Memory and Representation of the true Sacrifice and holy Immol^tion made on the
Altar of the Cross. And that Christ once dyed on the Cross, and there was
offered up in himself, but is daily offered up in a Sacrament, because in the
Sacrament there is a remembrance ^f that which was once^done; which he there
confirms by the Authorities of the Fathers, De C^^^ecrat. did. 2.
cited by Gratian in the Canon Law. If this Doctrine, I say, may yet pass for
good, and this be the Churches intention, Loc. Theol. lib. 12. c. 12
we want not this Intention of sacrificing. Add to this the Confession of
Melchior Canus, who says, the Lutherans do not wholly deny the Sacrifice, but
grant a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, which they call the f. Eucharisticum.
Eucharist: they will have none for sin which they call propitiatory. If he had
put hereto, unless it be a Mystery, he had rightly expressed the Opinion of
the Protestants.

Thirdly, You object, We want the matter and Form with which Orders should be
given: Namely, for the matter in Priesthood the delivery of the Patena with
Bread, and the Chalice with Wine: In Deaconship the delivery of the Book of the
Gospel, etc. By which reason the seven first Deacons had no true Ordination,
for then there was no Gospel written to be delivered them. Nor those Priests
whom the Pope shall make by his sole Word, saying, Esto Sacerdos. Whom
notwithstanding sundry famous Canonists hold to be well and lawfully ordained;
and Innocentius himself says, That if these Forms of Ordination were not found
out, any other Ordainer might in like manner make Priests, with those Words, or
the like: for as much as these Forms were in process of time appointed by the
Church. And if we list to seek for these metaphysical Notions of Matter and
Form, in Ordination, which at the most can be but by Analogy, how much better
might we assign the persons deputed to sacred Functions to be the matter (as
those that contract are by your selves made the matter in Matrimony) and the
imposing of Hands, with the expressing the Authority and Office given to be the
Form? In Dionysius though falsely called the Areopagite, yet an ancient Author,
you shall find nothing else; nor, which I may tell you by the way, any other
Orders, save Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

And to come to that wherein you say we fail most of all, the substantial Form
of Priesthood, tell me ingenuously, good Master Waddesworth, how do you know
that our Lord Jesus Christ made his Apostles, or they other Priests with this
Form, which has no mention or footstep in the Gospels, or otherwhere in Holy
Scripture! Nor so much as in the Council of Carthage; that from whence the
manner of giving other Orders is fetched; nor in Gratian, nor in any other
ancient Author that I can find, save in the Pontifical only. And is the present
Pontifical of such Authority with you, as the Form of Priesthood, the
substantial Form, can subsist in no other Words than those that be there
expressed? To omit the late turkesing whereof, consider what Augustinus
Patritius writes in his Preface before that which at Pope Innocent the Eighth
his commandment he patched together: That there were scarce two or three Books
found that delivered the same thing: Quot libri tot varietates. Ille deficit,
hic superabundat, alius nihil omnino de ea re habet, raro aut nunquam
convenient; saepe obscuri, implicati, and Librariorum vitio plerunque mendosi.
And in truth in this your essential Form of Priesthood, the old Pontificals
before that which he set forth, either had other Words at the giving of the
Chalice and Paten as may seem; or wanted both that Form and the Matter also
together. The Master of the Sentences declaring the manner of the Ordination of
Priests, and the reason why they have the Chalice with Wine, and Paten with
Hosts given unto them, says it is, Vt per hoc s^iant se accepisse potestatem
placabiles Deo hostias offerendi. Hugo in like manner, Accipiunt and Calicem
cum vino, and Patenam cum Hostia de manu Episcopi, quatenus potestatem se
accepisse cognoscant, placabiles Deo Hostias offerendi. Stephanus Eduensis
Episcopus, in the same Words: Datur eis Calix cum Vino, and Patena cum Hostia,
in quo traditur iis potestas ad offerendum Deo placabiles Hostias. So Johannes
Ianuensis in his Sum, entitled, Catholicon, verbo Presbyter. If you ascend to
the higher times of Rabanus, Alcuinus, Isid^rus, you shall find that they
mention no such matter, of delivering Chalice or Paten, or Words used at the
delivery; and no marvel, ^or in the Canons of the fourth Council of Carthage
they found none. Dionysi^s falsely called Arcopagita, whom I mentioned before,
setting down the manner of Ordaining in his time. The Priest upon ^oth his
knees before the Altar with the Bish^ps Right Hand upon his Head, is on this
manner sanctified by his Consecrator with holy Invocations. Here is all, save
that he says, after he has described that also which pertains unto the
Deacon, that every one of them is signed with the Cross when the Bishop
blesses them, and proclaimed, and saluted by the Consecrator himself, and
every one of that sacred Order that is present. The Greek Scholiast very lively
shows the meaning and manner of this proclaiming. He says, The Ordainer
pronounces by name when he signeth him, (...) Such a Man is consecrated from
being Presbyter to be a Bishop in the name of the Father, etc. and so in the
Presbyter and Deacon. Clemens Romanus (if F. Turrian and the rest of the Romish
Faction deceive us not, or be not deceived themselves, in attributing to him
the eight Books of the Apostolic Constitutions that bear his name) cuts the
matter yet more short, and without either crossing or proclaiming, appoints the
Bishop to lay his Hands upon him, in the presence of the Presbytery and the
Deacons, using a Prayer, which you may see at length in him; for the increase
of the Church, and of the number of them that by Word and Work may edify it:
For the party elected unto the Office of Priesthood, that being filled with the
operations of Healing and Word of Doctrine, he may instruct Gods people with
meekness, and serve him sincerely with a pure mind, and willing heart, and
perform holy Services without spot for his people through his Christ, to whom,
etc. These last Words which are in the Greek, (...) Carolus Bovius Bishop of
Ostuna interpret^, and Sacrificia pro populo t^o immaculata perficiat. Marvel
that he added not, tam pro vivis quam pro def^nctis. Sure if S. Paul, Romans
15.16. had not added the Word (...), he had sacrificed also. This was the
ancient and Apostolic manner of Ordination, if the Author be worthy of credit.
But that ye may perceive what tampering there has been to bring Ordinations to
the Form which the present Pontifical prescribes, consider with me the Words of
Amalarius Bishop of Triers in his second Book de Ecclesiast. Officiis, where in
the Office of the Subdeacon he thus writes; Miror qua de re sumptus usus in
Ecclesia, etc. I marvel whence the use was taken in our Church, that very often
the Subdeacon should read the Lesson at Mass, since this is not found committed
unto him, by the Ministry given him in Consecration, nor by the Canonical
Writings, nor by his name. And straight after, Nam primaevo tempore; For in
ancient time the Deacon read not the Gospel which was not yet written; but
after it was enacted by our Fathers, That the Deacons should read the Gospel,
they appointed also that the Subdeacon should read the Epistle or Lesson. It
appears then that in Amalarius time, who lived with Charles the Great and Lewis
his Son, that ridiculous Form was not in the Pontifical, where the Book of the
Epistles is given to the Subdeacons, and power to read them in the holy Church
of God as well for the Quick as the Dead. The same Author, coming to speak of
Deacons, tells of their consecration by Prayer, and imposition of Hands, and
confuteth that in the present Pontifical (which he says he found in a little
Book of Holy Orders) made he knows not by what Author, That the Bishop alone
should lay Hands on the Deacon. At last he adds, There is one Ministry added to
the Deacon, viz. to read the Gospel, which he says, does well befit him, quia
Minister est. But of the delivery of the Book of the Gospels, with authority to
read the Gospel for the Quick and Dead, not one Word. In the next Chapter of
Presbyters he expounds their name, and says further, hunc morem tenent
Episcopi nostri. Our Bishops have this Fashion, they anoint the Hands of
Presbyters with Oil, which Ceremony he declares; touching imposition of Hands
upon them, he remits us to that he said before in the Deacon. Then he shows out
of Ambrose and Hierom, That these are all one Order with Bishops, and ought to
govern the Church in common, like Moses with the seventy Elders: As for
delivery of Chalice and Wine, or Paten and Host, with power to sacrifice so
well for the Quick as the Dead, he makes no mention. Judge you whether these
were thought to be the matter and essential Form of Priesthood in his time. Yet
one Author more will I name in this matter, not only because he is a famous
Schoolman, and one of Luthers first Adversaries, and therefore ought to be of
more account with that side, but because he professes the end of his writing
to be, circa Sacramentum ordinis cautos reddere, ne pertinax quisquam aut levis
sit circa modum tradendi aut recipiendi ordines. It is Cardinal Cajetane, in
the second Tome of his Opuscula, Tit. De modo tradendi seu recipiendi Ordines.
Read the whole, where these things I observe for our present purpose. 1. If all
be gathered together which the Pontificals, or which Reason or Authority has
delivered, the nature of all the rest of the Orders except Priesthood only,
will appear very uncertain. 2. The lesser Orders and Subdeaconship according to
the Master of the Sentences, were instituted by the Church. 3. The Deacons
instituted by the Apostles, Acts 6. were not Deacons of the Altar, but of the
Tables and Widows. 4. In Deaconship there seems to be no certain Form; for
according to the old Pontificals, the laying of Hands upon the Deacon has no
certain Form of Words, but that Prayer; Emitte quaesumus in eos S. Sanctum:
Which according to the new Pontificals is to be said after the imposition of
Hands. For the giving of the Book of the Gospels, has indeed a form of Words,
but that impresseth not the Character, for before any Gospel was written, the
Apostles ordained Deacons by imposition of Hands. 5. In the Subdeaconship also
there is no Pontifical which has not the matter without Form; viz. the
delivery of the empty Chalice, etc. These things with more which he there sets
down, he would have to serve to the instruction of the learned touching the
uncertainty of this whole matter, to teach Men to be wise to sobriety, that is,
every Man to be content with the accustomed Pontifical of the Church wherein he
is ordained. And if ought be omitted of those things which be added out of the
new Pontificals, as for example, that the Book of the Epistles was not given,
with those Words [Take Authority to read the Epistles as well for the Quick as
the Dead] there is no need of supplying this omission by a new Ordination, for
such new additions make no new Law. Learn then of your own Cajetane, that the
new additions of delivery of the Chalice with Wine, and Paten with Hosts, and
authority to offer sacrifice for the Quick and the Dead, make no new Law. Learn
to be content with the Pontifical of the Church, wherein you were ordained.
Wherein first is verbatim all that which your Pontificals had well taken out of
the holy Words of our Savior, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum; quorum remiseris
pe^cata remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueris retent^ sunt. Which methinks you
should rather account to contain the essential Form of Priesthood than the
former, both because they are Christ's own Word, and joined with that Ceremony
of laying on Hands, which anciently denominated this whole action, and do
express the worthiest and principallest part of your Commission, which the
Apostle calls the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Then, because
this Office is not only deputed to consecrate the Lords Body, but also to
preach and baptize (which in your Pontifical is wholly omitted) in a larger and
more convenient Form is added out of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 4.1, and be thou a
faithful Dispenser of the Word of God and of his holy Sacraments. In the name
of the Father, etc.

As to that you add, That we offer no Sacrifice for the Quick and Dead, and
therefore well may be called Ministers, as all Laymen are, but are no Priests.
I have met with sundry that pull this Rope as strongly the other way, and
affirm that because by the very Form of your Ordination you are appointed
Sacrificers for the Quick and the Dead, well may ye be Mass-Priests as ye are
called, but Ministers of the New Testament, after S. Paul 's Phrase ye are
none. For that Office stands principally in preaching the Word, whereof in your
Ordination there is no Word said. And as little there is in Scripture of your
Sacrifice, which makes Christ not to be a Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck, etc. with much more to this purpose. Where my Defense for your
Ministry has been this, That the Form, Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins ye
remit they are remitted, etc. does sufficiently comprehend the Authority of
preaching the Gospel. Use you the same equity toward us, and tell those hot
Spirits among you, that stand so much upon formalities of Words, That to be a
Dispenser of the Word of God and his holy Sacraments, is all the duty of
Priesthood. And to you I add further, that if you consider well the Words of
the Master of the Sentences which I vouched before, how that which is
consecrated of the Priest is called a Sacrifice and Oblation, because it is a
Memorial and Representation of the true Sacrifice and holy Offering made on the
Altar of the Cross, and join thereto that of the Apostle, Heb. 10.14
that by that one Offering Christ has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, and as he says in another place, through that Blood of* his Cross
reconciled unto God all things whether in Earth or in Heaven; you shall
perceive, that we do offer Sacrifice for the Quick and Dead, remembering,
representing and mystically offering that sole Sacrifice for the Quick and
Dead, by the which all their sins are meritoriously expiated, and desiring that
by the same, we and all the Church may obtain remission of sins, and all other
Benefits of Christ's Passion.

To the Epilogue therefore of this your last Motive, I say in short. Since we
have no need of Subdeaconship, more than the Churches in the Apostles times,
and in truth those whom we call Clerks and Sextons perform what is necessary in
this behalf. Since we have Canonical Bishops, and lawful Succession. Since we
neither want due intention to depute Men to Ecclesiastical Functions, nor
matter or Form in giving Priesthood; deriving from no Man or Woman the
Authority of Ordination, but from Christ the Head of the Church; you have
alleged no sufficient Cause, why we should not have true Pastors, and
consequently a true Church in England.

CHAP. XII. Of the Conclusion. Mr. Waddesworth's Agonies and Protestation, etc.
YEt by these (you say) and many other Arguments, you were resolved in your
understanding, to the contrary. It may well be that your Understanding out of
its own heedless have, as that of our first Parents, while it was at the
perfectest was induced into error, by resolving too soon out of seeming
Arguments, and granting too forward assent. For surely, these which you have
mentioned, could not convince it, if it would have taken the pains to examine
them thoroughly, or had the patience to give unpartial hearing to the Motives on
the other side. But as if you triumphed in your own conquest and captivity, you
add that which passes yet all that hitherto you have set down, viz. That the
Church of Rome was and is the only true Church, because it alone is Ancient,
Catholic and Apostolic, having Succession, Unity and Visibility in all Ages
and Places. Is it only ancient? To omit Jerusalem, are not that of Antioch,
where the Disciples were first called Christians, and Alexandria, Ephesus,
Corinth, and the rest mentioned in the Scriptures ancient also? and of Antioch
antienter than Rome. Is it Catholic and Apostolic only? Do not these and many
more hold the Catholic Faith received from the Apostles, as well as the Church
of Rome? For that it should be the Universal Church, is all one as ye would say
the part is the whole, one City the World. Has it only succession? where to
set aside the enquiry of Doctrine, so many Simoniacks, and Intruders have
ruled, as about fifty of your Popes together, were by your own Men's Confession
Apostatical, rather than Apostolical? Or Unity, where there have been thirty
Schisms, and one of them which endured fifty years long, and at last grew into
three Heads, as if they would share among them the triple Crown? And as for
dissentions in Doctrine, I remit you to Master Doctor Halls peace of Rome,
wherein he scores above three hundred mentioned in Bellarmine alone; above
threescore in one only head of Penance out of Navarrus. As to that addition,
in all Ages and places; I know not what to make of it, nor where to refer it.
Consider, I beseech you, with your wonted moderation what you say; for sure
unless you were beguiled, I had almost said bewitched, you could never have
resolved to believe and profess, that which all the World knows to be as false,
I had (well nigh) said as God is true, touching the extent of the Romish Church
to all Ages and places.

Concerning the agonies you passed, I will say only thus much, if being
resolved though erroneously that was truth, you were withholden from professing
it with worldly respects, you did well to break through them all. But if
besides these, there were doubt of the contrary (as methinks needs must be)
unless you could satisfy your self touching those many and known Exceptions
against the Court of Rome, which you could not be ignorant of) take heed, lest
the rest ensuing these agonies were not like Sampsons sleeping on Dalilahs
knees, while the Locks of his Strength were shaven, whereupon (the Lord
departing from him) he was taken by the Philistines, had his Eyes put out, and
was made to grind in the Prison. But I do not despair but your former
resolutions shall grow again. And as I do believe your religious asseveration,
that for very fear of damnation you forsook us (which makes me to have the
better hope and opinion of you, for that I see you do so seriously mind that
which is the end of our whole life;) so I desire from my Heart the good hope of
salvation you have in your present way may be as happy, as your fear I am
persuaded was causeless.

For my part, I call God to record against mine own Soul, that both before my
going into Italy, and since, I have still endeavored to find and follow the
truth in the Points controverted between us, without any earthly respect in the
World. Neither wanted I fair opportunity had I seen it on that side, easily,
and with hope of good entertainment to have adjoined my self to the Church of
Rome, after your example. But (to use your words) as I shall answer at the
dreadful day of judgment, I never saw, heard, or read any thing, which did
convince me: nay, which did not finally confirm me daily more and more, in the
persuasion, that in these differences it rests on our part. Wherein I have not
followlowed humane conjectures from foreign and outward things (as by your
leave methinks you do in these your motives, whereby I protest to you in the
sight of God, I am also much comforted and assured in the possession of the
truth) but the undoubted Voice of God in his Word, which is more to my
Conscience than a thousand Topical Arguments. In regard whereof I am no less
assured, that if I should forsake it I should be renounced by our Savior,
before God and his Angels, than in the holding it be acknowledged, and saved;
which makes me resolve, not only for no hope, if it were of ten thousand
Worlds, but by the gracious assistance of God, without whom I know I am able to
do nothing, for no terror or torment ever to become a Papist.

You see what a large distance there is between us in Opinion. Yet for my part,
I do not take upon me to fore-judge you, or any other that does not with an
evil Mind and self condemning Conscience only to maintain a Faction, differ
from that which I am persuaded is the right. I account we hold one and the same
Faith in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and by him in the blessed Trinity.
To his Judgment we stand or fall. Incomparably more and of more importance are
those things wherein we agree; than those wherein we dissent. Let us follow
therefore the things of peace, and of mutual edification. If any be otherwise
minded than he ought, God shall reveal that also to him. If any be weak or
fallen, God is able to raise him up. And of you good Mr. Waddesworth, and the
rest of my Masters and Brethren of that side, one thing I would again desire,
that according to the Apostles profession of himself, you would forbear to be
Lords over our Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24.
nor straightway condemn of Heresy, our ignorance or lack or persuasion
concerning such things as we cannot perceive to be founded in holy Scripture.
Enjoy your own Opinions; but make them not Articles of our Faith: the analogy
whereof is broken as well by Addition as Substraction. And this self same
equity we desire to find in positive Laws. Orders and Ceremonies. Wherein as
every Church has full right to prescribe that which is decent and to
edification, and to reform abuse; so those that are Members of each are to
follow what is enjoined, till by the same Authority it be reversed.

And now to close up this Account of yours, whereof you would have Dr. Hall and
me to be as it were Examiners and Auditors. Whether it be perfect and allowable
or no, look you to it. I have here told you mine opinion of it, as directly,
plainly and freely as I can; and as you required fully, if not tediously. I
list not to contend with you about it. Satisfy your own Conscience, and our
common Lord and Master, and you shall easily satisfy me. Once yet by my advice
review it, and cast it over again. And if in the particulars you find you have
taken many nullities for signifying Numbers, many small^r signifiers for
greater; correct the total. If you find namely that out of desire of Unity, and
dislike of contention, you have apprehended our diversities to be more than
they are: conceived a necessity of an external infallible Judge, where there
was none: attributed the privilege of the Church properly called, to that
which is visible and mixed. If you find the reformed Churches more charitable,
the proper note of Christ's Sheep: The Roman Faction more fraudulent, and that
by public counsel, and of politic purpose, in framing not only all later
Writers, but some ancient, yea the Holy Scriptures for their advantage: If you
find you have mistaken the Protestants Doctrine, touching invisibility, your
own also touching uniformity in matters of Faith: If you have been misinformed
and too hasty of credit touching the imputations laid to the beginners of
Reformation: For as touching the want of Succession and the fabulous Ordination
at the Nags-head, I hope you will not be stiff, and persist in your error, but
confess and condemn it in your self: If (as I began to say) you find these
things to be thus; give glory to God, that has heard your Prayer, entreating
direction in his holy Truth; and withhold not that truth of his in
unrighteousness. Unto him that is able to restore and establish you, yea to
consummate and perfect you according to his almighty power and unspeakable
goodness, toward his elect in Christ Jesus, I do from my Heart commend you: and
rest you,

Your very loving Brother in Christ Jesus, W. Bedell.


FINIS.

