The Case of Compulsion In Matters of RELIGION STATED.

By G. B.

Addressed to the Serious Consideration of the Members OF THE Church of
England, in this present Juncture.

Licensed August 21. 1688.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. in the Year 1688.

The Case of Compulsion in matters of Religion stated.
ALL Persecution rises out of an impatience of Spirit, which makes a man less
able to bear Contradiction; there is a Tyranny in most men's nature, which makes
them desire to subdue all others by the strength of their understandings, and
such men have an implacable hatred to all that do not render themselves to
their Reasons, and think that they are affronted when other men refuse to
submit to them; so that he who would strike at Persecution in its root must
begin here, and endeavor to soften men, especially toward those who differ
from them in matters of Religion. This imperious temper, when it works upon
Subjects of Religion, finds somewhat to raise its spleen, that was of it self
impetuous enough before, and that which is called Fury and Rage, when it is
employed in other Disputes, comes to be called Zeal when it is turned toward
the Theories that relate to another world.

But when we consider what a sublime thing Divine Truth is, and what a poor low
thing the mind of man is, we shall see cause to blunt alittle the edge of our
Spirits if they are too sharp in such matters. Man is much governed by Fancy,
and Fancy follows the Texture of the Animal Spirits, which renders many more
capable of apprehending Objects that are some way proportioned to them, and
more disposed to follow them; So that Temper prepares men for some Opinions,
and prepossesses them against others.

With the greater part of mankind Education is so powerful, that they are
scarce ever able to overcome it; and if Education and Temper have hit together,
it will require a very extraordinary elevation to rescue a man from that force.
Men likewise receive with their impressions of Religion such a respect for them
as makes them look on every thought that calls them in question as criminal;
and when Persons are bred up to disquiet themselves with scruples, if they have
so much as made a doubt of their Religion, it is not hard to see them adhere so
firmly to the Principles of their Education* which stick so fast to the worst
sort of men, that even Atheists themselves, after all the pains they take to
get rid of them, cannot shake them off so entirely, but that they will be apt
to return often upon them. Men that think much, and that reason well, that are
freed from the bias that Interest, Honor, Kindred, and Custom do give them,
and that have leisure to examine matters carefully, may indeed get above all
these; Yet there are so few that can do this, and there are yet so much fewer
that will do it, that it is rather a wonder to see so many change their
Persuasions, than to see so few do it. And indeed it is so sublime a Theory to
think on God, and his Attributes, and Works, or to think of another state, and
of the way that leads to it, that till God furnishes out a new Mission of
Apostles with a Measure of those Extraordinary Gifts which he poured out on the
Great Pentecost, it is not easy to imagine how the Conversion of Heathen
Nations should be made, for though the Idolatry of some of these is extreme
gross, yet their Priests have such symbolical significations for all these
Rites, that they do much diminish the horror which is raised by the first sight
of them in the minds of strangers: And since the chief grounds upon which we
prove the Christian Religion are taken from the Prophecies of the Old
Testament, and their Accomplishmene in the New; from the evidence that was
given concerning the Miracles, the Death, and the Resurrection of Christ, which
we confirm from the collateral Proofs of the state of that time, of the
Writings of the Enemies of this Religion, and of that succession of Authors,
that in all Ages which have past since, have mentioned those matters, and cited
the Books which we hold Divine.

All this is so evident to those who can make the enquiry, that it is strange
to find how any one can withstand it; but to Barbarians who know nothing of it,
and who have no way of informing themselves concerning it, all this can signify
nothing, so that in order to the convincing of their understandings, for I do
not treat of Gods secret Methods in touching their Consciences, I do not see
how we should expect that they should yield easily, unless there were a new
Power of working Miracles conferred on those who labor in this work.

But to return from this digression, a man is scarce the Master of his own
thoughts: Habit, Constitution, and other things do so concur, that he cannot
open his eyes to new Objects, nor see them in a new Light, other than that in
which he has been accustomed to view them, and a Man can no more change his
notions of things, because a set of new Opinions would accommodate him better,
than he can change the relish that his senses, his ear or his taste have in
their Objects; A Man may prevaricate, but still he thinks as he thinks, and
cannot think otherwise because he would have himself do so.

But if a Man is not the Master of his own mind, much less is any other Man the
Master of it. No man has that superiority over any other man's Reason as to
expect that it should always accommodate it self to his; and the severest
exercise of Tyranny must still leave the thoughts at liberty; the forcing of a
man to say or do otherwise than he thinks, by threatenings, the execution of
which is above his force to endure, is only the delivering over such a Person
to the rack of his own Conscience here, and to all those miseries hereafter,
which must be the portion of Hypocrites, and of Dissemblers with God or Man.

Nor is there such infallible distinction in one man's nature from another, that
the one is more likely to be in the right than another; since therefore among
all those that differ, some must be in the wrong, those that have the power in
their hands may possibly be of the wrong side, and in that case all their
severity is turned against the Truth, and those who believe it. And since God
makes the Sun to shine, and the Rain to fall on the just as well as on the
unjust, Gideons reasoning may be applied to this matter, If Baal is as God let
him plead for himself; And the force of Gamaliels Argument that, If it is of
men it will come to naught; and if it is of God we must not fight against him;
As it silenced an Assembly of very fierce Persecutors, so it is full as strong
now as it was then: For Reason is Eternal, and changes not.

It seems also plain that those Actions which concern humane Society belong
indeed to the Authority of the Magistrate; but that our Thoughts, with relation
to God, and such actions as arise out of those Thoughts, and in which others
have no interest, are Gods immediate Province, and can belong to no other
Jurisdiction; God only knows our Thoughts, as he alone can change them; so that
a Magistrate by encroaching upon them, breaks in upon Gods Propriety, and upon
that Essential Right of Humane Nature of worshipping God according to our
Conviction, which is in us Antecedent to all Humane Government, and can never
be subject to it.

But if the general Theories from the nature of man give a very favorable view
of what is now advanced, the Characters of the Christian Religion, and the many
express Texts that are in it should determine this matter more positively. The
Religion revealed by Moses consisted in Temporal promises, an earthly Canaan,
and all the blessings of this life; so that since the Jews had all these things
by virtue of that Covenant, it was very reasonable that a Violation of that Law
should infer a forfeiture of all those Rights that the Jews held by virtue of
it; and therefore it was as just that a Jew should have been put to death for
the Violation of those Laws, as it is lawful for us to put a man to death that
Coins or Clips Money. Yet as for opinions the case was different even among the
Jews; and therefore though the Doctrines of the Sadducess struck at the
Foundations of all Religion, the Pharisees when they had the upperhand never
carried the matter so far as to proceed to extremities against them.

But what severities soever might have agreed with the Mosaical Dispensation,
they seem to be all out of doors under the Christian Religion, which gives us
no earthly Canaan, no Temporal Blessings, nor the Rules for Civil Society. But
having found the world in the Possession of their Temporal Rights, it only came
to superadd to those the Doctrines and Rules of a Divine Discipline, upon which
the happiness or miseries of another state do depend. Now it seems to be an
uncontested Rule in Justice, that in whatsoever Society one is engaged, the
Violation of the Laws of that Society can only inser a forfeiture of all that
one had or might have expected by Virtue of it; but this cannot be carried so
far as to make one forfeit all that he holds by Virtue of any other Society to
which he belongs; and therefore since we hold our Temporal Estates and
Liberties not by virtue of our Christianity, but as we are the Members of the
State or Kingdom to which we belong, our doing any thing that is only contrary
to our Religion may well make us forfeit all that belongs to us by virtue of
our Baptismal Covenant; but this ought not to be carried so far as to cut off
those Rights that we have Antecedent to our Christianity, as we are Men, and
the Subjects of a Civil Government. Our Savior confirmed all this by saying,
That His Kingdom was not of this world, That he came not to destroy but to
save; and by giving this Rule of Justice, of doing to others that which we
would have others do to us; which would soon let all Persecutors see how
differently they act to it; but above all, our Savior has made the Doctrines
of Meekness and Charity such main Ingredients in his Gospel, that he has made
them the Characters by which his Disciples may be every where known; and this
Spirit of Love is so diffused through the whole Writings of the New Testament,
that how hard soever it may be to understand some of the other passages that
are in them, yet there is no ambiguity at all in those that set this forth; we
are not only restrained from ruining those who differ from us, but we are
required to love them, to bear with them, and to deal with them in the Spirit
of Meekness.

There are some of the Epistles that do not mention several of the Duties
incumbent on Christians, yet there is not one, how short soever, in which this
of Love is not proposed in terms that are both strong and tender; and while the
Church of Corinth was almost rent asunder by a variety of Opinions, and by the
different Parties that followed the several Teachers that had been among them,
St. Paul does not enter much into the grounds of their disputes, but recommends
Love and Charity to them, in terms that show how much he himself was inflamed
while he writ them; and he is carried into all the raptures of a Divine
Eloquence that so transporting a subject could inspire.

St. John lived so long as to see a great deal of the first fervor of the
Christian Religion slacken; but when he writ to revive that Spirit, the
Argument upon which he dwells chiefly, is, to persuade all to love one another,
and he does that in the softest and most melting language that can be imagined.
The controversy concerning the Obligation that lay on the Gentiles for obeying
the Mosaical Law was judged by the Apostles against the Judaizers, and the
Inferences that depended on that controversy were such, that St. Paul says,
they went so far as to make void the Death of Christ; yet the same Apostle is
gentle to those that without seeing the extent of those consequences were
carried away by those Judaizers; so that he acknowledges that in their
observing them from a good motive they were acceptable to God, and that as the
Kingdom of God, or the Gospel, consisted not in those scrupulous distinctions
of Meats and of Drinks, but in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost;
so he adds, that every man was to endeavor to be fully persuaded in his own
mind, and was not to judge his Brother in such matters, but to leave him to the
Judgment of God.

This way of managing a controversy that was of such importance, and that was
maintained with so stiff an opposition, even to that extraordinary Authority
that was lodged in the Apostles, ought to have been the measure upon which all
the succeeding Ages of the Church ought to have formed themselves; and when the
Apostles that had an Infallible Assistance, and so might have spoken in a
strain of higher Authority than any that have come after them, yet thought fit
to Treat of those matters in such an humble and softning style; those who
cannot* pretend to such a direction ought not to take upon them to dictate, and
to threaten and destroy those who differ from them.

The Christians did during the first Ages declare highly against all Cruelties
on the account of a Difference of Persuasion in matters of Religion; and though
their Interest naturally led them to this, yet we pass a very hard Judgment on
those times, if we think that they were only of that mind because the Power was
then in the hands of their Enemies. When the Empire turned Christian, the very
Heathen Worship was not only tolerated for above a whole Age together, but the
Heathens themselves continued to be in the chief Employments of the Empire; and
it is pleasant to see how the Heathens that had so long persecuted the
Christians, and that had contrived the severest of all Persecutions under
Julian, which very probably had been put in execution if he had returned
victorious from the Persian Expedition, saw the state of things no sooner
altered than they began to employ all their Eloquence in the behalf of
Toleration; as if Liberty of Conscience had been an Essential Right of Mankind,
from which they ought never to be cut off; and they carried this-so far as to
pretend, That a difference in Religion tends more to the Honor of God, than an
Uniformity in it could do, and so they fancied that a Variety in it was
acceptable to God.

The first Severity that Christians practiced one upon another was the
banishing of Arius, and a few of his Followers: It must be acknowledged that
this seems to be the utmost extent of Civil Authority in those matters: For
certainly a Government may put such Persons out of its Protection that are
Enemies to its Peace, and so banish them upon great occasions, giving them
leave to sell their Estates, and to carry away with them all that belongs to
them; yet this being all that any Humane Government can claim, it ought not to
be applied too easily or rashly, till it is visible that all other means are
ineffectual, and that the Public Safety can be no other way secured: But
though this Severity against Arius had no great effects, yet the Arians had no
sooner the power in their hands than they put in practice first all the
contrivances of Craft and Fraud, together with many less crying violences under
Constance; and they carried this afterward to a more open Persecution under
Valens; and after that, both in Spain and Africa, it appeared that a cruel
Spirit was so inherent in that Party, that it showed it self as often as they
had power; but while Valens persecuted in his Division of the Empire, it is
observed, that Valentinian his Brother thought it was enough to support the
Orthodox without persecuting the other. Gratian carried the matter further, and
tolerated both almost equally. And in the happy turn under Theodosius, at what
pains was St. Gregory Nazianzen to restrain the Orthodox from retaliating upon
the Arians the ill treatment that they had suffered from them; and not only the
Novatians, but even the Arians continued to have their Churches in the Imperial
Cities.

The first instance of employing the Secular Arm against Heretics that was set
on by any of the Orthodox, was under the Reign of that bloody Tyrant Maximus,
and it was managed by two such scandalous Bishops, that their ill Lives is no
small Prejudice against every thing that is carried on by such Instruments.
This was condemned by the best Bishops of that Age, and the ill effects of that
Severity are very copiously marked by the Historian. One is unwilling for the
sake of those Ages to reflect on the rigor that appears in some Laws that are
in the Code, yet the mild behavior of Atticus, Proclus. and some other
Bishops, is marked with the praises that were due to it; and it is probable,
that those Laws were rather made to terrify, than that they should be
executed. The Donatists, after a Contest of above 120 years continuance, that
was managed at first more gently, grew at last so fierce and intolerable, that
not being contented with their own Churches, they broke in upon the Churches of
those of the Unity, and committed many outrages on the Persons of some of the
Bishops, putting out the eyes of some, and leaving others for dead. The Bishops
upon that consulted whether they ought to demand, not only the Emperors
Protection, but the Application of the Laws made against Heretics to the
Donatists. St. Austin and some Bishops opposed this for some time, but they
yielded at last, and these Laws were so severely executed, that not only the
Donatists themselves complained heavily of them, but St. Austin in several
Letters that he writ to the Magistrates upon this occasion made the same
complaints; He interceeded very earnestly for the Donatists, and said, That it
detracted much from the Glory of the Church, that had received so much honor
from the sufferings of the Martyrs, to see others suffer upon the account of
the Church; and he told them plainly, That if they did not proceed more
moderately the Bishops would suffer all that could come upon them from the Rage
of the Donatists, rather than complain any more to those who acted so
rigorously.

Yet though St. Austin condemned the Excesses of the Civil Magistrates in some
particulars, he set himself to justify severity in General, when it was
employed upon the account of Religion; and all the moderate pleadings for
Liberty that are to be found either in Tertullian, Cyprian, and more copiously
in Lactantius, with relation to Heathens, and the like reasonings that are to
be found in Athanasius, Hillary and Lucifer with relation to the Persecutions
of the Arians, were in a great measure forgot; St. Austin had a heat of
imagination that was very copious which way soever he turned it, and this was
employed chiefly in Allegorizing Scripture, so as to bring together a vast
number of proofs for every cause that he undertook; without troubling himself
to examine critically what the true meaning of those Passages might be: and he
is so apt to run out in all his Reasonings into excessive Amplifications, and
into all the Figures of copious and uncorrect Eloquence, that it is no wonder
to find that Passage of our Savior in the Parable, Compel them to enter in,
with some other Places misapplied on this occasion.

With that Father the Learning of the Western Church fell very low, so that his
works came to be more read in the succeeding Ages than the Writings of all the
other Fathers; and in this, as in other things, Men that knew not how to reason
themselves, contented themselves with that lazy and cheap way of copying from
him, and of depending on his Authority.

The Incursion of the Northern Nations that overthrew the Roman Empire, and
those Polishings of Learning and Civility that fell with it, brought on a night
of Ignorance that can scarce be apprehended, by those who have not read the
writings of the following Ages; Superstition grew upon the ruins of Learning,
and eat up all. The fierce Tempers of the Northern People being mufled up in
Ignorance, and wrought on by Superstition, were easily leavened with Cruelty,
till at last Heresy came to be reckoned the greatest of all Crimes; and as it
condemned Men to everlasting burnings, so it was thought that those might be
well anticipated by Temporary ones of their kindling. Zeal against Heresy was
extolled as the highest act of Piety toward God; and since Heresy is reckoned by
St. Paul among the Works of the flesh, it seemed as just to punish it in the
severest manner, as it was to punish any other Works of the flesh; and since
all Heretics were looked on as Persons damned, all tenderness toward them, and
pity for them, was as far extinguished as was possible. For a false Religion
will not easily have the better of good nature so entirely as to root it quite
out; All the room that was left for good nature, was the favorable Definition
that was given of Heresy; by which Obstinacy was made its peculiar Character
that distinguished it from Error, which lies in a more innocent mistake in
Divine matters. And as many have explained this Obstinacy, it amounts to a
continuing in Error after one is convinced of it. This notion of Heresy, which
has been received by many of the Greatest of Men, even of the Church of Rome it
self, seems to agree well with that of St. Paul's ranking Heresy among the
works of the Flesh; For if it is merely a mistake in the Judgment in which one
continues because he cannot overcome his Persuasion, nor see Reasons strong
enough to oblige him to change his mind, such an adhering to Error may be
called any thing rather than a work of the Flesh. But if a Man from a Principle
of Interest, Pride, or Discontent, either throws himself into ill Opinions, or
continues in them after his mind is better enlightened, so that he stifles and
denies that inward Conviction; then the Reason is very plain why such an ill
Temper of Mind should be reckoned a work of the Flesh, because it plainly
arises out of a depraved nature.

I will not here enter into so troublesome an Enquiry as it would be to examine
how far an Erroneous Conscience acquits one before God; for that must be left
to Him who will judge every man according to his works, and who best knows how
far he will accept of a general Repentance of unknown sins, and of a general
Act of Faith. even of Truths that are yet unknown; but as for the Judgments of
Men, certainly when the other parts of ones Life make it clear, not only to a
Judgment of Charity, but even to that of Discretion, that he is sincere, and
that he means well, it is hard to know when he is Obstinate, and when his
Errors become Heresies, that is to say, works of the Flesh.

So far have I been led upon the consideration of the Spirit of Persecution,
that is not only warranted by Custom, and a long continued Practice, but by
Laws, Councils, etc. I am carried next into a Scene of Thoughts that are more
particularly suited to the Doctrines of the Reformed Churches; and here it must
be acknowledged that Persecution is a more justifiable thing according to the
Principles of the Church of Rome, than it is according to our Tenets; for the
Church of Rome that pretends to be Infallible, has a better Right to demand a
blind submission from all its subjects, and to treat those roughly who refuse
to grant it, than a Church that pretends to nothing but a Power of Order and
Government; and that confesses, she may be mistaken. Our being subject to Error
is unreasonably urged, when men would carry it so far as to make us doubt of
all things; yet it ought at least to have this effect on us as to keep us from
being too ready to judge hardly of those who are of another mind, or to use
them roughly for it; since it is possible that they may be in the right, and
that we may be mistaken; at least they may have very probable Reasons for their
Opinions, which if they do not quite justify their mistakes, yet do very much
excuse and lessen them.

It is likewise visible, that all severe Proceedings upon the diversity of
Opinions how effectual soever they may be on base-minded men, who will always
make Shipwreck of a good Conscience when it comes in competition with the Love
of this present World, yet work quite contrariwise on Men of awakened
Understandings and generous Souls; instead of gaining on such Persons, these
inspire them with horror at a sort of men who go about to ruin companies of
people that never did them hurt. It is from this that those violent hatreds
arise among men of different Persuasions. Every man is not capable to
understand an Argument, or to be much disturbed at it; and though Divines that
carry their Speculations farther into the consequences of Opinions, whether
real or imaginary, grow hot and angry at one another upon those heads, yet the
people understand them little, and feel them less; but every man feels an
injury, and Nature makes her inferences very quick upon it, and concludes that
Those who use us ill hate us; and there must be a great degree of Regeneration
to keep men from hating those that hate them. Upon this arises all the
animosity that is among the several Parties; for every one reckoning himself a
Member of that Body to which he associates himself, thinks that he is obliged
to resent all the injuries that are done to his Fellow Members as much as if
they were done to himself in particular; and by the same Natural Logic he
casts the guilt of the wrongs done his own Party, not only on those individuals
of the other Party from whom they did more immediately arise, but upon the
whole Body of them; and so here is a War kindled in Men's Breasts; and when that
is once formed within, it will find some unhappy occasion or other to give it
self a vent. Those who are ill used* are in a State like that of a Mass of
Humors in the Body, which ^^^ul about less perceived till some unlucky accident
has weakened any part of it, and then they will all discharge themselves on the
part that suffers. Men that are uneasy naturally love changes; for these are
like the shifting of postures, that give some present ease, and they flatter
the Patient with the hope of more to follow.

Persecution is not only hurtful to those that suffer many hard things by it,
but is likewise mischievous to them by the Aversion that it inspires in them to
those at whose hands they suffer, by the ill habit of Mind into which it throws
them, and by those violent Projects and Convulsions which do very naturally
come into the Heads of those, who as they feel much, so they fear yet more.

Those that do Persecute, though they seem to triumph a while with the spoils
of their Enemies; yet will soon feel how this sinks their credit extremely
among those that were more indifferent Spectators, while the debate was managed
with the Pen or Tongue; but they will certainly take part at least in their
Compassions with the Miserable, and will be disposed to think ill not only of
those men that are heavy upon their harmless Neighbors, but even the cause it
self, that is supported by such methods.

The Multitude even of the lowest Order of Men has a Remnant of good Nature
left, which shows it self in the sad looks that all put on at the Execution
even of Malefactors: But if a false Religion has not quite extinguished
Humanity in its Votaries, this will make a more sensible Impression, when men
that have done nothing amiss, and are only in fault because they cannot help
thinking as they do, are made Sacrifices to the rage of others, that perhaps
have little more to say for themselves but that they are in possession of the
Law; which in the next Revolution of Affairs that may fall out will be an
Argument so much the stronger for using themselves in the same manner, because
it is a just retaliation on them for that which they made others to suffer.

In short, Persecution does extremely vitiate the Morals of the Party that
manages it; the worst men, so they are furious and violent, are not only
connived at, but are even courted, and men otherwise of severer Morals will
insensibly slacken, by reason of their engagements with vicious men, whom they
will find themselves forced to cherish and employ; and if those who have
Persecuted others fall under a reverse (...) Fortune, and come to suffer
themselves a little of that which they made others feel, as their ill
behavior, will deprive them in a great measure of those Compassions that would
otherwise work toward them, so it will raise within them many uneasy
reflections upon their own Actings, which will prove but Melancholy Companions
to them in their Afflictions; and these will force them to conclude, that
because they showed no mercy therefore they now meet with the requital of
Judgment without mercy; which how unjust soever it may be in those by whom they
suffer, yet they will find it meet to look up to God, and to confess that just
and righteous are all his ways.

And the returning the Severities we have suffered at the hands of any, is a
Practice so contrary to the Christian Religion, and to the Principles of the
Protestant Religion, that I do not stick to say it, that I had rather see the
Church of England fall under a very severe Persecution, than fall to Persecute
others* when it should come to its turn to be able to do it. The former will
(...) serve to unite us among our selves, and to purge us from our Dross, and
in particular, from any of the Leaven of the Doctrine of Persecution that we
have not yet quite thrown out; but the other would very much slain the purest
and best constituted Church in the World; and it would be too near an approach
to that cruelty which we cannot enough detest; but how much soever we may hate
their corruption* we must still remember that they are Men and Christians,
though perhaps of a course grain, and that we our selves are Reformed
Christians, who in Imitation of our Blessed Master must not render evil for
evil, but overcome evil with good.

G. B.

FINIS.

