AN APOLOGY FOR THE Church of England, With relation to the Spirit of
PERSECUTION: For which She is Accused.
I. ONE should think, that the Behavior of the English Cl^rgy for some years
past, and the present Circumstances in which they are, should set them beyond
Slander, and by consequence above Apologies; yet since the Malice of her
Enemies work against her with so much Spite, and since there is no insinuation
that carries so much Malice in it, and that seems to have such colors of Truth
on it, as this of their having set on a s^vere Persecution against the
Dissenters, of being still sowr'd with that Leven, and of carrying the same
implacable hatred to them, which the present Reputation that they have gained,
may put them in a further capacity of executing, if another revolution of
Affairs should again give them Authority to set about it; it seems necessary to
examine it, and that the rather, because some aggravate this so far, as if
nothing were now to be so much dreaded as the Church of England's getting out
of her present distress.

II. If these Imputations were charged on us only by those of the Church of
Rome, we should not much wonder at it, for tho it argues a good degree of
Confidence, for any of that Communion to declaim against the Severities that
have been put in practice among us, ^ince their little finger must be heavier
than ever our loins were, and to whose Scorpions our Rods ought not to be
compared; yet after all, we are so much accustomed to their methods, that
nothing from them can surprise us. To hear Papists declare against Persecution,
and Jesuits cry up Liberty of Conscienc^, are, we confess, unusual things: yet
there are some degrees of shame, over which when people are once passed, all
things become so familiar to them, that they can no more be put out of
countenance. But it seems very strange to us, that so^e, who if they are to be
believed, are strict to the severest forms and sub-divisions of the Reformed
Religion, and that who some years ago were jealous of the smallest steps that
the Cour^ made, when the danger was more remo^e; and who cried out Popery and
Persecution, when the Design was so ma^^t that some well-meaning men could no^
miss being deceived by the Promises that were made, and the Disguises that were
put on; that, I say, these very persons who were formerly so distrustful,
should now when the Mask is laid off, and the Design is avowed, of a sudden
grow to be so believing, as to throw off all distrust, and be so gulled as to
betray all; and expose us to the Rage of those* who must needs give some good
words, till they have gone the round, and tried how effectually they can divide
and deceive us, that ^o they may destroy us the more easily; this is indeed
somewhat extraordinary. They are not so ignorant as not to know, that Popery
cannot change its nature, and that Cruelty and Breach of Faith to Heretics,
a^e as necessary parts of that Religion, as Transubstantiation and the Popes
Supremacy are* If Papists were not Fools, they must give good Words and fair
Promises, till by these they have so far deluded the poor credulous Heretics,
that they may put themselves in a posture to execute the Decrees of their
Church against them: and tho we accuse that Religion as guilty both of Cruelty
and Treachery, yet we do not think 'em Fools: so till their party is stronger
than God be thanked it is at present, they can take no other method than that
they take. The Church of England was the Word among them some y^ars ago,
Liberty of Conscience is the Word at present; and we have all possible reason
to assure u^, that the promises for maintaining the one, will be as religiously
kept as we see those are which were lately made with so great profusion of
Protestations, and shows of Friendship for the supporting of the other.

III. It were great Injustice to charge all the Dissenters with the
Impertinencies that have appeared in many Addresses of late, or ^o take our
measures of them, from the Impudent strains of an Alsop or a Care* or from the
more Important and now more visible steps that some among them, of a higher
form, are every day making; and yet after all this, it cannot be denied but the
several bodies of the Dissenters have behaved themselves of late like men that
understand too well the true Interest of the Protestant Religion, and of the
English Government, to sacrifice the whole and themselves in Conclusion to
their private resentments: I hope the same justice will be allowed me in
stating the matter relating to the so much decried Persecution, set on by the
Chapter of Eng. and that I may be suffered to distinguish the heats of some angry
and deluded men, from the Doctrine of the Church* and the practices that have
been authorized in it; that so I may show, that there is no reason to infer
from past Errors, that we are incurable; or that new Opportunities inviting us
again into the same severities, are like to prevail over us to commit the same
follies over again. I will first state what i^ past, with the sincerity that
becomes one that would not lie for God; that is, not afraid nor ashamed to
confess faults, that will neither agrravate nor extenuate them beyond what is
just; and that yet will avoid the saying any thing that may give any cause of
offense to any party in the Nation.

IV. I am sorry that I must confess, that all the parties among us, have
showed, that as their turn came to be uppermost, they have forgot the same
Principles of Moderation and Liberty which they all claimed when they were
oppressed. If it should show too much ill nature to examine what the Presbytery
did in Scotland when the Covenant was in Dominion, or what the Indepedents have
done in New England, why may not I claim the same privilege with relation to
the Church of England, if severities have been committed by her while she bore
rule? Yet it were as easy as it would be invidious to show, that both
Presbyterians and Independents have carried the principle of Rigor in the
point of Conscience much higher, and have acted more implacably upon it than
ever the Church of England has done, even in its angriest fits; so that none of
them can much reproach another for their excesses in those matters. And as of
all the Religions in the world the Church of Rome the most persecuting, and the
most bound by her Principles to be unalterably Cruel; so the Church of England
is the least persecuting in her principles, and the least obliged to repeat any
errors to which the intrigues of Courts or the passions incident to all parties
may have engaged her, of any National Church in Europe. It cannot be said to be
any part of our Doctrine* when we came out of one of the blackest persecutions
that is in History, I mean Q Maryes, we showed how little we retained o^ the
Cruelty of that Church, which had provoked us so severely; when not only no
Enquirie^ were made into the illegal acts of Fury, that were committed in that
pe^secuting Reign, but even the Persecutors themselves lived among us at ease
and in peace; and no Penal Law was made ex^ept against public exercise of that
Religion, till a great ma^y Rebelions and Treasons extorted them from us for
our own preservation. This is an Instance of the Clemency of our Church, that
perhaps cannot be matched in History* and why should it not be supposed, that
if God should again put us in the state in which we were of late, that we
should rather imitate so Noble a patte^n, than return to those mistakes of
which we are now ashamed?

V. It is to be considered, that upon the late Kings Restoration, the
remembrance of the former War, the ill Usage that our Clergy had met with in
their Sequestrations, the angry Resentments of the Cavalier-party, who were
ruined by the War, the Interest of the Court to have all those principle^
condemned, that had occasioned it, the heat that all Parties that have been ill
used are apt to fall into upon a Revolution; but above all, the practices of
those who have still blown the Coals, and set us one against another, that so
they might not only have a divided force to deal with, but might by turns make
the Divisins among us serve their Ends: all these, I say, concurred to make us
lose the happy opportunity that was offered in the Year 1660. to have healed
all our Divisions, and to have triumphed over all the Dissenters; not by
ruining them, but by overcoming them with a spirit of Love and Gentleness;
which is the only Vict^ry that a generous and Christian temper can desire. In
short, unhappy Councils were followed, and several Laws were made. But after
all, it was the Court-party that carried it for rougher methods: some
considerble Accidents, not necessary to be here mentioned, as they stopped the
mouths of some that had formed a wiser Project, so they gave a fatal Advantage
to angry and crafty men, that to our misfortune, had too great a stroke in the
conduct of our Affairs at that time. This Spirit of Severity was heightened by
the Practices of the Papists, who engaged the late King in December, 1662. to
give a Declaration for Liber^y of Conscience. Those who knew the secret of his
Religion, as they saw that it aimed at the introduction to Popery, so they
thought there was no way so effectual, for the keeping out of Popery, as the
maintaining the Uniformity, and the suppressing of all designs for a
Toleration. But while those who managed this, used a due reserve, in not
discovering the secret motive that led them to it, and others flew into
seve^ity, as the principle in vogue: and thus all the slacknings of the rigor
of the Laws, during the first Dutch War, that were set on upon the pretense of
quieting the Nation, and of encouraging Trade, were resi^ted by the Instruments
of an honest Minister of State, who knew as well then, as we do now, what lay
still at bottom, when Liberty of Conscience was pretended.

VI. Upon that Ministers Disgrace, some that saw but the half of the S^cret,
perceiving in the Court a great inclination ^o Toleration, and being willing to
take measures quite different from those of the former Ministry, they entered
into a treaty for a Comprehension of some Dissenters, and the Tolerating of
others, and some Bishops and Clergymen, that were inferior to none of the Age
in which they lived, for true Worth and a right Judgment of things, engaged so
far, and with so much success into thi^ project, that the matter seemed done,
all things being concerted among some of the most considerable men of the
differen^ Parties. But the dislike of that Ministry, and the Jealousy of the
ill designs of the Court, gave so strong a prejudice against this, that the
proposi^ion could not be so much as hearkened unto by the House of Commons: and
then it appeared how much the whole Popish Party was alarmed at the Project: it
is well known with how much Detestation they speak of it to this day: tho we
are now so fully satisfied of their Intention^ to destroy us, that the zeal
which they pretended for us, in opposing that design, can no more pass upon us.

VII. At last, in the Year 1672. the design for Popery discovering it self, the
end that the Court had in favoring a Toleration became more visible: and when
the Parliament met, that condemned the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
the Member^ of the House of Commons, that either were Dissent^rs, or that
favored them, behaved themselves so worthily in concurring with the Church of
England, for stifling that Toleration* choosing rather to lose the benefit of
it, th^n to open a breach at which Pope^y should come in, that many of the
members that were for ^he Church of England, promised to procure them a bill o^
Ease for Protestant Dissenters. But the Session was not long enough for
bringing that to perfection; and all the Session^ of that Parliament after
tha^, were spent in such a continual struggle between the Court and Country
Party, that there was never room given for calm and wise Consultations: yet tho
the Party of the Church of England did not pe^form what had been promised by
some Leading men to the Dissenters, there was little or nothing done against
them, after that, till the Year 1681. so that for about nine years together
they had their Meetings almost as publicly and as regularly as the Church of
Englan^ had their Churches, and in all that time, whatsoever particular
hardships any of them might have met with in some corners of England, it cannot
be denied b^t they had the free Exercise of their Religion, at least in most
parts.

VIII. In the year 1678. things began to change their face: it is known, that
upon the breaking out of the popish plot, the Clergy d^d Universally express a
great desire for c^ming to some temper in the points of Confo^mity: all so^ts
and ran^s of the Clergy seemed to be so well disposed toward it, that if it
had met with a suitable entertainment, matters might probably have been in a
greater measure composed. But the Jealousy that those who managed the Civil
concerns of the Nation in the House of Commons, took off all that was done at
Court, or proposed by it, occasioned a fatal breach in our public Councils: in
which division the Clergy by their principles, and interests, and their
disposition to believe well of the Court were determined to be of the Kings
side. They thought it was a sin to mist^ust the late King^ Word, who assured
them of his steadiness to the Protestant Religion so often, that they firmly
depended on it: and his present Majes^y gave them so many Assurances of his
maintaining ^till the Church of England, that they believed him likewise: and
so thought that the Exclusion of him from the Crown, was a degree of rigor to
which they in Conscience could not consent: upon which they were generally
cried out on, as the Betrayers of the Nation, and of the Protestant Religion:
Those who demanded the Exclusion, and some other securities, to which the
Bishops would not consent in Parliament, looked on them a^ the chief hindrance
that was in their way: and the License of the Press at that time was such, that
many Libels and some severe Discourses were published against them. Nor can it
be denied, that many Churchmen, who unde^stood not the principles of Humane
Society, and the rules of our Government, so well as other points of Divinity,
writ several T^eatises concerning the measures of submission, that were then as
much censured, as their per^ormances since against Popery have ^een deservedly
admired. All this gave such a Jealousy of them to the Nation, that it m^st be
confessed, that the Spirit which was then in fermentation went very high
against the Church of England, as a Con^ederate, at least, to Popery and
Tyranny. Nor were several of the Nonconformists wanting to inflame this
disli^e; all sec^et propositions for accommodating our differences were so
co^dly entertained, that they were scarce hearkened unto. The Propositions which
an Eminent Divine made even in his Books writ against Separation, showed that
while we maintained the War in the way of dispute, yet we were still willing to
Treat: ^or the Great Man made not those ^dv^^^es towa^ds t^em without
consulting with his S^^eriours. Yet we were then ^a^^lly gi^en up to a spirit
of Dis^ention: and t^o the Parliament in 1680. entered upon a project for
healing ou^ differences, in which great steps were made to the removing of all
the occasions of our Contest^; the Leaders of the Dissenters, to the ama^ement
of all persons, made no account of this: and even seemed uneasy at it, of
which the Earl of Nottingham and Sir Thomas Clarges, that set on that Bill with
much zeal, can give a more particular account: All these things concurred to
make those of the Church of ^ngland conclude, a little too rashly, that the^r
ruin was resolved on; and then it was no wonder if the spirit of a Party, the
remembrance of the last War, the present prospect of Danger, and above all, the
great favor that was showed them at Court, threw them fatally into some angry
and Violent Counsels; self-preservation is very natural* and it is plain, that
many of them took that to be the Case, so that truly spaeking, it was not so
much at first a spirit of Persecution, as a desire of disabling those who they
believed intended to ruin them from eff^cting their designs, that set them on
to all those unhappy things that followed. They were animated to all they did
by the continued ear^estness of the King and Duke, and of their M^nisters. That
Reproach of Justice, and of the p^ofession of the Law, who is now so ^i^h, was
singled out for no other end, but (...) the^r Common Hangman over England; o^
whom the late King gave t^is true character, That he had neither Wit, Law* nor
Common Sen^e; b^t that he had the Impud^nce of ten carted W^ores in him.
Another Buffo^n, (...) to pl^gue the Nation with three or four P^pers a week,
which to the Reproach o^ the Age in which we live, had but too great and too
general an effect, for poisoning the spirits of the Clergy. But those who knew
how all this was managed, saw that it was not only set on, but still kept up by
the Court. If any of the Clergy had but preached a word for moderation, he had
a chiding sent him presently from the Court, and he was from that day marked
out as a disa^fected person: and when the Clergy of London did very worthily
refuse to give Informations against their Parishioner^ that had not always
Conforme^, the design having been formed, upon that to bring them into the
Spiritual Courts, and Excommunicate them, and make them lose their right of
Voting, that so the Charter of London might have been delivered up when so many
Citizens were by such means shut out of the Common Council; we remember well
how severely they were Censured for this, by some that are now dead, and others
that are yet alive. I will not go further into this matter: I will not deny but
many o^ the Dissenters were put to great hardship^, in many parts of England. I
cannot deny it, and I am sure I will never justify i^. But this I will
positively say, having observed it all narrowly, that he must have the brow of
a Jesuit, that can cast this wholly on the Church of England, and free the
Court of it. The beginnings and the progress of it came from the Court, and
from the Popish party: and tho perhaps every one does not ^now all the secrets
of this matter, that others may have found out, yet no man was so ignorant as
not to see what was the chief spring of all those Irregular motions that some
of us made at that time: so upon the whole matter, all that can be made out of
this, is, that the pa^sions and infirmities of some of the Church of England,
being unhappily stirred up by the Dissenters, they were fatally conducted by
the Popish party, to be the Instruments in doing a great deal of mischief.

IX. It is not to be doubted, but though some wea^er men of the Clergy may
perhaps still retain their little peevish animosities against the Dissenters,
yet the wiser and more serious heads of that great and Worthy Body, see now
their Error: they see who drove them on in it, till they hoped to have ruined
them by it. And as they have appeared against Popery, with as great a strength
of Learing, annd of firm steadiness as perhaps can be met with in all
Church History, so it cannot be doubted, but their reflections on the dangers
into which our Divisions have thrown us, have given them truer Notions with
relation to a rigorous Conformity: and that the just Detestation which they
have expressed of the Corruption^ of the Church of Rome has led them to
consider and a^hor one of the worst things in it, I mean their Severity toward
Heretics. And the ill ^se that they see the Court ha^ made of their Zeal ^or
supporting the Crown, to justify the subversion of our Government that is now
set on from some of their large and unwary expressions, will certainly make
them hereafter more cautious in meddling with Poli^icks: the Bishops have undo^
their hands both disowned that wide extent of the Pr^rogative, to the
overturning of the Law, and declared their disposition to come to a Temper in
the matters of Conformity; and there seems to be no doubt left of the sincerity
of their Intentions in that matter. Their Piety and Virtue, and the prospect
that they now have of suffering themselves, put us beyond all doubt as to their
sincerity, and if ever God in his Providence brings us again into a settled
State, out of the storm into which our passions and folly, as well as the
Treach^ry of others has brought us, it cannot be imagined, that the Bishops
will go off from those moderate Resolutions, which they have now declared* and
they continuing fir^ to them, the weak and indiscreet pa^sions of any of the
inferior Clergy, must needs vanish, when they are under the conduct of wise
and worthy Leaders. And I will boldly say this, that if ^he Church of England,
after she has got out of this Storm, will return to hearken to the peevishness
of some sour men, she will be abandoned both of God and man, and will set both
Heaven and Earth against her The Nation sees too Visibly, how dear the Dispute
about Conformity has co^t us, to stand any more upon such Punctilio's: and
THOSE in whom our Deliverance is wrapped up, understand this matter too well, and
judge too right of it, to imagine that ever they will be Priestridden in this
point* So that all considerations con^ur to make us conclude, that the^e is no
danger of our splitting a second time upon the same Rock: and indeed, if any
Argument we^^ wanting to complea^ the certainty of this point* tha Wise and
Generous behavior of the main body of the Dissenters, in thi^ present
Juncture, has given them so just a Title to our Friendship, that we must
resolve to set all the World against us, if we can ever forget it; and if we do
not make them all the returns of Ease and Favor, when it is in our power to do
it.

X. It is to be hoped, that when this is laid together, it will have that
effect on all Sober and True Protestants, as to make them forget the little
angry Heats that have been among us, and even to forget the injuries that have
been done us: all that we do now one against another, is to shorten the work of
our Enemies, by destroying one another, which must in Conclusion turn to all
our Ruin. It is a madmans Revenge to des^roy our Friends that we may do a
pleasure to our Enemies, upon their giving us some good words; and if the
Diss^nters can trust to Papists, after the usage that the Church of England ha^
met with at their hands, all the comfort that they can promise themselves, when
Popery begins to act it^ natural part among us, and to set Smithfield again in
a Fire, is that which befell some Quakers at Rome, who were first put into the
Inquisition, but were afterward removed to Bedlam: so tho those false Brethren
among the Dissenters, who de^eive them at present, are certainly no Changlings,
but know well what they are doing; yet those who can be chated by them, may
well claim the privilege of a B^dlam, when their Folly has left them no
other ret^eat.

XI. I will not digress too far from my present pu^pose; nor enter into a
discussion of the Dispensing power, which was so effectually overthrown the
other day at the Kings-Bench-Bar, that I am sure all the Authority of the B^nch
it self is no more able to Support it: yet some late Papers in favor of it,
give me occasion to add a litt^e relating to that point. It is ^rue, the
Assertor of the Dis^ensing power, who has lately appeared wi^h allowance,
pretends, that it can only be applied to the Test for public Employments* for
he owns, that the Test for both Houses of Parliament is left e^tire, as not
within the compass of this extent of the Prerogative: but another Writer, whom
by his sense we must conclude an Irish man, by his brow a Jesuit, and by the
bare designation in the Title page, of James Stewarts letter, a Quaker, goes a
strain higher, and thinks the King is so ^bsolutely the Sovereign as to the
Legislative part of our Government, that he may dissolve even the Parliament
Test* so nimbly has he leapt from being a Secretary to a Rebellion, to be an
Advocate for Tyranny. He fancies, that because no Parliament can bind up
another, therefore they cannot limit the Preliminaries to a subsequent
Parliament. But upon what i^ it then, that Counties have but two Knights, and
Buroughs as many* that men below such a value have no Vote, that Sheriffs only
receive Writs and return Elections, besides many more necessary requisites to
the making a legal Parliament. In short, if Laws do not regulate the Election
and Constitution of a Parliament, all these things may be overthrown, and the
King may cast the whole Government in a new Mould, as well as dissolve the
obligation that is on the Members of Parliament for taking the Test. It is
true, that as soon as a Parliament is legally met and constituted, it is tied
by no Laws, so far as not to repeal them: but the Preliminaries to a Parliament
are still sacred, as long as the Law stands that settled them: for the Members
are still in the quality of ordinary Subjects, and not entered upon their share
in the Legislative power, till they are constituted in a Parliament Legally
chosen and Lawfully assembled, that i^, having observed all the Requisites of
the Law. But I le^ve that impudent Letter to return to the most Apology that
has been yet writ for the Dispensing power. It yields that the King cannot
abrogate Laws, and pretends only that he can dispense with them: and the
distinction it puts between abrogation and Dispensation, is, that the one is a
total repeal of the Law, and that the other is only a slackning of its
obligatory fo^ce, with Relation to a particular man or to any body of men; so
that according to him, a simple Abrogation, or a total Repeal, is beyond the
compass of the Prerogative. I desire then that this Doctrine may be applied to
the following words of the Declaration; from which the Reader may infer whether
these do import a Simple Abrogation, or no^, and by consequence, if the
Declaration is not illegal; We do hereby further Declare, That it is our Royal
will and pleasure that the Oaths commonly called the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and also the several Tests and Declarations -- shall not at any
time hereafter, be required to be taken, Declared, or subscribed by any person
or persons whatsoever, who is or shall be Employed in any Office or Place of
Trust, either Civil or Military, under us or in our Government, This is plain
English, and needs no Commentary. That paper offers likewise an Expedient for
securing Liberty of Conscience, by which it will be set beyond even the
Dispensing power; and that is, that by Act of Parliament all Persecution may be
declared to be a thing evil in it self, and then the Prerogative cannon reach
it. But unless this Author fancies, that a Parliament is that which those of
the Church of Rome believe a General Council to be, I mean Infallible, I do not
see that such an Act would signify any thing at all. An Act of Parliament
cannot change the nature of things which are sullen, and will not alter,
because a hard wor^ is clapped on them in an Act of Parliament; nor can that m^ke
that which is not evil of it self become evil of it self: for can any Act of
Parliament make the Clipping of Money, or the not Burying in Wo^llen evil of it
self? Such an Act were in^eed null of it self, and would sink with its own
weight* even without the burden of the Prerogative to press it down: and yet
upon such a sandy foundation would these men have us build all our Hopes and
our Securi^ies. Another topic like this, is, that we ought to trust to the
truth of our Religion, and the providence and protection of God, and not to
lean so much to Laws and Tests. All this were very pertinent, if God had not
already given us human^ Assurances against the Rage of our Enemies, which we
are now desired to abandon, that so we may fall an easy and cheap Sacrifice to
those who wait for the favorable moment to destroy us: by the same reason they
may persuade us to take off all our Doors, or at least all our Locks and Bol^s,
and to sleep in this exposed condition, trusting to Gods Protection: The simily
may appear a little too high, tho it is really short of the matter; for we had
better trust our selves to all the Thieves and Robbers of the town, who would
be perhaps contented with a part of our Goods, than to those whose designs are
equally against both Soul and Body, and all that is dear to us.

XII. I will only add another Reflection upon the renewing of the Declara^ion
this year, which has occasioned the present ^^orm upon the Clergy. It is
repeated to (...) that so we may see that the King continues firm to the
Promises he made la^t year. Yet when Men of Honor have once given their word,
they take it ill if any do not trust to that, but must needs have it repeated
to them: in the ordinary commerce of the world, the repeating of promises over
and over again, is ^ather a ground of Suspicion than of Confidence, and if w^
judge of the accompli^hment of all the other parts of the D^^laration, from
that o^e* which relates to ^he m^intaining of the Church of England* as b^ Law
established, the proceedings against the Fellows of Magdalen College, gives us
no reason to conclude, that this will be like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians, which alter not: all the talk of the New Magna Charta cannot lay us
asleep* when we see so little regard had to the Old one. As for the security
which is offe^ed us in this repeating of the Kings promise^, we must crave
leave to remember, that the King of France, even after he had resolved to break
the Edict of Nantes, yet repeated in above an hundred Edicts, that were real
and visible violations of that Edict, a clause con^irmatory of the Edict of
Nantes, declaring that he would never Violate it: and in that we may see what
account is to be had of all promises made to Heretics, in matter^ of Religion,
by any Prince of the Roman Commu^ion, but more particularly by a Prince who has
put the conduct of his Consciince in the hands of a Jesuit.

FINIS.

