THE Conversion and Persecutions OF EVE COHAN, Now called Elizabeth Verboon, A
Person of Quality of the Jewish RELIGION. Who was Baptized the 10 th of
October, 1680. At St. Martins in the Fields, By the Right Reverend Father in
God, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of St. ASAPH.

LONDON: Printed by I. D. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

THE PREFACE.
THe World has been so often deceived in many pretended Converts, who make a
Trade of changing their Religion, that it is no wonder if Men are not easily
persuaded of the sincerity of those who come over from one Religion to another;
since it is certain the prepossession of Education and Custom is so strong,
that such as turn to a New Religion, must either be led to it by a clear
Conviction, which will show it self in other signal Effects, or are guilty of
great levity and fickleness of Mind, that disposes them too easily to change
for changes sake; or do it upon a baser account, of working upon the
Compassions of those, who being very Religious themselves, are apt to deal
their Charity liberally to such as seem to follow the steps of Abraham, who
being called to it, forsook his Kindred and Country to serve the true and
living God.

But here is a Convert that is indeed a Disciple of the Cross, and has, in all
the steps she made toward her Change, been often in danger of her Life, and has
suffered much from her Mother and Kindred: Whose Persecutions ceased not after
she had taken sanctuary in this Country, where she might reasonably have
thought, that either the Jews durst not presume to have pursued her any longer;
or if they would have attempted it, could not have found Instruments to have
served their wicked Designs. But even here, as they found out cursed Tools to
have spirited her away; so when they failed, they betook themselves to all the
Arts of Villainy, in which they are so well practiced: and hoping that nothing
could resist their Wealth, of which they resolved to be prodigal upon this
Occasion, they carried their Designs so far, that she was neglected by some,
and hardly used by others, from whom a greater Zeal to the Christian Religion
ought to have been expected.

When she seemed thus abandoned by many Christians, the Jews then hoped to have
prevailed on her weakness and fears, and her Mother writ tenderly to her, to
persuade her to return home again: But God left her not wholly destitute, for
as he directed her to lodge in a House, where she met with all the care and
tenderness she could have expected from her nearest Relations; so she was found
out by that eminent and learned Convert Charles du Veil, Doctor of Divinity;
who being born and bred a Jew, was first converted to the Christian Religion in
France; but both he, and his most learned Brother, seeing and detesting the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, forsook the great Advantages they had, and
might have expected there, and came hither, and joined themselves to our
Church. This Dr. Du Veil, remembering that word of our Savior to St. Peter,
When thou art converted, strengthen the Brethren, made it his Business both to
instruct and comfort her, and to procure the charitable Supplies and
Assistances of others to her.

He applied himself chiefly to the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of St. Asaph, as the Churchman most concerned in it, since this Convert
had taken shelter in the Parish of St. Martins, of which he was then Vicar: and
he followed her Concerns with that Zeal that the Occasion required. And the
Lord Mayor of London being informed by him of the whole Business, has taken it
into his care, with that sincere and hearty Affection which becomes a
Christian, and so great a Magistrate; and is contriving the most effectual
means possible, not only to do her right against her Oppressors, but also to
have her possessed of a fair Estate that belongs to her in Holland: The hazard
of losing which Estate, together with both Liberty and Life, she run with
cheerfulness, that she might embrace the Christian Religion. The particular
account of so remarkable a Conversion, and those things which happened upon it,
I hope will be no unacceptable entertainment to the Reader; and therefore
having gathered the Passages and Steps of it together, upon very good
Authority, I now offer them to the World.

THE Conversion and Persecution OF ELIZABETH VERBOON.
ELizabeth Verboon carries her Christened Name from the Baptismal Font, and her
Surname from her Husband Mr. Michael Verboon, but her Name formerly was Eve
Cohan: Her Father was Abraham Cohan, a Man of great Wealth and Credit, not only
among the Jews in Holland, but among the Dutch: So that as Michael Levi, the
Solicitor for the Jews, informed the Lord Mayor, he was chief Governor of the
Dutch Plantations in Brasile; and was then believed worth 100000 l. Sterling,
but lost a great deal of it when the Portugueses beat the Dutch out of Brasile;
yet, he said, that to his knowledge he died worth 20000 l. or upward: He died
about ten Years ago, when this his Daughter was not twelve Years Old; who has
lived ever since under her Mothers care: Her Name was Rebekah, alias Elizabeth:
She was Daughter to one Pallacius, who as this Convert had been told, was sent
Ambassador from the States, and was one of the Professors in the University of
Leyden. Levi knew this better than she did, and told the Lord Mayor that he was
sent Ambassador, both to the Emperor of Morocco, and to the King of Poland;
what he professed in Leyden we do not yet know: It may be supposed, from his
Negotiations, that he was a Civilian. He was a Jew in his heart, but gave
himself out for a Christian: So that his Daughter, and other Children, as we
are informed, were all Baptized.

This Eve Cohan lived with her Mother at Delft, where one Mr. Shol, that
teaches Music, being employed to teach her, used frequently to discourse with
her of the Christian Religion: and carried her sometimes to Church, on pretense
to hear the Organs play; where she staid, not only while the Psalms were
singing, but all the while, both of the Sermon and Prayers: And a New Testament
being secretly conveyed to her, she took great delight in reading in it. She
says, That which first made Impression on her was, that their Nation was now
dispersed over the World, no more under the Conduct of any Prophet: Nor had
they any of those visible Marks of the Favor and Protection of God, which
their Ancestors enjoyed in those Ages in which the Books of the Old Testament
were written. So that they seemed cast off by God, and under these Curses
threatened by Moses and the Prophets: and yet they kept the Laws of Moses better
than ever, and were more careful than their Fathers had been to abstain from
Idolatry. When she read the Account of our Savior's Passion, she felt her self
mightily affected with that passage of Iudas's confessing that he had betrayed
Innocent Blood; and his being so transported with the horror of it, that he
went and hanged himself.

This did first open her eyes, about two Years ago, and from that time she was
ever since disposed to become a Christian. But it coming some way to her
Mothers knowledge, as she discharged the Musick-master, so she treated her very
severely, and shut her up as a Prisoner near six months: and when gentler
Severities were ineffectual, she threatened to poison her if she changed her
Religion. So that once, for eight days together, she durst eat nothing that
they gave her, till she saw others taste of it before her. She was often beaten
by her Mother, and not suffered to come to the Door, or look out at those
Windows that opened to the Street, lest being in a Christian Country, she might
have discovered her Designs to such as would have assisted her in bringing them
to perfection. But that which confirmed her in the belief of Christianity, was,
what she read of the Resurrection of our Savior, of which he had given
assurance to his Followers before his Sufferings; this did so effectually
convince her, that He was her only Savior and Redeemer, that she called often
on him for his assistance and direction, and resolved to dedicate her self to
his Service.

While she was under those Apprehensions and Fears, he that is now her Husband,
Mr. Michael Verboon, then served her Eldest Brother, Jacob Cohan; he is
descended of honest Parents, though but of a mean condition: He had been
entertained by one of the Admiralty of Utrecht, as his Servant for three Years.
After that he served the Here Waerkendam (one of the States General, who was
sent Ambassador into Denmark) other three Years; and when he left his Service,
he had a Certificate of his Faithful Service, signed by his Lady, himself being
then from home, bearing date the third day of May, 1679. From thence he went to
serve Jacob Cohan, and staid with him nine months, and had from him a
Certificate of his faithful Service, two days after he left him.

There has been very great enquiry made concerning him in Holland, and all
People there give a good Character of him. He being in the same House with her,
addressed himself to her as a Suitor for Marriage, which she for some months
rejected, but at last gave him some encouragement, though no promise nor
assurance; and indeed intended then no more, but to make use of his kindness to
her, so far as to be conveyed, by his means, into some place of safety, where
she might without danger profess her self a Christian. Upon this he left her
Brother's Service, and resolved to go for some time into France, and went on
his way as far as Brussels.

She was daily in fear of her Life, and the rather, because her Mother had said
to her, that Mr. Honslaier, a Minister at Delft, had been with her to demand
her from her, because he understood she had an inclination to turn Christian.
This we have learnt from Holland was not true, but only pretended by her
Mother: and it is probable was said by her, that she might by that Artifice
draw from her Daughter the discovery of a correspondence she suspected might be
between the Minister and her. These things made her desirous to be out of their
hands; so having contrived the way of her escape, she got out of her Mothers
House in the end of May; and knowing by a Letter that Mr. Verboon wrote to her,
that he was still at Brussels, she went thither. But being more concerned to
preserve her Life, and to save her Soul, then careful how to live, she did not
so much as carry away the Jewels that were in her own possession: so far was
she from robbing her Mother, or giving the rest of the Family any ground to lay
those Actions on her, by which they hoped to have ruined her: though a parcel
of very fair Jewels, that were her Mothers, lay so open to her very Eye, that
she could easily have carried them away if she had designed it.

When she saw that the Christians at Brussels worshipped Images, and hearing
that the Christians in France were generally guilty of the same Idolatry; she
resolved rather to come into England, and be Baptized in a Christian Church,
that was not defiled with such Abominations: and Mr. Verboon having been bred a
Protestant, and making her understand the difference between the two Churches,
she chose to join her self to a Protestant Church. So they went to Newport, and
from thence came to England, in July, and took Lodgings in Mr. Peter Lavignes
House, a French Tailor in Bedford-bury. She carried her self there very
decently and virtuously; the People of the House knew that she went often to
Prayers: Mr. Verboon and she lived like Brother and Sister together; sometimes
they went to the Dutch Church in London. The mean while she went to the
Countess of Arlington, to desire her to help her to a Service; but that good
Lady knew not how to recommend her, till she had a farther account of her from
other hands.

On the 27 th of July, Moses Cohan, her youngest Brother, and Samuel Vandersee
her Cosen German, to whom, as it is said, her Mother intended to have married
her, found her out, and took Lodgings in the same House. This made Mr. Verboon
more pressing to have her marry him, fearing they might, either by force or
persuasion, prevail with her to return.

So on the 29 th of July, they went out to Knightsbridg, with two Witnesses,
and were married there, according to the form of the Church of England. Levi
was not ashamed to say, before the Lord Mayor, that she was within six weeks of
her time; yet she having been now ten weeks married* appears not to have been
with Child till after her Marriage, of which she has since miscarried by
fright, as shall be told afterward. And her Husband with a solemn Oath
declared to Bishop Lloyd, that she kept him at a due distance ever till they
were married.

Her Brother brought her a Letter from her Mother, in which she charges her
with no dishonest or unhandsome thing, but with many fair Offers and Promises,
persuades her to abandon Verboon, and return home again.

Vandersee did, by many impious Blasphemies against the Person of our Blessed
Savior, endeavor to divert her from her Resolution of becoming a Christian.

But seeng all these ways were ineffectual, they resolved to betake themselves
to more desperate and mischievous ones. And for this end they consulted with
Michael Levi, the formerly mentioned Solicitor for the Jews; who laid the
Train artificially enough to have spirited her away. He came often to the House
where they were lodged, and dealt with Mistress Lavigney to help him to speak
with Mistress Verboon; he offered her a Present, and made her many promises of
large Rewards, both of Gold and Silver, if she would persuade her to go back to
her Mother: But as Mistress Verboon could not see him, so Mistress Lavigney
worthily rejected all his Offers, though he came four times to her, hoping, by
such Importunities and Bribes, to overcome her at last. They intended first to
have arrested Mr. Verboon, hoping if he were once put out of the way, they
might deal with his Wife more effectually: but when the Bailiffs were brought
about the House, he was, by his Landladies care, conveyed out at the Window. It
is plain, they have no just ground of any Action against him, for two days
after he left her Brother's House, he had a discharge of his Service under his
Hand and Seal, bearing date the 17 th of May, 1680.

When those two Jews had been five weeks in the same House with her, and
perceived all the ways of Persuasion and Bribery were insuccessful, they then
betook themselves to other Courses, in which they hoped they should succeed.

Michael Levi found out two fit Tools for their purpose, one Holland a
Middlesex Bailiff, and one Hammond a Sergeant, belonging to the
Poultry-Counter; the former of these came sometimes into the House where they
lodged, as a Porter, carrying Jewish Meat to Cohan and Vandersee; by these
means he was not suspected, and so found an opportunity to execute a Warrant
upon Master Verboon, under the name of Eve Cohan, on the first of September,
for forty pound, at the Suit of her Mother. There was Bail presently offered,
by the procurement of the Landlord and his Wife: The Bailiff seemed willing to
accept it, but Hammond had learned his Lesson better; and pretended he must
needs carry her to the Under-Sheriffs Office in Hatton-Garden, and so hurried
her into a Coach, into which Hammond went with him: but Mistress Lavigne thrust
her self also in with them to see what should be done with Mistress Verboon: and
those who offered to bail her, followed them to the Sheriffs Office.

All the while that this was doing, Levi, the principal Contriver, was standing
at some distance, to see the issue of the Plot he had so skilfully laid, and
carried himself, as if he had known nothing of it, but asked one, for what was
that disturbance? the Woman he spoke to, perceiving he was a Jew, treated him
with the Indignation that such a Provocation seemed almost to justify; and he
fearing some violent effects of it, ran away. But Holland the Bailiff, instead
of carrying his Prisoner to the Sheriffs Office, where those that went to be
Bail, stayed some hours in vain expecting them, ordered the Coachman to drive
within the Liberties of London, and then discharged her of the Arrest he had
her under, and immediately Hammond took out his Mace, and arrested her for 2000
l. at her Mothers Suit, and so carried her into London. It was in vain to tell
them, that she being married, and under Covert-barr, was liable to no Arrest
for Debts; for though the Certificate of the Marriage was showed them, they who
had other Instructions from Levi, resolved to finish the Project he had laid:
which, as Hammond then declared, was for carrying her away into Holland. And
Levi confessed afterward, before the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, that he had
employed Hammond to Arrest her. When the Coachman had driven to the Rose Tavern
near the Poultry Counter, Hammond had a mind to make Mistress Verboon to go up
two pair of Stairs; but she was in such a fright, and trembled so, that she sat
down in the first Floor; and there Mistress Lavigne began to open the Business
to some Company that was in the Rome: but Hammond, in a great rage, called the
Drawer, and made him drag her out of the Room; and then going up one pair of
Stairs higher, he went about to persuade her to be contented and go home in
quiet, for, said he, Mistress Verboon should not go to Prison, but lodge in his
House, where she should be well used: and told her, that Levi had employed him
in this Business, who never undertook any Affair in which he did not succeed.

But finding she still persisted in her resolution of assisting of Mistress
Verboon, and of bringing some to Bail her, he threatened her that she should
never be paid what was owing her, and that she and her Husband both, should
come into great trouble and danger, by meddling further in it; but if she would
make no more noise, she should not only be paid, but well rewarded.

All these had no effect on her, so a Person she had sent for coming to them,
he forced Hammond to carry her to the Counter; for they knew well the design of
carrying her to the Serjeants-House, was only that she might be conveyed away
more secretly.

She being lodged in the Prison, Master Lavigne fearing that the Jews might
have taken her out of Prison, set some to keep constant watch before the
Counter Gate; and after two days entered an Action of 500 l. against her, that
so she might not come out without his knowledge; and lest the Jews should have
brought some to have bailed her out, that so they might get her into their
Power; he continued his Watch there [employing some, on whom he knew their
Bribes would have no influence] several Nights before the Counter Gate. There
was need of all this Caution, when the Jews were so cruelly set on the poor
Woman's destruction; and had found out such fit Instruments for their ends. She
knew what she was to expect if she fell in their hands, for Vandersee had told
her, That if she proved with Child in their hands, she should see it when
delivered of it, but never more: but she had reason to look for further Effects
of their enraged Cruelty, if they had her once in their Power. And that those,
whose Ancestors in Unbelief, had with so bloody a Malice crucified our Blessed
Savior, would have spared no invention of Mischief, to execute their Revenge
on one, that was now resolved to believe in Him.

But so zealous was Hammond to serve the Jews in this Plot, that seeing Mistress
Lavigne was like to raise a great stir about it, and that neither Promises, nor
Threatenings, nor Violence, could work on her; for he found the calling of her
Witch, Bawd, and such other base Names, and the beating her, and pulling her by
the Hair of the Head, could not deliver him from her Importunities; he
thereupon contrived another way to frighten her, or to have her torn in pieces
by the People.

It is probable that Levi contrived this also, for both he and the other Jews
came often and drank with Hammond at the Rose Tavern: but whosoever contrived it,
this way Hammond took; The next time he saw her, he cried out, A Papist Bitch,
a harbourer of Jesuits; though it is notoriously known, that both she and her
Husband have been always good Protestants: with this Outcry he brought many
together; who if her Sister had not been there* and brought some Friends to
rescue her out of their Hands, had very probably done her much mischief.

But the poor Prisoner, who now seemed in a forlorn state, was not forsaken of
him, to whose Service she was resolved to dedicate her self. Mistress Lavigne
had brought Dr. du Veil to her while she lay at her House, as the fittest
Person to instruct her, having been himself of that Religion. He waited on her
every day during her Imprisonment, and comforted her much in her Afflictions:
for these were the Pledges of her being to Reign with Christ, since she now
suffered for him. He took care also of providing such Supplies as her
Necessities called for.

And above all the rest of the good Offices he did her, he acquainted the Lord
Bishop of St. Asaph with the Matter, in whose Parish this Prisoner was lodged,
when she was so violently and fraudulently carried out of it; He had been out
of Town when she was taken, but coming to it the next day, he set about it with
all that diligence and zeal which the occasion required.

But now the Jews finding their Prisoner was under such a Protection, betook
themselves to more Artificial Methods; and knowing that there was no ground,
neither for the Action of 40 nor of 2000 l. let these fall the next Court day,
and brought two new Actions, one of 500 l. at the Suit of Vandersee, and the
other of 200 l. for Trover and Provision at her Mothers Suit; and they
entertained my Lord Chief Justice Scroggs his Son to be their Counsel.

A Reverend Divine had informed my Lord Chief Justice of the Affair, who
ordered a hearing of the Business before himself at his House, on the 10 th of
September: where because Bishop Lloyd could not then attend, he sent Mr. Tissar
to appear for Mistress Verboon. When they came thither, Levi and Vandersee, with
Hammond, being on the one side, were called up Stairs, for what end is not
known: but after a little stay they came down, and soon after my Lord Chief
Justice came out, and said, he was in haste, and must go to White Hall, and so
could not hear it: but he very mildly said, He saw the thing was a Trick, and
that Hammond had been abused; but he bad him go from him, to the Judge of the
Sheriffs Court, and tell him, he perceived it was a Cheat. This was all could
be obtained for him. So the poor Christian Complainants went away, as much cast
down, as the Jews were lifted up with this great Success.

On the 7 th of September, the Trial for Vandersee's pretended Debt was brought
into the Sheriffs Court, where Mistress Verboon's Attorney, Mr. Cross of
Woodstreet, though he knew of her Marriage, yet pleaded non Assumpsit. So the
Witnesses were ordered to be summoned to the next Court Day; which was the 9
th, and then the Trial was put off till Saturday. Then the Jews had obtained a
Levetur for removing it to the Lord Mayor's Court, for a further delay: but the
Lord Mayor being informed rightly of the Matter, by that worthy Gentleman Mr.
Crisp, the Common Sergeant, presently signed a Remandetur, by which the
Business was turned back to the Sheriffs Court; for the Jews had such a good
acceptance with the Lord Chief Justice, that they hoped now to have wearied the
poor Prisoner out with Vexatious Suits and Delays.

The Common Sergeant did also most worthily Bail her, on the 11 th of
September: So being at liberty, she resolved to delay her Profession of the
Christian Religion no longer, having been now as it were initiated into it by
the Cross which she had born so long.

Yet the Bishop of St. Asaph resolved to delay it till he got a return to a
Letter he wrote to the Minister of the English Congregation at the Hague,
desiring him and Mr. Swanswick (a Learned Advocate there, with whom he had made
an Acquaintance, when he waited on her Highness the Princess of Orange into
Holland) to inform themselves of as many Particulars as they could learn
concerning Mistress Verboon and her Husband: and having received a long and full
Answer from the Minister to whom he wrote, he perceived it had been known in
Delft, by the means of the Musick-master, that this Convert was inclined to be
a Christian; that she had been sometimes at Church to hear Sermons; that she
used often to read the New Testament; and that her Mother had treated her
barbarously; but the Ministers had not demanded her, as her Mother had said to
her.

So that was a piece of the Mothers Craft, to fish out of her Daughter what
Correspondence there might have been between them and her: and for Mr. Verboon,
they had a good Character given of him by all that knew him; only the angry
Mother accused him of some ill things; but the discharge of his Service two
days after he left the House, shows these were all Calumnies. And in a word,
the Bishop found that every thing that Mistress Verboon had told him, proved to
be true: So having used this Caution, which the many Cheats of pretended
Converts had made more necessary, he resolved to Baptize her into the Christian
Religion; and left the particular care of instructing her on Dr. du Veil, who
had of his own accord traveled much in it, and had followed all her Concerns
with a very tender Care and assiduous Zeal.

But though she was bailed out of Prison, yet she was not delivered from the
Persecutions of her Family. They knew well she had stolen nothing from her
Mother, and that she owed her nothing.

On the contrary, her Mother ows her her Portion, which by Levy's own account,
will rise to above 2500 l. And he also said, That her Mother had offered her to
him with 3000 l. Portion in present, and more after her own Death.

Vandersee, when he was before my Lord Chief Justice, pretended, that all he
did was on the Mothers Account, and that Mistress Verboon was indebted so much
to her in Money. But now in the Sheriffs Court, Vandersee sued for a Debt
pretended to be due to himself. Her Marriage was proved in Court, by the Oath
of the Minister, the Clark, and two Witnesses; but all that went for nothing,
the Attorney having made another Plea. But then for the pretended Debt, no
Evidence was brought, but her Brother Moses; and he could speak no English, but
as Smith his Interpreter swore: he said, upon his Oath, that he saw Vandersee
lend her four Duccatoons at Mr. Lavigne's House, which comes to about two and
twenty Shillings English Money: So now all the Actions of 40, 2000, 500* and 200
l. upon which they had so long vexed and imprisoned her, dwindled into this
small Debt; which the Jews knew, if it had been due, they could have had it any
time for the asking. But so impartially did the Jury proceed in this Verdict,
that upon this single Evidence, and he manifestly a Party in the Conspiracy,
and swearing on an English Bible, which they count a profane Book, and on the
back side of it too, which Dr. du Veil told them was no Oath by the Jews
Doctrine; yet upon this Evidence they cast Mistress Verboon; so that after all
other Rigours, Costs of the Suit were to come on her, according to our Law;
which the Judge of the Court set at 40 s.

From all this it is apparent, that the whole Business was a Conspiracy of the
Jews, of which Levi was the chief Contriver, and Hammond the main Instrument,
though the Lord Chief Justice was so favorable to him, as to say, He was
abused in that matter, and drawn into it. Both of these expressed their Joy,
not without some transport, when the Jury gave their Verdict. Levi said, He
would give 500 l. on condition she had not been bailed: Hammond said to those
who had depended much on the Bishop of St. Asaph's Assistance, Where is your
Lord now?

Mr. Verboon was advised to Arrest Vandersee for the false Imprisonment of his
Wife; and on the 4 th of September he Arrested him in an Action of 200 l.
which was not out of reason; but very modest for one that had suffered so
many Arrests for such great Sums, and all for nothing: but Levi soon bailed
him; and so prevalent were the Arts and Presents of the Jews, that it was
entered in the Books but 20 l. So that whether they are Plantiffs or
Complainants, they are resolved to show their skill; and perhaps have a secret
Pleasure to let the World see how much their Practices can work on those who
are called Christians; even in a Matter wherein the honor of Jesus Christ is
so much concerned.

But the Malice of the Jews stopped not her, for perceiving that Mistress Verboon
was by her Marriage covered from all their Suits, they resolved on another
way, which looks like a Design to destroy her.

Levi had said before my Lord Mayor, that she was within two months of her
time, and therefore he could not but believe she was with Child, and very
capable of being frighted into Miscarriage.

But it was a sure effect of their Revenge on her Husband, against whom
Vandersee had expressed so much malice, that he has often said he was
resolved to kill him, though he should be hanged for it. So on the second of
October, Mr. Verboon was Arrested in an Action of 200 l. and it appears that
the Bailiffs were again instructed to behave themselves with more than
ordinary rudeness: one of them was Benedict Helm; there were others whose
Names are not known. They came at Dinnertime, when they might expect to find
them at Dinner together: they seized upon him at Table, and dragged him forth
with their utmost violence; which when Mistress Lavigne saw, and vvithal took
notice of a Coach at the Door, she immediately reflected on the Trick that they
had put on them before: and therefore ran to him, and clasped her Arms about
his Waste, to keep him from being thrust into the Coach. The Bailiffs, to be
revenged on her, beat and bruised her Head, Breast, and Body, with the greatest
fury; of which the marks appear yet on her: Her Head was broke in three
places, and she was thereby, as the Chyrurgeon has certified under his hand,
in great hazard of her Life: yet she clogged them so, that they could not get
their Prisoner into the Coach; and the People beginning to come about them,
they were fain to thrust him into an Alehouse near at hand: from whence she
presently sent an Advertisement to the Bishop of St. Asaph. Upon his coming,
and offering the Bailiffs Bail, they saw it in vain to attempt any thing
farther, and so accepted the Bail. But though Mrs. Lavigne was forced to keep
her Bed some time, by the Wounds and Bruises she received, yet this had a more
fatal effect on poor Mistress Verboon; who when she saw the Bailiffs draging her
Husband, fell presently in a swoon; and being then young with Child, was so
disordered by the fright, that she has not yet recovered it; but on the 9 th
day after she miscarried. The Midwife, and others that were with her, are ready
to declare upon Oath, that the Conception had been some days dead, and wasted
within her; and that it was not above eight or nine weeks old, though she had
been eleven weeks married. So false was that Imputation which Levi cast on her
before the Lord Mayor, that she was within two months of her time. How far the
Law will charge this on the Bailiffs, or on the Jews that set them on to it, I
do not know; but sure I am, they are in a high degree guilty of Murder before
God. When all these Effects of the Malice and Industry of the Jews had appeared
so evidently, the Bishop of St. Asaph, who had before acquainted the Lord Mayor
with the Business, having received the Answer formerly mentioned from Holland,
did then, with more assurance, desire his assistance in this Affair, in which
the Honor of the Christian Religion, and of the English Nation, was so much
concerned.

The Lord Mayor did thereupon send for Levi, to hear what he could say for the
defense of himself, and of his Countrymen: who made some pretended excuses for
himself, as if he had not meddled in the Matter at all; but he did not deny that
he believed the Design of the Jews was to force Mrs. Verboon to go back to her
Mother, who he acknowledged was a severe and cruel Woman. By his own Story, the
Lord Mayor perceived clearly what a malicious Contrivance this whole
prosecution of Mrs. Verboon and her Husband had been; and told Levi, very
roundly, that they should soon see what a thing they had done, who finding
shelter in a Christian Country, and being so obnoxious to the Law as they all
were, durst offer such an Affront to the Religion, and to the Nation, as thus
to endeavor to Spirit away one, to whose charge they could lay nothing, but
her turning Christian. This he assured him should be carried so far, as to
reach their whole Congregation. There was no way to redeem them from trouble,
but for them to bring over her Portion from her Mother, and to satisfy her to
the full for the Costs and Trouble to which they had put her: And if they did
not do that, he assured him, he would carry the Matter as far as the Law would
allow him against their whole Sect: and though his time was near an end, yet he
knew his Successor would pursue it with the same vigor, with which he was
resolved to begin. He gave also order to some to bring him an Extract of the
Laws in force against the Jews. And for Hammond, no doubt he will be made an
Example for his impious Conspiracy with the Enemies of Christ, against one for
turning to him, which was the only root of all the malice they bore her.

This Matter being thus put in a fair way, the Bishop resolved to receive her
into the Christian Church by Baptism. He gave the Right Honorable, Sir Lionel
Ienkins, one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, an account of all
the steps of this Affair; who as he has expressed in his whole Life a true and
sincere love to the Christian Religion; to which he has been an Ornament
indeed, by the gravity and strictness of his deportment, in all those high
Employments in which he has behaved himself with so much Honor; So he received
the Bishop's Information of this Conversion and Persecution, with that sense
which might have been expected from so good and so great a Man. He offered, not
only all the assistance which he could give her in his Office, or at the
Council Board, when the Matter should be brought thither; but concerned himself
so particularly in it, as to be her Susceptor in Baptism; and those two most
Religious and Devout Ladies, the Countesses of Thanet and Clarendon very
readily took upon themselves to be her Godmothers. So on the 10 th of October,
after Evening Prayers, she was Baptized in St. Martins Church in the Fields.
She has since said, that she felt an unusual Joy in her Mind, when she was
initiated to Christianity, having now performed what she had long purposed and
wished to do: and though she saw a Jew in the Church, looking and laughing at
her in the very time, this did not a whit disorder her But as it may be
supposed, her inward and vehement desire of Baptism might have supported her
till that was over; so the Night after it, those Frights and Disorders she had
been put in formerly, chiefly that last when her Husband was Arrested,
brought pains on her, which ended in an Abortion, as was formerly told.

This Recital was thought necessary, to let the Nation see what a sort of
People these Jews are, whom we harbor so kindly among us; who, as they yet lie
under the guilt of that Innocent Blood, which their Fathers wished might rest
on them and their Children: so continue not only in their obstinate Infidelity,
but do still thirst after the Blood of such of their Nation as believe in Him
whom their Fathers Crucified; and whom they in derision called often to this
Convert that hanged Man. He was indeed hanged on a Tree by the Jews of his
Time, but they themselves knew then that He rose from the Dead, and so
triumphed over all that Hell or hellish Men had contrived: and tho they hired
the Soldiers, that first saw Him rising out of the Grave, to suppress so
dreadful a Truth, as his Resurrection must needs have been to them, yet it
broke out with such undeniable Evidence, that (...) a few of those who had
procured his Death, came afterward to believe in Him: nor could they, by the
Imprisonments, Whippings, Stonings, and all the other Effects of their enraged
Cruelty, by which those first Converts to Christianity suffered so much, fright
them from publishing those things which they had seen and heard. One of whom,
as he was among the most violent Persecutors of that way, so he was one of the
most learned and zealous of their Religion; was by such an irresistible force
from Heaven both convinced and converted, so that he became from the Chief of
Sinners, the Chief of the Apostles of Christ.

According to the sage Advice of Gamaliel, the Event clearly proved that this
Doctrine was of God: for as of old, Dagon's falling before the Ark of God, was
a proof of the weakness of the Idol, and of the Majesty of the living God,
whose Simbole the Ark was; So their being driven out of their Land, their
Temple being destroyed, by which all those Expiations, which that Covenant
afforded for Sin, can no longer be had* show that the Covenant with their
Fathers is dissolved, their Ceremonies are ineffectual, and the whole Mosaical
Religion is determined long ago. Josephus, the last of their Writers, to whom
any credit is due in Matters of History, has given a great, though a short
testimony to these things; and though he has not enlarged on our Savior, as he
has done either on St. John the Baptist, or St. James the Lesser, the Brother
of our Lord* as he is commonly called, knowing how displeasing it would be to
his Countrymen to dwell much on such a Subject; yet he was too faithful a
Writer, to have quite passed over a Matter of such great consequence.

I do not design to inflame any to Rage or Fury against the Jews, nor do I
desire to have any force put upon their Consciences: For the Wrath of Man
works not out the Righteousness of God; but I have the rather written this,
to provoke all, that may be concerned in the Sequel of this Affair, to proceed
in it as becomes truly zealous Christians, and to redeem the Nation from the
Infamy that so base a Conspiracy (if not severely punished) will bring on it;
that so those Enemies of Christ, if they are suffered to live among us, yet may
not again dare to adventure on such Practices, against those who forsake their
blind Superstition, and come to believe in the only Savior of the World: And
that those who are called Christians, may by the signal punishment of those
Instruments of Wickedness, whom they found among us, be so terrified, that they
may no more, with Judas, for a little Money, betray a Member of Christ, to be
Crucified by them.

FINIS.

