News from France: IN A LETTER Giving a RELATION of the Present State of the
DIFFERENCE Between the French King AND The Court of Rome.

To which is added, The Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and the
Protestation made by them in Latin, together with an English Translation of
them.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC LXXXII.

News from France:
In a LETTER giving a Relation of the present state of the difference between
the French King and the Court of Rome.
SIR,
IN obedience to your Commands, I send you herewith a Copy both of the Pope's
last Brief to the Clergy, and of the Protestation made by them. But I know
these will not fully answer your expectation, nor satisfy your Curiosity,
unless accompanied with a more particular account of the state of that affair,
such as a stranger who is not yet so happy, as to be let in to much of the
Conversation of this place, could pick up in so short a time. It is true, the
French are apt to talk, and upon this occasion, it is no hard thing to engage
them into much discourse, especially when their fears do not check the freedom
of Speech that is so natural to the Nation: for being now safe under the
protection of the Kings Authority, and secured under the covert of Edicts and
an Assembly of the Clergy, they are ready enough to speak out what they
formerly disguised, or trusted only to a few confiding persons.

As for the Generality of the Inferior people here, and the Women, they appear
to be more addicted to the Sea of Rome than could have been imagined. The Popes
Infallibility passes among them for an Article of Faith; so they are much
scandalized at the reports which are secretly set about by the Monks and
Friars, as if the King were like to be abused by the Archbishop of Paris, and
engaged in a Schism from the Chair of St. Peter; and it is said, that that
Prelate hopes by these means, to be made Patriarch of France, and so to become
very little Inferior to the Pope himself; and in time, if the design of the
Universal Monarchy goes on, which is the common discourse of this Court, then
as the Patriarch of the French Empire, he may pretend at least, to be made in
all things equal to the Bishops of Rome, as well as the Bishops of
Constantinople were anciently* when that City was made the Seat of the Empire.
It is true, the Precedence was then granted to the Bishops of Rome, because it
was the chief City, and the Empire* carrying its name from Rome, no wonder if
the Bishop of the Capital City had the Right Hand still reserved to him. But if
Paris becomes the Metropolis of this Fifth Monarchy, then I do not see, but it
may so fall out, that the Bishop of Paris may even dispute Precedence with his
Holiness at Rome; that City having now retained little more of its ancient
Greatness, than the Name: and it is not like to be ever esteemed the Metropolis
of the New Empire, which is now so much talked of here.

In a word, the people here that are most zealous against Heresy, have been so
managed by the Jesuits and the begging Friars in Confessions, that they almost
universally look on the Pope as Infallible: and every one remembers, that about
twenty year ago there was scarce any other Doctrine to be heard, but that which
extolled the Popes Infallibility, not only in Points of Faith, but also in
Matters of Fact: and the falling from the submission due to St. Peter's Chair,
was called the root and source of all heresy, which was aggravated with all
that could be invented to make the Iansenists the more odious, who were then
looked on as ill affected to that See.

This is so fresh in all peoples remembrance, and is now so often repeated by
those who bear no good will to that Order, that if they were not a sort of men
very incapable of the Impressions which modesty and shame make on most people,
they would scarce know how to lift up their heads. It is not unpleasant to hear
how those that rally them, make Apologies for them from their own principles:
Some tell us, that the Intention according to their Casuistical Divinity,
justifies the means used to accomplish a good end; and since the promoting the
honor of the Society, is the end they aim at, it is said, that when the
complementing the Sea of Rome may promote, that it is lawful to do it: but if
the depressing that, and extolling the Regal Power becomes more necessary for
the Interests of the Society, the good Intention will secure all still: and
there is no reason to doubt, but they seriously intend the good of their Order,
and as little to question, that this is a good thing. So here the Doctrine of
Intention serves them to very good purpose.

Their other celebrated Maxim of Probability, is no less useful to them, that
in a probable Opinion a man may with a good Conscience follow either side, and
that any approved Doctor's being of any side, makes that Opinion probable. From
which, those that divert themselves with them, say in their defense, that
approved Doctors having been of both sides in the Point of the Pope's
Infallibility, a man may with a safe Conscience choose either side, as he finds
it is most convenient for him. Thus the two Doctrines of Intention and
Probability joined together, make a very substantial Apology for them; and
indeed it is all I hear said to vindicate them in this particular: for to tell
you truth, It is very hard to get any of them to talk of this matter: those
that are mere Scholars, are still for the Pope; but they are so restrained by
the Political Fathers, that they will not enter upon this discourse: and for
those that play their Game at Court, you may as soon make those of
Whetstones-park among you blush, as put them out of countenance. They do now
value themselves upon their Zeal for the King, and upon his Zeal for the
Catholic Religion against Heresy: and one can draw nothing from them on this
subject, but high Elogies of their King, as, That he who has given peace to all
Europe, will never raise a War in the Church; and who can think, that a Prince
who employes all his authority for the Extirpation of Heresy, will ever turn
it against the Church? Upon this occasion I could tell you a great deal of Mr.
Maimbourg's Eloquence, who is so full of Raptures when he engages in this
discourse, that if he thinks what he says will be reported either in the Kings
hearing, or before any of his Ministers, he grows almost Ecstatical on that
head.

These things are not said only by the Canaille, but by those of the highest
condition; and even the Queen and Dauphiness, as we hear, grow apprehensive
that a Rupture may happen between those two great Luminaries the Pope and the
King: but I assure you, whatever the Popes presumption might be in former Ages,
in comparing himself to the Sun, and the Temporal Princes to the Moon, that
would now pass here for a piece of high presumption: for this Glorious Monarch
would think it a strange degradation, if he, to whom so many of the Glories of
the Sun have been ascribed by hungry Flatterers, were now to be compared to the
Moon. It is reported, that these two Illustrious Princesses have expressed
their Zeal on this occasion, and have told the Arch Bishop of Paris, That they
were informed, he and some others of the Clergy intended to break with the
Pope: they might do what they pleased, but for their parts, they were resolved
to continue to be good Roman Catholics. Others say, the King is a Good
Catholic, the Most Christian King, and the Eldest Son of the Church, full of
Zeal for it, but he sees by other men's eyes: and as the common style in England
of those who are displeased with the Government, is only an arraigning of the
Ministers, the King himself being treated with the respect of Civil words, even
by those who study most to expose his Government; so here the Zealots take the
freedom to speak very liberally of the Clergy. Indeed the Archbishop of Paris
carries the heaviest load; the former parts of his life have been such, that he
is not proof against censure: and upon all such occasions, if there has been
just grounds given for some ill reports, malice and envy improves these with
great industry, even to a pitch that is scarce credible: But I love not to
dwell much on so unfavoury a subject. I shall therefore say no more of him, but
that as he is certainly a man of great and polite thoughts, and a very
dexterous Courtier; so there is nothing to be imagined neither for impiety nor
lewdness with which he is not openly charged here, not only in discourses, but
in Prints, of which the Authors are known, and some that are in the Bastile for
them, offer to justify all that they have aspersed him with.

For the rest of the Clergy, I understand they may be reduced to three Ranks or
Classes. The first and greatest, is of those who have neither Learning nor
Piety, nor common Morality: Some of the greatest of them where they think they
may use freedom, speak of Religion with all the Insolence of blasphemous scorn
possible: they are men of quality who have taken Orders merely for the Dignity
and Wealth that they aspired to; and do scarce observe the common decencies of
their profession. In short, the King is all the God they serve, and so they are
ready to advance any thing that will recommend them to his favor, or
contribute to their promotion.

The second Class is of the Cartesian Philosophers, who approve of the Morals
of the Christian Religion, but for Miracles or Mysteries, they believe very
little; and consider the several Institutions of Religion, only as they do Laws
and received Customs, which are not to be rashly changed for fear of the
Convulsions that may follow; but as to their own persuasions of things, all
opinions and practices in the Ritual part of Religion seem indifferent to them.
So that when some gross things are objected to them, they are Ingenuous enough
to confess, there is a great deal of reason in the Objection; but after all,
they will comply with their Interests, and this not so much out of an
Atheistical temper, as because they consider all the Institutions of Religion,
only as matters of Policy and Law.

A third Class, which as it is much the best, so it is much the least, is of
those who are both Learned and Good Men, and are fully convinced of many Errors
in their Church, which they think need Reformation: but what by a weakness of
temper, what by some principles which they have carried too far against every
thing that seems to lead to Schism, they have not Spirit enough to own the
freedom of their thoughts, and say they hope that God will forgive their
temporizing, since they know not how to emancipate themselves: Nor do they see
a party to which they can turn. They have great prejudice against the Hugonots,
both as to the first Constitution of their Churches, and several other things
that are among them: but I am confident if they were in England, they would be
more inclined to come over to the Church there: and indeed I hear only two
exceptions to the Church of England among them; the one is the positive
definition against the Corporal Presence in the Sacrament, which they wish were
left in general terms without positive definitions either one way or another;
the other is, that there is not such a Spirit of Devotion and Mortification and
exemplary Piety among the Churchmen, as ought to be. They speak of Pluralities
and Non-Residence and of the Aspiring and Pomp of Church men with horror: And
it is certain that this Church could not have subsisted so long, if the gross
scandals that are given by the Bishops and Abbots of the Court were not
counterballanced by the shining examples of some of their Prelates, which I
must confess, is far beyond any thing I ever saw.

You may wonder, that in this Enumeration I do not reckon up the Bigots; but
really there are so few of those among the Superior Clergy, that they scarce
make a Classis. I have not heard of one of them that believes the Pope
Infallible, or is persuaded of Transubstantiation. I heard one pleasantly
declaim against the folly of the Messieurs of Charenton, for writing such
Learned Volumes in confutation of these things, which, said he, none of the
Catholics believed any more than They did, so they might well spare the pains.
But he reckoned the Revenues of the Ecclesiastics in their communion were
fifty Millions a year; In that, said he, is the strength of our cause: Let Mr.
Claude answer that, and then Mr. Arnauld will be a feeble party to him.

Among the Monks and Friars there is something very like Bigotry, though there
is so little sincerity among them, that it is very hard to know when they may
be believed. I confess, one thing I heard put to one of them that seemed
unanswerable, and it pressed them hard in this point of the Popes
Infallibility. The great Topic they use, and that is in every bodies mouth
against the Heretics, is, that men must not trust to their own opinions, but
submit all to the Church: and that truth could not be preserved, if there were
not a living Infallible Judge on earth; and by this great numbers of well
meaning Hugonots are drawn over. It has an appearance that is apt to work on an
humble and well disposed mind. Now the people always thought that this was to
be understood of the Pope, to whom all the Bishops were to make their
application for the resolution of such controversies as might arise; and so the
argument had still some effect: but now that the Councils of Constance are
declared for, that lodged this Infallibility in a General Council, the Church
has lost her great advantage against Heretics: for there is no such Council in
being, there has been none that pretended to that Title now almost one hundred
and twenty years; and it is not probable there shall ever be another, so there
is no living Infallible Judge. The Friar said so little in answer to this, that
I clearly perceived, he looked on the belief of the Popes Infallibility as the
Basis or the Center of the Church. But they are so much afraid of the
Archbishop of Paris his Spies, and of the rigor of the Court of Parliament,
that they speak of this matter only in dark Figures or Riddles.

One of them would say no more, but that it was safest to stick to the root of
the tree: another said, all things will return to their center. The truth is,
the Regulars are much concerned in the maintaining of the Popes authority, for
all their exemptions depend upon it. And there is no Heresy of which they are
so apprehensive, as that of losing their privileges, and being brought under
the Jurisdiction of their Bishops: and this the Bishops do all so openly
pretend to, that it would be the first step that would be made after a rupture
with Rome, to bring them in all points, within the care, and under the
authority of their Diocesans. This present Assembly of the Clergy had this
matter under their consideration, and by this time it is probable they would
have made some progress in it, if the King had not ordered them to adjourn for
some time. So you need not doubt, but that they are very careful to possess all
people in such secret methods as they dare venture on, with very tragical
apprehensions of the Issue of the present contest with Rome. And if the
severity against the Protestants were not interposed, as a signal evidence of
the Kings Zeal for the faith, it is probable this meeting with the other things
that raise so much discontent in this Kingdom, might have produced more
considerable effects than have yet appeared. That this may be always in the
peoples eye, new Edicts come out every day, which show, that the King is
resolved to make his Hugonot Subjects grow weary either of their lives, or of
their Religion.

Two came out the other day: the one was, that no Protestant may have the
Relief of an Evocation (or appeal) from any Court of Justice where he finds
himself aggrieved. The other is, that no Seaman nor Tradesman shall offer to
go out of the Kingdom without leave, under the pain of being sent to the
Galleys. So that it is resolved, that all who profess that Religion, shall be
miserable, if they stay in the Kingdom; and much more so, if they offer to fly
out of it. These things give the people some comfort, who cannot be easily made
to doubt of their Kings firmness to their Religion, as long as he continues
true to one main branch of it, which is persecuting those of other persuasions.

But upon the whole matter, it is not probable, that all this business, on
which the World has now looked so attentively for some time, will produce any
great effect. The King does not meddle in matters of Speculation himself, and
there is little reason to expect much from a man of the Arch Bishop of Paris
his temper. So that we begin generally to think, that some Expedient will be
found. The King has declared, that he is resolved, not to break with the Pope,
and he has lately received a Brief from him, writ in a more obliging strain,
than those formerly sent. I have not yet seen a Copy of it, so I cannot send
it; only the first words are much talked of, for it begins thus, My Son give me
thy heart. It seems it has made some impression on the King, and that he is in
hopes of bringing the whole matter to an amicable conclusion; and therefore he
takes cares that there be no new provocation given the Pope, and so he has
ordered the Assembly of the Clergy to adjourn for some time, which they did on
the 30th of May last, and many think they will hardly meet again except it be
for forms sake.

Some begin also to talk of a Legate to be sent into France, for concluding
this affair; and Azolini is the man most talked of, who is a very fit person
for such an Employment, for he has the reputation of a very prudent and devout
man. Last Winter he retired from all business, and gave himself wholly to
devotion and meditatitiom: So whether he will leave his retirement to do so
great a service to his Church or not, we do not yet know. It is true I found at
Rome, last Winter his character much lessened among the Italians, who look upon
such retirements, as either the effects of melancholy or affectation: For
indeed few there understand either the Philosophy, or the piety that should
work such a change in a man dignified with the Purple. But the Pope has a much
better sense of such things, as appeared in this last promotion of Cardinals,
which I found all at Rome, confess was the best that ever was made.

This is the state of the affair of the Regale, which has set both France and
Rome in such a fermentation: But for the last Edict, touching the Popes
authority over Princes, his Infallibility and the Superiority of General
Councils over him, it is a harder Chapter: for as at Rome it is not to be
imagined they can ever comply with it or endure it; so it is not likely this
Court will ever suffer it to be altered or recalled. The temper that will be
perhaps found, will be this the Edict will be still left upon Record; but there
will be secret directions given not to execute it. The Pope has by his Brief
annulled all that the Assembly has done, and so he will look upon it as
condemned by his authority; and perhaps will be satisfied with this, without
proceeding to a more express condemnation. On the other hand a secret
intimation from the Court not to proceed any further in the execution of it,
will be perhaps easily obtained; and so this which is the greatest difficulty
may be so made up, that at present this difference will be carried no further.
The Court of Parliament will think it enough that the Edict is past, and will
advise the keeping it as a perpetual terror for the Court of Rome. So that
hereafter, upon every disgust offered to this Crown by that Court, this Edict
will be made use of; and by the shaking this Rod it may be thought the Popes
will be kept to their good behavior. Somewhat of this will appear within a few
days, for many of the Doctors of the Sorbon have complained highly of the
proceedings of the Parliament, and in particular of the making a Declaration on
such points, and the requiring them to Register it, without ever asking their
opinion about them: They have not yet obeyed the Edict nor registered it;
yesterday they were cited to appear before the Court of Parliament, and were
required for the second time to call an extraordinary Assembly within ten days,
and without further delay to put the Edict in their Registers. So whether they
will give obedience, or whether the thing will be let fall, or at least
delayed, is not yet certain and therefore you must have a little patience till
the progress of this affair give you a better view of it, than can be done by
such conjectures as are made here.

In the mean while it seems the Iansenists expect a storm both because the
Archbishop of Paris is their declared and enraged enemy, and looks on them as
the authors of all those Libels that fly about Paris against him; and also
because in this matter they do openly espouse the Popes interests. And this is
represented to the King as an effect of their Factious and restless tempers,
and of the hatred they bear to his government. In this there is too much reason
to justify that imputation; for it seems as odd a thing to see them turn
Champions for the Popes authority, as it is to see the Jesuits declare against
it: And it shows but too evidently that interests and resentments govern both
parties in their opinions as well as in their practices. The Iansenists are now
mightily run down here, and beside the old Imputations of their being too
favorable to the Heretics, this is now added to it, That they are too great
friends to the liberty of the people; That they do not love the Kings Arbitrary
Government, and, That they will be of any side that is against the King. It
seems they expect nothing but severity; and therefore they animate their party
to prepare for it, and to bear it patiently: For the famous Mr. Arnauld, though
he has retired out of the world, so that it is not known where he lives, has of
late published a continuation of his defense of the Translation of the New
Testament, Printed at Mons; which he concludes with a bold and pathetick
Discourse concerning the sufferings of that party, in which he rejoices, and
calls them the trials of their Faith and patience, and a portion which the
Church Militant must of necessity look for. And on this he enlarges with all
the strains and figures of that Masculine Eloquence that is so natural to him.
But that for which he is much blamed, is that he makes so bold with the King;
he laments that he sees with other men's eyes, and that his Reign must be
reckoned among the Reigns of persecution. In short, it is such a discourse, as
would make a very pertinent conclusion to the Sermon of a Hugonot Minister, on
a Fast Day, if he intended to spend the rest of his days in the Bastile.
Iansenism is a thing now disowned almost by every body, and yet it spreads so
universally among the Learned and Good men in this Church, that upon the first
favorable conjuncture, it will appear how considerable it is: Though those
that now receive it, use almost as much precaution in owning it, as they would
do in speaking of Treason. But though they dare not speak out in the condemned
points concerning Grace; yet by many other things as so many Shibboleths, it is
not hard to know them, as by their excessive commendations of St. Austin among
the Ancients; and Cardinal Borromee among the Moderns: by their lamenting over
the present corruptions in the Church, chiefly in the conduct of Penitents, and
by their sharpness against the Jesuits: By these things they are generally
known, and a mark is set on them, so that none of them are at any time raised
to any eminent promotion. The King considers them as men that love liberty, and
so thinks them bad Subjects: And the Lewd Court-Bishops look upon them as their
worst enemies, and do hate them much more than the Heretics; and consider all
that is said of a Reformation, as intended on purpose to expose them; for guilt
makes men very tender and jealous.

I shall end this long Letter, with a passage that has fallen out here of late,
that will perhaps give you some diversion, and make you more easy to forgive
the tedious length to which this Letter has run out.

A woman that lives in Tours, and was melancholy and full of Vapors, desired
to receive the Sacrament every day, in which she said she found most wonderful
consolation. The Priest has the reputation of a very worthy man, and being a
judicious person, he clearly saw through the poor Woman's weakness and
superstitition, and was willing enough to do what he thought an innocent fraud,
that might both give the distempered person some ease, and yet not tend to a
profanation of Holy things; so instead of the Sacrament, he gave her
unconsecrated wafers which she received with her ordinary devotion, and they
had their ordinary effects on her: But as Frenchmen are too apt to tell their
own secrets; the Curate made himself merry with some of his friends upon this
occasion, and told how he had deceived the Hypochondriacal Woman: So the thing
got wind, and was looked on as a great impiety in the Priest to suffer one to
commit such Idolatry to a piece of bread, to which no doubt she offered the
same adoration, that was due, if it had been Consecrated; so the Curate was
cited before the Archbishop of Tours, where he had met with a severe censure,
if the esteem he is justly in, had not preserved him: He excused himself that
he had not failed out of Malice, but out of ignorance, and that he thought it
best to comply with the weakness of a Woman, abused by melancholy, and since it
would have increased her distemper to have denied her the Sacrament, and yet
her condition was not such that it was fit for her to receive every day: He
thought he took that course in which there was the least danger; but he was
condemned to six months Imprisonment, yet it is thought the sentence will be
mitigated, and upon his submitting to some severe penances, he will be set at
liberty ere long.

I leave it to you, and your most Learned Friend when you meet, to consider, if
this is acknowledged to be Idolatry in the melancholy Woman, to worship a piece
of bread, which she verily believed was the body of Christ; then whether it
will not certainly follow that the whole Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry,
if Christ is not Corporally present in the Host, and that their adoring him as
present, will not excuse them from Idolatry, if he is not really present. But I
must not enter upon points of Controversy with you, much less will I increase
the trouble I have given you, by offering you a great many Apologies for what I
have written; I know your Curiosity in this affair of the Regale makes you more
than ordinary concerned to know the true State of it; and I was willing to
enlarge much more copiously, than was perhaps necessary, for one that knows so
much of the Transactions of this Kingdom: But as I demonstrate to you my
readiness to obey your commands, so I am not unwilling so far to expose my self
to you, as to let you see the use I make of my Travels, which will at least
give you occasion to correct what you find amiss; and I shall be a great gainer
by the exchange, if instead of a long scrible of News I have a return from you,
that shall contain such reflections of yours, as may be able to direct me to
observe matters more exactly, and to judge more maturely of them. I shall
afflict you no more, but shall only add that I am, with great sincerity,

SIR, Your most humble and most obliged Servant.
Paris the 6th June S. N.
The Popes Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy of France, annulling all that
they have done.
Venerabilibus Fratribus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, etc.
PAternae Charitati qua Carissimum in Christo filium nostrum Ludovicum Regem
Christianissimum, Ecclesias vestras, vosipsos and universum istud regnum
amplectimur, permolestum accidit ac plane acerbum cognoscere ex vestris literis
tertio Februarii ad nos datis, Episcopos plerumque Galliae qui Corona olim and
gaudium erant amplissimae sedis, ita se erga illam in praesens gerere ut
cogamur multis cum lachrymis usurpare propheticum illud, Filii matris meae
pugnaverunt adversus me; quanquam adversus vosipsos potius pugnatis, cum nobis
in ea causa resistitis, in qua vestrarum Ecclesiarum salus ac felicitas agitur,
and in qua pro juribus ac dignitate Episcopali in isto regno tuendis, ab
aliquibus ordinis vestri piis ac fidelibus viris appellati absque mora
insurreximus, and jampridem in gradu stamus nullas privatas nostras rations
secuti, ut debitae omnibus solicitudini, ac intimo amori erga vos nostro
satisfaciamus.

Nihil sane laetum ac vestris nominibus dignum eas literas continere, in ipso
earum limine intelleximus; nam praeter ea quae de norma in Conciliis
convocandis, peragendisque servata ferebantur, animadvertimus eas ordiri a metu
vestro, quo suasore nunquam Sacerdotes Dei esse solent in ardua and excelsa pro
Religione and Ecclesiae suae liberate vel aggrediundo fortes, vel perficiendo
constantes.

Quem quidem metum falso judicavistis posse vos in sinum nostrum effundere, in
sinu enim nostro hospitari perpetuo debet Caritas Christi, quae for as mittit
and long arcet timorem, qua caritate erga vos regnumque Galliae paternum cor
nostrum slagrare multis jam ac magnis experimentis cognosci potuit, quae hic
refer non est necesse; si quid est autem in quo been merita de vobis Caritas
nostra sit, esse imprimis putamus illud ipsum Regaliae negotium, ex quo, si
serio res perpendatur, omnis vestri ordinis dignitas atque auctoritas pendet.
Timuistis igitur ubi non erat timor, id unum timendum vobis erat ne apud Deum
hominesque jure redargui possitis, loco atque honori vestro and pastoralis
officii debito defuisse. Memoria vobis repetenda erant, quae antiqui illi
Sanctissimi Praesules, quos plurimi postea qualibet aetate sunt imitati,
Episcopalis constantiae and fortitudinis exempla in bujusmodi casibus in
vestram eruditionem ediderunt. Intuendae imagines praedecessorum vestrorum, non
solum quae Patrum, sed quae nostra quoque memoria sloruerunt. Ivonis
Carnotensis dicta notatis, facta etiam cum res posceret, imitari debuistis.
Nostis qui is fuerit, quaeque passus sit in turbulenta illa and periculosa
contentione inter Urbanum Pontisicem and Philipum Regem, muneris sui
arbitratus, contra regiam indignationem stare, bonis spoliari, carceres and
exilia perferre. Deserentibus aliis meliorem causam, officii vestri erat Sedis
Apostolicae auctoritati studia vestra adjungere, and pastorali pectore ac
humilitate Sacerdotali causam Ecclesiarum vestrarum apud Regem agere, ejusque
conscientiam de tota re instruere, etiam cum periculo regium in vos animum
irritandi, ut possetis in posterum sine rubore ex quotidiana Psalmodia Deum
alloquentes, Davidica verba proferre, Loquebar de testimoniis tuis in conspectu
Regum and non confundebar; quanto magis id vobis faciendum fuit jam perspecta
atque explorata optimi principis justitia and pietate, quem singulari
benignitate Episcopos audire and Episcopalem potestatem intemeratam velle vos
ipsi scribitis, and nos magna cum voluptate legimus in literis vestris.

Non dubitamus pro causae tam justae defensione, neque defutura vobis quae
loqueremini, neque Regi cor docile, quo vestris annueret postulatis; nunc cum
muneris vestri and regiae aequitatis quodammodo obliti in tanti momenti negotio
silentium tenueritis, non videmus quo probabili fundamento significetis vos ad
ita agendum adductos. Quod in controversia victi sitis, quod causa cecideritis,
quomodo cecidit qui non stetit? Quomodo victus est qui non pugnavit? Quis
vestrum tam gravem, tam justam, tam sacrosanctam causam apud Regem oravit, cum
tamen praedecessores vestri in simili periculo constitutam, non semel apud
superiores Galliae Reges, immo apud hunc ipsum libera voce defenderint,
victoresque a regio conspectu decesserint, relatis etiam ab aequissimo Rege
praemiis Pastoralis officii strenue impleti. Quis vestrum in arenam descendit
ut opponeret murum pro domo Israel? Quis ausus est invidiae se offerre? Quis
vel vocem unam emisit memor pristinae libertatis; Clamarunt interim, sicuti
scribitis, and quidem in mala causa pro regio jure clamarunt regii administri
cum vos in optima pro Christi and Ecclesiae honor sileretis, neque illa
solidiora quod reddituri nobis rationem, seu verius excusationem allaturi rerum
in ejusmodi comitiis per vos actarum exaggeretis periculum ne Sacerdotium and
imperium collidantur, and mala quae exinde in Ecclesiam and rempublicam
consequi possent, proinde existimasse vos ad officium vestrum pertinere inire
rationem tollendi e medio gliscentis dissidii, nullam vero commodiorem
apparuisse quam remedia a patribus Ecclesiae indicata, utili condescentione
canonis temperandi, pro temporum necessitate, ubi neque fidei veritas neque
morum honestas periclitentur; Deberi ab ordine vestro, Deberi a Gallicana, imo
ab universa Ecclesia, plurimum Regi tam praeclare de Catholica Religione
merito, and (...) magis mereri cupienti; propterea vos juri vestro decedentes
illud in Regem (...). Omittimus hic commemorare quae significatis (...) a vobis
Seculari Magistratu a quo victi (...) enim ejus facti memoriam aboleri, and
(...) vos verba ex literis vestris expungere, ne in (...) Gallicani resideant
ad dedecus nominis vestri (...). Quae de Innocentio 3. Benedicto 12. and (...)
8. in vestram defensionem adducitis, Non defuerunt qui doctis lucubrationibus
ostenderint quam frivola and extranea sint huic causae, and magis notum est
quam ut opus sit commemorari quo Zelo, qua constantia eximii illi Pontifices
Ecclesiae libertatem defenderunt adversus seculares potestates, tantum abest ut
eorum exempla possint errori vestro suffragari: Caeterum ultro admittimus and
laudamus consilium relaxandi Canonum Disciplinam pro temporum necessitate, ubi
fieri id possit sine fidei and morum dispendio. Immo addimus cum Augustino,
Toleranda aliquando pro bono unitatis quae odio hadenda sint pro ratione
aequitatis, neque eradicanda Zizania ubi periculum sit ne simul etiam triticum
eradicetur: sed ita tantum accipi oportet ut in aliquo tantum peculiari casu,
and ad tempus, and ubi necessitas urget, licitum sit. Factum est ab Ecclcsia
cum Arianos and Donatistas ejurato errore, Ecclesiis suis restituit, ut populos
qui secuti eos fuerunt in officio contineret. Aliud est ubi Disciplina
Ecclesiae per universum amplissimi regni ambitum sine temporis termino and cum
manifesto periculo ne exemplum latius manet, labefactatur, immo evertitur
ipsius disciplinae and Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae fundamentum, sicuti evenire
necesse est, si quae a Rege Christianissimo in negotio Regaliae nuper acta
sint, una etiam consentientibus vobis contra Sacrorum Canonum, and praesertim
Generalis Concilii Lugdunensis authoritatem, contra notam jam pridem vobis in
ea re mentem nostram, and contra ipsam jurisjurandi Religionem, qua vos Deo,
Romanae, vestrisque Ecclesiis obligastis, cum Episcopali charactere imbuti
eramini, haec exsecutiom mandari and malum invalescere diutius differendo
permittamus, ac non nos pro data divinitus humilitati nostra suprema in
universam Ecclesiam potestate praedecessorum nostrorum vestigiis inhaerentes
improbaremus: Cum praesertim per abusum Regaliae non solum everti disciplinam
Galliae res ipsa doceat, sed etiam fidei ipsius integritatem in discrimen
vocari facile intelligatis ex ipsis regiorum decretorum verbis quae jus
conferendi beneficia Regi vendicant, non tanquam profluens ex aliqua Ecclesiae
concessione, sed tanquam ingenitum and coaevum regiae coronae. Illam vero
partem literarum vestrarum non sine animi horrore legere potuimus, in qua
dicitis vos juri vestro decedentes illud in Regem contulisse quasi Ecclesiarum
quae curae vestrae creditae fuere, essetis arbitri, non custodes, and quasi
Ecclesiae ipsae and spiritualia ipsaram jura possent sub potestatis secularis
jugum mitti ab Episcopis qui se pro illarum liberate in servitutem dare
deberent. Vos sane ipsi hanc veritatem agnovistis and confessi estis, dum alibi
pronunciastis jus Regaliae servitutem quandam esse quae in eo praesertim quod
spectat Beneficiorum Collationem imponi non potest, nisi Ecclesia concedente,
vel saltem consentiente. Quo jure ergo vos illud in Regem contulistis? Cumque
sacri Canones distrahi vetant jura Ecclesiarum, quomodo ea vos distrahere in
animum induxistis quasi eorundem Canonum authoritati liceat vobis derogare?
Revocate in memoriam quae Inclytus ille Clarevallensis Abbas non Gallicanae
modo sed etiam Ecclesiae universalis lumen a vobis merito nuncupatus Eugenium
Pontificem officii sui admonens praeclare scripta reliquit, meminisse, esse cui
claves traditae, cui oves traditae sunt, esse quidem and alios coeli Ianitores
and gregum pastores; sed cum habeant illi assignatos greges singuli singulos,
ipsi universos creditos, uni unum, nec modo ovium sed and pastorum Eugenium
esse pastorem. Ideoque juxta Canonum Statuta alios Episcopos vocatos fuisse in
partem solicitudinis, ipsum in plenitudinem potestatis. Quantum vos admoneri
par est, de obedientia and obsequio quod debetis huic sanctae sedi, cui nos,
Deo authore, quanquam immeriti, praesidemus; tantum pastoralis nostra
solicitudo excitat nos ad inchoandam tandem aliquando in hoc negotio, quam
nimia fortasse longanimitate nostra dum poenitentiae locum damus, hactenus
distulit Apostolici Muneris executionem. Quamobrem per praesentes literas,
tradita nobis ab omnipotente Deo authoritate, Improbamus, Rescindimus, and
Cassamus quae in istis vestris comitiis acta sunt in negotio Regaliae, cum
omnibus inde secutis, and quae in posterum attentari continget, eaque perpetuo
irrita and inania declaramus: Quamvis cum sint ipsa per se and manifest nulla,
cassatione aut declaratione hujusmodi non egerent. Speramus tamen vos quoque
ipsos re melius considerata celeri retractatione consulturos conscientiae
vestrae and Cleri Gallicani Existimationi, ex quo Clero sicuti huc usque non
defuere, ita in futurum non defuturos confidimus, qui boni Pastoris exemplo
libenter animam suam parati sint pro ovibus suis and pro testamento Patrum
suorum dare. Nos quidem pro officii nostri debito parati sumus, Dei adjutrice
gratia, sacrificare sacrificium justitiae, Ecclesias Dei, jura, libertatem, and
hujus sanctae sedis authoritatem dignitatemque defendere; nihil de nobis, sed
omnia de Deo praesumenda sunt qui nos consortat, and operatur in nobis, and qui
jussit Petrum super aquis ad se venire: Praeterit enim sigura hujus mundi, and
dies domini appropinquat. Sic ergo agamus, venerabiles fratres and dilecti
filii, ut cum summus paterfamilias, and cum princeps pastorum rationem ponere
voluerit cum servis suis; sanguinem pessundatae and laceratae Ecclesiae quam
suo acquisivit, de suis ipsorum manibus non requirat. Vobis iterum omnibus
Apostolicam benedictionem, cui coelestem accedere optamus, intimo amoris
affectu impertimur.

Dat. Romae 11. Aprilis 1682.
The Translation of the former Brief, directed to his Venerable Brethren the
Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. assembled at Paris, bearing date the Eleventh
of April 1682.
IT was very uneasy and bitter to us, by reason of the Fatherly affection
which We bear to our dearest Son in Christ Lewis the most Christian King, and
to your Churches and Persons, and that whole Kingdom, To perceive by your
Letters, directed to us on the third of February, that a great many of the
Bishops of France (who were anciently a Crown and rejoicing to this most
Eminent See) should now behave themselves so toward it, that We are sorced with
many Tears to make use of these words of the Prophet, My Mothers Children have
fought against me: Though in truth you rather fight against your selves, when
you set your selves in opposition to us, in a Cause, in which the welfare and
freedom of your Churches is so much concerned; and for which some pious and
resolute men of your Order having appealed to us, We did without delay stand up
for defense of the Episcopal Rights and Dignity in that Kingdom, which now for
a great while We have maintained, having in that sought no private ends of our
own; being set on to it merely by that care that We owe to all the Churches,
and the love that We bear to you, which is so deeply rooted in our hearts.

We perceived from the very beginning of your Letter, that there was nothing in
it that could be either welcome to us, or worthy of that name you bear in the
world: For not to insist on what you said of the Rule that was observed in the
calling and managing of Councils, We observed that your Letter began from your
fears, and that is a motive, by which Gods Priests are never animated to
undertake any difficult or weighty cause, that concerns either Religion, or the
Liberty of the Church, with that Courage that becomes them at first, or to
persevere in it with that constancy, which they ought to hold to the last.

And you were much mistaken when you thought you might pour out your fears into
Our breast; for the Love of Christ ought always to dwell in Our breast, which
casts out fear, and keeps it at a great distance: We have already demonstrated
in many and signal instances, that Fatherly Love that is kindled in Our hearts
toward you and the Kingdom of France, which We need not here reckon up. And if
there is any thing in which our affection has deserved well at your hands, We
think it has chiefly appeared in this business of the Regale, upon which if the
matter is well considered, it will appear that the whole Dignity and authority
of your Order does depend. You were therefore in fear where no fear was:
Whereas this only was that of which you ought to have been afraid, lest you
might have been justly accused before God and men, for having been wanting to
your Station and Honor, and the duty of your Pastoral charge. And you ought to
have remembered the examples of Episcopal Constancy and Courage: which in the
like cases, the ancient and most holy Bishops have set before you, for your
instruction; and which have been imitated by many Bishops in every age, from
their days. You ought also to have reflected on your own Predecessors, not only
those who flourished in the times of our forefathers, but in Our own days. You
cite the words of Ivon of Chartres, but you ought also to follow his actions,
when there is occasion for it: You know what he both did and suffered in those
troublesome and dangerous contests, that were between Pope Urban and King
Philip. He thought it became his Function, to endure the Kings displeasure, to
bear the spoiling of his goods, and to suffer both Imprisonment and Banishment.

It became your Function, even when others were forsaking the better cause, to
have joined your endeavors to the Authority of the Apostolic See, and to have
pleaded the cause of your Churches before the King; joining the resolution that
became Pastors, with the humility of Priests; and to have informed his
Conscience of the whole matter, even though you had apprehended the danger of
drawing his Displeasure upon you: That so for the time to come, you might
without blushing, use the words of David, when you address your selves to God
in the daily Psalmody, I did speak of thy Testimonies before Kings, and was not
confounded: But how much more ought you to have done this, when you had so well
known, and so often tried the justice and piety of your excellent Prince, of
whom you your selves write, that he hears the Bishops with a singular
gentleness, and that he is resolved to maintain the Episcopal Authority without
suffering it to be entrenched upon; which We read in your Letter with great joy.

We do not doubt, that in the defense of so just a cause you could either want
Arguments fit to be used; or the King a heart tractable, and inclined to grant
your desires. But now since you seem to have forgot both your own duty, and the
Kings justice, and that you have been silent in a matter of so great
consequence, we do not see upon what probable ground you can found that which
you represent to us, that you have been induced to do what you have done,
because you have been overcome in this Dispute, and have lost your cause. But
how could he lose it that never stood to it? And how could he be overcome that
never struggled? Who of you all did plead this weighty, this just, and this
most Sacred Cause, before the King? Whereas your Predecessors, even in the like
danger, did defend it oftener than once with all freedom, both before the former
Kings of France, and even before this King himself: And having carried their
cause, they were dismissed by their most just King, with rewards for having so
manfully performed the duty of the Pastoral charge. But who of you have engaged
in this contest, that he might raise a Wall for the house of Israel? Who has
had the boldness to expose himself to envy? Who has uttered so much as one
word, that savoured of the freedom of former times? The Kings Officers have
indeed cried aloud as you write, they have cried aloud in an ill cause, for the
Rights of the Crown; whereas you in the best cause, that was both for the
Honor of Christ and the Church, have been silent: Nor is there any more weight
in what you say, when you render us an account, or indeed rather offer us an
excuse, for the things that have been done by you in this Assembly. You
aggravate the danger of a breach between the Priesthood and the Civil Power,
and the ill effects that may follow from thence, both in Church and State: And
infer that therefore you thought it became you to find out a mean for removing
the difference that was increasing, and that no mean appeared more convenient
than those remedies proposed by the Fathers of the Church for tempering the
Canons by a prudent condescension according to the necessity of the times, in
such things as might no way endanger either the truth of Religion, or the Rules
of Morality: and that you thought your Order and the whole Gallicane and indeed
the Universal Church owed so much to a King that had merited so eminently of
the Catholic Religion, and who was daily desiring to merit further of it, and
that therefore you passed from your Rights, and resigned them to the King.

We forbear to mention what you represent to us of the Appeal you made to the
Secular Magistrate, by whom this Cause was judged against you; for We wish the
remembrance of that might be buried in oblivion, and would gladly have you dash
out those words out of your Letters, so that they might not remain upon the
Records of the Gallicane Church to your eternal reproach.

As for what you bring for your own defense, concerning Innocent the Third,
Benedict the Twelfth and Boniface the Eighth, there have not been wanting some
who have by Learned Treatises demonstrated how frivolous and foreign they are
to this matter: and it is so notoriously known, that it is needless to mention
it, with what zeal and constancy those great Popes defended the liberty of the
Church against the Secular Powers: So little reason have you to maintain your
error by those precedents.

We do readily allow of and commend the Resolution of relaxing the Discipline
of the Canons according to the necessity of the times, where that may be done
without any prejudice either to Religion or a good life: and we add with St.
Austin, That things are to be sometimes endured for the good of unity, which
ought to be abhorred, if considered according to equity: Nor are the tares to
be rooted out, if there is danger of plucking up the wheat likewise with them.
But all this is so to be understood that it may be done only in some particular
case, and for a time, and upon an urgent necessity as was done by the Church
when she restored the Arrians and Donatists to their Churches, upon their
abjuring their errors, that so the people that had followed them might be the
more easily governed. But the case is very different from this, when the
Discipline of the Church is weakened, and the foundation of the whole
Ecclesiastical Discipline and Hierarchy is indeed overthrown through the whole
extent of so great a Kingdom without any limitation of time, and with the
manifest danger of establishing a precedent which may spread much further.
These consequences must certainly follow, if We should suffer the things to be
put in execution, which have been lately done by The Most Christian King, even
with your consent, in the affair of the Regale (against the Authority of the
holy Canons, and chiefly against the General Council of Lions, and against Our
mind that has been long ago signified to you in that affair, and contrary to
that Sacred Tie of your Oaths by which when you received the Episcopal
character, you bound your selves to God, to the Roman Church, and to your own
particular Churches) and if we by delaying longer, should suffer this evil to
become more inveterate; and should not, in imitation of the examples of our
Predecessors, and according to that Supreme Authority over the whole Church
which is given by God to Our Meanness, condemn it: and that the rather, that by
the abuse of the Regale the Discipline of the Church is not only overthrown, as
is notoriously evident, but even the purity of the faith is brought in danger:
which you may easily gather from the very words of the Kings Edicts, by which
the Right of conferring Benefices is ascribed to the King, not as flowing from
any Concession of the Church; but as a Right innate and coaeval to the Crown:
Nor could we read that part of your Letter without horror, in which you say,
you have departed from your Rights, and have transferred them on the King; as
if you were the Masters, and not the Guardians of these Churches that are
trusted to your care; and as if the Churches themselves and the Spiritual
Rights belonging to them could be brought under the yoke of the Secular Power,
by the Bishops, who indeed rather ought to become slaves themselves for setting
them at liberty. You your selves did acknowledge and confess this truth, when
upon another occasion you declared, that the Right of the Regale, especially in
that branch of it that belongs to the Collation of Benefices, was a servitude
that could not be brought upon the Church, but by her concession, at least by
her consent. By what right then have you conferred that on the King? and since
the holy Canons forbid the alienating the Rights of the Church, how could it
enter into your minds to alienate these Rights? as if you could derogate from
the authority of the Canons.

Call to mind what that renowned Abbot of Clarevall writ excellently to this
purpose, whom you justly call the Light not only of the Gallican, but of the
Universal Church, when he was putting Pope Eugenius in mind of his duty, He
bids him remember that the Keys of the Church were delivered to him, but not
the Sheep themselves: There were others that kept the Gates of Heaven, and were
the Pastors of the Flock; but whereas every one of these have their several
Flocks assigned them, to him were the whole trusted: one Flock under one
Shepherd: and that Eugenius was not only the Shepherd of the Sheep, but of the
Shepherds themselves: and therefore according to the appointment of the Canons
the other Bishops were called to a portion of the care, but he to the fullness
of the power.

But as it is expedient to give you warning of the obedience and submission
that you owe this holy See, which We, though unworthy, do now by the Divine
appointment govern; so our Pastoral care does stir us up, now at last, to set
about the discharge of our Apostolical Office, which we have hitherto delayed,
perhaps by an excessive long suffering, being willing to give time to
repentance.

Therefore We through the authority of Almighty God committed to us, do by
these present Letters Condemn, Rescind and Annul what has been done in this
your Assembly in the affair of the Regale; together with every thing that has
followed thereupon, or that may happen to be attempted for the future; and We
declare them to be for ever Null and Void: though these things being of
themselves manifestly Null, it was not necessary to interpose any Declaration
for annulling them: Yet We hope that you your selves having considered better
of this matter, will by a speedy retractation consult the good of your own
consciences, and the honor of the Gallicane Clergy: of which Clergy, as
hitherto some have not been wanting, so we hope that for the time to come,
others will not be wanting, who following the example of the good Shepherd,
shall be ready to lay down their lives willingly for their Sheep, and for
maintaining the Inheritance conveyed down to them from their Fathers.

As for our part, We are ready according to the duty of our Function, and by
the assistance of Divine Grace, to offer up the Sacrifice of Righteousness, and
to maintain the Rights and Liberties of the Church of God, and the authority
and Dignity of this holy See: not trusting in Our selves, but depending for all
things on God, who comforts and strengthens Us, and who commanded Peter to come
unto him, walking on the waters: for the fashion of this world passes away,
and the day of the Lord approaches. Let Us therefore, Venerable Brethren and
beloved Children, so behave Our Selves that when the great Master of the
Family, and the Prince of Pastors shall make his accounts with his Servants, he
may not require at their hands the blood of a broken and torn Church, which he
redeemed with his own blood. We do again give you all Our Apostolical Blessing
with much sincere and cordial affection, and pray that the Divine blessing may
be added to it.

Given at Rome, April 11. 1682.
The Protestation made by the Assembly of the Clergy against the Popes
proceedings before the former Brief was read by them.
ECclesia Gallicana suis se regit legibus, propriasque consuetudines inviolate
custodit, quibus Gallicani Pontifices, Majoresque nostri, nulla definitione,
nullaque authoritate derogatum esse voluerunt, and quas ipsi summi Pontifices
agnoscere and laudare dignati sunt. Prope tamen est ut perfringantur leges
justae quas prisca Galliarum religio reverendaque vetustas, inconcussas
fecerunt. Ecce etenim, quod sine acerbissimo animi sensu dici non potest, hisce
annis superioribus, per Provincias Galliarum and Civitates literae Apostolicae
seminatae sunt, quibus antiqua Gallicanae Ecclesiae jura and patria Instituta
aperte violantur. Ex his scilicet intelligimus de regni Ecclesiarumque
nostrarum negotiis contra mores nostros usurpatam esse cognitionem. Inauditis
partibus pronunciata judicia, jurisdictionem Episcoporum conculcatam, denique
contra Canonem Ecclesiasticum and contra consuetudines Illustrissimae
Gallicanae Ecclesiae, Metropolitae gladium excommunicationis intentatum esse.
Dolet Clerus Gallicanus, queriturque ex his and aliis quae exinde facta sunt,
oppressas libertates Ecclesiarum; perturbatam Ecclesiae formam, illatum dedecus
Pontificali ordini, terminosque perruptos quos patres nostri constitueraent: Et
ne officium and causam suam deserere aut praevaricari suae dignitati,
Ecclesiarumque suarum commodis videatur, publica contestatione obloqui, and
inertis silentii a se movere culpam, decrevit: Ut exemplo patrum suorum in
posterum provisum sit, ne quid nocere possit juribus and libertatibus Ecclesiae
Gallicanae; eoque magis inclinat in eam sententiam quod Summus Pontifex
Innocentius XI. morum antiquorum and Canonicae Disciplinae severus assertor non
patietur fieri injuriam decretis suorum praedecessorum, est Canonibus
promulgatis qui rescindebant quicquid subreptum erat contra privata
provinciarum jura. Nolebant siquidem Ecclesiarum privilegia, quae semper
conservanda sunt, confundi. Propterea Clerus idem Gallicanus professus antea
omnem reverentiam, obedientiamque quam semper exhibuit, perpetuoque exhibiturus
est, Cathedrae Petri, in qua potentiorem agnoscit principatum, coram Clarissimo
Domino Joanne Baptista Lauro, Protonotario Apostolico, and Nunciaturae
Apostolicae Galliarum auditore, protestari constituit, sicut de facto
protestatur per praesentes, ne literis Pontificiis datis ad Episcopum
Apamiensem die secundo Octobris 1680. ad Ecclesiae Apamiensis Capitulum eodem
die Octobris, ad Episcopum Tholozanum die primo Januarii 1681. ad Moniales seu
Canonissas Regulares Congregationis beatae Mariae Virginis Monasterii de
Charonne die septimo August. and 15. October. 1680. vel aliis exinde and illarum
virtute actis and secutis quibuscunque; damnum aliquod seu praejudicium juribus
Ecclesiae Gallicanae fieri possit, neve quis in aliis locis and temporibus hoc
in exemplum and in authoritatem trahat, ut antiquos Ecclesiae Canones, Avitas
regni consuetudines, receptosque mores Ecclesiae Gallicanae oppugnare audeat,
aut propter ea quidquam sibi licere existimet; immo vero nemo nesciat hoc nihil
obstare, quo minus Canones, Consuetudines, jura and libertates ejusdem
Ecclesiae pristinam vim and integram authoritatem retineant and custodiant.
Hoc, Clerus Gallicanus sibi suisque privilegiis cautum consultumque voluit, and
omnibus notum esse, ne quis ignorantiae causam praetexet.

Datum in Comitiis Generalibus Cleri Gallicani Lutetiae habitis, May 6. 1682.
The Translation of the former Protestation.
THe Gallicane Church governs her self by her own Laws, and does inviolably
observe her own Customs, from which the Bishops of France and our Ancestors
have thought that no Decision, and no Authority could derogate; and the Popes
themselves have thought fit both to acknowledge and to commend them: But now
those just Laws, which the ancient piety of France, and Venerable Antiquity
have esteemed such as that they were never to be shaken, are almost enervated.
For we have seen (which cannot be mentioned without a most bitter and sensible
affliction to us) that of late years, Letters from the Apostolic See, have
been disseminated through the Provinces and Cities of France, in which the
ancient Rights of the Gallicane Church and the appointments of our Forefathers
are manifestly violated. By these We understand that an inspection into the
affairs of this Kingdom and of our Churches, has been assumed against Our
Customs; That judgments have been given without hearing the parties; That the
Episcopal jurisdiction has been trodden under foot, and that the sentence of
Excommunication has been threatened against a Metropolitan, contrary to the
Ecclesiastical Canons, and the Customs of the most Illustrious Gallicane Church.

The Gallicane Clergy is grieved and complains, that by these things, and by
what has been since done pursuant to them, the Liberties of their Churches have
been oppressed, and the order of the Church has been disturbed; That the
Episcopal Office has been disgraced, and the Landmarks have been broke
through, which Our Fathers had fixed: And therefore that they may avoid the
imputation of having abandoned their Duty and Station, or betrayed their own
Dignity and the interests of their Churches, they have resolved to oppose these
things by a public Protestation, and so to free themselves from the guilt of a
neglectful silence; that so according to the examples set them by their
Forefathers, they may take care, that these things may not for the future
prejudice the Rights and Liberties of the Gallicane Church. To this they are
the more inclined because the present Pope Innocent the Eleventh (so eminent
for Excellent Virtues and a strict observance of the Discipline established by
the Canons) will not suffer any thing to be done that shall be injurious to the
Decrees of his Predecessors, and the Canons already promulgated; by which every
thing is rescinded that has been surreptitiously obtained, contrary to the
proper Rights of Provinces; nor would they suffer the privileges of Churches
to be confounded, which ought to be constantly preserved.

Therefore the said Gallicane Clergy having first made profession of all
Reverence and obedience, which she ever has expressed and ever will express to
the Chair of St. Peter, in which she acknowledges a more Powerful Or Dignity.
Principality, has resolved to Protest before the most renowned John Baptist
Lauri, Protonotary Apostolic, and Auditor of the Apostolic Nunciature in
France, as in fact she does by these presents protest that the Popes Letters to
the Bishop of Pamiers, bearing date the 2 of October 1680. and to the Chapter
of Pamiers of the same date, and to the Bishop of Toulouse, bearing date the 1
of January 1681. and the Letters to the Nuns, or Regular Canonesses of the
Blessed Virgin of the Nunnery of Charron, bearing date the 7 of August and the
15. of October 1680. or any other that have followed since that time, or any
thing that has been acted or done by virtue of those, shall be no ways hurtful
or prejudicial to the Rights of the Gallicane Church, and shall turn to no
Precedent or Warrant for doing the like in any other time or place; and that
none may thereupon presume to oppose the ancient Canons of the Church, or the
established Customs of this Kingdom, or the received practices of the Gallicane
Church, or think that he may lawfully do any thing, pursuant thereunto; and let
none be ignorant, that these things notwithstanding the Canons, Customs,
Rights, and Liberties of the said Church, shall still remain and preserve their
ancient Force and Authority entire: Hereby the Gallicane Clergy have thought
fit to secure and preserve themselves and their privileges, and this this they
will have known to all persons, that so none may pretend ignorance.

Past in the Assembly General of the Clergy of France, the Sixth of May 1682.
A Letter from Paris of the 20th of June New-stile, containing a further
account of the Contests between the Pope and the French King.
BY my last, which I sent by one that went from hence a fortnight ago, I gave
you a large account of our Affairs here, which I hope has come to your hands
before this time; but the great change of the present prospect We have of that
matter, from that which appeared when I wrote last, needs not surprise you: For
the secrets of State are not known here, so quick as with you, and they lie in
so few hands, and those are so true to the Kings service, that the greatest
persons here can penetrate no further into the Councils than as they are
pleased to lay them open. You will not therefore wonder, if I now tell you that
instead of the adjusting of that Affair, of which all people here seemed so
assured that it was universally spoken of as a thing done, yet it appears now
to be more desperate than ever. We now know the true cause of the sudden
Adjourning the Assembly of the Clergy, and that it flowed not from any
disposition to compose this difference, but that it was done to prevent a
stroke, that might have put it past reconciling: The true reason was this, The
Old resolute Pope sent a Courier to France to the Internuntio with a Bull of
Excommunication, which he required him to carry into the Assembly, and there to
fulminate in his Name against all the Assembly. This came to the knowledge of
Cardinal d' Estree, who, to prevent the ill effects of so hardy a Step, sent
presently a Courier with a strict charge to use all possible have to get before
the Popes Courier, that so the King might have timely notice of what the other
was bringing; and this is now known to be the true reason of that sudden
Adjournment. So by this you see this matter is further from being composed than
ever. As for the Affair of the Sorbonne, of which I gave you an account in my
last, it has had another effect than was expected. On Monday last the Faculty
met, where there was great opposition made to the Registring the Kings Edict,
insomuch that they could not bring the Affair to any Issue at that time; but
Adjourned the debate till next day, yet it was visible enough that those for
the Negative were the stronger party; so at night the Archbishop of Paris, the
Marquess of Segnelay, the first President, and the Attorney General met, and it
seems resolved on that which was put in execution next day; for when the
Sorbonne was again assembled and engaged in the debate, about eleven a Clock an
Officer was sent from the Court of Parliament, requiring them to suspend their
debates, and to send them 12 of their Number, who were named in the Order,
together with their Clerk and their Register; the persons were not left to
their choice, lest they might have sent some that might have spoken too freely
to the Parliament. When the persons thus called for, appeared, the first
President made a most terrible harangue to them; he accused the Sorbonne of
ingratitude and presumption, that they who were but a Faculty, that had no
Authority, and had their meeting only by the Kings Connivence, should have
arrogated an Authority to themselves, to have examined the matter of an Edict
that was made by the Assembly of the whole Clergy of France, and was confirmed
by the King, and verified by the Parliament. He therefore commanded their Clerk
to insert it in their Register, and charged them not to Assemble any more, but
as they should be required and authorized to it by orders from the Court: And
told them that by the first of July, the Kings pleasure should be signified to
them. Thus you see how firm the Sorbonne is in this matter, for the proceedings
of the Court of Parliament are an open confession that the Majority of the
Sorbonne would have refused to receive the Edict. I add no more but that I am
entirely yours.

Paris, June 20. S. N. 1682.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAGE 8. l. 33. after Constance, r. and Basil: p. 18. l. 22. r. Nostis quae is
fecerit: p. 25. l. 8. for from r. with.

There are lately Published
THe Abridgement of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England.

The History of the Rights of Princes in the disposing of Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Church Lands.

Both written by Gilbert Burnet D. D. And Printed for Richard Chiswell.


