THE ILL Effects of Animosities AMONG PROTESTANTS IN ENGLAND DETECTED: AND The
necessity of Love unto, and Confidence in one another, in order to withstand
the Designs of their Common Enemies, laid open and enforced.

Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation; and every
city or house divided against it self, shall not stand. Matthew. xii. 25.

Dum pugnant singuli, universi vincuntur. Tacit.

Printed in the Year 1688.

IT is long since the Court of England, under the Authority of the late King
and his Brother, was embarked in a design of subverting the Protestant
Religion, and of introducing and establishing Popery. For the two Royal
Brothers being in the time of their Exile seduced by the Caresles and
importunities of their Mother, allured by the promises and favors of Popish
Princes, and being wheedled by the Crafts and Arts of Priests and Jesuits, who
are cunning to deceive, and knew how to prevail upon persons, that were but
weakly established in the Doctrine, and wholly strangers to the practice and
power of the Religion they were tempted from; they not only abjured the
Reformed Religion, and became reconciled to the Church of Rome, but by their
example, and the influence which they had over those that depended upon them
both for present subsistence and future hopes, they drew many that accompanied
them in their Banishment, to renounce the Doctrine, Worship, and Communion of
the Church of England, though in the War between Charles I. and the Parliament,
they had pretended to fight for them in equal conjunction with the Prerogatives
of the Crown. So that upon the Restoration in the year 1660. they were not only
molded and prepared themselves for promoting the desires of the Pope and his
Emissaries, but they were furnished with a stock of Gentlemen out of whom they
might have a supply of Instruments both in Parliament and elsewhere, to
cooperate with, and under them, in the methods that should be judged most
proper and subservient to the extirpation of Protestancy, and the bringing the
Nation again into a servitude to the Triple Crown. And besides the Obligations,
that the Principles of the Religion to which they had revolted, laid them under
for eradicating the Established Doctrine and Worship, they had bound themselves
unto it, by all the promises and Oaths, which persons are capable of having
proscribed unto and exacted of them.

Nor can any Now disbelieve his late Majesty's having lived and died a Papist,
who has either heard what he both said and did, when under the prospect of
approaching death, and past hope of Acting a Part any longer on the present
Stage, or who have seen and read the two Papers left in his Closet, which have
been since published to the World, and attested for Authentic by the present
King. And had we been so just to our selves, as to have examined the whole
course of his Reign, both in his Alliances abroad, and his most important
Counsels and Actions at home, or had we hearkened to the reports of those who
knew him at Collen and in Flanders, we had been long ago convinced of what
Religion he was. Nor were his many repeated protestations of his Zeal for
Protestancy, but in order to delude the Nation, till insensibly as to us, and
with safety to himself, he had overturned the Religion which he pretended to
own, and had introduced that which he inveighed against. And while with the
highest asseverations he disclaimed the being what he really was, and with most
sacred and tremendous Oaths professed the being what he was not, his Religion
might in the mean time have been traced through all the signal occurrences of
his Government, and have been discerned written in Capital Letters, through all
the material affairs wherein he was engaged from the day he ascended the
Throne, till the hour he left the World. His entering into two Wars against the
Dutch, without any provocation on their part, or ground on his, save their
being a Protestant State; his being not only conscious unto, but enterposing
his commands, as well as encouragements, for the burning of London; his
concurrence in all the parts of the Popish Plot, except that which the Jesuits,
with a few others, were involved in against himself; his stifling that
Conspiracy, and delivering the Roman Catholics from the dangers into which it
had cast them; his being the Author of so many forged Plots, which he caused to
be charged upon Protestants; his constant Confederacies with France, to the
dissobliging his people, the betraying of Europe, the neglect of the Reformed
in that Kingdom, and the encouraging the design carried on against them for
their extirpation; his entailing the Duke of York upon the Nation, contrary to
the desires and endeavors of three several Parliaments, and that not out of
love to his Person, but affection to Popery, which he knew that Gentleman would
introduce and establish: all these, besides many other things which might be
named, were sufficient evidences of the late Kings Religion, and of the design
he was engaged in for the Subversion of ours. So that it would fill a sober
person with amazement, to think that after all this there should be so many
sincere Protestants and true Englishmen, who not only believed the late King to
be of the Reformed Religion, but with an insatiableness thirsted after the
blood of those that durst otherwise represent him. And had it not been for his
receiving Absolution and Extreme Unction from a Popish Priest at his death, and
for what he left in Writing in the two Papers found in his Strong Box, he would
have still passed for a Prince who had lived and died a Cordial and Zealous
Protestant, and whosoever had muttered any thing to the contrary, would have
been branded for a Villian and an execrable person. But with what a scent and
odor must it recommend his memory to them, to consider his having not only
lived and died in the Communion of the Church of Rome, in contradiction to all
his public Speeches, solemn Declarations and highest Asserverations to his
people in Parliament, but his participating from time to time of the Sacrament,
as Administered in the Church of England, while in the interim he had Abjured
our Religion, stood reconciled to the Church of Rome, and had obliged himself
by most sacred Vows and was endeavoring by all the Frauds and Arts imaginable
to subvert the Established Doctrine and Worship, and set up Heresy and
Idolatry in their room. And it must needs give them an abhorrent Idea and
Character of Popery, and a loathsome representation of those trusted with the
Conduct and Guidance of the Consciences of Men in the Roman Communion, that
they should not only Dispense with, and indulge such Crimes and Villainies, but
proclaim them sanctified and meritorious from the end which they are calculated
for, and levelled at.

And for his dear Brother, and renowned Successor, who now possesses the
Throne, I suppose his most partial Admirers, who took him for a Prince, not
only merciful in his Temper, and imbued with all gracious inclinations to our
Laws, and the Rights of the Subject, but for one Orthodox in his Religion, and
who would prove a Zealous Defender of the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of
the Church as Established by Law; are by this time both undeceived, and filled
with resentments for his having abused their credulity, deceived their
exspectations, and reproached all their gloryings and boastings of him. For as
it would be now the greatest affront they could put upon the King, to question
his being of the Roman Communion, or to detract from his Zeal for the
introduction of Popery, notwithstanding his own antecedent protestations, as
well as the many Statutes in force for the preservation of the Reformed
Religion; so I must take the liberty to tell them, that his Apostasy is not of
so late a Date, as the World is made commonly to believe. For though it was
many years concealed, and the contrary pretended and dissembled; yet it is most
certain that he Abjured the Protestant Religion, soon after the Exilement of
the Royal Family, and was reconciled to the Romish Church at St. Germains in
France. Nor were several of the then suffering Bishops and Clergy ignorant of
this, though they had neither the Integrity nor Courage to give the Nation and
Church warning of it. And within these five years there was in the custody of a
very worthy and honest Gentleman, a Letter written to the late Bishop of D^^by
a Dr. of Divinity, then attending upon the Royal Brothers, wherein the Apostasy
of the then* Duke of York to the Sea of Rome is particularly related, and an
account given how much the Duchess of Tremoville (who without being her self
observed) had heard the Queen Mother glorying of it, bewailed it as a dishonor
to the Royal Family, and as that which might prove of pernicious consequence to
the Protestant Interest. But tho the old Queen privately rejoiced and triumphed
in it, yet she knew too well what disadvantage it might be both to her Son, and
to the Papal Cause in Great Britain, to have it at that season communicated and
divulged. Thereupon it remained a Secret for many years, and by virtue of a
Dispensation, he sometimes joined in all Ordinances with those of the
Protestant Communion. But for allthe art, hypocrisy and sacrilege, by which it
was endeavored to be concealed, it might have been easily discerned, as
manifesting it self in the whole course of his Actions. And at last his own
zeal, the importunity of the Priests, and the cunning of the late King,
prevailing over Reasons of State, he withdrew from all Acts of Fellowship with
the Church of England. But neither that, nor his refusing the Test enjoined by
Law for distinguishing Papists from Protestants, tho thereupon he was forced
both to resign his Office of Lord High Admiral, and to stand excluded from the
House of Lords; nor his declining the Oath which the Laws of Scotland for the
securing a Protestant Governor, enjoin to be taken by the High Commissioner;
nor yet so many Parliaments having endeavored to get him excluded from
Succession to the Crown, upon the account of having revolted to the Sea of
Rome, and thereby become dangerous to the established Religion, could make
impression upon a wilfully deluded and obstinate sort of Protestants, but in
defiance of all means of Conviction, they would persuade themselves, that he
was still a zealot for our Religion, and a grand Patriot of the Church of
England. Nor could any thing undeceive them, till upon his Brothers death he
had openly declared himself a Roman Catholic, and afterward in the fumes and
raptures of his victory over the late Duke of Monmouth, had discovered and
proclaimed his intentions of overthrowing both our Religion and our Laws. Yea,
so closely had some sealed up their Eyes against all Beams of Light, and
hardened themselves against all evidences from Reason and Fact, that had it
pleased the Almighty God to have prospered the Duke of Monmouth's Arms in the
Summer 85. the present King would have gone off the State, with the reputation
among them of a Prince tender of the Laws of the Kingdom, and who
notwithstanding his own being a Papist, would have preserved the Reformed
Religion, and have maintained the Church of England in all her Grandeur and
Rights. And tho his whole life had been but one continued Conspiracy against
our Civil Liberties and Privileges, he had left the Throne with the Character
and under the Esteem of a Gentleman, that in the whole course of his Government
would have regulated himself by the Rules of the Constitution, and the Statutes
of the Realm.

Now among all the Methods fallen upon by the Royal Brothers, for the
undermining and subverting our Religion and Laws, there is none that they have
pursued with more ardor, and wherein they have been more succesful to the
compassing of their designs, than in their dividing Protestants, and alienating
their Affections, and imbittering their Minds from and against one another. And
had not this lain under their prospect, and the means of effecting it appeared
easy, they might have been Papists themselves, while in the mean time they had
been dispensed with to protest and swear their being of the Reformed Religion,
and they might have envied our Liberties, and bewailed their Restriction from
Arbitrary and Despotical Power; but they never durst have entertained a thought
of subverting the established Religion, or of altering the Civil Government,
nor would they ever have had the boldness to have attempted the introducing and
erecting Popery and Tyranny in their room. And whosoever should have put them
upon reducing the Nation to the Church of Rome, or upon rendering the Monarchy
unlimited and iudependent on the Law, would have been thought to have laid a
snare for exposing the Papists to greater severities, than they were obnoxious
unto before, and to have projected the robbing the Crown of the Prerogatives
which belong unto it by the Rules of the Constitution, and to which it was so
lately restored. And the despair of succeeding, would have rendered the Royal
Brothers deaf to all importunities from Romish Emissaries, and Court Minions.
Neither the promises and Oaths which they had made and taken beyond Sea to
introduce Popery, nor their ambition to advance themselves beyond the restraint
of Laws, and the Control of Parliaments, would have prevailed upon them to
have encountered the hazards and difficulties, which in case of the Union of
English Protestants, must have attended and ensued upon attempts and endeavors
of the one kind and of the other. Or should their beloved Popery, and their own
be biggottedness in the Romish Superstition, have so far transported them
beyond the bounds of wisdom and discretion, as to have appeared possessed with
an intention of Subverting the Protestant Religion, and of enslaving the Nation
to the Superstition and Idolatry of Rome, they would have been made soon to
understand. That the Laws which make it Treason to own the jurisdiction of the
Pope, or to seduce the meanest subject to the Church of Rome, were not enacted
in vain, and that those as well as many more made for the security of the
Protestant Religion, and to prevent the growth and introduction of Popery, were
not to be dallied and played withal. Or should they have been so far infatuated
and abandoned of all understanding, as out of a foolish and haughty affectation
of being Absolute, to have attempted the alteration of the Civil Government,
they would have been immediately and unanimously told, that the people have the
same Right to their Liberties, that the King has to the Prerogatives of the
Crown. And if they would not have been contented with what belongs unto the
Prince by the Common and Statute Laws of the Realm, but had invaded the
Privileges reserved unto the Subject: they would have been made to know, that
they might not only be withstood in what they strove to Usurp contrary to Magna
Charta, Petition of Right, and other Laws of the Kingdom, but that thereby they
forfeited, and might be disseized of what either appertained unto the Crown by
fundamental Agreements, or has been since settled upon the Monarch by Statute
Laws. Nor could any thing have emboldned his late Majesty and the present King,
to enterprises of the one kind or the other, but the prospect of begetting a
misunderstanding, jealousy, and rancour among Protestants, and thereby both of
making them instrumental to the ruin of one another, and contributary to the
loss of English Liberty and the Reformed Religion, which they equally value and
esteem, and to the setting up Popery and Tyranny, which the one detesteth and
abhors no less than the other.

Though all English Protestants have ever been at an accord in all the
Essentials and Vitals of Religion, yet from the very beginning of the
Reformation, there have been differences among them concerning Ecclesiastical
Government and Discipline, and about Forms, Rites, and Ceremonies of Worship.
And had they consulted either their Duty to God, or the common interest of
Religion, they might have found ways either for removing the occasions of them,
or they ought to have lived together as Brethren, notwithstanding the
differences which were among them in those things. But how much wiser are the
Children of this World, than those of the Kingdom of God and of Jesus Christ.
For though the differences amon the Papists do far exceed ours, both in their
number and in the importancy of those things wherein they disagree, yet they do
mutually tolerate and bear with one another. The matters wherein they differ,
are neither made the Terms of their Church Communion, nor the grounds of mutual
Excommunications and Persecutions.

But alas! one party among us has been always endeavoring to cut or stretch
others to their own size, and have made those things which themselves style
indifferent, both the Qualifications for admission to the Pastoral Office, and
the conditions of Fellowship in the Ordinances of the Gospel. Nor is it to be
expressed, what advantages were hereby administered all along to the Common
Enemy, and what Sufferings Peaceable and Orthodox Christians were exposed unto
from their peevish and angry Brethren. And tho these things, with the heats
begotten among all, and the Calamities undergone by one side, were not the
cause of that funestous War betwixt Charles the First, and the Parliament, yet
they were an occasion of diverting thousands from the side which the
persecuting Church Men espoused, and of engaging them in the behalf of the two
Houses, in the Quarrel which they begun and carried on against that Prince, for
Defense of the Civil Liberties, Privileges, and Rights of the People. But some
of the Mitred Clergy were so far from being made wise by their own and the
Nations Sufferings, as upon their Restoration to hearken to moderate Counsels,
and to decline their former Rigors and Severities, that they became the Tools
and Instruments of the Court, not only far reviving, but for heightning and
enflaming all the Differences, which had formerly been among English
Protestants. For the Royal Brothers finding nothing more adapted and
subservient than this, to their design of altering the Government, and
subverting Religion, they animated those waspish and impolitick Ecclesiastics,
not only to pursue the Restoration of all those things which had given rise and
occasion to former Dissentions and Persecutions, but to lay new snares for
alienating many persons of unspotted lives and tender consciences from the
Church, and of rendering them obnoxious to suffer in their Names, Persons, and
Estates. And what a satisfaction was it to the late King and his Brother, to
find the old Episcopal Clergy prepared through principles of revenge, as well
as from love of domination, ambition, and covetousness to fall in with the
design not only of increasing Divisions among Protestants, both by making the
conditions of entering upon the Pastoral Function narrower and for screwing
conformity with the Church in her Forms and Ceremonies of Worship, into Tests
for admission to Magistracy and Civil Trusts, but of obtaining severer Laws
against Dissenters, whereby the penalties to which they foresaw that people
would become liable, were rendered greater than they had been before, and their
Sufferings made more merciless, inhuman and barbarous.

For tho his late Majesty had by a Declaration dated at Breda, promised
Indulgence to all Protestants that would live peaceably under the Civil
Government; yet it was never in his thoughts to perform it, and the previous
obligations which he was under to the Church of Rome, had a virtue to supercede
and cancel his Engagements to English Heretics. And all he intended by that
Declaration was only to wheedle and Iull those into a tameness of admitting his
Return into his Dominions, whom a jealousy of being afterward persecuted for
their Consciences, might have awakened to withstand and dispute it. And to give
him his due, he never judged himself longer bound to the observation of
Promises and Oaths made to his People, than until without hazard to his Person
and Government he could violate and break them. Accordingly he was no sooner
seated in the Throne of his Ancestors, and those whom he had been apprehensive
of resistance and disturbance from, put out of capacity and condition of
attempting any thing against him, but he thought himself discharged from every
thing, that the Royal Word and Faith of a Prince had been pledged and laid to
stake for in that Declaration, and from that day forward acted in direct
opposition to all the parts and branches of it. For having soon after his
return obtained a Parliament molded and adapted both to his Arbitrary and
Papish Ends, he immediately set all his Instruments at work for the procuring
such Laws to be enacted, as might divide and weaken Protestants, and thereby
make us not only the more easy a Prey to the Papists, but afford them an
advantage through our Scuffles, of undermining our Religion with the less
notice and observation. How such persons came to be chosen and to constitute
the majority of the House of Commons, who by their actings have made themselves
infamous and execrable to all ages, were a matter too large to penetrate at
present into the reasons of: but that which my Theme conducts me to observe,
is, that as they sacrificed the Treasure of the Nation to the profuseness and
prodigality of the Prince, and our Rights and Liberties to his Ambition and
arbitrary Will, so they both reintroduced and established those things which
have been a means of dividing us, and by many severe and repeated Laws, they
subjected a great number of industrious English Men and true Protestants, to
Excommunications, Imprisonments, rigorous and multiplied Fines, and all this
for matters only relating to their Consciences, and for their Obedience to God
in the Ordinances of his Worship and House. And notwithstanding the late Kings
often pretended compassions to the Fanatics, it will be hard to discern them,
unless in effects which proceed from very different and opposite principles.
The distance which hekept them from his Person and favor; the influencing these
members of both Houses that depended upon him, to be the Authors and Promoters
of Severities against them; the enjoining so often the Judges and Justices of
Peace to execute the Laws upon them in their utmost Rigor; the instigating the
Bishops and Ecclesiastical Courts, if at any time they relented in their
prosecutions, to pursue them with fresh Citations and Censures; the arraigning
them not only upon the Statutes made intentionally against Dissenters, but upon
those that were originally and solely enacted against the Papists; these and
other procedures of that nature are the only proofs and evidences which we can
find, of the late Kings Bowels, Pity, and Tenderness to the Fanatics. And
whereas the weak Churchmen were imposed upon to believe, that all the Severity
against the Nonconformists, was the Fruit of his Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and for the Security of the Worship and Discipline established by
Law; they might have easily discovered, if passion, prejudice, wealth and
honor, had not blinded them, that all this was calculated for ends perfectly
destructive to the Church, and inconsistent with the safety and happiness of
all Protestants. For as his seeking oftener than once to have wriggled himself
into a power of superceding and dispensing with those Laws, and suspending
their Execution, plainly shows that he never intended the support and
preservation of the Church by them; so his non-execution of the Laws against
Papists, his conniving at their increase; his persuading those nearest unto him
to reconcile themselves to the Sea of Rome, as he did among others the late
Duke of Monmouth; his countenancing the Roman Catholics in their open and
intolerable Insolences, and his advancing them to the most gainful and
important Places and Trusts, sufficiently declare that he never had any love to
Protestants, or care of the Reformed Religion; but that all his designs were of
a contrary tendency, and his fairest pretenses for the protection and grandeur
of the Church of England adapted to other ends. Thus the Royal Brothers having
obtained such Laws to be enacted whereby one party of Protestants was armed
with means of oppressing and persecuting all others, neither the necessity of
their affairs at any time since, nor the application and interposure of several
Parliaments for removing the grounds of our Differences and Animosities by an
indulgence to be past into a Law, could prevail either upon his late Majesty or
the present King to forego the advantage they had gotten of keeping us in
mutual enmity and thereby of ministering to their projection of supplanting our
religion, and of reestablishing the Faith, and Worship of the Church of Rome.
Hereupon the last King not only refused to consent to such Bills as diverse
late Parliaments had prepared for indulging Dissenters, and of bringing them
into an union of Counsels, and conjunction of interest, with those of the
Church of England, for resisting the conspiracies of the Papists against our
legal Government and established Religion; but he rejected an address for
suspending the execution of the penal Laws against Fanatics, which was offered
and presented unto him by that very Parliament which had framed and enacted
those cruel and villainous Laws.

And as the Royal Brothers have made it their constant business to Cherish a
division and rancour among Protestants, and to provoke one party to persecute
and ruin an other, so nothing could more naturally fall in with the design of
Arbitrariness, or be more subservient to the betraying the Nation to Papal
Idolatry and Jurisdiction. For severe penal Laws against a considerable Body of
the people, do either expose them against whom they are enacted, to be
destroyed by the Prince with whom the executive power of the Law is trusted and
deposited, or they prove a temptation to such as are obnoxious, of resigning
themselves in such a manner to the will and pleasure of the Monarch, for the
obtaining his connivency at their violation of the Laws, as is unsafe and
dangerous for the common liberty, and good of the Kingdom. For in case the
Supreme Magistrate pursue an interest distinct from and destructive to that of
his people, they who the Law has made liable to be oppressed, are brought
under inducements of becoming so many Partisans for abetting him in his
designs, in hopes of being thereupon protected from the penal Statutes, the
execution whereof is committed to him. And as it is not agreeable to the wisdom
and prudence which ought to be among men, nor to the mercy and compassion which
should be among Christians, for one party to surrender an other into the hands
and power of the Sovereign to be impoverished and ruined by him at his
pleasure, especially when those whom they give up to be thus treated and
entertained, are at agreement with them in all the Essentials of Religion,
equally zealous as themselves for the Liberties of their Country, and who for
sobriety in their lives, industry in their callings, and usefulness in the
Commonwealth, are inferior to none of their Fellow Subjects: so it is obvious
to any who give themselves leave to think, that the King would long ere this
have been stated in the absoluteness that is aspired after, and both Church and
State reduced to ly at the discretion of the Monarch, provided the
Nonconformists, for procuring his favor in non-execution of the Laws, had
suffered themselves to be prevailed upon, and drawn over to stand by and assist
him in his Popish and Despotical Designs.

But those people, tho hated and maligned by their Brethren, rather than be
found aiding the King in his usurpations over the Kingdom, have chosen to
undergo the utmost calamities they could be made subject unto, either through
the execution of those Laws which had been made against them, or through our
Princes and their Ministers wrecking their malice upon them in arbitrary and
illegal methods. But what the Royal Brothers could not work the afflicted and
persecuted side unto, they found the art to engage the other side in, tho not
only excepted from all obnoxiousness to those Laws, but strenthened and
supported by them. For as soon as the Court begun to despair of prevailing
upon the Fanatics, to become their Tools and Instruments of enslaving the
Nation, and of exalting the Monarchy to despotical absoluteness, they applied
to Some of the Church of England, whom by gratifying with a vigorous execution
of the Laws upon Dissenters, they brought to abett, applaud, and justify them,
in all those counsels and ways which have reduced us into that miserable
condition wherein we now are. The Clergy being advanced to grandeur and
opulency, things which many of them are fonder of, and loather to forego, than
Religion and the Rights of the Nation, the Court made it their business to
possess them with a belief, that unless the Fanatics were suppressed and
ruined, they could not enjoy with security their dignities and wealth.
Whereupon not only the lesser Levites, but the superior Clergy having their
lesson and cue given them from Whitehall and St James, fell upon pursuing the
Nonconformists with Ecclesiastical punishments, and upon exciting and animating
the Civil Officers against them. And under pretense of preserving and defending
the Church, they gave themselves over to an implicit serving of the Court, and
became not only Advocates but Instruments for the robbing of Corporations of
their Charters, for imposing Sheriffs upon the City of London who had not been
legally elected, and of fining and punishing men Arbitrarily for no crime, save
the having asserted their own and the Nations Rights in modest and lawful ways.
Posterity will hardly believe that so many of the prelatical Clergy, and so
great a number of members of the Church of England, should from an enmity unto,
and pretended jealousy of the Panaticks, have become Tools under the late King
for justifying the Dissolution of so many Parliaments, the invasion made upon
their privileges, the ridiculing and stifling of the Popish plot, the shamming
of forged Conspiracies upon Protestants, the condemning several to death for
high Treason who could be rendered guilty by the Transgression of no known Law,
and finally for advancing a Gentleman to the Throne, who had been engaged in a
conjuration against Religion and the legal Government, and whom three several
Parliaments would have therefore excluded from the Right of Succession. And
being seduced into an espousal of the Interests of the Court against Religion,
Parliaments, and the Nation, it is doleful to consider what Doctrines both from
pulpit and press, were thereupon belched forth and divulged. Such as Monarchy's
being a Government by divine Right; that it is in the Princes power to Rule as
he pleases; that it is a grace and condescension in the King to give an
account of what he does; that for Parliaments to direct or regulate the
Succession borders upon Treason, and is an offense against the Law of Nature;
and that the only thing left to subjects in case the King will Tyrannise over
their Consciences, Persons and Estates, is tamely to suffer, and as they
absurdly express it, to exercise passive obedience. So that by corrupting the
minds and consciences of men with those pestilent and slavish Notions, they
betrayed the Nation both to the mischiefs which have already overtaken us, and
to what further we are yet threatened with. Nor did these Doctrines tend merely
to the fettering and enfeebling the Spirits of men, but they were a temptation
to the Royal Brothers to put in execution what they had been so long contriving
and traveling with, and were a kind of reprimanding them for being ignorant of
their own Right and power, and for not exerting it with that vigor and
expedition which they might. I do acknowledge that there were many both of the
sacred order, and of the laick Communion of the Church of England, who were far
from being infected with those brutish sentiments and opinions, and who were as
zealous as any for having the Monarchy kept within its ancient limits;
Parliaments maintained in their wonted Reverence and Authority; the subjects
preserved in the enjoyment of their immemorial privileges; and who were far
from sacrificing our Religion and Laws to Popery and Arbitrariness, and from
lulling us into a tameness and lethargy, in case the Court should attempt the
abolishing the established Doctrine and Worship, and the subverting and changing
the Civil Government. But alas! besides their being immediately branded with
the name of conformable Fanatics, and registered in the Calendar with those
that stood precluded the Kings favor and merited his animadversion; their
modesty was soon drowned and silenced in the loud noise of their clamorous
Brethren, and their retiredness from conversation, while the others, frequented
all places of society and public concourse, deprived the Nation of the benefit
of their example, and the happiness of their instructions. Not have I mentioned
the extravagancies of any of the Ecclesiastics and members of the Church of
England, with a design either of reproaching and upbraiding them, or of
provoking and exasperating the Fanatics to resentments, but only to show how
fatal our divisions have been unto us, what excesses they have occasioned our
being hurried and transported into, and what mischievous improvement our
enemies have made of them to the supplanting and almost subverting of all that
is valuable unto us as we are Englishmen, Christians, and Protestants.

And as our animosities through our Divisions gave the Court an advantage of
suborning that party, which they pretended to befriend and uphold, into a
ministration to all their Counsels and projections against our Religion and
Laws; so by reason of the unnatural heats wherewith Protestants have been
enflamed and enraged against Protestants, many weak, ungrounded, and unstable
Souls, have been tempted to question the truth of our Religion, and to
apostatise to the Church of Rome, and thereupon have become united in
inclination, power, and endeavors with the Court and our old Enemies the
Papists, for the exstirpation of protestancy and the alteration of the
Government. As it has been matter of offense and scandal to all Men, so it
has been ground of stumbling and falling unto many, to see those who are
professedly of the same Religion, to be mutually embittered against one
another, and so far transported with malice and rage, as to seek and pursue
each others destruction. For such a carriage and behavior are so contrary to
the spirit an principles of Christianity, and to the genius and temper of true
Religion, that it is no mervaile, if persons ignorant of the holy Scriptures,
and strangers to the converting and comforting virtue of the Doctrine of the
Gospel asserted in our Confessions, and insisted upon by our Divines; should
suspect the Orthodoxy of that Religion which is accompanied with so bitter
fruits, even in the Dispensers of the word as well as in others, and betake
themselves to the Communion of that Church, where how many and important soever
their differences be one with an other, yet they do not break forth into those
flames of excommunicating and persecuting each other; that ours have done. How
have some among us through having their spirits fretted and exasperated by the
craft and cunning of our Enemies, not only loaded and stigmatized their
Brethren and Fellow Protestants with crimes and Names, which were they true
and deserved, would justly render us a loathing and an abomination to mankind,
but have libelled and branded those whom God had honored to be instruments of
the Reformation, with appellations and characters fit to beget a detestation of
their Doctrine, as well as their Memory. The worst that the Papists have forged
and vomited out against Luther Zwinglius, Calvin etc. has been raked up and
repeated to the disparagment of the Reformation, and to the scandalising the
minds of weak men against it. And as the Jesuits and Priests have improved
those slanders and calumnies to the seduction of diverse from the Church of
England, and to a working them over to a Reconciliation with the Church of
Rome; so the Court has there by had an increase of their Faction and party
against our Religion and Liberties, and have been enabled to muster Troops of
Janisaries for their Despotical and unlimited claim.

Nor have our Divisions with the heats, animosities, revilings, and
persecutions that have ensued thereupon, proved only an occasion of the
seduction of several from our Religion, and of their Apostasy to Popery, but
they have been a main spring and force of the debauchery, irreligion and
Atheism, which have overspread the Nation, and have brought so many both to an
indifferency and unconcernedness for the Gospel and all that is virtuous and
noble, and have disposed them to fall in with those that could countenance and
protect them in their impiety and profaneness, and feed their luxury and pride
with honor and gain. What a woeful scheme of Religion have we afforded the
world, and how shamefully have we painted forth and represented the holy
Doctrine of the blessed Jesus, while we have not only lived in a direct
opposition to all the commands of meekness, love and mutual forbearance, which
our Religion lays us under the Authority off, but have neglected to practice
good manners, to observe the rules of Civility, to treat one another with
common humanity and to do as we would be done unto. While we have been more
offended at what seemed to supplant our Dominations and Grandures than at what
dishonored God and reproached the Gospel; while we weighd not so much whether
they whom we took into our sacred Communion as well as into our personal
friendship, were conformable in their lives to the Scripture, as whether they
complied with the Canons of the Church; while we reprobated all that were not
of our way, tho never so virtuous and devout, and sainted all that were, tho
never so wicked and profane; while we branded such for Fanatics, whom we
could justly charge with nothing, save the not admiting that into Religion
which came not from the divine Author of it, and hugged those for good and
orthodox believers, that would sooner consult the Statute Book for their
practice in the Worship of God, than the Bible; while we haled those to prison
and spoiled them of their Estates, to whom nothing could be objected except
their being too precise and conscientious in avoiding that through fear and
apprehension of sinning, which others had a liberty and latitude to do as
judging it lawful, and in the mean time esteemed those worthy of the chiefest
Trusts in the Church and commonwealth, whose folly and villainies made them
unfit for civil Societies; while they who lived most agreeably to the Laws of
God, and the example of Christ, were persecuted as Enemies to Religion and the
pests of the Kingdom, and in the interim too many of the very Clergy were not
only countenancers of the most profligate persons as their best friends, but
joined and assisted in scandalous debaucheries, under pretense of sustaining
the honor of their Tribe, and doing service to the Church. I say while these
were unhappy but too obvious fruits of our Divisions and of the bitter heats
that accompanied them, how was the reverence for the sacred Order lessened and
diminished, the veneration for Religion weakened and lost, the shame and dread
of appearing profane and wicked removed and banished, and such who took the
measures of Chistianity from the practices of those that were styled
Christians, rather than from the immaculate and holy Scriptures, tempted to
think all Religion a juggle, and priesthood but an artifice and craft to
compass honor and wealth. And tho nothing but a shortness of understanding, and
an immoderate love to their lusts, could occasion the drawing such a conclusion
from foregoing premises, yet I must needs grant that there was too just ground
administr'd to them of saying that many did not believe that themselves, the
Faith whereof they recommended to others. But that which I would more
particularly observe, is, that it is from among those who by the foregoing
occasion have been tempted to debauchery and irreligion, that the Romish
Emissaries have made the harvest of proselytes and converts to the Church of
Rome. For as they who fear not God, will be easily brought to imitate Caesar,
and such who are of no Religion, will in subserviency to secular ends assume
the mask and profession of any; so Popery is extremely adapted to the wishes
and desires of wicked and profane men, in that it provides for their living as
enormously as they please here, and flatters them with hopes and assurances of
blessedness hereafter. They who can be ascertained of going to Heaven upon the
confessing their sins to a Priest, and their receiving Absolution, the
Encharist and Extreme Unction, need not look after Repentance toward God,
Conversion to holiness, nor a life, of Faith, Love, Mortification, and
Obedience, which the Protestant Religion, upon the Authority of the Gospel
obliges them unto, in order to the obtaining of eternal happiness. And as the
late Apostates to Popery in England, are chiefly such who were Notorious for
looseness, profaneness and immorality, and were the scandal of our Religion while
they professed it, and while in our Church were not properly of it, so it from
among men of this stamp and character that his late Majesty and the present
King have found persons assisting and subservient to their Despotical and
Arbitrary designs. For whosoever takes a survey of the Court Faction, and
considers who have been the Advocates for encroachments upon our Liberties,
and abetters of usurpation over our Right, they will find them to have been
principally the profligate and debauched among the Nobility and Gentry, the
Mercenary, ignorant and scandalous among the Clergy, the offscouring and such
as are an ignominy to humane Nature among the yeomanry and pesants. And it was
in order to this villainous End, that the Royal Brothers have endeavored so
industriously to debauch the Nation, and have made sensuality and profaneness
the qualifications for preferment, and the badges of Loyalty. And if among
those that appear for the preservation of the Liberties of their Country, there
be any that deserve to be styled Enemies to Religion and virtue, as I dare
affirm that they owe their immoralities to Court Education, Converse and
Example, so I hope that though they have not hitherto been all of them so happy
as to have left their vices where they learned them, yet that they will not
continue to disparage the good cause which they have espoused with an
unsuitable life, nor give their Adversaries reason to say, that while they
pretend to seek the Reformation of the State, they are both the deriders of
sobriety and virtue, without which no Constitution can long subsist, and guilty
of such horrid Oaths, Cursing, imprecations, blasphemies and uncleanesses,
which naturally as well as morally and meritously dispose Nations to subversion
and Extirpation.

Finally being through the bitter effects which have ensued upon our Divisions,
made apprehensive and jealous one of another, it has from there come to pass,
that while the care of the Conformists has been to watch against the grouth of
the Dissenters, and the solicitude of the Nonconformists has been how to
prevert the rage of the Bigoted Church men, the Papists in the mean time
without being headed or observed have both incredibly multiplied, and made
considerable advances in their designs of ruining us. For whenever the Court
was to take a signal step toward Popery and Arbitrary power, there was a
clamor raised of some menacing boldness of the Fanatics. And if the Nation
grew at any time alarmed, by reason of the favor shown to Roman Catholics, and
of some visible progress made toward the Kings becoming Despotical, all was
immediately hushed with a shout and cry of the Government and Churches being in
eminent hazard from the Dissenters. Yea whenever the Papists and their Royal
Patrens stood detected of having been conspiring against our Religion and Civil
Liberties, all was diverted and stiffled by putting the Kingdom upon a false
scent, and by hounding out their Beagles upon the Nonconformists. So that the
eyes and minds of Protestants being employed in reference to what was to be
apprehended and feared from one anoother, the workings of our Popish Enemies
either escaped our observation, or were heeded by most only with a superficial
and unaffective glance. And while our Church men stood prepossessed by the
Court with a dread and jealousy of the Fanatics, all that was said and
written of a Conspiracy carried on by the Papists against our Laws and
Religion, was entertained and represented by the prejudiced Clergy, as an
Artifice only of the Dissenters for compassing an Indulgence from the
Parliament, which in case such a plot had obtained the belief that a matter of
so great danger and consequence required, would have been easily granted, being
the only rational expedient for the preservation of the established Religion
and the legal Government. Nor did our Enemies question but that having enflamed
our Divisions and raised our Animosities to so great a height, rather than the
one party would lay aside their severities, and the other let fall their
resentments, we would even be contented to lie at their mercy, and submit our
selves to the pleasure and discretion of the Court and Papists. And there have
not wanted some peevish, foolish, and ill men of both parties, who rather than
sacrifice their spleen and passion, and abandon their particular Quarrels for
the interest and safety of the whole, would be inclined to expose the
Protestant Religion and English Liberties, to the hazards wherewith they are
apparently threatened, and to suffer all extremities, merely to have the
satisfaction of seeing those whom they respectively hate, involved with them
under the same miseries. But as this is such a degree of madness and
infatuation, as can proceed from nothing but brutish rage, and argues no less
than a Divine Nemesis; so I hope they are but few that stand infected with
these passionate sentiments and inclinations, and remain thus hardened in their
mutual prejudices. And to those I have nothing to say, nor the least advice to
administer, but shall leave them to their own follies, as persons to whose
conviction no Discourse tho never so rational can be adapted, and whom only
stripes can work upon.

It Is to such therefore as are capable of harkening to Reason, and who are
ready to embrace any Counsel that shall be found adjusted to the Common
Interest, that I am to address what remains to be represented and said in the
following leaves. For all parties of Protestants having seen, how far our
Enemies have improved our divisions and rancours to the compassing their wicked
and ambitious designs, and the robbing us of all, that good and generous men
account valuable, they are at last convinced of the necessity we are reduced
unto, of altering the measures of our acting toward one another, and both of
laying aside our persecutions, and of exchanging our wranglings among our
selves, into a joint contending for the Faith of the Gospel, and the Rights of
the Nation. For what the Gentleman now in the Throne intends and aims at, is
not any longer matter of mere suspicion and jealousy, but of demonstrable
evidence and unquestionable certainty. His mask and vizor of zeal for the
preservation of the Church of England, and of tender regard for the Laws of the
Land are laid by and put off, and his resolutions of Governing arbitiarily, and
of introducing Popery, are become obvious to all men whom Reason and sense have
not forseken and left. The Papists whom it was thought much a while ago to see
connived at in the exercise of their Worship in private Houses, are allowed now
to practice their Idolatry openly in our chief Towns, and in the Metropolitan
City of the neighboring Kingdom to usurp the public Churches and Cathedarals.
Those Catholic Gentlemen whom heretofore it was matter of surprise, to see
countenanced with the private favor of the Prince, are now advanced to the
supreme Commands in the Army, and the principal Trust in Civil affairs. The
Recusant Lords whose enlargement out of the Tower, we could not but look upon
as an unpresidented violation both of Laws of the Land and of the Rights and
jurisdiction of Parliament, being committed thither by the Authority of the
House of Lords upon a charge and Impeachment of high Treason by the Commons of
England in Parliament assembled, are now honored to be members of the privy
Council, and exalted to be chief Ministers of State. They whom the Statutes of
the Realm make subject to the severest penalties for Apostasy to Rome, are not
only protected from the edge of the Law, but maintained in Parochial
Incumbencies and Headships of Colleges. Our Orthodox Clergy are not only
inhibited to preach against Popery, but are illegally reprimanded, silenced,
and suspended, for discharching that duty, which their Consciences, Offices,
Oaths, and the Laws of the Kingdom oblige them unto. And such whom neither the
Ecclesiastical nor Westminster Courts, can arraign and proceed against, we have
a new Court of Inquisition erected for the adjudging and punishing of them. So
that it is not the Fanatics who are the only persons to be stuck at and
ruined, but the Conformists are to be treated after the same manner, and to
share in the common lot whereunto all honest and sincere Protestants are
destined and designed. Even they who were the darlings of Whitehall and St.
James's, and recompensed with Honors and Titles for betraying the Rights and
Privileges of Corporations, persecuting Dissenters, and heading Addresses,
wherein Parliaments were reproached, the Course of Justice against Popish
Offenders was slandered, the illegal and arbitrary procedures of the Court
applauded and justified, and all that were zealous for our Laws and Liberties
stigmatized with the names of Villains and Traitors, are now themselves, for
but discouraging Popish Assemblies and attempting to put the Laws in execution
against Priests who had publicly celebrated Mass, not only checked and rebuked,
but punished with seizure and imprisonment. Nor are our Religion and Civil
Liberties merely supplanted and undermined by illegal Tricks glossed over with
the varnish of judicial Forms, but they are assaulted and battered in the face
of the Sun, without so much as a palliation to give their procedures a
plausible figure. And the King being brought to a despair of managing the
Parliament to his barefaced purposes of Popery and Arbitrariness, and of
prevailing with them to establish Tyranny and Idolatry by Law, notwithstanding
their having been as industriously packt and chosen to answer such a design* as
art, bribery and Authority could reach, and notwithstanding their having been
obsequious in their first Session to an excess that has proved unsafe to
themselves and the Nation, he seems resolvd not to allow them to meet any more,
but to set up a la mode de France, and to have his personal Commands, seconded
with the assent of his durante beueplacito judges to be acknowledged and obeyed
for Laws. So that they who were formerly seduced into a good opinion of him,
are not only undeceived, but provoked to warm resentments for having had their
credulity and easmess of belief so grossly abused. And as the converting so vast
a number of well meaning but woefully deluded people, who had suffered
themselves to be hoodwinked and fatally hurried to betray their Religion,
Country, and Posterity, to the Ambition and Popish Bigottry of the Court, was a
design becoming the Compassion, Mercy and Wisdom of God; so the methods and
means whereby they are come to be enlightened and proselyted, are a signal
vindication of the Sapience and Righteousness of God in all these tremendous
steps of his providence, by which our Enemies have been emboldned to detect and
discover themselves. For tho their continuing so long to have a good opinion of
the present King, and their abetting him so far in the undermining our Religion
and invading our Liberties, may seem to have proceeded not so much from their
ignorance is from their obstinacy and malice; yet God who penetrates into the
hearts of men, may have discovered some degrees of sincerity in their
pretensions and carriages tho accompanied with a great deal of folly and
unmanliness. Nor are the Lords ways like to outs, to give persons over us
unteachable and irreclaimable, upon their withstanding every measure of light,
and the resisting even those means which were sufficient and proper for their
conviction; but he will try them by new and extraordinary methods, and see
whether feeling and doleful experience may not convert those, upon whom
arguments and moral evidence could make no impressions. And their being among
those formerly missed and deluded Protestants, many who retained a love for
their Country, a care for their posterity, and a zeal for the Gospel and
Reformed Religion, even when their actions imported the contrary, and seemed to
betray them; the singling and weeding out such from among the Court Faction and
party, is a compensation both for the defeatment of all endeavors for the
prevention of the evils that have overtaken us, and for the distresses and
calamities under which we do at present lie and groan. And if there be joy in
Heaven upon the conversion of a Sinner, with that thankfulness to God, and joy
in themselves, should they who have so many years wrestled against the
encreachments of Popery and Arbitrariness, and who have deeply suffered in
their Names, Persons and Estates upon that account, welcome and embrace their
once erring and misled but now enlightened, reclaimed and converted Brethren.
And instead of remembering or upbraiding them with the opposition and rancour*
which they expressed against our persons, principles, and ways, let there be no
language heard from us, but what may declare the joy we have in our selves for
their conversion, and the entire trust and confidence which we put in them. For
tho as to many things which might have been hindered, had they not been lulled
into deep delusions, they may seem born out of due time, yet there is season
enough left both for giving obstruction to what we are farther threatened with,
and for recovering out of the jaws of the Enemy what he thinks he has
irretrievably swallowed and devoured.

The first duty incumbent therefore upon Dissenters toward those of the Church
of England, is to believe that notwithstanding there having been many of them
so long Advocates and Partisans for the Court through ignorance of what was
aimed at and intended, they are nevertheless as really concerned as any others,
and as truly zealous for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and for
maintaining the legal Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and when occasion
shall offer will approve themselves accordingly. It Is a ridiculous as well as a
mischievous fancy, for one party to confine all Religion only to themselves,
or to circumscribe all the ancient English ardor for the common Rights of the
Nation to such as are of their particular Fellowship and persuasion, there
being sincere Christians, and true Englishmen among those of all judgments, and
societies of Protestants, and among none more than those of the Communion of
the Church of England. It were the height of wickedness as well as the most
prodigious folly, to imagine that the Conformists have abandoned all fidelity
to God. and cast off all care of themselves and their Country, upon a mistaken
judgment of being Loyal and obedient to the King. They know as well as any,
that the giving to Caesar the things that are Cesars, lays them under no
obligation of surrendering unto him the things that are Gods, nor of sacrificing
unto the will of the Sovereign the privileges reserved unto the people by the
Fundamental Rules of the Constitution, ^^d by the Statutes of the Realm. And
they understand as well as others, that the Laws of the Land are the only
measures of the Princes Authority and of the Subjects Fealty, and where they
give him no Right to command, they lay them under no tie to obey. And tho here
and there a Dissenter have written against Popery with good success, yet they
have been mostly conformable Divines who have triumphed over it in elaborate
Discourses, and who have beaten the Romish Scriblers off the Stage. Nor can it
be thought that they who have so accurately related and vindicated the History,
and asserted an desended the Doctrine of the Reformation, should either tamely
relinquish, or be wanting in all due and legal ways to uphold and maintain it.
And tho one or two Fanatics have with sufficient strength and applause
brandished their pens against Arbitrariness and in detecting the Designs of the
Royal Brothers, yet they who have generally and with greatest honor appeared
for our Laws and Legal Government against the Invasions and Usurpations of the
Court, have been Theologues and Gentlemen of the Church of England. Nor in case
of further attempts for altering the Constitution and enslaving the Nation,
will they show themselves unworthy the having descended from Ancestors, whose
Motto in the high places of the Field was Nolumus leges Angliae mutari. They
who have so often justified the Arms of the united Netherlands against their
Rightful Princes the Kings of Spain, and so unanswerably vindicated their
casting off Obedience to those Monarchs, when they had invaded their
Privileges, and attempted to establish the Inquisition over them, cannot be
ignorant what their own Right and Duty is in behalf of the Protestant Religion
and English Libertles; for the security whereof, we have not only so many Laws,
but the Coronation Oaths and Stipulations of our Kings. And those Gentlemen of
the Church of England, who appeared so vigorously in three Parliaments for
excluding the Duke of York, from the Succession to the Crown, by reason of a
jealousy of what, through being a Papist, he would attempt against our
Religion and Privileges, in case he were suffered to ascend the Throne; cannot
be now to seek what becomes them toward him, tho actually Regnant, having seen
and felt what before they only apprehended and feared. For if the Law that
entalleth the Succession upon the next of Kin, and obliges the Subjects to
admit and receive him, not only may but ought to be dispensed with, in case the
Heir, through having imbibed Principles which threaten the safety, and are
inconsistent with the happiness of the People, has made himself incapable to
inherit; we know by a short Ratiocination how far we stand bound to a Prince on
the Throne, who by transgressing against the Laws of the Constitution, has
abdicated himself from the Government, and stands virtually deposed. For
whosoever shall offer to Rule arbitrarily, does immediately cease to be King de
jure, seeing by the Fundamental, Common and Stature Laws of the Realm, we know
none for Supreme Magistrate and Governor, but a limited Prince, and one who
stands circumscribed and bounded in his Power and Prerogative. And should the
Dissenters entertain a belief that the Conformists are less concerned and
zealous than themselves for the Protestant Religion and Laws of the Kingdom,
they would not only sin and offend against the Rules of Charity, but against
the measures of Justice, and daily Evidences from matters of Fact. For neither
they not we owe our Conversion to God, and our practical holiness to the
Opinions about Discipline, Forms of Worship, and Ceremonies, wherein we differ,
but to the Doctrines of Faith and Christian Obedience, wherein we agree. It Is
not their being for a Liturgy, a Surprise, or a Bishop, that has heretofore
Influenced them to subserve the Court in Designs tending to Absoluteness, but
they were seduced unto it upon Motives whereof they are now ashamed, and the
ridiculousness and folly of which they have at last discovered. Nor is the
multitude of profligate and scandalous persons with which the Church of England
is crowded, any just impeachment of the purity of her Doctrine in the Vitals
and Essentials of Religion, or of the Virtue and Piety of many of her Members.
For as it is her being the only Society established by Law that attracts those
Vermin to her Bosom, so it is her being restrained by Law from debarring them,
that keeps them there to her reproach, and to the grief of many of many of her
Ecclesiasticls. Neither is it the fault of the Church of England, that the
Agents and Factors for Popery and Arbitrary Power, have chosen to pass under
the name of her Sons; but it proceeds partly from their Malice, as hoping by
that means to disgrace her with all true Englishmen, as well as with
Dissenters, and partly from their Craft, in order thereby the better to conceal
their Design, and to shroud themselves from the Censure and Punishment, which
had it not been for that Mask* they would have been exposed unto, and have
undergone. And I dare affirm, that besides the Obligations from Religion, which
the Conformists are equa^ly under with Dissenters, for hindering the
introduction of Popery, there are several inducements from Interest, which sway
them to prevent its establishment, wherein the Fanatics are but little
concerned. For tho Popery would be alike afflictive to the Consciences of
Protestants of all Persuasions, yet they are Gentlemen and Ministers of the
Church of England, whose Livings, Revenues, and Estates are threatened in e^se
it come to be established. Nor would the most Loyal and Obsequious Levites,
provided they resolve to continue Protestants, be willing that their Parsonages
and Incumbencies, to which they have no less Right by Law, than the King has
to the Excise and Customs, should be taken from them and bestowed upon Romish
Priests, by an Act of Dispotical Power, and of unlimited Prerogative. And for
the Gentlemen, as I think sew of them would hold themselves obliged to part
with their Purses to Highway Padders, t^ough such should have a Patent from
the King to rob whomsoever they encountered upon the Read; so there will not be
many inclined to suffer their Manors and Abbey-Lands, to which they have so
good a Title, to be ravished from them either by Monks or Janissaries, tho
authorized thereunto by the Prince's Commission. Even they who had formerly
suffered themselves to be seduced to prove in a manner Betrayers of the Rights
and Religion of their Country, will now (being undeceived! not only in
conjunction with others withstand the Court in its prosecution of Popish and
Arbitrary Designs, but through a generous exasperation for having been deluded
and abused, will judge themselves obliged in vindication of their actings
before, to appear for the Protestant Religion and the Laws of England, with a
Zeal equal to that wherewith they contributed to the undermining and
supplanting of them. For they are not only become more sensible than they were
of the Mischiefs of Absolute Government so as for the future to prize and
assert the Privileges reserved unto the People by the Rules of the
Constitution, and chalkt out for them in the Laws of the Land; but they have
such a fresh view of Popery both in its Heresies, Blasphemies, Superstitions
and Idolatries, and in the Treachery, Sanguinariness, Violence and Cruelty,
which the Papal Principles mould, influence, and oblige men unto, that they not
only entertain the greatest Abhorrency and Detestation imaginable for it, but
seem resolved not to cherish in their Bosom, a thing so abominable to God,
execrable to good Men, and destructive to Humane as well as to Christian
Societies.

Nor are the Dissenters merely to believe that the Conformists are equally
zealous as themselves for the Reformed Religion and English Rights, but they
are to consider them as thy only great and united Body of Protestants in the
Kingdom, with whom all other Parties compared bear no considerable proportion.
For tho the Nonconformists considered abstractedly make a vast number of honest
and useful People, yet being laid in the Scale with those of the Episcopal
Communion, they are but few and lie in a little room. And whosoever will take
the pains to balance the one against the other, even where the Fanatics make
the greatest Figure, and may justly boast of their multitude, they will soon be
convinced that the number of the other does far transcend and exceed them. And
it be so in Cities and Corporations, where the greatest Bulk of Dissenters are,
it is much more so in Country Parishes, where the latter bear not the
proportion of one to a hundred. Nor does the Church of England more exceed the
other Parties in her number, than she does in the Quality of her Members. For
whereas they who make up and constitute the separate Societies, are chiefly
persons of the middle Rank and Condition, the Church of England does in a
manner vouch, and claim all the Persons of Honor, of the Learned Professions,
and such as have valuable Estates, for her Communicants. And though the other
sort are as necessary in the Commonwealth, and contribute as much to its
Strength, Prosperity, and Happiness, yet they make not that Figure in the
Government, nor stand in that capacity of having influence upon public
Affairs: for not only the Gentlemen of both the Gowns, who by reason of their
Calling and Learning are best able to defend our Religion and vindicate our
Laws and Privileges with their Tongues and Pens, but they whose Estates,
Reputation, and Interest, recommendeth them to be elected Members of the great
Senate of the Nation, as well as they who by reason of their Honors and
Baronages are hereditary Legislators, are generally, if not all, of the
Communion of the Church of England: so that they who conform to the established
Worship and Discipline, are to be looked upon and acknowledged as the great
Bulwark of the Protestant Religion in England, and the Hedge and Fence of our
Civil Liberties and Rights. And though it be true that this great breach, made
upon our Religion and Laws, is fallen out under their hand, while the poor
Dissenters had neither accession to, nor were in a condition to prevent it; yet
seeing their own Consciences do sufficiently load and charge them for it with
Shame and Ignominy, it were neither candid, nor at this juncture seasonable, to
upbraid it to them, or improve it to their dishonor and reproach. For as they
have tamely looked on and connived till our Religion and Liberties are so far
undermined and supplanted, so it is they alone who are in a condition of
stemming the Inundation of Idolatry and Tyranny with which we are threatened,
and of repairing our Breaches, and reducing the Prerogative to its old Channel,
and making Popery sneak and retreat into its Holes and Corners again. And
should the Church of England he overthrown and devoured, what an easy Prey
would the Fanatics be to the Romish Cormorants. And could the King, under the
Conduct of the Jesuits, and with the assistance of his Myrmidons, dissolve the
established Worship and Discipline, they of the Separation would be in no
capacity to support the Reformed Religion, nor able to escape the common Ruin
and Persecution. It Is therefore the interest as well as the duty of the
Dissenters, to help maintain and defend those Walls, within the skreen and
shelter whereof, their own Hutts and Cottages are built and stand; and the
rather, seeing the Conformists are at last, tho to their own Religion's and the
Nations expense, become so far enlightened, as to see a necessry of growing more
amicable toward them, and if not to enlarge the Terms of their Communion, yet
to grant an Indulgence to all Protestants that differ from them. And as we
ought to admire the Wisdom of God in those Providence, by which Protestants
are taught to lay aside their Animosities, and to let fall their Persecutions
of one another; so it would be a contradiction both to the Principles and
repeated Protestations of Dissenters, to aim at more than such a Liberty as is
consistent with a National Ecclesiastic Establishment. Yet it were to proclaim
themselves both Villains and Hypocrites, not to allow their Fellow Protestants
the exercise of their Judgments, with what farther Profits and Emoluments the
Law will grant them, provided themselves may be discharged from all
obnoxiousness to Penalties and Censures upon the account of their Consciences,
and be admitted a free and public practice of their own respective Modes of
Discipline, and be suffered to Worship God in those ways which they think he
has required of and enjoined them. And were England immediately to be rendered
so happy as to have a Protestant Prince ascend the Throne, and to enjoy a
Parliament duesy chosen, and acting with freedom, no one Party of the Reformed
Religion among us, must ever expect to be established and supported to the
denial of Liberty to others, much less to be by Law empowered to ruin and
destroy them. Should it please Almighty God, through denying Male Issue to the
King, to bring the Princess of Orange to the Crown, tho the Church of England
may in that case justly expect the being preserved and upheld as the National
Establishment, yet all other Protestants may very rationally promise themselves
an Indulgence, and that not only from the mildness and compassionate sweetness
of her Temper, but from the influence which the Prince her Husband will have
upon her, who as he is descended from Ancestors, whose glory it was to be the
Redeemers of their Country from Papal Persecution and Spanish Tyranny, so his
Education, Generosity, Wisdom, and many Heroic V^rtues, dispose him to embrace
all Protestants with an equal tenderness, and to erect his Interest upon the
being the Head and Patron of all that profess the Reformed Religion. Had the
late Duke of Monmouth been victorious against the Forces of the present King,
and enabled to have wrested the Scepter our of his hand; tho all Protestants
might thereupon have expected, and would certainly have enjoyed an equal
Freedom, without the lyableness of any Party to Penal Laws for matters of
Religion, yet he would have been careful, and I have reason to believe that it
was his purpose, to have had the Church of England preserved and maintained,
and that she should have suffered no alteration but what would have been to her
strength and glory, through an enlargement of the Terms of her Communion, and
what would have been to the praise of her Moderation and Charity, through her
being persuaded to bear with such as differed from her in little things, and
could not prevail with themselves to partake with her in all Ordinances. Upon
the whole, it is both the prudence and safety of Dissenters, as they would
escape Extirpation themselves, and have Religion conveyed down to Posterity, to
unite their strength and endeavors to those of the Church of England, for the
upholding her against the Assaults of Popish Enemies, who pursue her
Subversion. As matters are now circumstanced and stated in England, there is
not an Affront or Injury offered or done unto her by the Court, which do not at
the same time reach and wound the Fanatics. It Is not her being for Episcopacy
Ceremonies, and imposed set Forms of Worship, the things about which she and
the Nonconformists differ, that she is maligned and struck at by the Man in
power and his Popish Juncto; but it is for being Protestant, Reformed, and
Orthodox, Crimes under the guilt whereof Dissenters are equally concerned and
involved. Being therefore in opposition to the common Cause of Religion, that
the late Court of Inquisition is erected over her Ecclesiastics, all
Protestants ought jointly to resent the Wrongs which she sustains, and not only
to sympathise with those Dignified and lower Clergy, which are called to
suffer, but to espouse their Quarrel with the same warmth that we would our own.

And as we are to look upon those of the Episcopal Communion, to be the great
Bulwark of the Protestant Religion and Reformed Interest in England; so it is
farther incumbent upon Dissenters toward them, and a duty which they owe to
God, the Nation, and themselves, not to be accessory to any thing, through
which the legal Establishment of the Church of England, may by any Act of
pretended Regal Prerogative be weakened and supplanted. I am not counselling the
Fanatics to renounce their Principles, nor to participate with the Prelatical
Church in all Ordinances on the Terms to which they have straightened and narrowed
their Communion, For while they remain unsatisfied of the lawfulness of those
Terms and Conditions, they cannot do it without offending God and contracting
guilt upon their Souls; nor will they of the Church of England in Charity,
Justice, and Honesty, expect it from them: for whatsoever any man believes to
be in, it is so to him, and will by God be impured as such, till he be
otherwise englightned and convinced; nor are the Fanatics to be falie and
cruel to themselves, in order to be kind and friendly to them. But that which I
would advice them unto, is that after the maintaining the highest measure of
love to the consormable Congregations as Churches of Christ, and the esteeming
their Members as Christian Protestant Brethren, notwithstanding the several
things wherein they judge them to err and to be mistaken, that they would not
by any Act and Transaction of theirs, betray them into the Despotical Power of
this Popish King, nor directly nor indirectly acknowledge his being vested with
an Authority paramount unto, and superceding the Laws, by which the Church of
England is established in its present form, order, and mode of Jurisdiction,
Discipline, and external Worship. Whatsoever ease arriveth to the Dissenters,
through the King's suspending the execution of the Penal Laws, without their
Address and Application, they may receive it with joy and humility in
themselves, and with thankfulness to God; nor is there hereby any prejudice
offered on their part to the Authority of the Law, or offense or injury given
or done to the Conformable Clergy. Nor is without grief and regret that the
Churchmen are forced to behold the harassing, spoiling, and imprisonment of
the Nonconformists, while in the mean time the Papists are suffered to assemble
to the celebration of their Idolatrous Worship without censure and control.
And were it in their power to remedy it, and give relief to their Protestant
Brethren, they would with delight and readiness embrace the occasion and
opportunity of doing it. But alas! instead of having an advantage put into
their hand, of contributing to the relief of the Fanatics, which I dare say
many of them ardently wish and desire, they are compelled, contrary to their
Inclination as well as their Interest, to become instrumental in persecuting
and oppressing them, Nor does the King covet a better and a more legal
Advantage against the Conformists, than that they would refuse to pursue
Dissenters, and decline molesting them with Ecclesiastical Censures and Civil
Punishments: so that their Condition is to be pitied and bewailed, in that they
are hindered from Acting against the Papists, though both enjoined by Law, and
influenced thereunto by motives of Self-preservation, as well as by ties of
Conscience; while in the mean time they are forced to prosecute their Fellow
Protestants, or else to be suspended and deposed, and put out of their Offices
and Employs. And though I do believe, that they would at last have more Peace
in themselves, and be better accepted with God in the great day of their
account, should they refuse to disturb and prosecute their Protestant Brethren,
and scorn to be any longer Court Tools for weakening and undermining the
Reformed Cause and Interest; yet I shall leave them to act in this as they
shall be persuaded in themselves, and as they shall judge most agreeable to
Principles of Wisdom and Conscience. In the interim, the Fanatics have all the
reason in the World to believe, that the Proceedings of the Clergy and Members
of the Church of England at this season and juncture against them, are not the
Results of their Election and Choice, but the effects of moral compulsion and
necessity. Not will any Dissenter that is prudent and discreet, blame them for
a matter which they cannot help, but bear his misfortune and lot with patience
in himself, and with compassion and charity toward them, and have his
Indignation raised only against the Court, which forces them to be
instrumental in their oppression and trouble. And instead of being thereby
provoked to petition the King to suspend the execution of the Penal Laws, or
that he would by an Act of his Prerogative dispense with their Meetings for
religious Worship in defiance of them; they ought to consider that is what the
Court aims at, by commanding their conformable Brethren to molest and pursue
them. For a power paramount and transcendent to the Law is what the King is
usurping, and which he would fain work his Subjects one way or another to
acknowledge. The Fanatics cannot be so far void of sense, as to think that the
person now in the Throne bears them any good will, but his drift is to screw
himself into a Supremacy and Absoluteness over the Law, and to get such an
Authority confessed to be vested in him, as when he pleases he may subvert the
established Religion, and set up Popery: for by the same power that he can
dispense with the Penal Statutes against the Nonconformists, he may also
dispense with those against the Roman Catholics: and whosoever owneth that he
has a Right to do the first, does in effect own that he has a Right to do the
last; for if he be allowed a Power for the superceding some Laws made in
reference to matters of Religion, he may challenge the like Power for the
superceding others of the same kind: and then by the same Authority that he can
suspend the Laws against Popery, he may also suspend those for Protestancy: and
by the same Power that he can in defiance of Law indulge the Papists the
exercise of their Religion in Houses, he may establish them in the public
celebration of their Idolatry in Churches and Cathedrals. Yea whereas the Laws
that relate to Religion are enacted by no less Authority than those that are
made for the preservation of our Civil Rights, should the King be admitted to
have an Arbitrary Power over the one, it is very like that by the Logic of
Whitehall he will challenge the same absoluteness over the other. Nor do I
doubt but that the eleven Judges who have gratified him with a Despoticalness
over the former, will, when required, grant him the same over the latter. I
know the Dissenters are under no small Temptations, both by reason of being
hindered from enjoying the Ordinances of the Gospel, and because of many
grievous Calamities which they daily suffer for their Nonconformity, of making
Applications to the King for some relief, by his suspending the execution of
the Laws; but they must give me leave to add, that they ought not, for the
obtaining of a little ease, to betray the Kingdom, and sacrifice the legal
Constitution of the Government to the Lust and Pleasure of a Popish Prince,
whom nothing less will serve than being Absolute and Despotical. And were he
once in the quiet Possession of an Authority to dispense with the Penal Laws,
the Fanatics would not long enjoy the benefit of it. Nor can they deny him a
Power of reviving the execution of the Law, which is part of the Trust
deposited with him as supreme Magistrate, who have granted him a Power of
suspending the Laws, which the Rules of the Government preclude him from. And
as he may, whenever he pleases, cause the Laws to which they are obnoxious,
to be executed upon them, so by virtue of having an Authority acknowledged in
him of superceding the Laws, he may deprive them of the Liberty of meeting
together to the number of Five, a Grace which the Parliament thought fit to
allow them, under all the other Severities to which they were subjected. Nor
needs there any further evidence that the Prince's challenging such a Power is
an Usurpation, and that the Subjects making any Application by which it seems
allowed to him, is a betraying of the ancient Legal Government of the Kingdom;
than to consider that the most obsequious and servile Parliament to the Court
that ever England knew, not only denied this Prerogative to the late King, but
made him renounce it by revoking his Declaration of Indulgence, which he had
emitted Anno 1672. And as it will be to the perpetual Honor of the Dissenters
to have chosen rather to suffer the Severities which the Laws make them liable
unto than by any Act and Transaction of theirs, to undermine and weaken either
the Church or the State; so it will be a means both of endearing them to future
Parliaments, and of bringing them and the Conformists into an union of Counsels
and endeavors against Popery and Tyranny, which is at this season a thing so
indispensably necessary for their common preservation: especially when, though
a new and more threatening Alliance and Confederacy with France than that in 72,
the King has not only engaged to act by and observe the same measures toward
Protestants in England, which that Monarch has vouchsafed the World a Pattern
and Copy of in his carriage toward those of the Reformed Religion in France;
but has promised to disturb the Peace and Repose of his Neighbors, and to
commence a War in conjunction with that Prince against Foreign Protestants. For
as the Kings giving Liberty and Protection to the Algerines to frequent his
Havens, and sell the Prizes which they take from the Dutch, is both a most
infamous Action for a Prince pretending to be a Christian, and a direct
violation of his Alliance with the States General; so nothing can be more
evident, than that he thereby seeks to render them the weaker for him to
assault, and that he is resolved (if some unforeseen and extraordinary
Providence does not interpose and prevent) to declare War against them the next
Summer, in order whereunto great Remises of Money are already ordered him from
the French Court. So that the Indulgence which he pretends to be inclinable to
afford the Dissenters, is not an effect of kindness and good Will, but an
Artifice whereby to oblige their Assistance in destroying those abroad of the
same Religion with themselves. Which if he can compass, it is easy to foresee
what Fate both the Fanatics and they of the Communion of the Church of England
are to expect. Who as they will not then know whither to retreat for shelter,
so they will be destitute of Comfort in themselves, and deprived of Pity from
others, not only for having through their Divisions made themselves a Prey to
the Papists at home, but for having been accessory to the ruin of a Reformed
State abroad, and which was the Asilum and Sanctuary of all those that were
elsewhere oppressed and persecuted for Religion.

FINIS.

