THE Life and Death OF Sir MATTHEW HALE, Knight. SOMETIME LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF His
Majesty's Court OF KINGS BENCH. Written by GILBERT BURNETT, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for William Shrowsbery, at the Bible in Duke-Lane, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
NO part of History is more instructive and delighting, than the Lives of great
and worthy Men: The shortness of them invites many Readers, and there are such
little and yet remarkable passages in them, too inconsiderable to be put in a
general History of the Age in which they lived; that all people are very
desirous to know them. This makes Plutarch's Lives be more generally Read than
any of all the Books which the ancient Greeks or Romans Writ.

But the lives of Hero's and Princes, are commonly filled with the account of
the great things done by them, which do rather belong to a general, than a
particular History; and do rather amuse the Reader 's fancy with a splendid
show of greatness, than offer him what is really so useful to himself; And
indeed the Lives of Princes are either Writ with so much flattery, by those who
intended to merit by it at their own hands, or others concerned in them: Or
with so much spite, by those who being ill used by them, have revenged
themselves on their Memory, that there is not much to be built on them: And
though the ill nature of many makes what is Satyrically writ to be generally
more read and believed, than when the flattery is visible and course, yet
certainly Resentment may make the Writer corrupt the truth of History, as much
as Interest: And since all Men have their blind sides, and commit Errors, he
that will industriously lay these together, leaving out, or but slightly
touching what should be set against them, to balance them, may make a very
good Man appear in very bad Colors: So upon the whole matter, there is not
that reason to expect either much truth, or great instruction, from what is
written concerning Hero's or Princes; for few have been able to imitate the
patterns Suetonius set the World in writing the Lives of the Roman Emperors,
with the same freedom that they had led them: But the Lives of private Men,
though they seldom entertain the Reader with such a variety of passages as the
other do; Yet certainly they offer him things that are more imitable, and do
present Wisdom and Virtue to him, not only in a fair Idea, which is often
looked on as a piece of the Invention or Fancy of the Writer, but in such plain
and familiar instances, as do both direct him better, and persuade him more;
And there are not such temptations to biass those who writ them, so that we may
generally depend more on the truth of such relations as are given in them.

In the age in which we live, Religion and Virtue have been proposed and
defended with such advantages, with that great* force of reason, and those
persuasions, that they can hardly be matched in former times; yet after all
this, there are but few much wrought on by them, which perhaps flows from this,
among other reasons, that there are not so many excellent Patterns set out, as
might both in a shorter, and more effectual manner recommend that to the World,
which discourses do but coldly; The wit and style of the Writer being more
considered than the argument which they handle, and therefore the proposing
Virtue and Religion in such a Model, may perhaps operate more than the
perspective of it can do; and for the History of Learning, nothing does so
preserve and improve it, as the writing the Lives of those who have been
eminent in it.

There is no Book the ancients have left us, which might have informed us more
than Diogenes Laertius his Lives of the Philosophers; if he had had the art of
writing equal to that great Subject which he undertook, for if he had given the
World such an account of them, as Gassendus has done of Peiresk, how great a
stock of knowledge might we have had, which by his unskilfulness is in a great
measure lost; Since we must now depend only on him, because we have no other,
or better Author, that has written on that Argument.

For many Ages there were no Lives writ but by Monks, through whose writings
there runs such an incurable humor, of telling incredible and inimitable
passages, that little in them can be believed or proposed as a pattern:
Sulpitius Severus and Jerome showed too much credulity in the Lives they writ,
and raised Martin and Hilarion, beyond what can be reasonably believed: after
them, Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, and Palladius, took a pleasure to tell
uncouth stories of the Monks of Thebais; and Nitria: and those who came after
them, scorned to fall short of them, but raised their Saints above those of
former Ages, so that one would have thought that undecent way of writing could
rise no higher; and this humor infected even those who had otherwise a good
sense of things, and a just apprehension of Mankind, as may appear in Matthew
Paris, who though he was a Writer of great Judgment and fidelity, yet he has
corrupted his History with much of that Alloy: But when emulation and envy rose
among the several Orders or Houses, then they improved in that art of making
Romances, instead of writing Lives, to that pitch, that the World became
generally much scandalized with them: The Franciscans and Dominicans tried who
could say the most extravagant things of the Founders, or other Saints of their
Orders, and the Benedictines; who thought themselves possessed of the belief of
the World, as well as of its wealth, endeavored all that was possible still to
keep up the dignity of their Order, by outlying the others all they could; and
whereas here or there, a Miracle, a Vision, or Trance, might have occurred in
the Liv^s of former Saints; now every page was full of those wonderful things.

Nor has the humor of writing in such a manner, been quite laid down in this
Age, though more awakned and better enlightened, as appears in the Life of
Philip Nerius, and a great many more: And the Jesuits at Antwerp, are now
taking care to load the World with a vast and voluminous Collection of all
those Lives that has already swelled to eleven Volumes in Folio, in a small
Print, and yet being digested according to the Calendar, they have yet but
ended the Month of April: The Life of Monsieur Renty is writ in another manner,
where there are so many excellent passages, that he is justly to be reckoned
amongst the greatest patterns that France has afforded in this age.

But while some have nourished Infidelity, and a scorn of all sacred things, by
writing of those good Men in such a strain, as makes not only what is so
related to be disbelieved, but creates a distrust of the authentical writings
of our most holy faith; others have fallen into another extreme in writing
Lives too ^ejunely, swelling them up with trifling accounts of the Childhood
and Education, and the domestic or private affairs of those persons of whom
they Write, in which the World is little concerned: by these they become so
flat, that few care to read them, for certainly those Transactions are only
fit to be delivered to Posterity, that may carry with them some useful piece of
knowledge to aftertimes.

I have now an Argument before me, which will afford indeed only a short
History, but will contain in it as great a Character, as perhaps can be given
of any in this age; since there are few instances of more knowledge and greater
virtues meeting in one person. I am upon one account (beside many more) unfit
to undertake it, because I was not at all known to him, so I can say nothing
from my own Observation, but upon second thoughts I do not know whether this
may not qualify me to write more impartially, though perhaps more defectively,
for the knowledge of extraordinary persons does most commenly biass those, who
were much wrought on by the tenderness of their friendship, for them, to raise
their Style a little too high when they write concerning them: I confess I knew
him as much as the looking often upon him could amount to. The last year of his
being in London, he came always on Sundays, (when he could go abroad) to the
Chapel of the Rolls, where I then Preached: In my life I never saw so much
Gravity tempered with that sweetness, and set off with so much vivacity as
appeared in his looks, and behavior, which disposed me to a veneration for
him, which I never had for any, with whom I was not acquainted: I was seeking
an opportunity of being admitted to his Conversation; but I understood that
between a great want of health, and a multiplicity of business, which his
Employment brought upon him, he was Master of so little of his time, that I
stood in doubt whether I might presume to rob him of any of it, and so he left
the Town, before I could resolve on desiring to be known to him.

My ignorance of the Law of England, made me also unfit to Write of a Man, a
great part of whose Character as to his Learning is to be taken from his skill
in the Common Law, and his performance in that* But I shall leave that to those
of the same Robe: Since if I engaged much in it, I must needs commit many
errors, Writing of a Subject that is foreign to me.

The occasion of my undertaking this, was given me first by the earnest
desires of some that have great power over me, who having been much obliged by
him, and holding his Memory in high estimation, thought I might do it some
right by Writing his Life; I was then engaged in the History of the
Reformation, so I promised that, as soon as that was over, I should make the
best use I could of such Informations and Memorials as should be brought me.

This I have now performed in the best manner I could, and have brought into
method all the parcels of his Life, or the branches of his Character, which I
could either gather from the Informations that were brought me, or from those
that were familiarly acquainted with him, or from his Writings: I have not
applied any of the false Colors with which Art, or some forced Eloquence might
furnish me in Writing concerning him; but have endeavored to set him out in
the same simplicity in which he lived: I have said little of his Domestic
Concerns, since though in these he was a great Example, yet it signifies
nothing to the World, to know any particular exercises, that might be given to
his Patience; and therefore I shall draw a Vail over all these, and shall avoid
saying any thing of him, but what may afford the Reader some profitable
Instruction: I am under no temptations of saying any thing, but what I am
persuaded is exactly true, for where there is so much excellent truth to be
told, it were an inexcusable fault to corrupt that, or prejudice the Reader
against it by the mixture of falsehoods with it.

In short as he was a great example while he lived, so I wish the setting him
thus out to Posterity, in his own true and native Colors, may have its due
influence, on all persons; but more particularly on those of that profession,
whom it more immediately Concerns, whether on the Bench or at the Bar.

The Reader is desired to correct the Book by the following Errata, before he
reads it over, especially the first fault, page 15. l. 9. that being the most
considerable.
Page 15. l. 9. read indiscreet Men called Obstinacy. page 39. l. 8. for r.
but. page 44. l. ult. to highly so r. so highly to. page 50. l. 3. after County
r. of. page 101. l. 8. assignat as salurem, r. assignatus salutem. page 147. l.
10. was r. were. page 168. l. 20. eternal r. external. page 172. l. 17.
dearlier, r. earlier. page 200. l. 15. foresta, r. forestae.

THE LIFE and DEATH OF Sir MATTHEW HALE, Knight. LATE Lord Chief Justice of England.
MATTHEW HALE, was Born at Alderly in Glocestershire, the first of November,
1609. His Grandfather was Robert Hale, an Eminent Clothier in
Wotton-under-edge, in that County, where he and his Ancestors had lived for
many Descents; and they had given several parcels of Land for the use of the
Poor, which are enjoyed by them to this day. This Robert acquired an Estate of
ten Thousand Pound, which he divided almost equally amongst his five Sons;
besides the Portions he gave his Daughters, from whom a numerous Posterity has
sprung. His Second Son was Robert Hale, a Barrister of Lincoln's Inn; he Married
Joan, the Daughter of Matthew Poyntz, of Alderly Esquire, who was descended
from that Noble Family of the Poyntz's of Action: Of this Marrage there was no
other Issue but this one Son. His Grandfather by his Mother was his Godfather,
and gave him his own Name at his Baptism. His Father was a Man of that
strictness of Conscience, that he gave over the practice of the Law, because he
could not understand the reason of giving Color in Pleadings, which as he
thought was to tell a Lie, and that, with some other things commonly practiced,
seemed to him contrary to that exactness of Truth and Justice which became a
Christian, so that he withdrew himself from the Inns of Court to live on his
Estate in the Country. Of this I was informed by an Ancient Gentleman, that
lived in a friendship with his Son for fifty Years, and he heard Judge Jones*
that was Mr. Hales Contemporary, declare this in the King's Bench. But as the
care he had to save his Soul, made him abandon a Profession in which he might
have raised his Family much higher, so his Charity to his poor Neighbors, made
him not only deal his Alms largely among them while he lived, but at his Death
he left (out of his small Estate which was but 100 l a Year) 20 l. a Year to
the Poor of Wotton, which his Son confirmed to them with some Addition, and
with this Regulation, that it should be distributed among such poor
Housekeepers, as did not Receive the Alms of the Parish; for to give it to
those, was only as he used to say, to save so much Money to the Rich, who by
Law were bound to relieve the poor of the Parish.

Thus he was descended rather from a good, than a Noble Family, and yet what
was wanting in the insignificant Titles of High Birth, and Noble Blood, was
more than made up in the true worth of his Ancestors. But he was soon deprived
of the Happiness of his Fathers Care and Instruction, for as he lost his Mother
before he was three years old, so his Father died before he was five; so early
was he cast on the Providence of God. But that unhappiness was in a great
measure made up to him: For after some opposition made by Mr. Thomas Poyntz,
his Uncle by his Mother, he was committed to the care of Anthony Kingscot, of
Kingscot Esquire, who was his next Kinsman, after his Uncles, by his Mother.

Great care was taken of his Education, and his Guardian intended to breed him
to be a Divine, and being inclined to the way of those then called Puritans,
put him to some Schools that were Taught by those of that party, and in the 17
th. year of his Age, sent him to Magdalen-Hall in Oxford, where Obadiah
Sedgwick was his Tutor. He was an extraordinary Proficient at School, and for
some time at Oxford. But the Stage Players coming thither, he was so much
corrupted by seeing many Plays, that he almost wholly forsook his Studies. By
this he not only lost much time, but found that his Head came to be thereby
filled with such vain Images of things, that they were at best Improfitable, if
not hurtful to him; and being afterward sensible of the Mischief of this, he
resolved upon his coming to London, (where he knew the opportunities of such
Sights would be more frequent and Inviting) never to see a Play again, to which
he constantly adhered.

The Corruption of a Young Man's mind in one particular, generally draws on a
great many more after it, so he being now taken off from following his Studies,
and from the Gravity of his deportment, that was formerly Eminent in him, far
beyond his Years, set himself to many of the vanities incident to Youth, but
still preserved his Purity, and a great probity of Mind. He loved fine Clothes,
and delighted much in Company: and being of a strong robust Body, he was a
great Master at all those Exercises that required much Strength. He also
learned to Fence, and handle his Weapons, in which he became so expert, that he
worsted many of the Masters of those Arts: but as he was exercising himself in
them, an Instance appeared, that showed a good Judgment, and gave some hopes of
better things. One of his Masters told him he could teach him no more, for he
was now better at his own Trade than himself was. This Mr. Hale looked on as
flattery; so to make the Master discover himself, he promised him the House he
lived in, for he was his Tenant, if he could hit him a blow on the Head: and
bad him do his best, for he would be as good as his word: so after a little
Engagement, his Master being really Superior to him, hit him on the Head, and
he performed his promise; for he gave him the House freely: and was not
unwilling at that rate to learn so early, to distinguish flattery from plain
and simple truth.

He was now so taken up with Martial matters, that instead of going on in his
design of being a Scholar, or a Divine, he resolved to be a Soldier: and his
Tutor Sedgwick going into the Low Countries, Chaplain to the Renowned Lord
Vere, he resolved to go along with him, and to trail a Pike in the Prince of
Orange's Army; but a happy stop was put to this Resolution, which might have
proved so fatal to himself, and have deprived the Age of the great Example he
gave, and the useful Services he afterward did his Country. He was engaged in
a Suite of Law with Sir William Whitmore, who laid claim to some part of his
Estate, and his Guardian being a Man of a retired temper, and not made for
Business, he was forced to leave the University, after he had been three Years
in it, and go to London to solicit his own business. Being recommended to
Sergeant Glanvill for his Councellor, and he observing in him a clear
apprehension of things, and a solid Judgment, and a great fitness for the
study of the Law, took pains upon him to persuade him to forsake his thoughts
of being a Soldier, and to apply himself to the study of the Law: and this had
so good an effect on him, that on the 8 th. of November, 1629. when he was past
the 20 th. Year of his Age, he was admitted into Lincoln's Inn: and being then
deeply sensible how much time he had lost, and that Idle and Vain things had
overrun and almost corrupted his mind, he resolved to Redeem the time he had
lost, and followed his Studies with a diligence that could scarce be believed,
if the signal effects of it did not gain it Credit. He Studied for many years
at the rate of 16 Hours a day: he threw aside all fine Clothes, and betook
himself to a plain fashion, which he continued to use in many points to his
dying day.

But since the honor of reclaiming him from the idleness of his former course
of Life, is due to the memory of that Eminent Lawyer Serj. Glanvil, and since
my Design in Writing is to propose a Pattern of Heroic Virtue to the World, I
shall mention one passage of the Sergeant which ought never to be forgotten.
His Father had a fair Estate, which he intended to settle on his Elder Brother,
but he being a Vicious young Man, and there appearing no hopes of his Recovery,
he settled it on him, that was his Second Son. Upon his Death, his Eldest Son
finding that what he had before looked on, as the threatenings of an angry
Father, was now but too certain, became Melancholy, and that by degrees
wrought so great a change on him, that what his Father could not prevail in
while he Lived, was now effected by the severity of his last Will, so that it
was now too late for him to change in hopes of an Estate that was gone from
him. But his Brother observing the reality of the change, resolved within
himself what to do: so he called him, with many of his Friends together to a
Feast, and after other Dishes had been served up to the Dinner, he ordered one
that was covered to be set before his Brother, and desired him to uncover it;
which he doing, the Company was surprised to find it full of Writings. So he
told them that he was now to do, what he was sure his Father would have done,
if he had lived to see that happy Change, which they now all saw in his
Brother: and therefore he freely restored to him the whole Estate. This is so
great an instance of a Generous and just Disposition, that I hope the Reader
will easily pardon this Digression, and that the rather since that Worthy
Sergeant was so Instrumental in the happy Change that followed in the course of
Mr. Hale's Life.

Yet he did not at first break off from keeping too much Company with some vain
People, till a sad Accident drove him from it, for he with some other young
Students, being invited to be merry out of Town, one of the Company called for
so much Wine, that notwithstanding all that Mr. Hale could do to prevent it, he
went on in his Excess till he fell down as dead before them, so that all that
were present, were not a little affrighted at it, who did what they could to
bring him to himself again: This did particularly affect Mr. Hale, who
thereupon went into another Room, and shutting the door, fell on his Knees, and
prayed earnestly to God, both for his Friend, that he might be restored to Life
again; and that himself might be forgiven for giving such Countenance to so
much Excess: and he vowed to God, that he would never again keep Company in
that manner, nor drink a health while he lived: His Friend recovered, and he
most Religiously observed his Vow, till his Dying day. And though he was
afterward pressed to drink Healths, particularly the Kings, which was set up by
too many as a distinguishing mark of Loyalty, and drew many into great Excess
after his Majesty's happy Restoration; but he would never dispense with his
Vow, though he was sometimes roughly treated for this, which some hot and
indiscreet led Obstinacy.

This wrought an entire change on him: now he forsook all vain Company, and
divided himself between the Duties of Religion, and the Studies of his
Profession; in the former he was so regular, that for Six and thirty years
time, he never once failed going to Church on the Lords day; this observation
he made when an Ague first interrupted that constant Course, and he reflected
on it, as an Acknowlegement of God's great Goodness to him, in so long a
Continuance of his health.

He took a strict account of his time, of which the Reader will best Judge, by
the Scheme he drew for a Diary which I shall insert Copied from the Original,
but I am not certain when he made it; it is set down in the same Simplicity in
which he writ it for his own private use.

MORNING.
I. To lift up the heart to God in thankfulness for renewing my Life. II. To
renew my Covenant with God in Christ. 1. By renewed Acts of Faith receiving
Christ, and rejoyceing in the height of that Relation. 2* Resolution of being
one of his People doing him Allegiance. III. Adoration and Prayer. IV. Setting
a Watch over my own Infirmities and Passions, over the Snares laid in our way.
Perimus licitis.
Day Employment.
There must be an Employment, two kinds.

I. Our ordinary calling, to serve God in it. It is a Service to Christ though
never so mean. Colos. 3. Here Faithfulness, Diligence, Cheerfulness. Not to
overlay my self with more Business than I can bear. II. Our Spiritual
Employments: Mingle somewhat of Gods Immediate Service in this day.
Refreshments.
I. Meat and Drink, Moderation seasoned with somewhat of God. II. Recreations.
1. Not our Business. 2. Suitable. No Games, if given to Covetousness or Passion.
If alone.
I. Beware of wandering vain lustful thoughts, fly from thy self rather than
entertain these. II. Let thy Solitary thoughts be profitable, view the
Evidences of thy Salvation, the state of thy Soul, the coming of Christ, thy
own Mortality, it will make thee humble and Watchful.
Company.
Do good to them. Use God's name reverently. Beware of leaving an ill
Impression of ill Example. Receive good from them, if more knowing.

EVENING.
Cast up the Accounts of the Day. If ought amiss, Beg pardon. Gather resolution
of more Vigilance. If well, Bless the Mercy and Grace of God that has
Supported thee.

These Notes have an Imperfection in the Wording of them, which shows they were
only intended for his Privacies. No wonder a Man who set such rules to himself,
became quickly very Eminent and remarkable.

Noy the Attorney General, being then one of the greatest Men of the Profession,
took early notice of him, and called often for him, and directed him in his
Study, and grew to have such friendship for him, that he came to be called
young Noy. He passing from the extreme of Vanity in his Apparel, to that of
neglecting himself too much, was once taken when there was a Press for the
Kings-Service, as a fit Person for it; for he was a strong and well built Man:
But some that knew him coming by, and giving notice who he was, the Press-Men
let him go. This made him return to more decency in his Clothes, but never to
any Superfluity or Vanity in them.

Once as he was Buying some Cloth for a new Suit, the Draper with whom he
differed about the Price, told him he should have it for nothing, if he would
promise him an Hundred pound when he came to be Lord Chief Justice of England;
to which he answered, That he could not with a good Conscience wear any Man's
Cloth, unless he paid for it; so he satisfied the Draper, and carried away
the Cloth. Yet that same Draper lived to see him advanced to that same dignity.

While he was thus improving himself in the Study of the Law, he not only kept
the Hours of the Hall constantly in Term-time, but seldom put himself out of
Commons in Vacation-time, and continued then to follow his Studies with an
unwearied diligence; and not being satisfied with the Books writ about it, or
to take things upon trust, was very diligentin searching all Records: Then did
he make diverse Collections out of the Books he had Read, and mixing them with
his own Observations, digested them into a Commonplace Book; which he did with
so much Industry and Judgment, that an Eminent Judge of the King's Bench,
borrowed it of him when he was Lord Chief Baron: He unwillingly lent it,
because it had been Writ by him before he was called to the Bar, and had never
been thoroughly revised by him since that Time, only what Alterations had been
made in the Law by subsequent Statutes, and Judgments, were added by him as
they had happened: but the Judge having perused it said, that though it was
Composed by him so early, he did not think any Lawyer in England could do it
better, except he himself would again set about it.

He was soon found out by that great and learned Antiquary Mr. Seldom, who
though much superior to him in Years, yet came to have such a liking of him,
and of Mr. Vaughan, who was afterward Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
that as he continued in a close friendship with them while he lived, so he left
them at his Death, two of his four Executors.

It was this Acquaintance that first set Mr. Hale on a more enlarged pursuit of
Learning, which he had before confined to his own Profession, but becoming as
great a Master in it, as ever any was, very soon; he who could never let any of
his time go away unprofitably, found leisure to attain to as great a variety of
knowledge, in as Comprehensive a manner as most Men have done in any Age.

He set himself much to the Study of the Roman Law, and though he liked the
way of Judicature in England by Juries, much better than that of the Civil Law,
where so much was trusted to the Judge; yet he often said, that the true
Grounds and Reasons of Law were so well delivered in the Digests, that a man
could never understand Law as a Science so well as by seeking it there, and
therefore lamented much that it was so little Studied in England.

He looked on readiness in Arithmetic, as a thing which might be useful to him
in his own Employment, and acquired it to such a Degree, that he would often on
the Sudden, and afterward on the Bench resolve very hard Questions, which had
puzzled the best Accomptants about Town. He rested not here, but Studied the
Algebra both Speciosa and Numerosa, and went through all the other Mathematical
Sciences, and made a great Collection of very excellent Instruments, sparing no
cost to have them as exact, as Art could make them. He was also very Conversant
in Philosophical Learning, and in all the curious Experiments, and rare
Discoveries of this Age: And had the new Books Written on those Subjects sent
him from all Parts, which he both read and examined so Critically, that if the
Principles and Hypotheses which he took first up, did any way prepossess him,
yet those who have differed most from him, have acknowledged, that in what he
has Writ concerning the Torricellian Experiment, and of the Rarefaction and
Condensation of the Air; he shows as great an Exactness, and as much Subtilty
in the Reasoning he builds on them, as these Principles to which he adhered
could bear. But indeed it will seem scarce Credible, that a man so much
employed, and of so severe a temper of Mind, could find leisure to Read,
Observe and Write so much of these Subjects as he did. He called them his
Diversions, for he often said when he was weary with the Study of the Law, or
Divinity, he used to Recreate himself with Philosophy or the Mathematics; To
these he added great skill in Physic, Anatomy and Chyrurgery: And he used to
say no man could be absolutely a Master in any Profession, without having some
skill in other Sciences; for besides the Satisfaction he had in the knowledge
of these things, he made use of them often in his Employments. In some
Examinations he would put such Questions to Physicians or Chyrurgeons, that
they have professed the College of Physicians could not do it more Exactly; by
which he discovered great Judgment, as well as much Knowledge in these things:
And in his Sickness he used to Argue with his Doctors about his Distempers, and
the Methods they took with them, like one of their own Profession; which one of
them told me he understood, as far as Speculation without Practice could carry
him.

To this he added great Searches into Ancient History, and particularly into
the roughest and least delightful part of it, Chronology. He was well
acquainted with the Ancient Greek Philosophers, but want of occasion to use it,
wore out his Knowledge of the Greek Tongue; and though he never Studied the
Hebrew Tongue, yet by his great Conversation with Seldom, he understood the
most curious things in the Rabinical Learning.

But above all these, he seemed to have made the Study of Divinity the chief of
all others, to which he not only directed every thing else, but also arrived at
that pitch in it, that those who have read, what he has Written on these
Subjects, will think, they must have had most of his time and thoughts. It may
seem Extravagant, and almost Incredible, that one man in no great Compass of
years, should have acquired such a variety of Knowledge; and that in Sciences
that require much Leisure and Application. But as his Parts were quick, and his
Apprehensions lively, his Memory great, and his Judgments strong; so his
Industry was almost Indefatigable. He rose always betimes in the Morning, was
never idle, scarce ever held any discourse about News, except with some few in
whom he confided entirely. He entered into no Correspondence by Letters, except
about necessary Business, or matters of Learning, and spent very little time in
Eating or Drinking; for as he never went to public Feasts, so he gave no
Entertainments but to the Poor; for he followed our Savior's direction, (of
feasting none but these) literally: And in Eating and Drinking, he observed not
only great Plainness and Moderation, but lived so Philosophically, that he
always ended his Meal, with an Appetite: So that he lost little time at it;
(that being the only Portion which he grudged himself) and was disposed to any
Exercise of his mind, to which he thought fit to apply himself, immediately
after he had Dined: by these means he gained much time, that is otherwise
unprofitably wasted.

He had also an admirable equality in the temper of his mind, which disposed
him for what ever Studies he thought fit to turn himself to; And some very
uneasy things which he lay under for many years, did rather engage him to, than
distract him from his Studies.

When he was called to the Bar, and began to make a Figure in the World, the
late unhappy Wars broke out, in which it was no easy thing, for a Man to
preserve his Integrity, and to live, Securely, free from great danger and
trouble. He had read the Life of Pomponius Atticus, Writ by Nepos, and having
observed, that he had passed through a time of as much Distraction, as ever was
in any Age or State, from the Wars of Marius and Scilla, to the beginnings of
Augustus his Reign, without the least blemish on his Reputation, and free from
any Considerable Danger, being held in great Esteem by all Parties, and courted
and favored by them: He set him as a Pattern to himself, and observing that
besides those Virtues which are necessary to all Men, and at all times, there
were two things that chiefly preserved Atticus, the one was his engaging in no
Faction, and meddling in no public Business, the other was his constant
favoring and reliveing those that were lowest, which was ascribed by such as
prevailed to the Generosity of his Temper, and procured him much Kindness from
those on whom he had exercised his Bounty, when it came to their turn to
Govern: He resolved to guide himself by those Rules as much as was possible for
him to do.

He not only avoided all public Employment, but the very talking of News, and
was always both Favorable and Charitable to those who were deprest, and was
sure never to provoke any in particular, by censuring or reflecting on their
Actions; for many that have Conversed much with him, have told me they never
heard him once speak ill of any Person.

He was employed in his practice by all the Kings party: He was assigned
Council to the Earl of Strafford, and Arch Bishop Laud* and afterward to the
Blessed King himself, when brought to the infamous Pageantry of a Monk*Tryal,
and offered to plead for him with all the Courage, that so Glorious a Cause
ought to have inspired him with, but was not suffered to appear, because the
King refusing, as he had good reason, to submit to the Court* it was pretended
none could be admitted to speak for him. He was also Council for the Duke of
Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the Lord Capel: His Plea for the former of
these I have published in the Memoires of that Dukes life. Afterward also
being Council for the Lord Craven, he pleaded with that force of Argument, that
the then Attorney General, threatened him for appearing against the Government,
to whom he answered, he was Pleading in defense of those Laws, which they
declared they would maintain and preserve, and he was doing his duty to his
Client, so that he was not to be daunted with Threatenings.

Upon all these occasions he had discharged himself with so much Learning,
Fidelity, and Courage, that he came to be generally employed for all that
Party; Nor was he satisfied to appear for their just Defense in the way of his
Profession, but he also relieved them often in their Necessities; which he did
in a way that was no less Prudent than Charitable, considering the dangers of
that time: for he did often deposite considerable Sums in the hands of a Worthy
Gentleman of the Kings Party, who knew their Necessities well, and was to
Distribute his Charity according to his own Discretion, without either letting
them know, from whence it came, or giving himself any Account to whom he had
given it.

Cromwell seeing him possessed of so much Practice, and he being one of the
Eminentest Men of the Law, who was not at all afraid of doing his duty in
those Critical times; resolved to take him off from it, and raise him to the
Bench.

Mr. Hale saw well enough the Snare laid for him, and though he did not much
consider the prejudice it would be to himself, to Exchange the easy and safer
profits he had by his Practice, for a Judges place in the Common Pleas, which
he was required to accept of, yet he did deliberate more on the Lawfulness of
taking a Commission from Usurpers; but having considered well of this, he came
to be of opinion, that it being absolutely necessary, to have Justice and
Property kept up at all times: It was no Sin to take a Commission from
Usurpers, if he made no Declaration of his acknowledging their Authority, which
he never did: He was much urged to Accept of it by some Eminent Men of his own
Profession, who were of the Kings Party, as Sir Orlando Bridgeman, and Sir
Geoffery Palmer; and was also satisfied concerning the lawfulness of it, by the
resolution of some famous Divines, in particular Dr. Sheldon, and Dr. Henchman,
who were afterward promoted to the Sees of Canterbury and London.

To these were added the importunities of all his Friends, who thought that in
a time of so much Danger and Oppression, it might be no small Security to the
Nation, to have a Man of his Integrity and Abilities on the Bench: and the
Usurpers themselves held him in that Estimation, that they were glad to have
him give a Countenance to their Courts, and by promoting one that was known to
have different Principles from them; Affected the Reputation of Honoring and
trusting men of Eminent Virtues, of what persuasion soever they might be, in
relation to public Matters.

But he had greater Scruples concerning the proceeding against Felons, and
putting offenders to Death by that Commission, since he thought the Sword of
Justice belonging only by right to the lawful Prince, it seemed not warrantable
to proceed to a Capital Sentence by an Authority derived from Usurpers; yet at
first he made distinction between common and ordinary Felonies, and offenses
against the State, for the last he would never meddle in them; for he thought
these might be often legal and warrantable Actions, and that the putting Men to
Death on that account was Murder; but for the ordinary Felonies, he at first
was of opinion that it was as necessary even in times of Usurpation to Execute
Justice in those cases, as in the matters of property; For after the King was
Murdered, he laid by all his Collections of the Pleas of the Crown, and that
they might not fall into ill hands, he hid them behind the Wainscotting of his
Study, for he said there was no more occasion to use them, till the King should
be again restored to his Right, and so upon his Majesty's Restoration he took
them out, and went on in his design to perfect that great Work.

Yet for some time after he was made a Judge, when he went the Circuit, he did
sit on the Crown Side, and Judged Criminals: But having considered farther of
it, he came to think that it was at least better not to do it; and so after the
Second or Third Circuit, he refused to sit any more on the Crown Side, and told
plainly the reason, for in matters of Blood, he was always to choose the safer
Side: And indeed he had so carried himself in some Trials, that they were not
unwilling he should withdraw from meddling farther in them, of which I shall
give some instances.

Not long after he was made a Judge, which was in the year 1653, when he went
the Circuit, a Trial was brought before him at Lincoln, concerning the Murder
of one of the Townsmen, who had been of the Kings Party, and was Killed by a
Soldier of the Garrison there. He was in the Fields with a Fowling piece on
his Shoulder, which the Soldier seeing, he came to him and said, it was
contrary to an Order which the Protector had made, That none who had been of
the Kings Party should carry Arms, and so he would have forced it from him;
But as the other did not regard the Order, so being stronger than the Soldier,
he threw him down and having beat him, he left him: The Soldier went into the
Town, and told one of his fellow Soldiers how he had been used, and got him to
go with him, and lie in wait for the Man that he might be revenged on him. They
both watched his coming to Town, and one of them went to him to demand his Gun,
which he refusing, the Soldier struck at him, and as they were struggling, the
other came behind, and ran his Sword into his Body, of which he presently died.
It was in the time of the Assizes, so they were both Tried: Against the one
there was no Evidence of forethought Felony, so he was only found guilty of
Manslaughter, and Burnt on the Hand; But the other was found guilty of
Murder: And though Colonel Whaley thatCommanded the Garrison, came into the
Court and urged, that the Man was Killed only for disobeying the Protectors
Orders, and that the Soldier was but doing his Duty; yet the Judge regarded
both his Reasons and Threatenings very little, and therefore he not only gave
Sentence against him, but ordered the Execution to be so suddenly done, that it
might not be possible to procure a Reprieve, which he believed would have been
obtained, if there had been time enough granted for it.

Another occasion was given him of showing both his Justice and Courage, when
he was in another Circuit; he understood that the Protector had ordered a Jury
to be returned for a Trial in which he was more than ordinarily concerned: upon
this information, he Examined the Sheriff about it, who knew nothing of it, for
he said he referred all such things to the under- Sheriff, and having next
asked the under- Sheriff concerning it, he found the Jury had been returned by
order from Cromwell; Upon which he showed the Statute, that all Iuries ought to
be returned by the Sheriff or his lawful Officer; And this not being done
according to Law, he dismissed the Jury, and would not try the Cause: Upon
which the Protector was highly displeased with him, and at his return from the
Circuit, he told him in Anger he was not fit to be a Judge, to which all the
Answer he made was, That it was very true.

Another thing met him in the Circuit, upon which he resolved to have proceeded
severely: Some Anabaptists had rushed into a Church, and had disturbed a
Congregation, while they were receiving the Sacrament, not without some
Violence; At this he was highly offended, for he said it was intolerable for
men, who pretended to highly so liberty of Conscience, to go and disturb
others; Especially those who had the Encouragement of the Law on their side:
but these were so supported by some great Magistrates and Officers, that a stop
was put to his proceedings; upon which he declared, he would meddle no more with
the Trials on the Crown-side.

When Penruddocks Trial was brought on, there was a special Messenger sent to
him requiring him to assist at it. It was in Vacation time, and he was at his
Country House at Alderly: he plainly refused to go, and said, the four Terms,
and two Circuits, were enough, and the little Interval that was between, was
little enough for their private affairs, and so he excused himself; he thought
it was not necessary to speak more clearly, but if he had been urged to it, he
would not have been afraid of doing it.

He was at that time chosen a Parliament Man, (for there being then no House of
Lords, Judges might have been chosen to sit in the House of Commons) and he
went to it, on design to obstruct the Mad and Wicked projects then on foot, by
two parties, that had very different Principles and ends.

On the one hand, some that were perhaps more sincere, yet were really
Brainsick, designed they knew not what, being resolved to pull down a Standing
Ministry, the Law, and property of England, and all the Ancient Rules of this
Government, and set up in its room an Indigested Enthusiastical Scheme, which
they called the Kingdom of Christ, or of his Saints; many of them being really
in expectation, that one day or another Christ would come down, and sit among
them, and at least they thought to begin the glorious Thousand years, mentioned
in the Revelation.

Others at the same time, taking advantages from the Fears and Apprehensions,
that all the sober Men of the Nation were in, lest they should fall under the
Tyranny of a distracted sort of People, who to all their other ill Principles,
added great Cruelty, which they had Copied from those at Munster in the former
Age, Intended to improve that opportunity to raise their own Fortunes and
Families. Amidst these, Judge Hale steered a middle Course; for as he would
engage for neither side, so he with a great many more Worthy men came to
Parliaments, more out of a design to hinder Mischief, than to do much good;
wisely foreseeing, that the Inclinations for the Royal Family were daily
growing so much, that in time the disorders then in Agitation, would ferment to
that happy Resolution, in which they determined in May, 1660. And therefore all
that could be then done, was to oppose the ill designs of both Parties, the
Enthusiasts as well as the Usurpers. Among the other extravagant Motions made
in this Parliament, one was, to destroy all the Records in the Tower, and to
settle the Nation on a New-Foundation; so he took this Province to himself, to
show the Madness of this Proposition, the Injustice of it, and the Mischeifs
that would follow on it, and did it with such Clearness, and strength of
Reason, as not only satisfied all sober Persons (for it may be supposed that
was soon done) but stopped even the Mouths of the frantic people themselves,

Thus he continued administering Justice till the Protector died, but then he
both refused the Mournings that were sent to him and his Servants for the
Funeral, and likewise to accept of the New Commission th^^ was offered him by
Richard, and when the rest of the Judges urged it upon him, and employed others
to press him to accept of it, he rejected all their Importunities, and said he
could act no longer under such Authority*

He lived a private man till the Parliament met that called home the King, to
which he was returned Knight of the Shire from the County Gloucester. It
appeared at that time how much he was beloved and Esteemed in his Neighborhood,
for though another who stood in Competition with him had spent near a Thousand
pounds to procure Voices, a great Sum to be employed that way in those days,
and he had been at no cost, and was so far from soliciting it, that he had
stood out long against those who pressed him to appear, and he did not promise
to appear till three days before the Election, yet he was preferred. He was
brought thither almost by Violence, by the Lord (now Earl of) Berkeley, who
bore all the charge of the Entertainments on the day of his Election, which was
considerable, and had engaged all his Friends and Interest for him: and whereas
by the Writ, the Knight of a Shire must be Miles gladio cinctus, and he had no
Sword, that Noble Lord girt him with his own Sword during the Election, but he
was soon weary of it, for the Imbrodery of the Belt, did not suit well with the
plainness of his Clothes: and indeed the Election did not hold long, for as
soon as ever he came into the Field, he was chosen by much the greater Number,
though the Poll continued for three or four days.

In that Parliament he bore his share, in the happy period then put to the
Confusions that threatened the utter Ruin of the Nation, which contrary to the
Expectations of the most Sanguine, settled in so serene and quiet a manner, that
those who had formerly built so much on their Success, calling it an Answer
from Heaven to their solemn Appeals, to the providence of God, were now not a
little Confounded, to see all this turned against themselves, in an instance
much more extraordinary than any of those were, upon which they had built so
much. His great Prudence and Excellent temper led him to think, that the sooner
an Act of Indemnity were passed, and the fuller it were of Graces and Favors,
it would sooner settle the Nation, and quiet the minds of the People; and
therefore he applied himself with a particular care to the framing and carrying
it on: In which it was visible he had no concern of his own, but merely his
love of the Public that set him on to it.

Soon after this, when the Courts in Westminster Hall came to be settled, he was
made Lord Chief Baron; and when the Earl of Clarendon (then Lord Chancellor)
delivered him his Commission, in the Speech he made according to the Custom on
such Occasions, he expressed his Esteem of him in a very singular manner,
telling him among other things, that if the King could have found out an
honester and fitter Man for that Employment, he would not have advanced him to
it; and that he had therefore preferred him, because he knew none that deserved
it so well. It is ordinary for Persons so promoted to be Knighted, but he
desired to avoid having that Honor done him, and therefore for a Considerable
time declined all opportunities of waiting on the King, which the Lord
Chancellor observing, sent for him upon Business one day, when the King was at
his House, and told his Majesty there was his modest Chief Baron, upon which,
he was unexpectedly Knighted.

He continued Eleven Years in that place, Managing the Court, and all
Proceedings in it with singular Justice. It was observed by the whole Nation,
how much he raised the Reputation and Practice of it: And those who held
Places, and Offices in it, can all declare, not only the Impartiality of his
Justice, for that is but a common Virtue, but his Generosity, his vast
Diligence, and his great Exactness in Trials. This gave occasion to the only
Complaint that ever was made of him, That he did not dispatch Matters quick
enough; but the great care he used, to put Suits to a final End, as it made him
slower in deciding them; so it had this good Effect, that Causes tried before
him, were seldom if ever tried again.

Nor did his Administration of Justice lie only in that Court: He was one of
the principal Judges that sat in Cliffords-Inn, about settling the difference
between Landlord and Tenant, after the Dreadful Fire of London. He being the
first that offered his Service to the City, for accommodating all the
differences that might have arisen about the Rebuilding it, in which he behaved
himself to the satisfaction of all Persons concerned; So that the sudden and
quiet Building of the City, which is justly to be Reckoned one of the Wonders
of the Age, is in no small Measure due to the great care, which he and Sir
Orlando Bridge-man, (then Lord Chief Justice of the Common-Plea's afterward
Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England) used, and to the Judgment they showed
in that Affair: since without the Rules then laid down, there might have
otherwise followed such an endless train of vexatious Suits, as might have been
little less chargeable than the Fire it self had been. But without detracting
from the Labors of the other Judges, it must be acknowledged that he was the
most instrumental in that great work; for he first by way of Scheme, contrived
the Rules upon which he and the rest proceeded afterward; in which his
readiness at Arithmetic, and his skill in Architecture were of great use to
him.

But it will not seem strange that a Judge behaved himself as he did, who at
the Entry into his Employment, set such excellent Rules to himself, which will
appear in the following Paper Copied from the Original under his own hand.

Things Necessary to be Continually had in Remembrance.
I. That in the Administration of Justice, I am entrusted for God, the King and
Country; and therefore, II. That it be done, 1. Uprightly, 2. Deliberately, 3.
Resolutely. III. That I rest not upon my own Understanding or Strength, but
Implore and rest upon the Direction and Strength of God. IV. That in the
Execution of Justice, I carefully lay aside my own Passions, and not give way
to them, however provoked. V. That I be wholly intent upon the Business I am
about, remitting all other Cares and Thoughts, as unseasonable and
Interruptions. VI. That I suffer not my self to be prepossessed with any
Judgment at all, till the whole Business and both Parties be heard. VII. That I
never engage my self in the beginning of any Cause, but reserve my self
unprejudiced till the whole be heard, VIII. That in Business Capital, though my
Nature prompt me to Pity; yet to consider, that there is also a Pity due to the
Country. IX. That I be not too Riged in matters purely Conscientious, where all
the harm is Diversity of Judgment. X. That I be not biassed with Compassion to
the Poor, or favor to the Rich, in point of Justice. XI. That Popular, or
Court Applause, or Distaste, have no Influence into any thing I do in point of
Distribution of Justice. XII. Not to be sollicitous what Men will say or think,
so long as I keep my self exactly according to the Rule of Justice. XIII. If in
Criminals it be a measuring Cast* to incline to Mercy and Acquittal. XIV. In
Criminals that consist merely in words, when no more harm ensues, Moderation is
no Injustice. XV. In Criminals of Blood, if the Fact be Evident, Severity is
Justice. XVI. To abhor all private Solicitations, of what kind soever, and by
whom soever, in matters Depending. XVII. To charge my Servants, 1. Not to
interpose in any Business whatsoever, 2. Not to take more than their known
Fees, 3. Not to give any undue precedence to Causes, 4. Not to recommend
Council. XVIII. To be short and sparing at Meals, that I may be the fitter for
Business.
He would never receive private Addresses or Recommendations from the greatest
Persons in any matter, in which Justice was Concerned. One of the first Peers
of England went once to his Chamber and told him, that having a Suite in Law to
be tried before him, he was then to acquaint him with it, that he might the
better understand it, when it should come to be heard in Court. Upon which the
Lord Chief Baron interupted him, and said he did not deal fairly to come to his
Chamber about such Affairs, for he never received any Information of Causes but
in open Court, where both Parties were to be heard alike, so he would not
suffer him to go on: Whereupon his Grace (for he was a Duke) went away not a
little dissatisfied, and complained of it to the King, as a Rudeness that was
not to be endured. But his Majesty bid him content himself that he was no worse
used, and said, he verily believed he would have used himself no better, if he
had gone to solicit him in any of his own Causes.

Another passage fell out in one of his Circuits, which was somewhat censured
as an affectation of an unreasonable strictness, but it flowed from his
Exactness to the Rules he had set him self: A Gentleman had sent him a Buck for
his Table, that had a Trial at the Assizes; So when he heard his Name, he asked
if he was not the same Person that had sent him Venison, and finding he was the
same, he told him, he could not suffer the Trial to go on, till he had paid him
for his Buck; to which the Gentleman answered, that he never sold his Venison,
and that he had done nothing to him, which he did not do to every Judge that
had gone that Circuit, which was confirmed by several Gentlemen then present:
but all would not do, for the Lord Chief Baron had learned from Solomon, that a
gift perverteth the ways of Judgment, and therefore he would not suffer the
Trial to go on, till he had paid for the present; upon which the Gentleman
withdrew the Record; and at Salisbury the Dean and Chapter having according to
the Custom presented him with six Sugar Loaves in his Circuit, he made his
Servants pay for the Sugar before he would try their Cause.

It was not so easy for him to throw off the importunities of the Poor, for
whom his Compassion wrought more powerfully than his regard to Wealth and
Greatness, yet when Justice was concerned, even that did not turn him out of
the way. There was one that had been put out of a place for some ill behavior,
who urged the Lord Chief Baron to set his hand to a Certificate, to restore him
to it, or provide him with an other: But he told him plainly his fault was such
that he could not do it; the other pressed him vehemently and fell down on his
knees, and begged it of him with many Tears; but finding that could not
prevail, he said he should be utterly Ruined if he did it not; and he should
Curse him for it every day. But that having no Effect, then he fell out into
all the reproachful words, that Passion and Despair could inspire him with, to
which all the answer the Lord Chief Baron made, was, that he could very well
bear all his Reproaches, but he could not for all that set his hand to his
Certificate. He saw he was Poor, so he gave him a large Charity and sent him
away.

But now he was to go on after his Pattern, Pomponius Atticus, still to favor
and relieve them that were lowest; So besides great Charities to the
Nonconformists, who were then as he thought too hardly used, he took great care
to cover them all he could, from the Severities some designed against them, and
discouraged those who were inclined to stretch the Laws too much against them:
He lamented the differences that were raised in this Church very much, and
according to the Impartiality of his Justice, he blamed some things on both
sides, which I shall set down with the same freedom that he spoke them. He
thought many of the Nonconformists; had merited highly in the Business of the
Kings Restoration, and at least deserved that the terms of Conformity should
not have been made stricter, than they were before the War. There was not then
that dreadful prospect of Popery, that has appeared since: But that which
afflicted him most was, that he saw the Heats and Contentions which followed
upon those different Parties and Interests, did take People off from the
Indispensable things of Religion, and slackned the Zeal of other ways Good men
for the substance of it, so much being spent about External and Indifferent
things. It also gave advantages to Atheists, to treat the most Sacred Points of
our holy Faith, as Ridiculous, when they saw the Professors of it contend, so
fiercely, and with such bitterness, about lesser Matters: He was much offended
at all those Books that were written, to expose the contrary Sect to the scorn
and contempt of the Age in a wanton and petulant Style; He thought such Writers
wounded the Christian Religion, through the sides of those who differed from
them: while a sort of lewd People, who having assumed to themselves the Title
of the Wits (though but a very few of them have a right to it) took up from
both hands, what they had said, to make one another show Ridiculous, and from
thence persuaded the World to laugh at both, and at all Religion for their
sakes. And therefore he often wished there might be some Law, to make all
Scurrility or Bitterness in Disputes about Religion punishable* But as he
lamented the proceedings too rigourously against the Nonconformists, so he
declared himself always of the side of the Church of England, and said those of
the Separation were good Men, but they had narrow Souls, who would break the
Peace of the Church, about such inconsiderable Matters, as the points in
difference were.

He scarce ever meddled in State Intrigues, yet upon a Proposition that was set
on foot by the Lord Keeper Bridgeman, for a Comprehension of the more moderate
Dissenters, and a limited Indulgence toward such as could not be brought
within the Comprehension, he dispensed with his Maxim, of avoiding to engage
in Matters of State. There were several Meetings upon that occasion. The Divine
of the Church of England that appeared most considerably for it, was Doctor
Wilkins, afterward promoted to the Bishopric of Chester, a Man of as great a
Mind, as true a Judgment, as eminent Virtues, and of as good a Soul, as any I
ever knew. He being determined as well by his excellent temper, as by his
Foresight and Prudence, by which he early perceived the great Prejudices that
Religion received, and the vast Dangers the Reformation was like to fall under
by those Divisions; set about that project with the Magnanimity that was indeed
peculiar to himself; for though he was much Censured by many of his own side,
and seconded by very few, yet he pushed it as far as he could: After several
Conferences with two of the Eminentest of the Presbiterian Divines, Heads were
agreed on, some Abatements were to be made, and Explanations were to be
accepted of. The particulars of that Project being thus concerted, they were
brought to the Lord Chief Baron, who put them in form of a Bill, to be
presented to the next Sessions of Parliament.

But two Parties appeared vigorously against this Design, the one was of some
zealous Clergymen, who thought it below the Dignity of the Church to alter
Laws, and change Setlements for the sake of some whom they Esteemed
Schismatics: They also believed, it was better to keep them out of the Church,
than bring them into it, since a Faction upon that would arise in the Church,
which they thought might be more Dangerous than the Schism it self was. Besides
they said, if some things were now to be changed in Compliance with the humor
of a party, as soon as that was done, another party might demand other
Concessions, and there might be as good reasons invented for these as for
those: Many such Concessions might also shake those of our own Communion, and
tempt them to forsake us, and go over to the Church of Rome, pretending that we
changed so often, that they were thereby inclined to be of a Church, that was
constant and true to her self. These were the reasons brought, and chiefly
insisted on against all Comprehension; and they wrought upon the greater part
of the House of Commons, so that they passed a Vote against the receiving of
any Bill for that Effect.

There were others that opposed it upon very different ends: They designed to
shelter the Papists from the Execution of the Law, and saw clearly that nothing
could bring in Popery so well as a Toleration. But to tolerate Popery
barefaced, would have startled the Nation too much; so it was Necessary to
hinder all the Propositions for Union, since the keeping up the differences was
the best Color they could find, for getting the Tolleration to pass only as a
slackning the Laws against Dissenters, whose Numbers and Wealth made it
advisable to have some regard to them; and under this pretense Popery might
have crept in more covered, and less regarded: So these Councils being more
acceptable to some concealed Papists then in great Power, as has since appeared
but too Evidently, the whole Project for Comprehension was let fall, and those
who had set it on foot, came to be looked on with an ill eye, as secret
Favorers of the Dissenters, Underminers of the Church, and evey thing else
that Jealousy and distaste could cast on them.

But upon this occasion the Lord Chief Baron, and Dr. Wilkins, came to contract
a firm and familiar Friendship; and the Lord Chief Baron having much Business,
and little time to spare, did to enjoy the other the more, what he had scarce
ever done before, he went sometimes to Dine with him. And though he lived in
great Friendship with some other eminent Clergymen, as Dr. Ward, Bishop of
Salisbury; Dr. Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln; Dr. Barrow, late Master of Trinity
College; Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury; and Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St.
Paul's, (Men so well known and so much Esteemed, that as it was no wonder the
Lord Chief Baron valued their Conversation highly, so those of them that are
yet alive will think it no lessening of the Character they are so deservedly
in, That they are reckoned among Judge Hale's Friends) yet there was an
intimacy and freedom in his converse with Bishop Wilkins that was singular to
him alone: He had during the late Wars, lived in a long and entire Friendship
with the Apostolical Primate of Ireland Bishop Usher: Their curious searches
into Antiquity, and the Sympathy of both their Tempers led them to a great
Agreement almost in every thing. He held also great Conversation with Mr.
Baxter, who was his Neighbor at Acton, on whom he looked as a Person of great
Devotion and Piety, and of a very subtle and quick Apprehension: their
Conversation lay most in Metaphysical and abstracted Idea's and Schemes.

He looked with great Sorrow on the Impiety and Atheism of the Age, and so he
set himself to oppose it, not only by the shining Example of his own Life, but
by engaging in a Cause, that indeed could hardly fall into better hands: And as
he could not find a Subject more worthy of himself, so there were few in the
Age that understood it so well, and could manage it more Skilfully. The
occasion that first led him to Write about it was this. He was a strict
observer of the Lords Day, in which, besides his constancy in the public
Worship of God, he used to call all his Family together, and repeat to them the
Heads of the Sermons, with some Additions of his own, which he fitted for their
Capacities, and Circumstances, and that being done, he had a Custom of
shutting himself up for two or three Hours, which he either spent in his secret
Devotions, or on such profitable Meditations as did then occur to his thoughts:
He writ them with the same simplicity that he formed them in his Mind, without
any Art, or so much as a thought to let them be published: He never Corrected
them, but laid them by, when he had finished them, having intended only to fix
and preserve his own Reflections in them; So that he used no sort of care to
polish them, or make the first draught perfecter than when they fell from his
Pen: These fell into the hands of a worthy Person, and he judging, as well he
might, that the Communicating them to the World, might be a public service,
Printed two Volumes of them in Octavo a little before the Authors Death,
Containing his CONTEMPLATIONS,
I. Of our latter End. II. Of Wisdom, and the fear of God. III. Of the
knowledge of Christ Crucified. IV. The Victory of faith over the World. V. Of
Humility. VI. Jacobs Vow. VII. Of Contentation. VIII. Of Afflictions. IX. A
good method to entertain unstable and troublesome times. X. Changes and
Troubles, a Poem. XI. Of the Redemption of time. XII. The great Audit. XIII
Directions touching keeping the Lords Day, in a Letter to his Children. XIV.
Poems Written upon Christmass-day.
In the 2 d. Volume.
I. An Enquiry touching Happiness. II. Of the Chief end of Man. III. Upon 12
Ecles. 1. Remember thy Creator. IV. Upon the 51. Psalm. v. 10. Create a clean
heart in me, with a Poem. V. The folly and Mischief of Sin. VI. Of self Denial.
VII. Motives to Watchfulness, in reference to the Good and Evil Angels. VIII.
Of Moderation of the Affections. IX. Of Worldly hope and Expectation. X. Upon
13. Heb. 14. We have here no Continuing City. XI. Of Contentedness and
Patience. XII. Of Moderation of Anger. XIII. A preparative against Afflictions.
XIV. Of Submission, Prayer, and Thanksgiving. XV. Of Prayer and Thanksgiving on
Psalm. 116.12. XVI. Meditations on the Lords Prayer, with a Paraphrase upon it.


In them there appears a Generous and true Spirit of Religion, mixed with most
serious and fervent Devotion, and perhaps with the more advantage, that the
Style wants some Correction, which shows they were the genuine Productions of
an excellent Mind, entertaining it self in secret with such Contemplations. The
Style is clear and Masculine, in a due temper between flatness and affectation,
in which he expresses his thoughts both easily and decently: In writing these
Discourses, having run over most of the Subjects that his own Circumstances led
him chiefly to consider, he began to be in some pain to choose new Arguments;
and therefore resolved to fix on a Theme that should hold him longer.

He was soon determined in his Choice, by the immoral and irreligious
Principles and Practices, that had so long vexed his Righteous Soul: And
therefore began a great design against Atheism, the first part of which is
only Printed, of the Origination of Mankind, designed to prove the Creation of
the World, and the truth of the Mosaical History.

The Second part was of the Nature of the Soul, and of a future State.

The Third part was concerning the Attributes of God, both from the abstracted
Idea's of him, and the Light of Nature; the Evidence of Providence, the notions
of Morality, and the voice of Conscience.

And the Fourth part was concerning the Truth and Authority of the Scriptures,
with Answers to the Objections against them: On writing these he spent Seven
years. He Wrote them with so much Consideration, that one who perused the
Original under his own hand, which was the first draught of it; told me, he did
not remember of any considerable Alteration, perhaps not of twenty words in the
whole Work.

The way of his Writing them, only on the Evenings of the Lords Day, when he
was in Town, and not much oftener when he was in the Country, made, that they
are not so contracted, as it is very likely he would have writ them, if he had
been more at leisure to have brought his thoughts into a narrower Compass, and
fewer words.

But making some Allowance for the largeness of the Style, that Volum that is
Printed, is generally acknowledged to be one of the perfectest pieces both of
Learning and Reasoning that has been Writ on that Subject: And he who read a
great part of the other Volumes told me, they were all of a piece with the
first.

When he had finished this Work, he sent it by an unknown hand to Bishop
Wilkins, to desire his Judgment of it; But he that brought it, would give no
other Account of the Author, but that he was not a Clergy man. The Bishop, and
his worthy Friend Dr. Tillotson, read a great deal of it with much pleasure,
but could not imagine who could be the Author, and how a Man that was Master of
so much Reason, and so great a variety of Knowledge, should be so unknown to
them, that they could not find him out, by those Characters, which are so
little Common. At last Dr. Tillotson guessed it must be the Lord Chief Baron,
to which the other presently agreed, wondering he had been so long in finding it
out. So they went immediately to him, and the Bishop thanking him for the
Entertainment he had received from his Works, he blushed extremely, not without
some displeasure, apprehending that the Person he had trusted had discovered
him. But the Bishop soon cleared that, and told him, he had discovered himself,
for the learning of that Book was so various, that none but he could be the
Author of it. And that Bishop having a freedom in delivering his opinion of
things and Persons, which perhaps few ever managed both with so much plainness
and Prudence, told him, there was nothing could be better said on these
Arguments, if he could bring it into a less Compass, but if he had not leisure
for that, he thought it much better to have it come out, though a little too
large, than that the World should be deprived of the good which it must needs
do. But our Judge, had never the opportunities of revising it, so a little
before his Death, he sent the first part of it to the Press.

In the beginning of it, he gives an Essay of his Excellent way of Methodizing
things, in which he was so great a Master, that whatever he undertook, he would
presently cast into so perfect a Scheme, that he could never afterward Correct
it: He runs out Copiously upon the Argument of the Impossibility of an Eternal
Succession of Time, to show that Time and Eternity are inconsistent one with
another; And that therefore all Duration that was past, and defined by Time,
could not be from Eternity, and he shows the difference between successive
Eternity already past, and one to come; So that though the latter is possible,
the former is not so; for all the parts of the former have actually been, and
therefore being defined by Time, cannot be Eternal; whereas the other are still
future to all Eternity, so that this reasoning cannot be turned to prove the
possibility of Eternal Successions, that have been, as well as Eternal
Successions that shall be. This he follows with a Strength, I never met with in
any that Managed it before him.

He brings next all those Moral Arguments, to prove that the World had a
beginning; agreeing to the Account Moses gives of it, as that no History rises
higher, than near the time of the Deluge; and that the first Foundation of
Kingdoms, the Invention of Arts, the Beginnings of all Religions, the gradual
Plantation of the World, and Increase of Mankind, and the Consent of Nations do
agree with it. In managing these, as he shows profound Skill both in
Historical, and Philosophical Learning, so he gives a Noble Discovery of his
great Candor and Probity, that he would not Impose on the Reader with a false
show of reasoning by Arguments, that he knew had Flawes in them; and therefore
upon every one of these, he adds such Allays, as in a great measure lessened
and took off their force, with as much Exactness of Judgment, and strictness of
Censure, as if he had been set to Plead for the other Side: And indeed Sums up
the whole Evidence for Religion, as impartially as ever he did in a Trial for
Life or Death to the Jury; which how Equally and Judiciously he always did, the
whole Nation well knows.

After that, he Examines the Ancient Opinions of the Philosophers, and inlarges
with a great variety of curious Reflections in answering that only Argument,
that has any appearance of Strength for the Casual production of Man, from the
origination of Insects out of putrified Matter, as is commonly supposed, and he
concluded the Book, showing how Rational and Philosophical the Account which
Moses gives of it is. There is in it all a sagacity and quickness of Thought,
mixed with great and curious Learning, that I confess I never met together in
any other Book on that Subject: Among other Conjectures, one he gives
concerning the Deluge is, that he did not think the Face of the Earth and the
Waters, were altogether the same before the Universal Deluge, and after: But
possibly the Face of the Earth was more even than now it is: The Seas possibly
more dilated and extended, and not so deep as now* And a little after, possibly
the Seas have undermined much of the appearing Continent of Earth. This I the
rather take notice of, because it has been since his Death, made out in a most
Ingenious, and most Elegantly Writ Book, by Mr. Burnet of Christ's College in
Cambridge, who has given such an Essay toward the proving the possibility of
an universal Deluge, and from thence, has Collected with great Sagacity what
Paradise was before it, as has not been offered by any Philosopher before him.

While the Judge was thus employing his time, the Lord Chapter Just. Keyling dying,
he was on the 18 th. of May 1671, promoted to be Lord Chief Justice of England.
He had made the Pleas of the Crown one of his Chief Studies, and by much
search, and long Observation, had Composed that great Work concerning them,
formerly mentioned: He that holds the high Office of Iusticiary in that Court,
being the Chief Trustee, and Assertor of the Liberties of his Country; all
People applauded this Choice, and thought their Liberties could not be better
deposited than in the hands of one, that as he understood them well, so he had
all the Justice and Courage, that so Sacred a Trust required. One thing was
much observed and commended in him, that when there was a great Inequality in
the Ability and Learning of the Counselors that were to Plead one against
another: He thought it became him, as the Judge, to Supply that; so he would
enforce what the weaker Council managed but indifferently, and not suffer the
more Learned to carry the Business by the Advantage they had over the others in
their quickness and skill in Law, and readiness in Pleading, till all things
were cleared in which the Merits and Strength of the ill defended Cause lay. He
was not satisfied barely to give his Judgment in Causes, but did especially in
all Intricate ones, give such an Account of the Reasons that prevailed with
him; that the Council did not only acquiesce in his Authority, but were so
convinced by his Reasons, that I have heard many profess that he brought them
often to change their opinions; so that his giving of judgment was really a
learned Lecture upon that point of Law: and which was yet more, the Parties
themselves, though Interest does too commonly corrupt the Judgment, were
generally satisfied with the Justice of his decisions, even when they were made
against them. His Impartial Justice, and great Diligence, drew the Chief
Practice after him, into whatsoever Court he came: since, though the Courts of
the Common Pleas, the Exchequer and the King's Bench, are appointed for the
Trial of Causes of different Natures, yet it is easy to bring most Causes into
any of them, as the Council or Attorneys please; so as he had drawn the
business much after him, both into the Common Pleas, and the Exchequer, it now
followed him into the King's Bench, and many Causes that were depending in the
Exchequer and not determined, were let fall there, and brought again before him
in the Court to which he was now removed. And here did he spend the rest of his
public Life and Employment: But about Four years and a half after this
Advancement, he who had hitherto enjoyed a firm and vigorous Health, to which
his great Temperance, and the Equality of his Mind, did not a little conduce,
was on a sudden brought very low by an Inflammation in his Midriff, which in
two days time broke the Constitution of his Health to such a degree, that he
never recovered it: He became so Asthmatical, that with great difficulty he
could fetch his Breath, that determined in a Dropsy, of which he afterward
Died. He understood Physic so well, that considering his Age, he concluded his
Distemper must carry him off in a little time; and therefore he resolved to
have some of the last Months of his Life reserved to himself, that being freed
of all Worldly Cares, he might be preparing for his Change: He was also so much
disabled in his Body, that he could hardly, though supported by his Servants,
walk through Westminster Hall, or endure the Toil of Business; he had been a
long time wearied with the distractions that his Employment had brought on him,
and his Profession was become ungrateful to him; he loved to apply himself
wholly to better Purposes, as will appear by a Paper that he writ on this
Subject, which I shall here Insert.

First, If I consider the Business of my Profession, whether as an Advocate, or
as a Judge, it is true I do acknowledge by the Institution of Almighty God, and
the Dispensation of his Providence, I am bound to Industry and Fidelity in it:
And as it is an act of Obedience unto his Will, it carries with it some things
of Religious Duty, and I may and do take Comfort in it, and expect a Reward of
my Obedience to him, and the good that I do to Mankind therein, from the bounty
and beneficence and promise of Almighty God; and it is true also that without
such Employments, civil Societies cannot be supported, and great good redounds
to Mankind from them, and in these respects the Conscience of my own Industry,
Fidelity and Integrity in them, is a great comfort and satisfaction to me. But
yet this I must say concerning these Employments, considered simply in
themselves, that they are very full of Cares, Anxieties and Perturbations.

Secondly, That though they are beneficial to others, yet they are of the least
benefit to him that is employed in them.

Thirdly, That they do necessarily involve the party, whose office it is, in
great Dangers, Difficulties, and Calumnies.

Fourthly, That they only serve for the Meridian of this Life, which is short
and uncertain.

Fifthly, That though it be my Duty, faithfully to serve in them, while I am
called to them, and till I am duly called from them, yet they are great
consumers of that little time we have here, which as it seems to me, might be
better spent in a pious contemplative Life, and a due provision for Eternity: I
do not know a better temporal Employment than Martha had, in testifying her
Love and Duty to our Savior, by making provision for him, yet our Lord tells
her, That though she was troubled about many things, there was only one thing
necessary, and Mary had chosen the better part.

By this the Reader will see that he continued in his Station upon no other
Consideration, but that being set in it by the providence of God, he judged he
could not abandon that Post which was assigned him, without preferring his own
private Inclination to the Choice God had made for him; but now that same
Providence having by this great Distemper disengaged him from the Obligation of
holding a Place, which he was no longer able to discharge, he resolved to
resign it: This was no sooner surmised abroad, than it drew upon him the
Importunities of all his Friends, and the clamor of the whole Town to divert
him from it, but all was to no purpose; there was but one Argument that could
move him, which was, that he was obliged to continue in the Employment God had
put him in for the good of the public; but to this he had such an Answer, that
even those who were most concerned in his withdrawing, could not but see, that
the reasons inducing him to it, were but too strong; so he made Applications to
his Majesty for his Writ of Ease, which the King was very unwilling to grant
him, and offered to let him hold his Place still, he doing what Business he
could in his Chamber; but he said, he could not with a good Conscience continue
in it, since he was no longer able to discharge the Duty belonging to it.

But yet such was the General Satisfaction which all the Kingdom received by
his Excellent Administration of Justice, that the King, though he could not
well deny his Request, yet he deferred the Granting of it as long as was
possible: Nor could the Lord Chancellor be prevailed with to move the King to
hasten his Discharge, though the Chief Justice often pressed him to it.

At last having wearied himself, and all his Friends, with his importunate
desires, and growing sensibly weaker in Body, he did upon the 21 th. day of
February, 28. Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1675/6. go before a Master of the Chancery,
with a little Parchment Deed, drawn by Himself, and Written all with his own
hand, and there Sealed and delivered it, and acknowledged it to be Enrolled,
and afterward he brought the Original Deed to the Lord Chancellor, and did
formally surrender his Office in these words.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptura pervenerit, Matheus Hale,
miles Capitalis Iusticiarius Domini Regis ad placita-coram ipso Rege tenenda
assignatas Salu^em in Domino Sempiternam, Noveritis me praefatum Matheum Hale,
militem jam senem factum and Variis Corporis mei Senilis morbis and
infirmitatibus dire Laborantem and adhuc Detentum. Hac Charta mea Resignare and
sursum reddere Serenissimo Domino Nostro Carolo Secundo Dei Gratia Angliae
Scotiae Franciae and Hiberniae, Regi, Fidei Defensori, etc. Predictum Officium
Capitalis Iusticiarii ad plac^ta coram ipso Rege tenenda, humillime petens quod
hoc Scriptum irrotaletur de Recordo. In cujus rei Testimonium huic chartae meae
Resignationis Sigillum meum apposui, Dat vicesimo primo Die Februarii Anno
Regnidict. Dom. Regis nunc Vicesimo Octavo.

He made this Instrument as he told the L. Chancellor for two End^, the one was
to show the World his own free Concurrence to his Removal: Another was to
obviate an Objection heretofore made, that a Chief Justice being placed by
Writ, was not removable at pleasure, as Judges by Patent were; Which opinion,
as he said, was once held by his Predecessor the Lord Chief Justice Keyling,
and though he himself were always of another opinion, yet he thought it
reasonable to prevent such a Scruple.

He had the day before surrendered to the King in Person, who parted from him
with great Grace, wishing him most heartily the return of his Health, and
assuring him that he would still look upon him as one of his Judges, and have
recourse to his Advice when his Health would permit, and in the mean time would
continue his Pension during his Life.

The Good man thought this Bounty too great, and an ill Precedent for the King,
and therefore Writ a Letter to the Lord Treasurer, earnestly desiring that his
Pension might be only during Pleasure, but the King would grant it for Life,
and make it payable Quarterly.

And yet for a whole Month together, he would not suffer his Servant to Sue out
his Patent for his Pension, and when the first Payment was received, he ordered
a great part of it to Charitable Uses, and said, he intended most of it should
be so Employed as long as it was paid him.

At last he happened to Die upon the Quarter day, which was Christmas day, and
though this might have given some occasion to a dispute whither the Pension for
that Quarter were recoverable, yet the King was pleased to decide that Matter
against himself, and ordered the Pension to be paid to his Executors.

As soon as he was discharged from his great Place, he returned home with as
much Cheerfulness, as his want of Health could admit of, being now eased of a
Burden he had been of late groaning under, and so made more capable of
Enjoying that which he had much wished for, according to his Elegant
Translation of, or rather Paraphrase upon, those excellent Lines in Seneca's
Thyestes. Act. 2.

Stet quicunque volet potens,
Aulae culmine lubrico:
Me dulcis Saturet quies.
Obscuro positus loco,
Leni perfruar otio:
Nullis nota Quiritibus,
Aetas per tacitum fluat.
Sic cum Transierint mei,
Nullo cum Strepitu dies,
Plebeius moriar Senex.
Illi mors gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Let him that will ascend, the t^ttering Seat
Of courtly Grandeur, and become as great
As are his mounting Wishes: As for me,
Let sweet repose and rest my Portion be;
Give me some mean obscure Recess, a Sphere
Out of the Road of Business, or the fear
Of falling lower; where I sweetly may
My self and dear retirement still enjoy:
Let not my Life or Name be known unto
The Grandees of the Time, to'st too and fro
By Censures or Applause; but let my Age
Slide gently by, not overthwart the Stage
Of public Action, unheard, unseen,
And unconcerned, as if I near had been.
And thus, while I shall pass my silent days
In shady privacy, free from the Noise
And bustles of the mad World, then shall I
A good old Innocent Plebeian Die.
Death is a mere Surprise, a very Snare
To him, that makes it his Life's greatest Care
To be a public Pageant, known to all,
But unacquainted with himself, does fall*
Having now attained to that Privacy, which he had no less seriously than
piously wished for, he called all his Servants that had belonged to his Office
together, and told them, he had now laid down his Place, and so their
Employments were determined; upon that, he advised them to see for themselves,
and gave to some of them very considerable Presents, and to every one of them a
Token, and so dismissed all those that were not his Domestics: He was
discharged the fifteenth of February, 1675/6; And lived till the Christmas
following, but all the while was in so ill a State of Health, that there was no
hopes of his Recovery: he continued still to retire often, both for his
Devotions and Studies, and as long as he could go, went constantly to his
Closse^, and when his Infirmities increased on him, so that he was not able to
go thither himself, he made his Servants carry him thither in a Chair. At last,
as the Winter came on, he saw with great Joy his deliverance approaching, for
besides his being weary of the World, and his longings for the Blessedness of
another State, his Pains increased so on him, that no Patience inferior to his
could have born them without a great uneasiness of mind; yet he expressed to
the last such submission to the will of God, and so equal a Temper under them,
that it was visible then what mighty Effects his Philosophy and Christianity
had on him, in supporting him under such a heavy Load.

He could not lie down in Bed above a Year before his Death, by reason of the
Asthma, but sat, rather than lay in it.

He was attended on in his Sickness, by a Pious and Worthy Divine Mr. Evan
Griffith, Minister of the Parish; and it was observed that in all the
Extremities of his Pain, when ever he Prayed by him, he forbore all Complaints
or Groans, but with his Hands and Eyes lifted up, was fixed in his Devotions:
Not long before his Death, the Minister told him, there was to be a Sacrament
next Sunday at Church, but he believed he could not come and partake with the
rest; therefore he would give it to him in his own House: But he answered, No;
his Heavenly Father had prepared a Feast for him, and he would go to his
Fathers House to partake of it: So he made himself be carried thither in his
Chair, where he received the Sacrament on his Knees, with great Devotion, which
it may be supposed was the greater, because he apprehended it was to be his
Last, and so took it as his Viaticum and Provision for his Journey. He had some
secret unaccountable Presages of his Death, for he said, that if he did not Die
on such a day, (which fell to be the 25 th. of November) he believed he should
Live a Month longer, and he Died that very day Month. He continued to enjoy the
free use of his Reason and Sense to the last Moment, which he had often and
earnestly Prayed for during his Sickness: And when his Voice was so sunk that
he could not be heard, they perceived by the almost constant lifting up of his
Eyes and Hands, that he was still Aspiring toward that Blessed State, of which
he was now speedily to be possessed.

He had for many years a particular Devotion for Christmas day, and after he
had received the Sacrament, and been in the performance of the public Worship
of that day, he commonly wrote a Copy of Verses on the Honor of his Savior,
as a fit Expression of the Joy he felt in his Soul, at the return of that
Glorious Anniversary. There are Seventeen of those Copies Printed, which he
Writ on Seventeen several Christmas days, by which the World has a Taste of his
Poetical Genius, in which, if he had thought it worth his time to have
Excelled, he might have been Eminent as well as in other things; but he Writ
them rather to entertain himself, than to merit the Laurel.

I shall here add one which has not been yet Printed, and it is not unlikely it
was the last he Writ; it is a Paraphrase on Simeon's Song; I take it from his
blotted Copy not at all finished, so the Reader is to make Allowance for any
Imperfection he may find in it.

Blessed Creator, who before the Birth
Of Time, or e're the Pillars of the Earth
Were fixed or formed, did lay that great Design
Of Man's Redemption, and did define
In thine Eternal Councels all the Scene
Of that stupendous Business, and when
It should appear, and though the very day
Of its Epiphany, concealed lay
Within thy mind, yet thou were pleased to show
Some glimpses of it, unto Men below,
In Visions, Types, and Prophesies, as we
Things at a distance in Perspective see:
But thou were pleased to let thy Servant know
That that Blessed hour, that seemed to move so slow
Through former Ages, should at last attain
Its time, e're my few Sands, that yet remain
Are spent; and that these Aged Eyes
Should see the day, when Jacob's Star should rise.
And now thou have fulfilled it, blessed Lord
Dismiss me now, according to thy word;
And let my Aged Body now return
To Rest, and Dust, and drop into an Urn;
For I have lived enough* mine Eyes have seen
Thy much desired Salvation, that has been
So long, so dearly wished, the Joy; the Hope
Of all the Ancient Patriarchs, the Scope
Of all the Prophesies, and Mysteries,
Of all the Types unvailed, the Histories
Of Jewish Church unridl'd, and the bright
And Orient Sun arisen to give light
To Gentiles, and the joy of Israel,
The Worlds Redeemer, blessed Emanuel.
Let this sight close mine Eyes, it is loss to see,
After this Vision, any sight but Thee.
Thus he used to Sing on the former Christmas-days, but now he was to be
admitted to bear his part in the new Songs above; so that day which he had
spent in so much Spiritual Joy, proved to be indeed the day of his Jubilee and
Deliverance, for between two and three in the Afternoon, he breathed out his
Righteous and pious Soul. His End was Peace, he had no struglings, nor seemed
to be in any pangs in his last Moments. He was Buried on the 4 th. of January,
Mr. Griffith Preaching the Funeral Sermon, his Text was the 57 of Isa. 1 verse.
The Righteous perishes, and no Man lays it to heart; and Merciful Men are
taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to
come. Which how fitly it was applicable upon this occasion, all that consider
the course of his Life, will easily conclude. He was Interred in the
Churchyard of Alderly, among his Ancestors; he did not much approve of Burying
in Churches, and used to say the Churches were for the Living, and the
Churchyards for the Dead. His Monument was like himself, decent and plain, the
Tombstone was black Marble, and the sides were black and white Marble, upon
which he himself had ordered this bare and humble Inscriptian to be made, HIC
INHUMATUR CORPUS MATTHEI HALE, MILITIS;

ROBERTI HALE, ET IOANNAE, UXORIS EJUS, FILII UNICI.

NATI IN HAC PAROCHIA DE ALDERLY, PRIMO DIE NOVEMBRIS, ANNO DOM. 1609. DENATI
VERO IBIDEM VICESIMO QUINTO DIE DECEMBRIS, ANNO DOM. 1676. AETATIS SUAE, LXVII.



Having thus given an Account of the most remarkable things of his Life, I am
now to present the Reader with such a Character of Him, as the laying his
several Virtues together will amount to: in which I know how difficult a Task I
undertake, for to Write defectively of Him, were to injure Him, and lessen the
Memory of one to whom I intend to do all the Right that is in my Power: On the
other hand, there is so much here to be commended, and proposed for the
Imitation of others, that I am afraid some may imagine, I am rather making a
Picture of Him, from an abstracted Idea of great Virtues, and Perfections, than
setting him out, as he truly was: But there is great Encouragement in this,
that I Write concerning a Man so fresh in all peoples Remembrance, that is so
lately Dead, and was so much and so well known, that I shall have many
Vouchers, who will be ready to justify me in all that I am to relate, and to
add a great deal to what I can say.

It has appeared in the Account of his various Learning, how great his
Capacities were, and how much they were improved by constant Study: He rose
always early in the Morning, he loved to walk much abroad, not only for his
Health, but he thought it opened his Mind, and enlarged his thoughts to have
the Creation of God before his Eyes. When he set himself to any Study, he used
to cast his design in a Scheme, which he did with a great exactness of Method;
he took nothing on Trust, but pursued his Enquires as far as they could go, and
as he was humble enough to confess his Ignorance, and submit to Mysteries which
he could not comprehend, so he was not easily imposed on, by any shows of
Reason, or the Bugbears of vulgar Opinions: He brought all his Knowledge as
much to scientifical Principles, as he possibly could, which made him neglect
the Study of Tongues, for the bent of his Mind lay another way. Discoursing
once of this to some, they said, they looked on the Common Law, as a Study that
could not be brought into a Scheme, nor formed into a Rational Science, by
reason of the Indigestedness of it, and the Multiplicity of the Cases in it,
which rendered it very heard to be understood, or reduced into a Method; But he
said, he was not of their mind, and so quickly after, he drew with his own
hand, a Scheme of the whole Order and Parts of it, in a large sheet of Paper,
to the great Satisfaction of those to whom he sent it. Upon this hint, some
pressed him to Compile a Body of the English Law; It could hardly ever be done
by a Man who knew it better, and would with more Judgment and Industry have put
it into Method; But he said, as it was a Great and Noble Design, which would be
of vast Advantage to the Nation; so it was too much for a private Man to
undertake: It was not to be Entered upon, but by the Command of a Prince, and
with the Communicated Endeavors of some of the most Eminent of the Profession.

He had great vivacity in his Fancy, as may appear by his Inclination to
Poetry, and the lively Illustrations, and many tender strains in his
Contemplations; But he looked on Eloquence and Wit, as things to be used very
chastely, in serious Matters, which should come under a severer Inquiry:
Therefore he was both, when at the Bar, and on the Bench, a great Enemy to all
Eloquence or Rhetoric in Pleading: He said, if the Judge or Jury had a right
understanding, it signified nothing, but a waste of Time, and loss of words;
and if they were weak, and easily wrought on, it was a more decent way of
corrupting them, by bribing their Fancies, and biassing their Affections; And
wondered much at that affectation of the French Lawyers in imitating the Roman
Orators in their Pleadings. For the Oratory of the Romans, was occasioned by
their popular Government, and the Factions of the City, so that those who
intended to excel in the Pleading of Causes, were trained up in the Schools of
the Rhetors, till they became ready and expert in that luscious way of
Discourse. It is true, the Composures of such a Man as Tully was, who mixed an
extraordinary Quickness, an exact Judgment, and a just Decorum with his skill
in Rhetoric, do still entertain the Readers of them with great Pleasure: But
at the same time, it must be acknowledged, that there is not that chastity of
Style, that closeness of Reasoning, nor that justness of Figures in his
Orations, that is in his other Writings; So that a great deal was said by him,
rather because he knew it would be acceptable to his Auditors, than that it was
approved of by himself; and all who read them, will acknowledge, they are better
pleased with them as Essays of Wit and Style, than as Pleadings, by which such
a Judge as ours was, would not be much wrought on. And if there are such
Grounds to censure the performances of the greatest Master in Eloquence, we may
easily infer what nauseous Discourses the other Orators made, since in Oratory
as well as in Poetry, none can do Indifferently. So our Judge wondered to find
the French, that live under a Monarchy, so fond of imitating that which was an
ill Effect of the Popular Government of Rome: He therefore pleaded himself
always in few words, and home to the Point: And when he was a Judge, he held
those that Pleaded before him, to be the main Hinge of the Business, and cut
them short when they made Excursions about Circumstances of no Moment, by which
he saved much time, and made the chief Difficulties be well Stated and Cleared.

There was another Custom among the Romans, which he as much admired, as he
despised their Rhethorick, which was, that the Iuris-Consults were the Men of
the highest Quality, who were bred to be capable of the chief Employment in the
State, and became the great Masters of their Law: These gave their opinions of
all Cases that were put to them freely, judging it below them to take any
present for it; And indeed they were only the true Lawyers among them, whose
Resolutions were of that Authority, that they made one Classis of those
Materials out of which Trebonian compiled the Digests under Justinian; for the
Orators or Causidici that Pleaded Causes, knew little of the Law, and only
employed their mercenary Tongues, to work on the Affections of the People and
Senate or the Pretors: Even in most of Tullies Orations there is little of Law,
and that little which they might sprinkle in their Declamations, they had not
from their own Knowledge, but the Resolution of some Iuris-Consult: According to
that famous Story of Servius Sulpitius, who was a Celebrated Orator, and being
to receive the Resolution of one of those that were Learned in the Law, was so
Ignorant, that he could not understand it; Upon which the Iuris-Consult
reproached him, and said, it was a shame for him that was a Nobleman, a
Senator, and a Pleader of Causes, to be thus Ignorant of Law: This touched him
so sensibly, that he set about the Study of it, and became one of the most
Eminent Iuris-Consults that ever were at Rome. Our Judge thought it might
become the greatness of a Prince, to encourage such a sort of Men, and of
Studies; in which, none in the Age he lived in was equal to the great Seldom,
who was truly in our English Law, what the old Roman Iuris-Consults were in
theirs.

But where a decent Eloquence was allowable, Judge Hale knew how to have
excelled as much as any, either in illustrating his Reasonings, by proper and
well pursued Similies, or by such tender expressions, as might work most on the
Affections, so that the present Lord Chancellor, has often said of him since
his Death, that he was the Greatest Orator he had known; for though his words
came not fluently from him, yet when they were out, they were the most
Significant, and Expressive, that the Matter could bear: Of this sort there are
many in his Contemplations made to quicken his own Devotion, which have a Life
in them becoming him that used them, and a softness fit to melt even the
harshest Tempers, accommodated to the Gravity of the Subject, and apt to excite
warm thoughts in the Readers, that as they show his excellent Temper that
brought them out, and applied them to himself, so they are of great use to all,
who would both Inform and quicken their Minds. Of his Illustrations of things
by proper Similies, I shall give a large instance out of his Book of the
Origination of Mankind, designed to expose the several different Hypotheses the
Philosophers fell on, concerning the Eternity and Original of the Universe, and
to prefer the Account given by Moses, to all their Conjectures; in which, if my
Taste does not misguide me, the Reader will find a rare and very agreeable
mixture, both of fine Wit, and solid Learning and Judgment.

[That which may illustrate my Meaning, in this preference of the revealed
Light of the Holy Scriptures, touching this Matter, above the Essays of a
Philosophical Imagination, may be this. Suppose that Greece being unacquainted
with the Curiosity of Mechanical Engines, though known in some remote Region
ofthe World, and that an excellent Artist had secretly brought and deposited in
some Field or Forest, some excellent Watch or Clock, which had been so formed,
that the Original of its Motion were Hidden, and Involved in some close
contrived piece of Mechanism, that this Watch was so framed, that the Motion
thereof might have lasted a Year, or some such time as might give a reasonable
Period for their Philosophical descanting concerning it, and that in the plain
Table there had been not only the Description and Indication of Hours, but the
Configurations and Indications of the various Phases of the Moon, the motion
and place of the Sun in the Ecliptic, and diverse other curious Indications of
Celestial Motions, and that the Scholars of the several Schools, of Epicurus,
of Aristotle, of Plato, and the rest of those Philosophical Sects, had casually
in their Walk, found this Admirable Automaton; what kind of Work would there
have been made by every Sect, in giving an account of this Phenomenon? We
should have had the Epicurean Sect, have told the Bystanders according to their
preconceived Hypothesis, that this was nothing else but an accidental
concretion of Atoms, that happily fallen together had made up the Index, the
Wheels, and the Balance, and that being happily fallen into this Posture, they
were put into Motion. Then the Cartesian falls in with him, as to the main of
their Supposition, but tells him, that he does not sufficiently explicate how
the Engine is put into Motion, and therefore to furnish this Motion, there is a
certain Materia Subtilis that pervades this Engine, and the Moveable parts,
consisting of certain Globular Atoms apt for Motion, they are thereby, and by
the Mobility of the Globular Atoms put into Motion. A Third finding fault with
the two former, because those Motions are so regular, and do express the
various Phenomena of the distribution of Time, and of the Heavenly Motions;
therefore it seems to him, that this Engine and Motion also, so Analogical to
the Motions of the Heavens, was wrought by some admirable conjunction of the
Heavenly Bodies, which formed this Instrument and its Motions, in such an
admirable Correspondency to its own Existence. A Fourth, disliking the
suppositions of the three former, tells the rest, that he has a more plain and
evident Solution of the Phenomenon, namely, The universal Soul of the World, or
Spirit of Nature, that formed so many sorts of Insects with so many Organs,
Faculties, and such congruity of their whole composition, and such curious and
various Motions as we may observe in them, has formed and set into Motion this
admirable Automaton, and regulated and ordered it, with all these congruities
we see in it. Then steps in an Aristotelian, and being dissatisfied with all
the former Solutions, tells them, Gentlemen, you are all mistaken, your
Solutions are Inexplicable and Unsatisfactory, you have taken up certain
precarious Hypotheses, and being prepossesed with these Creatures of your own
fancies, and in love with them, right or wrong, you form all your Conceptions
of things according to those fancied and preconceived Imaginations. The short
of the Business is, this Machina is eternal, and so are all the Motions of it,
and in as much as a Circular Motion has no beginning or end, this Motion that
you see both in the Wheels and Index, and the successive Indications of the
Celestial Motions, is eternal, and without beginning. And this is a ready and
expedite way of solving the Phenomena, without so much ado as you have made
about it.

(...) he took that extraordinary care to keep what he did secret, that this
part of his Character must be defective, except it be acknowledged that his
Humility in covering it, commends him much more than the highest expressions of
Devotion could have done.

From the first time that the Impressions of Religion settled deeply in his
Mind, He used great caution to conceal it: not only in obedience to the Rules
given by our Savior, of Fasting, Praying, and giving Alms in Secret; but from
a particular distrust he had of himself, for he said he was afraid, he should
at some time or other, do some enormous thing, which if he were looked on as a
very Religious Man, might cast a reproach on the profession of it, and give
great advantages to impious Men, to blaspheme the name of God: But a Tree is
known by its Fruits, and he lived not only free of Blemishes, or Scandal, but
shined in all the parts of his Conversation: and perhaps the distrust he was in
of himself, contributed not a little to the Purity of his Life, for he being
thereby obliged to be more Watchful over himself, and to depend more on the
aids of the Spirit of God, no wonder if that humble temper produced those
excellent Effects in him.

He had a Soul enlarged and raised above that mean appetite of loving Money,
which is generally the root of all Evil. He did not take the profits that he
might have had by his Practice: for in common Cases, when those who came to ask
his Council gave him a Piece, he used to give back the half, and so made Ten
shillings his Fee, in ordinary Matters that did not require much time or Study:
If he saw a Cause was Unjust, he for a great while would not meddle further in
it, but to give his Advice that it was so; If the Parties after that, would go
on, they were to seek another Councellor, for he would Assist none in Acts of
Injustice: If he found the Cause doubtful or weak in point of Law, he always
advised his Clients to agree their Business: Yet afterward he abated much of
the Scrupulosity he had about Causes that appeared at first view Injust, upon
this occasion: There were two Causes brought to him, which by the ignorance of
the Party or their Attorney, were so ill represented to him, that they seemed to
be very bad, but he enquiring more narrowly into them, found they were really
very good and just; So after this he slackned much of his former Strictness, of
refusing to meddle in Causes upon the ill Circumstances that appeared in them
at first.

In his pleading he abhorred those too common faults of misreciting Evidences,
quoting Presidents, or Books falsely, or asserting things Confidently; by which
ignorant Juries, or weak Judges, are too often wrought on. He Pleaded with the
same sincerity that he used in the other parts of his Life, and used to say it
was as great a dishonor as a Man was capable of, that for a little Money he
was to be hired to say or do otherwise than as he thought: All this he ascribed
to the unmeasurable desire of heaping up Wealth, which corrupted the Souls of
some that seemed to be otherwise born and made for great things.

When he was a Practitioner, differences were often referred to him, which he
settled, but would accept of no reward for his Pains, though offered by both
Parties together, after the agreement was made; for he said in those cases he
was made a Judge, and a Judge ought to take no Money. If they told him, he lost
much of his time in considering their Business, and so ought to be acknowledged
for it; his answer was, (as one that heard it told me,) Can I spend my Time
better, than to make People friends, must I have no time allowed me to do good
in.

He was naturally a quick man, yet by much Practice on himself, he subdued that
to such a degree, that he would never run suddenly into any Conclusion
concerning any Matter of Importance. Festina lent was his beloved Motto, which
he ordered to be Engraven on the Head of his Staff, and was often heard say,
that he had observed many witty Men run into great Errors, because they did
not give themselves time to think, but the heat of Imagination making some
Notions appear in good Coolours to them, they without staying till that cooled,
were violently led by the Impulses it made on them, whereas calm and slow Men,
who pass for dull in the common estimation, could search after Truth and find
it out, as with more deliberation, so with greater certainty.

He laid aside the tenth penny of all he got for the Poor, and took great care
to be well informed of proper Objects for his Charities; And after he was a
Judge, many of the Perquisites of his Place, as his Dividend of the Rule and
Box-money, was sent by him to the Jayls to discharge poor Prisoners, who never
knew from whose hands their Releif came. It is also a Custom for the Marshall
of the King's Bench, to present the Judges of that Court with a piece of Plate
for a New-years-gift, that for the Chief Justice being larger than the rest:
This he intended to have refused, but the other Judges told him it belonged to
his Office, and the refusing it would be a prejudice to his Successors, so he
was persuaded to take it, but he sent word to the Marshall, that instead of
Plate, he should bring him the value of it in Money, and when he received it,
he immediately sent it to the Prisons, for the Releif and discharge of the poor
there. He usually invited his poor Neighbors to Dine with him, and made them
sit at Table with himself: And if any of them were Sick, so that they could not
come, he would send Meat warm to them from his Table: and he did not only
relieve the Poor in his own Parish, but sent Supplies to the Neighboring
Parishes, as there was occasion for it: And he treated them all with the
tenderness and familiarity that became one, who considered they were of the
same Nature with himself, and were reduced to no other Necessities but such as
he himself might be brought to: But for common Beggars, if any of these came to
him, as he was in his Walks, when he lived in the Country, he would ask such as
were Capable of Working, why they went about so idly; If they answered, it was
because they could find no Work, he often sent them to some Field, to gather
all the Stones in it, and lay them on a Heap, and then would pay them liberally
for their Pains: This being done, he used to send his Carts, and caused them to
be carried to such places of the Highway as needed mending.

But when he was in Town, he dealt his Charities very liberally, even among the
Street-Beggars, and when some told him, that he thereby encouraged Idleness,
and that most of these were notorious Cheats, he used to answer, that he
believed most of them were such, but among them there were some that were great
Objects of Charity, and pressed with grievous Necessities: and that he had rather
give his Alms to twenty who might be perhaps Rogues, than that one of the other
sort, should perish for want of that small Releif which he gave them.

He loved Building much, which he affected chiefly because it employed many
poor People; but one thing was observed in all his Buildings, that the changes
he made in his Houses, was always from Magnificence to Usefulness, for he
avoided every thing that looked like Pomp or Vanity, even in the Walls of his
Houses; he had good Judgment in Architecture, and an excellent faculty in
contriving well.

He was a Gentle Landlord to all his Tenants, and was ever ready upon any
reasonable Complaints, to make Abatements, for he was Merciful as well as
Righteous. One instance of this was, of a Widow that lived in London, and had a
small Estate near his House in the Country; from which her Rents were ill
Returned to her, and at a Cost which she could not well bear: so she bemoaned
her self to him, and he according to his readiness to assist all poor People,
told her, he would order his Steward to take up her Rents, and the returning
them should cost her nothing. But after that, when there was a falling of Rents
in that Country, so that it was necessary to make abatements to the Tenant; yet
he would have it to lie on himself, and made the Widow be paid her Rent as
formerly.

Another remarkable instance of his Justice and goodness was, that when he
found ill Money had been put into his hands, he would never suffer it to be
vented again; for he thought it was no excuse for him to put false Money in
other Peoples hands, because some had put it in his: A great heap of this he
had gathered together, for many had so far abused his Goodness, as to mix base
Money among the Fees that were given him: It is like he intended to have
destroyed it, but some Thieves who had observed it, broke into his Chamber and
stole it, thinking they had got a Prize; which he used to tell with some
pleasure, imagining how they found themselves deceived, when they perceived
what sort of Booty they had fallen on.

After he was made a Judge, he would needs pay more for every Purchase he made
than it was worth; If it had been but a Horse he was to Buy, he would have
out-bid the Price: and when some represented to him, that he made ill Bargains,
he said; it became Judges to pay more for what they bought, than the true
Value; that so those with whom they dealt, might not think they had any right
to their favor, by having sold such things to them at an easy rate: and said
it was suitable to the Reputation, which a Judge ought to preserve, to make such
Bargains, that the World might see they were not too well used upon some secret
Account.

In Sum, his Estate did show how little he had minded the raising a great
Fortue, for from a Hundred pound a Year, he raised it not quite to Nine
Hundred, and of this a very Confiderable part came in by his share of Mr.
Selden's Estate; yet this, considering his great Practice while a Counselor,
and his constant, frugal, and modest way of Living, was but small a Fortune: In
the share that fell to him by Mr. Selden's Will, one memorable thing was done
by him, with the other Executors, by which they both showed their regard to
their dead Friend, and their Love of the Public; His Library was valued at
some Thousands of pounds, and was believed to be one of the curiousest
Collections in Europe: so they resolved to keep this entire, for the Honor of
Selden's Memory, and gave it to the University of Oxford, where a noble Room
was added to the former Library for its Reception, and all due respects have
been since showed by that Great and Learned Body, to those their worthy
Benefactors, who not only parted so generously with this great Treasure, but
were a little put to it how to oblige them, without crossing the Will of their
dead Friend. Mr. Seldom had once intended to give his Library to that
University, and had left it so by his Will; but having occasion for a
Manuscript, which belonged to their Library, they asked of him a Bond of a
Thousand pound for its Restitution; this he took so ill at their hands, that he
struck out that part of his Will by which he had given them his Library, and
with some passion declared they should never have it: The Executors stuck at
this a little, but having considered better of it, came to this Resolution;
That they were to be the Executors of Mr. Selden's Will, and not of his
Passion; so they made good what he had intended in cold Blood, and past over
what his Passion had suggested to him.

The parting with so many excellent Books, would have been as uneasy to our
Judge, as any thing of that nature could be, if a pious regard to his friends
Memory had not prevailed over him; for he valued Books and Manuscripts above
all things in the World: He himself had made a great and rare Collection of
Manuscripts belonging to the Law of England; he was Forty years in gathering
it: He himself said it cost him about fifteen Hundred pounds, and calls it in
his Will, a Treasure worth having and keeping, and not fit for every Man's view;
These all he left to Lincoln's Inn, and for the Information of those who are
curious to search into such things; there shall be a Catalogue of them added at
the end of this Book.

By all these instances it does appear, how much he was raised above the World,
or the love of it. But having thus mastered things without him, his next Study
was to overcome his own Inclinations: He was as he said himself naturally
passionate; I add, as he said himself, for that appeared by no other Evidence,
save that sometimes his Color would rise a little; but he so governed himself,
that those who lived long about him, have told me they never saw him disordered
with Anger, though he met with some Trials, that the nature of Man is as little
able to bear, as any whatsoever. There was one who did him a great Injury,
which it is not ncecssary to mention, who coming afterward to him for his
Advice in the settlement of his Estate, he gave it very frankly to him, but
would accept of no Fee for it, and thereby showed both that he could forgive as
a Christian, and that he had the Soul of a Gentleman in him, not to take Money
of one that had wronged him so heinously. And when he was asked by one, how he
could use a Man so kindly, that had wronged him so much, his Answer was, he
thanked God he had learned to forget Injuries. And besides the great temper he
expressed in all his public Employments, in his Family he was a very gentle
Master: He was tender of all his Servants, he never turned any away, except
they were so faulty, that there was no hope of reclaiming them: When any of
them had been long out of the way, or had neglected any part of their Duty; he
would not see them at their first coming home, and sometimes not till the next
day, least when his displeasure was quick upon him, he might have chid them
indecently; and when he did reprove them, he did it with that sweetness and
gravity, that it appeared he was more concerned for their having done a fault,
than for the Offense given by it to himself: But if they became immoral or
unruly, then he turned them away, for he said, he that by his place ought to
punish disorders in other People, must by no means suffer them in his own
House: He advanced his Servants according to the time they had been about him,
and would never give occasion to Envy among them, by raising the younger Clerks
above those who had been longer with him. He treated them all with great
affection, rather as a Friend, than a Master, giving them often good Advice and
Instruction. He made those who had good places under him, give some of their
profits to the other Servants who had nothing but their Wages: When he made his
Will, he left Legacies to every one of them* But he expressed a more particular
kindness for one of them Robert Gibbon, of the middle Temple, Esquire In whom he
had that Confidence, that he left him one of his Executors. I the rather
mention him, because of his noble Gratitude to his worthy Benefactor and
Master, for he has been so careful to preserve his Memory, that as he set those
on me, at whose desire I undertook to write his Life; So he has procured for me
a great part of those Memorials, and Informations, out of which I have Composed
it.

The Judge was of a most tender and compassionate Nature; this did eminently
appear in his Trying and giving Sentence upon Criminals, in which he was
strictly careful, that not a circumstance should be neglected, which might any
way clear the Fact: He behaved himself with that regard to the Prisoners, which
became both the gravity of a Judge, and the pity that was due to Men, whose
Lives lay at Stake, so that nothing of jearing or unreasonable severity ever
fell from him. He also examined the Witnesses in the softest manner, taking
care that they should be put under no Confusion, which might disorder their
Memory: and he Summed all the Evidence so equally when he charged the Jury,
that the Criminals themselves never complained of him. When it came to him to
give Sentence, he did it with that Composedness and Decency, and his Speeches
to the Prisoners, directing them to prepare for Death, were so Weighty, so free
of all Affectation, and so Serious and Devout, that many loved to go to the
Trials, when he sat Judge, to be edified by his Speeches, and behavior in
them, and used to say, they heard very few such Sermons.

But though the pronouncing the Sentence of Death, was the piece of his
Employment, that went most against the Grain with him; yet in that, he could
never be molified to any tenderness which hindered Justice. When he was once
pressed to recommend some (whom he had Condemned) to his Majesty's Mercy and
Pardon; he answered he could not think they deserved a Pardon, whom he himself
had Adjudged to Die: So that all he would do in that kind, was to give the King
a true Account of the Circumstances of the Fact, after which, his Majesty was
to Consider whether he would interpose his Mercy, or let Justice take place.

His Mercifulness extended even to his Beasts, for when the Horses that he had
kept long, grew Old, he would not suffer them to be Sold, or much Wrought, but
ordered his Men to turn them loose on his Grounds, and put them only to easy
work, such as going to Market and the like; he used old Dogs also with the same
care: His Shepherd having one that was become blind with Age, he intended to
have killed or lost him, but the Judge coming to hear of it, made one of his
Servants bring him home and fed him till he Died: And he was scarce ever seen
more Angry than with one of his Servants for neglecting a Bird, that he kept,
so that it Died for want of Food.

He was a great incourager of all young Persons, that he saw followed their
Books diligently, to whom he used to give directions concerning the method of
their Study, with a humanity and sweetness, that wrought much on all that came
near him: and in a smiling pleasant way, he would admonish them, If he saw any
thing amiss in them: particularly if they went too fine in their Clothes, he
would tell them, it did not become their Profession: He was not pleased to see
Students wear long Perriwigs, or Attorneys go with Swords; so that such young
Men as would not be persuaded to part with those Vanities, when they went to
him laid them aside, and went as plain as they could, to avoid the reproof
which they knew they might otherwise expect.

He was very free and communicative in his Discourse, which he most commonly
fixed on some good and useful Subject, and loved for an Hour or two at Night,
to be visited by some of his Friends. He neither said nor did any thing with
Affectation, but used a simplicity, that was both natural to himself, and very
easy to others: And though he never studied the modes of Civility or Court
breeding, yet he knew not what it was to be rude or harsh with any, except he
were impertinently addressed to in matters of Justice, then he would raise his
Voice a little, and so shake off those Importunities.

In his Furniture, and the service of his Table, and way of Living; he liked
the old plainness so well, that as he would set up none of the new Fashions, so
he rather affected a Courseness in the use of the old ones: which was more the
effect of his Philosophy than disposition, for he loved fine things too much at
first: He was always of an equal Temper, rather cheerful than merry. Many
wondered to see the evenness of his deportment, in some very sad passages of
his Life.

Having lost one of his Sons, the manner of whose Death had some grievous
circumstances in it; One coming to see him and Condole, he said to him, those
were the effects of living long, such must look to see many sad and
unacceptable things; and having said that, he went to other Discourses, with
his ordinary freedom of Mind; for though he had a Temper so tender, that sad
things were apt enough to make deep Impressions upon him, yet the regard he had
to the Wisdom and providence of God, and the just Estimate he made of all
Eternal things, did to admiration maintain the tranquillity of his Mind, and he
gave no occasion by idleness to Melancholy to corrupt his Spirit, but by the
perpetual bent of his thoughts, he knew well how to divert them from being
oppressed with the excesses of Sorrow.

He had a generous and noble Idea of God in his Mind, and this he found did
above all other Considerations preserve his quiet. And indeed that was so well
Established in him, that no accidents, how sudden soever, were observed to
discompose him: Of which an Eminent Man of that Profession, gave me this
instance: In the year 1666, an Opinion did run through the Nation, that the end
of the World would come that year. This, whether set on by Astrologers, or
advanced by those who thought it might have some relation to the number of the
Beast in the Revelation, or promoted by Men of ill Designs, to disturb the
public Peace, had spread mightily among the people; and Judge Hale going that
year the Western Circuit, it happened, that as he was on the Bench at the
Assizes, a most terrible Storm fell out very unexpectedly, accompanied with
such flashes of Lightning, and claps of Thunder, that the like will hardly fall
out in an Age; upon which a whisper or a rumor run through the Crowd, that now
was the World to end, and the day of Judgment to begin, and at this there
followed a general Consternation in the whole Assembly, and all Men forgot the
Business they were met about, and betook themselves to their Prayers: This
added to the horror raised by the Storm looked very dismally; in so much that
my Author, a Man of no ordinary Resolution, and firmenss of mind, confessed it
made a great Impression on himself. But he told me, that he did observe the
Judge was not a whit affected, and was going on with the Business of the Court
in his ordinary manner; from which he made this conclusion, that his thoughts
were so well fixed, that he believed if the World had been really to end, it
would have given him no considerable disturbance.

But I shall now conclude all that I shall say concerning him, with what one of
the greatest Men of the Profession of the Law, sent me as an abstract of the
Character he had made of him, upon long observation, and much converse with
him: It was sent me, that from thence with the other Materials, I might make
such a Representation of him to the World, as he indeed deserved, but I
resolved not to shred it out in parcels, but to set it down entirely as it was
sent me, hoping that as the Reader will be much delighted with it, so the Noble
person that sent it, will not be offended with me for keeping it entire, and
setting it in the best light I could; It begins abruptly, being designed to
supply the defects of others, from whom I had dearlier and more copious
Informations.

He would never be brought to discourse of public Matters in private
Conversation, but in questions of Law, when any young Lawyer put a Case to him
he was very communicative, especially while he was at the Bar: But when he came
to the Bench, he grew more reserved, and would never suffer his Opinion in any
case to be known, till he was obliged to declare it Iudicially; And he
concealed his Opinion in great Cases so carefully, that the rest of the Judges
in the same Court could never perceive it: His reason was, because every Judge
ought to give Sentence according to his own Persuasion and Conscience, and not
to be swayed by any respect or deference to another Man's Opinion: And by this
means it has happened some times, that when all the Barons of the Exchequer
had delivered their Opinions, and agreed in their Reasons and Arguments; yet he
coming to speak last, and differing in Judgment from them, has expressed himself
with so much Weight and Solidity, that the Barons have immediately retracted
their Votes and concurr'd-with him. He has sat as a Judge in all the Courts of
Law, and in two of them as Chief, but still wherever he sat, all Business of
consequence followed him, and no Man was content to sit down by the Judgment of
any other Court, till the Case were brought before him, to see whether he were
of the same mind; And his Opinion being once known, Men did readily acquiesce
in it; and it was very rarely seen, that any Man attempted to bring it about
again, and he that did so, did it upon great disadvantages, and was always
looked upon as a very contentious Person; So that what Cicero says of Brutus,
did very often happen to him, Etiam quos contra Statuit Aequos placatosque
Dimisit.

Nor did men reverence his Judgment and Opinion in Courts of Law only: But his
Authority was as great in Courts of Equity, and the same respect and submission
was paid to him there too; And this appeared not only in his own Court of
Equity in the Exchequer Chamber, but in the Chancery too, for thither he was
often called to advise and assist the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper for the
time being; and if the Cause were of difficult Examination, or intricated and
entangled with variety of Settlements, no man ever showed a more clear and
discerning Judgment: If it were of great Value, and great Persons interested in
it, no man ever showed greater Courage and Integrity in laying aside all
respect of Persons: When he came to deliver his Opinion, he always put his
Discourse into such a method, that one part of it gave light to the other, and
where the proceedings of Chancery might prove Inconvenient to the Subject, he
never spared to observe and reprove them: And from his Observations and
Discourses, the Chancery has taken occasion to Establish many of those Rules
by which it Governs it self at this day.

He did look upon Equity as a part of the Common Law, and one of the Grounds of
it; and therefore as near as he could, he did always reduce it to certain Rules
and Principles, that men might Study it as a Science, and not think the
Administration of it had any thing arbitrary in it. Thus eminent was this man
in every Station, and into what Court soever he was called, he quickly made it
appear, that he deserved the chief Seat there.

As great a Lawyer as he was, he would never suffer the strictness of Law to
prevail against Conscience, as great a Chancellor as he was, he would make use
of all the Niceties and Subtilties in Law, when it tended to support Right and
Equity. But nothing was more admirable in him, than his Patience: He did not
affect the Reputation of Quickness and dispatch, by a hasty and Captious
hearing of the Council: He would bear with the meanest, and gave every man his
full Scope, thinking it much better to lose Time than Patience: In summing up
of an Evidence to a Jury, he would always require the Bar to interrupt him if
he did mistake, and to put him in mind of it, if he did forget the least
Circumstance; some Judges have been disturbed at this as a Rudeness, which he
always looked upon as a Service and Respect done to him.

His whole Life was nothing else but a continual course of Labor and Industry,
and when he could borrow any time from the public Service, it was wholly
employed either in Philosophical or Divine Meditations, and even that was a
public Service too as it has proved; For they have occasioned his Writing of
such Treatises, as are become the Choicest entertainment of wise and good Men,
and the World has reason to wish that more of them were Printed: He that
considers the active part of his Life, and with what unwearied Diligence and
Application of Mind, he dispatched all Men's Business which came under his Care,
will wonder how he could find any time for Contemplation: He that considers
again the various Studies he past through, and the many Collections and
Observations he has made, may as justly wonder how he could find any time for
Action: But no Man can wonder at the exemplary Piety and Innocence of such a
Life so spent as this was, wherein as he was careful to avoid every idle word,
so it is manifest he never spent an idle day. They who come far short of this
Great Man, will be apt enough to think that this is a Panegyric, which indeed
is a History, and but a little part of that History which was (...) great Truth
to be related of hi^* Men who despair of attaining such perfection, are not
willing to believe that any Man else did ever arrive at such a Height.

He was the greatest Lawyer of the Age, and might have had what Practice he
pleased, but though he did most Conscientiously affect the labors of his
Profession, yet at the same time, he despised the Gain of it, and of those
profits which he would allow himself to receive, he always set apart a tenth
Penny for the Poor, which he ever dispensed with that secrecy, that they who
were relieved, seldom or never knew their Benefactor: He took more pains to
avoid the Honors and Preferments of the Gown, than others do to compass them.
His Modesty was beyond all Example, for where some Men who never attained to
half his Knowledge, have been pufft up with a high conceit of themselves, and
have affected all occasions of raising their own Esteem by depreciating other
Men; He on the contrary was the most obliging Man that ever Practiced: If a
young Gentleman happened to be retained to argue a point in Law, where he was
on the contrary side, he would very often mend the Objections when he came to
repeat them, and always Commend the Gentleman if there were room for it, and
one good word of his was of more advantage to a young Man, than all the favor
of the Court could be.

Having thus far pursued his History and Character, in the public and
Exemplary parts of his Life, without interrupting the thread of the Relation,
with what was private and Domestic, I shall conclude with a short account of
these.

He was twice Married, his first Wife was Anne Daughter of Sir Henry Moore, of
Faly in Berkshire, Grandchild to Sir Francis Moore, Sergeant at Law; by her he
had Ten Children, the four first Died young, the other six lived to be all
Married; And he out lived them all, except his eldest Daughter, and his
youngest Son, who are yet alive.

His eldest Son Robert Married Frances the Daughter of Sir Francis Chock, of
Avington in Berkshire, and they both dying in a little time one after another
left five Children, two Sons Matthew and Gabriel, and three Daughters, Anne,
Mary, and Frances, and by the Judges advice, they both made him their Executor,
so he took his Grandchildren into his own Care, and among them he left his
Estate.

His second Son Matthew, Married Anne the Daughter of Mr. Matthew Simmonds, of
Hilsley, in Glocestershire, who dyed soon after, and left one Son behind him
named Matthew.

His third Son Thomas, Married Rebekah the Daughter of Christian Le Brune, a
Dutch Merchant, and Died without Issue.

His fourth Son Edward, Married Mary, the Daughter of Edmund Goodyere, Esquire of
Heythorp, in Oxfordshire, and still lives, he has two Sons, and three Daughters.

His eldest Daughter Mary, was Married to Edward Alderly, Son of Edward
Alderly, of Innishannon, in the County of Cork in Ireland, who dying, left her
with two Sons, and three Daughters; she is since Married to Edward Stephens,
Son to Edward Stephens, Esquire of Cherington in Glocestershire. His youngest
Daughter Elizabeth, was Married to Edward Webb, Esquire Barrister at Law, she Died,
leaving two Children, a Son and a Daughter.

His second Wife was Anne, the Daughter of Mr. Joseph Bishop, of Ealy in
Berkshire, by whom he had no Children; He gives her a great Character in his
Will, as a most dutiful, faithful, and loving Wife, and therefore trusted the
breeding of his Grandchildren to her Care, and left her one of his Executors,
to whom he joined Sir Robert Ienkinson, and Mr. Gibbon. So much may suffice of
those descended from him.

In after times, it is not to be doubted, but it will be reckoned no small
Honor to derive from him; And this has made me more particular in reckoning up
his Issue, I shall next give an account of the Issues of his Mind, his Books,
that are either Printed, or remain in Manuscript; for the last of these by his
Will, he has forbid the Printing of any of them after his Death, except such as
he should give order for in his Life: But he seems to have changed his mind
afterward, and to have left it to the descretion of his Executors, which of
them might be Printed; for though he does not express that, yet he ordered by a
Codicill, that if any Book of his Writing, as well touching the Common Law, as
other Subjects; should be Printed; then what should be given for the
Consideration of the Copy, should be divided into Ten shares, of which he
appointed Seven to go among his Servants, and Three to those who had Copied
them out, and were to look after the Impression. The reason, as I have
understood it, that made him so unwilling to have any of his Works Printed
after his Death, was; That he apprehended in the Licensing them, (which was
necessary before any Book could be lawfully Printed, by a Law then in force,
but since his Death determined) some things might have been struck out or
altered; which he had observed not without some Indignation, had been done to a
part of the Reports, of one whom he had much Esteemed.

This in matters of Law, he said, might prove to be of such mischievous
Consequence, that he thereupon resolved none of his Writings, should be at the
Mercy of Licensers; And therefore because he was not sure, that they should be
Published without Expurgations or Interpolations, he forbid the Printing any of
them; in which he afterward made some Alteration, at least he gave occasion by
his Codicill, to infer that he altered his mind.

This I have the more fully explained, that his last Will may be no way
misunderstood, and that his worthy Executors, and his Hopeful Grandchildren,
may not conclude themselves to be under an Indispensible obligation, of
depriving the public of his excellent Writings.

A Catalogue of all his Books that are Printed, and are to be Sold by William
Shrowsbury at the Sign of the Bible in Duke-lane.
1. THe primitive Origination of Mankind, considered and examined according to
the light of Nature. Fol. 2. Contemplations Moral and Divine, part 1. Octavo.
3. Contemplations Moral and Divine, part 2. Octavo. 4. Difficiles Nugae, or
Observations touching the Torricellian Experiment, and the various solutions of
the same, especially touching the Weight and Elasticity of the Air. Octavo. 5.
An Essay touching the Gravitation, or Non-Gravitation of fluid Bodies, and the
Reasons thereof. Octavo. 6. Observations touching the principles of natural
Motions, and especially touching Rarefaction, and Condensation; together with a
Reply to certain Remarks, touching the Gravitation of Fluids. Octavo. 7. The
Life and Death of Pomponius Atticus, written by his Contemporary and
Acquaintance Cornelius Nepos, translated out of his Fragments; together with
Observations, Political and Moral thereupon. Octavo. 8. Pleas of the Crown, or
a methodical Summary of the principal matters relating to that Subject. Octavo.
Manuscripts of his not yet Published.
1. COncerning the secondary Origination of Mankind. Fol. 2. Concerning
Religion, 5 Vol. in Fol. viz. 1. De Deo, Vox Metaphysica, pars. 1. and 2. 2.
Pars 3. Vox Naturae, Providentiae, Ethicae, Conscientiae. 3. Liber sextus,
septimus, Octavus. 4. Pars 9. Concerning the H. Scriptures, their Evidence and
Authority. 5. Concerning the Truth of the H. Scripture, and the Evidences
thereof.
3. Of Policy in matters of Religion. Fol. 4. De Anima, to Mr. B. Fol. 5. De
Anima, Transactions between him and Mr. B. Fol. 6. Tentamina, de ortu, natura
and immortalitate Animae. Fol. 7. Magnetismus Magneticus, Fol. 8. Magnetismus
Physicus, Fol. 9. Magnetismus Divinus. 10. De generatione Animalium and
Vegetabilium, Fol. Lat. 11. Of the Law of Nature, Fol. 12. A Letter of advice
to his Grandchildren. Quarto. 13. Placita Coronae, 7 Vol. Fol. 14. Preparatory
Notes concerning the Right of the Crown, Fol* 15. Incepta de Iuribus Coronae,
Fol. 16. De Prerogativa Regis, Fol. 17. Preparatory Notes touching
Parliamentary proceedings, 2 Vol. Quarto. 18. Of the Jurisdiction of the House
of Lords, Quarto. 19. Of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. 20. Touching Ports
and Customs, Fol. 21. Of the Right of the Sea and the Arms thereof, and
Customs, Fol. 22. Concerning the advancement of Trade, Quarto. 23. Of Sheriffs
Accounts, Fol. 24. Copies of Evidences, Fol. 25. Mr. Seldens Discourses, Octa.
16. Excerpta ex Schedis Seldenianis. 27. Iournal of the 18 and 21 Iacobi Regis,
Quarto. 28. Great Common place Book of Reports or Cases in the Law, in Law
French, Fol.
In Bundles.
ON Quod tibi fieri, etc. Matthew. 7.12. Touching Punishments, in relation to the
Socinian Controversy. Policies of the Church of Rome. Concerning the Laws of
England. Of the amendment of the Laws of England. Touching Provision for the
Poor. Upon Mr. Hobbs his Manuscript. Concerning the time of the abolition of
the Jewish Laws.
In Quarto.
QUod sit Deus. Of the State and Condition of the Soul and Body after Death.
Notes concerning matters of Law.
To these I shall add the Catalogue of the Manuscripts, which he left to the
Honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn, with that part of his Will that concerns
them.

ITem, As a testimony of my Honor and Respect to the Society of Lincoln's Inn,
where I had the greatest part of my Education; I give and bequeath to that
Honorable Society the several Manuscript Books, contained in a Schedule annexed
to my Will: They are a Treasure worth having and keeping, which I have been
near Forty years in gathering, with very great Industry and Expense: My desire
is, that they bekept safe, and all together, in remembrance of me; They were
fit to be bound in Leather and Chained, and kept in Archives: I desire they may
not be lent out, or disposed of: Only if I happen hereafter, to have any of my
Posterity of that Society, that desires to transcribe any Book, and give very
good caution to restore it again in a prefixed time, such as the Benchers of
that Society in Council shall approve of; then, and not otherwise, only one
Book at one time may be lent out to them by the Society; so that there be no
more but one Book of those Books abroad out of the Library at one time. They
are a Treasure that are not fit for every Man's View; nor is every Man capable
of making use of them: Only I would have nothing of these Books Printed, but
entirely preserved together, for the use of the industrious learned Members of
that Society.

A Catalogue of the Books given by him to Lincoln's Inn, according to the
Schedule annexed to his Will.
PLacita de tempore Regis Iohannis, 1 vol. stitcht. Placita coram Rege E. 1.
two vol. Placita coram Rege E. 2, one vol. Placita coram Rege E. 3, three vol.
Placita coram Rege R. 2, one vol. Placita coram Rege H. 4. H. 5. one vol.
Placita de Banco, E. 1. ab anno 1, ad annum 21. one vol. Transcripts of many
Pleas, coram Rege and de Banco E. 1. one vol. The Pleas in the Exchequer,
styled Communia, from 1 E. 3. to 46 E. 3, five vol. Close Rolls of King John,
verbatim, of the most material things, one vol. The principal matters in the
Close and Patent Rolls, of H. 3. transcribed verbatim, from 9 H. 3. to 56 H. 3.
five vol. velome marked K. L. The principal matters in the Close and Patent
Rolls, E. 1. with several Copies and abstracts of Records, one vol. marked F. A
long Book of abstracts of Records, by me. Close and Patent Rolls, from 1 to 10
E. 3, and other Records of the time of H. 3, one vol. marked W. Close Rolls of
15 E. 3. with other Records, one vol, marked N. Close Rolls from 17 to 38 E. 3.
two vol. Close and Patent Rolls from 40 E. 3. to 50 E. 3. one vol. marked B.
Close Rolls of E. 2. with other Records, one vol. R. Close and Patent Rolls,
and Charter Rolls in the time of King John for the Clergy, one vol. A great
Volum of Records of several natures, G. The Leagues of the Kings of England,
tempore E. 1. E. 2. E. 3. one vol. A Book of ancient Leagues and military
provisions, one vol. The Reports of Iters, of Derby, Nottingham and Bedford,
transcribed, one vol. Itinera Forest de Pickering and Lancaster, transcript ex
Originali, one vol. An ancient Reading, very large upon Charta de Foresta, and
of the Forest Laws. The Transcript of the Ite^ Foresta de Dean, 1 vol. Quo
Warranto and Liberties of the County of Gloucester, with the Pleas of the Chase
of Kingswood, one vol. Transcript of the Black Book of the Admiralty, Laws of
the Army, Impositions and several Honors, one vol. Records of Patents,
Inquisitions, etc. of the County of Leicester, one vol. Muster and Military
provisions of all sorts, extracted from the Records, one vol. Gervasius
Tilburiensis, or the Black Book of the Exchequer, one vol. The Kings Title to
the pre-emption of Tin, a thin vol. Calender of the Records in the Tower, a
small vol. A Miscellany of diverse Records, Orders, and other things of various
natures, marked E. 1 vol. Another of the like nature in leather Cover, 1 vol. A
Book of diverse Records and Things relating to the Chancery, one vol. Titles of
Honor and Pedigrees, especially touching Clifford, one vol. History of the
Marches of Wales collected by me, 1 vol. Certain Collections touching Titles of
Honor, one vol. Copies of several Records touching Praemunire, 1 vol. Extract
of Commissions tempore, H. 7. H. 8. R. and the proceedings in the Court
Military, between Ray and Ramsey, one vol. Petitions in Parliament tempore, E.
1. E. 2. E. 3. H. 4. three vol. Summons of Parliament, from 49 H. 3. to 22 E.
4. in three vol. The Parliament Rolls from the beginning of E. 1. to the end of
R. 3. in 19 Volums, viz. one of E. 1. one of E. 2. with the Ordinations. two of
E. 3. three of R. 2. two of H. 4. two of H. 5. four of H. 6. three of E. 4. one
of R. 3. all Transcribed at large. Mr. Elsings Book touching proceedings in
Parliament, 1 vol. Noye's Collection touching the Kings Supplies, 1 vol*
stitcht. A Book of various Collections out of Records and Register of
Canterbury, and Claymes at the Coronation of R. 2. one vol. Transcript of
Bishop Ushers Notes, principally concerning Chronology, three large vol. A
Transcript out of Dooms-day-Book of Gloucestershire and Hereford-shire, and of
some Pipe-Rolls, and old Accounts of the Customs, one vol. Extracts and
Collections out of Records touching Titles of Honor, one vol. Extracts of
Pleas, Patents and Close-Rolls, tempore H. 3. E. 1. E. 2. E. 3. and some old
Antiquities of England, one vol. Collections and Memorials of many Records and
Antiquities, one vol. Seldeni. Calender of Charters, and Records in the Tower,
touching Gloucester-shire. Collection of Notes and Records of various natures,
marked M. one vol. Seldeni. Transcript of the Iters of London, Kent, Cornwall,
one vol. Extracts out of the Leiger-Books of Battle, Evesham, Winton, etc. one
vol. Seldeni. Copies of the principal Records in the Red-Book, in the
Exchequer. one vol. Extracts of Records and Treaties, relating to Sea-affairs.
one vol. Records touching Customs, Ports, Partition of the Lands of Gil. De
Clare, etc. Extract of Pleas in the time of R. 1. King John, E. 1. etc. one
vol. Cartae Antiquae in the Tower, Transcribed, in 2 vol. Chronological
Remembrances, extracted out of the Notes of Bishop Usher. one volume stitched.
Inquisitiones de Legibus Walliae. one vol. Collections or Records touching
Knighthood. Titles of Honor. Seldeni. 1 vol. Mathematics and Fortifications.
one vol. Processus Curiae Militaris. one vol. A Book of Honor stitched. one
vol. Extracts out of the Registry of Canterbury. Copies of several Records
touching proceedings in the Military Court. one vol. Abstracts of Summons and
Rolls of Parliament, out of the Book Dunelm. and some Records Alphabetically
digested. one vol. Abstracts of diverse Records in the Office of first Fruits.
one vol. stitched. Mathematical and Astrological Calculations. 1 vol. A Book of
Divinity. Two large Repositories of Records, marked A. and B.
[All those above are in Folio.]

THe proceedings of the Forests of Windsor, Dean, and Essex, in Quarto. one
vol.

[Those that follow, are most of them in Velome or Parchment.]

TWo Books of old Statutes, one ending, H. 7. The other, 2 H. 5. with the Sums.
two vol. Five last years of E. 2. one vol. Reports tempore, E. 2. one vol. The
Year Book of R. 2. and some others. one vol. An old Chronicle from the Creation
to E 3. one vol. A Mathematical Book, especially of Optiques. one vol. A Dutch
Book of Geometry, and Fortification. Murti Benevenlani Geometrica. one vol.
Reports tempore E. 1. under Titles. one vol. An old Register, and some Pleas* 1
vol. Bernardi Bratrack Peregrinatio. one vol. Iter Cantii and London, and some
Reports, tempore E. 2. one vol. Reports, tempore, E. 1. and E. 2. one vol.
Leiger Book, Abbatiae De Bello. Isidori opera. Liber altercationis, and
Christianae Philosophiae, contra Paganos. Historia Petri Manducatorii. Hornii
Astronomica. Historia Ecclesiae Dunelmensis. Holandi Chymica. De Alchymiae
Scriptoribus. The black-Book of the New-Law, Collected by me, and digested into
alphabetical Titles, Written with my own hand, which is the Original Copy.

MATTHEW HALE.


The Conclusion.
THus lived and died Sir Matthew Hale, the renouned Lord Chief Justice of
England: He had one of the blessings of Virtue in the highest measure of any of
the Age, that does not always follow it, which was, that he was universally
much valued and admired by Men of all sides and persuasions. For as none could
hate him but for his Justice and Virtues, so the great estimation he was
generally in, made, that few durst undertake to defend so ungrateful a Paradox,
as any thing said to lessen him would have appeared to be. His Name is scarce
ever mentioned since his Death, without particular accents of singular respect.
His opinion in points of Law generally passes as an uncontrollable authority,
and is often pleaded in all the Courts of Justice: And all that knew him well,
do still speak of him as one of the perfectest patterns of Religion and Virtue
they ever saw.

The Commendations given him by all sorts of people are such, that I can hardly
come under the Censures of this Age, for any thing I have said concerning him;
yet if this Book lives to aftertimes, it will be looked on perhaps as a
Picture, drawn more according to fancy and invention, than after the Life; if
it were not that those who knew him well, establishing its Credit in the
present Age, will make it pass down to the next with a clearer authority.

I shall pursue his praise no further in my own words, but shall add what the
present Lord Chancellor of England said concerning him, when he delivered the
Commission to the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford, who succeeded him in that
Office, which he began in this manner.

The Vacancy of the Seat of the Chief Justice of this Court, and that by a way
and means so unusual, as the Resignation of him, that lately held it, and this
too proceeding from so deploreable a cause, as the infirmity of that Body,
which began to forsake the ablest Mind that ever presided here, has filled the
Kingdom with Lamentations, and given the King many and pensive thoughts, how to
supply that Vacancy again. And a little after speaking to his Successor, He
said, The very Labors of the place, and that weight and fatigue of Business
which attends it, are no small discouragements; For what Shoulders may not
justly fear that Burden which made him stoop that went before you? Yet I
confess you have a greater discouragement than the mere Burden of your Place,
and that is the unimitable Example of your last Predecessor: Onerosum est
succedere bono Principi, was the saying of him in the Panegyric; And you will
find it so too that are to succeed such a Chief Justice, of so indefatigable an
Industry, so invincible a Patience, so exemplary an Integrity, and so
magnanimous a contempt of worldly things, without which no Man can be truly
great; and to all this a Man that was so absolute a Master of the Science of
the Law, and even of the most abstruce and hidden parts of it, that one may
truly say of his knowledge in the Law, what St. Austin said of St. Hieroms
knowledge in Divinity, Quod Hieronimus nescivit, nullus mortalium unquam
scivit. And therefore the King would not suffer himself to part with so great a
Man, till he had placed upon him all the marks of b^unty and esteem, which his
retired and weak Condition was capable of.

To this high Character, in which the expressions, as they well become the
Eloquence of him who pronounced them, so they do agree exactly to the Subject,
without the abatements that are often to be made for Rhetoric; I shall add
that part of the Lord Chief Justices answer, in which he speaks of his
Predecessor.

-- A person in whom his eminent Virtues, and deep Learning, have long managed
a contest for the Superiority, which is not decided to this day, nor will it
ever be determined I suppose, which shall get the upper hand. A person that has
sat in this Court these many Years, of whose actions there I have been an eye
and ear witness, that by the greatness of his learning always charmed his
Auditors to reverence and attention: A person of whom I think I may boldly say,
that as former times cannot show any Superior to him, so I am confident
succeeding and future time will never show any equal: These considerations
heightened by what I have heard from your Lordship concerning him, made me
anxious and doubtful, and put me to a stand, how I should succeed so able, so
good, and so great a Man: It does very much trouble me, that I who in
comparison of him am but like a Candle lighted in the Sunshine, or like a
Glowworm at midday, should succeed so great a Person, that is and will be so
eminently famous to all Posterity: and I must ever wear this Motto in my breast
to comfort me, and in my actions to excuse me, Sequitur, quamvis non passibus
aequis.

Thus were Panegyricks made upon him while yet alive, in that same Court of
Justice which he had so worthily governed. As he was honored while he lived,
so he was much lamented when he died: And this will still be acknowledged as a
just inscription for his Memory, though his modesty forbid any such to be put
on his Tombstone.

THAT HE WAS ONE OF THE GREATEST PATTERNS THIS AGE HAS AFFORDED, WHETHER IN HIS
PRIVATE DEPORTMENT AS A CHRISTIAN, OR IN HIS PUBLIC EMPLOYMENTS, EITHER AT THE
BAR OR ON THE BENCH.

FINIS.

